THE SINFULNESS OF Evil Thoughts: OR, A DISCOURSE, Wherein, The Chambers of
IMAGERY are Unlocked: The Cabinet of the HEART Opened. The Secrets of the
INNER-MAN Disclosed.

IN The particular Discovery of the Numerous Evil Thoughts, to be found in the
most of Men, with their various, and several Kinds, sinful Causes, sad
Effects, and proper Remedies or Cures.

Together with Directions how to observe and keep the HEART; The highest,
hardest, and most necessary work of him that would be a Real CHRISTIAN.

By JO. SHEFFEILD Pastor of SWITHINS London.

London Printed by J. H. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659

To the Worshipful THE MASTER, WARDENS, ASSISTANTS, And the rest of THE Right
Worshipful Society OF SALTERS, His Honored PATRONS.
Much honored Gentlemen,
THE many Favors I have received from you, ever since my coming to this place,
and especially your bestowing so freely of late (the first fruits of your
Patronage) a Presentation for my continuance, upon the unanimous and concurrent
desires of my loving Neighbors of Swithins, after many years conversing
together, has deeply engaged me in duty, and thankfulness to you and them;
And having nothing else to return in way of requital, besides my humble thanks,
and my hearty prayers, whereof the one are fit to be proclaimed upon the
housetop, the other more fit to be in silence and secrecy presented unto God,
I was willing to give unto you, and to the world, a public and solemn
testimony of the honor and Christian respect, which from my heart I bear to
your whole Society in general, and to your selves in particular, by presenting
this ensuing Discourse into your hands. It treats of the Thoughts and inwards
of the Heart, the greatest business we have to look unto; if we would be
Christians indeed, not in the Letter, but inwardly in the Spirit, and have our
praise not of men but of God. Many others I confess, have to their deserved
praise, and to the great benefit of the Church written of the same subject; but
none, that I know, so particularly as here you will find; yet am I not
commending my self, or this Discourse, while I say this (being not so much a
stranger to my own tenuity) unless to your Candor and favorable acceptance:
If you shall please at your best leisure to peruse and read it, I hope you will
not altogether repent your time and pains bestowed. But if your selves, or any
other (any one soul) shall reap any benefit hereby, I shall rejoice and bless
God for my poor pains and time so well bestowed. Now that it may as the seed
upon the ground, or the rain from heaven upon the seed, prosper, to that which
it is sent abroad, I shall follow it with my prayers, for a plentiful, and
effectual blessing upon you and it, as being

Yours, ever engaged to serve You: JO. SHEFFEILD.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
MAny Learned, in their several Professions, have put forth profitable
Discourses, One De occulta Philosophia, another De secretis naturae, another De
morbis secretis, a fourth of Stratagems of War, a fifth of Policies of State,
others of the Anatomy of man's body, of the Circulating of the blood, etc.
Useful and profitable all. But the Proper subject of a Divine is to handle the
Mysteries, of Godliness, and withal to detect the Mysteries of ungodliness.
Solomon in his great wisdom did not only Contemplate the Excellency of
Wisdoms paths and precepts, but gave his heart also, to understand and find
out the ways of folly, sin and madness. Here have I undertaken as hard a task
as any, (I would I could say I had as well performed it; To will was present)
propounding to my self to write of this occult Mystery of iniquity, the secret
diseases of the soul, the Stratagems, Policies, and depths of Satan, the
Anatomy of the heart, and the Circulating of flesh and blood in our hearts and
thoughts. I hope I have undertaken a task not more hard and painful to me,
than profitable and useful to thee.

Some have traveled far, into unknown Lands, to show thee the fruits of their
pains, travel and expenses; I show thee only thy self. Some have compassed
Seas and Lands, and given thee the Longitudes, Latitudes, the dangers of
passages; my design is to bring home my travels to thy self, and to show thee
the dangers of thy own heart; that as in water face answers face, so in my
heart, thou may see thy own, the Methods of Satan, the Gulphes of sin, the
Straits to heaven; the various and uneven ebbings and flowings of this sea or
lake in thy heart.

Some have told us, in their Travels, they have discovered strange Countries,
Creatures, Fruits. They relate of Terra del fogo, Insulae Latronum, they have
seen Mountains flaming with Brimstone, Dens of Lions, the Lake of Sodom,
Fountains of pitch, Dead Seas, Scalding springs, Frozen lakes. Here is the
Land of fire, Island of Robbers, Brimstone mountains, Sodoms Lake, a Fountain
of pitch in thy own heart. Thou needst not go into far and remote Countries to
see strange and fearful sights; In the Map and Microcosme of thy heart thou
may see all.

(...) The 1 John 5. 19.
whole world lies in this wicked one. Orbis in Urbe, was said of Rome once,
Orbis in Cord, may be said of this Mystical Babylon. A world of wickedness,
lies in this narrow heart, yet are there none that seek to make discoveries of
this New unknown World.

Man is the silliest of all Creatures; they all preserve themselves, destroy
their enemies; Man destroys himself, and spares his enemies, those of his own
house.

Man though he pretend to all knowledge, yet is of no understanding, but
brutish in his knowledge, knowing J^^ 10. 14.
nothing of what he ought to know; in vain does he profess all Arts, when he
knows not his own heart.

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc tibi scire est;
Et tua men's nequam, si noverit omnia sequam.
In vain does the Grammarian teach Congruity of speech, while he corrects not
the incongruities of his own heart. The Logician studieth Syllogismes, and the
way of disputing subtly, and is not able to deal with the Sophistry and
fallacies of his own heart. The Astronomer casts his eye up to heaven, as if he
had perfectly passed all lower studies, he numbers the Stars, takes the height
of heaven, observes the motion of the several Planets, but knows not the
uncertain motion of this one Planet, this little, lowest Planet. The
Geometrician measures both Seas and Lands, and has not yet the measure of his
own heart. The Mathematician by his instruments measures Circles, Squares, or
Angular figures, has no measure for this Center, cannot measure this Triangle,
much less bring it into Square. The Traveller seeks to know all Kingdoms,
Cities, Nations, Languages, habits, manners, customs, Laws, and knows none of
these in his own heart. Tecum habita, nec te quaesiveris extra.

Man mind thy self, there is a hid treasure in thy own ground; Dig but deep
enough and thou will find it (to be sure) either the good treasure of the good
heart, or an evil treasure of an evil heart. But nature, and art, and all
industry fall short here, yea Grace it self, (as now imperfect) comes not up to
a full understanding of his own heart. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? says the Prophet, Jer. 17. 9.
The bodies of the trees are seen, the root lies deep and unseen; The heads of
springs unseen, the waters seen and tasted: Heart-work is the hard work.
Abyssus es tute tibi, said the noble Mornay. Infernus tibi, I may say. Here art
thou at a loss, at thy ne plus ultra, at a terra incognita, at a Mare
congelatum; when thou come to the heart, there is no sailing further. This is
the place which the Vultures Eye spies not, and here lies a Carcass which the
Eagles sight or smell discovers not. We often find in the bottom of Wels, Frogs
and Toads, when the waters are fair above; Go to the bottom and thou know
not what thou shall epsy: Thou will tell me another tale, and say, I told thee
not the one half. Under the Grass lurkes the Snake, and under the Ground Corn,
in the deep Well are the Spies hid. He 2 Samuel 17. 19. Prove. 28. 26.
that trusts in his own heart is a fool in the wise man's Judgment, when it
speaks fairest, believe it not, there are seven abominations within it. It is
like the Lapwing, it will call, and send thee further off, when thou come
closest to it. Who can understand his own errors? says holy David. Many are
subtle and inquisitive to know the Polycies of States, Interests of men and
times, Errors in Governors, the Heresies and Errors that have of old, and do
at present, pester the Church. But who can understand his Errors? man's
understanding is very large, be that is Learned, can understand every Language,
every Science; But commonly, the most understanding man is the most ignorant
Christian. Is not the wisdom of this world foolishness 1 Cor. 13. 9.
with God? The heart is versute and deceitful above all things, who can know
it? Man has affected the Knowledge of all things; since the Fathers eat that
sour Grape off that Tree of Knowledge, all the childrens teeth have been set on
edge after it. He knows the nature of herbs, trees, plants, spices, metals,
minerals, yet who can know it! He knows a thousand faces at first sight, a
thousand voices, at first word, yet to his dying day knows not the face and
voice of his heart; Who can know it!

This is thy A. B. C. Reader, if thou art a young Christian; And this not thy
Alpha but Omega too, if thou be the greatest Student, and a professed Artist.
The skill, pains, and industry of man has surprised Cities, overrun
Kingdoms, changed Governments, has tamed all Creatures, Beasts, Birds,
Serpents, he has caught, kept, tamed, caged, taught them all to change their
natures. But two little members (yet two microcosms) in himself, none has
known, tamed, or changed, nor can be. The less microcosme the tongue, (in
which is a world of deadly poison) which is but the Jam. 3. 6, 8.
Cistern, some few have tamed. But the heart the greater microcosme, the
fountain that feeds this Cistern, none has tamed; only God who made it, and
keeps the Key of it, tames, changes and governs it. Thou must beg of him to
give thee a Key to let thee into thine own heart, and to give thee a lock,
bolts, and bars to keep it in.

For my part, I am more afraid of the Errors of my own heart, then of all the
Doctrinall Errors broached and vented in the World: And am more afraid of what
is within and flows from the heart, then of whatsoever enters the mouth. The
poison of the most venomous serpent, only endangers others, preserves her self;
but ours, the most pestiferous poison, hurts, our selves most, our selves only.

How sad is it that we who affect neatness and cleanliness, so much in every
thing, should be so careless and slight here? If we have rich clothes, they
must be kept and laid up clean, If fair linen, it must be washed and worn
clean; If plate, it must be scoured bright, and used clean; If but brass and
pewter, it must be scoured too, and kept clean; An ordinary entertaining Room
must be always kept clean; A Garden must be weeded and kept clean; A neat
Watch, dust must not take it, but it must be daily looked to and kept clean:
But the heart, which is the choicest apparel, linen, plate, vessel, garden,
entertaining room, watch, is above all neglectings neglected, as if it had been
said, above all keeping, keep these other things, out of which are only the
issues of vain and earthly delights, but above all neglecting, neglect thy
heart, out of which are the issues of eternal life and eternal salvation. I
speak not this as if I could say, I have made my heart clean, but as Tertullian
said of his Book of Patience; Langu^nt^s cum vacent a sanitate de bonis ejus
tac^re non norunt. Ita miserrimus ego semper aeger Calorious impatientiae, qua^
non ob^inco, patientiae sanitat^m, and suspirem, and invocem, and peror^m
nec^sse est. Tert. de pat.
He was the more pleased to write of Patience, because he wanted and bewailed
the want of Patience; as the sick man, says he, largely commends the
blessing of health, which he now knows the more how to prize because he wants
it. My case thou will see in the last Chapter, in a sad selfbemoaning Soliloquy.

Reader, thou see all men labor to attain to the perfection of their
Professions, be not thou a puny in thine; This is the best discovery of a
growing Christian, when he is more skilled in himself, verst in his own heart;
when thou art grown acquainted with the wants, diseases, wiles; with the state,
cure, order, government of thy heart; when thou art wholly taken up in the
observing, regulating and keeping of thy heart, then art thou the grown
Christian. To study Books may make thee a Scholar, to study the Scriptures may
make thee a Preacher, to study Men, a Politician; but to study the man thy
self, and thine own heart, makes thee a well grounded and well grown Christian.
There be four Books must be well studied and compared together to make an
accomplished Christian.

1. The book of Providence is not to be a despised Legend, nor to be studied
alone.

2. The The Book of Scripture is to be compared with the Book of Providence,
rightly to understand it, or thou will become an Atheist.

3. The Book of Conscience, which is to be conferred with the Scripture, or
thou will prove a mere formalist.

4. The Book of books, Christ Jesus, to be brought home to conscience, or thou will be a dead and heartlesse christian. Deal with no one of them alone, or
thou will prove but a piece or shadow of a Professor. But bring Scripture and
Providence, Conscience and Scripture, and Christ and Conscience together, and
thou have done thy work, so shall thou come behind in no gift, waiting for the
appearing of Jesus Christ; Which is the Prayer of

Thy Companion in the Spiritual Warfare. Jo. SHEFFEILD.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. Context opened in sundry observations, and the grand observation (the
subject of the whole discourse) propounded. page 2 Chap. 2. The Doctrine
explained, proved, and confirmed, by sundry arguments in the Text. p. 14 Chap.
3. Several other reasons from other Scriptures. 22 Chap. 4. The several kinds
of evil Thoughts, whereof some transient, some deliberate. 39 Chapter 5. The
several kinds of deliberate Thoughts, referred to three heads. 45 Chapter 6. Sins
of thoughts in respect of God; and first in having no thoughts of God. 50 Six
kinds of Atheism. ibid.
Chapter 7. Of Low thoughts of God. 58 Chapter 8. Of Atheistical thoughts. 61 Chap. 9.
Of Injurious and Erroneous thoughts. 68 Chapter 10. Of Blasphemous thoughts. 70 Chapter
11. Of Politic thoughts. 76 Chapter 12. Of Gross and Superstitious thoughts. 81
Chapter 13. Of Hard thoughts of God. 84 Chapter 14. Of Despairing thoughts. 87 Chapter 15.
Of Presumptuous thoughts. 98 Chapter 16. Of Murmuring thoughts. 110 Chapter 17. Of
Careful thoughts. 112 Chapter 18. Of Carnal thoughts. 127 Chapter 19. Of Doubtful,
distrustful, and fearful thoughts. 128 Chapter 20. Of Reasonings and Irrational
thoughts. 132 Chapter 21. Of Hypocritical thoughts. 139 Chapter 22. Of Evil thoughts
in reference to our Neighbor. 142 The Evil Eye. 143 Eight evil eyes. ib. Chapter
23. Many other Evil thoughts, 1. Censorious. 151 Sevenill Judges. 152
2. Contemptuous thoughts. 154 3. Over weening thoughts. 155 4. Cunning
craftiness. 156 5. Revengfull and malicious. 158 7. Uncompassionate. ib. 8.
Vile and sinful wishes. 159 Chapter 24. Of Evil thoughts in respect to our selves.
160 1. Impure thoughts. 161 2. Ambitious. 162 3. Thoughts of Security. 164 4.
Self-magnifying. 165 5. Projecting thoughts. 166 Chapter 25. Of the Melancholy
thought. 167 And the sinful Merry thought. 171 Four kinds of Mirth. 172 Four
kinds of Evil Mirth. 176 Chap. 26. Of thoughts of Self-Murder. 181 Chapter 27. Of
Careful thoughts. 186 Vain thoughts. 196 Chapter 28. The first Use. 200 Thought is
not free. ib. Chapter 29. All are to be humbled for their thoughts. 204 Chapter 30.
Third Use of Information. 1. Of the difference between the Laws of Men and the
Law of God. 214 2. A worse difference between Gods holy Law and our vile
hearts. 215 3. Where the difference lies between the unfound and the sincere.
216 4. What a busy work it is to be a Christian. 217 5. How far a Hypocrite
may go, instance in Simon Magus. 219
Chapter 31. Contains, 1. A Use of Terror, to such as harbor Evil thoughts. 226
2. Comfort to the godly soul, whose good thoughts are the best part of his
sanctification. 229 3. Resolution how to judge of the thoughts. 230 Chapter 32. Use
of Exhortation. 1. To know and keep the heart. 238 2. To repent of Evil
thoughts. 242 3. To Fly to Christ. 244
Chapter 33. An Use of Examination, with certain notes to try whether the thoughts
be good or evil. 246 Chapter 34. Of good desires. 253 Eight Conclusions concerning
good desires. 253
Four Rules to know them by. 260 Rule 1. Desires good when the Object good. 260
What their Object is. ib. Rule 2. When they flow from a right spring. 263 The
right spring of desires. ib. Rule 3. When their properties and effects are
right. 265 Sundry properties of such desires. ib. Rule 4. When attended with
their right Companions. 273 The many Companions of such desires. ib. Chap. 35.
Directions how to keep the heart. 276 Prove. 4. 23. Explained and enlarged upon.
ib. How the heart is to be observed if evil. 279 How to be preserved if good.
280 1. In Tenderness. ib. Four Notes of a tender heart. ib. 2. In Humility.
281 Three Considerations to keep the heart humble. ib. 3. The heart must be
kept up in due height. 282 Three Helps hereto. ib. 4. The heart must be kept
clean. 282 Three Helps thereto. ib. 5. To be kept in Faith. ib. Three Helps
thereto. 283 6. To be kept in holy fear. ib. Three Helps thereto. ib. 7. To be
kept in readiness and willing. nesse. ib. Three Helps thereto. 284 8 To be
kept in steadiness. ib. Three times especially when to be so kept. ib.
Several helps to prevent evil thoughts. 285 Chapter 36. An admonition to Simon
and his followers. 292 Chapter 37. A sad Soliloquy or meditation upon the evil of
the thoughts. 296
THE SINFULNESS OF Evil Thoughts
Act. 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if
perhaps, the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.


NONE will think this passage The Preface.
of Scripture, at the first sight, to be like the Carcass of the Judge. 14. 8.
Lion which Sampson found, and therein a swarm of Bees, and so sweet an
Honeycomb; but more like the Carcass of a Dead Dog, wherein is to be seen
nothing but a Swarm of Vermin, and a Comb full of the Gall of Bitterness. But
wait a while, and I hope you will find out of this Eater may come Meat, and out
of this strong unsavory smell may come some sweet. It is not like, I confess,
to that sight which Moses beheld with admiration and delight, a Bush burning
not Consumed, wherein the Exodus 3. 2, 4.
Lord was present, and out of which he spoke; But here you may see one of
Satan's Hell-bushes, Burning with sin, nor yet Consumed, out of whom Satan
spoke; yet be not afraid to draw near, and I hope we shall hear the voice of
the Lord speaking, if not out of the Bush, yet to the Bush, or at least to us.
Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps, the thought of thy
heart may be forgiven thee.

CHAP. I.
THIS Book of the Acts of the Apostles is as it were the New Testaments book of
Kings and Chronicles, containing the Authentic Records of the most remarkable
Passages in those Primitive, and purest times, and may deservedly be styled,
The Acts and Monuments of the Apostles, and of the first Apostolical Churches;
Wherein we have summarily set down the manifold Pains, Travel, Success, or
opposition which the Apostles met with in their propagating the Gospel at
first, and laying the happy foundation of Christian Churches, amidst a world of
Infidells and Pagans.

Yet among the Famous Acts of the Apostles, and memorialls of some particular
Saints, you find inserted, now and then, the foul, and infamous stories of some
bloody Persecutor, or black hypocrite (a worse shame, and greater Blot to the
Christian name and profession) yea we have inserted among the lives of Blessed
Saints, Act. 13. 8. and 16. 16.
the story of several execrable Sorcerers, the worst of men (as Elimas, and
the Pythonisse, and this Simon) who made a stir in those Early days, to the no
small trouble of the Church.

But above all the rest, there never was a worse Fish caught by the net of the
Gospel, then this Simon Magus, who gives us the occasion of this discourse; The
Vilest Copronymus that ever received, and defiled holy Baptism: The foulest
Ethiopian that ever holy water wet, and washed: whose Tripartite history is
here briefly set down in this chapter, Naught in the whole, and each part worse
then other. His first part was in Sorcery, his second in (show, better, indeed
much worse) Hipocrisy; And his third worst of all, Apostasy and avowed Impiety.

Yet is there a fourth part of his story written by Ecclesiastical hystorians,
his further progress in all impiety, his opposition to the Gospel, the
heresies which he Broached, The divine honors which he aspired to, The statues,
and Images built to him, and to his strumpet Helen (as unto a Scortum suum
Helenam peculiarem d^i vim esse asfirmabat. Alsted.
new God) Simoni sancto Deo; and after all, his Tragical end, by breaking his
neck, when he had threatened to forsake the world for receiving the Christian
faith, and not regarding him, he made an attempt to fly in their sight to gain
more credit to all he had said, but down he fell and brake his neck.

And we may safely say there is another Fifth part (which though) not written,
will be found and discovered in the last day s^ddest of all, his present, and
eternal damnation; His Going into Perdition with his money and Magic, after
all his Rewards of divination, Divine honors, Popular adoration, Public
statues, and Monuments; where we shall leave him, in the gall of bitterness,
and in the bonds of his iniquity.

Yet is this, as all other examples in Scripture, written for our admonition
and instruction. And therefore I shall take a brief survey of the three parts
of his written story, and make some short observations thereon, as we go along.

His first part he acted, was of a Sorcerer at Samaria, where he set up and
played his prizes, this is set down v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Here observe.

Doct. 1. Into the most eminent and popular Cities, often enter the vilest
impostors, Atheistical, and Diabolical Sorcerers, there they lurk, lodge,
there they seek to set up, and play their prizes.

2. These Sorcerers, Astrologers, cheators do shamefully, and notoriously
delude the silly multitude; He bewitched the people of Samaria, it is said.

3. These vile creatures cover and set off their Diabolical, and hellish
pranks with specious titles, He gave it out, that he was some great one; That
he was a man of rare skill, singular art, he could do wonders, Cure any
disease, tell any man his fortune, etc.

5. These Magicians are not so mad and vain, to brag, and boast, but a many
more are as mad and vain to believe them, cry them up, and follow them: He said
v. 9. he was some great one. They overdo and (...)
Cry him up, as the Great power of God, and think he is more then a man, all is
lawful at least, and it may be, God has given him a gift above all other men.
To him they all gave heed, from the least, to the greatest, saying, this man is
the mighty power of God. They dream of nothing less then doing these feats by
the help and power of Satan.

6. These cheating companions are often long ere they are discovered, and given
over: And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched
them with Sorceries, v. 11.

7. Where the true knowledge of God comes, the gross impieties of these
impostors are presently smelt out, detested, and abhorred: But when thy
believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the
Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. v. 12. Where the
light of the Gospel begins to peep, and the least spark of religion enters,
Satan falls as lightning, Magic vanishes; This Dagon cannot stand before that
Ark of God. Aarons Rod devoureth the Magicians Rods. As soon as Sergius Paulus
receives the Acts 13. 12.
Gospel, he has no more to do with Elimas. As soon as they of Ephesus were
converted, they would not keep, much less Acts 19. 19.
use a Magic book, but made a fire of them.

The second part follows, v. 13. Where you see the Scene changed, and a new
part acted. Simon is a convert, a Christian, a Professor, a Believer, a devout
Believer. Then Simon himself believed also, and when he was baptized, he
continued with Philip and wondered, beholding the miracles, and signs which
were done.

Here the unclean spirit goes out, but it is to fetch in seven worse.

Obs. 1. All is not fish that comes to the Gospel net; Some fish, some trash:
In the purest Earthly Church, Some true Saints, Some hypocrites; Wheat and
Tares in the same field; Chafe and Wheat in the same floor. The Gospel
preached may have some operation on a soul, where it produces not inward
sanctification, Sol non omnes quibus lucet calefacit. The rising sun Bern.
makes many a black cloud look with a Gilded look.

2. Simon be leeveth, is baptized, continues, wondereth. Obs. Too fast to
last, Too hot to hold out; of others v. 12. it is said, they heard, believed,
were baptized. There is all: Magus outgoes them all. The hypocrites, and
temporaries faith is all on a sudden, Velocior in principio, tardior in fine,
The stony ground has joy at first, when others begin with sorrow: Magus has
faith at first; Peter calls him back to Repentance, where he should have begun:
A Gourd or Mushrumb may grow in a night, and wither in a night. True grace (as
Church-work) goes slowly an end; Mar. 4.
first the root, then the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear
The hypocrites growth is per saltum, first the full corn in the ear, but
neither stalk, nor blade, nor root. Such another forward one was Saul, who took
all his degrees per saltum 1. Sam. 10. 6. and 9.
too, all of a sudden, he was turned into another man, and had another (not a
new) heart, his change was at highest at first, he was not Renewed day by day,
as other poor souls are content to be. The first time he ever was admitted
into the Society of the Prophets, he commenced Doctor, and Prophesied with the
best of them; in so miuch that the greatest notice was taken of him, What is
this that is come to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the Prophets? But the
second time he came into their company, at Najoth in Ramah, there he put them
down all, 1 Samuel 19. 23, 24. When he came to Najoth the Spirit of God came upon
him, that he went on and prophesied, and he stripped off his clothes also, and
prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down, or feil naked all that
day, and all that night, wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the Prophets?
They stood and Prophesied v. 20. he went on, he could run and prophecy: They
strip off their lusts, he his clothes; they lay their hearts naked, he his
body; They are raised up to heaven, he falls down and lays along on the
earth; They go about their business, or get them some what to eat, at least
must to bed when night comes, he was so full of his spirit, that he lay down
naked all that day, and all that night. He neither eat, nor drank, nor slept,
nor rose, nor stirred, nor spoke, but lay as in a trance all that time; he
missed neither meat, nor drink, nor clothes, nor sleep: Here was an old
Adami^e, and a famous Quaker indeed. But do you ever read that he prophesied a
third time, or that he was ever the holier, or honester man for all this. Did
he after all this prophesying cease to persecute David ever the more to his
dying day? David is thought by some book learned men, to have a spirit of
prophecy too, but he was silent here: But Saul and his bloody followers, who
sought the life of David and Samuel, and took away the lives of so many
Priests, they all prophesied, v. 20. But Samuel and David's spirit, and Saul and
his Messengers spirit were not alike. I read indeed a third time of his
prophesying, mentioned 1 Samuel 18. 10. with his Javelin in his hand, but it was
both a mad and counterfit prophesying; Junius renders it, prophetico more se
componebat: and the Chaldee render it, Insaniebat. He was mad. This by the way.

3. He believes, and is baptized:] Outward profession justly gains admission
into the Christian Congregation. Our Judgment is of charity, not certainty; Is
of the outward man, not of the heart.

4. Take in hypocrisy with profession, and there is a faith makes one worse
then Infidelity; a Baptized person, worse then an unbaptized; a Christian worse
then a Pagan: Grace if counterfeit, Ordinances if rested in, Duties if slightly
performed, do leave us as far from the Kingdom of heaven, as no grace,
ordinance, or duty at all. Simon as good a Sorcerer still, as an unsound
professor.

The third part of his story, where we see the Ogdoas malorum spirituum (as
Irenaeus speaks) seven new worse spirits returning with the former, is set out
from the 14. to the 24. v. containing his demands and carriage to Peter, and
Peter's answer and carriage to him. Here does Magus show he had obtained what
before he aimed at, to be (...), some great and prime one Vulgo existimatur
Patriarcha h^reticorum, No. Test. Alsted.
in Iniquity: He would not be one of the Thirty, but the first of the Three of
Satan's Grandees, he might now glory if Cain, Lamech, or Judas, if Ebion,
Cerinthus, or Nicolas should be punished seven fold, surely Simon seventy fold:
He obtained the Primacy and chief Patriarchship among all the fathers of
Heretics: and he has further obtained this Indulgence, that he and his
followers in that black profession, should sit one at Satan's Right hand,
another at his Left, in his fiery Simonem omnium haereticorum esse Patrem ex eo
omnes haeres^s subsistunt, dixit Irenaeus. Ex hac amarissima Radice exortisunt
Dosithea^ni, Cleobani, Georthoni, Masbothei, Adrianistae, Eutichistae,
Cainistae. Theodoret.
Region, or Kingdom. Seven several sorts of haereticks, Ecclesiastical
writers affirm to have sprung from this Hidra, or Serpent.

But to return to this third part; It consists of his demands and carriage to
Peter, and of Peter's Reply to him. In the former you see what he did, he
offered money. 2. The occasion of it, when he saw that through laying on of the
Apostles hands, the Holy Ghost was given. 3. His End, or the conditions upon
which he was so ready to part with his money; Give me also this power that on
whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost, says he.

Obs. 1. Some creep in to Christian Society as Spies, to see and observe what
they teach, do, hold, and practice; He saw and marked their laying on of hands,
and the giving the Holy Ghost.

2. Many that come in as Spies at first, go Jude v. 12.
out as Spots at last.

3. One corrupt professor, seeks to corrupt another, yea the most sincere, and
the most eminent, Simon Magus sollicits Simon Peter.

4. Many make a gain of Godliness, and a Merchandise of Christian profession;
Magus would not have given so freely, if he had not expected to receive as
freely of others for the Holy Ghost, which he desired to buy, not keep; and
intended to sell, not to give.

5. A cunning close hypocrite may lurk undiscovered a while, but after a while
he lays open his own Impiety. Suo se indicio prodit.

In the other, viz. Peter's carriage to him, four things considerable.

1. Peter rejects him, and scorns his motion with the greatest detestation, v.
20. Thy money perish with thee.

2. Convinces him, both of his fin and danger, v. 20, 21. Because thou
thoughtest that the gift of God may be purchased with money, thou have neither
part, nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.

3. Admonishes and counsels him to two duties, Repent and pray, v. 22.

4. Concludes and pronounces a sentence of condemnation against him, and so
leaves him and gives him over, v. 23. I perceive thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of Iniquity.

Obs. 1. Wicked (though gainful) motions are to be scorned; and refused by the
Godly with the greatest detestation. Mat. 4. So Christ to Satan, offering all
the Kingdoms of the world. Our hearts cannot rise too high in Indignation
against sin, and temptations to sin.

2. We should not countenance but disclaim such as are otherwise of our own
religion, profession, society, or party, and hold and join with us, if they be
not Godly and sincere. Christ would not receive a true testimony to his
Divinity from a false Christ does there rebuke Satan for his confession, as at
other times for temptations. Dr. Reynoldes. That confession was indeed a
Temptation.
fiend; nor Paul applause toh is Ministry from an enchanting Pythonisse, Acts
16. 18.

3. Rotten hypocrites are to be handled roughly, Soundly Rattled, Roundly
shaken up, and reproved sharply, what ever come on it. Sons of Belial are to be
dealt with as Thorns, handled with Iron weapons, and thrust away with greatest
Indignation, 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7.

4. That is the best Ministry and Gospelpreaching which searches the heart,
sounds the depthes of sin, and lays open the danger of an unsound or sinful
state.

5. True Repentance is a necessary Gospel duty to be preached and practiced;
But Solemn and more then ordinary Repentance, after soul and fearful sins.

6. Repent and Pray] We should despair of none, but put them upon the use of
means. If Magus could have repented, and would have prayed, Peter could and
would have had hope of his well-doing for all that was past.

7. Wicked men are yet to pray, and to perform duty; Pray Magus. Let wicked men
pray, let them sing Psalms, let them hear; I do not say let them be wicked: It
is their sin if they do not pray, is not their sin to pray: Say not, my
children shall not pray, nor be taught to pray, till they be holy and
sanctified. As some pray by the Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. Luke 11. 13.
spirit, so others pray for the spirit first. Refuse not to join with such who
are no Saints in singing, praying, etc. which are the proper works of Saints.
Let wicked ones pray, I say, but let them repent as well as pray. Repent of
this thy wickedness and pray, etc.

8. Wicked and desperate sinners, after conviction, reproof, and plain
admonition are to be given over, and left to themselves and Gods Judgment, with
their blood running upon their own heads. Let the dart be left sticking in
their side, Let them take Rev. 22. 11.
their course and be filthy still; and let the word take its course, and become
a favor of death, to death to such. Here is no place for foolish pity, and
casting Gospel Pearls before such swine. The Godly Minister is unto God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2. 15.

None of these observations do we intend to stand upon. But the ninth and last,
which we shall fasten upon, is this; Doct. Sinful thoughts, got, rooted, and
entertained in the heart, put a man into a very sinful and woeful condition.
Or thus, If such sinful thoughts be received and entertained in the heart
without true and serious Repentance of them, and Earnest prayers against them,
the man is in a hopeless, and desperate state.

CHAP. II. The point explained, Proved and confirmed by sundry arguments in the
text.
FIrst, I say (for the opening of the terms in the position) Thoughts finfull
fixed, rooted, entertained] such was this in Magus (...) machinatio. Beza.
Cogitatio nimium dilute redditur. Significatur his vafrum Simonis commentum.
Leigh.
It was in his heart, and the two words used here signify fixed and
deliberate thoughts: (...) v. 20. which is more then a transient, injected,
sudden thought, or inconsiderate Imagination. And the other word in this verse
(...) rendered (thought) signifies more properly machination, project, design,
purpose of the heart.

Secondly, Peter would never have begun with such an Execration of his motion,
or used such an Imprecation on his Person, Thymony perish with thee, or thy
money and thee (...)
go into Perdition together (for so is the Grammatical reading) nor would he
have concluded with such a peremptory sentence of Condemnation, nor would he
have so Rattled, and Terrified him, if his sin and danger had not been very
great; nor lastly, would he have doubled all his Arguments, if it had not been
to leave him sensible of so great a mischief, and thoroughly to waken and warn
others. 1. He tells him twice of his thought, v. 20. and 22. 2. He tells him
twice or thrice of his state. 1. Thy heart is not right in the sight of God. 2.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. 3. Thou art in the gall of
Bitterness and bond of Iniquity.

Thirdly, He calls upon him to a double duty, Repent and pray.

Fourthly, And to drive him out of all his security, and to force him out of
his sloth, he makes him no absolute promise, nor so much as conditional
neither, but leaves him in doubt, yea a double doubt; 1. If, 2. perhaps. He
says not so much as Joel 2. 14. Who knows but the Lord may repent? but all he
says is Perhaps; and, as if that were too much yet, he puts in another If: If
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

For the evil of thoughts, consider these other Scriptures. Pro. 6. 18. among
those six things which God hates, The heart that devises wicked Imaginations
is one, Pro. 15. 26. The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord.
Esaias. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
tboughts. Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickcdness, that thou
may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? When the
Pharisees carped at some acts of our Savior, and reasoned, in their hearts, it
is said, Jesus knowing their thoughts, rebuked them, saying wherefore think you
evil in your hearts. Often it is said Mat. 9. 4.
in the Gospel, Jesus Christ took notice of their thoughts, Luke 11. 19. and
Luke 24. 38. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? By all which proofs it
appears, how much evil is in the evil thought.

Reasons. There be many reasons at hand in the Text. 1. These Proclaim what we
make of God, of the Gospel, and the ways and servants of God. Thy money perish
with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money. q. d. What a thought have thou conceived, what do thou think of God, of
the Holy Ghost, the gift of God, of the Gospel, and of us? Thou art all for
money thy self, thou think God is so, at least we are so, and that the
Gospel and gift of God is but a devise to get more money, Thy money and thy
thoughts perish together.

2. These thoughts lay open the heart, and show the temper of it, more then any
outward action or expression: Phisiognomy does not so declare the constitution
of the mind, not the Pulse of the heart, nor the urine of the disease, as the
thoughts do the state and frame of the heart, if thou will take the pains to
observe them, Vrina est meretrix, and baptism, profession, hearing, wondering,
money giving, are no better, show not the Christian to himself, so much as the
thoughts. Thy heart is not right, says Peter, because thou have harbored such
a thought, in the sight of God. Jer. 4. 14. Wash thine heart, how long shall
vain thoughts lodge within thee? Where vain thoughts are lodged, the heart is
not clean.

3. These to a Judicious and discerning Eye, leave in a most desperate state,
what ever Ignorant, wicked or self-deceiving persons may dream to the contrary,
I perceive, says Peter (I know thou think not so ill of thy self, or thy
state) I perceive that thou art in the very gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of Iniquity. That is, thy heart and state is as bad can be, as bitter as
gall. Thou art as fast in sin as if bound to it with chains. It is more, says
Beza, then to have Gall or bitterness in him, as it is more to be in wine, or
to be in the water, or (...), Extra se erat, v. 13. Idem verbum v. 9. non eodem
sensu acceptum, ibi Magus prestigiisf acinavit, dement avil spectatores, hic
ipse quasi in Extasi positus totus obstupuit.
to be in passion, then to say win^, water, passion is in a man; he is overcome
of wine, drowned in the water, full of passion: as the like phrases, To be in
darkness, to be in the flesh signify, to be wholly so, full of darkness,
nothing but flesh, etc.

4. Baptism, hearing, joining, and continuing in the best and purest Church,
Exstasies, Raptures, admirations, greatest Expressions of affections, nay
faith, yea the Holy Ghost too, in many common gi^ts, and the greatest
Liberality and contribution of the largest sum of money, put into the best
hands, nay the greedie^t desire and t^irst of the most eminent gifts, and to
be a Communicator of them, profit nothing, but are all in vain, where wicked
thoughts lodge and are harbored. All those soremmed, were in this soul
Hypocite Magus, yet was he in the gall of birternesse; he was baptized,
believed, and seemed to be so far affected and transported above the common
sort, that he was in an Ecstasy, or Rapture, so the word signifies. He had also
the Holy Ghost, (as it may seem, for diverse had, who could say, Lord have not
we propl esied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and done many
mighty works, yet will Christ profess to them, I never k^ew ^ou) Besides, it
is said, when Mat. 7. 22. Heb. 6. 4.
Peter and John came, they bid their hands on them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, and this Magus was one of that number: And again Simon offered money
(not that he might receive the Holy Ghost, for that he had already, but) that
he might have like power to give, or confer the Holy Ghost. Therefore look well
to your selves you Professors, and look well to your he^rts, and to your
thoughts.

5. Nothing but deep, Solemn, and Particular Repentance (Repent of this thy
wickedness) and hard praying, and beginning all anew will help, where these
evil thoughts have taken root in the heart; All the prayers of the Church,
without thine own (Pray ye unto the Lord for me, said he) all thy own prayers,
without Repentance, all General re^entance without a particular bitter
bewayling of this evil in the heart, will leave thee but in a doubtful and
desperate state.

6. Nay it is well if any prayer, and all the repentance in the world will be
accepted in such a case. He gives no absolute promise, nor yet so much as a
conditional. But a b^re perhaps (if perhaps thy sin may be forgiven thee) q.
d. I will not say what true Repentance ^ccompanyed with e^rnest prayers may do
(for they do much with God, and have saved many a poor soul) But in this case,
I say, Look well to thy Repentance, and how thou prayest, that it be not common
and slight prayer and overly Repentance, for if thy after-Repentance be no
better then thy former faith, and thy future prayers no better then thy present
profession, all is desperate: The man and his money, his faith and repentance,
his prayers and profession, will all perish together.

7. The malignity of evil thoughts is as witchcraft, (Rebellion is as bad as
witchcraft) 1 Samuel 15. 23.
these worse it seems. These make the case of a professor, worse then sorcery,
witchcraft, or any other sin in time of our Ignorance: Simon the Sorcerer may
be pardoned and received into the Church when he believes; Simon the Professor
is cast out for his evil thoughts, and left in a hopeless condition without
repentance. Here I say again, look to it Professors, look more narrowly to your
hearts and thoughts after conversion, then on all your evil ways before.

8. From what he Replies, Pray ye for me, etc. where evil thoughts are
entertained they deaden prayer. There is no prayer used, where these are
harbored, nor can such in their greatest distress, when they are put upon it,
and pressed earnestly to it, and when their life and salvation lies upon it,
know how to go about to pray. But like an Image or stock he stands, and all he
says for himself is, Pray ye for me. q. d. I cannot pray if my life lay on it,
what ever comes on it; if other good peoples prayers will not help me, I am a
damned person, I have never been used to this duty of prayer that you so press
me to. And here ye Profane ones, and Professors both look to it. 1. Ye
Profane Job. 15. 4.
ones, who cast off fear, and restrain prayer before God; you who will not use
to pray in peace, and do not ordinarily, cannot pray in distress, nor when you
should Extraordinarily. But this (...) would-be, this great one stands like a
great block, and says, Pray ye for me. But it is our own meat which
nourishes; our own faith that saves; our own prayers that are heard. The
child shall not die for his fathers transgression, nor shall he live for his
fathers obedience and holiness; The child happily may be nourished by what the
mother eats, but nature inableth the little Infant to draw that nourishment
from the mother and make it his own: But the child is not saved by the parents
faith, unless it join and make the parents faith and holiness, his own. 2.
Look to it ye Professors, that ye begin not at the wrong end, with common and
General faith and baptism, resting there, and neglect repentance and solemn
prayer, least ye find your own faith (false faith) and outward privileges to
deceive you, and others prayers unable to help you.

9. Lastly, Consider how vain and foolish these evil thoughts received, and
harbored, make and leave the heart to dream of separating sin and punishment
(as inseparable, as night and darkness, as winter, and cold) he is only
troubled at the punishment, not at all sensible of his sin. Pray ye for me
(says he) that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me. But in
vain it is to presume we may Eat the forbidden fruit and not die, and to pray
that though we hold on in sin, God should hold off the punishment.

Thus shall we leave Magus as we found him, bound in the bond of iniquity, and
leave those reasons which we have from him, and from the Text, and call in some
other, from other Scriptures.

CHAP. III. Sundry other Reasons of the Point from other Scriptures.
Reas. 1. THE evil thought is the Original sin, or the original of sin, They
are Originale peccatum, or at least Originale peccati. They are the little
sparks of Hell, by which the whole world is set on fire; The spawn of which
all sin is bred; The seed of the Serpent; The Egg of the Cockatrice, or
Crocodile: Strange it is that so great a monster as the Crocodile, whose body
is sometimes Thirty foot long, and his tail as long as his whole body, whose
Throat so wide that he can swallow an heifer whole, should yet be bred of an
Egg no Heylia.
bigger then a Turkies. But more horrid it is that the worst monster sin, is
bred of a less egg, an evil thought. The evil thought is the Devils Dam, that
the Succubus, the Devil the Incubus. It is the bed in which Satan lodges, in
which his brats are conceived and born, The hot Sand in which this Ostridge
lays and leaves his eggs, which will hatch and bring forth of themselves.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed; then
when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when perfected,
brings forth death, Jam. 1. 13. The evil thought is the Prima matter, or
materia Prima, the first mother, or matter of all sin, capable of every form of
evil. It is the little end of the wedge, which entering, makes way for the great
to follow: The little Boy, which let in at the window, sets the doors wide
open, for all the greater Thieves to enter and carry all away.

The Devil is more modest (or too much a serpent) to say at first, Curse God
and die, Blaspheme, cast thy self down headlong, give me thy soul, commit
adultery, and give thy self over to all uncleanness with Greediness, he has
learnt a better and surer way, he uses Art, method, Stratagems; And as Pompey
when he had in vain assaulted a City, and could not take it by force, devised
this Stratagem; In way of agreement, he told them he would leave the siege, and
make peace with them; only desired he might leave a few weak and sick
soldiers among them to be cured; They let in, when the City was secure, let in
Pompey's army: So Satan desires but a look, or a wanton thought at first, he
needs no more. All the sin that is in the world, had his rise from a thought;
all Jeroboams sin, who did evil, and made Israel to sin began here: Jeroboam
said in his heart, If the 1 King. 12. 26
people go up to Jerusalem to worship, etc. then shall the Kingdom return from
me to the house of David, etc. all Judas his sin began in a thought; yea Adams
first sin, and Eves, began in a thought; Satan's temptation begat a thought,
that a look, that a liking, that a lusting, that a tasting, that enticing her
husband, that fellowship in sin, that running from God, that denying, or
defending the fact, thence a flood of Belial and wickedness, which has
drowned the whole world (a flood before the flood) a flood more dreadful and
general then Noah's flood was, that drowned bodies, this souls; There eight
escaped, here not one; That lasted about thirteen months, then dried up, This
continues to this day in its height; Even from Adams fall to this day, every
Imagination of man is evil, and only evil continually: Genesis 6. 5.
And which is saddest of all, This flood had its head in Paradise, and from
thence is divided into several streams, compassing the whole earth.

What is unbelief made up of, but a heap of doubting, and distrustful
thoughts? What is Atheism, but vile impious thoughts condensed? What is malice,
but mischievous thoughts boiled up to a consistence?

The whole earth was once well watered by a little cloud no bigger then the
palm of a man's hand. The main Sea is made up of Rivers, they of less springs,
they of many single drops multiplied, and those drops bred of a thin vapor,
which you would think had nothing in it; So that a thin vapor is great grand
mother to the Ocean, and a thin slender thought to the greatest sin. Cogitatio
prava delectationem parit, delectatio consensum, consensus actionem, actio
cousuetudinem, consuetudo necessitatem, necessitas mortem. An evil thought,
says Bernard, begets delight, delight consent, consent action, an act a
custom, custom a necessity, necessity destruction.

Reas. 2. But though the evil thought be the original of sin, yet it stays not
there, but soon proceeds to more ungodliness, and frets like a Gangrene. How
great an Ilias malorum or volume of evils may be contained in a Nutshell!
Behold how great a matter a little fire consumes! From this one son of the
Bondwoman proceed twelve Princes of darkness. Mar. 7. 21. After the evil
thought, follow adulteryes, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, Blasphemy pride,
foolishness. One fly-blow taints the whole flesh: The Leprosy taking a
thread, overspreads the whole piece of cloth, warp and woofe; or taking a
stone, overruns all the wall and fabric of the house. The waters of the
sanctuary Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4.
rise not so fast as the floods of ungodliness, from the ancles at first to
the knees, then to the loins, then to the neck, then over head and ears. You
may observe how Romans 1. 21. vain Imaginations lead to uncleanness, v. 24.
Uncleanness to Vile affections, v. 26. Vile affections soon grow up to a
reprobate sense; and then it follows, they were filled with all
unrighteousness, v. 29, 30, etc. where a bead roll of above twenty sins comes
trayling after. And Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. you may observe with what speed and
increase this evil weed grows; The thin vapor presently became a drop, The
drop made the spring, the spring a River, the River a Sea. This I say that ye
henceforth walk not as other Gentiles, in the (vanity of their minds) having
the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
Ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts, who being
past feeling have given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. Here is first the seed, then the root, then the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear, then there wants nothing
but a sickle to cut down all, and a fire to burn it. Observe here the linkes of
the chains of darkness, the gradation of sin, and the descent into Hell. The
first head of the lake of Hell is vanity of mind, that overflowes the whole
understanding and darkens it, then follows alienation of affection, then
blindness or hardness of heart, that begets Insensiblenesse, unsensiblenesse
(of sin) begets desperateness (and unsensiblenesse of danger) desperateness
begets Impudence, Impudence delight, delight Insatiablenesse, and thus thrusts
into the midst of Hell, and fixes a gulf, that there is no coming back. See
how much mischief arises from an evil thought.

It was a strange assertion of the Philosopher, that the world was made up of
Atoms, but I may safely say, the whole world of sin in our hearts and lives is
made up of these Atoms of evil thoughts united. Out of nine single figures the
greatest numbers in Arithmetic are made up; And out of four and twenty letters
all the words and languages in the world are made; so of a few evil thoughts,
all evil actions So that all sin may be said to be virtualiter (vitialiter
potius) virtually, or rather vitially in the evil thought comprehended and
contained.

Reas. 3. It is by the ill thought only that the heart is defiled, Mat. 15.
19. out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, says our Savior, and these defile
the man. It is not what we see, hear, read, eat, drink, touch, taste, nor what
we are tempted to which defiles, but what we think. There would be no murders,
adulteries, fornications to defile, if it were not for evil thoughts. Joseph
was solicited to unchastity, our Savior tempted other ways but neither
defiled, because no entertainment given in the thoughts. And Joseph's Mistress,
Ananias, Saphira, Simon Magus, though not outwardly tempted, were inwardly
defiled, because of evil thoughts. These are the unclean birds which defile
their own nest. The Poison in the Toad or Serpent, hurts not it self, but
others only, this poison of evil thoughts kills it self, not any other; no man
is defiled till the heart defiled, the heart not defiled till the thought.

Reas. 4. These are Primitiae and Primogeniti Diaboli, the first fruits, and
firstborn of the Devil. Our Savior ranking many unclean and foul sins, sets
an Imprimis on evil thoughts in that place forenamed, out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, adulteryes, fornications, etc. as if this was the unclean spirit
that brings in all the other twelve unclean spirits, more wicked then himself,
for so they are, murder, adultery, blasphemy, etc. are worse much then only
bare thoughts. This is the Beelzebub or the Prince of Devils, whom all the rest
do follow and attend upon. These are the males of Edom or firstborn of Hell,
which if destroyed, no fear of being overcome by all Satan's forces. These the
wels of Moab, which the Israelites are commanded to stop up, 1 King. 3. 19.
These the first fruits of Hell, as good thoughts are the first fruits or
blossoms of the spirit, the seed of God, the Initialls of grace; when a young
convert can do but little, cannot yet believe, pray rejoice, much less suffer,
yet can he desire, he has some motions, wishes, longings, stirrings of his
spirit, Ejaculations, some sigh, sob, groan, here is true grace; So are the
evil thoughts, the porch or broad gate by which you enter into that wide way
which leads to destruction. They say that witches have no power to hurt a man
till they get or borrow somewhat of him, and if he give or lend them but the
least thing to the value of a halfpenny, they have enough now to do their will
upon him. I am sure it is so with Satan, have thou nothing to do with him thou
art safe, but if thou lend him but an ill thought, he has thee now under his
power. It is but small policy to let an enemy into the outworks, in hope to
drive him out after; make good thy ground: So to let Satan into the thought,
and to think to drive him back by reasoning and disputing it with him, will
endanger all.

Reas. 5. We should the more carefully look to our thoughts, because they give
us the best and truest way and means of knowing our selves: The man is known by
his heart, the heart by the thought, Animus cujusque is est quisque, and
cogitatio cujusque est animus cujusque; Such as the heart is such is the man;
and such as the thought is such the heart. Pro. 23. 7. As he thinks in his
heart, so is the man, says Solomon. God is said, Pro. 16. 2. to weigh the
spirits, when he tryes the weight of the man; so much spirit, so much good
weight, all else is light: And when he searches the heart to take measure of
it, he looks upon the Imagination of the thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. and by them
Judges what the heart and man is. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God
of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind,
for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of
the thoughts.

As the Goldsmith weighing a piece of plate, takes it out of the case, or
paper, etc. takes away the dross, or dirt, if any stick to it, and searches
if it be hollow, whether there be no deceit, and gives you for so much silver,
or gold, no more; so God in weighing man, knocks off this and that, and reckons
only so much spirit, so much weight. Or as the Tailor, in taking measure pulls
off the upper garments, etc. so God that he may take a true measure of us (or
we of our selves) strip off all till he come to the heart and spirit.

Reas. 6. These evil thoughts are so much the more dangerous, because men do
more securely live in them, as being out of Cognizance of the world, therefore
the wicked often boasts himself, Psalm. 10. 3. and often blesses himself in his
hearts desire, he says, who sees, who can say black is mine eye? They search
out iniquity and accomplish a diligent search, because the inward thought of
every one of them, and the heart is deep, they say who shall see them, Psalm.
64. 56.

The evil Thoughts are the dark Cloister, or the Chambers of Imagery, wherein
are to be seen the greater abominations. There are Ezekiel. 8.
strange forms of creeping things, all abominable beasts, and all the Idols of
the world portrayed upon the wall. As the heart of the godly one is a Well
sealed, so the wicked is as Solomon's Whore, a deep ditch, and a narrow pit; so
deep as not to be sounded to the bottom, so narrow as not to be looked into, as
deep as Hell, and as dark as Hell. Bernard complained his heart was like that
great deep in which are Reptilia sine numero; how much more, may it be said of
the wicked, his heart is the great deep, in which are things creeping
innumerable, small and great beasts; There go the greatest ships, Psalm. 104.
25, 26.
(and are no burden, want no Sea-room) there is the great Leviathan (the
greatest creature, and monster in nature) who does play therein. The great Sea
is not more full of various creatures, which harbors and fosters them all,
then the heart of sinful thoughts; Who can tell the number of creeping Lusts,
and crawling Corruptions? There are the great beasts and small, sins of all
sorts, some more heinous and horrid thoughts, some more vain and frivolous, and
there is only room for the great ships to ride, and the great Leviathan to
sport, whom the lesser Rivers cannot receive; so in the heart are the greatest
and foulest of sins no where else to be bestowed.

And because the heart and thoughts are so deep and indiscernable to man, he is
apt to think they are so to God; therefore do these Athiests in these close
chambers of their Imagery say, The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken
the earth, we are out of Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 14. 3.
men's sight and Gods too; Or otherwhile, these hypocrites dare come into Gods
sight, with these Idols in their heart, and take the boldness to inquire of
him, and pray to him, as if he only saw as man sees, and could not judge, but
by outward appearance, nor search the heart. And therefore you may observe
throughout the Scripture, those are branded as the most notorious offenders,
and threatened with the heaviest judgments who do harbor these sinful
thoughts in their hearts. Woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from
the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who
knows us? Surely your turning of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the
potters clay. For shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? Or
shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, he has no understanding?
Shall not he that made the eye, see, and he that made the heart understand? as
much as the Potter who made the vessel, knows the mould, and make, and measure
of it? Esaias 29. 15, 16. see also, Ezekiel. 8. 12. Psalm. 10. 11, 13. 64. 4, 5, 6,
7. 94. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Reas. 7. But as deep and dark as they are, the Lords eye is upon them, and
observes every one of them. The Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are
vain. Yea he understands the thoughts a far off, (Psalm. 139. 2.) or long
before, as well as we know what the harvest will be by the seed, and that a
company of croking frogs will follow, when we see the spawn.

First, He knows our thoughts a far off, that is, long before they break
forth in any Act. Deuteronomy. 31. 16. 19. Behold says the Lord to Moses, thou shallt
sleep with thy Fathers, and this people will rise up and go a whoring after
other Gods, etc. For I know their imaginations which they go about, even now,
before I have brought them into the land which I swear unto them.

Secondly, He knows the thoughts a far off, that is, long before we think it;
as Elisha told Hazael, what outrageous acts he should commit when he should be
King of Syria, 2 King. 8. 13.
when it was the furthest end of his thought that either he should be so great
a person, or so vile a monster: Is thy servant a dead dog, says he, that I
should do thus? The Lord Ezekiel. 38. 10.
foreseeth what thoughts, counsels, projects, ambition, greatness, and high
places will engender.

Thirdly, As he knows what we never yet acted, or what we never yet imagined,
so, what we never shall act, (but what we have in our thoughts) if we were not
hindered; he therefore tells David, that the men of Keilah had such a purpose
to deliver him up into Saul's hands; though Saul never came thither, and David
never stayed to try, 1 Samuel 23. 12. Will the men of Keilah deliver me into the
hand of Saul? and the Lord said they will deliver thee up.

The inward man of the heart, is the only privileged place where external
Courts have no jurisdiction to exercise, and the several Thoughts are the
Casus reservati, the Cases reserved only to Divine Cognizance, but here
therefore does God show his Sovereignty, and heavenly Prerogative most. He sets
up his Throne in the heart, gives out commands to the thoughts, he binds them
in chains (of duty) for obedience, and binds them in chains (of wrath and
darkness) for disobedience. Here does he exercise his Legislative power, here
does he keep a daily Visitation, and here does he chiefly exercise his
Judicial Authority. Other causes may be tried below in man's day, at man's Bar;
The Thought-knowing is reserved to Gods day, and the judging to his Bar.

There are only five who have to do with the Thoughts.

1. The Father, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Solomon my Son, know the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and willing mind, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations, etc.

2. Jesus Christ (which is an Argument of his divinity) Rev. 2. 23. All the
Churches shall know, that I am he which searches the hearts and the reins.
And I will give to every one of you according to your works.

3. The holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God.

4. The Word, Which is Gods Law, and has his power and authority committed to
it: In his name to bind and loose; save and destroy, as the Law of the Land
has the power of the supreme judicatory. For what is the Law, but an
Omnipresent (unseen) Magistrate, or Parliament. So the Word of God is Gods
Vicegerent, has God-like Power and Jurisdiction, Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of
God is quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart. So, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The
weapons of our warfare, (the Word and Gospel which we preach) are not carnal,
but mighty through God, to the casting down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

5. The Conscience is Gods Delegate, and the Laws Officer, in his own
Precincts, to take an account of the thoughts, to examine them, check, restrain
or censure them, and upon all occasions to make a privy search in the heart as
often as it will. The Spirit of Prove. 20. 27. Romans 2. 15.
man is the candle of the Lord, searching the inner parts of the Belly. So that
if Conscience do his office right, it must be as those living creatures, full
of eyes within, and look narrowly to the thoughts; and if thou will do any Rev.
4. 8.
part of thy duty as thou ought, thou must admit Conscience to be Ex
intimus, and a Secretioribus; to be thy Hushai, thy bosom friend, and of the
Cabinet counsel, and say, thus and thus says Ahithophel, but what say thou
Hushai? Thus and thus my thoughts suggest, but what say thou Conscience: and
it must be to thee a Sacratioribus too, thy Confessor or dome^tick Chaplain, to
whom thou must give an account of all thy actions and intentions.

And these are all who have to do with our Thoughts at present, but there is a
day a coming, wherein God will lay open all enclosures, and discover all hidden
things of darkness, turning each man's inside outward, and will make known the
Counsels of the 1 Cor. 4. 5. Romans 2. 15. 16. Eccles. 12. 14.
heart, as the Apostle says. And then all the world shall be made privy to our
Thoughts, and be as well witnesses and judges of them, as of our Actions. Mean
time, let the People of God be busy about ordering and judging their own
thoughts, let them forbear to pry into other men's, judge nothing before the
time (we shall come to judge and be judged too, soon enough) and let them
patiently undergo all other men's censures, and misconstructions, (as unknown,
yet well known; as deceivers, yet true men, 2 Cor. 6. 8.) and refer all to God,
who will bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their integrity as
the noon day. And then shall every one have 1 Cor. 4. 5.
his praise of God, as the Apostle says in the place forenamed.

Lastly, Evil thoughts, as they are the first seed of Satan, and original of
sin, as we said in our first reason, so are they the last refuge and strong
hold which Satan has to retire unto, when he is driven out of his outworks.
He first hires these Cellars and Vaults below, when he intends the most horrid
powder plot, and when he doubts open assaults, to foul actual sins may be
repulsed, his last device and stratagem is, to lay a privy Ambuscado in the
Thoughts. Therefore must all our batteries be made against these strong holds,
to cast down imaginations, and to bring 2 Cor. 10. 4.
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. When we have with
Joshua, destroyed all the enemies that appear abroad, we must at last destroy
the Kings themselves, and the very chief of them, that were immured, and shut
up in caves. After we have Josh. 10. 22.
escaped shipwreck, as Paul, by flying the pollutions of the world, take heed
this Viper fasten not on thee, but cast it into the fire, that thou be not
destroyed by the Pollutions of the mind. Our most dangerous conflict of all is
not with flesh and blood, no nor with Principalities and powers, (the foulest
and fiercest devils) but with spiritual wickednesses. Always diseases of the
mind are more dangerous then of the body, and sins in the mind, worse then
carnal pollutions. It is as poison in the spring, or in the heart that
presently disperseth itself all over. Who knows not that Error, heresy,
atheism, unbelief, hypocrisy, are worse then carnal filthiness? Yet who
considers it? All the sins of Satan which are worse than man's, are only
spiritual wickednesses, not corporeal; as flesh and blood are not so
dangerous as principalities and powers, so bodily wickedness in earthly
things, are not so bad as spiritual wickednesses in heavenly or higher things.
The one makes us like beasts indeed, but the other like Devils. Here look well
about you Professors, you have an enemy in your bosom, a Dalilah in your bed;
Satan is secure, you may go hear, pray, believe, be baptized, join with the
godly in every duty, and be as forward to see to as the best; yet is he safe
and you betrayed, if he can fasten one evil Thought, and get entertainment for
a few sickly Soldiers, as Pompeys Stratagem was, (none of the most desperate
and violent) yea give him but one, he desires no more; Possession in Law is
kept, as well by one as twenty. Look to it then, I say. The Thought is Satan's
reserve, and last charge; Keep him out here, thou art a Victor; yield here, all
is lost. You Profane ones, your first and greatest work is, to wash your
hands; Jam. 4. 8.
but you Professors, your first and last work is, to purify your hearts. The
filthy Leprosy sluck closer to Gehazi then to Naaman, so 2 King. 5. 27
will pollution of mind, stick more dangerously to a disciple, if he take not
heed, then all profaneness to an ignorant man that never yet knew better.

CHAP. IV. Of the several kinds of Thoughts.
AND now I may say, I am in a Wood, or am entering into a wild field, being
about to speak of Thoughts, or into a howling wilderness, being about to speak
of Evil Thoughts. I am not entering into Jonathans Wood dropping honey, but into
Absaloms which devoured more men then the 1 Samuel 14. 25. 2 Samuel 18. 8.
sword, and I may not say, as in our Proverb, where I cannot see Wood for
Trees, but where for Wood and Trees, it is hard to see any way.

Thoughts, some Divines rank into three sorts: Though I shall reduce them to
two, as to our purpose, and insist mainly on one kind only, even the worst of
the three. There are three kinds of thoughts, says Learned and Acute Dr. Ames,
conversant about Evil.

1. The first and most innocent whereof, is Lib. 3. de Consc^ent. ^. 20.
about the simple and bare apprehension of Evil.

2. The second, is not so good, when together with the apprehension of the
mind, there is also some inclination in the Will to consent.

3. The third and worst, is when deliberated upon, it has gained a full
consent and approbation.

The first of these is without sin, for it was found in Christ, when being
tempted, Mat. 4. he fully and sufficiently apprehended the Evil motion
propounded, but detesled and abhorred it. Hence it is a Maxim, and resolved
Case, Scire malum non est malum; barely to know evil is no evil. When Solomon
meditated and wrote of the wicked wiles of the subtle Harlot, Prove. 7. 6, 7.
When he gave himself to the Theory, to the studying and investigation of
mischief, and madness, and folly. Eccles. 2. 12. he was not thereby defiled,
but instructed. The Physician looking on the disease, is not thereby diseased,
nor the Minister when studying or discoursing of the foulest nature of the
foulest sins, and Satan's monstrous methods, and stratagems, is nothing thereby
defiled; yet had we need deal warily and considerately, as the Dogs at Nile,
least we should be snapt; or as Ulysses amongst the Syrenes, stopped his servants
ears, and bound himself to a Mast, that he might not be enchanted by their
Songs. So should Ministers and students, herein do as those, who go by some ill
and offensive savor, they stop their noses, or smell to some better sent, to
prevent the offensivenesse.

The other two kinds have both of them their part of sin in them, and the later
more. Holy Bernard makes also these three kinds, and resembles the first to
Dirt, which bes^otteth the body, when dashed on it, but makes no blunesse, or
skar; when it is washed, there is no sign of it. The second he resembles to
Blows, which cause bruises, blackness, wounds, those make deformed and sick
and cause pain, but no death follows. But the third sort of deliberate
entertained thoughts, he compares to a mortal Stab, or deadly wound, which
neglected brings certain death. So may a good Christian be touched with the
first, and troubled P^ccati cogitatio decolorat, affec^tia vuluerat, consensus
omnin^ animam necat and oss a frangit. Idem.
with the second, but let him take heed of the third, that he be not
heart-stabbed, or have his bones broken with the last. Let no man, says he, be
regardlesse of the two former, for, etsi non sint mortiferae sunt certe
periculosae, although they be not deadly, yet are they dangerous.

But I shall, as I said, refer all ill Thoughts to two heads. There are some
which are transient, unvoluntary, undeliberate, such are as the motes in the
clearest sunshine, and not as congregated clouds, causing any darkness at
all, and are inseparable from our clearest day and purest state. Ex toto caveri
non possunt quamdiu in hoc corpore mortis peregrinamur a Domino. It is
impossible to be wholly free from them, for any that yet carries about a body
of death with him, says the same Bernard. And hence it was that holy Austine
was wont to pray, Educ me a necessitatibus meis. Lord deliver me from my
unavoidable sins. My unavoidables are also inexcusables. These kind of
thoughts, it is true, lesten not our Justification in the least, which is
perfect and complete notwithstanding them, no nor do they spoil sanctification,
though they grieve the Saint. Sanctification is nevertheless true
notwithstanding these, the less perfect it is indeed, and perfection who looks
for here? These moates are as inseparable from the mind, as the shadow from the
body, and show all is not yet so clear below; our air not so pure, and our
earth, when thick fogs ascend not, yet a dust there is. These are we to be
humbled Daemonum est malas cogitationes suggerere, nostrum est cas illico
expellere. Nam in animo nostro eas jacere nostrae deputatur culpae. Voluntate
sua cadit qui cadit, voluntate Dci stat qui stat. Bern.
for, yet not to despair because of them, unless in thy self-sanctification,
who can say his heart is clean? Prove. 20. 9. These we can no more help or
hinder, then we can the flying of a bird over our heads, though we may hinder
the birds resting on our head and building her nest there. Joseph's Brethren
could not hinder the putting of the money into their sacks, or the Cup into
Benjamins, when they had not the keeping of their sackes themselves, but they
could when they saw their sacks open, disown, disallow, and dislike what they
could not help. These are like the weeds which the earth puts up of it self,
which the Gardener never sowed, nor willingly watered, but when he finds them
peep, he is at them with his spade or hands, to dig or pluck them up, yet do
they grow again, they are his trouble and find him continual work, but they
are not charged upon him, as if he was altogether negligent, or unskilful.
These are like the Ship sailing in the sea, which cuts the waves, but leaves no
impression, like the Eagle in the air, or the Arrow shot out of the Bow, or
like the Serpent on a Rock, which slides away and leaves no mention of their
abiding. These are in scripture called by Misso ratiocinio recti quod dcus
mandaverat, ac indiderat infinita alia ratiocinia cogit^tiones and studia
suscepit. Jun. in Eccl. 7. 29.
several Names. 1. Motions, Romans 7. 2. Imaginations, Genesis 6. 5. 3. Reasonings,
2 Cor. 10. 4. 4. Wanderings, or walkings of the soul, Eccles. 6. 9. 5.
Inventions, Eccles. 7. 29.

2. There are also other Thoughts, which are more ^ deliberate, and therefore
far more dangerous. Those were Gnats, these Camels; those Moats in the Eye,
these Beams; those Atoms or Moates in the Air, not hindering the Sunshine,
these thick Clouds; those Arrows Flying, these Sticking fast in the But; those
a Ship Volant or Sailing, these a Ship at Anchor; those a Serpent on the Rock,
these a Serpent in a Rock, or in his Den; these as the Birds Roosting in our
house, those as Samson Judge. 15. 15.
assaulted with the Philistines, whom he discomfited; these as Sampson asleep,
in Dalilahs Judge. 16. 19.
lap, if he sleep on he is undone. In a word, those are like the pulling off of
Joseph's Garment, when his chastity was not touched, he was accused, troubled,
yet conscience pure: These like Tamars Vail, and harlots Genesis 38. 14.
attire put on, who purposely sat in the way ready to yield, if not to entice
her Father in Law. These if not the worst of sins, of which more hereafter, yet
we may safely say, they are the sins of the worst, who have deliberated,
plotted, projected, conceived, travailed to be delivered of their sinful
conceptions. Thus did Cain, Lamech, Pharaoh, Amnon, Absalom, Jeroboam, Ahab,
Judas, Magus, and those Grandees in iniquity, come to be so transcendently
impious, and their sins and persons out of measure sinful. These show more of
the habit and temper of the soul, and are described by other names and
expressions; as, 1. Saying in the heart, Psalm. 14. 1. 1 Kings 12. 26. 2.
Minding and savouring things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5, 6. 3. Searching of heart,
Judge. 5. 16. Psalm. 64. 6. 4. Devices, Prove. 3. 29. Psalm. 36. 4. Prove. 6. 18.
Isa. 33. 7, 8. Micah 2. 1. 5. Purposes, Job. 33. 17. As Esau purposed in his
heart to kill Jacob, Genesis 27. 42. Herod to kill Peter, Acts 12. 6. Councels, 1
Cor. 4. 5. Psalm. 33. 10. 11. 7. Plottings, Psalm. 37. 12. So this word in the
Text, spoken of Magus, (...), signifies. 8. Traveling with sin, Psalm. 7. 14.
9. Studying, Prove. 24. 2. 10. That which is set upon the heart, or spirit,
Ezekiel. 20. 32. Quod ascendit super spiritum vestrum. Arias Mont. That which
comes into your mind. 11. Reckoning of sin before hand, I will pursue, I will
overtake, I will divide the spoil, Exodus 15. 9. Nothing but I will, I will.
12. Fixed resolutions for time to come, Eccl. 8. 11. The heartfully set to do
evil. 13. Delight in sin, if they can come at it to commit it, Prove. 2. 14. and
4. 17. 14. Greediness after sin to be committed, Ephesians. 4. 18. Lastly,
Greevedness of mind, if disappointed of their sinful desires, Prove. 4. 16.
Their sleep is taken away that night, when they could do no mischief by day.
These are Scala inferni the Devils ladder, whereby sin is raised to the highest
elevation; of these and such as these are we to speak. Yet I do not promise to
speak of every particular Thought, that were more then I could make good, or
any other whatsoever. It were an easier task to write of the whole habitable
world, or of all the several Creatures in the Universe, then to speak of every
kind of thought; those may be numbered, these cannot; Man has sought out so
many inventions.

CHAP. V. Ot the several kinds of Deliberate Thoughts.
BUT here beloved, before I begin, I must forewarn you not to expect any
pleasant sight, I am not about to raise up a Samuel, but a more horrid Ghost,
and if you come but to gaze and behold, I may say to you, as our Savior
concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken
with the wind? (such is the thought) but would it were no worse, But what come
ye out to see, a man clothed in soft raiment? or come ye to see a Prophet? no
but a man clothed with filthy raiment, as Josua was, and no prophet neither,
but an impostor. Yea I may say as David to Saul, What are we come into this
wilderness to look after, a 1 Samuel 24. 14. and 26. 20.
Dead dog (or stinking carrion, yea that we are and worse for its noisomenesse)
or a flea, or Partridge for their mobility, and nimblenesse? Yea I shall dig
through the wall, and represent you with the ugliest sight of Ezekiel. 8. 12.
foulest sins in the chambers of imagery; and worse then that. Turn again and
you shall see the pale horse, and he that sat upon him, Rev. 6. 8.
whose name is death, and Hell following after him: yea once more, turn again,
and yea shall see yet worse, The bottomless pit opened, and the smoke thereof
ascending as the smoke of a furnace, darkening the air, Rev. 9. 12.
and swarms of noisome multiformed locusts covering the earth.

Had we been to speak of good thoughts, they had been a pleasant subject of
discourse, a pleasant object to behold, like Ashers cup, or cupbord, affording
royal dainties, Genesis 49. 20.
A garden of Eden they had been for God to walk in, a fair upper Room furnished
for Christ to feast in, an heard of Deer of most Savoury meat. These are the
dry places where the unclean spirit can find no rest. But I am leading you into
an uncouth wilderness, now I am to speak of thoughts; yea among moorish
places, and slime pits, now I am about to speak of evil thoughts; yea I must
bring you among a heard of filthy Swine, or to the mountains of Lions, and dens
of Leopardes, or into the Country of Savages, more cruel then Cannibals, more
terrible then Anakims. It is not the pleasant gate of the fountain that I am
set to work at, or the wall of the healing poople of Siloam by the Kings
garden, as they in Neh. 3. 15. But my charge and lot is, to work at the dung
gate. Neh. 3. 14. and to set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the
bars thereof. Good thoughts are not easily reduced into order; What shall we
then do with bad? Which are so mutinous, numerous, various, intricate,
restless, violent, moveable, uncertain, and obscure: So mutinous, as that not
content to obey Moses and Aaron, the captains the Lord has set over them, the
law and prophets, or the law and Gospel, they rise up in Arms, and say, let us
break his bonds asunder, and cast away all cords of subjection from us, and
make us a Captain to bring us into Egypt. So numerous as that it may be said
Jud. 6. 5.
of them as of the camp of the Midianites, which came up as Grasshoppers for
multitude, they and their camells were without number, they devour all before
them, and leave no green thing growing: Or like the army of Gog and Magog,
whose number is as the fand of the sea, Rev. 20. Their name may well be Legion
they are so many, and Legio fulminatrix, a Thundering Legion, they are so
dreadful and irresistible; And so various and diverse, that those creatures,
Ezekiel. 1. with four faces a piece, are not so hard to describe, and those
multiformed locusts out of the Bottomless pit, mentioned Revel. 9. 7, 8. are
not so horrid and monstrous as these, who have the same King set over them, the
Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name is Apollyon, Abaddon, or Destroyer. So
Intricate, and inexplicable and so close together, as the scales of Leviathan
stick not closer, and those wheels within other wheels, were not more
impacted, involved, and undiscernable. So restless, as the water out of the
Ezekiel. 1.
fountain is not more continually flowing; and so violent withal, as the
land-floud waters are not hurried down the steepest hills with like
impetuousnesse and raging fury. And so swift and moveable, as Asahels Roe-like
swiftness, and Jonathans Eaglelike 2 Samuel 2. 18. 2 Samuel 1. 23.
fleetnesse, are nothing to their motion, and velocity, yea the suns
swiftness, which in twelve hours courseth from East to West, and in one hours
space is said to run 1038442 miles is, not so swift as the motion of the
thought which in one moment passes from East to West, yea from Heaven to Hell.

It is hard charging at a galloping enemy, or aiming at a flying bird, yet I do
not doubt ere I have done to tell you what is done in the King of Syrias
bedchamber, by certain conjecture out of the word, and as Jonathan with his
Armor-bearer, by the Assistance of God, to discover our selves, and make an
essay upon the Garrison of these uncircumcised; and my humble prayer is that it
may be with like success of the Apostle, who did not beat the air, but by the
mighty weapons of his spiritual and ministerial warfare did batter down those
strong holds, and cast down imaginations, till every thought be reduced to the
obedience of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4.

Again, they are so uncertain and fallacious, that to those four things which
the wise man confessed were too wonderful for him, that he knew not what to
say of them, the way of an Eagle in the air, of a ship in the sea, Pro. 30. 19.
a Serpent on a Rock, etc. we may add this fifth, the motion and turning of
this Serpent (the evil thought) in the Rocky heart.

And so obscure they be, as those armies which in Gideons time once for fear
of the Midianites, and in Saul's again for fear of the Philistines, had hid
themselves and their provision, in holes, and pits and caves, lay not so much
out of sight, as do these evil thoughts, which harbor and secure themselves in
these deepes and caves of the heart. How hard a task then have I undertaken,
yet I must go on, and shall first marshall these into three Ranks; and give
you to descry three flying bands of rovers like 1 Samuel 13. 17.
those of the Philistines, and they have three several colors or ensigns,
referring to God, 2 man, 3 our selves.

CHAP. VI. Sins of the thoughts in respect of God, and first of having no
thoughts of God.
WE shall begin with those thoughts which concern God. Where in the first
place, The first fai^ing of the thoughts is in having no thoughts of God. This
is a sin of Omission, or defect, but a great one. By this David describes the
wicked man, God is not in all his thoughts; Psalm. 10. 4.
or as others read it, All his thoughts are, There is no God: This is the first
kind of Atheism, a kind of Privy, or Privative Atheism, and the other reading
is Positive and downright Atheism. There are six kinds of Atheists, and
Atheism mentioned in Scripture.

1. The Negative Atheist, who has not God in all his thoughts.

2. The Positive Atheist, All whose thoughts are there is no God.

3. The Professed Atheist, who studyeth to destroy the Deity and sticks not
to affirm, there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1.


4. The Practical Atheist, who lives as if there were no God. Psalm. 36. 1. The
wickedness of the wicked says within my heart, there is no fear of God before
his eyes. It is all one not to acknowledge a God, and not to fear, serve and
obey him. Psalm. 14. 4. and 53. 4. The Atheist is charged with, and convicted by
this, That he calls not on God. This proves him a Practical, though he be
not a Professed Atheist.

5. There is a Professing (not professed) Atheist, who Professes to know,
love, and honor God, but by his works denies him, being abominable
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, as the Apostle says. Such lewd
Tit. 1. 16.
actions and conversations proclaim aloud that he has denied the God that is
above, as Job said. Job 31. 28.


6. There is Interpretative, or consequentiall Atheism. So the unbeleeving
Gentiles are said to be (...) Ephesians. 2. 12.
Without Christ, and without God (or Atheists) in the world; because strangers
to him, without Covenant, promise, ordinance, and so much as pretense to the
true Church, and truth of religion. So when we withdraw our dependence upon God
and rely upon an arm of flesh, or Satan, seeking to witches, and wizards: This
is by consequence or interpretation plain Atheism, for is there no God for
thee in Israel to enquire of, that thou sendest to Baalzebub the God of Ekron
to enquire 2 King. 1. 3.
of him: Now which of all these is the worst Atheist I shall not say; They are
all very bad, and this first very Dangerous, though we little regard it, To
have no thoughts of God. The professed Atheist would dipsute God out of Heaven,
this Negative Atheist shuts him out of his own heart, and says with the
Legionist, What have I to do with thee. Torment me not. If Mar. 5. 7.
he cannot say to God, depart from me, and cause the Holy one of Israel to
cease before him, as they say, Job 21. 14. Esaias. 30. 11. Yet does he by his
evil heart of unbelief, and uncogitancy depart from the living God. We commonly
reckon sins of commission, sins, as to ly, steal, or to think evil it may be;
But of omissions, especially in thoughts, who once takes notice? whose heart
smites him for this, I have no thoughts of my God. My heart is like Jericho
shut Josh. 5. 1.
up, there is no such thought comes in, there is no such thought goes out, or
peepes and breathes out. There is none says where is God my maker, who gives
us songs in the night? Job 35. 10. whereas God made man purposely for himself,
and gave man this Cogitative faculty, chiefly for this end, that he might in
his mind and thoughts better meditate, conceive and comprehend God, then in his
words express him. It is a great and grievous offense, the Lord complains of
it in the Prophet Jeremy, My people have forgotten me days without number. Out
of sight, out of mind. But can a Maid Jer. 2. 32.
forget her ornaments, or a Bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me.

The wanton Lover has his Mistress so running in his mind, that he wears her
name in his hatband, writes it in every leaf, cuts it in every tree, graves it
in every glassewindow where he comes, and should we forget the name of our God?
Some commemorate Psalm. 44.
their Founders, some praise their Benefactors, some have their minds run on
their Chariots, some on their Horses, some of their Bonds, some of their Bags,
and shall not we remember the name of the Lord our God? I have read of such a
pestilentiall disease once at Athens, as took away the memory of such as were
infected with it, that it is said, they forgot even their own names. A godly
man will say with David, Let my right hand sooner forget her skill, to play and
please me, or her care to feed me, and let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, and forget to speak, rather than my heart should forget to think of God.
How divine was that of the Poet?

Praesentem Praebet quaelibet herba Deum. He could, he said, read God in every
Leaf, and found his name written on every green Herb, and what a shame is it to
us, if we cannot read God in every Leaf of Scripture, and find his Name written
in our hearts.

Holy Ignatius, could say, such was his Love to Christ, and desire after him,
that if his heart were opened when he was dead, they should find Jesus Christ
written there. It is a strange story, which I have had from very good hands,
that Mr. Done, a known Surgeon of this City, took out of the heart of a
Gentleman, who died of Love, a Stone, having much of the resemblance of the
Centlewoman beloved, such impression (it seems) natural affection may make. Oh
that the Love of Christ were set as a Seal as a Signet Cant. 8. 6.
upon our hearts, that we might have Christ formed in us, we should never fail
of this suit, nor die of this disease. Some have been sick of this Love, none
have died: It is said, that the Arms of the Duke of Roan, which are Fusils, or
Lozenges, are to be found in all the Wood and Stone of his Country; and that
the Arms of the Shugburyes in Warwickshire, which are Stars, are found in
every stone of the Manor of Shugbury. So that break a Stick or Stone in the
one, or any Stone in the other, and you have a Fusil, or a Star. Oh that our
hearts did bear the resemblance of God, and Efsigies of Christ, whose we are,
and whose Effigies and remembrance we should ever bear in our minds. But alas!
I fear if many of our hearts should be opened, we should find, as Q. Mary said,
Callis there, the world there, Vanity written there; No thoughts of God there;
Their heart as the first Chaos without form and void, and nothing but a mere
vacuity, and darkness with^ll, covering the face of this Deep, the heart. Be
astonished O Christian, and ashamed Oh Atheist; that thou should have room
for thoughts of husband, wife, parent, child, treasure, pleasure, of business
and disports, and none for God. Can thou not forget a friend, a Patron, a
Benefactor? and can thou forget God. Oh how sad is it, that the Pulse of our
thoughts is beating from morning to night, whether we eat, drink, labor, rest,
walk or talk, still the thoughts are stirring with a restless motion, tha^
among all these thoughts we should have none of God. For an Ephah full of
thoughts of the world, as heavy as Lead, yet carried on with ease as with
wings, the wings of the wind, there should not be so much as an Omer full of
thoughts Zech. 5. 8.
of God. That when head aches, back is ready to break, and brains to crack,
with a load of cares, and thoughts of the world, thou should not have so
much as one single and serious thought of God. Reader consider this. Is this to
be a man or beast? a Christian or worldling? You cannot serve Mat. 6. 24.
God, and cleave to Mammon. Had any of us who live at London, a Father or Child
at York, an Estate in New England, our minds would be there sometimes, there
would be writing and sending, and enquiring, and discoursing, and going thither
too may be; and can we say, we have relations, and expectations, and treasure
in heaven, a Father a Savior, an Inheritance there, and no thoughts there?

How happy a man was David, who could say, I set the Lord always before me, he
is at Psalm. 16. 8.
my right hand, therefore I shall not be moved, q. d. He is neither our of
sight nor out of mind to me. How happy again was he who could say, How
precious are thy thoughts to Psalm. 139. 17, 18.
me O God! how great is the sum of them: if I should count them they are more
in number then the sands; How many of us may say, how strange and unwelcome to
us are the thoughts of thee O God: how small the sum of them, if I should count
them they are fewer in number then the sand in the empty part of the
Hour-glasse, where there may be found a few scattering dusts, when my thoughts
of the world are like the whole measure of the sand run out into the lower part
of the glass. Again he says, when I awake I am still with Ibid.
thee, as if he should say; Lord, I have not only remembered thee in my bed,
and meditated on thee in the night watches, Psalm. 63. 6. But the first and last
thing I do, is, while I am waking, to be with thee, thinking of thee, talking
to thee; It would trouble me if I did not think of thee in sleep, if then I
could think of any thing, for even when I sleep thou art with me; Thou
compassest my path, and my bed, and thy thoughts are to me thoughts of peace,
all the night long: But as soon as I awake, I am with thee, as soon as I come
to my self, and a throng of thoughts come pressing to the door of my heart, I
say to the rest stand by, let first the thoughts of God come in, and if there
be another of his Companions, let him come in, so all the day* let my heart be
taken up with entertaining these guests, and when late and dark night comes, I
part not willingly with them, till overcome with sleep, I drop a sleep with one
of these in my mind, and when I awake I am at it again. Oh happy he that could,
and happy we if we can say so!

We would account him a dry Preacher, who cannot make a Sermon of an easy and
copious Text, him a mean Scholar, who can make no discourse of an excellent an
ordinary Theme, and him a weak Lawyer sure who has not a word to say in the
clearest Cause. A bad Stomach that must needs be, which cannot pick out a
handsome Dinner out of the Richest Feast: And a Silly shiftlesse fellow, he who
could use no means, were he in the Syrians Tents, where there was Treasure to
be had for carrying, if he took none with him. Oh! But there is no such Text,
Theme, Cause, no such Feast and Treasure, as Communion with, and Meditation of
God is. But what dry, poor, stomacklesse, beggarly Christians are we, that can
think, speak, utter nothing, pick out, carry away nothing, where there is such
store? Complain not oh weak Memory, oh dull Invention! But see and bewail it,
oh vile Worldly Heart, oh base Carnal Affection!

Luther said, he that had but one word of God to his Text and could not make a
sermon of it, would never make a good preacher. Luth. Col.

CHAP. VII. Low Thoughts of God.
THE next failing toward God in having no Thoughts of him, is the having of
Low and too mean Thoughts of him. This is the sin charged on the Gentiles, who
knew and acknowledged God, but did not glorify him as God, nor were thankful,
but became Romans 1. 21.
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. They did not
rise up high enough from their dry speculations to a high admiration, and holy
adoration of him, to glorify him as God, as so Great, and Glorious a God? This
is next door to Atheism to think contemptibly of God, It is almost all one to
Deny, or to Debase the Deity. Princes hold them not only their enemies, who
would depose them, but such as will not give them their full and due titles,
they refuse their petitions if not presented in due style and form. Give unto
the Lord the glory due to his name, says the Psalmist. The first thing
required Psalm. 29. 2.
in him that comes to God is to believe that he is, and the second to believe
that he is a rewarder of such as seek him. That man shall Heb. 11. 6.
obscure and disparage and unsun the sun, who shall make it but like the lesser
stars, and he does blaspheme God (as Rabshakeh) who shall think God like other
creatures, or deities. To whom will ye liken me, Es. 40. 18. 25.
says God: To strike awe into his people, and to whom am I equal? to strike
them into high and magnificent thoughts of him. I am first, and I am last, and
besides me there is no Savior. The Lord is very Es. 44. 6. 8. and 45. 5.
Jealous in this respect of his imperial Glory and dignity. He will not give
away of his Glory. As he said, I will be aut Caesar, Es. 42. 8.
aut nullus, either Caesar, or nothing, so the Lord says, aut Deus, aut nullus;
aut Deus optimus, maximus, aut nullus, Either I will be a great God or nothing.
Be still and Psalm. 46. 10.
know, says he, that I am God, I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth. Am I not a great King says the Lord? and shall not my
name be great from the rising of the sun? Therefore cursed is that Mal. 1. 8.
11. 14.
deceiver that has in his flock a male, yet offers to God a corrupt thing,
any slight service, That which is sick and diseased, that which is torn and
distracted. Offer such a sorry present to thy Prince, will he accept it says
the Lord? much to this purpose in Malachi. As the highest honor the Holy
Angels can give to God, is to glorify him, by raising their thoughts so high,
that God is raised to the highest in their admirations and Praises: And as in
earth the highest honor, the holiest Saint can put upon God, when his heart is
elevated and raised to a higher exalting and lifting up of God, is in his
thoughts; Thence the Church Ex. 15. 2. Psalm. 34. 3. 90. 5. 107. 32. Psalm. 30.
1. 145. 1. 66. 17. 69. 30.
says sometimes, I will exalt him; Sometimes, I will Extol him, Lift him up,
Magnify him; all which phrases denote the Souls high thoughts of God, and
raised affections toward him: So on the other side, the greatest indignity and
dishonor we can put upon God, is to have low and sordid thoughts of him.
Therefore are the wicked brought in speaking slightingly and disdainfully of
him. Who is the Almighty, that we should know him, what profit is it to us Job
21. 15. and 22. 17.
to call on him? Again, they say to God, Depart from us, for what can the
Almighty do for us? How slightly do they speak of God, Who is the Lord? And
what can he do for us? So in Zephany. The Lord will neither do good, nor evil.
These men Zeph. 1. 11.
are settled on their lees and dregs of impiety and irreligion; whereas it is
the language of the Godly, Who is like unto thee O Lord? Who is like the God of
Israel? And Ex. 15. 11. Psalm. 89. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
hereby do the Godly know they have been spiritual in their duties, if they
rise up in the duty to, or depart from the duty with higher, more raised,
admiring and exalting thoughts of God in their hearts, and more low and self
abasing thoughts of themselves.

CHAP. VIII. Of Atheistical thoughts.
HAving before spoke of several kinds of Atheists: I shall here speak of the
Atheistical thought; A thought so black, Irrational, Brutish and horrid as
can be thought. A thought which may be darted and happily glance at a gracious
heart, but can only find footing and stick with a heart altogether graceless.
To show the heinousness and hatefullnesse whereof, I may boldly say five
things.

1. That it cannot possibly be received but where the man has first worn out
his conscience and all principles of religion. It does ipso facto, unsaint a
Saint upon its first admission. Some other Errors possibly may stand with
grace, this entertained cannot.

2. Nor does it ever stick, but where the man has lost his reason and his
brains too, as well as his conscience: It is not only against the light of
Scripture, but nature (even corrupted nature) and does consequently not only
un-saint the Christian, but un-man the man. Some other Errors have some seeming
reason on their side, This utterly none. It is the fool only who says (that
is, imagines) in his heart, There is no God. And have they no knowledge says
he afterward? No indeed, none Psalm. 14. 1. and 4.
at all, either spiritual, or so much as natural. The whole Host of heaven
and earth, and all the creatures, animate, and inanimate, combine together to
bear witness against this folly and impiety. They are all Gods witnesses, and
say to man if thou denyest a God, thou art a liar, or if thou doubtest thou art
a fool, and we will prove it. For who could make these visible heavens but the
invisible Deity? Who could make the eye but he who is all eye? and give the
understanding, but he who is all understanding? Though many of the creatures
are mute and cant speak another word they all plainly pronounce this one word,
A God, a God. This is the sound of the harmony of the heavens, and the note of
the whole universe, there is no speech, nor language, where this voice is not
heard. So much Divinity at least is received for Orthodox among all Nations,
established not by particular, national, or general Counsels, convened (as
some other points) but by the Oecumenicall counsel of mankind, (though never
convened together) and subscribed to man, by man, all the world over, and has
gained universal consent in all ages, and places, as the first, if not only
principle of natural belief, and our mother natures Creed. Some Nations have
one Creed, some another; some have altered their present Creeds, this was never
altered, but received by all without dispute, or contradiction. There be some
people that admit of some books of holy Scripture only, as the Samaritans of
old, and the Turk at this day, of the five books of Moses, Some receive the Old
Testament entirely, as the Jowes; Some receive the old and New Testament both,
as the sound Christian Churches; Some admit the Apocrypha and unwritten
Traditions too, as the Papists; Some reject all the whole Bible, and have no
written Scripture. But all have this Scripture written in their hearts, the
most ancient Scripture in the world, before there were any penman of holy Writ.
And this is universally received, and read in all nations in their mother
Tongue, and expounded in their several, and different (the most corrupt)
exercises of religion and worship. There have been several Sorts of
Philosophers in the world, one opposing and thwarting another Axioms; there
have been several sects of Heretics in the Church, all opposing other truths,
and rejecting the soundest Creeds. There have been oppositions in all sciences,
disputes against every thing said or practiced in all arts, trades,
professions. But all sorts of Philosophers, heretics, of all arts, trades,
professions and sciences have unanimously concurred in this, when nothing else,
There is a God. However People are divided by Lands and Seas, dissonant in
their Language, and complections, more different in their laws, customs,
manners, apparel, yet in this, all Nations by a divine instinct harmoniously
agree, there is, and of force must be acknowledged, There is a God. And a
little reason will serve to prove it, for, as when I see a son, I must needs
yield this child had a Father, so when I see the creatures I must needs grant a
Creator, who is the Lord. Therefore hold this fast.

3. This is the most Destructive thought and error in the world. Some errors
are about the Superstructure, this a fundamental error; some fundamental
errors impugn some one article of faith, or principal doctrine; This is
destructive of all Religion; destroys all divinity and humanity too, it leaves
us never an article of faith, never a command in the Decalogue, and never a
point of doctrine. It leaves not a stone upon a stone, but pulls down all. This
smites the glorious Statute of Body of Religion upon his feet, and breaks all
to pieces, and brings it down to the ground, destroying piety, civility,
humanity, curtesy, and the improvements of common reason, as that stone which
smote that Image in Daniel, so that Gold, Dan. 2. 24.
silver, brass, iron, and clay, all crumbled in pieces, and became like the
chafe in the summer threshing-flore.

4. This Atheism in the thought, is a Mother sin, a big-bellied monstrous sin,
having in its womb all manner of impiety, and like Babylons Cup, is full of all
manner of abominations. Atheism never goes alone; Therefore it is added, Psalm.
14. 1, 2. The fool said there was no God: Corrupt are they, and have done
abominable works, etc.

5. The fifth and last thing I shall observe is, that there is so much
Irrationallity in this thought, that it is banished the world and excluded the
society of man; and so much of Impiety in it, that it is not only excluded
heaven, but this of all other sins is excluded out of hell too. There is no
Atheism to be found in hell, there is blasphemy, malice, envy, etc. no
Atheism. The Atheist goes to hell, Atheism does not,

Nullus in Inferno est Atheos, ante fuit. And is not this a mad and monstrous
impiety which can be harbored in the heart, when neither heaven, earth, or
hell it self, will own it? The devils and damned are herein sounder then thou
art, they believe and tremble. And the Atheist herein is the devils Prosylite,
two fold more a child of hell then his master.

Yet for all this, happily, if we be not more aware, we may find this fools Bolt
shot into our hearts, and these fiery darts injected by the Prince of
darkness, who as he deceived our first Parents with this cheat, would put the
same upon us; You shall be as Gods. A godly soul may sometime be dogged and
hanted with such tentations, but take heed of parlying with them, or pausing on
them. Resist this devil and he will fly from you. This Cerberus cannot choose
but affright and terrify, when he barks in thy ears, Believe no God, worship
no God, renounce God, abjure Religion, Curse God and dye, or eat and live. fall
down and worship, and thou shall rise and be worshipped. But take heed of
giving the least entertainment to such a thought, or so much as to debate them,
but break off abruptly with Michaels farewell; The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Jud.
v. 9.


I have read of a little Vermin in Guiana, in the West Indies, less then the
least flea, Heylin in Guiana. Gage discovery of the West Indies.
no bigger then a pins point, called by the Spaniard, Nignas, which getting
into the least Toe, multiply there to infinite numbers, breed a bladder full of
nits, which cause a fearful burning and itching, with intolerable torments,
unless speedily prevented, and it has caused their feet to fester, and has
cost many their lives; They find no better remedy, then to pour melted wax hot
on the place, which being pulled off when cold, has drawn the Vermin away,
sometimes 800 at a pull. Do thou so, let not one of these nits rest, they will
fearfully multiply. As the Magicians said of their Lice, This is the finger of
God, so mean a Exodus 8. 9.
Creature could never else have caused so great annoyance; So say thou when
thou ^eest any of these Vermin in thy soul, This is the finger of the Devil;
The hand of Satan is palpable in this, for it can have no other father, then
the father of Lies.

Therefore says learned Weems; This Atheism is the center of all sins, and the
Atheist, the vilest of all Creatures: Therefore when he had compared them with
Balaam the worst of Southsayers, and false Prophets, with the Samaritans, the
worst of Israelites, with Epicures, the worst of Philosophers, with Heretics,
the worst of Christians, and with the Devil, the worst of Creatures, and
Beings; he says, the Atheist is worse then any of them. Therefore says he,
let us abhor Atheism above all other sins, and shun the company of these
damnable Atheists who are appointed for hell and damnation.

CHAP. IX. Of Injurious and Erroneous Thoughts.
THERE are Injurious and Erroneous Thoughts, which men are apt to harbor of
God, which are full of hellish impiety; These charge God foolishly, and horridly
with their wickedness, Ps. 50. 12. the Lord tells the wicked what his deeds
were, and what his thoughts; Thou saw a thief and consentest, have been
partaker with adulterers, thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, and
slanderest thy mothers Son; These things thou did and I kept silence, thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. As who should say, thy deeds
were very bad, but thy thoughts were far worse. And we may observe that God
keeps a Register for Thoughts, as well as acts and words; and in the day of
Judgment, Process shall issue out against Thoughts, as well as either.
Imprimis, will God begin, So many evil words, oaths, idle and scurrilous
speeches. Item, So many evil acts, at such a time thou sattest there, and did
so, another time in that place thou stoodest and did thus (place, and day,
and very gesture, and company, all set down together) But above all, in comes
this talent of lead, to make the Ephath of iniquity full weight, thou had
such and such Thoughts of me at that time, which is worst of all: Erroneous and
impious thoughts, are as bad as Atheistical, Deus and bonus convertuntur, God
and good are convertible; Toll bonitatem, tollis Deitatem, take away Gods
Piety, and you take away his Deity. We can fasten no greater contumelies or
dishonor upon God, then by injurious thoughts, to charge God with Nescience,
the Lord sees us not, Ezekiel. 8. 12. or with negligence, the Lord regards us
not, or with forgetfullnesse, the Lord has forgotten, he hides his face, he
will never see, Psalm. 10. 11.
or with supine oscitancy, and unadvertence, he will neither do good or evil,
Zeph. 1. 12. Above all, to make God such a one as has pleasure in wickedness,
not to reprove and punish it, or to have no such pleasure in holiness as to
approve and reward it, is the highest, and most daring impiety that can be.
With the Familists and Gnostics, to think all our acts are of Gods acting in
us, and there is no difference of good and evil, or with the misguided Zelot,
to think to set up his own way by violence, and to take away Ministry,
Ordinances and old duties, as Antichristian forms, is to do God service. These
erroneous and deceitful thoughts, are such high steps to all impiety, as you
can hardly go further. For the Gentiles to make a God of gold and silver, was
too gross and simple, but for Christians to make a God of impiety and
impurity, is ten thousand times worse. There was God represented in the
likeness of man, but here in the likeness of Satan. And indeed Plutarch was
not out when he said, Superstitious and impious thoughts of God were worse then
downright Atheism, when he speaks of the impious, barbarous, inhumane and
obscene service many Pagans did tender to their gods. It had been well, said
he, if those Typhones, Cyclopes, and Giants, had overthrown those gods, rather
than that they should be thought to be honored with such Victimes and
Sacrifices; As I had rather, said he, that any should say there is no such man
as Plutarch, than to say Plutarch is an angry, furious, unchaste, and vicious
person.

CHAP. X. Of Blasphemous Thoughts.
NEXT unto these march a Troop of Blasphemous and hellish Thoughts, and they
march furiously as the Devils Vantguard, more furiously than Jehu, like Goliath
with his Armor-bearer, defying the hosts of the living God, or like railing
Rabshakeh, with a libellous letter in his hand, and black mouth wide open,
reviling the most High. Yet are the seeds of this in every heart, as well as
other evil Thoughts, Mar. 7. 22, 23. Out of the heart of man (every man)
proceed evil thoughts, -- blasphemies. This case is very sad, and goes as a
sword to the soul of the people of God; They rend their clothes, humble, yea,
torment themselves, they weep, pray, mourn, and spread out their hands to
heaven, in this day of sad rebuke and blasphemy. These Thoughts are the Devils
black Guard, and are properly the sin of Hell. There do the damned gnaw their
tongues for anguish, and blaspheme the God of heaven out of despite. And as it
is the case of the damned, who are past all hope of mercy, so it is only the
case of such unhappy miscreants yet on earth, to entertain such thoughts as are
without God and without hope, Either desperately si^^ing while they open their
mouth against heaven, or sinfully despairing, as wretched Spira, who sometimes
blasphemously wished that he might be above God; Such wish that there were no
God, no soul, no Law to forbid sin, no hell to punish sin, no judgment day.
Heaven they give for lost, mercy not to be obtained, Gods wrath not to be
appeased, and his displeasure not to be endured and undergone: They have
despised mercy, despighted grace, rejected Christ, resisted the holy Ghost, as
enemies they have carried themselves to God, and as an enemy they look to find
him: Hence that hatred of God, departure from him, despair of all endeavors,
a desperate saying to God, Depart from us, and at last, which is the utmost
which Satan can persuade or wish, To curse God and die.

Oh the rage of man! oh the malice of Satan! oh the poison of unbelief and
despair! what fire and brimstone comes out of this Etna!

Yet happily a right gracious heart may be assaulted with these fiery darts; our
Savior himself, to what was he solicited? Even to renounce God, and to devote
himself to Satan. There is none of these temp^^tions but are common to men, But
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to to be tempted above that you are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be 1
Cor. 10. 13.
able to bear it, as the Apostle says.

The busy flies will be sometimes hovering and buzzing about the purest meat,
so does this Beelzebub the God of flies, (as his name signifies) seek to taint,
or terrify the purest heart with these injections, these come hovering and
fluttering about a godly heart as Abraham's birds, but he rises up and drives
the^ away, but they light and settle on a wicked heart, as the birds on the
Bakers head, there the interpretation is sad and ominous,

Job was afraid least his sons (though brought up religiously) might curse God
in their hearts. He knew they durst not speak an ill word of God in his
hearing, nor think irreverently of God when they were to call upon him in
prayer; But how far they might forget themselves when they were warmed with
good cheer and mirth, this holy and jealous Father was much afraid, therefore
he sent and sanctified them and offered burnt offerings, For Job said, it may
be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts, Job 1. 5.

Thoughts of this nature were darted into Jobs wives heart, and took fire, she
was overcome by them, and by her they were handed to her husband, Curse God and
die.

This old mischievous Engineer Satan will be casting these Squibs at us, to try
if they will either fire or fright us, and these Grenades, he is often
throwing into well fortified hearts, knowing well, that if they ly a while and
break there, they make bloody execution; but our wisdom is to catch these
Grenades before they break and settle, and throw them back upon him, then they
will mischief him not us; Or do as the Gardener, who espyeth the weeds
springing up where he set good herbs, who cries out, I wonder how you come
here, I sowed better seeds, here is no place for you, what envious one has
sown these tares, he plucks them up, and his garden is kept clean.

I intended not to extenuate, or excuse these blasphemous and cursed thoughts
for they are the greatest sins, the child of Beliall can conceive and travel
with, neither need I to aggravate them, for they are the greatest trouble a
child of God can be exposed to; Yet are sometimes such thoughts darted in by
Satan, and words to like purpose are sometimes bolted out, even from the child
of God, but it is when he is not himself, but overclouded with passion,
overwhelmed with temptation, or disordered by some violent disease, which has
distempered not his faith only, but his reason. But our comfort is, God can
distinguish between our diseases and our sins, between our constant temper, and
a transient distemper, between our voluntary transgressions, and our
involuntary and bewailed sufferings, between Satan's act, and our passivenesse,
as he did between Joseph's Mistress tempting, and Joseph resisting and slying;
She was looked upon as foully guilty, as if the sin had been committed, but he
as innocent as if he had never been tempted. Besides the Scripture says, There
is pardon for Blasphemies and Blasphemers, All sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven to men; All passive, or Man. 12. 31.
involuntary Blasphemy, this is not the Blaspheming of the Holy Ghost which is
never forgiven, for that is always allowed, voluntary, wilful, obstinate and
unbewailed. Paul had been a Blasphemer in his Ignorance, and Peter a worse in
his inconsideratnesse; but both pardoned, Paul because he knew not what he did,
Peter because he liked not what he did, but repented of it. Bernard says,
Satan does cast in Offert horribili^ de divinitate, terribilia de fide,
mirabilia de fidei institutione, et in alveolo meant is venenifer as ingerit
potiones, quas in consesssione evomere peccator oneratus exhorret.
thoughts horrible to think about God, terrible things about faith and
Scripture promises, and casts in such poisonous potions into the soul, that the
burdened patient sick to death with them, dare hardly venture to vomit up by a
holy confession. In the law there was a provision made, that if fire did break
out and catch thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the
field were consumed there with, he that kindled the fire should be liable to
make restitution. Exodus 22. 6. The Lord does know what an Incendiary Satan is,
and how that by his thorns, or firebrands the stack, and standing corn is set
a fire, the trouble is ours at present, but the damage will be charged upon
him. Yet in this case our duty is to bestir our selves as fast as we can to
quench this fire and preserve as much of the corn as we can by stopping the
flames. Or to do as Hezekiah did upon the receipt of that blasphemous letter,
humble thy self extraordinarily, Rend thy clothes, put on sackcloth, go into
the house of the Lord, spread the railing letter before the Lord, cry out this
is a day of trouble indeed, and of rebuke and blasphemy, for the children are
come to the birth and there is no strength to bring forth, lift up thy own
prayers, call for help from others, if so be that the Lord will hear all those
railing blasphemies, and reprove the words which he has heard, and put a hook
into the nostrils, and a bridle into the Jaws of this infernal Sennacherib,
and cause him to return to the place from whence he came, and thou shall
certainly be delivered. And if Solomon could in his wisdom and Justice discern
whose the dead child was, and give it to the right mother, when she said divide
it between us, The Lord will certainly pronounce Satan the only father of
these hellish brats which thou do disown, though he would have them divided
between thee and him.

CHAP. XI. Of Politic thoughts.
HItherto I have given you a prospect and view of your enemies, but you have
seen only the outside, or utmost part of them; There are many more companies
yet undiscovered, and more then I can reckon: But you shall see several troops
more marching with their several colors. Whereof the first is a desperate
company of Po^itick, subtle and irreligious thoughts (a pack of as dangerous
enemies as God and his Church has ever had to do with) whose design is not by
open force to assault, but by Stratagems to undermine religion and blow up the
Church, and by killing the Heir, to make themselves masters of his inheritance.
They are no mean ones, they who are of this company, but they are the Kings and
Rulers of the world, who do conceive these thoughts, and appear in these
designs against the Lord and his Sic and nostri principes jam nihil aliud
agunt quam ut sint malidicti a Deo. Luther. Our Princes make it their only
work to get the curse of God.
anointed: And generally all the Grandees of the world do make it their
business to Model and subordinate religion to their own interest and State
securing policy. All the sheaves in the field, and the Sun, Moon, and all the
Stars in heaven too, must stand up and do obeisance to this sheafe, and if it
be possible Pharaohs and the impostors rod must devour Aarons rod, and then
the work is done. Come let us deal wisely said Pharaoh (subtly and
perfidiously Steven calls it Act. 7. 19.) or we shall be foiled and
overmastered. This people must be kept down and brought under. Jeroboam had his
head full of these irreligious thoughts and projects, a famous master of this
piece of King-craft, he made Israel sin, and all the Kings of Israel, yea he
has made all the Kings of Christendom, and Potentates of the world to sin,
few or none to this day like Josiah, turning to the Lord with all his heart,
and with all his soul, 2 Chronicles. 34. 2.
not turning to the right hand, nor to the left; but though like Jehu and some
others, they 2 King. 10. 31.
have destroyed Baal and Popery, yet from the sin of Jeroboam few or none have
tutned away. He said in his heart, the text said, 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
this people will fall from me if I look not well about me, to handle the
matter wisely, and moderately in matters of religion, and worship of God.
Purity of religion settled and followed, may secure a heavenly Kingdom, but it
hazzards (thinks he) all earthly Crowns; therefore he modells religion to the
just temper of his interest, and seeks out new Priests fit to match the temper
of his religion, and out must all that can not conform, even all the sons of
Levi, the rightful consecrated Priests; And then seconded he is by all the
people, Tag and 2 Chr. 11. 14.
Rag knowing no other religion, and searching no other Bible but the mind and
pleasure of their leader. The King indeed sets up his Golden calves, the meaner
ones (the calves of the people as they are called) had none such, but the meanest
of them that Psalm. 68. 30. 2 Chr. 13. 9.
could bring a young Bullock, or a Ram was sufficiently qualified and had
enough: They were inspired presently, without any manner Ordination and
deserved more countenance from Authority, than those rigid Churchmen, the sons
of Aaron. But what came of it? Did it not become sin to the House of Jeroboam,
to cut it off; though 1 King. 14. 34.
he had such a notable headpiece, as no man had a stronger, and was noted to
be of so active and industrious a spirit, and had so cunningly wrought himself
into the people, till he was got into the saddle. This is the design of
Antichrist, and is that great mystery of iniquity, which is still at work in
the great Ones of the world, who think they have no other stone to square, but
that which is cut out of the mountain, and then all is their own; Let us break
his bonds asunder, Dan. 2. 45. Psalm. 2. 3.
and cast his cords from us. But has not this always proved a burdensome
stone to those who have lifted at it? This is indeed the Zach. 12. 3.
Masterpiece and grand Design of Satan himself, who goes not about to deny a
God out and out, but all he aims at, is to deprive God of his pure Worship. He
is not an enemy to Religion, he wishes there were many more Religions in the
world, and would have all countenanced, but the true one only: That every
people may walk after the way Mic. 4. 5.
of his God, and every person after the light of his Conscience, as sometimes
it has been, when Religion was wholly lost and buried in such a multitude and
medley of religions: Read 2 King. 17. 29, 30. 31, etc. Oh how much is it to be
lamented, that a people who have had God so nigh unto them, and have had such
righteous laws and statutes as no Nation in the world, should be so fickle and
unconstant! When we may pass over all other Nations, and they will not change
their Gods, or their religion, that Israel should Jer. 2. 10, 11.
change their glory for that which cannot profit. How quickly as Moses often
complained were Deuteronomy. 9. 12. 16.
Israel turned aside. Soon after the Tabernacle was set up in a manner, they
were contriving and imagining to alter religion, and to rid themselves of God,
and his Impositions. For I know their imaginations Deuteronomy. 31. 20, 21.
says the Lord, which this people imagine against me even now. And after, when
they had had that famous Temple set up, to which so many promises were made,
Solomon's head was no sooner laid, but they were desirous of a new form of
Government and Religion too. But it cost them dear, it filled all with such
Rents as never could be made up again. Be wise therefore, O ye Psalm. 2. 10.
Kings, and be warned you great ones of the earth. Think not your house is to
be built upon the ruins of Gods house. The Philistines shouted once when they
had taken the Ark, as if it had been the greatest conquest they could have had:
But how long did it last? 1 Samuel 5. and 6. chap.
A sweeping plague followed, and they had soon enough of it, and were glad to
return the Ark whence they had taken it, and to rid their hands of it, as fast
as they could.

CHAP. XII. Of gross and superstitious Thoughts.
THere is a company of gross and superstitious Thoughts, which most men,
especially ignorant persons that know not God, his holy nature, and spiritual
worship, and that make corrupt Reason their Judge, and humane Example or
Tradition their Rule, are subject to be overtaken with. Such was this gross
Thought of Magus, who thought any gift of God might be purchased with money.
How gross and superstitious were those Israelites, who thought Sacrifice, and
Temple-service, was the sum of all obedience, when this, God said he called
for, not that, i. e. not that alone, or in the Jer. 7. 22, 23.
first place; and much worse, when they thought the sacrificing of a child,
might go for the sparing of a lust, of which the Lord says, it never came into
his mind to command Jer. 7. 31.
such a bloody sacrifice. Such Saul's conceit, who thought a fat and full
sacrifice of his own devising, might excuse an half obedience. 1 Samuel 15. 21.
Mar. 7. 11.
How ill did the Pharisees teach, that what was given to Corban (spent in
sacrifice or maintaining Gods service) was better then what was given to
relieve an indigent Parent; Religion must excuse ill nature and disobedience.
How gross and superstitious a conceit was that, that washing of Cups, Pots,
Mar. 7. 8.
and hands, (external reverence and devotion, such as all popery is made up
of; Kneeling, fasting, crossing, etc.) made them a holy people, though the
heart were not kept but defiled.

That it is more Piety to shun a heathen, and def^e a heretic, then the
foulest sin; that it were more impiety to enter into the Praetorium, Joh. 18.
28.
then to condemn Christ, worse to put; Judas his money into the holy Corban,
then Mat. 27. 6.
to hire him to betray his Master. That some notable act of charity, and a
round sum at death, bequeathed to pious and charitable uses, may expia^e
oppression, and rapine in life, and want of restitution at death (a new kind of
Simony) and yet the man be safe. That the spoil of the poor will make as good
a way to an heavenly Kingdom, as David's sending the spoil of his enemies
before him, did to his attaining 1 Samuel 30. 26.
of an earthly Kingdom. Whereas that monster of mankind Selimus (the most
barbarous of all the Turkish Emperors) dyed a better Christian than these, who
being advised by Pyrrhus the Bassa, to bestow the great wealth he had taken
from the Persian Merchants, upon some hospital for the poor; Replied (more
like a Christian than many with us) God forbid I should bestow other men's goods
wrongfully taken from them, upon works of Charity and devotion, for my own
vainglory and praise: But see they be restored to the right owners. God hates
robbery for burnt-offering, sacrifice without mercy, mercy without
righteousness, and all external observance of Religion, without inward
religiousnesse of the heart.

Of these gross and superstitious Thoughts I might say much more, but here is
more need of tears than words, they are the great obstructers of Reformation
in our Land at this day, among the multitude (encouraged also too much by some
Churchmen) By reason whereof that may be sadly said of our times which was of
Jehoshaphats, 2 Chr. 20. 33.
Howbeit the high places were not taken away, (after all endeavors of
Reformation) for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts to seek the
Lord God of their Fathers.

These are the Philistines which have captived the Ark of God, and would fain
set it up by their Dagon, who make many a godly heart mourn with her who cried
out Ichabod, The glory is departed, where is the glory of Englands 1 Samuel 4. 21.
Reformation?

CHAP. XIII Of Hard Thoughts of God.
IN the heels of these come a crowd of Hard Thoughts, as dishonorable to God,
to Jesus Christ, to the Spirit of Grace, to the Promise, Truth, Goodness of
God, and as dangerous to our own souls, as any other. And these come with that
violence, that they often drive all before them. These conclude of God, It is
in vain to serve him, and to no purpose Mal. 3. 14.
to keep his Ordinances, and to walk mournfully before him. And speak as
confidently as the evil servant, I know thee to be an hard Master, reaping
where thou did not sow, and gathering where thou did not straw, I therefore
feared Mat. 25. 24, 25.
the success, and hid my Talent, etc. Oh madness! oh blasphemy! Will thou
charge the Sun with darkness, the Sea with dryness, Justice it self with
injury, and Mercy, the highest mercy it self, with cruelty? Do thou disdain
to have jealous thoughts of a loyal Wife, distrustful thoughts of a loving
Father, and art thou not ashamed to charge God so foully. Blush when thou
read God mentioning his thoughts to thee. I know the thoughts that I think
toward you says the Lord, Thoughts of peace not of evil, to Jer. 29. 11.
give you an expected end; And correct thine toward God, which are black, and
hard thoughts of evil, and not of peace. Our thoughts are not his thoughts.
Labor to have thy heart not only filled with high, holy, and honorable
thoughts of God, but with sweet, gracious, good, candid, hopeful thoughts.
Suspicion destroys friendship and confidence among men, These destroy all
commerce with God. He that comes to Heb. 11. 6.
God must believe that he is a rewarder of such as seek him; This is the first
article of our Faith, and the first step or motive to obedience; The first
letter, as I may say, in Gods Name, when himself proclaimed it to Moses, is,
(not as the chief titles of eatthly Monarchs, who are styled, High, Mighty,
Dread, etc. but) The Lord, gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in
loving kindness and truth, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin. Come
therefore to him as to a Father of mercies, to a fountain of living water;
Expect not little from him, from whom thou can not expect too much, nay, not
enough, as we cannot from men expect too little.

Yet herein wicked and godly ones both are much to blame.

1. Wicked men think well only of themselves, and hardly of all others, yea of
God himself, and therefore as they never speak of others without a But, a
blotting, or abasing But, a Sed diminuentis. Such a one is a wise, learned,
good man, say they, but a Passionate, man or the like; yet when they speak of
themselves or any evil in them, they throw in another But (a sed Augentis) a
weighty But, that fetches all up again, I am hasty indeed, I am rash, foolish
sometimes, and forget my self, I have my weaknesses, but I have as good an
heart and meaning as can be: So they deal with God himself in their thoughts,
they believe he is Almighty, great, excellent, pure, omniscient, just, but they
doubt he is not so merciful and kind to his poor creatures as were to be
wished. They doubt for all this, he takes a little too much delight in casting
off, and then tormenting his creatures; And if our sins be thus upon us we must
needs die, and how shall we then live? they do object. And the Lord to stop
their mouths, and for ever to silence such destructive thoughts, answers
immediately, and binds it with an oath; As I live says the Ezekiel. 33. 10, 11.
Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live. Turn you from your evil ways, for why will ye die O
house of Israel. Who is then to be believed? He that says to man offending,
sin and live, and to man repenting, repent and die, as Satan ever does; or He
that says to every sinner, sin and die, repent and live, believe and be
justified, look to me and be saved.

2. Neither are the godly often to be excused, who as they have low thoughts of
themselves, so have too low, and hard thoughts of God, and hence they walk so
sadly, when these thoughts be entertained. They have ever high thoughts of God
for his Power, truth, holiness, faithfulness, and loving-kindnesse, yet
misdoubt his mercy, at Psalm. 77. and 88.
least to them, they complain sometimes as if God had forgotten himself, cast
off them, and that he has shut up his mercies in displeasure; many such sad
and mournful complaints of the men of God are recorded in Scripture. And the
Lord often takes much pains to satisfy and remove these stumbling blocks.
Esa. 40. 27, 28. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak oh Israel, my way is hid
from the Lord, and my judgment passed over from my God, etc. And Esa. 49. 14,
15. But Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my God forgotten me. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? Yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee.

CHAP. XIV. Of Despairing Thoughts.
BUT Thoughts of Despair, which often follow on those hard Thoughts before
spoken of, and do therefore fitly follow the handling of them, are of all sads,
the saddest; and it may be said of them more truly then the Philosopher said of
Death, of all Terribles, the most Terrible; more dreadful then (...).
death it self, yea as black as hell, from which they are but one remove
distant. Despair is the saddest Disease and Torment incident to the soul of
man, living or dead; To the living it is the upper region of hell, and the
suburbs of it, to the which no darkness or shadow of death is to be compared,
no nor in his own thoughts hell flames torment not more; And to the dead, it is
their nethermost hell, the sting of the second death, and the victory and
triumph of hell. A most woeful and sinful condition, wherein two seas meet,
(as once to shipwreck Paul.) 1. The pain Act. 27. 41.
of loss, the greatest loss, Gods favor, and the comfort of it. 2. And the
pain of sense, the greatest sense of Gods wrath, and the terrors of the Lord to
shipwreck the distressed soul, yea ordinarily the two seas of sin and misery
meet together, threatening the present and eternal ruin of such poor creatures,
to make their miserable condition above all measure miserable. Yet can I not
but say, some such as these may seize on a godly soul, whose life is hid with
Christ in God, and bound up in a bundle of eternal love and life: even godly
souls have been often at the very brink, of despair; The sorrows even of Psalm.
18. 4. and 116. 3.
hell, have taken hold of them, and floods of Beliall have made them afraid.
The Accuser of the Brethren, sometimes, casts out a flood Rev. 12. 10, 15.
of these out of his mouth, to swallow them up alive as those that go into the
pit* aggravating Prove. 1. 12.
to their awakened and affrightned Consciences their sins to be unpardonable,
and Gods Justice as unappesable, the Laws sentence of condemnation nation as
irrevocable, and the interposition of Christ's death as unavailable. Hence have
they Jonah 2. 4. Psalm. ^8. 4. and 40. 12. Job 6. 3. Psalm. 42. 7.
cried out, I am cast out of thy sight, my sins are gone over my head, my heart
has failed me. my grief is heavier than the sand. All thy waves and billows
are gone over me, And sometimes have cried out, their sorrow was inexpressible,
Job 7. 15. Job. 6. 4. Job 3. 1.
their souls could choose strangling rather then life, the terrors of God have
set themselves in array against them, made them a terror to themselves, yea
they have made bitter exclamations, accursing themselves, their states, their
birth and life; yea have cried out, as if they had been in the sulphurous lake
and belly of Hell, and that the pit had shut her mouth upon them.

And all this while, more fear than danger, the Lord may bring down to Hell,
and bring 1 Samuel 2. 6.
up to Heaven. The Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief,
yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies, Lam. 3.
31, 32. Yea it is as impossible that a soul that has the least seed of God in
it, and the least of Christ, a sin-bewailing, a Christ-thirsting soul, should
be held fast of the powers of Hell, as it was for Christ Act. 2. 24.
himself to be holden by them; the Lord will not leave their souls in hell, nor
suffer the least of his Saints to inherit corruption. The least of the New
Creature and true Grace, is too good to be cast away.

But this is ordinarily the case of flagicious and atrocious offenders, who
have often resisted the Spirit of God, and rushed into sin as the horse into
the battle; who having first sinned away their Consciences, and afterward
their hopes, they find that which they least feared to have come upon them,
their sins have now found them out, and are as so many devils staring Number. 32.
23.
them in the face. The just Judgment of God. They who grieved the good Spirit
of God, and would none of his counsels, have an evil Spirit from the Lord, sent
to terrify 1 Samuel 16. 15.
them, as Saul had, and they are of God delivered up to Satan, now they find
their Judgment (before slighted) lingereth no more, nor does their damnation
slumber, but they look upon themselves, as if God and Satan had agreed in their
destruction, and to laugh at their calamity.

What words can express the misery of this condition! They are like the raging
sea, says the Prophet, which cannot rest, whose waters cast out mire and dirt.
They have all Esa. 57. 20. Job. 20. 26.
darkness hid in their secret place, says Zophar, as if all Hell had exhausted
it self and adjorned his residence thither. Yea, his heart meditates terror,
dreaming, talking of, and feeling nothing but devouring flames, and everlasting
burnings. Their sight is gashly, their speech amazing, and the remembrance of
them will not easily out of the mind of the sad beholders. Who can read or
mention Spira's, and such like cases without horror?

A sad case I confess, and not easily admitting remedy. Yet let me say, This
case of despair is not altogether without hope, if at any time they repent,
they may be recovered out of the snares, and power of the Devil, though taken
captives by him at his will; if he fly to Christ, he is able to save to the
utmost. Believe it, there is not so much malignity in all the sin of the world,
or malice in Satan, as there is mercy in God, and merit in Jesus Christ,
unless we shall say, finite, is more then Infinite, and the creature stronger
then the Creator. Add not therefore final impenitency to all former Impiety,
and obdurate unbelief to former disobedience, and desparation to thy long
presumption, and thou may yet be safe. For first, It is said H^b. 7. 25.
Christ is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, therefore
there is no doubting of his power: Save to the utmost] not to such, or such a
degree, no further, but further, and further than ever thou have sinned. Many
men have often sinned to their utmost, doing evil with both hands as they
could; But Christ never yet showed mercy or saved to his utmost, but he is able
to out-doe all that we have done, or can ask, yea to out-doe all that himself
has done, pardoning yet greater sins to penitents then ever yet were pardoned,
if greater could be committed. Then secondly, consider Ezekiel. 18. 23. and 33. 11.
further, that thou might not make question of his will, he has said, I
desire not the death of a sinner. Him that comes to Joh. 6. 37.
me I will in no wise cast out. There is you see power and will both engaged to
save thee; So that it is not his will-not, but thy will not hinders thy
salvation. Why will ye dye, says he: I would ye would not; nor is it Gods
Ezekiel. 18. 31. Mat. 23. 37.
shall not, but thy care not, excludes thee heaven.

Thirdly, if thou shall say, I have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost,
therefore there is no mercy for me; I answer, what ever that sin be, it is not
that sin shall be unpardoned if thou do repent, for the greatness of that
sin does not exceed the virtue of Christ's blood, (no nor the sin of Devils
neither, I would not fear to say Christ's blood was a sufficient price to
ransom them, if God had so intended, but it was never his intention so to do,
because he took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of the woman) I say
therefore, had thou Heb. 2. 16.
sinned that sin against the Holy Ghost, yet mercy might be had upon
repentance; But it is therefore concluded to be unpardonable, because they that
go into that, return not again, they are never renewed by repentance, as the
Apostle speaks. But do Peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum non potest accidere
sitientibus justitiam Christi. Dickson. There. sacr. l. 2. c. 4.
thou mourn, grieve, complain, weep, lament and say, thou have sinned that sin
against the Holy Ghost, that cannot be.

Fourthly, But if thou shall yet persist in thy wilful rejecting the mercy
and putting away the Kingdom of God from thee, with that foul cavil and
blackest objection in all the Bible, Oh but I am a reprobate, and Ezekiel. 33. 10.
if our transgressions and sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how can
we then live, say they. And Job once, If I be wicked, why labor I in Job. 9.
29.
vain? q. d. I may as well sit still, all endeavors are in vain.

I answer 1. God has no where declared of this, that, or any man, that he is a
reprobate; no man can say it of himself, no Reprobationis indicium nullum
certum dedit Deus praeter peccatum in Spiritum S. quod non potest accidere
sitientibus justitiam Christi, and finalem impenitentiam, quae compleri non
potest nisi in ipsa morte. Idem ibid. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
man may say it of another; nor does Satan, or any Angel know who is a
reprobate; Election may at length come to be known, and thence assurance, but
reprobation never; So long as there is life, there is hope, for though he that
is in state of grace to day shall be to morrow: yet you cannot say, he that is
in state of wrath to day, shall be to morrow, Who can tell how long and how far
one may go in a way of sin, ere he come to be past grace, never to return?

2. Does not the Lord say, As I live, I desire not the death of a sinner? Turn
and live, repent sin shall not be your ruin. It is not Gods eternal decree of
reprobation therefore does make thee incapable of salvation, but they own
wilful sin and persisting in it, cast away thy sin, thou shall never be a
castaway. Thy sin is the bar, not Gods Ezekiel. 18. 31. 1 Samuel 15. 23.
decree. None are rejected by God, but such as with Saul have first rejected
the word of the Lord. In a word, it is thy election and love of sin that thou
have more cause to fear, then Gods reprobation and hatred of thee.

3. I say, consider of it, does not the Lord Act. 17. 30. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Jo 5.
10.
call all men every where to repent? And say, he is not willing any should
perish, but all come to repent, and wi^t thou exclude thy self and make God a
liar setting his secret decree against his revealed will; He has commanded the
Gospel to be preached to every creature, Mar. 16. 15. 16.
and said he that believes, shall be saved, he that believes not, shall be
damned. And therefore as I would not fear to say to an elect (as to Solomon) if
thou forsake the 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Genesis 4. 7.
Lord, he will cast thee off for ever; so to a Cain if thou do well, or repent
of evil, shall thou not be accepted? As the most righteous has no cause to
hope (notwithstanding his election) if he repent of his repentance, and turn
from his righteousness, so the Ez^k. 18. 24. and 27. compared.
unbeliever, and unrighteous (notwithstanding any decree of reprobation feared)
has no cause to despair if he break off his sin.

4. I say the pit has not yet shut her mouth upon thee, nor is the gulf
fixed. There is a possibility of salvation to any yet living; while there is
life, there is hope: out of the Hell of despair there is redemption, though out
of the despair of Hell there is no redemption. Hell is not so easily born as
thou conceivest, how glad would they be in Hell, if there were now so much as
any possibility. Despise not the last offer of grace; If thou can believe,
all things are Mar. 9. 23.
possible to him that believes, there is a possibility that thou may
believe, though yet thou do not, or can not; Say, I cannot believe, if thou will; Say not with Thomas I shall no^, I will not believe; yet did thou so
Jo. 20. 25.
conclude, thou might after come to cry out with highest rejoycings of
assurance with him, My Lord, and my God: Nay if Jo. 20. 28.
thou art come to that, to say there is no possibility in thee to be saved, Are
our impossibles impossible with God? Our Savior speaking of the difficulty of
the salvation of some, resolves and stays it upon Gods omnipotency; With man
this is impossible, but with Mar. 10. 27.
God all things are possible. Hang therefore upon possibility to beget desires,
and on these desires till thou gettest hope, on hope (above or against hope)
till thou come to faith, on faith till thou come to assurance, Say I will look
up to his holy temple, I will Jonah. 2. 4.
look up to the mercy-seat, and if I perish, I will not perish with my hands in
my bosom, but I will repent, mourn, pray, and when I have done my part, the
Lord do with me what he will. I have read of one in despair, whom Satan
persuaded in was in vain to pray, or serve God, for he must certainly go to
Hell, who yet went to prayer and begged of God that if he must go to Hell when
he died, yet he would please to give him leave to serve him while he lived,
upon which his terrors vanished, being clearly convinced, none could pray that
prayer that had sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost.

5. Let me say to thee, as Tamar to Amnon in another case: This later evil in
turning 2 Samuel 13. 16.
mercy out of doors, is worse then the former in abusing it, and forcing it to
serve thy lusts? Both are naught, this worse. The sin of Cain despairing, was
worse then the killing his brother, there he wronged Justice, here mercy;
thereby he violated the law, hereby he disparaged the Gospel, thereby he set
light by the blood of his brother, hereby of the blood of a Savior, which
cries louder for better things, then the blood of Abel for vengeance: we say
the like of Judas despair, Heb. 12. 24.
it was a greater sin then the betraying of his Master.

Lastly, If thou must have examples to encourage thee, who say none was ever
such a one as my self and pardoned, consider what is written in Scripture;
Manasses was a man given over to all wickedness, an Idelater, 2 Chronicles. 33. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.
Corrupter of Gods worship, a man of blood, a consulter with familiar spirits,
the greatest contemner of the Prophets and commands of God that could be, yet
found mercy when he was humbled. And Paul who had been before a persecutor, and
a blasphemer, and injurious in the highest degree 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15.
to make him the greatest of sinners, yet found mercy.

We could instance in some others of our own knowledge, having many gracious
experiences of that truth, Where sin has abounded, grace has more then
abounded, super abounded, And where sin has reigned (as a tyrant) To. 5. 20.
21.
unto death and condemnation, grace has reigned (as a gracious King) unto
eternal life, in acts of pardon and mercy through Jesus Christ.

But I shall content my self to give thee one as sad an example as you shall
ordinarily meet with, out of Aretius a Godly and eminent Author, speaking of
the sin against the Holy Ghost. I saw, says he, and knew the man my self, and
it is no fained story: There was, says he, a Merchant at Strasbourgh, whose
whole l^fe was abominable for whordome, Usury, drunkenness, contempt of Gods
word, he spent his lfe in gaming and whoring to his old age, at Aret. in Mat.
12. 32.
last he came to reflect on himself, and be sensible of the dreadful judgments
of God hanging over his head: Then did his conscience so affright, and the
Devil accuse and terrify him, that he fell into open, and down right
desperation, he confessed, and yielded himself to the Devil as being his; he
said, the mercy and grace of God could not be so great as to pardon sins so
great as his; Then what horror was upon him, gnashing of death, weeping,
wayling, yea he would challenge Satan, and wish the Devil would fetch him away
to his destined torments, he threw himself all along upon the ground, refused
both meat and drink; had you seen him you could never have forgot him wh^le you
had lived, you had seen the fullest pattern of a despairing person: Yet says,
after the many pains of Godly and learned men who came to him, watched with
him, reasoned with him, laid open the word and will of God, and after many
prayers public and private put up for him, at length he recovered, and became
truly penitent, and having lived piously for certain years after, he died
peaceably. Wherefore he concludes, it is not an easy matter to determine of
any man sinning against the Holy Ghost, and uncape^ble of mercy, so long as he
yet live^.

CHAP. XV. Of presumptuous thoughts.
BUT of the thoughts of presumption the world is more full. It is that which
first dug and opened the Pit of Hell, now keeps it open, at length will
fill it up brim full. This is Satan's standard bearer. And of this we may safely
say, It was the first sin in the world. The Original sin of the lapsing Angels,
who not content with their allotted station in so high glory, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, and having entertained such a presumptuous
thought of a Dii erimus, they aspired after it, and were thrown into Hell with
it; so that their place is no more found in heaven, nor any place for
presumption there since. But this their original sin they soon propagated to
mankind (soon after falling) Satan in the likeness of a subtle serpent buzzing
in their heads a Dii eritis, ye shall be as Gods, they Genesis 3. 5.
neither regarding precept, or threat to the contrary, were soon tainted with
it, and were justly for their presumption, cast out of Paradise. But though it
could find no place in Heaven, or Paradise, it has overspread the whole world;
And this Dii eritis (as one says) will never die; but in every presumptuous
sin, or attempt, or rising of heart, there is a spice of it, Dii sumus, or Dii
erimus, we will be as Gods, and as for the Lord every presumptuous sinner says
in his heart, I know him not, Ex. 5 3. Psalm 12. (...)
Who shall be Lord over us? And being bred in the flesh, it will never be out
of the bone, as we say, every one more or less tainted with it. And there are
presumptuous thoughts of two kinds, we are subject unto, Carnal and spiritual
presumption.

1. Carnal all are subject unto, hence if we have an arm of flesh to trust in,
how apt Jer. 17. 5.
are we to swell and to depart from the living God, And if we find our mountain
to stand strong, and lower springs of creature supplies to run fresh, a David
is too apt to say, I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30. 6.
which causes God to hide his face, and turn our springs into blood, that we
may learn to know on what ground we stand; And ordinarily the men of the
world, if their riches increase, they are apt to say I have a strong castle to
secure me, I may say to my soul thou have goods enough, Take thine ease, eat,
drink and be merry, I sit a Pro. 18. 11. Lu. 12. 19. Rev. 18. 7.
Queen, says the whore in her pride and presumption, I shall never see sorrow.
This presumption thrusts out gratitude.

So if any thing have been undertaken and succeeded, how apt are we to
attribute all to our selves? and to sacrifice to our own net, Habak. 1. 16.
and to say in the pride of our hearts with Nabuchadnezzar, Is not this the
Palace that Dan. 4. 30.
I have built for the Glory of my Majesty, etc? And with the Assirian to vaunt
with the strength of my hand, and with the sole of my foot have I done these
things, etc. Which moves the Lord to pull down such, Esaias. 10. 13.
that they may learn to know, that the heavens bear rule over the earth, and
there is a Dan. 4. 26.
divine providence overrules all humane affairs. This presumption thrusts out
dependence.

So again, if any thing be to be done, we are ready with David to say, Go
number the 2 Samuel 24. 2.
people, that I may know my strength; we will send to Egypt, and stay our
selves on horses because they are many, and on horsemen because they are
strong, but look not to the holy one of Esaias. 31. 1.
Israel, nor do we seek the Lord, as the Prophet says. Thus presumption
thrusts out faith and prayer.

Hence it is that the Lord often takes delight to wither the arm of flesh, to
blast our designs and deny the race to the swift, Eccle. 9. 11.
and the victory to the strong, and sends us home mourning and well beaten for
our pains, as Israel once, who would go up presumptuously in their own
strength, and took not God Number. 14. 44, 45.
along with them, they were beaten home Deuteronomy. 1. 45.
with shame, then did they lament their folly. And as the ten tribes, who went
against the wicked Benjamites in their own strength, they were more then ten to
one for number, yet did they lose in two battles forty thousand, and might have
had more sad days, if they had not been driven by Jud. 20. 21; 25 and 26.
compared.
their ill success to seek God, fast, mourn, and humble themselves. Gods
people are sometimes too strong in their own eye, and too sure, and too many
for him to go along with and give salvation to' as the Lord said once to
Gideon. God should have no more Jud. 7. 2.
from such then he had from Herod, who took the Dii eritis upon him, and the
vox dei, The voice of God, and not of man, and became Ac. 12.
a worm-eaten God for his pains, a just recompense for a worms affecting the
honor of a God; Or then he had from Pope Adrian the sixth, who having caused a
fair College to be built, caused this inscription to be set over the gates,
Trajectum plantavit, Levanium rigavit, Caesar dedit incrementum, Utrecht
planted me (there he was born) Lovaine watered me (there he was bred up in
learning) and Caesar gave the increase, for he had preferred him to the Papacy,
to show the folly and presumption of whom, one wrote, Hic Deus nihil fecit;
Here God had no hand in all, said Luther.

Thus this presumption thrusts Gods honor out of the world.

Therefore does the Lord warn his people to take heed of these presumptuous
thoughts and speeches, when their silver and gold is multiplied, etc. not to
say in their hearts, My hand has got me this substance, but thou shall Deuteronomy.
8. 17, 18.
remember it is the Lord who gives thee power to get this substance.

These presumptuous thoughts have been costly and dear thoughts to many a man,
who have paid full dear for them, and by this presumption, they have presumed
themselves out of all, and presumed themselves into misesery, beggary, infamy
and disgrace. The Lord walking constantly by that his just old rule, to pull
down the high hearts, and looks, and lay Psalm. 18. 27. Esa. 2. 18.
low the loftiness of man, and to exalt the humble and meek.

2. Spiritual presumption. Thoughts of this kind are more dangerous, whereby
many have presumed themselves into hell, the proper place for it, as we may see
in a few instances.

1. How many are there that will adventure their eternal salvation on this
presumptuous reasoning; If I be Elected I shall be Saved however I live, if
not, all holiness and endeavors are in vain: But does Election destroy or
establish means? You will not reason thus, God has decreed there shall be
Seed-time and Harvest while the world stands, therefore we need not plow or
sow; or if thy house were on fire, and thou in thy bed, thou would not say,
if God have a purpose to stay the fire, I need not cry out, or stir out of my
bed, but thou will find a tongue to call, hands and feet to stir, and have
thou no hands, nor feet, nor cries, nor prayers, nor tears to escape Hell.
Faith sees a sweet consonancy between decrees and promises, precepts, threats
and means; Presumption is not content to oppose Heaven it self, but would set
all Heaven in a flame, making variance between decree and decree, (as of
salvation and sanctification, both decreed simultaneously and at once, 2 These.
2. 13.) between decrees and promises, decrees and precepts, etc.

2. Many are apt to presume on salvation, relying totally and solely on Gods
mercy, as they think, (which is indeed the only refuge of Saints) but not in
way of duty and holy fear, departing from sin, and they think they give much
glory to God by relying on his mercy so much as they do; but the Lord abhors
this presumption. When wicked men say, I shall have peace, though I walk after
the Imagination of my heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, The Lord says, he
will not spare such, but his anger and jealousy shall smoke against that man,
etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. So Micah 3. 10, 11, 12. They build up Sion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity, the heads thereof judge for reward, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil
shall come upon us. Therefore shall Zion for their sake be plowed like a field,
and Jerusalem become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of
the forest. Is there no way to exalt Gods Mercy but by destroying his justice,
purity, truth and holiness? And is there no other Faith with thee, but what
destroies fear, obedience, repentance, and conscientiousnesse? How unlike are
these to David and the Saints, who say, Psalm. 130. 4.
there is mercy with thee, therefore thou shall be feared. Ames faith well, qui
salutem sine resipiscentia and pietate sperant, sperando presumunt, praesumendo
pereunt. They who once persuade themselves, they shall be saved, yet mind not
repentance and godliness, such persuasion is presumption, such presumption is
perdition.

3. Many have presumed themselves into Hell by a vain dream of long life, and a
fond presumption of late repentance, when we can neither boast of to morrow, or
were we assured of longer life, have we any promise of late repentance: Qui
promittit penitenti veniam, non promittit peccanti penitentiam; God has made a
promise of pardon to the penitent, but none of repentance to the presumptuous
offender. Many have had space given to Rev. 2. 21.
repent, that have not the grace given, as is Genesis 6. 3. Rev. 22. 11. Mat. 21.
19.
said of Jezabell. God will not have his Spirit always strive with sinful man,
but will at length say, he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, never let
fruit grow on thee henceforward; seeing I would have purged thee, and Ezekiel. 24.
13.
thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged till I cause my fury to rest
upon thee.

Secondly, It is not likely thou should repent at last, after so long a
course in sin; Jer. 13. 23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, then may ye
learn to do well Novella planta facilius eradicatur, quam cum profundius
radices egerit. Ames.
that have been accustomed to do evil. Is it a likely matter thou should
pull up an Oak of twenty years growth and deep rooted in the earth, which thou
can not pull up after it has stood but one year, but might easily the
same day it was set: Is repentance likely to be any thing easier to a dying man
when all his sins come flocking in together, when pains torment, when strength
and understanding fail, when friends distract, etc? Is it likely a dying man
should be able to do more, and bear a heavier burden then a man in his
strength? Is it likely a man should find that in the dark and stumble upon it,
which they could never find in the light? How irrational are thoughts of late
repentance! But that many are willing to deceive themselves, and presume to
find a short and easy way to life.

Thirdly, If thou should then repent, it is a great question whether such
repentance would be accepted, for though true repentance is never too late, yet
this late repentance is seldom true. God may justly shut the door upon thee,
and say, I know thee not, Depart thou rejecter of my grace, thou worker of
iniquity; Go to the Gods that you have chosen, Jud. 10. 14. or as in Deuteronomy. 32.
37, 38. Where are the Gods, and the rock in whom they trusted? Which did eat
the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings, let
them arise, and save thee in the time of thy trouble, or let them that have had
the best, take all the rest too. I am not willing to judge any man's estate that
is gone before, with his late repentance: But I remember what once Saint
Austin, Excellently said on such an occasion, he was asked what he would say of
a man that lived wickedly, and died penitently, and had confessed his sins, and
was absolved, why says he, what shall I say? shall I say he is damned? No I
will not, for I may not judge him; What then shall I say, he is saved? no I
will not, for I may not deceive thee; but shall I say nothing? Yes says he,
this is all I say to thee, repent thou truly, and timely, and thou art safe.
And if thou will repent when thou can not sin, thy sins have left thee, and
not thou thy sins. Lastly I would reason with those that intend a late
repentance, and ask them what they think of repentance; Is it good, or is it
evil? If it be good, why do they not get it now? If evil, why will they seek it
at any time? But if thou thin est it good, and yet deferrest the practice of
it, so often as thou think it good, thou condemnest thy self, and so often as
thou think it evil, and yet intendest to practice it at last, so often thou
condemnest repentance, and the grace of God.

4. And there is another presumptuous thought, and as destructive as any the
former, which is of such who think to fly to the death of Christ, and the grace
of the Gospel, yet still live in their sins. They say we cannot outsin the
death of Christ, nor can our sins come up to the measure of the grace of God,
but if sin abound never so much, grace will yet more abound. But do you thus
requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? Shall we say, Let us continue
in sin that grace may abound? To. 6. 1. To. 3. 31.
Does faith now make void the law? God forbid, says the Apostle, to both these
inferences. Sure that man is past grace, or hopes of it, that passes so little
by it, that if grace reign, it must not reign by righteousness, but by
unrighteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. The grace of
God that brings salvation, was wont to teach men to deny uugodlinesse, and
worldly lusts, and does it now teach to deny Tit. 2. 11. 12.
Godliness and heavenly lusts of the soul? as I may say (the spirit lusts
against the flesh) Gal. 5. 17.
and to live any otherwise then soberly righteously and Godly in this present
world.

5. I shall mention but one more presumptuous thought, which is the presuming
upon our own strength of grace, and many have been overthrown by this. In te
stas, and non stas, said Austin, thou would stand of thy self, and therefore
can not stand, In me stas, qui nonstas, says Christ; In me thou shall be
sure to stand who can not stand; Peter is a sad warning to us, who
over-confident of his own strength, was soon frighted into a base ly, and
cursed oath and execration, at the first look and word of a confident girl.
But Pendleton is a sadder, who in the beginning of Queen Maryes days, told
self-distrusting Sanders how stoutly he would stick to the truth, to the last
drop of blood, and that every drop of his fat body should be fried out at
Smithfeild, ere he would consent to the introducing of Popery. Sanders had not
so many words but more fears, yet weak, and self-fearing Sanders became the
Martyr, and Pendleton the Apostate. How much was Peter safer Mat. 14. 30.
when in the midst of the Sea ready to perish, he feared and cried out, Lord
save me? then when on firm ground, he feared not, and therefore prayed not. Be
strong in the Lord Ephesians. 6. 10.
and in the power of his might (says the Apostle) when thou art to engage in
the spiritual warfare, and put on the Armor of God, but take heed of presuming
on thy own strength, but put it off as David did Saul's Armor, that thou may
not be saved by bow, 1 Samuel 17.
and by sword, and by battle as it is, Hos. 1. 7. but by the Lord; and as in
Zach. 4. 6. not by might, nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord. When I
am weak, said the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 10.
then am I strong, and we find by sad experience, when we are strongest, then
are we weakest. Much safer therefore it is to 2 Cor. 12. 9.
boast of our infirmities, that the grace and strength of Christ may rest upon
us, then to make our boast in our own strength, to be sold for our presumption
into the hands of our enemies. Be not highminded To. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
therefore but fear; and when thou think thou stand, take heed least
thou fall. Blessed is he that fears always, Pro. 28. 14.
and hides himself; the fool rages and is confident. How many had been
safe, Pro. 14. 16.
how many had been saved if they had not presumed?

CHAP. XVI. Of Murmuring Thoughts.
NExt follow a Regiment of Murmuring and discontented thoughts (both near a
kin and much alike, only) these are more unconstant, tumultuous and
quarrelsome, and as undisciplined Soldiers are ready to mutine upon all
occasions, you may hear them muttering and complaining as they go along. They
are bred only in an ungrateful and ungracious heart, and argue (...) derivant
quidam a (...) grunio quod more suum gruniant. Aret. in Jud. 11. 16. Leigh.
Crit.
a proud, haughty, froward, and dog-like, or swine-like disposition. They run
to and fro, and like the snarling dog, says the Psalmist, they grudge if they
be not satisfied. The quiet and contented spirit never wants a feast; And the
murmuring, discontented spirit never wants woe; when he wants, he seeks and
makes it, creating it to it self; and such have Pashurs doom to me,
Magor-Missabibs, Jer. 20.
a Trouble and Terror to themselves. They are never long pleased in any
condition. If they want, then they grumble, if they want not, but see another
have what they have not, they murmr as much. Rachel has more of beauty, and
more share in her husbands affection than her sister, yet if she have not
children too, at her desire, she breaks out into murmuring with open mouth,
crying, give me children or I die. Humble Hannah in like case prays, but
quarrels not, mournes, but murmures not, grieves but grudges not, lays open
her desire, to God, and resignes up her self to God, and lost nothing by the
hand. But others are neither well full nor fasting, somewhat discontentieth
still; The mixed multitude were weary of their lives in Egypt, and weary of the
way to Canaan out of Egypt: Over-joyed with Manna at the first, and greedy of
it, never had such fare in their lives, after a while cloyed with it, they say,
their Onyons smelled better. And carnal Israel, how did they provoke God, by
their continual murmurings? Their bricks were doubled in Egypt, there they
murmured, Pharaoh pursued them, then they murmur, they meet with bitter water,
they murmur again, at another time no water, more murmuring, they murmur for
bread, murmur for flesh, murmur for the way, murmur at Canaan it self, murmur
at Moses, murmur at Aaron, they must be stoned, murmur at Caleb, and murmur at
Joshua, they must be stoned too, yea murmured against God himself, nothing but
murmuring, oh vile, perverse disposition. A godly man ever checks these
distempered thoughts and keps them down, and when he finds his heart begin to
whimper, and wrangle as a froward child, he seeks to hush and quiet it. My soul
keep thou silence unto God. Why art thou disquieted within me O my soul, said
David, reasoning with himself. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, said he at
another time, because thou did it. Of Patience comes ease, we say, and of
submission comes contentation. It is the Lord, said Eli, let him do what he
will. Correct me he may, injure me he cannot. Good is the Word of the Lord,
said Hezekiah, when a sad message was sent him, concerning his posterity; It
shall not be in my days, that is a mercy. It is captivity that is threatened
not destruction, that is a mercy again; if destruction yet not damnation, that
is a greater mercy still; It is not hell, and what ever is short of that is
short of desert, and rich Mercy. Why should the living man complain. It is
mere mercy that we are not consumed, said the Church, Lam. 3. 22.

CHAP. XVII. Of Careful Thoughts.
CAreful thoughts. These are necessary to be spoken to, as being a great part
of our thoughts ordinarily, and therefore, the word (...), taking care, is often
rendered, by our Translators, taking thought, Mat. 6. 25, 26, 27. and 10. 19.
Take no Thought. Careful thoughts, are forbidden, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all your care upon God. As if he should say, all man
is all care, but all your care must be cast upon God.

Yet there is an evil carelessness, such as that in Laish, Sodom, and the
Sidonians, Judge. 18. 7. In the idle dames of Israel, Esa. 32. 9. 10, 11. He
that is thus an ill Common-wealths-man, or ill husband, or ill house-wife, cant
be a good Christian.

2. A good Carelessness, 1 Cor. 7. 32. I would have you be without carfulnesse.
Mat. 10. 19. Dan. 3. 16. We are not careful to answer thee.

2. There is a holy commendable carfulness.

1. For the things of the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 34.

2. For thy own soul, thou must be full of cares, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

3. For the Church, so the godly Pastor is really Curatus, has a careful
heart above any other man, and his work is rightly called, Cura animarum, care
of souls. Such a careful Minister was Timothy, Phil. 2. 20. Paul and Moses
were worn out with their daily weighty cares, 2 Cor. 11. 28.

4. For the Ministers of the Church, Phil. 4. 10. Their Cura Pastoralis, should
be answered with your Cura Pastorum, their Cura animarum with your Cura
Corporum; Their care and diligence in sowing to you spiritual things, should
be answered with your care and forwardness to minister to them carnal things.

2. There is another Indifferent and tolerable (...) and (...), haud dubie
sunt mediae significationis. Leigh.
Carfulness, 1 Cor. 7. 34. The married cares for the things of the World.

3. There is a sinful carefullnesse, and such for the most part care is, 1
Cor. 7. 32. This C^refullnesse is evil: 1. When Inordinate. 2. When Immoderate.


1. When Inordinate, when we care for the body more then the soul, when more
for what we shall eat, drink, and how we shall live, then how we shall be
saved: When we are more careful of our own things, then of the things of the
Lord; When we take more care to double our state, and stock, then to double our
Talent. These are Inordinate Cares.

2. When Immoderate; Luke 21. 34. Take heed your hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. Our Savior ranks
immoderate care, with immoderate eating and drinking: Eating is good, and
drinking good and necessary, when with moderation; so of care we may say,
Modicum non nocet; But immoderate eating, is surfeiting, and immoderate
drinking is drunkenness, and immoderate care is as bad as either.

And Immoderate they are, 1. When Solicitudo est aegritudo animi cum
cogitatione. Tully.
the heart is oppressed and overloaden with them. In that place last named,
Luke 21. 34.

First, Let not them come near your heart.

Secondly, Let not your heart have more than you can well bear; a little meat
and drink lightens and refreshes the body, so moderate care is good; but when
one has loaded his stomach with meat, and has more drink than he can bear,
What is he fit for? so is the man overloaden with cares.

2. When they distract and divide the mind, hinder our close and individed
cleaving to the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 35. And when they get between God and us, that
his service is neglected: The farm, oxen, merchandise, and family businesses
following marririage, take up the man, that he has no leisure to attend
matters of soul-concernment.

3. When they are distrustful cares, tending to damp Faith, and to weaken
duties, but so much care as sets Faith and prayer awork, are good cares.
Melanchthon said his cares taught him to pray: Si non curarem, non orarem. No
care, no prayer. A due measure of care to the soul, is like water to the mill;
so much as drives it about, does well, but when floods of water come down, so
great that they cannot pass, that the Mill stands with a back water, it is
ill; so when care drives prayer about, it is well; when it makes prayer stand
still, it is ill.

4. When they are extended beyond their bounds: Care is but for the present, as
the Manna for the day; if it be kept till the morrow it stinketh. Care not for
the future; Let the morrow care for it self, Mat. 6. 34.

The evil of them appears, 1. In their Causes. 2. Properties. 3. Effects.


1. The chief Causes and Roots whence they spring, are,

1. Diffidence and distrust, or ignorance of the Care and Providence of God,
whence such say, Care I must, for I have none to care for me; They consider not
Gods care of them; therefore cry out as they, Mar. 4. 38. Carest thou not, we
perish. So Luke 10. 41. Carest thou not that I am left alone, to look after
all. Where our care ends, Gods begins, and when we think his ends, there must
ours needs begin.

2. They spring from an Over-high and false opinion of some Excellency in
outward things; The ^ich man's riches are his Castle, men are apt to think, had
they so much, they might then sing a Requiem to their souls, and then they were
out of the fear of Evil, Hab. 2. 9.

2. Their Properties are evil.

1. Because senseless, absurd, and irrational; We take Gods work out of his
hand, where it is much better. 1 Pet. 5. 7. As if a Child of seven years age,
should say to his Father, let me manage the business of the Family. Poor
Child, Thy shoulders are not for such burdens.

2. They are needless, your heavenly Father does it for you, Mat. 6.

3. Fruitless, you cannot with all your care, and skill, add a cue or doit to
your state, or a cubit or inch to your stature, Mat. 6. 27.

4. Endless, Life has an end, and Riches have an end, only Cares have no
end. The rich man had as many cares when his riches increased most, as when he
had less. The ten thousand pound man has more cares then the ten pound man,
Eccl. 4. 8. There is one alone and there is not a second, yea he has neither
child, nor brother, yet is there no end of all his labor, nor is his eye
satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my
soul of good? This is Vanity and a sore evil. Unus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit
Orbis. All the World can stand in a man's heart, and he desire never the less.

5. They are easelesse and restless, breaking the sleep; Eccles. 5. 12. They
cause a continual headache, or heart-ach, or are like those worms bred in
children, which gnaw and torture them, make them lose their fresh color, look
like earth, smell like earth, they start in their sleep, and rest unquietly.
Old age is more troubled with these worms, than childhood with the former; and
more die of these than of them.

6. But they are not faultlesse and sinlesse. for consider the Effects.

1. What a strange alteration they make in man.

1. They turn man into a clod or stone, as some springs and grounds turn wood
into stone; These cares turn man into stone, so was Nabal.

2. They turn man into a serpent who lives on the dust, goes on his belly, and
cleaves to the ground, these bring the serpents curse on the soul.

3. Turns a Christian into an heathen, Mat. 6. 32. after these things the
heathens seek, and if you take not heed, will turn thy family into an heathen
family, where is no care of the worship and service of God.

4. At best turn a Christian into a Meteor, Luke 12. 29. Who hangs between
heaven and earth, and is never like to get higher. He has somewhat of heaven
in his Conscience, more of earth in his Affection; therefore at last falls down
to earth in his Conversation; Earth being the predominate part.

2. These destroy the life of Faith and love, whereby we should cleave to God
without distraction, 1 Cor. 7. 35.

3. These keep from duties, Luke 14. The farm and merchandise keep from the
Lords supper; The great husband has devoured the good Christian.

4. These distract in duty, Martha could not stay by it when our Savior was
speaking, Luke 10. 42. These hinder our attending on a duty, and watching in it.

5. These choke Grace, and all good motions, Mat. 13. as the thorns choke the
seed. The mines of gold and silver are noted to be in the barrenest earth;
where these cares are there is greatest barrenness of grace. The Greek word
(...), Saint, signifies an unearthly man therefore, as some observe.

6. These keep out and banish Soul-peace, Phil. 4. 6, 7. Be careful for
nothing, etc. And the peace of God which passes understanding shall guarde
your hearts. The peace of God and evidence of his love, and assurance of
salvation, was never yet given, nor shall be to an earth-worm, whose heart is
eaten up with worldly cares. This hidden Manna is only put into a golden, not
earthen pot.

7. These ever unfit for death, Luke 21. 34. Let not your hearts be overcharged
with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, least that day
overtake you as a snare: As one being drunken, or one sick of a surfeit, is
unfit for work, or in an ill case to die, such is the man of cares at all
times. Death comes to him as a snare; Either he dies suddenly, before he
expects, as Luke 12. That rich fool died suddenly, or he ever dies
unpreparedly, which is worse. Nabal died not 1 Samuel 25. 37, 38.
suddenly, but though he lay ten days sick, he died unpreparedly, he lay like
a block or stone, and died miserably; Before his death, earth was turned into
earth, and before his burial his heart was covered with a stone. As Archimedes
was busy in drawing his lines, when the City was taken, and he knocked down
before he knew who hurt him; So does the Rich man fade away in his ways, he
Jam. 1. 11. Jer. 17. 11.
dies in the midst of his days, and in the midst of his buildings and
businesses, and in the end shall be a fool; That is, all his Monument; Dives
vixit, stultus obiit, He gathered wealth, but died a fool.

But because we are all so subject to these thoughts, and hardly persuaded out
of them, they have so much to say for themselves; I shall

1. Remove the objections by which they are upheld.

2. Prescribe certain remedies.

Obj. Oh but yet the world is hard, and it is not Talk will pay Rent, Taxes,
bring the Year about, we must take care.

Ans. Use a moderate providentiall carfulness, in Gods name, and spare not,
but then commit thy way to God.

2. Is the world hard, and is not thy heart harder, in which all the world is
crowded? Eccl. 3. 11. It is this makes thee so full of cares.

3. And is not heaven hard too, why have thou not some more such cares; here
quit thy self as a man, offer violence; As the worldling has the world set in
his heart, so has the godly heaven set in his heart, therefore his cares,
thoughts, and discourse, are all of heaven.

Obj. But I am poor, and this doctrine is for the Rich, they need not, I must
care.

Ans. Say with David, Psalm. 40. 17. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks
on me. The Lord provideth for the poor.

2. The rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the maker and cares for both,
Prove. 22. 2.

Obj. A poor widow, God help me and full of cares.

Ans. The Lord calls himself, The God of the Widow, Psalm. 68. 5. has an
especial care, and gives special charge about them, Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24. In
the time of famine, Elias the Prophet was sent only to a Widow to relieve her.

Ob. But I have a many fatherless Children.

Ans. Psalm. 68. 5. The Lord is the Father of the fatherless, and Jer. 49. 11.
he bids thee leave thy fatherless children with him, and be they many of few,
cannot God provide for many as well as few, Number. 11. Must it be marvelous in
Gods eyes, because it is marvelous in ours?

Ob. I have but a little left, I have lived to make a hand of all.

R. Yet may the Lord give his blessing to that little in the Cruse, that it may
suffice to bring thee to thy journeyes end.

Ob. But which is worse, I am in debt too.

Ans. Yet distrust not, but make thy case known to God by supplication and
prayer, and to the people of God, as did that poor widow of the Godly Prophet,
2 Kings 4. 1, 2. Who was left in straites, yet not left in her straites.
Distressed not forsaken.

Ob. I am a poor servant.

Ans. So was Joseph formerly, God sets up the poor from the dunghill, and
makes them Princes. Better is the poor servant at the last, then the Prince
born, and will not change states with him. Out of poverty he comes to rise,
whereas he that is born to a Kingdom comes to poverty. Eccles. 4. 13, 14.

Ob. But I have nothing in the world, to begin the world withal.

R. Yet a diligent hand, and depending Prove. 10. 5. Genesis 32. 10.
heart may make rich. Jacob went out with his staff in his hand, and returned
full of Cattle and stock, and store of riches; how many men at present, and in
former times, have risen to the greatest States, and highest Honors in the
City, that came hither in leathren breeches, and clouted shoes, like
Gibeonites, that have afterward like Mordecai, changed their sackcloth into
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and chains of gold.

Ob. But if I had a little more, I should then be content.

Ans. Thou have a deceitful heart of thine own which will never be content.

2. Did thou never say so before, when thou wast little in thine own eyes,
that if God would give so much as now thou have, thou would ask no more;

3. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. He that loves silver
shall never be satisfied with silver, Eccle. 5. 11, 12. The desires are
enlarged as hell, Hab. 2. why was not he content of whom Solomon speaks,
Eccle. 4. 8. who had neither son nor brother, no end of riches, and yet no end
of his labors?

Obj. The most plausible plea of all is, had I more, I might do more good.

Ans. Thou might do more happily, but would do less; The heart and the
price never meet in a fools hand; will and power seldom in a wise man's. What
good did he Eccle. 4. 8. or he in Luke 12. Few rich men rich in grace, or good
works. The lower vines give sweeter fruits then the higher cedars. The lower
valleys are always more fruitful then the loftier hills. The lesser springs and
brooks yield many a wholsomer draught then the swelling ocean. Twelve pence
comes more hardly out of the bag full cramd then five shillings out of a bag
half empty. The poor widow gave more then all the rich; The rich have more, the
poor love more. They spend more wastfully, These give more cheerfully. The 1
King. 17.
poor widow could find in her heart to give a bit of her last piece of bread to
the Prophet in a time of extreme famine, and could spare it out of her own
belly rather then he should want, when that rich miser 1 Samuel 25.
Nabal, who knew no end of his riches, could not part with bread, or cheese to
David in a time of plenty, and in a day of feasting. In our late collections
for the distres^ed Protestants in Piedmont, it was observed the rich Aldermens
fellows came not off so liberally in their contributions, as some meaner Godly
persons.

2. For remedies.

1. Study, believe, and rely upon Gods all-sufficient, all-disposing
providence, who cares for all, sets all our bounds, counts the hairs of our
head, regards the Sparrows, Ravens, Lillies, much more his servants.

2. Study his fatherhood, and the sweetness of paternall affections, what
parents if not worse then infidells or beasts, do not provide for their own,
and shall not God for his family; yea he that keeps so full a house for every
servant, will not see his children want, He that feeds the ravens that cry,
will not starve the doves that mourn; he that feeds the roaring Lion will not
starve the gentle Lamb. His Providentiall care is great, his Paternall love
sweeter.

3. Study such promises as those 1. Pet. 5. 7. Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 34. 9. 10.

4. Thou must pray down cares Phil. 4. 6. You cannot reason them down, they
will up again, nor can you sing care away, drink it away, play it away, it will
come again in a worse dress of poverty, executions, etc. but pray it away, and
thou will get the victory.

5. By soul cares, make a diversion of worldly cares, Mat. 6. 33. Seek the
kingdom of God and you will not want employment, Joh. 6. 27. Labor for that
meat that endures to eternal life: as we stop bleeding by opening a vain to
divert the blood, turn the stream of thy cares another way, and they will
trouble thee less.

6. Reckon thy self married to the Lord, not to the world, 1 Cor. 7. 34.
Therefore care for the things of the Lord.

7. Consider the instability and emptiness of these things, and let not thy
heart out upon them; a joy, love, care skin-deep is enough, let them not be
heart-deep, rejoice as not rejoicing, mourn as not mourning, and use the world
as not abusing it, for the fashion and scheme of all this world is passing away.

8. Consider thy life consists not in the abundance of the things which thou
possessest, Luke 12. 15.

1. Not life it self, for such must dye, the man that leaves his ten thousands,
dies as soon as he that never saw ten pounds.

2. Nor the comfort of his life, the poor man has as contented a meal of his
dish of herbs and fetches as sweet a sleep on his hard bed, as the rich with
his dainty cates, and bed of down. The rich has more cramps, gout, diseases,
and heart tormenting cares, envies, and discontents then the poor.

3. Nor the safety of this life, but they expose to more dangers, the rich are
set upon, robbed and plundered, when poor escape: The King and Nobles were all
carried captive, when the poor were left behind. The noble man and great man is
often secured Jer. 39. 10.
and laid up in a Prison, when the poor man breathes in a freer air.

4. Least of all eternal life, out of which, if riches do not exclude, yet
love, care and trust in riches do ever exclude, Mar. 10. 24.

And if this be all the good in these goods who would not say,

Horum ego tum optarem pauperrimus esse bo^orum.

Pius Quintus said, when he was an ordinary Priest he had good hopes of
salvation, when he was promoted to a Cardinal he became full of fears, But
when he was made Pope he even despaired.

CHAP. XVIII. Of carnal thoughts.
BEsides these, there are a many Carnal thoughts to be taken notice of
Dangerous thoughts. Carnal thoughts of God, of his word, worship and all his
ways. These the natural man is made up of, and they are the best thoughts he
has, or can have till he have another heart and become a spiritual person. He
savoureth the things of the flesh. To. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
He understands not, does not receive, perceive, or relish any thing that is
spiritual. The wisdom of God is foolishness with such. How contemptuously
may you often hear such speak of divine things, of the spirit, of the new
birth, of praying by the spirit, living in the spirit, being in the spirit,
walking after the spirit? How grossly do they conceive of many truths and duties
laid down in Scripture? Regeneration they know not what it is, if it be not
Baptism; feeding on Christ they know no other but either Carnal, or
Sacramental. Oh what strangers are they to the life of God, to the life of
faith, to Union with Christ, to the power of Ephesians. 4. 18. To. 8. 6.
Godliness. But to be carnally minded the Apostle says is death, had thou
no other sins. To be carnally minded is death, They that are in the flesh
cannot please God. To. 8. 8.
They may be in their Generations wise, in their carriage unblamable, for
natural endowments, acquired skill and abilities in Arts, Tongues, Trades,
State-pollicy, yea for humanity and the Theory of divinity they may be eminent,
yet their hearts, thoughts and temper of spirit being carnal, they perish in
the midst of all, as Zimri, only 1 King. 16. 18.
having the honor to burn in the house of a King, and in the midst of Royal
housholdstuffe, and may cry out as Nero, Quantus Artifex Pereo! How great
naturalists! How great Artists do we perish.

CHAP. XIX. Of doubtful, distrustful, and fearful thoughts.
IN the next place, because I now (and I suppose thou also) grow weary of these
evil thoughts, and would fain rid my hands (and heart) of them, I shall crowd
two or three companies of them into this and the next chapter that we may the
sooner have done with them. And oh! that I could as soon leave thinking, as I
can speaking of them, and as well throw them by out of my heart, as I can this
pen, or thou can this Book out of thy hand: But where there is so much
carrion, there will be crows; and where so much dung, there will be Scarabees.
Jericho was once so close shut up, they made account that none should go out,
none come in, yet did there Josh. 5. 1.
Spies get in, lodge, and go out after, that sought the destruction of the
City, that harbored them, and were never perceived. It is so with thee and me.

1. There are a crew of doubtful thoughts, that often pester the mind, cloud the
understanding, weaken faith, damp hope, deaden prayer, destroy dependence,
delight and joy in God: Doubts about self, our state, our duty; about God, his
word, his love, his presence, his care, Yea about every thing. May I believe in
God? may I adventure on such a promise? may I pray? may I expect an answer if I
pray? This doubting makes a Doting Christian. Gird up thy Loins, Ask in
faith, waver Jam. 1. 6. Mat. 21, 22.
not, and fear no^, whatsoever ye ask in prayer believing ye shall receive; But
he that wavereth and doubts will never come to any stability, but is like the
waves of the Sea driven up and down by reason of their lightness and mobility,
at the pleasure of every blast.

2. Distrustful thoughts, and unbeleeving are like the former, whereby we are
apt to call every thing in question, Gods providence, presence, care, truth,
faithfulness, yea this foul unbelief calls in question every thing; the
very Deity of God, the Trinity of persons, the Divinity of Christ, the verity
of holy Scripture, the very fundamentalls of salvation, and stumbles at every
high point and mysterious revelation, much more at the application of
particular promises, whether Christ can, and God will save such an one as he
is, whether he may ever expect an end of temptation and trouble, or whether he
can possibly reap any good by them. Oh this mischievous unbelief! this
murderous unbelief! what does more dishonor God? what more damage the soul?
Abraham by faith gave glory to God, But Moses and Aaron by To. 4. 20. Number. 20.
12.
their unbelief gave not glory to God (it is said) and were for no other cause
shut out of Canaan. This unbelief take heed of it, be humbled for it; had
thou no other sin this might shut thee out of Canaan and heaven too; Strip thee
of all present, and stop thee from all expected mercies. Except you believe you
shall never be established. All Satan's Es. 7. 9.
darts are thrown in the face of faith, our great work is to maintain the fight
of faith. The strongest and sharpest assaults of 1. Tim. 6. 12. Mat. 4.
Satan are against faith. If thou be the son of God, comes in at every turn. He
knows if thou beginnest to doubt, thou beginnest to yee^d. Happy is he who is
not troubled with such thoughts as these sometimes: few but are. But more happy
he who is most troubled with them and humbled for them. These tentations often
by Gods over ruling providence, tending as much to the deeper rooting of faith,
as the shaking winds to the rooting of the younger trees.

3. Fearful thoughts are like both the forementioned, full of sin and full of
trouble, keeping the soul in continual torment, the life in suspense, and the
spirit in bondage, from the too sad expectation of evil, and too little
expectation of good; and they have commonly these three ingredients, a deep
apprehension of danger, a quick apprehension and remembrance of guilt, and a
very little faith. Hence in any difficulty, when the storms arise, winds are
boisterous, waves are high, they cry out as if all were desperate, Lord save
Mat. 8. 28.
us we perish. For these the Lord does often check and chide his servants; Why
are ye fearful, Oh ye of little faith: fear not, Believe only -- who art
thou that fear a man that shall dye -- and forgettest the Lord thy maker --
and have feared continually Es. 51. 12, 13.
because of the fury of the oppressor as if he were ready to destroy and where
is the fury of the oppressor? Thus are we apt to torment our selves with sundry
unnecessary fears, fears of this, and fears of that, fears of want and
poverty, fears of afflictions and crosses, fear of loss of children or state,
fear of loss of Gods favor, fears of Satan, fears of wicked men, fears of
life, fears of death, fears of hell, fears of judgment, nothing in the world
but fears and all sinful fears.

CHAP. XX. Of reasonings and Irrational thoughts.
WE shall join together some more kinds of thoughts in this chapter, whereof
the first are a company of objecting, and disputing thoughts and Reasonings, as
they are called, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Which (...).
seem to have much to say for themselves to make a man wise above or against
what is written. These are strong holds hardly thrown down. Do all things
without murmuring Phil. 2. 14.
and disputing, especially with God. Christ Jesus loves the Currista better
then the quarista, or quaerista, as Luther said wittily, he loves such as can
go and run, rather then such as ask, why and wherefore. Where is the wise, and
scribe, and disputer of this world? Says the Apostle, he may have Philosophi
haereticorum Patriarchae. Quid Athenis and Hierosolimis? Quid Academiae and
Ecclesiae; Tert. Cedat curiositas fidei, cedat gloria saluti. Nihil ultra
regulam scire est ^mnia scire. Idem.
the highest place in the Schools and the lowest in the Church. Too much
learning and carnal reason makes ^^ad Christians. Nothing endangers Divinity
more then Philosophy: where reason Ends, there Religion begins, and where sense
sees least, faith sees most. We may dispute away all our faith, all our hopes,
all our comforts, and all our obedience too. It is not reason by which we stand
but faith, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Had Abraham begun to reason he had renounced his
faith, had he consulted with flesh and blood he had renounced his obedience.
His Logic was, God has promised, therefore it must be true; And his Ethickes
were, God has commanded, therefore it must be good. And before this faith,
mountains became plains, impossibilities became easy. God is able to perform
what he promised, and before this obedience the hardest command is as easy as
the least. An Implicit faith and blind obedience in this case, is the highest
perfection of a Christian. Who is blind as he that is perfect? Es. 42. 19. But
on the other side, when we will exalt Number. 11.
reason and put out our questions, How shall this be? As Moses, when the Lord
said he would give a months provision of flesh to so numerous an host in the
wilderness, thought it was too much for omnipotency to undertake. Sarah, how
shall a child be Gen 18. 13. Lu. 1. 18.
borne of one that is so old? Zachary the like, when a child was promised him
by the Angel Gabriell, their reason nonplust their faith, they dishonored and
displeased God, and show us how destructive to believing these reasonings are.
This the grand Antichrist in the soul, that opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or Gods revealed will. This the enemy of faith,
obedience, security and confidence. This reason the mother of all the evils
that pester both the souls of men and the Church of God, mother of unbelief
Scepticisme, Irresolution and sinful toleration, mother of pride, dissensions,
disobedience and violent impositions and persecutions, mother of heresies,
schism, seperations, mother of Atheism, Arrianisme, Antiscripturism,
Arminianism, and Socinianism. Certainly I should never believe and worship the
Trinity, believe the incarnation of the son of God, Justification by faith
without Melius est Idiotas and parum scientes existere, quam putare multum
scire and multa expertos in Deum suum blasphemos inveniri. Irenae. ad. Her.
the works of the Law, nor the resurrection of the dead, if I should consult
with flesh and blood, and not hold that in divine mysteries, Ipse dixit is
above all arguments and authorities, and Scriptum est above Probatum est.

The highest point in all Christianity is self denial, and the highest point of
self denial, is to deny our own reason in the things of God, and in plain
English, to learn to be fools, that we may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18.

The great conqueror is he who has overcome himself, and the first conquest
of self is when Reason has conquered sense and brutish Appetite, this is the
Moral man's conquest, the highest that the Heathen could go. The second is,
when conscience has subdued reason, this the conquest of the Christian. But
there is a Third, which is the highest pitch of Christianity, when the word and
the knowledge of Christ have subdued sense, reason, and conscience; Then is
soul, body, sense, reason, will, conscience all made an Holocaust, and
presented to God to be an acceptable sacrifice and a reasonable service. Reason
unsanctified is a blind guide that leads the soul into a thousand bywayes,
among a thousand Precipices. The Athenians reason disputed away the
Resurrection; The Arminians disputes away the Grace of God, The Socinian
disputes away the Deity of Christ, The Papist, the merits of Christ,
Justification by faith, and the second command of the Decalogue: In short, let
reason rule the matter, and we shall have never a command left in the
Decalogue, and never an Article left in the Creed. Therefore the Gospel has
ever been troubled more with Scollars, then with other men. And the Lord has
ever found more to do with the wise, then the babe and simple one. Mat. 11. 25.

It is the (...), The wisdom of the flesh which is enmity to God. To. 8. 7.
and it is not (...), but (...), not the foolishness, but the wisdom of the
world 1. Cor: 3. 19.
which is folly with God. Solomon says, the foolishness of fools is folly;
that is, with men. Pro. 14. 24. But the Apostle says, the wisdom of the wise
is folly with God, (...)(...). 1 Cor. 1. 19. Yea (...), To. 1. 21.
Their (...), and their (...). The wise, the scribe, the Sophy, the Prudent.
The man who is (...) animalis, all soul and 1. Cor. 3. 19.
reason, yea their understanding, ratiocinations, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
craftiness, are all nothing but plain foollishnesse, or enmity, and
opposition to God. He cannot take things upon trust by an Implicit faith from
God, as the believer does, who believes, not because things promised are
agreeable to reason, or probable, or possible, but because the Lord has said
it. Nor can he obey God with blind obedience, as Abraham did, who knew not
whether God would call him, and faith and obedience would carry him, but he
went when the Heb. 11. 8.
Lord commanded, not knowing whither he went, but he was sure he was in the way
of faith and obedience.

2. And if reasonings be so bad, what shall we say to such thoughts as are
without reason, Brutish, childish, foolish, irrational? Among the evils found
in the heart, foolishness is one mentioned by our Savior, Mar. 7. 22. And the
disease of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 21. was a foolish heart, a darkened
understanding, full of vain imaginations: If it be the weakness of childhood
to have much folly bound up in the heart, needing the rod of correction to
drive it out, what a shame is it for those who are past children to have folly
and madness bound up in the heart, which no rod of correction, or words of
instruction can drive out? Bewail thy vain, frivolous, fruitless, childish
and unsavory thoughts, Domitian the Emperor would pretend to be serious
sometimes, and therefore must be private, but they who stood at the door, could
peep in and spy him running after flies to catch them, which begat that answer,
who is within with the Emperor in his private chamber? ne musca quidem? no
body, not so much as a fly. Oh if our hearts were looked into often, might not
we be found as Idle in our imaginations, catching flies, weaving cobwebs, and
if it were asked, who is within in our hearts? we might answer no body, not a
thought worth a fly. The Scripture brands all the wise men of the world for a
pack of fools, and scores up their wisdom for stark foolishness, as I said
before, 1 Cor. 3. 19. and if the wisdom of the wise be folly, what is the
foolishness of the fools but folly in grain. Every man is brutish in his
knowledge, Jer. 10. 14. and 51. 17. What is he then beneath a bruit in his
Ignorance, or inconsiderateness. Holy and wise Agur bewailes his own
brutishness, Pro. 30. 2, 3. Surely I am more brutish than a man, and have not
the understanding of a man, I have neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy. Oh what cause have most men with blushing and shame, to
bewail the silliness and unsavourinesse of multitudes of our thoughts day after
day?

3. What shall we do with a company of Wild, wandering, Impertinent thoughts.
wild, wandering, impertinent thoughts, where shall we commit, and shut up
those vagabonds, or how shall we shut them out rather? The prisoners are too
many for the keepers, as at the battle of Agincourt it was with the English: we
have not bands nor fetters enough to hold them. Let them go, as they come, stay
them not, what wild wandering thoughts have we in hearing, wanderings in
meditation (when most serious) wanderings even in prayer, and while we are
looking here and there, after this and that vain thought, the man is lost (as
it was in the Prophets parable) The heart which we are charged with to keep
with all 1 King. 20. 40.
keeping, is lost in the crowd, and we know not where to seek it.

We might add to these vain thoughts (but of them we shall speak under the
third head hereafter) and of sinful, unadvised passionate wishes, as that a
Jonah: would I Jon. 4.
were dead; or that of Israel, would God we had died in Egypt, would God we had
died in the wilderness. This was their old note upon any discontent and their
rash wishes Number. 14. 2. 28.
came home to them to their cost -- These were not like those serious, and
humble, and pious, and charitable wishes that you find in others of the Saints,
as Number. 11. 29. Josh. 7. 7. Psalm. 119. 5. Act. 26. 29.

But I shall only add one short chapter of the hypocritical thought, and so
conclude this first head of evil thoughts relating to God.

CHAP. XXI. The hypocritical thought.
LAstly, we may not forget the hypocritical thought, which makes the heart as
bad as any other. What are we better if we have not Atheistical, Blasphemous,
or hard thoughts of God, if we have low, base and dishonorable thoughts, not
glorifying him as God, an heart searching omniscient God. There is no greater
abomination in the eyes of God, no greater reproach to the Church, and no
stranger monster in the world then the hypocrite is. In face and speech he is
an Angel, in heart and life a devil, has a head of Gold, feet of clay, and
heart of dirt. He is a black feind in a Prophets mantle, an Israelite with a
Babylonish Garment and wedge of Gold in his tent, a Syrian outwardly cleansed,
in heart a Rimmonite; a disciple with a Bag, and a devil with an holy Soppe;
a Psudo-nicodemite, by day with Christ, by night with the High Priests in their
Conclave; a bastard Moses, who puts on a veil when he appears before God, or
before Israel, puts it off when he comes into his closet, or among his
companions. He has ever a cloven foot, a cloven heart and cloven tongue, that
you may know whose child he is: He haltes between God and Baal, God and Rimmon,
God and Mammon, God and Molech. He has a cloven foot, with one knee bowing to
God, with the other to Rimmon; he has a cloven, or double heart, with one
heart embracing God, with the other Mammon; a cloven tongue too, he can swear
by God, and swear by Malcham too. He can pronounce Zeph. 1. 5.
Shibboleth and Sibboleth too, and can speak the language of Canaan and the
language of Ashdod both. These will needs pursue Christ and profession, as
Asahell dogged Abner, whom he would have been shut off, that he might not have
destroyed him. Turn thee 2 Samuel 2. 22:
aside to the right, or left hand, and take any other man's spoils, or garments
but leave me; But he would not turn aside from following him, Till Abner lift
up his spear, and smote him under the fifth rib. These had better be any thing
then Professors, and follow any one then Christ. He will at length give them
their deaths wound: All their sacrifices are abomination, as being offered with
leaven, and wanting the Salt of sincerity. What an Israelite, and steal and
dissemble Lev. 2. 13. Josh. 7. 11. Jer. 42. 20. Ez. 33. 32. Act. 5. 1. Ezekiel.
14. 4.
too as Achan? Protest, promise, and vow, and yet dissemble as Johanan? hear,
make loves and dissemble as Ezekiels hearers? Profess and dissemble as
Ananias? Preach and dissemble as Judas? Believe and dissemble as Magus? Come
before God with Idols in your hearts. Ah Sirs, God will not be mocked, God
will not be enquired of by such! God will answer them by himself. All Idols are
abomination, but the Idol in the heart, is the greatest: All falsehood is
abomination to the Lord, falsity in a balance, falsity in the speech, but most
of all in the heart.

As truth commends every thing that good is, and makes it much better, so
falsity debaseth every thing that seems never so good, and makes it stark
naught, what more delightful to hear then good news? It is good if true we
say. So are gold, Jewels, Pearls highly valued if true, not counterfeit.

A true professor, and a true Israelite indeed, who knows his worth how highly
does Jo. 1. 47.
God esteem him? a Prophet, how highly is he honored in the Church, above
another professor? but he must be a true Prophet; an Apostle above a Prophet,
if a true Apostle; The Messiah above them all, but it must be the true Messiah
then; And God above him too, but it must be the true God. On the other side,
how does falsity debase every thing: A false balance bad, a false tongue
worse, a false heart worse still, a false Professor worse yet, a counterfeit
Apostle, or false Prophet worse yet, A false Religion, or fained Gospel worse
still, But a false Christ, and a false God worst of all.

Kings proceed against such as traitors, who adulterate their Coin, and stamp
their Image on base metal; what will be done to them, can we imagine, that
shall be found guilty of adulterating Gods Coin, and stamping the Image and
superscription of God, and the Effigies of holy profession, upon a base drossy
heart, and spotted life?

CHAP. XXII. Of Evil Thoughts toward our Neighbor.
WE are now come into another field of Tares (without Wheat) or into another
Room of the Chambers of Imagery, where is a new discovery of more Abominations
yet; Or among another army of enemies, against whom we must oppose our selves,
as Israel when come over Jordan, were to encounter with the Canaanites, nearer
home. We are to speak of a second sort of ill thoughts, which concern our
Neighbor; and of these are very many kinds; we shall point at some of the
chief of them. Whereof the first is, The evil eye, Mar. 7. 22. mentioned in the
Inventory of the evil heart. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, etc. an evil eye. There be many evil eyes in the
world; And these are as clear indications of the mind in many cases, as the
tongue or hands. Solomon says, the wicked winketh with the eye, Prove. 6. 13.
and speaks with his feet. The eye is the tongue of the soul more then the
feet; and Ubi amor ibi oculus. So, Ubi odium, ira, etc. ibi oculus.
many sins, as adultery, lust, pride, envy, disdain, revenge, murder, are as
legible in the eye, as in the act; Some of which only hurt the person himself;
as adultery in the eye defiles the beholder, the other not being at all
defiled; murder in the eye kills the beholder, the other not being touched; so
pride, etc. Yet always it intends the evil of his neighbor.

1. The Eye of envy, is a very bad and sore Eye; the disease of hell, the first
sin of Satan, (say some Divines) which threw him out of heaven, because envying
that man an inferior creature, should be dignified above his angelical nature
in the intended assuming of our humane nature, by the Son of God; but certain
it was, his first sin after his fall, when he came down full of rage against
God, and envy at man standing, whom he now wished to be almost, and altogether
such as himself, in his bonds of sin and misery. It is a fly always bred in
dung, a vice only found in a base, low and malignant spirit, which joys in,
and seeks the hurt and downfall of others, and grieves at, and hinders the good
of others. Thus was Saul Eye-sick, when he saw David honored by the people in
their songs and dances. Saul was very wroth and said, they have ascribed to
David ten thousands, to me but thousands, what can he have more but the
Kingdom? And Saul eyed David (with an observing, mischievous, and envious eye)
from that day and forward. Saul was well 1 Samuel 18. 8, 9.
content that David should adventure his person, when he sat still, but could
not brook it, that he should have any share in the peoples affections, and
acclamations; but he thinks his own honor eclipsed. Jonathan he eyed David
too, but that was with an Eye of respect, his heart was knit to him, he loved
him as his own soul; as we say, he could 1 Samuel 18. 1.
not tell whether he might hear him or see him, he could never look enough on
him; But Saul eyed him, as if he would have run him through with his Eyes, as
well as with his Javelins. He looked at him (I will not say, as in our Proverb,
the devil looked over Lincoln, but) as the devil looked over Paradise, while
man remained innocent, seeking his ruin. Take heed of this foul sin, Charity
envieth not, says the Apostle; But 1 Cor. 13.
the corrupt spirit, that is in all the sons of men, does naturally lust unto
this sin of Envy.

And yet is there a worse Eye of envy than this, which looks a squint, not
only where men bestow their favors unequally, (as they think) but when God
shall bestow his unequally, as they suppose, on those who have not deserved so
well, done or suffered so much as themselves. There were that murmured against
the good man of the house at his distributions, to whom the Lord said, May I
not do what I will with mine own, Is Mat. 10. 15.
thine eye evil because I am good.

And yet a worse, (whereof a spice seemed to be in Josuah) when we emulate the
gifts and graces of God bestowed on others, as if our selves were eclipsed by
their luster. To whom a Moses would say, Let them increase, let me decrease; Oh
that all the Number. 11. 15.
Lords people did prophecy, and that the Lord would pour out of his spirit
upon all. Moses had a self-denying heart, and a bountiful eye; Whatsoever was
good in Gods eye, was good in his too.

2. There is an evil Eye of disdain. There is a generation (says the wise man)
Oh how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. Prove. 30. 13.
Thus Haman looked Est. 3. 5, 6.
Superciliously on Mordecai, as if he could have eaten him, when he thought
scorn to foul his hands with him. Thus scornful Michal, in her heart,
disdained her husband, 1 Chro. 15. 19.
when he danced before the Arc, as if she a Kings daughter, had been
disparaged by her husbands ardent zeal and piety. A base and wicked disposition
this is, and God ever owes such a shame. He resists the proud, and will bring
down the proud looks, as well as the proud hearts. Thus the Scripture often
describes Psalm. 18. 27.
the wicked by their gestures; Winking with the eye, Prove. 10. 10. Psalm. 35.
19. Putting out the fingers, Esaias 58. 9. as showing a disdainful spirit.

Yet is there also a good Eye of holy disdain and contempt in Godly men, Psalm.
15. 4. In whose eyes, it is said, a vile and wicked person is contemned: Noble
Mordecai looked upon Haman as vile and contemptible in midst of all his high
Titles and great offices of advancement. And holy Elisha looked upon a wicked
King, as so worthless a person, that in his holy contempt, he said, he would
not have vouchsafed to make him an answer, or lend him a look, were it not for
2 King 3. 14.
the presence of Jehoshaphat, whom he more honored for his Grace, than for his
Diadem.

3. The evil Eye of suspicion, whereas Charity thinks no evil, but interprets
all in the best sense, and will rather choose to make the best of evil, than the
worst of bad, or bad of good. Devise not evil against thy neighbor, says the
Lord, when he dwells securely Prove. 3. 29, 30.
by thee, and intends thee no harm. But suspicion and jealousy looks upon
every good act and office done with an evil eye. David sends to Hanun to
condole the death of his Father, and to congratulate his peaceable 2 Samuel 10. 3.
succession in the Throne. This is interpreted to be a perfidious act, to
fore-run an invasion by sending his messengers as spies, to observe the nature,
manners, and preparations of his Country. This suspion is a botch breaking out
in a base and foul heart, infected with fraud, falsehood, or other filthy guilt,
and is the bane of secure confidence, and is to be banished out of Christian
breasts, as the great enemy to humane society, and true friendship.

4. The Censorious Eye, is another evil eye. It is Totus oculus ad extra, totus
tenebrae ad intra, all eye without, all darkness within. He has a Beam in his
own eye, yet sees never the worse, but the better to espy the least mote in
his brothers eye: Whereas the sincere person, is totus oculus ad intra, The
least mote troubles him makes him weep, wipe, wash; But his neighbors mote or
beam troubles him not.

5. The Covetous and Greedy Eye, is another evil Eye. As there is a Bountiful
Eye that shall be blessed, Prove. 22. 9. He gives his bread to the poor, when
he sees their want, his eye pitties them. So he that hastes to be rich, says
the same Solomon, has an Prove. 28. 22.
evil eye, a covetous and cruel eye, and considers not that poverty shall
come on him. His eye is never satisfied with seeing his own wealth, and
another woe; he thinks much to see another live by him, he has devoured
Naboths vineyard already in his eye, Deuteronomy. 15. 9.
and is sick with discontent, if he cant get him part with it. Their desires
are enlarged as hell, says the Prophet, and they seek to add Hab. 2. 15.
house to house, and field to field, till there be no more place, that they may
be placed Esa. 5. 8.
alone in the midst of the earth.

6 The Eye of adultery is another evil eye, wherewith ever the beholders heart
is defiled, and often the chastity of another is endangered. The harlots
eyelids are very dangerous, Proverbs 6. 25.

7. The malicious and revengefull Eye is a devilish evil Eye, such was Cains,
who cast many a sower and menacing look at his brother Abel, when he gave him
never a word. Which malice and mischief in his thoughts and looks the Lord
reproved, when Genesis 4.
he said, Cain why art thou wroth with thy brother and why is thy countenance
cast down? This is Eye-murder, or heart-murder; as the former Unchaste Eye is
called heart-adultery, or Eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14.

8. The Unnatural and Ungracious Eye of children to their parents, or those in
nearest relations is worst of all, sometimes the eye of the Husband is evil to
the Wife, and the Wife to her Husband, yea the tender mother to her tender
babe, but that is not ordinary; but in time of extremest famine, and Deuteronomy. 28.
54, 55, 56, 57.
calamity, and is then the sorest judgment and the height of all misery. But
it is too ordinary to see the child look with an evil eye upon his aged and
indigent parents, and this is the height of impiety, and the most prodigious of
sins and inhumanity. The eye that mocketh his father and despises to obey his
Prove. 30. 17.
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagels shall
eat it. He ordinarily dies a shameful death, and lies unburied, then do the
Crows and Eagles prey upon his carcass as carrion, and begin with the eyes as
they usually do. He that curses his father or mother, he says again in
another place, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness. Prove. 20. 20.
Many such sad examples we have recorded in all ages, of these sons of Cham,
and brothers of Absalom; whereof the one in mirth and sport beheld his Fathers
nakedness, and profanely insulted over his infirmity, him the Father laid his
curse upon by imprecation, and God upon his posterity by execution. The other
ungraciously beheld his Fathers honor, and long life, with discontent, he
thought the old man would never die, he seeks to asperse his Government, and
make him incapable of the Crown, that himself being the eldest Son, might have
the Crown before his Fathers death. Him indeed the Father pitied, and desired
he might be spared, but vengeance suffered him not to escape. The Crows were
near picking out his eyes, when he was by divine Vengeance hanged between
heaven and earth, unworthy to go to the one, or to tread upon the other. Think
of this you undutifull and ungracious Children; if to honor Parents be the
first command, then to dishonor and disobey them is the first of sins. If to
be without natural affection, be such a heathenish sin, what is it to have
natural affection Romans 131.
turned into unnatural disaffection and disobedience; To be thorns in the
sides, and pricks in the eyes of their dearest Parents, and to prove such a
curse, as Elies sons, those who died, were a great grief dying in their sins,
and cut off by divine Vengeance, but those who lived were a greater eyesore,
and heart-break. That man of thine, whom I shall not cut off, (says the Lord)
shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart. Which 1 Samuel 2. 33.
has made unhappy Parents cry out, I have nourished and brought up Children,
and they have proved Vipers, rising up against me. How happy the womb that
never bare, and the paps which never gave suck, and to wish with Augustus
because of the lewdness of his Daughters, would God I had either lived
unmarried, or died without Children.

There be many other kinds of evil Thoughts against our Brother, whereof we
shall instance in some, not speaking much to them, but pointing briefly at
them. Only we shall lay down this Rule, that he who commands us to love God,
commands us to love 1 John. 4. 21.
our brother also; And he who commands that we should have none but high,
holy, honorable, and reverend thoughts of him, and that we should think
soberly concerning our selves, commands that we should have none but fair,
just, favorable, and charitable thoughts of our Neighbor, Zach. 7. 9, 10.
Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, Execute true judgment, and show mercy and
compassion every man to his brother, and oppress not the widow, the
fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil
against his brother in your heart.

CHAP. XXIII. Many other Evil Thoughts against our Neighbor.
1. CEnsorious Thoughts, and rash judging Censorious Thoughts.
of our Brother, of his heart and state, severely forbidden and threatened in
the Scriptures, as a sacrilegious inthroning our selves in Gods Tribunal, a
sin never so common as now: This Minister is Antichristian, that is a
Time-server, this man a hypocrite, that man a formalist, but all are judges,
and all are judged, and all are condemned. What shall become of us in that day,
when that shall be verified, With what judgment Mat. 7. 12.
ye judge ye shall be judged, condemn and be condemned? Why do thou judge
thy brother? Romans 14. 10.
and why set at naught thy Brother? What have thou to do to judge another man's
servant? To Romans 14. 4.
his own Master he must stand or fall, says the Apostle. If our Savior said,
Man, who made Luke 12. 14.
me a judge? do not thou make thy self a judge, unless, of thy self; here thou
have a 1 Co. 11. 31.
Patent, there none. Grudge not one against another, says Saint James, lest
you be condemned, Jam. 5. 9.
behold the judge stands before the door; and will thou keep him out, and
prevent him from doing his own work?

But we are not to wonder (as one says) if the world be full of unjust
judgments, when there are seven dangerous Judges alwais abroad in their
Circuit, who have given themselves Commissions, and will not be persuaded to
lay them down.

1. Judge Weak, an unfit person to make a Judge, yet is he the best of the
seven, for he has no ill meaning. He that yet knows not the latitude of
Gospel-Liberty, if he see another do but what he lawfully may, he cries out of
licenciousnesse. The weak is apt to Judge, as the strong to despise, Romans 14.
3. Thus Simon when he saw so wicked a woman come so near to Christ, and he
permit it, began to change his former good opinion he had of Christ, that if he
were so good a man Luke 7. 39.
and so great a Prophet as the world took him for, he would not su^^er such a
woman to touch him.

2. Judge Hastings, or Inconsiderateness, is a rash Judge. This made Eli so
rashly censure mourning Hannah for a drunken gossip, 1 Samuel 1. 14.
when (blessed Saint) she she more tears then she had drunk wine. And what
were they who said of Paul, without all doubt, this man is a murderer? Acts 28.

3. Judge Hearsay, is another Incompetent Judge; He takes things upon report,
never weighing circumstances, considering the quality of the Informers, or once
giving them their oath. Jesus Christ though he was the fittest person to judge,
did not judge according to the hearing of the ear, Esa. 11. 3. The Lord himself
came down into Sodom to make a more full discovery of the truth of that report
which was carried up to heaven. Genesis 18. 21.
But now a days a base report against the best man, from the worst hands, is
evidence enough to proceed to condemnation.

4. Judge Prejudice, or Erroneousnesse, (I cannot call him Justice) is a fierce
and cruel Judge ready to condemn those of differing minds, be they never so
pious and peaceable, such a one was Paul once toward the Apostles and other
Saints, and such he met with afterward. He had Judged them, and now they
Judged him the great disturber of the Churches peace, and corrupter of Religion.

5. Hypocrisy is another merciless Judge, he with his Beam in his own Eye
condemns his brothers Mote. Clodius occusat Maechos.

6. Profaneness is a furious Judge, and he that drinks up iniquity like
water, upon his Ale-^ench, condemns him that will not so much as taste. They
speak evil because you run not into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. These
are Inexcusable who judge others, yet do the same themselves. Romans 2. 1. Who is
the Troubler of Israel but Elias? and who must prove him so but Ahab? The
prophanest wretch in a Parish will Judge his Minister and all the godly in the
country. They are all naught, Hypocrites all, as bad in a corner as the worst.
I hate hypocrisy (say they) and shows of Religion; I would thou hatedst
profaneness too, and shows of Impiety. The Wolf of old condemned the Lamb,
and the Camel-swallower condemns the Gnat-eater.

7. But Malice is a mad Judge, and without all reason. He says of Job, he is
an hypocrite, and will stand to it, though God himself be his Vindicator and
Compurgator. This said of Christ, He is mad and has a devil, oh hear him not;
good people believe Joh. 10. 20.
him not; He is a glutton, winebibber, and seditious person too besides. And
John the Baptist he had a devil too.

We may add to these Judge Absalom, (Justice would be) would to God I were made
2 Samuel 15. 4.
Judge, says he, would do every honestman right) Judge Ambition, or Calumny,
who when his own heart is full of pride, malignity, impiety and rebellion, and
his ways known to be abominable, like another Captain mend-all, the head of an
old rebellion, takes upon him to censure the best, and to asperse all in place
of Government, Magistrates, Ministers, all may come to him to learn their duty.

Now seeing some or other of these Judges are in every place, no marvel that
all places are full of Judgment, and all Judgments full of perverseness;
Judgment running down like a river, but righteousness dried up as the Red Sea.

2. Contemptuous, disparaging, undervaluing Contemptuous Thoughts.
and insulting thoughts; whereas our duty is in point of honor, to prefer
others, and take To. 12. 10.
shame to our selves. He that is void of understanding despises his neighbor,
Pro. 11. 12. A stinking weed this is which grows only in a dunghill. Never
found but in a base, or ungracious heart: The Sorry bondwoman when she saw she
had conceived and her mistress barren, was a better woman then her mistrisse,
and slights her Genesis 16. 4. Psalm. 10. 5. and 12. 5.
as much as the dirt under her feet. And the wicked man is often described by his
pussing at every one, he is so puffed up himself with Arrogance, that he puffes
at every other man with insolency and contempt.

3. Again, Overweening and Magnifying Overweening thoughts.
thoughts of some, to the disparaging of others are as bad, and making odious
Comparisons and unbeseeming differences between man and man, according as
private interest or affection swaies the judgment. This began in the Apostles
times, and is Epidemicall and rife in our days: To 1 Cor. 4. 6.
think of men above what is written, and to be puffed up for one, against
another. I am for 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5. 8.
Paul, says one, But Apollos for me, says another, and Cephas is beyond them
both, says a third. But who is Paul, and who Apollos? Are they not one? They
are good men all and agree, do you also agree Ingeniis non ille favet,
plauditque sepultis. Nostra sed Impugnat, nos, nostraque lividus odit. Horat.
and rend not the Church by Divisions. It were a fond thing if one should say
this Moon is a rare moon, The last was as good, the next will be as good. To
say of this man dead, He was a man, none like him, of that Minister to whom
thou art a stranger, him I like; and to slight the present Ministers, thy own
especially (if faithful and godly) shows great precipitancy of judgment, but
little Sincerity. The Jews gloryed, they were Moses disciples, Jo. 9. 28.
took it in scorn to be Christ's disciples, and to learn of him. But Moses was
bad Ex. 17. 4.
enough while he lived, much ado he had to escape Stoning once. The dead
Prophets Extinctus amabitur Idem.
tombs must be Garnisht, and names must be Kalendered, while the living must
be persecuted, and their names buried in Infamy. If Paul and Peter, or Austin
and Jerome were alive, they would wonder how they came to be called Saints, when
others that preach the same doctrins are Anathematized, or reproched.

4. Cunning craftiness whereby men lie in Craftiness. Act. 13. 10.
wait to deceive, This turns men into Serpents, and makes men the children of
the devil, who is full of subtilty and mischief. Though this be cried up as the
Art of Arts, and the highest wisdom. Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere:
We say, He that cant dissemble must look to live despised, and dye a beggar;
Jonadab the son of Shimeah such a subtle Sycophant, and sly 2 Samuel 13. 3.
companion, that he could tell Amnon how to defloure Tamar and she should
neither be aware, nor could avoid it. Absalom was so perfect in this Art, that
he courted and gained all the people to depose his father, and set up himself,
that judgment 2 Samuel 15. 6.
might run down as a River and Justice as a stream. Jacob a plain man himself,
had sons too nimble at this, who first overreached, Genesis 34. 13.
then Massacred the men of Shechem. Into their secret let not my soul come,
say thou with Jacob: Cursed be this wrath, Cursed this Genesis 49. 6, 7.
policy, the one is cruel, the other hellish. The Godly man's rejoicing, is
that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, not fleshly wisdom, he has his
conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 4. 2.
And accounts it his glory to say, I have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness. And while the wicked projects how to
lay snares privily, and to swallow up others alive as the grave, and to Pro. 1.
11. Neh. 4. 11.
come over them, so as they shall not see nor know who hurts them, The Godly
man says, let integrity and uprightness preserve me, or let Micah. 7. 2.
me perish.

5. Treacherous and mischievous thoughts, Treacherous thoughts.
when greatest good will pretended; this is to be superlatively wicked, a devil
incarnate, as Judas was, who betraies his Master with a kiss, words smoother
then oil, yet war in his heart. Absalom intertaines Amnon with good cheer, and
a sword is 2 Samuel 13. 28.
presented for the second course; Jael-like Jud. 4. 19, 20.
begin with butter, and milk, and end with hammers, and nails. Thus, those
Sycophants and arch dissemblers who came to Christ, with Master we know thou
art true and able to resolve us, we have a case of conscience which troubles
us, tell us what Mat. 22. 16.
we shall do; all the while insidiating and laying wait for him.

6. Revengfull and malicious thoughts are Revengfull thoughts.
worst of all, such as Cains against Abell, and Esaus against Jacob, who
resolved to be revenged though he deferred it till his father was dead; Absaloms
to Amnon, who concealed his intended murder for two whole 2 Samuel 13.
years, yet at last it brake forth against all humanity, and Hamans to
Mordecai, who Est. 3. 7.
for a twelvemonth together was casting lots and meditating revenge to the
purpose; Such the men of Anathoth, Jeremies next Jer. 11. and 20. 10.
neighbors, against him, who watched for his halting saying peradventure he
will be enticed and we shall prevail against him, and then we shall take our
revenge on him. Such Joseph's brethrens courtesy to him: This is to Genesis 37.
be totally contrary to God, whose thoughts are only thoughts of peace, not of
evil, though he never want power to punish, and we never cease to give him too
much provocation. This is to be wholly conformed to Satan, who though he always
strikes not, yet waits like a roaring lion when to destroy. The wicked plotteth
against the righteous, and seeks to slay him. Psalm. 37.


7. If our thoughts are not so black and Uncompassionate thoughts.
bloody as these forenamed, yet may we be to blame by unsensible,
unsympathizing, and uncompassionate thoughts; If we do not mourn with those
that mourn, and weep for To. 12. 15. Am 4. 6. Psalm. 109. 16. Col. 3. 12.
the afflictions of Joseph. What direful imprecations does David pour out
against his adversaries, because they remembered not to show mercy, etc. Put on,
says the Apostle, as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness, etc.

8. Lastly to make have out of this Sodom, we may take notice of a Company of
Vile wishes, and risings up of heart against our neighbor ready to break forth
into open execrations, curses and imprecations, But there they lie muttering
and murmuring, like a company of young adders in their den, which though they
yet sting and poison not, they keep a hissing and put out their tongues, that
you may know whose breed they are and what they would do, had they more power.
These are all breaches of the royal law of love which bids us bless, but
curse not, forbids gruding, Le. 19. 18. Jam. 5. 9. murmuring, whispering,
swelling, yea once wishing ill to thy neighbors soul, but to love him
perfectly as thou do thy self. 2 Cor. 12. 20. Job. 31. 30.
Thus have we done with the two first woes, the third is at the door, and
having past the Lion and the Bear, shall now show you the Philistin, who
presents himself in the next chapter.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the evil thoughts which concern and respect our selves.
HERE are we come to smite at Hidras, third head, and have brought you into the
third region of thoughts, nothing purer air then the two former (never a
barrel better herring, as we say) or into the third Story of the chambers of
Imagery, where you will see, if you view, as unclean and deformed portraitures
as any yet; These are the Penetralia, or oracle: The pollutum pollutorum (I
dare not say Sanctum Sanctorum) of Satan's temple, which when you enter, you may
well think you are entering into Jeremies nasty Prison and Dungeon full of dark
Cabbins and Cells, yet not so Jer. 37. 16. and 38. 6.
much as a drop of water to drink, but filthy mire in which he sunk and stuck
fast. The evil thoughts respecting our selves only. A great Room, and
spacious, this to walk in, but within many closets, or chambers in a chamber,
as the Scripture phrase is, a 1 King. 22. 25.
great wheel it is in which many wheels may be discerned, wheel within
wheel, A chest of Drawers, or case of Boxes I may in this case compare our
naughty heart to, once begin to open it you think you shall never have an end,
you discover more, and yet more receptacles, and holes and unsuspected hiding
places; and which is worst of all, such stuff (the evil treasure of the heart)
hid there as none would imagine; For example;

1. A pack of Impure, unchaste, unclean Impure Thoughts.
thoughts; Speculative adultery, fornication, incest, etc. whereby the mind is
as much defiled, as the body is by the external act. The mill sometimes sets
it self a fire not being looked to, and having no corn to grind, and a man is
sometimes burnt up of his own lusts, by the agitation and motion of the
thoughts at work on themselves, for want of better employment. These evil
thoughts are Sodoms suburbs, linger not, but have and escape for thy life, look
not back upon them least thou be burnt in their flame. Certainly many are
guilty of murder before God, who never touched their neighbors life; and of
adultery, who never stained another chastity. Oh what have thou to answer for
a world of impure thoughts, whereby the bed of thy heart (which should be kept
as the chaste spouse of Christ) is defiled, when the bed of others is not
defiled. The Scripture speaks of eyes full of adultery, and of adultery in the
2 Pet. 2. 14. Mat. 5. 28. Job. 31. 1.
heart. We must make Jobs covenant with our eyes and with our thoughts, not to
think of a woman, as he says in an evil sense: Fence thine eyes and thou half
guardest thy heart, quench thy sparkling thoughts and the fire out. The evil
thought is hells burning Objectis ventos foribus, clansisque fenestris, Est
etiam tota mos prohibere domo. Ast aures, oculique hae sunt, utriaque decebat,
Quas satanae clausas opposuisse fores. Bez. Epigr.
glass which sets on fire the whole course of corrupt nature. And the eyes,
and ears, says Beza, are as well to be shut against Satan's temptations, as we
shut the doors and casements of the house to keep out the wind and weather.

2. Next to these unclean self-defiling thoughts, we may rank ambitious
self-exalting thoughts, which are self-defiling, and selfdestroying too for the
most part; such as were in old Lucifer, who said in his heart, I will ascend
into heaven, I will exalt my throne Esa. 14. 13.
above the stars of God, etc. Such as were in the old vaunting Assyrian, Are
not my Princes altogether Kings? Shall I not do to Jerusalem, as to Samaria and
her Idols? Desert not me to trust in God, for what Es. 36. 15. 18.
God can deliver out of my hand? but let Hezekiah and all desert God and put
their trust in me. It was time for the Lord to put a hook into his nostrills;
Such or worse was Simon Magus, who must needs be some great one in the world,
though he compact with Satan, and give a soul for vain glory; He said with
Saul, honor me before the people, and call me what you will, let me be
reprobate and rejected of God, that is not it which troubles me: Occidar modo
imperet, as Nero's mother said of him, let me or my child rise to greatness,
though I dye and damn for it.

And there are other ambitious thoughts in spiritual things as much to be
avoided; Magus his spiritual pride and hypocrisy made him two fold more a
child of hell then when he was a wizard; He was before a child of darkness,
now he is an Angel of light; he would before have been some body in the world,
now is he covetous earnestly of spiritual gifts, and seeks to be some eminent
luminary and light in the Church, a new Apostle at the least, and he bids fair
for it, he would spare for no money so it might be had, that he might give the
Holy Ghost (which none but the Apostles ever had power to do) that he might be
as much talked of for the spirit as any of them, and might out shine them all.
Oh that this spirit had died with him! Oh how many of his disciples and
sectators have we at this day, who affect spiritual gifts out of ambition, and
preach out of emulation? Some desire to Phil. 1. 15.
hear that they may learn and know: to know and learn that they may teach; to
teach, that they may practice themselves and edify others; but others there be
who care not for learning, knowing, teaching, practizing, edifying, but hear
and know and teach, that they may be heard and known and talked of, if not
worse, to gather disciples after them, such as Magus had: The impurest
Gnostics and Ranters bearing the name of Christians.

This spiritual pride is the more dangerous pride, when outward shows not, but
dies, take heed of a worse within. Pride is like the small pox, if it strike
inward it is certain death, better it should come out in the foulest bloches
and scabs. Some low spirits are proud of their clothes, as the peacock of his
feathers, of a head of hair as Absalom, Es. 19. 11.
of an old pedigree, as Pharaoh, of his many Honors and titles as Haman, of his
great atcheivements and fair buildings as Nebuchadnezzar; Bad and too bad all:
But another, Ez. 28. 3. 14.
as Tire, steps up as an anointed cherub, glories of his anointing, and is
proud of his wisdom, That he is more wise then Daniel, or any Scripture man of
them all, Here is the greatest danger. The Pharisees pride of spirit was worse
then that of Absaloms (as Diogenes pride of heart was worse then of Plato's
attire and fare) The one puffed up with his beauty, the other with his duty. How
much is it safer to be humble after a sin, then proud after a duty; and to be
kept low in midst of many weaknesses, then to be lifted up in midst of the
fullest mercies, and richest graces, which made Mr. Fox say his graces did him
most hurt, and his sins most good; and made Luther say in a sober sense;
operabona sunt perniciosa in salutem, good works are destructive to salvation,
to wit, if relied on, and prided or gloried in.

3. Thoughts of Security which are apt to Thoughts of Security.
seize upon a gracious heart: Either for his own private state, as David, who
once dreamed of Golden prosperity, that his Mountain Psalm. 30. 6. Job. 29. 18.
Jer. 45.
should never be moved; and Job, that he should die in his nest; and Baruch,
that he should enjoy great matters, and a quiet state in the world: God will
pour his servants from vessel to vessel, that their sent may not abide in
them: Or for the Church, but Noah may look and look again ere he see any dry
land for the Ark to rest upon it; and our Savior has forewarned us not to
think he comes to send Peace to his Church, but fire and sword rather; In the
world you Mat. 10. 34. Jo. 16. 33.
shall have tribulation: and live we never so Godly, They which will live Godly
in this world (all and every one of them) shall suffer tribulation; our
thoughts must not dream of sitting at the right hand and left, in Kingdoms
below, but of drinking of Christ's cup, and being baptized with his baptism.

4. Self magnifying and admiring thoughts of our own worth and excellency, and
despising others, forgetting that of the Apostle, that every man think soberly
and To. 12. 3. and 10. Pro. 26. 12.
meanly of himself, in honor preferring others: and of the wise man, See
thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him.
These are like little children, they blow a bladder first full of wind, then
play with it; or like the Baker, they dream a dream, and themselves must
interpret Genesis 40. 16.
it, and the interpretation must be their advancement. But these thoughts of
self-conceit and self-magnifying, have cost the world, and the Church
especially, very dear, they being the mother of faction, division, discontent,
heresies, schisms, rents, seperations, confusion, destruction; yea this
self-conceit is the Arch-heretick and the greatest sectary in the world, and
the greatest incendiary in the state.

5. Projecting, restles, working thoughts; There is a mint of them continually
going in the shop of a buisy mind. His inward thought is how to make his house
and name stand for ever, Psalm. 49. 11. And, Psalm. 146. 4. Thus is he employed
all his life long (with a hundred proclamations in his head) till death comes;
His breath goes forth, he returns to his dust, in that day all his thoughts
perish; should he live ever, his thoughts would be at work ever: He dies as
Archimedes buisie about his Projects: As Caligula or Domitian was wont to
tumble himself all along upon heaps of gold, so he tumbles himself upon a heap
of thoughts. Man is like a candle lighted, it wastes it self, goes out in
smoke, and ends in an ill savor, so man's thoughts; or man's mind is like a
piece of ordinance, made with much cost, mounted with much labor, but being
over charged, and fire put to it, flies a pieces and destroys the engeneer.
When death gives fire, the man's thoughts break and he and they perish together;
or every man is as a woman with child that dies in travel; women have a time
when they cease bearing and conceiving, man's mind never cease traveling. The
woman is usually delivered, and child, and she both safe, the man and his
thoughts perish together: Absalom traveled with ambitious thoughts, death
comes, there is an end of them: Ahitophel with Politic thoughts, death comes,
there is an end of them. The great builder, and gatherer, dreams of nothing
but getting, talks of nothing but building, thinks of nothing Immoritur studiis
and amore senesei^ habendi, Ho^
but enjoying, eating, drinking, living at such a rate, he goes well to bed,
rises no more, there all his thoughts perish

CHAP. XXV. The melancholy, and merry thought.
THE melancholy thought, is a sad thought, and where predominant worse then
many other, because more tenacious, obstinate and unmovable, Opprobrium medici,
Opprobrium Theologi, Ludibrium Diaboli. The Physician is tired with him, the
Minister grieved, the devil makes sport with him. In the German proverb, Luther
says it goes for current, Caput melancholicum diaboli balneum, The melancholy
head is the devils bathing place: This poor creature the devil makes him his
Ass, to ride in triumph upon, having first laid his own garments (all his own
sins upon him) which he willingly bears; This spirit, is the worst we have to
deal with, and to cast out; Like the dumb and deaf spirit whom the disciples
Mat. 9. 28, 29.
could not remove, only to be cast out by prayer and fasting, and the
omnipotency of Christ. A dumb spirit it is you can get nothing out of him, and
a deaf spirit too you can get nothing into him. The fire burns inward, and
there is no coming nigh with buckets, or engines; The saddest complexion it is
and the strangest Metamorphosis it makes in the mind, turning all truths into
fables, and all fictions and phancies into realities: Evil he calls good, and
good evil, sweet bitter, bitter sweet, light darkness, and darkness light;
mirth, joy, cheerfullnesse, company of friends he calls evil, darkness,
solitariness, mourning, sadness: these are good and sweet, yea hope, faith,
hearing, praying, he calls bitter, but reasonings of distruct, doubting,
gainsaying, oh how sweet. To laughter he says thou art madness, to joy what
meanest thou? of himself he faith, I am a companion to dragons, and company for
owls: To the light he says, why is light given to him that is in misery, and
life to the sad in heart? To his Job 3. 20.
friends he says turn away from me, labor not to comfort me, I will weep
bitterly, etc. Esa 22. 4.
To all Godly friends, Ministers as well as others he says, you are miserable
comforters all, Physicians of no value, o^ that you would altogether hold your
peace, whither he would he cannot tell, into any wilderness, or among tombs,
any where to be gone: And it is well if he do not say unto God, I am cast out
of thy sight, there is no hope, I am like a broken vessel; and instead of
better prayers, put up this passionate wish, Oh that I might have my request,
and that God would grant me the thing that I long for, Job 6. 8. 9.
even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand
and cut me off.

The case of this person^^ the more sad, because having for no cause put all
his old acquaintance and tried friends out of doors, viz. faith, hope, prayer,
promises, discourse, enquiries, he has left himself only two to consult with,
whom he reckons of as his best friends; silence, his ill counsellkeeper, and
sadness, the ill counsel giver, who are indeed his mortal enemies: And which
is worst of all, over head lodges despair, and below self-murder.

Poor soul wherewith shall I bemoan thee, or how shall I go about to comfort
thee; Sad, sad is thy condition, thou wishest night were day, and day were
night, and every thing, especially thy self, to be any thing but what they are;
sleep departs, joy is banished, meat distasteful, music loathsome, friends
unwelcome, employment torment, holy duties irksome, yea promises no more
savoury then the white of an egg; oh it is time to send for the Physician of
souls in this desperate case, disciples can do nothing.

In this case it is hard to say what is to be done or spoken: we speak not to
men but to stocks and stones, that have ears and hear not, tongues and speak
not, reason but understand not, and ofttimes faith, but believe not.

Go not in this case to Cains land of Nod to retire thy self from society, or
tire thy self with employment: To Saul's music for diversion, or to Endor in
thy desertion, nor to Judas's high Priests for satisfaction and exoneration,
nor to the Legionists Mar. 5. 5.
mountains, or tombs, no nor to Elias his cave, or John Baptists wilderness,
nay nor into the Incestuous penitents cloister or closet, to drown and macerate
thy self in thy sorrows; But get thee into the sanctuary of God, whatsoever be
the occasion of thy grief (whether sin or misery) pour out thy soul in
prayers, judging thy self, flying to Christ, looking up to the mercy seat,
staying thy self in thy darkest hours upon the name of the Lord, Es. 50. 10.
and trusting upon him whom thou would gladly find thy God. Cast all thy
care and burden even of sin and sorrow upon him, and as he is faithful he will
not fuffer thee to be tempted 1 Cor. 13. 10.
above thy strength; But will make a way out of all temptation and trouble,
that thou may be able to bear it.

He that goes in trouble of mind to the Harp at first for ease, commonly goes
to Endor after, and at last to the halter, sword, or knife.

And on the other side, the Mad-merry The mad merry Thought.
thought, or unsavory lightness of mind is nothing better, oft-times worse.
The former sad thought decayed the comforts of the soul, this destroies the
soul it self; That lops off the fruit of peace, this digs up the root of grace;
that abateth hope, this subverteth fear; Both bad, this worse. That like the
Legionist, runs away from Christ in fear, among the Mountains, but is cured
and recovered, this Mar. 5. 13.
runs with the possessed swine from Christ, with joy and delight from the
Mountains, Mar. 5. 5.
amain into the sea, and there they are choked and perish. As we say of
presumption and despair, despair kills more dreadfully, presumption more
unsuspectedly; yet presumption kills the ten thousands, and despair but
thousands; so for one that dies of sorrow, going mourning to the grave, ten die
of mirth, going laughing to hell. These swine go in herds.

Yet am I not against all mirth, but that which I called mad and unsavory.

There is one mirth to be allowed, another to be commended, a third to be
desired and increased, a fourth to be checked, reproved and suppressed.

1. There is a natural mirth which cannot Natural mirth.
be disallowed, the weary man does naturally rejoice in rest, the hungry in his
meat, the sick in health restored; so we read of the joy of the harvest man in
his harvest, of the rejoicing Esa. 9. 3. Esa. 62. 5. Joh. 16. 21.
of the bridegroom, in his bride, of the woman delivered of her child. Honest
and harmless joys all.

2. There is a better mirth to be commended, Moral and civil mirth.
a Civil, moral, virtuous mirth, an habitual pleasantness and alacrity of
mind, which is as much to be cherished as the health of the body, and does much
conduce to it, and to the carrying of us through the various conditions and
exercises of this life with cheerfulness. Thus the Lord would have his
servants not only to rejoice in his service, but to rejoice in whatsoever we
put Deuteronomy: 12. 18.
our hand unto; And he is pleased not only to permit, but more then once to
command the husband to live joyfully with his wife, he Deuteronomy. 24. 5. Eccl. 8. 7,
8, 9. Pro. 5. 18. Col. 3.
forbids bitterness, sournesse and morosity, and commands not only love, but
delight, joy and pleasantness to them in that condition, whereby their lives
should be made mutually more comfortable to each other.

3. But there is a third better mirth commended Spiritual mirth.
and commanded to the people of God, highly to be prized and desired, a
spiritual mirth and rejoicing, their duty and privilege, their work and
wages. To rejoice in the Lord, this is saintly, heavenly, yea Angelical, or
divine joy. This is ever to be desired, ever to be practiced, no time
unseasonable, no measure too great. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say
rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. Do it and do it again, do it as much as thou can, and do
it yet more, we often exceed in other joy, we always fall short here.

The people of God have always matter of joy in whatever condition they be,
they are all sons of consolation, joy is their new birthright, others have
their furtiva gaudia, stolen joys, as stolen waters and stolen bread: These
have gaudia concessa allowed and privileged joys.

1. They have joy in the spring, joy in God, Romans 5. 11. joy in Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3. 3. joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. a joy that for its nature is
unknown to others, Pro. 14. 10. for its measure is full, Joh. 16. 24. for its
kind Glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. for its sweetness unspeakable, ibid. for its
duration, none can take it away, Joh. 16. 22.

2. Joy in the stream, joy in Election, Luke 10. 20. Rejoice that your names
are written in the book of life; joy in their Vocation, as Zacheus, Luke 19. 6.
in their Conversion, as the Jailer, Act. 16. 34. in their Baptism, as the
Eunuch, Act. 6. 39. joy in accepting their persons, Eccles. 9. 7. joy in
pardoning their sins, Mat. 9. 2. joy in the Word, Jer. 15. 16. 1 These. 1. 6.
joy in the Worship of God, Esa. 56. 7. joy in their present portion and
possession, Mat. 13. 44. joy much more in their reversion and future
expectation, Romans 5. 2.

3. They have matter of rejoicing in themselves, Gal. 6. 4. joy in their
Consciences, 2 Cor. 1. 12. joy in their graces, joy of faith, Phil. 1. 25. joy
of hope, rejoicing in hope, Romans 12. 12. joyful in duties, sing and rejoice,
Psalm. 95. 1. pray and rejoice, 1 These. 5. 16. 17. joy in their beds, Psalm. 149.
5. joy at board, Act. 2. 46. joy in affliction, 1 These. 1. 6. rejoice in
tribulation, Romans 5. 3. joy in temptation, Jam. 1. 2. joy in persecution,
Matthew 5. 12. joy in losses and spoil of their goods, Heb. 10. 34. joy in
smartest sufferings and disgraces, Acts 5. 41. In a word, joy in life, the joy
of God (Christ calls it his joy, John 17. 13.) entering into them in its measure,
joy in death, they entering into the joy of God above all measure, and joy at
Mat. 15. 21.
the dreadful day of judgment, when all other joy shall be turned into
mourning, 1 Pet. 4. 13.

Oh happy portion! Happy art thou Oh Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
Who is like unto thee, oh people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help,
and who is the sword of thy excellency? And thine enemies shall be found liars
and submit themselves to thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places; as
Moses said in his farewell to Israel.

To conclude, this delightful point, as it was the care of Solomon by his
wisdom and peaceful Reign, ^o provide, and the happiness of all his people, in
his days, that Judah and Israel were as the sand of the Sea, 1 King. 4. 20, 25.
they dwelt securely, eating, drinking, and making merry; So it is the care and
desire of Christ Jesus, and he has made provision for his people, that they
may live under him at as much hearts ease, Eating their own bread with
gladness, and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all
the people, Acts 2. 46, 47. The one was the happiest time that ever Israel had
under the old Testament, the other the happiest days that ever the Christian
Church had under the New Testament; And if we desire the one for the state, we
should also as much desire the other for the Church.

And of this sight, I may say, Ecce quam bonum, and quam jucundum! Behold how
good and pleasant a sight it is to see a Christian good and pleasant!

4. But I must leave this pleasing discourse and change my note, and tell you
of another mirth that is evil, sinful and dangerous, which I therefore call
mad and unsavory mirth. And this is the rejoicing which Saint James says is
not good, a Laughter Jam. 4. 16. Prove. 14. 13. Jam. 4. 9.
that ends in mourning; a Laughter to be changed into mourning. There is a Vae
gaudentibus, a sad handwriting upon the wall, woe to you that laugh now, Luke
6. 25.

And this is either sensual, Epicurean and brutish joy. Ede, bibe, lude, the
hope and portion of the wicked worldling, whose belly is his God, who says to
his soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry. Luke, 12. 19. Amos 6. 1. Woe
to them that are at ease in Sion, -- that lie upon beds of ivory that chant to
the sound of the viol, they drink wine in bowls, etc.

2. Or Impious and Atheistical mirth as theirs, Esaias 22. 12. When God calls to
fasting, weeping, and mourning, behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and
killing sheep, with this desparate resolution; Let us eat and drink (drink away
sorrow) for to morrow we shall die.

3. There is another worse then this, a diabolical and hellish mirth, To
rejoice to do evil themselves, and delight in the frowardness of others, Prove.
2. 14. to whom it is meat and drink to do mischief, as is said in another
place, they sleep not except they have done mischief, -- for they eat the bread
of wickedness and drink the wine of violence, Prove. 4. 16, Prove. 14. 9.
17. who make a mock of sin, and it is a sport, Veluti ridere.
(matter of Laughter, so Arias Montanus renders it) to do mischief, Proverbs
10. 23.

4. There is a Low, light, aerie, frothy, and Vain mirth,
flashy mirth; an Indicium of a vain and light heart, unballasted with gravity
and piety, with men commended, with God condemned. Such can rejoice in a thing
of naught, Amos 6. 13. and live as if sent into the world, as Leviathan into
the seas, to take his pastime Psalm. 104. 26.
therein; And whose life at best is what Sampsons was at worst, to make sport
to Judge. 16. 25.
their company; but had not his eyes been out he had never made them such
sport, as ended in his own and their destruction; and had thou thine eyes,
thou would never do the like, Sporting thy self in thy own deceivings, 2
Pet. 2. 13.

There are two sights Satan is much pleased to behold. To see a Godly man sad,
and a wicked man merry, and all his art is used to keep them so. To the wicked
he says in the worlds salutation, sit you merry. And to the Godly he says,
why are not thou more sad? And as he has his temptations for every temper, so
his watchword is to the wicked, as Absaloms concerning Amnon; Mark when his
heart is merry, then strike him, 2 Samuel 13. 28. With the Godly he deals as
Amalek with Israel, strikes them when down and feeble; or as Simeon and Levi to
the men Deuteronomy. 25. 18.
of Schechem, came upon them when they were Genesis 34. 25.
sore, and slew them.

These two are Satan's greatest Stratagems and chief supporters of his kingdom,
but he prevails more by mirth, then mourning; He says of his jests and mirth,
as profanely Leo the Tenth said, quantum nobis profuit ista fabula? How much
have these fables, toys, and jests promoted our Kingdom?

Therefore is a godly man more afraid of mirth than mourning; He says of
laughter, what do thou mean? and of mirth, art thou not madness and have I
any need of madness, or Religion of mad men, as once Achish said? 1 Samuel 21.
15.

Job was never so much afraid least his children should forget themselves and
dishonor God, as when merry together, Job 1. 5.

It is noted of the Wise, His heart is in the house of mourning, but the Fools
in the house of laughter, Eccl. 7. 4. and that of the two, mourning is better
than rejoicing, for if it mar the countenance, it mends the heart. By the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made better, Eccl. 7. 3.

The fool is said to be known by his much Eccl. 10. 14. Pro. 10. 19.
talk, and much laughter, and in much of these is much of sin; A moderation in
both is like a Modicum of Honey, very good, but too much Pro. 24. 13. 25. 26. 17.
honey is not good.

It is noted of the wicked, They spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go
down to hell, Job 21. 13. Their lives are Comicall, their death Tragical. Hell
is full of mirth (carnal mirth) and Heaven of mourners (spiritual mourners)
Therefore says the Prophet Esaias 5. 12. 14. Hell has enlarged her self, and
opened her mouth wide without measure, and their glory, and their multitude and
their pomp, and he that rejoices, shall descend into it. Such as have the
harp, the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine in their feasts, but regard not
the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth, and have been wanton, says S. James, you have
cherished your hearts as in a day of slaughter, Jam. 5. 5.

Therefore check thy self in thy foolish mirth, with looking on that sad hand
writing of Christ on the wall, on the one hand, Vae ridentibus, Woe to you that
now laugh, for you shall mourn and weep, Luke 6. 25. And on the other hand,
Beati lugentes, Blessed are ye that mourn and weep now, for ye shall laugh,
Luke 6. 21.

Thy Savior was a man of sorrows, and will thou be a man of vain joys? he was
all his life acquainted with grief, and is it fit for thee Esa. 53. 3.
to have no acquaintance but with idle and empty delights?

I read that thy Savior mourned often, Mat. 3. (...). Jo. 11. 33. 35. Heb. 5.
7.
wept, grieved, groaned, sighed, cried out with strong cries and tears; Thou
never read that he Laughed. He Rejoiced sometime, it is said, but it was in
spirit, and spiritual joy; Luke 10. 21. He was full of joy, but it was in Gods
countenance and favor, Acts 2. 28.

Some passions, it is true are licensed, but with a restriction: Fear, Stand in
aw and sin not, Psalm. 4. 4. Anger, Be angry but sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. So joy,
Rejoice but sin not. Be merry and wise, as we say in our Proverb. Be merry and
godly, be merry and gracious, and be as merry as thou will.

The merry heart has a continual feast, It is said, Prove. 15. 15. But the
merry heart is the gracious heart, Tob Leb, the good heart, others render it,
the good Conscience is a continual feast.

Our speech should be with grace seasoned with salt, but it should be sal
Sanctuarii, not Col. 1. 6.
Sterquilinii, the salt of the Sanctuary, as it is called Lev. 2. 13. not the
salt of the dunghill. The Apostle does banish (...), Jesting, out of the
Christians society, uncomely facetiousnesse and lepidity, though among the wits
of the times, and the heathen Philosophers of old, it bare the Bell for a Prime
virtue.

It is the property of the Dog to smell to his own and others Excrements, do
not thou sport thy self in thy own or other men's profane jests. They are only
Swine that wallow in this mire, others stop their noses or ears at it. They
are only flies and beetles that are bred and live in this dung. Labor
therefore to keep thy loins girt, and thy mind composed, To be Serious without
sadness, and sournesse, and to be cheerful without levity, and slightness of
spirit. And this discourse I shall shut up with another Ecce unlike that which
concluded the former: Ecce quam malum, and quam injucundum est, cohibitare
malum and jucundum. Behold how ill and unpleasant a sight it is to behold an
ill man ill and pleasant.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Self-murdering Thoughts.
BUT the foulest and blackest thoughts of all, are self-destroying thoughts: Oh
these are sad and hellish thoughts! My heart trembles at the very mention of
them; yet are these incident sometimes to a godly heart, I do not say he can
entertain them; But, as when in a scare-fire, the sparks are driven by the
wind, he covers his house with wet sheets, and stands ready with water, to
resist the first fastnings and settling of the fire, so it must be here. Job had
once such a Transient thought, but it held not long, My soul chooses
strangling, and death rather than life, Job 7. 15. But his fixed resolution was
at other times, I will wait all the days of my appointed time, till my change
comes, Job 14. 14. And again, If he kill me yet will I trust in him, Job 13.
15.

To stop the execution of these black and bloody thoughts, we shall offer a few
reasons, if yet they will stay to hear any reason: The Lord set them home.

1. These come Immediately, and undoubtedly from Satan, who is a murderer from
the beginning, and delights in blood, especially of souls: These cannot come
from God. The Lords command is to love thy self, and to love thy neighbor, but
as thy self; if thou would not have a hand in another blood, then not in
thy own, whom thou art bound to love no less: These cannot come from thy self,
or nature. Natures first principle implanted in every animal, is
self-preservation; Graces first principle is, Soul-preservation, but Satan's
first principle is self-destruction, and soul-destruction, cast thy self down.
Thus at one stroke destroying soul and body, and cutting off two lives, for he
envieth not to man his life, but his salvation; as he envies no man for his
riches, but for his grace. Satan reckons of such as his own who yield to this.

2. It always is a sin, and impossible to be but a foul sin, self-murder. To
take away the life of another, is sometimes duty, thy own, is always sin. It is
sometimes necessary to take away another life, sometimes excusable, because
unavoidable; But never necessary, never lawful, never excusable, (upon
whatsoever pretense) to deprive thy self of thy own life. The Judge, yea the
Executioner are innocent when they take away the life of a malefactor; They are
both Gods Ministers, for the good of others. But thou can never be innocent
in this Act (though thou have been the foulest malefactor) because God has not
made thee a Judge and Arbitrator of thy own life and death, but binds thee to
the preservation only) and it is not God but Satan whose Executioner thou art.

3. As it is a foul and most horrid sin it self, so it is a big-bellied sin,
full of many other sins, which ever accompany it, as pride, impatience,
immoderategrief, bitter discontent, yea unbelief, and despair, etc. is ever
accompanied with hard thoughts of God, dislike of his providence and
proceedings, doubts of his truth, love, mercy, and promises in Jesus Christ.

4. There is no mention in all the Scriptures of any good man that ever did
thus; It is an Argument of great force and comfort, when we have to do with
some under foul sins, sad desertions, sorest distresses, if we can parallel
their case and say, No temptation bafals you but what is common to men, the
like has befallen others of the Saints: But this has never been the spot of
any of Gods people, recorded in Scripture, (I have nothing to do to judge of
the state of such, I only judge the sin) But this I say, we cannot bring any
ground of comfort to the friends of such (what ever becomes of themselves) as
we may to those that have committed other fearful enormities; I have more hope
of an adulterer, of a blasphemer, yea sorcerer, then of such; for of some such
I can certainly make good their salvation against all contradiction, but no man
alive will undertake to conclude certainly of the salvation of any such, and to
prove it when he has done, as have made away themselves.

5. They are only a company of wicked and notoriously wicked ones in
Scripture, who were given over of God, and left to fall into this Pit of
self-perdition, in this fearful manner, as Saul, Achitophel, Zimri, Judas; Ne^
sum nescius di^^ing ni solcre inter (...) v^luntariam a desperatione, vitae
^aedio, Indignation^, etc. o^iundam, and (...) Brutam, quae saepe accidit
furiosis, mente cap^is, Mclancholicis and insanis, aut spiritu ^liquo malo
obsessis: in qui^^us facultas ratiocinandi ita impeditur, ut absque rationis,
and communis sensus us^, fe^antur ad seipsos aliq^^ mortis genere perdendum. Hi
voluntarii suiipsorum interfectores dici no^ possunt. Vid. Dickson. There. ^ac.
^. 1. ^. 10.
etc.

6. Whither can any think such an act as this, so unnatural, horrid and worse
then brutish, such an hellish act as this can lead, but to the chambers of
hell? Because it is not repented of, nor can well be conceived possible to be
repented of; other sins whatsoever committed in life, may, if not before, be
bitterly repented of at death, and pardoned; God may call at the last hour, as
the thief at the last g^sp, and he is safe: But if Satan call at the last
hour, and thy last act be sin, where is thy hope of mercy? We can expect no
pardon without repentance, we cannot rationally imagine repentance where the
sun goes down in wrath: And therefore as we account Zimri, Cosbi, Corah,
Ananias, Saphira miserable, because they died in their sins, (...) know no
ground to hope of their salvation; so what hope can we have of you that shall
do such an act as this? I like that answer of a Godly Minister in the West, who
being demanded what he thought of a man overtaken in drink, who fell from his
horse and died, he being ordinarily a civil man, answered, If such a man as
this should go to heaven, it is no way fit for us to know it: and another said
in like case; If I were sure it were the case of this man, the dearest friend I
have should never have it from me.

7. Lastly, know this, What ever thy apprehension is (that God has left thee,
and Satan has power over thee, will not let thee alone, but compells thee)
that Satan has no such power over thee, It is thy own voluntary and sinful
act, Satan may persuade, and solicit, and suggest the time, way, place,
means, but he compells none, pray against him, resist him he flies. If he
could have done it, he had done it before now; Sad is the story of Sebastian
King of Portugal who engaging unadvisedly in his African War lost the battle
at Alcazar, lost also his Kingdom, wandered disguised, was discovered and
owned at Venice, sent prisoner to Naples; There thrust into an horrid dungeon,
and for three days and nights there left without food, and had a halter and a
knife laid by him, but highly is his fortitude and Christian courage to be
commended, who underwent all this, and chose rather to undergo all calamities
whatsoever, and to end his days in misery then to be the devils instrument to
destroy himself.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Careful Thoughts.
TO these we may add those self ^ormenting careful thoughts, of which
somewhat was said before, as they are displeasing to God, but they can never be
enough spoken againsts most men have a double portion of them in the mouth of
their hearts, as Jacobs sons double money in their sackes. These thorns are not
easily rooted up, they overrun all our hearts; Why take ye thought, says our
Savior? Why are ye as meteors tossed up and down, disquieting your selves and
all in vain? what are you the nearer by all your thought taking? These find us
endless employment, set us upon Penelopes web, weaving, unweaving, doing,
undoing, and make us wash the Ethiopian, or labor in vain as we say: man Mat.
6. 28. Lu. 12. 28. Psalm. 39. 6.
laden with these thoughts is like the horse in a mill, he is driven, he
draws, he toiles, sweats, yet is just where he was; Sometimes he hopes, then
he fears, now desires, anon despairs, always anxiety and torture. It is ill
with him that has a Thorn in his hand or foot, worse with him that has them
in his bed, or in his head and heart continually, this is the worldlings little
ease; the Scripture calls these cares, dividing cares, and so well it may,
they make many divisions.

1. Between a man and his near relations, while eaten up with worldly cares,
his natural affections are eaten up, he is wanting in making due, or necessary
provision for his family, in giving fitting education, and maintenance to his
children.

2. Between a man and himself (not such a blessed variance as grace makes
against corruption in a man's self) sometimes between the body and health, the
worldly-minded man cruelly oppressing nature, and impairing his health thereby.

3. Dividing between the body and his convenient rest, he is working, or
watching, or plodding when it is more then time he were in his bed.

4. Between rest and sleep, by night his body is laid down to rest, but his
sleep departs from him, or when he begins to sleep his cares make him turn
himself upon his bed, and raise him up before his time, Eccle. 2. 23.

5. Between the mind and Cheerfullnesse, Pro. 17. 22.
or contentedness, the cheerful mind is as good as a medicine, the careful
mind is as a consumption in the bones.

6. Between labor and delight, the Lord Deuteronomy. 12. 18.
would have his people to rejoice in all the works of their hands, and to
join labor and delight together, as those who serve a gracious master, these
bereave themselves of allowed outward comfort, disquieting themselves in vain,
and only eat the bread Psalm. 127. 2.
of carefullnesse, and drink the water of affliction. Now though there be no
comparison between worldly joy and Godly sorrow, the least drop of Godly sorrow
is more worth then the whole sea of worldly joys, yet between even natural
and worldly joys, and sorrows, there is a great difference, joy and delight
as much exceeding natural or worldly sadness, as the light does darkness, or
health does sickness, an ounce of Godly sorrow is more worth then a pound of
carnal and sinful joy, but an ounce of natural and honest joyfullnesse in
thy labors, is more worth then a pound of affected sadness, and heart
pinching carefullnesse.

7. Between industry and piety, God would have us both industrious and
religious, not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, To. 12. 10.
serving the Lord; The worldling thinks business goes not forward if Religion
and piety be not laid aside: The Christian goes to school to the Ant, and to
the spider too, The one labors for her food, The other seeks to get into the
Kings houses.

The good houswife described, Pro. 31. as she eats not the bread of
idleness, so she is Pro. 31. 20. 27.
full of good works of piety and charity.

8. Between diligence and dependence, The Codly Christian has learned to join
diligence and dependence together, because he reads in one chapter, these two
Proverbes set near together, The hand of the diligent makes rich, Pro. 10. 4.
and v. 22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich. The worldling says, away
dependence, sancta diligentia ora pro nobis, and help me saint diligence, he
throws away the keys of heaven with Julius the second, and trusts only in
his arm of flesh, and as Esau, lives by his sword, not his faith, Genesis 27. 40.

9. Between providence and providence, divine and humane, as if I could not
show my self provident, unless I destroy and distrusted Gods providence, or
could not be Curatus, unless Episcopus also, or nisi sublato Episcopatu, a
Curate, unless Gods Episcopacy and oversight be removed. I must take care for
my self, faith the worldling, whom have I to take care for me besides my self?
Beast! who takes care of the fowls of the heaven, and beasts of the earth, and
shall he not as much care for thee; oh Man. 6. 30.
thou of little faith!

10. More and worse divisions yet, They divide between the Christian and his
duty, Be careful for nothing, but in all things by prayer, supplication,
intercession, and giving Phil. 4. 5.
thanks let your request be known to God. Cares and Prayers dwell not together,
Though Melancton said once; Si non curarem non orarem, If I had not many cares
I should have made but a few prayers, yet commonly the Christian says
otherwise, Si non orarem, magis curarem, If I had prayed less, I must have
cared more; Prayer either weakens cares, or cares drive out prayers. So he that
has most cares of the world, has as we say no care in the world of spiritual
duties, hearing, reading, meditation. The Epicure makes short graces (we say)
and long meals, The worldling short graces and meals too, and only long
days works. He fears undoing no way, but by serving and trusting God; And
gives more credit to the worlds Cursed proverb, then to all Solomon's divine
proverbs; viz. He that is religious shall dye a beggar.

11. Worse divisions yet, between the duty and the heart in duty. The duty is
slubberd over, but the heart has been otherwise employed, he is like a child
who asks blessing, and looks another way. He hears without attention, he
prays without affection, his heart goes after his covetuousnesse all sermon
time; and when will the Sabbath be gone, is his constant Sabbath meditation. He
likes Amen better then all the prayer, and the grace of our Lord Jesus above
the whole sermon.

12. Between a spiritual seed time and harvest: The thorny ground had a most
lovely and hopeful seed time, better by far then the high way ground, yea then
the stony, that heard with joy, and believed Mat. 13. 20. 22.
early, These go very far, yet come to no maturity, and perfection, These never
persevere, up spring the thorns of worldly cares, and all is choked, he is a
knowing man, he was a great hearer, he continues a civil man, but the world
comes in upon him, and his heart is set upon it, he never holds out, but the
great husband has spoiled the good Christian; The Asses are cared 1 Samuel 10.
2. 1 King. 2. 40. 46.
for, till the Son is lost, with Kish: The servants are sought for, till thy
self art lost with Shimei; more ado for a lost groat, Lu. 15. then a lost soul.

13. Yea not to multiply particulars, they divide between many things, that are
of affinity, and should join to help each other.

1. They divide between cares and cares. 1 Cor. 7. 34. 2 Cor. 7. 11.


1. Cares of the world, lawful and moderate cares which are allowed and
commended; and carefullnesse for the soul, and for the things of the Lord,
which are more commended.

2. Between Gods cares and our cares, 1 Pet. 5. 7. There is both Gods care and
ours, Casting all your care upon him for he cares for you. The world casts in
care upon you: you are to cast it out, It is Gods work to care for you, this
burden will break your back if you cast it not upon the Lord.

3. Between Calling and calling. Thy general calling and thy particular which
are made to be mututall helpers of each other, but here the general calling of
Christianity is neglected, that the other may be more attended. Hag. 1. 9.


4. Between Labor and labor, that for bread which perishes, is preferred
before that for bread which endures to eternal life, Jo. 6. 27.
when as both are in their place and measure to be labored for.

5. Between, Rest and rest, he either takes away the sabbath out of the
decalogue and rests not, or he separates spiritual rest from bodily, his
body rests, it may be a Church time, but his thoughts as busy and working, as
all the week besides; as the Miller can set his mill a going, and himself stand
still, and the horseman sets his horse a going when he sits all the while, so
is the mind grinding and traveling when the man sits still.

6. Between provision for life, and provision for death; A surfeit of cares
taken by overheating our selves in seeking the things of this life, makes a sad
and untimely death, and is as bad as a surfeit of eating and drinking, Lu. 21.
34.
therefore joined by our Savior, Take heed least at any time your hearts be
surcharged with surfeiting, or drunkenness, and cares of this world, least
that day overtake you as a snare.

7. Between getting and giving; The Godly houswife, Pro. 31. has two hands,
one to get, another to give, she stretches out her hand to the poor; and
reckons what is well laid out, is better then ill laid up.

14. These always divide between the soul and grace, for if they divide between
the body and health, rest and sleep, the mind and content, between labor and
delight, between the man and his duty, industry and piety, di^igence and
dependence, etc. then sure between the soul and grace. Ever those grounds are
barren where are the mines of gold, silver and other mettalls; those hearts to
be sure are most barren of grace, where is most of worldly mindedness. It is
hard for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, it is impossible for such as
trust in riches, as our Savior expounds himself. Grace and poverty usually go
together, grace and riches rarely, grace and carefullnesse never. God and
mammon cannot be served; The one is despised where the other is cleaved to,
whether of the two soever it is: The God the world is as great an enemy to
grace, and grows in it, as the God of the world. Pius Quintus said when he
was first a Priest Cum essem religiosus sperabam de salute, Cardinalis factus
extim^i, Pontisex creatus pene d^spe^o.
he had good hopes of salvation, when a Cardinal he much feared, but when he
came to be Pope; he then despaired.

15. If they divide the soul and grace, then they must needs divide between the
soul and communion with God; how can these rejoice in God, How can the
hypocrite hope when God takes away his soul, though he has gained, can he
delight himself in the Almighty? He never could in all his life. He cannot joy
in God who is joined Job 27. 8, 9.
to mammon.

16. Then of necessity they must divide between the soul and salvation; Their
end is destruction, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. as Shimei lost his
life by seeking his servants, while he went beyond the bounds of his
confinement.

17. Lastly, which is his greatest affliction, but the righteous and most just
judgment of God, these cares are a means not only to divide between us, and
joy, and us, and God, but between us and enjoying, between endeavors and
success; God would give more, and sooner if we were less eager. If the child
ask mannerly and fairly the father gives, if eagerly, then you shall stay a
while we tell him. The Lord gives rest to his beloved, when Psalm. 127. 2.
others rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of sorrows. Care
will says God, Care shall, self do, self have, self serve, self save. The race
is not to the swift; Is it Eccle. 9. 11. Hab. 2. 13. Hos. 8. 7. Malach. 1. 4.
Hagge. 1. 7. 8. 9. Pro. 11. 24.
not of the Lord of hosts, that men labor as in the fire, yet weary themselves
for very vanity? They sow the wind, and reap the blasting east wind; They
build, God pulls down. They sow much, reap little, gather much, and it is put
into a bag of holes. Covetousness brings home nothing but poverty; always
spare, and always bare. Besides that, God blows upon his soul it prospers
not, he blasteth his labors that he comes not on, God pulls down such, as he
did Nebuchadnezzar, till he come to know that the heavens do rule. In returning
and rest shall ye be safe says the Lord, in quietness, confidence and
dependence ye shall have rest; no says unbelief, we will shift for our selves,
no, we will, fly upon horses (from poverty) therefore Es. 30. 16. 17.
shall ye fly, and we will ride after the world upon the swift, therefore they
that pursue you shall be swift, cares, torments and wants shall pursue and
overtake you.

How much happier is the believer, who has the promises of this life, as well
at that to come; therefore does his soul dwell at ease, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Psalm. 25.
13.
casting his cares on his heavenly father, and he sits still, as Ruth, and goes
about her own business, while Boaz is taking thought for Ruth. 3. 18.
her. The righteous is recompensed upon earth; he cleaves to the Lord without
separation, Pro. 11. 31.
and attends upon him without distraction. Oh how admirable are the effects,
and how sweet the fruit of faith that uniting grace! Which not only unites the
soul to God, the heart and love to Christ, the desires and hopes to heaven, but
sweetly joins and reconciles those which this carefullnesse, separates; It
gives to every one his due, children, family, friends, poor, to the body rest,
to the eyes sleep, to the mind content, sweetly joins labor and delight,
diligence and dependence, industry and piety, providence and providence, soul
carefullnesse with moderate worldly carefullnesse; It joins duties, holy
duties with endeavors, the heart with duties; It makes the General and
particular calling go hand in hand together, and makes provision for life give
way to preparation making for death, and by the blessing of God has his
success and expectation joined to his endeavors and undertakings.

Lastly, to make an end, for I am weary and weary at my heart of all these
evil thoughts, and would fain come to see an end of them; Yea I may say as
Rebekah weary of my self because of these daughters of Heth, Genesis 27. 46. There
is a company of vain thoughts which we are to beware of; I hate vain thoughts,
said holy David; And Psalm. 119. 119.
the Lords command is to wash the heart so clean, that a vain thought may not
lodge in Jer. 4. 14.
it. The vain thought is a sad, but common disease, morbus naturae, and morbus
gratiae, the disease of nature, and the disease of grace too. The vain thought
is a fit bait for Satan to nibble at; as a whale, or Shoale of Herrings make
sport with an empty vessel, so Satan to with a light, futilous, frivolous, and
empty mind. Vain thoughts make the mind as the ship without Ballast, ankers and
Pilot to be tossed upon the waves, and driven without stay before the winds, as
children play with a feather, or run after an empty hoop loosed from the
vessel, and drive it before them till they be even weary, so Satan makes sport
with a vain mind, as much as he desires; of these vain thoughts we have a
world, when at home, when a broad, in the shop, in the Church, in the closet,
hearing, reading, praying, praising these come about us humming like Bees,
buzzing like flies, such a carrion is the heart that is never without these
flies and vermin, such were the Gentiles thoughts, They became To. 1. 21.
vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart was darkened; such the
worldlings, Psalm. 4. who seeks after vanity; such the wisemans, 1 Cor. 3. 20.
The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain; such the best
man's, every man in his best state is altogether vanity, Psalm. 94. The Lord
knows the thoughts of (every) man, that they are vain: Cor meum, Cor pravum,
vanum and vagum, omni volubilitate volubilius, de uno in aliud vano incessu
transit quaerens requiem ubi non est, and smile folio quod a vento movetur and
circumfertur. Bernard bewayling his own vain thoughts, cried out: My heart is
an evil vain and vagabond heart, nothing is so moveable, unconstant, and
uncertain, now it goes to one thing, now to another, now this way, anon that,
seeking rest where none is to be had, and is like the leaf shaken and driven
up and down with the wind. And in another place he bewayles the common
condition of all the Godly themselves in this respect. There Otiosae, and
Onerosae cogitationes in anima justi, quibus resistere vult, non potest, sed
velit nolet irruit in oculos meant is muscarum Egypti pestilentia and
perstrepunt ranae in penetrali^us cordis ^jus. Mat. 12. 36. Col. 4. 6. To. 1.
21.
are idle and troublesome thoughts in the just man's soul, which he would
resist, but cannot; but will be, nill he, this Egyptian plague of flies is
dashing into his eyes, and these Egyptian frogs are croaking in the
bed-chambers of his heart.

Ob. But what are those you call vain thoughts?

Ans. 1. They are vain thoughts which are foolish, dark, idle, unsavory, no
spirit, grace, holiness in them, nothing of heaven, God, Christ, in them; as
those are vain idle words which are without salt, wisdom, gravity: Such were
the heathens thoughts of God, they became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened.

2. They are vain thoughts which are empty, addle, rotten, when you have
examined them, and pursued them home, there is no Pith, or solidity in them,
They have sown the wind, and reap the whirlwind, It Hos. 8. 7.
has no stalk, the bud yields no meal, or as Ephraim, who feeds on the
wind, and follows Hos. 12. (...).
after the East wind. As that is called vain glory, which is but a bubble, fancy,
Phil. 2. 3. Vain Religion, which is seeming, flashy, empty; so the Hebrew,
Greek and Latin (...) heb. (...) G^. (...) Lat.
word which signify vain, signifies also empty.

3. That is called vain which will deceive expectation, and cannot profit, nor
help in time of need. Turn not aside from the 1 Samuel 12. 21.
Lord, for then ye turn after vain things that cannot profit, nor deliver, for
they are vain.

4. Those are called vain thoughts, that Jud. 9. 4. and 11. 3. 2 Chr. 13. 7.
Pro. 12. 11. and 28. 19.
are lewd, light, wandering, as those are often in scripture called vain men,
who walk without calling, dwelling, employment, fit for any idle company, or
enterprise.

5. That serve to no good end, but leave the spirit in a worse frame then they
found it, as the vain Jangling which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 1. 6. Vain
bablings, 1 Timothy 6. 20. and 2 Timothy 2. 16. vain bablings shun which increase to
more ungodliness. So Tit. 3. 9. unprofitable and vain are joined.

Now what cause have we all to be humbled for our vain thoughts, and sadly to
cry out, vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities all is Vanitas vanissima,
Junius.
vanity, such are our employments, such our enjoyments, and such above all are
our thoughts. Vanity in the abstract, and vanities plural, and both
reiterated, vanity vanities, vanity vanities; q. d. lighter then vanity,
extreme vanity, beyond all imagination.

CHAP. XXVIII. The first use of confutation of that common error, that thoughts
are free.
IN the first place to come to the Application, see the vanity and falsehood of
that common assertion, That thought is free. To men and humane judicatories
they are, to God they are not.

1. God passes his judgment on the thoughts, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

2. The word of God is a judge of the thoughts, Heb. 4. 12.

3. The Ministers work is to encounter and demolish the evil thought, 2 Cor.
10. 4.

4. Conscience's busiest work is to overlook the thought, To. 2. 15.

Lastly, The true converts humiliation begins at his thoughts, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

Is Thought nothing? Did God condemn the old world for nothing? Is Magus
sentenced to be in the Gall of bitterness for nothing? Was it sin in the
Gentiles to be vain in their imaginations? and is it no sin in thee? They were
impious Atheists who said our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? And is
it less impiety to say our hearts are our own, who shall hinder us from
paying it with thinking? This is the shop and warehouse of all evil, the devils
strong hold, the imagery chambers, wherein the foulest abominations are
pourtrayed; into these the Lord looks most narrowly. We are as those tradesmen
for the most of us, who furnish their shops, and lay out their best wares as
Pedlars, when the inner rooms, and upper Garrets have little in them; as the
Goldsmith whose shop is full of plate, Jewels, Rings, when he has little
within doors for his own use. Their inward part is very wickedness, Psalm. 5.
The Lords eye is upon the heart and thoughts, Jer. 6. 19. The evil of thoughts
how little soever they be thought, are the greatest evils; Satan's sins are
only spiritual wickednesses, not carnal, or bodily pollutions, nihil fecit,
nihil operatus est Satanas, solummodo cogitavit, says Bernard, The devil
wrought not evil, only thought evil. Look how much Principalities and powers
are above flesh and blood, so much do spiritual wickednesses exceed any
carnal; These make us more like beasts, but those like Satan: And if we shall
divide all the sins of the world into three parts, Thought, word, deed, more
are the sins of the thoughts for number, and worse for nature, then both the
other, and all the sins in the world besides. Instance in the worst of sins we
shall find them here.

1. Is ignorance a great sin? The Lord shall come in flaming fire to render
vengeance to them who know not God; This is as bad as drunkenness, whordom,
etc. yet is this only in the thoughts, and in the heart.

2. Is Error any sin, It is counted little in these days, yet did God shut out
the carnal Israelites, and swear in his wrath they should not enter into his
rest, because they erred in their hearts. They whose plague was Psalm. 95. Lev.
13. 44.
in their head, were utterly unclean above all others, and shut out of the
camp. Error is soul adultery, and defiles no less then bodily fornication,
those who go a whoring after it.

3. Haeresy a foul sin, shutting out of Gods Kingdom, is only in the mind
and thoughts.

4. Insidelity that great Gospel sin, and that fearful Apollyon and soul
murderer, is only a sin of the heart and thoughts.

5. The like I might say of impenitency, hypocrisy, spiritual pride, malice,
envy, covetousness, and the worst of sins are all lodged in the heart.

6. Yea the sin against the Holy Ghost is not any outward acting of the most
monstrous impiety or abomination, but the fear of it is in the heart, the
contagion of it chiefly poisons the understanding, conscience and will.

As the diseases of the mind are worse and more incurable then bodily. Lunacy
is worse then a fever, a fit of Frenzy, worse then of Stone, or Gout. The
Doctor can say little to these diseases of the mind; so sins of the mind worse
then any bodily. The Pro. 18. 14.
spirit of a man may sustain any infirmity of body, but the wounded spirit who
can bear?

And as the Judgments inflicted on the soul, are above all the heaviest
judgments, as the immediate wrath of God darted into the soul, That fire not
blown, horror of Job 20. 26. To. 11. 8. To. 1. 26. 28.
conscience, the searea conscience, the spirit of slumber, or of remorse, Vile
affections, the reprobate mind, are all such plagues as hell has no greater,
so are soul sins worst of sins. The wrath of God is poured usually on the
spirits of men, the devils chains are not of Iron, but of darkness, the
pains of hell take not hold yet of the body, but of the spirit only.

Yea, as all the Treasures of grace and comfort in the Godly are laid up in the
hidden man of the heart, there is his best, and he is a thousand times better
in his heart, intention, desire, then he can be in all his holy acts and
duties, he would do much more and better still; so the worst wickedness even
in the most wicked, is within, when he does most villanously, and talks most
impudently, his heart is a thousand times worse yet then all his actions, for
this as it is the seat of grace and virtue, so of all sin and vice.

Yea, so much Malignity is in an evil thought, that as one drop of poison may
mar a whole cup of wine, so an evil thought spoils the best duty and
performance. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Pro.
21. 27.
because also (so some read it) he brings it with a wicked mind. Judas his
charitable Jo. 12. 5, 6.
motion stank, because of the covetousness that was in his heart; and his
kiss of piety Lu. 22. 48.
stank worse, because of the horrid treason and war which was in his heart,
though his words both times, smoother then oil.

CHAP. XXIX. The Second use for humiliation.
IN the second place, see what cause is here for Humiliation, universal and
continual humiliation, above all other sins be humbled for thy Thoughts;
Whatsoever is fair without, thy thoughts are foul to be sure, who can say his
heart is clean? Yea, whatever is Prove. 20. 9.
foulest without, the thoughts are yet more foul and filthy. Many men are like
the Egyptian Temples, rich, fair, beautiful without, when you come in Cats,
mice, serpents, Crocodyles; fair sepulchers, and painted over, full of stench
and rottenness within; when as the godly soul desires to be like Solomon's
Temple, which had the lights narrower without, wider within, which had nothing
but stone and timber to be seen without, within 1 King 6. 4. 21, 22, 30.
nothing but gold.

Alas! have not we many a wild, many a vile and sinful Thought to bewail, not
transient and involuntary, but deliberate, fixed and voluntary thoughts? How
hard to get the heart in a good frame? how hardly does a good thought enter?
how soon is it turned out of doors? what cold welcome do we give it? But to ill
thoughts we set doors wide open, we make room to entertain them, we keep them
company, discourse with them with much delight, and never think the time long
they stay, and are loath to let them go.

Oh how many forgetful thoughts have we of God, either no thoughts, or low
thoughts, or hard thoughts, or Atheistical, or blasphemous, or impious, at
least dishonorable and distrustful thoughts of God.

Toward thy neighbor, how many unkind, uncharitable, envious, censorious,
passionate, malicious, proud, scornful, injurious thoughts have thou had?

And for thy self, who need tell thee of thy vain, impure, self-deceiving,
self-exalting, self-magnifying, self-seeking thoughts; who can number thy
carking, caring, plodding, plotting thoughts; thy empty, aerie, frothy,
endless, useless, unprofitable, and unsavory thoughts?

Is not thy heart full of carnal reasonings, roving imaginations, motions, yea
of sinful counsels, devises, purposes?

The good man is like the Merchant, who has not much abroad, opens not shop,
but his goods are packed and piled up in low Cellars, and bestowed in his
warehouses, and back rooms of his house; But on the other side, the most of
men are like our gaudy and beggarly Alehouses, where you behold a painted
Sign-Post, and colored windows without, but never a good room within, nor a
bed to ly on, but store of loathsome smells, and more loathsome oaths and
filthynesse; or like our ordinary tradesmen, who have all their rich wares in
their shops, exposed to view and sale, but their Cellars are filled with
coals, trash and lumber. Our base hearts herein, are like some beggarly
Alehouses again, where if a man of fashion shall come and desire lodging, they
send him away, and say, they have no entertainment for him, when they will make
hard shift to lodge a company of lewd fellows, though they sit up all night
themselves. Or like Sodom, where there is not room for one godly Lot, but he
shall be wearied and worried out of his skin; or if an Angel come for a nights
lodging, he shall before he is well entered be assaulted, and haled out of
doors, when the city is full of vicious wretches. Or like Baals house, which
was cramd and crowded as full as ever it could hold from one end to another,
that they stood mouth to mouth, as it is said, 2 Kings 10. 21. as close as one
could stand by another, when there was narrow search made least one poor
servant of the Lord should creep in amongst them all. A good thought is as
Abel, soon made away, and dies without issue, when the evil as Cain, lives and
multiplies to fill the world. The good thought, like Sarah, is barren, when the
evil, as Hagar, presently conceives. The good thought is as the children of
Israel in Egypt, destined to death before it is brought forth, or persecuted by
the Dragon as soon as born, or cut off in the Cradle, as the children of
Bethlehem by Herod, when they are spared that deal treacherously, they are
planted, yea take root, they grow, yea they bring forth, as Jeremy complains,
Jer. 12. 1, 2. in another case.

Oh what a piece is this heart of man! Oh what a piece of carrion, which has
always such a swarm of flies humming about, fastening and blowing on it, and
what a breed and nest of Vermin that are bred in it, and at last devour it.

I have read of a poor Monk, who rebuking a rich Prelate, was bidden in scorn,
go kill his lice, who answered boldly, My Lord, I have killed mine, but yours
will kill you. The poor man's lice and Vermin are not so dangerous to the body,
as the rich, proud and wicked man's are to his soul.

What a deal of trash and beggary do we find, when we rave into an old ruinous
house? but worse when we come to rave into an old rotten heart.

We look sometimes with disdain upon a Beggars garment, past mending, where is
patch upon patch of twenty several colors and pieces; look in and thou will
find a more displeasing sight. The comparison is not so homely, as home and
true.

In a fair clear River when we drain it, what mud and Vermin at the bottom do
we spy? such is thy heart, or when we scour an old deep pond.

It was an Herculean labor to cleanse the Augaean Stable, not cleansed of
seven years before, he turned in a River to cleanse it. What labor then will
it cost to cleanse thy heart, not cleansed may be of twenty or thirty years?
need we had to turn in the whole stream of the blood of Christ, the upper
springs of the spirit of grace, all the conduits of Scripture arguments, the
lower springs, and all the water, the standing ponds of diligence repentance,
endeavor and circumspectnesse can procure.

The lower we dig, as for water, so for springs of sin, the faster the water
comes in.

The best eye having the help of the best perspective, upon the fairest
prospect, and in the clearest summers day, sees much, but not the thousandth
part of heaven, or earth; nor we of sin. They say much of the earth is unknown,
to be sure much of hell in thy heart is. If there be any part of an unknown
world yet undiscovered, I am sure there is a great part of an unknown world yet
undiscovered in thy heart. It is long ere a stranger can know all the streets,
lanes, and allies in the City, but thou will never know all the windings and
turnings of thy heart. In a great house sometimes at first a stranger loses
himself, but in the heart to the last, it is strange if the owner has not been
lost. My heart, says Bernard, is like the deep sea, in which are creeping
things and that without number; A flint it is, which, though cold, and dark,
has seeds of fire, and a thousand sparks lodged in it, if you strike and break
it, the seeds of all sin are there, even of the sin against the holy Ghost.

Noah's Ark was a great Microcosme, in which to the wonder of all the world, the
species of all the creatures were contained. Man is said to be a Microcosme;
And if the Apostle call that little member, the tongue, a Microcosme, Jam. 3. 6.
a little world of sin, what is the heart but a great one.

The opening of the heart is like the fourth Rev. 6. 8.
seal opened, when the pale horse appeared, death and hell followed, or like
the opening of the bottomless pit rather, where what darkness Rev. 6. 2.
and smoke issued, and in them a world of horrid, multiformed Monsters, or
Locusts.

How sad a judgment was that threatened to Babylon, Esa. 13. 19, 20, 21. and
Esa. 34. 12, 13, 14. where it is said, that Ziim, Iim, the Satyrs, wild beasts,
should dance there; and the screetch Owl, and nettles, and brambles should be,
where was once the glory of Kingdoms. Josephus tells how the Jews took on and
lamented when their Temple was polluted twice, under Antiochus first, with
swines flesh offered, and a second time under Herod, who caused the Roman Eagle
to be set over the porch; Many a man lost Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 21.
his life in that quarrel, whetted on by the indignation of the sight. It
grieves us to see the ways of Zion mourn, and fairest Churches to be turned
into stables; But how should we mourn and be transported with indignation to
see the soul, the only spiritual and holy Temple of God defiled!

Many have made Epitaphs and funeral Monuments upon great men, good and bad,
and have been able to give them all their Titles and full Characters, and to
say, Here lies such a one. None is able to make the hearts Epitaph, and to say
what lies there; Unless we shall write as of Pope Sixtus the Fourth.

Hic scelus omne simul clauditur, and vitium. All Sin and Vice
Here buried lies.


Or that, like it, of Pope Clement the 8th.

Urna brevis vitium claudit, and omne scelus. A world of Sin
Lies hid within.


Or this of a mean Poet.

Under this stone
of flesh and bone,
Lies more of sin,
then can come in
my narrow Verse.
Here ly more lusts,
Then earth has dusts,
and much more hell,
then you can tell,
or I rehearse.
Here lies the whole Body of death, which has more members then this natural
body has members or hairs. Physicians and Surgeons have a thousand times raved
into the bodies of men and yet are to learn all the joints, limbs, ligatures,
nerves, arteries, vessels and passages, in this narrow body of flesh and bone;
what an endless labor is it to dissect and anatomize the heart? The great
Volumes of Arts and sciences have been Epitomized, and the whole body or sum
of Divinity, has been often contracted into a narrow compass or Systeme; but
the body of sin in the heart, is not to be contracted or summed up. Some
learned men of old and late have made Catalogues of the noted Errors and
Heresies, that have troubled the whole Church from the beginning, but none dare
undertake to enumerate and catalogue the errors and enormities of one poor
single heart.

Here lies the killing stone, or secret Ulcer, as when the body is opened you
see all. Here is the root of the Caprificus wild fig, or wild Ivy, which like
that Leprosy in Leviticus, is not to be stayed, but house and all Lev. 14. 45.
must be pulled down to kill it. You cut down the branches, yet it grows, you
cut the body yet it grows, you cut it to the very hard root, yet it grows,
you pick out the root, as long as ever you can come at it, yet it grows, the
house must be pulled down, and then it dies. Or as it is with an Ele, you strike
it, yet it lives, you flea it yet it lives, you cut it in pieces, yet it stirs,
you throw it into scalding water, and there it stirs a while too; So, Bray a
wicked fool in a mortar, his folly will not depart from him, Prove. 27. 22.
Reproves kill it not, affliction kills it not, sickness kills it not, weakness
kills it not, death kills it not, nay, hell kills it not. The heart is the only
(...) The unruly evil which no man can tame. Jam. 2. 8. This sets on fire the
whole course of nature, and is it self set on fire of hell: Full it is of
deadly poison, as that old Leprosy, it infects all that comes near it. We
think Lev. 13.
it sad living in an unwholesome air, or in a house near the Common-shore,
because of the continual ill smells: What is it to live over the ill savor of
a fowl nasty heart? Who would willingly lodge or dwell in a house reported to
be haunted with Evil spirits? Thy heart is so, yet thou art not afraid. David
was weary of Mesech, Israel of Egypt, Lot sick of Sodom, Jeremy of his Dungeon,
and will thou, as the Bedlam, play with thy chains, and sport thy self with
thine own deceivings, in the midst of thy mortal and bloody enemies? Consider
well of it.

CHAP. XXX. The Third Use of Information in several particulars.
THE third use informs us of diverse weighty points.

1. What a wide and vast difference there is between the laws of men and the
pure law of God: All those fall far short of this; they reach but the outward
man, this the heart, spirit, conscience, and the most hidden thoughts, Heb. 4.
12. Their Laws are Carnal, this Spiritual, holy, requiring truth in the
inward parts. This applies Canons Romans 7 14.
and Engines to the mind, and forbids lust in the first motions, checks the
thought of Belial, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5. Romans 7 7.
or wickedness (as it is called) in the heart, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. The Laws of men
require no more but to strike the topsale, (in a civil behavior) The Law of
God boards every vessel, calls for the bills of lading, makes a through search in
every Cabin, sees what we are fraught with, and if it find any prohibited wares
(not goods) or concealed arms for the use of the enemy, they are seized on,
and the vessel must yield or sink. The Laws of men plant their Ordinance
against the Enemies colors, set out upon the walls of the Castle; That of God
undermines the foundations, and blows up all that stand in opposition. The
Magistrate only provides, ne peccatum turbet, God, ne sit; he ne peccatum
resistat, God ne restet. We may be Boni cives, mali Christiani. We may observe
the manner of the God of the land, as they said, 2 Kings 17. 27. Yet not know
or keep the Laws of the God of heaven. The Statutes of Omri, and Samaria are
oft-times kept by Mit. 6. 16.
those who violate the Edicts of Sion, and of Christ. The Christian therefore
must not be a Statute Christian, but a Scripture Christian.

2. What a sad difference there is between the holy Law of God, and our base
hearts. His Law pure, we impure, that spiritual, we carnal. It was an uneven
and uncomfortable match between beautiful, courteous, and virtuous Abigail,
and that clown and ungracious churl Nabal, that between beautiful Moses, and
black Zipporah, but Gods Law and our hearts are worse matched. But those were
the worst matches in all the Scriptures, Genesis 6. 2, 4. when the Sons of God
went in to the daughters of men, they begat that Gygantean and vicious race,
which corrupted the whole earth; But this is the worst match in the world,
wherein the Law of God is married to the heart of man. For the motions of sins
which are by the law, do work in our members to bring forth fruit to death,
Romans 7. 6. and hereby is the whole Church corruptted.

The Tables of the Law were formerly engraven in stone, and put into an Ark^
overlaid with pure Gold within and without, Exodus 25. 11. But the Tables of the
Law and Covenant of Grace are now written in Gold, and put into a homely ark of
stone.

3. What a difference there is between a godly and a wicked man, a sincere
person and a hypocrite, as much or more as between Solomon's shields of beaten
massy gold, and 1 King. 10. 17. and 14. 27.
Rehoboams of brass, of like size and number. Copper and Gold differ not so
much in color as in their weight and worth; So tin and silver look alike,
weigh not alike. The difference between man and man is not so much in favor,
complexion, stature, or state, as in the mind; not so much in diseases,
poverty, misery as sin; not so much in education, wit, reason, parts, or gifts,
as graces. The godly for his outward aspect is like to an old Church (Paul's for
example) built of ordinary stone; without plain, but when you come in, you find
there a comely inside, handsome seats, and a convenient place to worship God
in. The wicked for his outside not much unlike, yet more fitly compared to a
prison (Newgate for example) built of fair stone, but within nothing to be
found, but nastinesse, hunger, hardship, ill smells, and which is worst of all,
a company of Hell-birds, for their vile behavior. In a word, the godly are
like heaven, fair without, but the glory is all invisible, and not to be
imagined how great till you come within. And the wicked are like hell it self,
to which a broad and easy way does lead, but it is bad to describe, but worse
then you can imagine when you enter.

4. What a busy work is it to be a Christian, he has more to do then to wash
Animum rege hunc fraenus hunc tu compesce Catena. Horat.
the outside of the cup and platter, to make a covenant mith his eye, ear,
hand, foot, mouth and to keep his mouth bridled, he must keep his heart
bridled. Keep thy heart with all keeping, Prove. 4. 23. The God of truth
requires to be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4. 24. in the inward
parts. The cleanly Christian is like those neat Citizens who if they wash and
sweep their doors to the street side, do wash and rub, and keep the inside
cleanner; if they do but brush their outward garments, have their inner
garments washed, and the linen which is next them; so the Christian is to
cleanse his hands, but much more to purge and purify his heart.

The sincere Christian who would be approved of God is to adorn the inner man
of the heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4. as old Sarah did, and to affect to be of the Kings
daughters fashion (the spouse of Christ) all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. or
to be in the Bridegrooms fashion, whose outward garment was of four pieces, as
all the other Israelites were, Deuteronomy. 22. 12. yet was his inner garment
seamlesse, woven throughout, and all one piece; Or like Solomon's Temple, whose
outside was stone, inside gold, especially the Sanctum sanctorum, 1 Kings 6.
30. whose very floor, as well as roof was gold within and without, or like his
Chariot, the pillars whereof were of silver, but the bottom was of gold, Cant.
3. 10.

The sincere soul must not only see he be the same within that without, like
Noah's, or Moses Arc, the one pitched within, as well as without, with pitch,
for water-service, Gen 6. 14.
the other overlaid with gold within and without for Divine-service; and be
like the twelve Exodus 37. 2.
Gates of the New Jerusalem, each of which where one solid, entire pearl, Rev.
21. 21. But he should rather strive to be more within then he seems without,
herein differing from other men, as much as the building and framing of Gods
City does from all other buildings in the world; We lay our foundations of
course and rougher stone, but build up with fairer; But the holy Cities streets
was paved with gold, the wall was Jasper, but the foundations exceeded all, The
foundations of the wall were garnished with all manner of precious stones. Rev.
21. 18, 19. What a rare speech was that of an Heathen? We should always so act
and live, as if we were Sic certe vivendum est tanquam in conspectu vivamus.
Sic cogitandum tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere possit. quid enim
prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum, nihil Deo clausum. Interest animis
nostris and mediis cogitationibus intervenit, Seneca.
in open view, and so think, as if there were some one looking into our heart.
For what does it profit, to be hid from man, when nothing is to God. He steps
into our minds, and walks in the midst of our thoughts.

5. It informs us of another most sad and weighty point, how far a hypocrite
may go, and how high he may fly, yet at last fall low, and perish in some
unsuspected sin. There be many die of Occult and unknown diseases, who are
opened when they are dead, then it is seen what they died of, but then too
late, but there be more die of unknown sins, who would not have their hearts
opened here as Lydias was, that they might have lived; But then it is too late,
when they are dead and gone themselves, to come to the knowled of it. Magus,
next to Judas, is an example of an arch hypocrite, as any in all the Bible; he
came on apace, of a late Sorcerer a new Professor, and all the talk and news of
Samaria, was of Simons conversion and extraordinary forwardness and piety. He
outstrips them all, he hears, believes, is baptized, continues with the godly,
contributeth, wondereth Omnia facit, quae reliquos videt proestare, imo his
majora, Aret. in loc.
more then all the rest, and sits more close to the Preacher. Who dips his hand
usually so soon in the dish as the Traitor? Here if any were in Scripture, you
may lively behold a falling star, a washed swine, a painted sepulcher,
sepulcher, the unclean spirit going out and returning, in his hopeful stepping
forward, and mounting upward, and in his shameful retreat, and doleful
declination.

1. How many steps are here of his ascent, and hopeful exaltation, which show
him to be a star, washed, painted, and the unclean spirit going out.

1. He heard.

2. Believed.

3. Was Baptized.

4. Joined with the Church, and continued.

5. Wondered, Or was in a more than ordinary (...).
extacy or rapture, he was (at least seemed to be) extraordinarily taken and
affected with his new knowledge of the Gospel truths, and his own state.

6. He received the holy Ghost, in some, then common, yet now extraordinary
(never sanctifying) gifts. As may appear.

1. By that of Heb. 6. 4. where many are said to be partakers of the holy
Ghost, who do yet eternally miscarry, partaking of the common gifts of the holy
Spirit, whereof some were peculiar to those times, as to speak with tongues, to
prophecy.

1. By interpreting Scripture written.

2. By foretelling things to come, as Agabus, yea Balaam did, who is said to
have the spirit come upon him, Number. 24. 3. and some gifts that are common to
all ages, as illumination, conviction, elocution, utterance and acquaintance
with the mysteries of Godliness.

2. Many others have had the holy Ghost, as appears by that plea which will be
made by many, Mat. 7. 22.

3. It is said, they laid their hands on them, v. 17. and they all received the
holy Ghost, of which number, Simon was one.

4. He offered them money, it is said, v. 18. not to have the holy Ghost, which
other believers had, but to have power to give (or sell) the holy Ghost to
others, which power was peculiar only to the Apostles.

7. He was desirous of more gifts, more eminent, and Church-edifying gifts then
he had already as it seems.

8. He would not be sparing of his Purse, but would let money go, so he might
have spiritual gifts. He offered them money, (...) not (...), in the singular
number, as Acts 4. 37. but store of money. This word is rendered riches, Mar.
10. 23.

9. He seemed somewhat affected with his sad condition, so plainly laid before
him, Trepidum fuisse non est dubium. O^atio pctri ad cor penetravit, sauciavit
conscientiam, Arct. in locum.
and so smartly set home by Peter. He trembled, says Aretius, no question, was
pricked in his heart, and wounded and galled in Conscience.

10. He is to be commended too, that he did not storm and stomach at Peter's
reproof, (as many a one would have done) but seems to take it in good part.

11. He desires the prayers of others on his behalf, which is very commendable,
so Paul often, and the best of men have done.

12 He desires they would pray for his soul, that none of those evils might
pursue and overtake him, but that he might be out of the state of perdition,
and out of this gall of bitterness. Hitherto he runs well.

But Secondly, Observe him further, and you shall see the star falling, that he
was a swine still, though washed, a Sepulcher, though painted, and the unclean
spirit returning.

1. You may see here a change without a change, a seeming, but no real change.

2. An outward change before an inward; in true godliness, the inward goes
first, then the outward, the hypocrite washes the outside only.

3. Here was a change in profession, none in disposition; In principles, not
affections.

4. He was changed in company, not alone when by himself.

5. He was changed in head, not in heart. Vulpes pilos mutavit, non mo^es.

6. His change was in gifts, not in grace; He had more of common gifts, of
Knowledge, Utterance, Illumination, then of Conscience and Sanctification.

7. He had more of unsound grace, then true, more Faith then Repentance, more
Historical Faith, then heart-purifying Faith: If Faith comes before his time,
it is as dangerous as the Child born before the time; A too forward birth, is
commonly followed with animmature death.

8. His graces were out of Order; Repentance should have come first, and has
the scarler thread of Primogeniture tied about it; If Faith come out first,
Genesis 38. 28, 29.
it is as Pharez, it makes a breach; Therefore for all his forward believing,
Peter sets him back to In speech, as I may say, or his A. B. C. and bids him
repent.

9. He kept a wondering in his head, when there was no wounding in his spirit,
no humiliation, nor mortification of lusts.

10. He continued with them in public, and made more ado to be with them at
their meetings, then to be (...), a Jew in secret, and to pray in private, as
Paul did at his Romans 2. 29.
Conversion.

10. He desired others not to spare their prayers, but he joined not his own;
Thy other men's sins may sooner destroy thee, then thy other men's pray^rs save
thee, without thine own.

12. He only desired to be delivered from hell, and the misery of his sin, not
from the mischief of his sin. Pray, says he, that none of these things come
upon me.

Lastly, He only desired gifts for others, Verse 20. that he might become
eminent and famous, being equal to the Apostles.

So that, Beloved, we may see how far a man may go heavenward yet never come
there. Hell is not only full of sorcerers, adulterers, drunkards, swearers,
and profane swine; But there is many a hearer, professor, believer, and
convert, such as they be: There are See my late T^eatise of Hypocrisy, showing
at large how far a Hypocrite may go.
convictions, wishes, purposes, gifts, parts, yea faith and repentance, in
Hell. The Faith of Ignorant men, Hope and desires of Lazy men, the Knowledge
of unsanctified men, and the Repentance of dying men, lead all to Hell. An
over-sudden Faith, and an over-late Repentance, are alike dangerous. Conviction
without Conversion, Conversion without Reformation, Reformation without
Renovation in the spirit of the mind purged from evil thoughts, and Faith
without Repentance, all lead to Hell. Here was Conviction, Conversion,

Reformation, Faith, yet in the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity.

It is never good doing things by halves, Profession without through
Conviction, Conviction without hearty Contrition, Contrition without true
Conversion, Conversion without a Reformation, Reformation without a new Heart,
the new Heart without the ill Thoughts repented of, and purged out, leave a
Christian half short of Heaven.

These sudden changes are seldom good neither; a young Saul among the Prophets
and an old Sorcerer among the Apostles, deserve more to be observed then
trusted. A sudden believing, as I said, and a late Repentance I am always
jealous of. When a man Will chop suddenly on Profession in his life, or
Repentance at his death, I may have some Charity toward him, but have no
ground of Confidence of his good estate.

CHAP. XXXI. Containing three other uses.
TO proceed to some other uses yet remaining.

1. This serves for Terror to such as harbor and lodge those vile guests of
evil thoughts: As the laws of men are very severe against those who conceal,
entertain, relieve, proclaimed Traitors to the state, so are the Laws of God
against such as harbor and cherish these evil thoughts. The whole text and
discourse of Peter is an use of Terror, therefore this use is most proper; And
oh that I could so set it home as Peter did, that I might make the stou^est
thought to come down, and to put the Authors and Aberters of them into such a
trembling as Magus was. Or rather that I might do it with that success that
the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 14. 25. That the offender seeing the thoughts of
his heart laid open, may fall down and worship God, and say, This is Gods word
of a truth. I shall not in the managing of this use of Terror say all to thee
that Peter did to Magus, I shall not use Peter's imprecation to thee, Thy money
and thee perish together, thy thought and thee perish together, both because I
hope for thy part thou do not sin with Magus his high hand, and for my part,
I have not that insight into men's hearts, as Peter and some others had in those
times (discerning of spirits is or was a 1 Cor. 12. 10.
gift given to some, not to all) I shall therefore turn that imprecation into
caution, and say, take heed that thou and thy thought perish not together.

2. Here is matter of more Terror; Such as thou art have no part nor lot in
this matter, Thou art none of the Church, none of the promises, nor mercies of
God belong to thee; Thou art as certainly excluded heaven as any drunkard, or
adulterer.

3. More Terror still, thy heart is not right in the sight of God; and as of
all things God loves the pure and upright in heart, so above all, he hates and
abhors a rotten heart.

4. More Terror still, thou art in the very gall of bitterness; Some think
Peter does allude to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. Thou art that root that
bears gall and wormwood, and God will cause his Jealousy to smoke against
such a wretch as thou art, and all the curses written in his book, shall come
upon thee, and he shall blot out thy name from under heaven.

5. More Terror yet, Thou art in the bond of iniquity; Thou art under the
dominion and servitude of sin, thy evil thoughts keep thee captive, and till
thou do expel them and resist them, thou will never be thy own man.

6. And more terror yet; except thou do repent ^nsai^edly and pray earnestly
for pardon or such wickedness, all thy own believing, professing, baptism,
and all other men's prayers for thee will do thee no good. Oh consider this ye
that make so light of evil thoughts: If Magus was daunted and terrified, when
Peter looked into his heart, and laid open one evil thought, how will thou
stand confounded, when God shall lay open all thy heart? and set all thy
thoughts before thee, and first, one indictment read, Imprimis a Blasphemer, so
many Blasphemous thoughts; Item so many Atheistical thoughts, so many unclean,
malicious; Item so many High, Proud, Arrogant thoughts; Item a world of worldly
thoughts; Item a greater world of Vain thoughts, and many sad Items, and thou
shall have no more power to deny any of them then Magus had to deny a word that
Peter charged him with. In that dreadful day of judgment, the process shall
not be secundum allegat A and probata, as here, according to the evidence for
matter of fact; But God will proceed secundum agitata and cogitata, according
to his observation of thy thoughts, as he has told us aforehand. This thou
have done, and that thou have done, and besides that this thou have thought,
and that thou have thought, but I will reprove thee and set them in order
before thee. I shall Psalm. 50. 21.
conclude this use of terror with those words of terror that follow, Oh
consider this, ye that forget God, least he tea^ you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver. Certainly if you see not the ugliness of this sin till then,
it will befall you as it has befaln some curious Gentlewomen, who have been
sorely disfigured with the small Pox, who when they have seen themselves in the
glass, have run besides themselves, not thinking it possible they could have
been so ill; so will all these not only run mad, but into despair, which is
much worse, upon that discovery then of their sinful thoughts.

2. Here is also an use of singular comfort to the Godly, whose thoughts
(though they are often vain, and not so good as he could wish) are the best part
of his Sanctification, though he is short in duties, and performance, yet his
thoughts, especially his deliberate thoughts, his intentions, aims, purposes,
desires are all sincere. That he can humbly and gladly say search me O Lord and
try my heart, try me and know my Psalm. 139. 23. 1 Job. 3. 21.
thoughts. If we have this confidence in our own thoughts, we shall have
confidence before him. Can thou say with David, I hate vain thoughts, and
check them, I Psalm. 119. 113. Psalm. 139. 17.
love good thoughts and entertain them. Oh how precious are thy thoughts to me
O God: How great is the sum of them: In the multitude Psalm. 94. 19.
of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. It is well said,
says Austin,

The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the Velimus, nolimus, habemus eas
(concupiscentias) blandiuntur, stimulant insestant, surgere volunt. Premuntur
non extinguntur non quod ^ultis poteslis. Quid vullis? ut non omnino sint
concupiscentiae mal^, sed non potestis exercete bellum sperate triumphum. Aug.
De pugaa anim^. Psalm. 94. 11. 1 Cor 3. 20.
spirit against the flesh, that these are contrary the one to the other, that
we cannot do what we would. Why what is that we would? we would that there were
no concupiscence, or lust at all: But we cannot will we, nill we, we have them
they tickle, entice, insult, and would command; Suppressed they are,
extinguished they are not, etc.

3. This serves for resolution of a great objection, I have many an ill
thought, therefore what will become of me?

There are moates in our clearest Sunshine, and vain thoughts there are in the
best men, when employed in the best duties, yea there is vanity in the best
thought: Hence it is said the Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are
vain, and Paul adds, The thoughts of the wise they are vain: Hereupon it is
said that the Lord was moved in his Covenant of grace to pity and pardon
mankind, Genesis 8. 21. The Lord smelled a Savor of rest, and said in his heart,
I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth. And, Genesis 6. 5. It is said, that every
imagination of the thought of his heart is only evil continually. A hard
saying, but a true saying, which is thus to be understood.

1. Every thought of every unregenerated person is only and wholly evil, like
tree, like fruit. To the defiled and unbeleever is Tit. 1. 15.
nothing pure.

2. Every thought in a believer that is Ex tam sordid^ sonte ne gutt^ quidem
bonitatis profluere potesi. Parae^^ in locum.
his own is evil, we have not the matter of one good thought in us of our own,
we have not sufficiency as of our selves to think any thing. When we think
evil, we have it (...), as Satan when he speaks aly speaks of his own. The
earth brings forth weeds of her self, she is the natural Mother of them, to
the corn she is but a Nurse: The hearts of the Godly are natural mothers to
ill thoughts, nurses at best (sometimes unkind nurses) to bring up and cherish
good thoughts, the children of the spirit of God. The good thought is as
welcome to the Godly heart, as the Angels to Lots house, but it comes aliunde,
and superne, it comes from above, and seems as they, unwilling to enter under
our roof, therefore must be entreated and pressed upon greatly to get them in,
Genesis 19. 3. But the evil thought like the impudent Sodomites unsent for, press
to come in to the best heart, as they into Lots house, and no bars or doors are
able to keep them out without the help of God, v. 9.

3. In our best thoughts there is a mixture of evil, as in our best graces. In
the softest heart there is hardness, in the strongest faith somewhat of
unbelief in the most sincere heart some hypocrisy, so in our thoughts, our best
is vanity, all our righteousness are as filthy rags.

4. That good which is in them is not perfectly good, but it is weak, cold,
livelesse, flagging, fading.

2. But yet all ill thoughts argue not a heart to be bad, there are volatile,
transient evil thoughts which stay so short a while as to make no impression,
thus it is with the Godly. Elias himself might easier shut up heaven by his
prayer, then shut out all evil thoughts out of his own heart; Now it is not the
birds flying over the sacrifice that hurts it, if they light and settle not,
the flying birds pick not up the seed sown, but they that are suffered to
stay. Aswarm of flies buzzing about our mear taint in not, but when one stays
on it and blows it, then it leaves the matter for the filthy vermin to be
engendered of. Nehemiah had many a message sent to him to take him off from his
work, he would not stir a foot to parley with them. so the work was not at all
Neh. 6. 3.
hindered: Thou must do so with an ill thought, leave not thy business, enter
no parlies, let them go as they come.

3. Ill thoughts that are only injected and Cogitatio immunda non inquinat cum
pulsat nisi voluntatem per delectationem sibi subjugat. Voluntate sua cadit qui
cadit, B^rn.
ejected as fast, may trouble, shall not condemn us; as good thoughts injected
or transient, argue not a good heart, but when entertained. God casts in a good
thought sometimes into a wicked man, he casts it out presently; the Lord casts
in another, he casts it out again, and so never entertaines any: This is to
resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. when he stifles and checks them: So Satan
casts in an evil thought into a good heart, he casts it out, he casts it in
again, he casts it out as fast, and there is nothing but casting in, and
casting out, this is to resist Satan, Jam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 9. And to keep our
selves pure. The enemy casts in grandadoes, we cover all with Raw-hides sods of
earth, etc. take away all combustible matter and watch when they fall and catch
them up, and throw them in the face of the enemy, there they break and do him
more mischief then they do us. So Satan casts in sometimes a Blasphemous
thought, curse God and dye; Sometimes a Covetous or Ambitious thought, fall
down and worship; it may be a self-destroying thought, cast thy self down: If
we receive these as Hezekiah did Rabshakehs message, with rent hearts, and go
spread our complaint before God, we shall be secured. These Sons of Sodom may
gather about our house and press to the door and knock as if they would break
it open or pull down the house, if we keep within, and keep the door fast we
are safe.

4. When they are only injected, not bred there, as an honest man may have a
bastard child laid at his door, but it is none of his, nor like him, he
disownes it. Satan casts his brats at thy door, they are more like Satan, then
a believer, the Lord will easily decide the controversy and give the living
child to the right father, and the dead to Satan.

5. When injected indeed, but not cherished, fostered, maintained: Moses
becomes Pharaohs daughters son, when she nourished Non imputantur cum
violenter importantur, culpam non inferunt tales cogitationes, injuriam tamen
aliquam irrogant affectatae munditi^, Bern.
him. So thou may be charged with Satan's brats if thou receive them,
otherwise not; Make no provision for the flesh, faith the Apostle, to fulfill
the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14.

6. When not habitual, if we savor them not and become like unto them. To be
carnally minded is death, not to be carnally natured; we say that man is of a
hot complexion, whose temper is constantly hot, not in a fit of a fever. Good
or evil thoughts when habitual, constant and ordinary, show the heart good or
evil.

7. When not Predominant, there are evil thoughts in a good heart, and good
sometimes in a wicked heart; but as we say of a man he is Phlegmatic, sanguine
or melancholy, not because some of these humors are in him, but in whom that
humor is predominant, so is he the wicked man in whom wicked thoughts are
predominant, there is more store of them, and they rule and bear sway in the
heart; it is otherwise with the Godly, Pro. 12. 5. The thoughts of the
righteous are right, that is the major part of them for the most part are so.
But the councels of the wicked are deceit? Yea it Psalm. 119. 113.
is said in this respect, Pro. 11. 23. The desire of the righteous is only
good, and Pro. 21. 5. the thoughts of the diligent tend only to
plenteousnesse; as of the wicked it is said, because of his habitual and
predominant wickedness, Pro. 17. 11. The evil man seeks only rebellion. A
Godly man may say with David, I have vain thoughts but yet. I hate vain
thoughts, Psalm. 119. 113. I have them, but they have not me. There is a great
deal of difference, as one says, to have hypocrisy, Covetousness, or other
sins in us, and them to have us, it is one thing for them to be in us, it is an
other thing for us to be in them.

8. When evil thoughts are suggested, but not executed, this may be the case of
the Godly, But the wicked devises evil in his Psalm. 36. 4. Micah. 2. 1.
bed, and he gets up and practizeth it, if there be power in his hand; whereas
a David may have a full thought of revenge suggested, and resolved on, but an
Abigail with better advice stays the execution, and he blesses God and her, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33.

9. When they are not delighted in, but bewailed and resisted, That the spirit
lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17. He bewaileth Pto. 30. 32. Onerosae
cogitationes in anima justi, quibus resistere vult non potest sed velit, nolit,
irruit in oculos meant is muscarum Egypti pestilentia, and perstrepunt ranae in
penetralibus cordis ejus. Bern.
the law of his members warring against the law of his mind, and if he have
thought evil he lays his hand on his mouth, abhorring himself for such
thoughts, this is the case of the Godly, whereas the wicked sport and please
themselves in their own deceivings, 2 Pet. 2. 13. The greatest burden a child
of God has are from his evil thoughts, he can govern the outward man well
enough, and deal reasonable well with his tongue, But his thoughts and the
visions of his head (as it is said of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 5.) are they that
trouble him most:

Now as it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, and charity in us
covers a multitude of sins, much more will divine love and infinite grace, as
a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him, says
David, Psalm. 103. 13. And there are two arguments the Lord is pleased often to
make use of to encourage his people. The one a very mean and sorry one we would
think taken from man, such as these, Psalm. 103. 14. He chideth not us
continually for be knows our frame, he remembers we are but dust. He stirred
not up all his wrath for Psalm. 103. 14.
he remembers they were but flesh; He will not contend for ever, nor be
always wroth, Psalm. 78. 38. 39.
for then the spirit of man would fail before him. So especially in respect of
a man's vain and weak thoughts. It is said after Noah's sacrifice wherein the
Lord smelled a sweet Savor Es. 57. 16.
(through Christ) The Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground
Genesis 8. 21.
any more for man's sake, Genesis 8. 21. For (others read although, so Paraeus in
locum and Dr. Reynolds) The imagination of his heart is evil from his youth.
Reyn, sinful. o^ sin. P. 274.


The other argument is more high taken from himself, I am God and not man,
therefore you sons of Jacob are not consumed, I will not execute the
fierceness of mine anger, for I am Mal. 3. 6.
God and not man. Both these arguments are sweet, the latter especially, In
which Hos. 11. 9.
the Lord considers not so much what guilty man deserves, as what becomes a God
of mercy and compassion, who will not set his wisdom against our folly, his
purity against our impurity, and his strength against our imbecility. And here
is the fountain and only foundation of the comforts of a poor soul, in the
Covenant of Grace, when the Lord says, Ezekiel. 36. 32. Not for your sakes do I
this, be it known to you, Oh house of Israel; be ashamed and confounded for
your own ways, But for mine own names sake. I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Esa. 43. 25.
44. 22.

CHAP. XXXII. Containing a Use of Exhortation.
IT is Solomon's counsel, Pro. 27. 23. Be thou diligent to know the state of
thy flocks, and look well (in the Hebrew, set thy heart unto it) to thy herd;
And I may say as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. Does God take care for oxen, and
sheep, or does he speak this altogether for our sakes? may I not say rather, be
diligent to know the state of thy, heart, and of that flock of thoughts, which
is a greater business to look well too, then to keep a flock of sheep, or herd
of swine: A shame it is for man to look after every thing and not himself, to
know every City, Country, Art, Language, Science, and not to know himself; to
observe men, times customs every thing, and not to observe himself, and the
customs and manners of his own heart and thoughts. The Grammarian makes his
latin by rule, the Poet makes his verse by rule, the workman builds his house
by rule, and must we have no rule for our hearts and thoughts? The heavens and
every star move by rule, day and night come and go by rule, Summer, Winter,
seedtime and harvest come and go by rule, yea the Sea ebbes and flows by rule,
and the birds of the air, the Swallow and Cuckoo, come and go by rule, and
shall man be the only unruly creature, and have Jer. 8. 7.
no rule for his heart and thoughts to move by? and be as the clouds of the
air, or waves of the sea, or a ship without compass or Pilot, that is driven
up and down without guide or stay? Is it not matter of shame to see we should
keep house clean, face clean, hands clean, and all our cloths must be clean, or
we are ashamed of our selves, and the heart unclean. Garden must be weeded,
house must be washed, household stuff must be scoured, door must be swept, swine
and poultry must be rended, and the heart neglected; Strange it is we should
observe order in every thing and affect neatness, every thing must have his
fit place, the horse has his stable, the ox his crib, the dog his kennell,
the swine their coat, that horse, dog, and swine, eat not, nor ly together;
that we should have no partition in our hearts, good and evil thoughts tumble
together. We keep doors to our houses, yea to every room, locks, and bolts, or
latches to every door, yea we have doors and iron bars to our very stables, and
none to the heart. As a City without watch and ward, Gates and bars, or house
without Pro. 25. 28.
doors and locks, so is the man, says Solomon, that has no rule over his own
spirit; we have hedges and ditches about our grounds, foldes to keep in our
sheep, and to keep out other cattle, and shall our hearts only ly open and
unfenced, as commons and wastes without any regard; We put our very swine to a
keeper, and we have a horse-keeper, and shall we have no heart-keeper;
Especially when we have such a charge, that (whatever is neglected) the heart
must be (...) with all keeping, Pro. 4. 23. There are two things that ask a
great deal of pains and good skill.

1. To break and tame the heart, this is a work for the best Minister, the man
of a thousand, that can skill to tame and break a wild heart, as he had need of
good Job. 33. 23.
skill that shall back and break an unruly colt.

2. The other is thy own work, To keep thy own heart, and this is as great a
charge as Jacob had to keep a great flock of sheep, which made him sweat and
toil by day, Genesis 31. 40.
and broke his sleep by night; or to keep a herd of swine is not a more
toylsome business: yea thou have as great a charge and task to keep thy heart,
as if thou wast made keeper of Newgate, or any common Goal, thou have as many
unruly ones to deal with, that are more hardly kept in order, that thou have
need of strong doors, store of Animum rege qui nisi paret, Imperat, hunc
fraenis, hunctu compes^e catena. Hor.
locks, bolts, fetters, cords, and make all sure, least they give thee the
slip. A Captain over an unruly company of soldiers has somewhat to do to keep
them in order, but a General of an army had need to be a man of a good command
to keep all in good order; what have thou to do who art to command so many
Companyes and Regiments of mutinous and unruly thoughts?

Labor therefore to be well acquainted with they se^f, and to know thy heart
as perfectly as thou do every room in thy own house, that thou may say,
Nota magis nulli domus est sua, quam mihi cor est. Yea labor to know thy heart
as perfectly as if thou had a mesure of it, as the Prophet had of the Temple,
who was to show them Ezekiel. 43. ^^.
the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, the goings out thereof, and
the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and ordinances thereof, and
all the forms thereof again, and the laws thereof, and write it in their
sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances
thereof. So there are forms and forms again, many and diverse, and outgoings,
and incomings of the heart (the best temple of a good heart) which are not
easily described: This is the Art of Arts and science of sciences. It was an
adventurous undertaking of those that were sent to spy out the land of Canaan,
and it Number. 13. 2. 25.
was fit for chosen men; A ruler and eminent person in every tribe, they went
out and returned with a full account of their voyage after forty days: It
will cost thee many more days, and yet thou will not be able to espy half that
little-great piece of earth in thy own heart, and to be able to say; I speak
all that was in my heart, as Caleb did. And what an undertaking was that of our
Josh. 14. 7.
English worthies, Drake and Candish, and many others since, to go search the
whole world, and make discoveries of unknown lands and seas? They compassed the
whole earth in the space of two or three years and returned, but it is a more
honorable and profitable adventure to seek to compass this Narrow-wide spot
of earth in thy heart, though it may cost thee more time and pains, and yet
thou must say there is a great part of Terra incognita yet in it undiscovered.

2. The second exhortation is that of the text, To repent of evil thoughts; so
Agur exhorts, Pro. 30. 32. If thou have thought evil lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, that is humble thy self and bewail thy sin. If ever thou have repented
of any thing, repent much more for thy thoughts, if thou have never repenred,
begin repentance here, cleanse first the inside of this foul cup and platter.
Mat. 23. 26.
Here is the Original sin, and the Original of all sin; Open the mouth of this
Cave, and thou will see the Kings that were immured, Josh. 10. 22.
the chief enemies of thy soul lurk here; Here is the root of the matter of
sin: Here is the Cockatrices den, here hells mouth, here the devils forge. Here
are heaps upon heaps of wickedness, treasures of darkness, which the
vultures eye of the wicked, nor the Eagle eye of the Godly never yet saw; open
this pit and there steames out so much darkness as thou shall not see where
thou art. Actual sins are many, but sins in the thoughts many more, for one
act of adultery, murder committed, a thousand adulteries and murders in the
heart. Actual sins are sometimes restrained, but the restless thoughts are
ever sinning, The wells of Moab were all stop^ by the Israelites, 2 King. 3.
25. it were well if all the Israelites and people of God in the world could
stop up these wells. But who can shut up the sea with doors when it breaks
forth as if it issued out of the womb? Clouds are the garment of it, and thick
darkness, the swaddling band of it. The Job 38. 8, 9.
same may be said of the heart, who can shut it with doors, etc. thick
darkness is the swaddling band of it. Know that Gods word is a Judge of thy
thoughts, and Gods eye is Heb. 4. 12. Psalm. 139. 1 Cor. 4. 6. Jer. 6. 19.
upon the thoughts, and Gods judgment day is for the arraigning and discovering
of thy thoughts: And thy reward will be according to the fruit of thy thoughts;
And that which will most accuse, or excuse thee, Condemn or quit thee in that
day will be thy thoughts, To. 2. 15. Oh what a sad thing it will be when the
Lord shall lay open all thy thoughts, and say, thus thou did and thus Psalm.
50. 21.
thou thoughtest, thy thought still worse then thy deed, a professor in word an
hypocrite in thy heart, a Saint at Church, a devil in thy thoughts, charitable
in word, covetous in thy thoughts, courteous in words, false and treacherous in
thy thoughts. Item so many thousands of Atheistical, Impious, hard thoughts of
God; Item as many Injurious, malicious, revengefull, mischievous thought
toward others; Item as many more Unclean, proud, and vain thoughts besides
that thy hear^ was full off; Item so many worldly, plodding thoughts which all
perished with thee, Psalm. 146. 4. When thou would preserve them; Item so many
good thoughts which perished in thee, because thou wast so cruel to stifle and
strangle them.

3. To fly to the fountain opened for sin and uncleanness; These evil thoughts
where other foul sins have not broke out show us what an absolute, universal,
continual need all have to fly to Christ Jesus: These fiery serpents should
make us look up to this Brazen Number. 21.
serpent, for justifying, sanctifying and healing mercies. This Leprosy is
only to be healed by Jordan, not by Abana, and Pharpar waters. The blood and
spirit of Christ are the only means to cure this Leper, as the blood of the
dead bird and water with the living bird cleansed the legal Leprosy. And as
the separation water mixed with the ashes of the slain heifer, purified all
uncleanness, Lev. 16. Number. 19. So it is only the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God which can purge our
consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. For as when we
were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were in the flesh did bring forth
fruit unto death, so being married and joined unto Christ, we shall bring forth
fruit unto God, To. 7. 5, 6.

I have read of some springs that change the color of the cattle that drink of
them, into the color of their own waters, as Du Bartas sings.

Cerona, Xanth and Cephisus do make.
The thirsty flocks, that of their waters take,
Black, red and white, And near the crimson deep.
The Arabian fountain makes crimson sheep.
Jesus Christ is such a fountain in which whosoever bathes, and of which
whosoever drinks shall be changed into the same likeness, and as he is pure,
so shall they be presented without spot before God through him.

CHAP. XXXIII. An use of Examination, with certain notes to know whether the
thoughts be good or bad.
I should now come to make an use of Examination, but that is thy work, not
mine, I am to examine my own heart and thoughts, not another, and thou art to
examine thine; And we should make many such uses of examination, or else God
will make one sad one for us. All other uses of this doctrine are in vain, if
this be neglected; Be thou daily in this counting house, nec te qusr siveris
extra -- If any be so impious as to say, who made me my brothers keeper? let
none be so brutish as to say, who made me my own keeper? send Amaziahs Genesis 4.
9.
challenge to thy heart and say, come let us see one another in the face, let
thee and I 2. Chapter 25. 17.
commune together. And if thy heart send thee Sanballats message in good
earnest, come let us meet together and have a personal Neh. 6. 2, 3.
and private treaty; Say not, I am about other business, why should my work
stand still? Leave all worldly business to hear what this friend has to say
to thee. This is to be daily practiced to prevent that long examination at
last, and if we did thus Judge our selves we should not be judged of the Lord;
To this duty we are often exhorted, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

And I shall give a few notes whereby to try whether our thoughts be good, or
bad, after I have answered one objection.

Ob. If the heart be as the thoughts be, then I hope I have a good heart, for I
have good thoughts.

Ans. All good thoughts argue not the heart good, as we said all evil thoughts
prove not the heart evil. The most wicked man that lives may have some good
thoughts.

1. He has one single good thought, not many; God is not in (all) his
thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4.
yea in very few of them. But one swallow makes not a spring.

2. His thoughts are ordinarily and habitually evil, he may have accidentally
and occasionally some good thought, at a Sermon, etc. as Agrippa, Felix, etc.

3. Yet that good thought is transient, not deliberate, as a good man's bad
thought is transient, but good deliberate.

4. And it is usually checked and smothered when conceived, or suggested; as
Satan injects evil to the Godly, but he casts out; so do the wicked when God
injecteth good, God casts in, he casts out as fast; at an other time a good
motion is cast in, he casts it our again: They fall as sparks upon dank
tinder, they take not; They are like the summer fruits, eaten up as soon as
touched, Esa. 28. 4.

5. And likely thy good thoughts are impertinent and prepo^^erous, the devil
when thou art at Sermon, or at prayer will furnish thee with some good thought
to divert thee from what is thy proper business; as we say of evil, evil is
not only opposite to all good, but to some evil, vice to vice, as well as vice
to virtue; so we may say of some good thoughts, they are not opposite to evil
only, but sometimes to good, as to read or pray, when we should be hearing, or
to think of what we have heard, when we should be praying. An old stratagem of
Satan to draw us into an Ambush, when we should be safe if we kept our ground;
The devil seeks to set good men together by the ears, Saul and Barnabas, and
to get Agabus to divert Paul. When Act. 15. 39. Act. 21. 11. Lu. 9. 59.
Christ called one to preach the Gospel he would be excused by his care of his
aged father: Charity must hinder piety; so when Martha should have been
hearing, she was Lu. 10. 40.
cumbred, hospitality must justle out pie^y, good at another time, and very
commendable: So when that ointment was spent upon Christ, Judas puts in his vye
for the poor, Had not this ointment better have been sold and given to the
poor? Very plausible, but what says our Savior, Let her alone, ^^. 12. 5. ^.
she has done well; The poor you have always with you, and at another time
you may and must remember them, but this is fittest for this time.

6. Do not thy good thoughts trouble thee? As Nebuchadnezzar was troubled with
his thoughts, Dan. 4. 5. Many a wic^ed man may say as he, Psalm. 77. 3. I
remembered God and was troubled (not for his absence, but presence) wicked men
seek to cast out these conceptions as the Hindes bow themselves to cast out
their sorrows; Job. 39. 13.
they think they shall be melancholy if they think a little longer of them.
The Godly man is not more troubled with his bad thoughts then he is with his
good; When as to the Godly the good thought is his joy and delight. How
precious are thy thoughts to Psalm. 139. 17. Psalm. 104. 34.
me O God: my meditation of God, O how sweet is it!

7. Or thy thoughts are Confused, an he^p of them disorderly jumbled together,
nothing is set in order; As Christ once Lu. 2. 44.
(so the good thought is often) lost in the Crowd. It is the great weakness of
man that he cannot set in order Gods thoughts (or the thoughts of God) before
him. It is Gods Psalm. 40. 5.
perfection his thoughts are all ordered, I know the thoughts I think toward
you says the Lord; Jer. 29. 11.
we know not our own thoughts (though every fool says I know what I think) God
can set our disorderly thoughts before us and single them out one by one. So
should we Psalm. 50. 22.
single out some good thoughts at one time, another at another, and pursue
them. The Huntsman can have no game till he single his Deer he means to hunt
out of the whole herd, nor can we make any work of it in meditation, till we
pick out some good thought to fix and fasten upon.

8. Thy good thoughts lodge not, abide not with thee, but are like a night
vision, make no impression, they come to nothing; whereas the Godly ly down
with such thoughts and rise with them: When I awake I am still with thee, Psalm.
139. That is right thinking when we in^end the mind ad ruborem and calorem,
Psalm. 39. 3. My heart waxed hot within me, and while I was musing the fire
kindled, I felt my thoughts warm my heart; as it was said of Holy Bradford when
he was praying he never went off from a petition till he felt his heart
affected with it. But if thy thoughts are good indeed thou shall know it by
these notes.

1. Where heart and thoughts are good, the words will be so too, as the
treasure is within, such the communication. Say not Mat. 12. 35.
Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba; I talk at randum, merrily, Idly, but my
heart is good I think no harm. Say as well the Tree is good, though the fruit
evil; and the fountain sweet, though water bitter; Thy speech bewrays thee.
The good heart and good discourse ever go together, Psalm. 40. 9, 10. and 37.
30, 31. Mal. 3. 16. They that had gracious thoughts of Gods name by themselves,
were full of gracious discourses when they came together.

2. Where are holy thoughts, there are other graces, Mal. 3. 16. They feared
God and thought upon his name.

3. Good thoughts are ever accompanied with holy, serious, and frequent
meditations, Genesis 24. 63. Psalm. 1. 2. 19. 14. 104. 34. 119. 15. 23. 48. 78. 97.
148. and 143. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 15. Whosoever is a stranger to holy meditations,
cannot have, at least long keep, good thoughts; much study (one says) makes
the scholar, and much meditation makes the Christian.

4. Serious thoughts beget practical and unmoved determinations, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Their good thoughts are the law of God written in their hearts.

5. There is a concurrence between thoughts and conscience, To. 2. 15. Thought
gives conscience a jogge who sets at the the stern and awakens it, and
conscience thereby steeres better and keeps off from rocks and shelves.

6. As there is a concurrence between the good thought and the good conscience,
so there is a concordance between the good thought and the good conversation,
Job. 31. 1. I shall not (wantonly) think of a maid, therefore I made a covenant
with my eyes, and with my outward man, that there might be no temptation to any
ill behavior, said holy Job. Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned
my feet to thy testimonies.

7. Good thoughts are always backed with peremptory and fixed purposes and
resolutions, Dan. 1. 8. Act. 11. 23. Psalm. 17. 3. 2 Timothy 3, 10. Ruth 1. 16, 17,
18. Deuteronomy. 18. 6.

8. Frequent prayers. Such as those, let the words of my mouth, and the
Meditations, motions, imaginations of my heart be always acceptable in thy
sight O Lord, my strength and my redeemer, Psalm. 19. 14. Create in me a clean
heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. O Lord keep this
for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and
prepare their heart (or stablish the heart) unto thee, 1 Chr. 29. 18. The like,
1 King. 8. 57, 58.

9. There will be much joy and delight in them, as they much desire to let such
guests in, so they joy in their company. O God now Psalm. 108. 1.
my heart is fixed, I will therefore sing and give praise; O Lord who am I,
said David another 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. 18.
time, that we should have a heart so free and willing. O Lord keep it in the
imagination of the thoughts of our hearts and prepare our hearts toward thee.
Oh that this holy fire come from heaven might ever be kept burning, never go
Le. 6. 13.
out; oh that I had a treasure, a stock, a spring of such thoughts, I should
never be weary of them:

Lastly, good desires concerning which we shall make a particular digression in
the next chapter.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Good Desires.
THE Desires do as much discover the heart and thoughts as any thing else. And
because often Hypocrites are apt to shroud themselves under this pretense of
their good hearts, because of some good desires, and to think themselves to be
much better then they are; The wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and the
covetous blesses himself (in Psalm. 10. 3.
this respect) when the Lord abhors him; And on the other side, godly ones,
not taking notice how much good is in a right good desire, think themselves
worse then they are. I shall take a little pains,

1. For the encouraging of the one, to tell him how much good is in a good
desire.

2. For the undeceiving of the other, to tell him, what desires are good, and
when. And the first I shall lay down in Eight Conclusions.

1. There is so much good in good desires, that it is almost all the godly have
to speak and reckon of. Make an Inventory of a Christians State, and search
every room, if you find not these, you find nothing, and if you set these down,
you set down all he is worth, Inprimis, In his heart a few good desires.

Item. In his best duties, and prayers, a few good desires.

Item. In all his acts, dealings, and whole life, a few good, pious, and honest
desires.

Lastly, the Summatotalis is, so many good desires; Hence the godly have often
mentioned their desires, Esa. 26. 8, 9. They are mentioned twice, as if they
had nothing else to set down, Nehem. 1. 11. Psalm. 38. 9. As Daniel was called,
a man of desires, so may Dan. 10. 11.
every Christian, being wholly made up of good desires.

2. Of these God takes special notice, he Psalm. 10. 17. 1 King 8. 18. Cant.
1. 6. and 4. 7.
hears the desire of the humble; he says, in as much as it was in thy heart,
it was well; when we say, I am black, he says, thou art all fair, thou have
good and fair desires. As the new wine is found in the cluster and one says,
destroy it not, there is a blessing in it, so will I do for my servants sakes,
that I may not destroy them Esa. 65. 8.
all; in the cluster of good desires there is a great deal of good new wine put
into the bottle of the new heart; And God will not have one good desire
destroyed, but has a blessing in store for it.

3. These, if the heart could be looked into, and be ripped open, do show better
what is there of grace or sin, then any thing else. A wicked man is better
known by his desires then words or deeds, he may keep in ill words, forbear
evil acts, is never free from ill desires. Neither he nor Satan do always
tempt, ly, steal, murder, commit adultery, but do thou desire? So many sinful
desires so many sins, a man may be guilty but of one act of murder or adultery,
ye^ be a thousand times a murderer, or adulterer, because of so many such
desires; Pharaoh had slain Moses, Haman Mordecai, Saul David, Amnon had
ravished Tamar long before, if they could have had their desires: God does set
them down so many times a murderer, incestuous, etc. So is the godly man
measured by his desires: Do thou desire to pray, repent, believe, mortify
sin, honor God, benefit his Church? This is to have done so much as thou
desire, yea the godly is a thousand times better in his desires, then he can
be any other way; He aims at the mark in his desires, though he shoot still
short or wide; By his good will he would have every duty performed perfectly,
every sin destroyed, might he have his will, had his sins all one neck, as
Caligula wished of the Roman Senators, he would give the blow, and he makes
that vow that Israel did, Number. 21. 2, 3. If the Lord will deliver these
Canaanites into his hand, he will destroy them utterly, and call that day,
Hormah, that is, utter destruction.

4. Good desires are ever the first preparations unto grace, to let it in: As
the day comes in by the breaking of the clouds, so grace by the breaking of
good desires, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou hear the desire, thou preparest the heart.

5. They are not the preparations only for, but the first buds and blossoms
of grace. The first beginning of grace, and the appearance of it is seen in the
change of the desires; as the woman conceived with child, yet knows not whether
she be with child or no, but she observes there is a change in her, somewhat is
the matter, she has less stomach to former diet, she long's and desires that
which formerly she cared not for, and never thought off; So the godly, now
begin to loath sin, and to desire grace.

6. Yea further, These are the very life and soul of grace, as the flame is of
the fire, as natural life is preserved in the appetitive faculty, it begins and
ends with it, so spiritual life in the spiritual appetite and concupiscence.
Gal. 5. 17. The spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the
spirit. The life of sin is preserved not in the continual acts of sin, but in
the continual love of it; So life of grace not always continued in the
apparent acts and exercises of it, but in the desires after it.

7. To go yet higher, These are the very perfection, and the highest pitch of
grace on earth. Divines speak of many perfections here on earth.

1. Of parts, not degrees.

2. Comparative, not absolute.

3. Inchoated, not attained. Poor perfections all, God knows.

But the 4th. Of desires, is above them all, Parts, Comparative, Inchoated,
fall short as Caro concupisci^a ^versus spiritum and spiritus adversus carnem,
etc. ut ^on quod volumus facimus. Quare quia ve^mus ut null. lae amnino sint
concupisentiae, sed non passumus, Aug.
well as Degrees, absolute, attained; but desires rise higher. My duties,
parts, graces, are imperfect, says the godly soul, my desires are perfect;
duties low, desires high; duties smoke, desires flame; my duties creep of all
four and cannot go, my desires have four wings, like that creature Dan. 7. 6.
that had four feet, and four wings; my performances do but creep and leave me
on the ground, my desires are winged and carry me up to heaven.

Yea higher yet, what will you say, if we tell you desires are the best
perfection of heaven, where there is nothing of imperfection, and that not
only among the spirits of just men now made perfect, but among the Angels
themselves, who were never less then perfect? There are many perfections in
heaven, of degrees, absolute, complete; There is perfection of knowledge, love,
joy, peace, of all grace and glory, all perfections; Yet I may safely say, this
of desires is above all the rest. The holiest Saint and highest Angel, even
when they do love, adore, and magnify God, do cover their faces, because they
fall short of his perfections, such is their imperfection, (not their sin, the
imperfection of their nature, not of their state) Gods infinite perfections,
being not to be reached with any measure of finite graces; Only desires come
in to help out all, these rise up higher, and strive to reach Gods highest
praises, and to give him the full of his perfections; so that where tongues and
prophecy, and faith, and love it self cease or fall short, desires carry all
before them.

8. Lastly, These desires, as they are the first and highest of graces, so they
are the last and lowest, and the standing dish of grace, and shows the minimum
quid sic of a Christian, when nothing else is to be found. While life remains
desires continue, when desire cease, nature is spent, the man is dead or
dying, Eccies. 12. 5. All that the poor soul has to say for it self, sometimes
is this, Psalm. 38. 9. Lord thou know all my desire, my groaning is not hid
from thee. Romans 7. 18. To will is present, my desire cease not, yet, to thy
name, and to the remembrance of thee. Esa. 26. 8. I will look still after thee,
and toward thy holy Temple, though I am cast out of sight, and all thy waves
and billows have gone over me, Jonah 2. 4. I cry out as my dying, expiring
Savior, I thirst. I stretch out my hands unto thee, my soul thirsts for thee
as the thirsty land, hear me speedily; O Lord, my spirit fails, hide not thy
face least I be like to them that Psalm. 143. 6.
go down into the pit. I pant, Psalm. 42. 1. I long, Psalm. 63. 1. I faint, Psalm.
84. 2. All is well. The fire is not out while there is a spark, grace is not
dead while there is one desire left. Ly down again Samuel, the lamp of God is
not yet gone out. The Lord may call 1 Samuel 3. 3. ^
thee yet, and come to thee again and again; what is there in hungering and
thirsting, poverty of spirit and mourning, more then a few desires, yet all
those are called blessed, yea and they shall be blessed.

Will you hear what other eminent and ex^erienced Divines have said in this
case, to the comfort of poor souls, and those that are lowest and least in the
Kingdom of God? Mr. Perkins says, The desire to believe in the In his grain of
mustard seed.
want of faith is faith: Though as yet there want firm and lively grace, yet
art thou not altogether void of grace, if thou can desire it, thy desire is
the seed, conception, or bud of what thou want. Now is the spring time of
the inguafted word or immortal seed, cast into the furrows of thy heart. Wait
but a while, using the means and thou shall see that leaves, blossoms, and
fruits will shortly follow. Austin says, Let thy desires be before God, and he
which sees in In Psalm. 36.
secret shall reward thee openly; Thy desire is thy prayer, and if thy desire
be continual, thy prayer is continual. In another place: The In Expos. Epist.
Joh. tract. 4.
whole life of a Christian is an holy will and desire. Luther says, The more
we feel our unworthiness, and the less we find the promises belong to us, the
more we must desire them, being assured this desire does greatly please God,
who desires and wills, that his grace should be earnestly desired. Beza
says, If thou find not thy heart touched inwardly, pray that it may be Resp.
ad act. Col. Monpil.
touched, for then may thou know that this desire is a pledge of the fathers
good will toward thee. Chemnitius says, When I have a good desire, though it
scarcely shows it self in some little and slender sigh, I must be assured the
spirit of God is present, and works his good work. Ur sin said, Faith in the
most holy is not perfect, Lo. Com.
nevertheless whosoever feels in his heart an earnest desire to believe, and a
striving against his doubts, both may, and must assure himself, that he is
endued with true faith. Holy Bradford to Mr. Jo. Careless, Thy sins are
undoubtedly pardoned, etc. for God has given thee a penitent and believing
heart, that is, an heart which desires to repent and believe, for such a one
is taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a penitent and
believing heart indeed. Famous Knox, Albeit sometimes thy pain be so horrible,
that you find no release or comfort neither in spirit nor body, yet if thy
heart can only sob unto God, despair not, you shall obtain your hearts desire.
Many more such like expressions we might produce, out of our later Writers, but
these may suff^ce.

2. For the other thing, to know when desires are good, I shall lay down four
Rules, to know it by.

Rule 1. Desires are then good when the Object of them is good. The Object of
good desires is manifold.

1. The first and principal Object of our Te nontua, non te propter tua sed te
propter te, tua post te, propter te.
best desires is God himself, not his but himself, Esa. 26. 9. With my soul
have I desired thee. To desire the things of God, every one does; his blessings
the worldling; his salvation the prophanest; his gifts, graces, favor, the
hypocrite, himself for himself, above all riches, grace, life; heaven it self
is only the desire of the truly Godly. Oh how like an Angel did he sing, that
said, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and what do I desire in earth in
comparison of thee. Few of us that sing that Psalm Psalm. 73. 25.
with our understanding, can say, I sing thus in my spirit and understanding
also.

2. Next to God blessed for ever, Jesus Christ the delight of God, is to be the
desire of our eyes; He is called the desire of the nations, Hag. 2. 7. The
Church can say, I am my beloveds, and my desire is toward him, as well as my
beloved is mine, and his desire is toward me, Cant. 7. 10.

3. Covenant relation to God through Christ, This next to God and Christ to be
desired. Thus dying David said; He has made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my salvation and all my desire,
2 Samuel 23. 5.

4. Spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1. and saving grace much more which flow from
the Covenant, Neh. 1. 11. for though all gifts Gratis data non gratum faciunt.
are of grace, freely given, yet they are no^ always given with grace to
sanctify.

5. The Ordinances are to be desired, Psalm. 26. 8. 84. 1, 2. The Word, Acts 13.
7. 1 Pet. 2. 2. The Sacrament, Luke 22. 15. Thus did Christ himself. What
manner of Christians then are they, that have no delight in the Word, and that
say of the Table of the Lord, it is contemptible? Jer. 6. 10. Mal. 1. 7.


6. Much more Communion with God in Ordinances, else they are but dry, empty
and unsavory meat, Ps. 27. 3, 4. 84. 1, 2, 3. What is the Sun-dyal good for,
if the sun shine not on it? And what are Ordinances worth, if Christ shine not
on them? They are the star to lead to Christ, but it is Christ, not the star,
which is to be worshipped.

7. Communion and spiritual converse with the people of God, next to Communion
with God, 1 These. 2. 17.

8. Emploiment in gods service is much to be desired, if our selves or any of
our children be capable of it, as Hannah for her son Samuel. So Deuteronomy. 18. 6. If
the Levite came from any of the Villages to the Sanctuary, with the whole
desire of his soul to officiate in a more comfortable and serviceable manner,
he was to be encouraged. So the Apostle says, If any desire the office, the
employment (not the honor, and dignity of a Bishop, or faithful Pastor) he
desires a good work. 1 Timothy 3. 1.

9. Success and fruit in our employment, for the good of others souls, Phil.
4. 17. The Minister should desire that his people may be the great gainers, and
he the great layer out and spender, spending and being spent, as the Apostle
says; that they may have much 2 Cor. 12. 15.
more of spirituals from him, then he has of carnals from them.

10. Eternal salvation at the last, in the full and immediate fruition of
Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Having a desire to be dissolved and to be with C^r^st
which is far better

11. The salvation of others, those especially committed to us, that we may
save our selves and them that hear us. That salvation by our means may come to
our house, to a 1 Timothy 4. 16.
Town, Nation, Country, Romans 10. 1. Col. 1. 9. We desire that you may be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. And
verse. 28. 29. We warn and teach every man that we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus, whereunto I also labor striving according to his working
which works in me mightily. If we make such prayers, have such desires, use
such endeavors, and strive so mightily for the salvation of others, we may
say, we have good desires.

Thus we see the first rule opened; Desires are good when the object is good,
when we desire God first, then Jesus Christ, then Covenant relation, then gifts
and graces, then ordinances, and communion with God in ordinances, then
communion with the people of God, Employment above all employments in Gods
service, to be near to him, success and fruit in such employments, after all,
our own salvation, and next to our own the salvation of ot^^^ men, then are our
desires good.

Rule 2. Good desires are then good, when they flow from a right root or
spring, And this is sixfold.

1. When they arise from sense of want. Appetitus est ratione ^a^ent ^^.
Thus Adams desire of clothes was not good, for he wanted them not when created
pure, but he desired them as he pretended to cover his nakedness, so are all
the desires after good things in wicked men, only to cover their nakedness
and save them from Gods wrath, not for the worth of the things themselves; The
godly man sees a pure want and need of God, of Christ, of the Covenant of
grace, and gifts and Ordinances, and communion with God and the Saints;
therefore desires them, as the natural man desires meat, drink, rest and
sleep, out of sense of the want of them.

2. When they arise from the apprehension Ratione bonitatis; omnia app^tunt
bonum.
of the good that is in the things desired, what so good as those forenamed
objects? In them consists the souls present good and happiness, and his summum
bonum to all Eternity.

3. When we see a suitable goodness in Ratione conv^nt^ntiae.
them to our nature and condition, as the ox desires grass, the infant milk,
so the godly man knows these are most suitable to the rational and
intellectual creatures, especially to the new creature.

4. When we expect satisfaction and felicity Ratione satisfactionis.
in them. Thus the desire granted is a tree of life, Prove. 13. 12. therefore
does the godly desire those forenamed, and faith, Lord what wait I for? truly
my expectation is from thee, of satisfaction, Psalm. 39. 7. and 62. 1. 63. 3.
and 73. 25. Ratione electionis.


5. When out of choice not necessity, thus the hungry person desires meat, not
gold; so the godly grace, not riches, as preferring them in his choice, because
best.

6. This desire is out of Election, and this Ratione dilectio^is.
election and desire is out of love. Oh how do I love the Lord! do I love
Christ! do I love thy Law! thy Word! thy graces! faith the believing soul,
therefore do I desire them.

By these six Notes all the good desires of wicked men are found bad. They see
no such want of God, and Christ, and Grace, they see no such excellency in
them, see no such suitableness between them and themselves, expect no such
satisfaction in them, much less do they out of choice and love desire them,
but out of necessity and constraint; God and grace, and heaven are little
beholding to them; But as the sick man takes physic, or the maimed man cuts
off an arm rather then die, or as the Merchant in the storm casts his goods
overboard, he had as lieve die almost, but it is because there is no other way,
no remedy but perish else.

^ule 3. Good desires are then good, when they have the right shape and stamp
of their due properties and effects.

1. The first property of good desires, is when they are sincere, all the other
properties which follow are nothing without this.

Sincerity is the native and primitive goodness of every good. Faith is not
Faith, if not sincere, not is love, repentance, or obedience good, if not
sincere. Therefore the Scripture calls good desires, the desires of the soul,
Esa. 26. 8, 9. The whole desire, 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. all the desire of his mind,
Deuteronomy. 18. 6. hearts desire, Romans 10. 1. To set out their sincerity.

2. Though sincerity be the first and best property, yet not the sole, but the
more of those that follow the better still, whereof the next is that good
desires be constant, and frequent; With my soul have I desired thee in the
night, with my spirit will I seek thee early. Esa. 26. 8, 9.
When they are day and night, early and late, ever and anon, then are they
good; So Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired, and I will yet seek after it,
etc. I have desired, I do, and will do it. This is right, not the wandering
desire, Eccl. 6. 9. but the fixed, renewed and constant desire, as of the young
child to the breast, 1 Pet. 2. 2. It is ever sucking, cries for the breast,
sleeps with it, wakes and calls for it; or as a healthful man desires his meat
daily, two or three times a day, and cannot live without it; not as a sick man,
or longing woman, who long for this or that, and once serves their turn, they
long no more; This is a diseased not healthful desire: Such were in Pharaoh
and Ahab, such hell is full of. Many desire good prayers, and read Scriptures
or good books, indistresse, never else, as the sick man desires a Cordial or
strong water, and never drinks more till another qualm takes him. They are sick
and then they cry or howl on their beds, they get up and return again to sin.
The Hos 7. 14.
Mariner in a storm puts into a Port, when the storm is over he means to go to
sea again. And the Traveller puts under the Pear Tree in a shower to keep him
dry, when the rain is over he is flinging at it. These are killing desires,
such you read of Prove. 21. 25. the sluggards and the unconstant man's are so.
But when we say of good, as the Lord of Sion, I have chosen ^ion for an
habitation, I have longed for it, here will I dwell because I have desired it,
Psalm. 132. 13, 14. These are good desires.

3. When ardent and vehement, 2 Chronicles. The word (...) and (...) often used in
Scrip. signify a most vehement desire and long^ng in the mind, as Phil. 1. 8.
23. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 2. 7. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
15. 15. called the whole desire, Genesis 31. 30. Luke 22. 15. Desiring with
desire. The mind is altogether desires, the desires are altogether vehement. So
2 Cor. 7. 11.

4. When they are large, increasing, and unsatisfied. Three things are never
satisfied, the eye the ear, the desire; The covetous eye with seeing, the
curious or itching ear with hearing, and the gracious heart with desiring. But
as the wicked man's desires are enlarged as hell, Hab. 2. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3. So the
godly man's are as large as heaven; That all heaven must be ours, ere the desire
is satisfied. That the soul is said to ly panting, hungting, thirsting,
longing, coveting, craving. Psalm. 42. 1. 63. 1. 2. 73. 25. 1 Cor. 14. 1.

5. Laborious desires are good desires, Prove. 18. 1. Through desire a man
having separated himself, seeks and intermeddles in all wisdom, heart and hand
go together, as a scholar desirous of learning, shuts up himself in his study,
lets none come at him, is still at his book early and late; or the worldling
rises, runs, goes, sweats, toils to get riches, or the wicked man with cords
and cart-ropes, Esa. 5. 18. draws sin with both hands, Micha 7. 3. So does
the godly seek grace as silver and lifts up his voice for wisdom, as for the
greatest treasure. Working desires not wishing are saving desires. But alas
what violence do the Kingdoms, yea cottages of the earth suffer, and what
contempt heaven? Men will give twenty years purchase for earth, not seven for
heaven, yea many take more pains and are at a greater expense for hell, then
many a well-meaning man for heaven.

6. When invincible and irresistible.

1. As not to be quenched or quelled with difficulties, but as Shechem desired
Dinah, Genesis 34. 11.
let me have her, said he, what ever it cost, what ever I suffer, I love her,
must have her, will not go, without her, so Cant. 8. 7. Divine love is not to
be quenched with any waters of difficulty or discouragement.

2. Nor to be taken off by any diversion, as Hadad when he wanted no honor or
preferment in the Egyptian Court, yet said, Howbeit in any wise let me go home,
1 King. 11. 22. The man is where his desires are, and if the desires hang
homeward, a Kingdom cannot stay him; and if they hang heavenward, all the world
will not content him. But he says with the Apostle in another case, We being
staid for a short time in presence, 1. These. 2. 17.
not in heart, endeavored the more abundantly with great desire to come unto
you; Speaking of his love to the Godly believers. But much more out of his love
to Christ he says, 2 Cor. 5. 2, 3, etc. In this we groan earnestly, desiring
to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, if so be that being
clothed, we shall not be found naked. Yea knowing while we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, we groan and are burdened, willing rather to
be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, So Ruth 1. 16. 17.

7. Whenas they are not to be overcome themselves, but overcome, conquer and
triumph over all, especially captivate, and command the heart and subdue it,
every man's desire is his master, brings him under a voluntary, but pleasing
subjection, as Genesis 3. 16. The poor woman who loves her husband The like, Genesis
4. 7.
dea^ly, her desires are toward him, she is subject to him, and he rules over
her. Poor soul, she still has her husband at one end of her thoughts; if
abroad, her heart is with him; if at home, her eye is on him; if he be well he
is the, desire and delight of her eyes; if not well, he is the care and desire
of her heart; Every thing she does, she has this thought comes in, Will this
please my husband, etc. so is it with the soul.

8. True desires will be liberal and expensive to gain what is desired; wicked
men will be at charge to fulfill the desires of the flesh; Scholars who desire
learning, will spare no cost in books, and pains to fulfill those more noble
desires of the mind. Ephesians 2. 3.
And vain men, what cost will they be at (as he in the days of his vanity)
Eccle. 2. 10. Whatsoever their eyes desire they keep it not from them, what
ever it cost. So is it with the best, their desires being rightly set, they lay
out all they are able about them, as David and Solomon in building that house
for God which both of them were so ambitious to set forward, 1 King. 9. 1. 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. David expended as hundred thousand talents of Gold, a thousand
thousand talents of silver, both sums put together as they are computed
amount to seven hundred and fifty millions. This was at first laid by in the
time of his wars and straits, when he came bare to the Crown. And afterward it
seems he added Three Se the late Annotations of the English divines on the
place.
thousand talents of Gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined
silver, 1 Chronicles. 29. 4. (that is thirteen millions eight hundred thousand,
seventy five thousand pounds sterling more) because as he said he set his
affection on the house of his God, v. 3. And shall we say we have good desires
when we offer that to God which costs us nothing? How many are there who desire
(...) 1 Cor. 9. 18.
nothing more then to have a cheap and unchargable Gospel in these days, but
not in the Apostles sense, he would have it unchargeable to others, these to
themselves, But this we find they who first desire a cheap Gospel, do next
desire no Gospel at all.

9. When we take a right and proper course to attain our desires they are
right. Solomon as he spares no cost, so he uses all 1 King. 5. 5, 6.
means, sends far and near to get workmen and materials, the best could be
had for money for the Temple. The Queen of Sh^ba desired resolution of her hard
questions; She came from the uttermost parts of the earth to get Solomon's
answer to them. Saul desired 1 King. 10. 13. 1 Samuel 23. 20.
to have David in his power, he raises the country, mustereth his forces,
hunts him out in the wilderness, as if he should say, I Will have him dead, or
alive; if he be above ground, I Will have him. So says the desiring soul, I Will not
give over seeking, praying, waiting; Grace and pardon of sin I must have, if it
be above ground in ordinances, I Will after it, yea if it be above in heaven I Will
thither to God for it. And for sin, I Will have the life of it, if it were
present, I would throw my javelin at it, if it hides itself, I Will seek after it;
if it be decaying, I Will hasten to make an end of it, as they dealt with Absalom,
when he was laboring for life 2 Samuel 18. 14, 15. 17.
in the tree, Joab thrusts three darts into his heart, then ten more come to
make him sure if he had any more lives then one, then they lay an heap of
stones upon him; one death is not enough for such an enemy. So it will be here,
but they kill him, and kill him again, to rid the world of such an Arch Rebel,
such indignation against and full revenge will be pursued against the Arch
Rebel in the soul, the prevailing lust: Or as Jehu whom God raised up to cut
off the house of Ahab, he marches furiously, and when he lights on Joram the
first born, he draws his bow with his whole might, and smites Joram between
the arms, that the arrow went out at his heart; and he sunk down in his
chariot, then throws him out to the dogs, 2 King. 9. 24, 25. The like or worse
to Jezebell the cursed mother of that wicked race, he bids throw her out of the
window and break her neck, not content with that fall he treads her under foot,
and then leaves her to the dogs too, to make an end of her; To execute the
Judgment that was written; Such honor (such Indignation) have all the Saints,
Psalm. 149. 9. So say the Godly, sin has brought one death upon me, and would
bring a second and an eternal death, I would therefore bring a first, second
and eternal death upon it.

10. Lastly, Good desires are impatiently patient, or patiently impatient till
they be fulfilled, patient of pains, impatient only of delays or
disappointment, Pro. 13. 12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the
desire comes, it is a tree of life. Shechem Genesis 34. 19.
because his soul clave unto Dinah, delaid not to be circumcised. And Jacob
when he Genesis 31. 22. 30.
longed to at his fathers house, set out by night, and was three days journey
on his way ere he was missed. A man whose heart hangs heavenward and to his
fathers house, will not stay till he be forced out by sickness and death, but
up he gets, and on he goes with all the speed he can. Wicked Shimei may be a
good example to wicked men, who was the first to fling stones at David, and
curse him, when he thought David could never call him to an account, but when
he saw David returning, he hasted with the first to meet David to beg his
life, and desired it because he came in of himself, the first of all the
rebels, and obtained it, 2 Samuel 19. 16. 19, 20.

4. Rule, desires are then good when attended with good companions: As.

1. Prayer and desires go together, To. 10. 1. Psalm. 21. 2. Dead desires may
gasp out some faint wishes, good desires breath out strong prayers.

2. Desires and waiting, Es. 26. 8.

3. Desires and seeking early and earnestly ever go together, Esaias. 26. 9.
Where are no endeavors, there are no desires, unless killing, as Solomon calls
them, Pro. 21. 25. The desire of the slothful kills him, for his hands
refuse to labor, Pro. 13. 4. The soul of the sluggard desires and has
nothing, because he joyneth no warm endeavors with his cold desires. He loves
roast, but he Eccle. 4. 5
love^h nor to turn the spit, Pro. 12. 27. The slothful roasteth not what he
took in hunting. He desires a good harvest and a year of plenty with many a
good wish, but he cannot away with this plowing and sowing, with this heat and
cold, with this toiling, and sweating; Therefore his desires make him a beggar
it is said. Pro. 20. 4. But as the Poet says,

Qui Cupit optatam vitae contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit and al sit.
Who so desires a blessed life to gain.
Endures cold, heat, toil, sweat, thirst, hunger, pain.
But wishers and woulders we say never prove good householders, and certainly
shall never prove heavenholders. Heaven is propounded in Scripture as the
reward only to the hard labourer, Jo. 6. 27. To the diligent seeker, To. 2. 7.
To the earnest striver, Lu. 13. 24. To the unwearied runner, 1 Cor. 9. 24. To
the valiant fighter, 1 Timothy 6. 12. To the prevailing conqueror, Rev. 2. 7. To
him that overcomes; But Lazy desires have no place there. But they are one of
the chief Arches upon which Hellbridge is founded, or of the pillars by which
Satan's kingdom is supported, which are reckoned five.

1. The good purposes of bad men, tha^ they will amend, etc.

2. The good desires of Lazy men.

3. The prayers and promises of sick men.

4. The tears and repentance of dying men.

5. The strong faith and good hopes of Ignorant, and profane men. Satan says
to all these, well done good and faithful servant. Purpose so still desire so
still, pray and promise so still, repent so still, and believe so still.

4. Good desires are accompanied usually with mourning after what is desired,
and fervency of mind, therefore mourning and earnest desire joined.

5. With many other good companions mentioned, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Carefullnesse, 2
Cor. 7. 7
selfclearing, holy indignation, fear, zeal, revenge.

6. With earnest groanings of soul, Psalm. 38. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 2. and breaking of
heart almost till we have attained, Psalm. 119. 20.

7. Lastly, with greatest joy, when the desire is granted, Pro. 13. 12. yea
delight and contentment in looking after what is desired Cant. 7. 10. 1 Pet. 1.
12.

If thy desires have these companions, they are good desires, but if they be
solitary desires, and appear alone (as Castor, or Pollux single, were
acccounted ominous, if together, prosperous) they are killing and sluggish
desires.

CHAP. XXXV. Containing directions what means to use to prevent evil thoughts,
and to purge them out.
AND that thy heart may be rid of these evil guests of sinful thoughts, and
kept from them; observe these directions, and conscientiously use these means
here prescribed.

1. Above all getting to get thee a right and new heart; thy heart is not
right, said Peter to Magus here, therefore thy thoughts so cursed. Pray with
David, Create in me O Psalm. 51. 10
Lord a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me; The heart is the spring
and treasure, such as the heart, such the thought must needs be. Get the spring
healed, or the waters must needs be unsavory, 2 King. 2. 22. Get the heart
well washed, or unclean thoughts will not out, Jer. 4. 14. If the Lungs be
putrid, and rotten, the breath will smell; powders and perfumes on thy apparel
sweeten not thy breath: If the garment be spotted, it is not a new lace or
trimming, but washing or brushing that cleanses it; if the hand be foul, it is
not a fair glove or Gold ring, but washing that mends it; So it is nothing
will cure the evil thought, without washing, purging and mending the heart.

2. Above all keeping keep thyheart, Pro. 4. 23. This is the first and great
commandment, yea the first and second too, on which hang all the law and the
Prophets (the old and new Testament) keep thy heart and thou do love the Lord
with all thy heart; and keep thy heart, and thou do love thy neighbor as thy
self; this is Custos utriusque tabule, keep it and thou do keep all the ten
Commandments. Therefore is it charged upon all in such peremptory and
undispensable terms.

1. Keep, there is thy duty.

2. Keep with keeping, there must be thy care, not a single but double care, a
double diligence must be used here.

3. Keep with (All) keeping, not a single, or double care sufficient, but all
care little enough.

4. Keep the heart (above) all keeping, says the text, q. d. Here must be the
chief care above all other things. The mouth must be kept too, v. 24. The eye
must be kept, v. 25. The feet kept, v. 26. All the ways of God to be kept, v.
27. That thou turn not to the right hand, or the left; But here is an Attamen
imprimis, above all keep thy heart, not above all keeping thy mouth, thy eye,
thy foot, or path, but above all keeping, keep thy heart.

5. It is made every man's particular and personal duty, keep thy heart thy
self, another may be thy Parke-keeper; Thy cash-keeper, thy ^^rse-keeper, or
thy housekeeper, but thou must be thy own heart keeper, yea if you be Lords or
Ladies, you must be a Lord keeper, and Lady keeper. The greatest office in the
State, is to be Lord keeper of the great seal, or Treasurer; in the Church, is
to be keeper of the Seal or Treasure of the heart.

2. He backeth this charge with two reasons.

1. Out of the heart well kept are the Issues or revenues of life; keep this,
and thou keep the tree of life, life and death are in the power of the heart
(as he says of the tongue in another place) and he th^^ Pro. 18. 21
keeps this, keeps his life. Pro. 13. 3.

2. The second reason is, keep thy heart and thou keep all, as I said, thy
mouth thy eye, thy foot, (thy path, v. 24, 25, 26, 27. As great men, have a
Porter stand at the great gate, and all men have stronger outward doors, locks,
bats and bolts, there to keep the entrance safe, then are the inner rooms all
secured, so keep thy heart well and the whole house (the whole man) is safe.
The heart must have a watch, or sentinel continually set before it, and is
never to be trusted without a keeper. Therefore is this set as the porch, or
porter, before all these other duties following.

And here I might speak a little more particularly of this heart keeping work,
but I shall hasten to an end, I might tell you what it is to keep the heart,
and how it must be kept. To keep the heart, implies two things. 1. To observe.
2. To preserve it.


1. If it be an evil heart, it would be observed, not kept, it is better to
change then keep an evil heart, no breed so bad to keep as the evil heart, The
heart of the wicked is little worth. Out of it are the Issues Pro. 10. 20.
of death, yet observed it would be what the temper of it is, what the haunt,
what the diseases of it are, and kept the evil heart had need be.

1. Kept close prisioner, give it not too much liberty, keep it from evil
companions, from sinful objects.

2. Do with an untoward heart as we do with a stubborn child, put him to a
Master that will keep him in awe; we put our horse to break to a skillfull
rider, choose to put thy heart into the hands of a Minister, skillful in that
excellent art of heartbreaking and heart-taming.

3. Keep an evil heart with hard fare, with the bread of affliction, and water
of affliction, let it have nothing set before it, but the terrors of the Lord,
the wrath of God, the sentence of the Law, the day of judgment, the torments
of hell; A bad heart cannot be kept too hard, as a good heart too well.

4. Trust not a bad heart at any time without a keeper, a double keeper; Thy
own resolution is not able to keep it, desire God to assist thy resolution,
that it may neither be enticed nor baffled by his prisoner.

5. But as soon as thou can rid thy hands of this evil heart, or get it
changed; men care not for keeping a dead commodity by them, in which there is
loss; The bad heart is the worst dead commodity we can keep by us, part with
it.

2. But the good heart is to be preserved, and kept in good plight, well looked
to, and duly ordered, nothing needs it more, nothing deserves it more, no
garden needs so much looking to, that it may be well kept, nothing will so
recompense thee. We say Keep thy shop and it will keep thee; but keep thy heart
well and it will surely keep thee.

1. Keep it in tenderness, be more choice of this then of the apple of thine
eye. You may keep your child too tenderly, cannot keep your heart too renderly.

The tender hearted person howsoever he lives, wheresoever he dies, ever dies
in peace, as was promised to Jostah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.

Four Notes of a tender heart.

1. It flies the first motions unto sin, How can I do this wickedness, said
Joseph, and sin against God? q. d. shall I take fire into my bosom, poison in
my mouth? This were worse.

2. It often reflects on self, and the heart smites for the least sins, when
matters are small or doubtful, 1 Samuel 24. 5. much more for foul and manifest
sins. 2 Samuel 24. 10. Thus it was with David in both those places.

3. It fears to partake of other men's sins, Number. 16. 4.

4. Flies appearances and shows of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. Number. 32. 6. Et sequ.
Josh. 22. 16.

2. The heart must be keep, in humility. Wines are kept best in lowest Cellars,
the heart in lowest temper. An horse may be kept too low, but all the danger of
the heart is keeping it too high, Esa. 57. 15. The lowest heart is the fittest
habitation for the most High God. God is called Deus optimus maximus, but Jesus
Christ in respect of his humility was Optimus minimus.

Three things should keep our hearts humble.

1. Gods Excellency, Esa. 6. 2, 3, 5. Job 42. 6.

2. His many and undeserved mercies, Genesis 32. 10. 2 Samuel 7. 18. Nothing does so
kindly humble a gracious heart, as Mercies, nothing so unkindly puffs up an
ungracious heart.

3. Thy own great sins. Thus it was with Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Never was there a viler sinner then I, never more grace showed from God.

3. The heart must be kept up also in due height, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. Jehoshaphats
heart was lifted up in the ways of God.

Three things help to lift up the heart, and show it well lifted up.

1. When we strive to walk worthy of God, Call. 1. 10.

2. To walk worthy of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27.

3. To walk worthy of heaven, and the expectation of it, 1 These. 2. 12.

4. The heart must be kept clean and pure, Psalm. 24. 4. and 73. 1. Mat. 5. 8.
We may be too choice of our clothes and houses, to keep them clean, but cannot
be of the heart.

Three things help to keep the heart clean.

1. Often washing; some say, Caput nunquam, pedes raro, manus saepe, but, Cor
saepius, saepissinie, Jer. 4. 14. Wash thy heart that vain thoughts lodge not;
Say to them, as we say to nasty and slovenly beggars, here is no lodging for
you.

2. Often searching, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

3. Frequent and fervent prayer, Jam. 4. 7, 8. Cleanse your hearts, and draw
nigh to God joined: Prayer is as Thunder and Wind, they purge the air, this
the heart.

5. The heart is to be kept in Faith, Heb. 10. 22. Habak. 2. 4.

Three things help to keep the heart in Faith.

1. To eye Gods promise, this Faiths food, and the life of the life of Faith.

2. To eye and remember Gods past providence and our Experiences, 2 Cor. 1.
10. He has delivered and does and will deliver.

3. To study Gods alsufficiency, Romans 4. 21. What he promises he is able to
perform.

6. The heart is also to be kept in due fear. The Child is well kept, when kept
in awe; so is the heart. This is the great heart-keeper, and Covenant keeping
grace, Jer. 32. 40.

Three things help to keep the heart in holy fear.

1. A due sense of Gods dreadful Name and Majesty, Deuteronomy. 28. 48.

2. A due sense of Gods goodness, Hosea 3. 5.

3. A continual sense of our own weakness, Prove. 28. 14. The child that fears
a fall, escapes a fall. Vis in timore esse securus, in securitate time as,
Bern. Fear in time of security, makes secure in time of fear.

7. In readiness and willingness, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Exodus 35. 2. Gods people
are a ready and willing people. And as it is a commendation to a man or woman,
to be handy and ready, to be able to take our work and leave it, so it is here.

Three things help to make us more ready and willing.

1. Frequency and familiarity with duties. Use makes perfectness. By praying
thou will learn to pray. An instrument daily used is soon fit to play upon,
long disused asks much time to tune it. How unfit must they needs be for
prayer, that pray not from sabbath to sabbath?

2. To consider that God accepts a willing mind for the best deed, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

3. All other service is unacceptable to God, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9, 10. Unprofitable
for us, 1 Cor. 9. 17.

8. In steadiness, Psalm. 108. 1. Act. 11. 23. Cleave to God with full purpose
of heart.

Three times when we should look to keep the heart steady.

1. In state of fulness, The full vessel evenly carried tries the steady hand
and head, Phil. 4. 12. I can abound and not be proud, be lifted up, yet not be
lifted up. A hard lesson.

2. In time of straits, Psalm. 112. 8. His heart is established, and does not
shrink and warp, as unseasoned timber. Job said, I will not curse; God is where
he was, I am where I was, my faith where it was, and my integrity I will not
let go. This another hard lesson.

3. In earthly business, to have the heart steady, eying God; I am in my
calling God sees me. This a high lesson. The wicked his heart is steady and
fixed on the world; when at prayer, he cant get the world out of his mind: the
godly have heavenly minds in earthly businesses.

3. Would thou be free from evil thoughts, then get thy mind filled, he which
has his chests, his shop and his house filled, but his mind empty, is a poor
man. We must not do with our hearts as with our houses, have the lower rooms
furnished, and have nothing in the upper garrets but trash; but have our upper
rooms especially furnished. Satan comes into the house that is empty, swept,
and garnished; But Jesus Christ chooses to keep his feast in an upper room that
is furnished, Luke 22. 12. Take some good meditation, promise, Scripture, read
next thy heart, to keep out wind, every morning. An empty addle heart is a fit
bayt for Satan.

4. Get a heart fixed, as well as filled, that thy spirit sit not loose about
thee. Keep thy loins girt, this bow continually bent, arcum intentio frangit
animum remissio, It is too much looseness or unbending that breaks the mind, as
too much bending breaks the bow. We love not a garment too big, or shoes to
slop about our feet. We get our arms fixed, get thy mind so, and be ever and
anon saying, sursum corda. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may
depart from hell beneath, Prove. 15. 24. How safe was David when he could say, O
God my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed? Psalm 108. 1. And the stable Psalm. 51.
12.
spirit is that he prays for, as well as the right or new spirit. The devil
makes as good sport with an unfixt spirit, as children do with light airy
toys, the squibs, bubbles, and empty hoops, which they drive before them, or
the paper Kite, driven with the wind, which, though never so high mounted, they
can pull to them when they will, these are taken captive by Satan at his will,
as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

5. See the Lords eye still upon thee, and set him at thy right hand, 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. Psalm. 139. 2. The eye of the Master, awes and reaches the Scholar, and
the presence of the Commander keeps the soldier from routing and disorder.

6. Plant the word of God as battering Engines, against any evil thought
approaching, and take this enemy off before he come too near, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
Heb. 4. 12. Especially such Scriptures as do level directly against thy
thoughts. If thy thoughts be vain, discharge these Scriptures as Gods Ordinance
against them, Jer. 4. 14. Romans 1. 21. Ephesians. 4. 17. If wanton, Mat. 5. 28. If
passionate, Mat. 5. 22. If malicious, apply that 1 John 3. 15. If covetous,
apply Col. 3. 5. If carnal, apply Romans 8. 5. Keep this two edged sword, ever
turning at the door of thy heart, that thou may secure the tree of life.

7. Attend diligently thy honest calling: Employment gives not a portion only,
but protection; and is as necessary for the soul, as for the bodies health and
subsistence; Give not ear to every idle diverting thought, stir not, but follow
thy business. Say with Nehemiah, I am about a better work, I am Neh. 6. 3.
not at leisure to parley with every one that envies my peace and would
interrupt my proceedings. Nothing keeps the knife or plow share so bright, as
continual usage, nothing causes rust but want of use. It is so with the mind;
The hour of Idleness is the hour of Temptation. Satan tempts the Busy man,
the Idle man tempts Satan. Get an honest calling first, then walk painfully in
it.

8. Look well to thy outward senses, those Cinque Ports, as one calls them; When
the Suburbs are fired the City will soon be taken; if the Enemy be possessed of
the Outworks, he will ere long make a breach into the Castle: Sometimes the
eye has affected the heart, but more often infected it. Eve and David Lam. 3.
51.
were betrayed by their sight, and upright Noah by his taste and palate.

It is not enough that we may sleep securely, that there be no thief within the
house of our Domestics, but we must look to the doors and windows that they
be made fast.

9. Make a Privy search, ever and anon, and keep a privy sessions often in thy
own Jurisdiction, and set up a Court Martial, that execution may be done upon
mutinous, rebellious, and all disorderly thoughts; and having in readiness,
ever to revenge all disobedience. It is a shame that we should cast up 2 Cor.
10. 6.
our shop at least once the year and besides a many washings of linen, and
scouring of vessels, we should have some Solemn^ scourings and some great and
general washing and whitening of all once, or oftener in the year, and it may
be thy heart has not had one day of examination, and enquiry into it all thy
life.

10. Call in God to help thee in thy search, Two eyes see more then one, as
holy David often when he was most buisie to look into himself, yet being full
of holy jealousy least he should overlook, prays, Lord examine me and prove
me, try my reins and my heart, for thy loving kindness is before mine eyes,
and I have walked in thy truth, Psalm. 26. 2, 3. and Psalm. 139. throughout. When
he had been searching and scanning himself, he calls in God to help him in his
heart, Search me O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting, v. 23,
24. Oh it is a happy boldness that an upright heart (men's sibi consciarecti)
has before God, if our heart condemn us not (upon a through search) then have
we boldness before God, 1 Jo. 3. 21. and can lay all before him as
confidently, as honest Jacob leads Laban into his tents, and Judah and his
brethren opened their sacks, and say search all my stuff, and see what thou
can find, Genesis 31. 32. How happy is he that can say with Peter, Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, Jo. 21. 17.

10. Holy, humble, and servent prayer is another excellent means to make and
keep the heart clean from evil thoughts, and at some times the only way to rid
the heart of these messengers of Satan sent to buffet us. As the North wind
drives away the rain, and as Thunder purgerh the air, so does fervent and
frequent prayer purge the heart, and drive away those soaking showers of evil
thoughts; and without prayer, it is as impossible to keep the heart clean, as
it is to keep the house clean without washing, or sweeping: Pray with Solomon,
1 King. 8. 59. considering the untowardnesse of our hearts; The Lord incline
our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments,
and his statutes, and his judgments: And when thy heart is in a good and holy
frame, pray with David, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts, of the heart of
thy people, and prepare, or stablish their heart unto thee.

11. Holy and serious purposes of heart are an excellent underkeeper of the
heart, under God and after prayer. Thus did Daniel keep himself from being
defiled, Daniel purposed in his heart, Dan. 1. 8. And thus did Barnabas exhort
the primitive Christians, That with purpose of heart they would cleave to the
Lord, Act. 11. 23. But they must be Serious purposes and resolutions, de
praesenti, not de futuro, joined with present performance, not put off by
future promises, as Pharaoh, Felix, and that disciple did, who said Lord I will
follow thee, but I must Lu. 9. 59.
first see my father buried.

12. Get and learn that excellent, and heavenly art to extract some profitable,
moral, or divine meditation out of every object and occurrent. Solomon by this
exercise raised himfelf to that high pitch of wisdom; he could not see the
Ant, Spider, and Conies, he could not look upon the drunkards eyes, the beggars
rags, and the sluggards hedge, but he took out divine observations thence to
add to his own wisdom, and to inform his reader; so above all that greater
then Solomon teaches us this heavenly art, who upon mention of Leaven,
mustard seed, fishers nets, seed sown and every thing, raised up his own and
his hearers minds to heavenly contemplations.

13. Art thou troubled with evil thoughts, be not then too much alone, if thy
thoughts are sad, and black hellish thoughts. It was Genesis 2. 18.
not good for man to be alone in his integrity, much less now; it is good yea
necessary to be sometimes alone, sometimes in a closet Mat. 14. 23. Mar. 1. 35.
Lu. 6. 12.
or solitary place by thy self, as thy Savior often was; but it is dangerous
for some to be too much alone, such as are of a Melancholy disposition, Satan
will take advantage upon thy Solitude, as he did upon Eve. He set not upon
Christ any where so furiously, nor continued the temptation so long as when he
was in the desert. He that walks over the dry and lightsome places, and
finds no rest, comes into the wet, dark and solitary places, and there
finds it; Those Austere Eremites of old, who forsook the world to dwell in
caves and deserts, could not fly from Satan, and from a sinful nature, though
they fed on the bread of affliction, and water of affliction; sin and Satan are
not cast out with such Engines. We may go out of the world, while we are in it,
we cannot run from the flesh, or Satan so. Some old Eremites shut themselves up
from the sight and speech of man and woman. Asepesima sixty years, Didimu^
ninety years, and was never seen of any; John Sornany an Egyptian Eremite stood
three years in a cliffe of a rock, till his legs and feet swelled, broke and
run with putrified matter; But sin follows us into caves and solitude. Lot was
more safe in Zoar, yea Sodom then in his cave; whom the vicious Sodomites could
no^ corrupt those that came out of his own bowels, watching their opportunity,
overcame and defiled: Certainly it is safer living in a Sodom where God is not
known, yea abiding in a corrupt Church as Pergamus was, where Satan's Seat is,
and where Satan dwells, Re. 2. 13. Then to shut up our selves too much in
corners, where Satan's circle is, and Gods protection is not, because our
callings and conditions lead not to it.

CHAP. XXXVI. The last use of admonition to Simon and his followers.
BEfore we make an end, we must have a word with our young Simons, the
Scholars and followers of this old Sorcerer, Neque enim ulli sunt ex h^^mano
genere magis degeneres, vel minus homines, quam qui paciscuntur cum insernis
spiritibus, a^t ill^s quovis modo consulu^t. Dr. Arrowsmith. Tact. Sac. 1. ^ c.
3.
who gave us the occasion of all this discourse; Among men these are worst,
among Christians none at all. They have neither part nor lot in this matter.
These, if any, would be rebuked sharply, as he was then by Peter, men in the
gall of bitterness, and bonds of all iniquity. The Astrologer, Southsayer, and
fortune teller is his brother, whose first aim is to be (...) some great one,
whose last end is to be (...) a foul black one. Some sins are scarlet and
bloody sins, yet may be cleansed, these are like the Ethiopians skin, not to be
changed; yet I do not say it is impossible these should be saved, for Manasseh
repented of this sin, and found mercy. 2 Chr. 33.
But I say with Peter, Repent of this wickedness, and know thy sin is great;
The greatest sin in Scripture, Rebellion, is said to 1 Samuel 15. 23.
be, as the sin of witchcraft, therefore what is witchcraft it self? The
professors of this black art, since oracles ceased, are the only oracles the
devil now has left, by them he is enquired of, by them he gives his answers.
These are the dragons mouth, out of which he casts floods of impiety and
reproach against the Ministers of Christ; and these his tail by which he would
sweep the stars out of heaven. Rev. 12. 4.


If Saul perished for going unto such, 1 Chr. 10. 13.
what shall become of such who are so themselves? but the truth is both these
blind ones fall into the ditch. And as the Psalmist says of Idols, Idol
makers, and Idol worshippers they are all alike, They that make them Psalm.
135. 18.
are like unto them, so are all that trust in them; So I may say of Satan, the
sorcerer and them who resort to them. The sorcerer who erects the figure is
like to Satan from whom he learnes his art, he speaks in this image, and he
that trusts in him is as bad as himself.

I shall desire him if he have yet any sense left, to think of Peter's words to
Simon Magus, and add to them the words of Paul Act. 13. 10.
to Elimas Magus, And so leave him. It is said, Paul full of the Holy Ghost set
his eyes upon him and said, Oh full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child
of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert
the right ways of the Lord? Here are seven vialls full of the wrath of God
poured upon the head of such.

1. Thou full of all subtilty] The devil ever makes choice of serpents, subtle
(not simple) one^ to deceive others by. They are subtle, crafty, slippery, and
cunning serpents, that makes simple ones admire them.

2. And full of mischief] These have as much of the one, as the other, serpents
in both these properties, subtilty and mischief.

3. Thou child of the devil] Others are the servants, or captives of the devil,
these his legitimate children, begotten by him, bearing his image, professing
his black art and upholding his kingdom of darkness among the children of
disobedience.

4. Thou enemy of all righteousnesse] worst of men, others want righteousness,
these have it, oppose it, calumniate it; who speak or write so maliciously
against Godly and learned Ministers as these do? where is there such lying,
cheating, bewitching, ensnaring, destroying, as among these sons of Apollyon?

5. These pervert the right way of the Lord] Others ignorantly mistake it, and
wander from it; These ^^udiously pervert it, and mislead others out of it.

6. Will thou not cease to pervert, etc.] These when they begin, seldom make
an end, but persist in their pernicious ways, as being given up to a reprobate
mind.

7. And the last vial puts out his eyes, and smites him with spiritual
Excaecation. The hand of God is commonly observed to fall heavy on them in this
world either bringing them to shameful deaths, as to their bodies, or sealing
them under spiritual and judicial hardness of heart, and blindness of mind.

Discite justitiam, aut judicium tremite. Betimes amend.
Or hell's your end.


CHAP. XXXVII. Containing a Soliloquy, or the souls sad meditation upon the
Trouble of Evil thoughts.
SAve me O God for the waters come into my Psalm. 69. 1, 2. Psalm. 93. 3.
soul, I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing? I am come into deep
waters where the floods overflow me. The floods have lift up O Lord, the floods
of Beliall lift up their voice, they lift up their waves.

And this busy heart of mine is like the raging sea that cannot rest, and Esa.
57. 20.
these restless thoughts of mine are like the raging waves, foming out their
own Jud. v. 13.
shame.

My fight is not so dangerous with flesh and blood abroad, as with
principalities, and powers above, nor yet with them neither so dreadful, as
with the spiritual wickedness in secret places within. The 2 Samuel 10. 9.
battle is round about, behind and before that I am sorebeset: I fear and faint
and see no place of safety; I cry but can not fly; I think to fly, but fall
into the mouth of danger; I run from the roaring Lion and Am. 5. 19.
a Bear assaults me; I have from him to find shelter in the house, and the
serpent in the wall stings me; I esc^pe the open pit and am taken in the hidden
snare; Abroad the Esa. 24. 18. Lam. 1. 20.
sword devoureth, within there is as death; I run with Lot from the Sodom of a
profane world, and think to find safety in the Genesis 19. 30, 31.
Zoar of holy ordinances, but there am I in fear; I go to the cave of solitude,
and there they that come out of my loins deflower me; I row and work, but the
sea outworks me; I sleep and am not secure, a storm awakes me, I perceive a
Jonah is Jonah. 1. 13.
within.

I cry unto thee, my throat is dried, Psalm. 69. 3. Psalm. 1. 43. 6. Psalm. 119.
82. Psalm. 144. 7. 11.
I stretch out my hands to thee as the parched thirsty land. Mine eyes fail in
waiting for thy salvation, saying, when will thou rid me and deliver me from
the hands of strange children, whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood? I
cry out with thy Church of old, our persecutors are swifter then the eagles
Lam. 4. 19.
of heaven, they pursue us upon the mountains, and lay wait for us in the
wilderness. Oh that Jer. 9. 1.
my head were waters, and that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the bruise of the daughter of Sion (my soul) whose
whole head is sick and heart faint, from the crown of the head to the so^e of
the foot, there is no soundness, but wounds and blaines and Esa. 1. 6.
putrefying sores. Oh that I had a cottage in the wilderness, that I might
leave my Jer. 9. 2.
habitation and go from an assembly of Treacherous ones. Or that I had wings
like Psalm. 55. 6.
a dove, that I might fly away and be at rest; Oh that thou would put out
thy hand and take me into thy Ark, that I might be delivered from these windy
storms and tempests.

In the multitude of my many other sins, my Thoughts, perplex my soul.

Ashamed I am O Lord to speak, and blush to think what an heart I have, an
heart so dark, so dead, so vain and vile, so foul and filthy: A noisome
dunghill, a stinking sepulcher, a loathsome dungeon, an infected Pesthouse, a
cage of filthy birds, a sty of swine, a den of thieves. Like that great tree,
this heart of mine is, wherein are branches enough for all fouls of the air to
build their nests, and under whose shade is shelter for all the beasts of the
earth. A very Tophet I may call it, because a burying place it is of whatever
good is; an Horma because a place Jer. 7. 32. Number. 21. 3. Number. 11. 34. Genesis 14.
10. Hos. 4. 15.
of execution to holy motions and desire; a Kibroth-hattaavah, because the
grave of lusts; the vale of Siddim, because so full of slimepits, yea a
Beth-Aven, because a house full of iniquity is in it.

Ah Lord what thoughts are there! what sinful thoughts! my good desires few,
faint, fading; I think and think not; I muse and mind not; I like, but seek
not; allow, but pursue not; I know but love not; I say but do not; I wish but
will not; A will, or almost half a will I have, a power, and care, and complete
will I want.

But of sinful thoughts, how great the number! how foul the nature, how
restless their motion, rudely rushing in unsent for, proudly commanding
entertainment, though not bid welcome, refusing to quit their lodgings, if not
by strong hand excluded, though desired to be gone.

The good thought how rarely is it seen in this Climat, as rare almost as an
Angel in Sodom, whither once there came a couple, and when pressed, and
entreated to come in, had almost choose rather to lie in the streets then come
under this roof, but when once entered, how do the sons of Sodom, young and old
beset the room, from every quarter, pressing upon me with violence to have them
out, no doors, bars, entreaties of mine can keep them out. Lord put out thy
hand, draw in this heart, secure these heavenly guests, and strike these sons
of Sodom with blindness, or deadness, that they may never find a door for
entrance.

Oh! What cold entertainment does a good thought find! it is either ripped out of
the womb, as Hazaell ripped the children out of their mothers bellies, before it
is ripe for birth, or cast out as soon as born, as the males of Israel to be
destroyed, or else persecuted to death in infancy, as the children in
Bethlehem, by that bloody Herod, who sought to slay thy Son, if it had been
possible. Lord remember, they that seek my life, seek thine and thy Christ's.
But let what is of Christ be preserved though all the rest perish. In Egypt, I
read the more thy people were diminished, the more they multiplied; oh that it
might be so here with me, at least let the Lord leave a seed, that I be not as
Sodom, or made like unto Gomorrah.

I have too many other sins to bewail, of eye, ear, mouth, hand, foot, and the
whole diseased man; Totus pro corpore morbus. But as unhappy Saul had not it
seems hurt enough done him by the Philistines wounds, but he must hasten his 1 Samuel 31. 4.
own death, by falling on his own sword, so miserable I, as if I had not
enemies enough abroad, must contribute somewhat to my own ruin from my self. Had
I no other sins, my thoughts alone would undo me, should I wash my self with
snow water, and Job 9. 30. 31.
make my self never so clean, These garments would defile me. Oh of thee Lord,
how few thoughts have I! And those again how low, mean and sorry! Of thy Son,
Spirit and grace, how irreverent, confused, and unbecoming! Of thy Word and
Works, how many questioning, disliking, and gainsaying thoughts have I!

And my evil thoughts not transient and vanishing, as are my good, but fixed,
deliberate and abiding; either ever remaining, or ever and anon returning. How
ignorant, earthly, carnal is my heart, not savouring the things of God, but
those which are of Mat. 16. 23.
men! how cold, loose, dead is my spirit! all the wisdom that is here below,
is earthly, sensual, or devilish. This heart of mine a Jam. 3. 15.
garden to weeds, a grave to graces, a lake of Sodom, or dead sea, wherein no
holy motion breeds, or is long-lived. The earth puts forth her weeds at spring,
forbeares in winter, my heart is winter all the year long to grace, a spring to
weeds. The Aguish body has his well day after an ill, I am followed with a
Quotidian; that has his hot fit after his cold, I have both together, a
continual cold fit to duty, and hot to sin.

Lord when shall this Etna have done smoking and sparkling; when shall this
filthy scum boil out; when shall these wells Ezekiel. 24. 6. 2 King. 3. 25. Ezekiel.
36. 25.
be filled and stopped up. Oh when shall this heart be made clean! when! when
shall it once be, and when shall the clean water promised, be poured out.

Deep calls loud unto Deep, the deeps Psalm. 42. 7. Zech. 13. 1.
of misery to greater deepes of mercy. This secret fountain of sin, to that
open fountain of grace for sin and uncleanness.

Lord search, and cleanse this heart, and Psalm. 139. 23. Psalm. 19. 12. Psalm.
51. 10. Psalm. 17. 8.
cleanse me most from secret sins.

A new, a right, a stable s^irit create in me O God, and keep thou this heart
for me with all thy keeping, as thou would keep the apple of thine eye. Woe
is me that I must Psalm. 120. 5.
still dwell in Mesech, and my soul with them that hate peace. Oh blessed,
thrice blessed Psalm. 23. 1, 2.
he whose sin is pardoned, and most blessed he in whose spirit there is no
guile. Apply the Lev. 14. 6. 50. Lev. 14. 25. 28.
warm blood of a dying Savior, to remove my guilt, and the efficacy of a
living spirit to purge out my guile, as the blood of the dead, and water with
the living sparrow, went both together to cleanse the Leprous house, and as the
blood of the lamb, and the anointing oil together, to cleanse the Leprous
person.

Oh when shall I have done trifling, dallying, roving, in my thoughts!

Oh when shall I have done doubting, disputing, distrusting!

Oh when shall I have done, murmuring, repining, fretting!

Oh when shall I have done carking, caring, thought-taking!

Oh when shall my heart become composed, fixed, stablished!

Oh when shall my thoughts begin to be serious, spiritual, sanctified!

Oh when shall I begin to be considerate, circumspect, heavenly!

Oh when shall I begin to love, choose, and obey thee!

When shall I follow on to know, acknowledge, and glorify thee as God!

When shall I see that happy day to delight, rejoice and glory in thee!

When, when shall it be my study to seek God, contemplate God, converse with
God.

When, when shall it be my practice to sleep and wake with God, to talk and
walk with God, to enjoy and joy in God!

Let natures works lead me by the hand to seek thee, let reason lift up my head
to discern thee, let thy word raise up my heart yet higher to admire thee, and
let thy spirit of grace elevate my soul yet higher to embrace thee, till Grace
and Glory meet to make thee and my soul meet and be united.

Only deny me not two things before I die, Prove. 30. 7, 8. Psalm. 120. 3.
remove from me vanity and lies, deliver me O Lord from lying lips, and from a
vain deceitful heart.

Lord is folly so fast bound up in the heart of a child that the rod must fetch
it out, and Prove. 22. 15.
is it bound up so much faster in the heart of a man, that neither rod, nor
word, nor smiles, nor blows, nor mercies, nor judgments, can fetch it out?
Thou have brayed me in a mortar, yet does not this folly depart from Prove. 27.
22.
me.

Oh send out once thy light, and truth, thy grace and spirit, and let them lead
me! Psalm. 43. 138.


Oh when will thou prepare, repair, and renew this heart!

Oh that thou would soften, circumcise, and subdue this heart!

Oh that thou would purge, sweep, and cleanse this heart!

Oh that thou would adorn, enrich, and furnish this heart!

Oh that thou would enlighten, enliven, and enlarge this heart!

Oh that thou would abide in, inhabit, and keep this heart!

Oh that thou would watchover, secure, and guard this heart!

Oh that thou would open, shut, and lock this heart; shut out idle, unclean
and vain thoughts; keep in holy, pure and chaste thoughts; setting up the doors
thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. Neh. 3. 6. 2 King. 2. 21.


Oh season this spring, then shall not the waters be barren, nor dead. Mend
this treasure, then shall communication be wholesome, Mat. 12. 35.
and conversation holy.

Give me Lord; What will thou give me?

Give me the heart to ask, give me the heart I ask for.

Give a soft, a tender, a sound heart.

Give a rent, a broken, a contrite heart.

Give a mourning, a melt^ng, a fleshy heart.

Give me Lord a believing, a loving, an obedient heart.

Give a humble, a meek, a contented heart.

Give a holy, a high, a heavenly heart.

Give Lord a faithful, a thankful, a cheerful heart.

Give a panting, a praying, a praising heart.

Give a free, a firm, a fixed, heart.

Give a willing, a wise, an understanding heart.

Give a pure, a perfect, a sincere heart.

Give a new, a true, another heart, yea Lord that heart, that is according to
thine own heart.

Lord take this heart for an Ark, and a Temple, and a sacrifice, for God.

Lord make this heart the habitation, the sanctuary, the mercy-seat of God.

Let it be thy Shiloh, thy Bethel, thy Penuel.

Let it be my Jehovah-j^rith, Jehovah Shammah, Jehovah Shalom.

Let it be thy fountain sealed, thy engraven signet, thy garden enclosed.

But Alas! Alas! I must renew my griefs, mine habitation is in the midst of
deceit, my dwelling among briers and thorns, yea among scorpions is my abode,
serpents and Cookatrices that will not be charmed. Were it an open enemy I had
to do with, I would bear it, or seek to avoid him, or were it a suspected
friend I would be shy and wary of him and hide my self: But it is thou my
familiar (my self) where shall I go out to fly, or go in to hide me? I have
long looked for peace but behold trouble. W^e is me, my soul is wearied because
of murderers. Jer. 4. 13.
And my life is a weariness to me because of these daughters of Heth to which
I am married. They who repaired the gate of the fountain in Nehemiahs time, had
a happy and honorable emploiment, but how unhappy mine, who am set to repair
this Dung-gate, and to set up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the
bars thereof! Neh. 3. 14, 15.


But is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Is there no
Refiners fire, nor fullers soap to be had or hoped for? Must I sit down and say
it is my burden, and I must bear it? The frogs Jer. 10. 19.
were a sore plague to the Egyptians which came into their Chambers and were
upon their Tables. But these come into an Israelites heart, into my oratory,
closet and bed: Thou did sever then between the Israelites and Egyptians,
sever now between the Israelites and these frogs. They after two or three days
were removed, and shall these never? They had that plague of lice crawling on
their bodies, yet at length removed, but I! unhappy I, have these on my spirit.
They had botches on their backs, I a plague in my heart; they the pestilence
among their cattle, I among my firstborn.

The woman with child travailes and hopes to cast out her sorrows, but must I
ever travel, never be delivered of this dead child; This body of death. Ah
sinful, base, proud heart! ah vain, loose, idle heart! ah unconstant,
unstable, uncertain heart! ah falfe, deceitful, treacherous heart! ah sickly,
diseased, faint heart! ah unclean, rebellious, stubborn heart! oh thou son of
perverse rebellion, do 1 Samuel 20. 30.
thou not know that thou have chosen these companions to thy own destruction,
and that thou shall never be stablished till these removed.

Ah! What shall I take to witness for thee? What shall I liken to thee? and to
what shall I equal thee? that I may bemoan or comfort thee. Thy breach is great
like the Sea, Who can Lam. 2. 14.
heal thee? Unsafe was the valley of Siddim, so full of slime-pits, for a place
of battle; Genesis 14.
there fell the Kings, and holy Lot among them captive. My habitation is among
these slime-pits, wherewith I am always bemired, too often foiled. Sad was
holy Ezekiels lot, among Briers and Scorpions. Jeremies Ezekiel. 2. 6.
case sad in that mirie dungeon: Daniels in the Lions Den; the three childrens
in the Dan. 6. Dan. 3. Jon. 2. Act. 12.
fiery furnace; Jonahs in the whales belly; Peter's, in the midst of Iron
chains, and more stern keepers; mine more sad than they altogether.

Sad the Egyptians case, when the waters turned into blood; their vines smitten
with hail, fruits consumed with locusts, land covered with frogs, their day
turned into night, themselves annoyed with flies, and lice, and frogs, and evil
Angels. How many of these plagues are continually upon me? Miserable Herod, who
was eaten up with the vermin Act. 12.
that issued out of his own body; more miserable to have the soul tormented
with those vermin which are bred and engendered there. Miserable Sampson, who
was betrayed, bought and sold into the hands of the Philistines, and there made
to grind, or Jud. 16.
make sport to his insulting enemies; my case no less miserable. Were we in
this case sold for slaves, or delivered to death, or to make sport to men, well
we might bear it, but to grind in Satan's prison house, and to make sport for
hell, who would not prefer death before it? must the Cedar vine and olive
submit to a bramble? And shall Athaliah Jud. 9. 2 King. 11. 1.
quietly possess the throne when she has destroyed the seed royal? Avenge me
of these Midianites; Deliver me from mine enemies for they hate me with cruel
hatred; Hold not thy peace O God of my praise? Why stand thou so far off?
Art thou a God that have pleasure in wickedness, or delight in the death of a
sinner? Shall I say with Peter, depart from me I am a Lu. 5. 8.
sinful man O Lord? Or shall I say, Lord carest thou not that I perish?
neither Lord; Mar. 4. 58. Mat. 8. 2.
But if thou will, thou can make me clean. Say Lord, I will be thou clean, I
ask no more; Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and Hab. 1. 13.
can not look on iniquity, why look thou then upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the more
righteous? Lord make this sea go back, this Jordan stand still; Let not the
water flood drown me, neither let the pit shut her mouth upon me. Being
environed with these so many envious keepers as Peter was, and laden with so
many chains, and deslined to death by mine enemies, I cry the more
importunately, Lord send thine Angel loose these bonds, disperse these keepers,
open the prison doors, yea make this iron gate to open of it self, that the
ransomed of the Lord may go forth with songs and everlasting Esa. 35. 10. Jon.
2. 4.
joy upon his head. Out of the belly of hell do I cry unto thee, let my prayer
come before thee. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer
not for Dan. 9. 17. 19.
thin^ own sake O my God, cause thy face to shine on this sanctuary (this soul)
that is desolate for the Lords sake. Avenge me this once and help me this once,
and let me dye with Jud. 16. 28.
these uncircumcised, with whom I have conflicted all my life, if I may not be
so happy as to outlive them, and see them cut ost; If I can not see the
Egyptians destroyed in the wilderness, but they still pursue me, carry me
through the red sea of death that I may see them dead on the shore. Lord Ex.
14. 30. Josh. 10. 6.
slack not thine hand, to assist this poor Gibeonit^ now in covenant with
thee, who flies to thy protection against the numerous host of the Canaanites
round about, deliver me from mine enemies for they are stronger then I, and mo
in number then the hairs of my head.

Jacobs service was hard with Laban which lasted twenty years, and he was
deceived Genesis 31. 7.
ten times by him, I have served longer one who has deceived me more then ten
and ten times, and shall I not be set free? Thy people Israel were sadly
oppressed in Egypt, they sighed by reason of their burdens, and their bondage,
and thou sentest a redeemer, But when shall the Redeemer come out of Sion? when
will the Lord turn the captivity of his people? They were after carried into
Babylon and they that took them captives held them fast and refused to let them
go; But strong and faithful was their Redeemer, Jer. 50. 33. 34.
who did thoroughly plead their cause, and give rest again to his land, and
disquieted the inhabitance of Babylon. And shall this captive exile dye in a
pit: and shall his eyes fail in Esa. 51. 14. Esa. 38. 14.
expecting salvation? I am oppressed, undertake for me. Well now I see what
cause to cry out, Oh the depth of the riches of the To. 11. 33.
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments and his ways
past finding out? Thy ways and thoughts are all to me mysterious.

I read, O Lord, that David was thrice anointed to one kingdom, ere he came to
the full possession of it, and must I be so too? He was first anointed by
Samuel when a child, but for all that little like a 1 Samuel 16.
kingdom followed, but persecutions, hatred, exile, poverty, and misery; The
second time in Hebron after the death of Saul, then somewhat indeed of a
kingdom 2 Samuel 2. 3.
(a divided kingdom) was given unto him, though maintained and kept with long
and sore wars; But a third happy anointing followed after the death of
Ishbosheth, when he had possession given him of the whole kingdom which he
held all his days. Lord when thou had first anointed me in thy eternal 2 Samuel 5. 3.
decree of election, there was a designation indeed to a heavenly kingdom; but
till the second anointing comes in effectual vocation, there is nothing like a
King, or of one designed for heaven to be discerned; But then some small part
of the kingdom is settled upon us, A little grace set up in Gods throne (the
heart) but opposed by much corruption; Lord hasten the third anointing in
Jerusalem, that the kingdom of old designed in election, entered into in
vocation (though yet engaged in doubtful wars) may be fully and quietly
possessed.

There was long war then between Saul 2 Samuel 3. 1.
and David; But David grew stronger and stronger and out lived that war, and
was settled in peace. But when I have done with Saul, I have an Absalom coming
out of my own bowels, and that rebellion scarcely quelled but another Sheba up,
he blows a Trumpet, all make head, and I almost forsaken. 2 Samuel 20. 1.
Oh must there be no discharge from this war? must it continue as that between
Rehoboam Eccl. 8. 8. 1 King. 14. 30.
and Jeroboam all our days? There was a^ time when Kings went out to war, and
a cessation 2 Samuel 11. 1.
time when David was at home, walking on his roof; must I neither expect a
triumph here, nor hope for peace, nor so much as look for a cessation? Thou
do all in mercy and for the best I hope; we should be in more danger on the
roof then in the field. Thy will be done. The Canaanites were left to try thy
Jud. 3. 1, 2.
people and to learn them war, just and good; They would otherwise have been
secure, and Deuteronomy. 7. 22.
then the beasts of the earth had risen up against them: Better it is I must
needs say to be exercised continually with these Canaanites, then to be
destroyed for ever by the wild beasts.

I read of the care of a mother toward the 2 Samuel 21. 10.
carcasses of her children when dead, though they could take no more hurt;
Rizpah the daughter of Aiah Saul's Concubine suffered neither the birds of the
Air to rest on her two Sons by day (when executed and hanged on a tree) nor
the beasts of the field by night, even for a long time, from the beginning of
barley harvest, till water dropped upon them, out of heaven, and then were they
taken down; and all that time she took sackcloth and spread it for her upon the
rock; And have I no care of a living-dead-carrion-heart, and is there no help
but the birds of the air, and beasts may come and rest upon it day and night?
Well I will spread sackcloth for me upon this rock, till either water drop from
heaven to soften and cleanse this heart, or till it be (not taken down, but)
taken up and translated.

Collige oves, Area^ munda, Templumque repurga; Cor renova, Satanam contere,
Christ veni.

(...)

Rev. 21. 20.
FINIS.

