THE Clear Sunshine of the Gospel BREAKING FORTH UPON THE INDIANS IN
NEW ENGLAND.

OR, An Historical Narration of Gods Wonderful Workings upon sundry of the
INDIANS, both chief Governors and Common People, in bringing them to a willing
and desired submission to the Ordinances of the Gospel; and framing their
hearts to an earnest inquiry after the knowledge of God the Father, and of
Jesus Christ the Savior of the World.

By Mr. THOMAS SHEPARD Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ at Cambridge in
New England.

Isaiah 2 2, 3. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain
of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the bills; and all Nations shall flow unto it.

And many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

London, Printed by R. Cotes for John Bellamy at the three golden Lions in
Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled In High Court of
Parliament.
Right Honorable,
THese few sheets present unto your view a short but welcome discourse of the
visitations of the most High upon the saddest spectacles of degeneracy upon
earth, The poor Indian People: the distance of place, (if our spirits be
right) will be no lessening of the mercy, nor of our thankfulness, That
Christ is glorified, that the Gospel does any where find footing; and success
is a mercy as well worthy the praise of the Saints on Earth, as the joy of the
Angels in heaven. The report of this mercy is first made to you, who are the
Representative of this Nation, That in you England might be stirred up, to be
Rejoycers in, and Advancers of these promising beginnings. And because to You
an account is first due of the success of the Gospel in those dark corners of
the World, which have been so much enlightened by Your favor, enlivened by Your
resolutions, encouraged by Your fore past endeavors for God, and hope still
being parts of Your selves, to be further strengthened by Your benign aspects
and bountiful influences on them.

The present troubles have not so far obliterated and worn out the sad
mispressions which former times have made upon our spirits, but we can sadly
remember those destructive designs which were on foot, and carried on for the
Introduction of so great evils both into Church and State; In order to which it
was the endeavor of the Contrivers and Promoters of those designs, to wast
the number of the godly, as those who would never be brought to comply in such
destructive enterprises; which was attempted by banishing and forcing some
abroad, by burthening and afflicting all at home. Among those who tasted of the
first, I say not the worst sort of their cruelty, were these our Brethren, who
to enjoy the liberties of the Gospel, were content to sit down, and pitch
their tents in the utmost parts of the Earth, hoping that there they might be
out of the reach of their malice, as they were assured they were beyond the
bounds of their love. God who does often make man's evil of sin, serviceable to
the advancement of the riches of his own Grace; The most horrid act that ever
was done by the sons of men, the ^^rther of Christ, God made serviceable to
the highest purposes of Grace and mercy that ever came upon his breast; That
God does show that he had merciful ends, in this their malicious purpose: as
he suffered Paul to be cast into prison, to convert the Act 16. 30, 33, 34.
Acts. 8. 1. 11
Jailer, to be ship wrackt at Melita, to preach to the barbarous, so he
suffered their way to be stopped up here, and their persons to be banished
hence, that he might open a passage for them in the Wilderness, and make them
instruments to draw souls to him, who had been so long estranged from him.

It was the end of the adversary to suppress, but Gods to propagate the
Gospel; theirs to smother and put out the light, Gods to communicate and
disperse it to the utmost corners of the Earth; that as one says of Paul, his
blindness gave light to the (...)
whole World, so we hope God will make their distance and estrangednesse from
us, a means of bringing many near and in to acquaintance with him.

Indeed along time it was before God let them see any farther end of their
coming over, then to preserve their consciences, cherish their Graces, provide
for their sustenance: But when Providence invited their return, he let them
know it was for some farther Arrand that he brought them thither, giving them
some Bunches of Grapes, some Clusters of Figs in earnest of the prosperous
success of their endeavors upon those poor outcasts: The utmost (...)
ends of the earth are designed and promised to be in time the possessions of
Christ; And he sends his Ministers into every place where he himself intends
to come, and take possession. Where the Ministry is the Harbinger and goes
before, Christ and Grace will certainly follow after.

This little we see is something in hand, to earnest to us those things which
are in hope; something in possession, to assure us of the rest in Promise, when
the ends of the earth shall see his Psalm. 22. 27. Rev. 11. 15. Psalm. 72. 8, 9,
10, 11.
glory, and the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord
and his Christ, when he shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and they that
dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him. And if the dawn of the morning
be so delightful, what will the clear day be? If the first fruits be so
precious, what will the whole harvest be? if some beginnings be so full of joy,
what will it be when God shall perform his whole work, when the whole earth
shall be full of the knowledge Isa. 11. 9. 10.
of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, and East and West shall sing together
the song of the Lamb?

In order to this what does God require of us, but that we should strengthen
the hands, encourage the hearts of those who are at work for him, conflicting
with difficulties, wrestling with discouragements, to spread the Gospel, and in
that, the same and honor of this Nation, to the utmost ends of the earth? It
was the design of your enemies to make them little, let it be your endevor to
make them great, their greatness is your strength. Their enemies threatened
their hands should reach them for evil, God disappointed them; And let your
hands reach them now for good; there is enough in them to speak then fit
objects of your encouragement, they are men of choice spirits, not frighted
with dangers, softened with allurements, nor discouraged with difficulties,
preparing the way of the Lord in those unpassable places of the earth, dealing
with such whom they are to make men, before they can make them Christians. They
are such who are impressed for your service in the service of Christ, can stand
alone, but desire to have dependence on you, they fear not the malice of their
enemies, but desire the countenance and encouragement of their friends; And
shall your Honors in consideration of their former sufferings, their present
service, and real deservings, help the day of small things among them; shall
you interest them in your assistances, as you are interested in their
affections, you will thereby not only further these beginnings of God by
encouraging their hearts, and strengthening their hands to work for him, but
also (as we humbly conceive) much add to the comfort of your own accounts in
the day of the Lord, and lay greater obligations on them yet more to pray for
you, to promote your counsels, and together with us your unworthy servants to
write down themselves,

Yours humbly devotedin the service of the Gospel. Stephen Marshall Jeremy
Whitaker Edm. calamy William Greenbill John Downam Philip Nigh Syd. Symptson
William Carler The. Goodwin The. Case Simeon Asbe Samuel Bolton.


TO THE Godly and Well affected of this Kingdom of England; who pray for, and
rejoice in, the thrivings of the Gospel of our LORD JESUS
Christian Reader,
IF ever thou had experience of this day of power, these visitations of
Christ upon thine own spirit; I suppose thee to be one who have embarked many
prayers for the success of the Gospel in these dark corners of the earth to
strengthen thy faith, enlarge thy heart, and assure thy soul that God is a God
hearing prayers: An account is here given to thee of the conquests of the Lord
Jesus upon these poor outcasts, who have thus long been estranged from him,
spilt like water upon the ground and none to gather them. Formerly thou had,
The Daybreak, some dawnings of light, after along and black night of darkness,
here thou see the sun is up, which we hope will rejoice like the strong man
to run its race, scattering those thick clouds of darkness, and shining
brighter and brighter till it come to a perfect day. These few sheerts give
thee some footing for such thoughts, and some further encouragements to wait
and pray for the accomplishment of such things. Here thou may see, the
Ministry is precious, the feet of them who bring glad tidings beautiful,
Ordinances desired, the Word frequented andattended, the Spirit also going
forth in power and efficacy with it, in awakening and humbling of them, drawing
forth those affections of sorrow, and expressions of tears in abundance, which
no tortures or extremities were ever observed to force from them, with
lamenting: we read here, their leaving of sin, they forsake their former
evil ways, and set up fences never to return, by making laws for the
punishment of those sins wherein they have lived, and to which they have been
so much addicted. They set up prayers in their families morning and evening,
and are in earnest in them; And with more affection they crave Gods blessing
upon a little p^rched corn, and Indian stalks, then many of us do upon our
greatest plenty and abundance. They rest on the Lords day, and make laws for
the observation of it, whereinthey meet together to pray and instruct one
another in the things of God, which have been communicated to them. They
renounce their diabolical Charms and Charmers, and many of those who were
practitioners in these sinful and soul-undoing Arts, being made naked,
convinced and ashamed of their evil, forsake their may, and betake themselves
to prayer, preferring the Christian Ma. 26. 16. Incantario, mushtatio. ler. 8.
17. Ecclef. 10. 11.
Charm, before their diabolical Spells: herein God making good that promise
Zeph. 2. 11. I will famish all the Gods of the earth, (which he does by
withdrawing the worshippers, and throwing contempt upon the worship) And men
shall worship me alone every one from his place, even all the Isles of the
Heathens.

All these are hopeful presages that God is going out in his power and grace
to conquer a people to himself; That he begins to cast an owning look on them,
whom he has so long neglected Act. 14. 16. Acts 17. 30. (...)
and despised. And indeed God may well seek out for other ground to sow the seed
of his Ordinances upon, seeing the ground where it has been sown has brought
forth no better fruit to him, he may well be peak another people to himself,
seeing he finds no better entertainment among the people he has espoused to
him, and that by so many mercies, privileges, indeerments, engagements. We
have as many sad symptoms of a declining, as these poor outcasts have glad
presages of a Rising Sun among them. The Ordinances are as much contemned here,
as frequente there, the Ministry as much discouraged here, as embraced three;
Religion as much derided, the ways of godliness as much scorned here, as they
can be wished and desired there; generally we are sick of plenty, we surfeit
of our abundance, the worst ofSurfets, and with our loathed Manna and disdained
food, God preparing them a Table in the wilderness; where our satieties, will be
their sufficiencies; our complaints, their contents; our burdens, their
comforts; if he cannot have an England here, he can have an England there: and
baptize and adopt them into those privileges, which we have looked upon as
our burdens. We have sad decays upon us, we are a revolting Nation, a people
guilty of great defection from God. Some fall from the worship of God to their
old superstitions, and corrupt worship, saying with those in Jeremy, It was
better with us then now. Some fall from the doctrine of grace to errors, some to
damnable, others to defiling some to destructive, others to corruptive
opinions. Some fall from professed seeming holiness, to fin and profanenes: who
like blazing comets did shine bright for a time, but after have set in a night
of darkness. We have many sad symptoms on us, we decay under all the means of
nourishment, are barren under all Gods s;owings, dry under all the dews,
droppings showers of heaven, like that Country whereof Historians speak, where
drought causes (...) dat (...), imbres pulverem.
dirt, and showers causes dust. And what does God threaten herein, but to
remove the Candlesticks, to take away the gospel, that precious Gospel, the
streams whereof have brought so many ships laden with blessings to our shore,
that Gospel under the shadow whereof we have sat down and been refreshed these
many years? where the power is lost, God will not long continue the form, where
the heat is gone, he will not long continue the light. The temple did not
preserve the laws when their hearts were the Synagogues of Satan, nor shall any
outward privilege hold us up, when the inward power is down in our spirits.
God has forsaken other Churches as eminent as ever England was: where are the
churches of Asia, once famous for the gospel, for general Councels, now places
for Zim and Ochim, their habitation desolate? where are those ancient people of
the lews who were (segulla micol hagnamim) his peculiar and chosen people of al
nations? they are scattered abroad as a curse, and their place knows them no
more. And shall I tell you? God has no need of us, he can calthem Gnammi, his
people, who were Lo gnammi, not his people, and them beloved, who were not
beloved. Indeed he has held up us, as if he had not known where to have
another people, if he should forsake us we have been a Goshen, when others have
been an Egypt, a Canaan, when others an Akeldama, the garden of God, when
others have been a wilderness, our fleece has been wet, when others have been
dry: But know, God has no need of us, he can want no people if he please to
call; If he speak, all the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the
Lord, and (...) 27, 28. etc. 11 Esa 9. 10.
all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him. If he set up his
standard, to him shall the Gentiles flock, and the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. It is not for need but for
love that God abides with England, and there is nothing out of himself the
incentive of this Amat^^^, ^^^ aliunde ^^^ habet, sed ip s^ ^^ unde an at. Aug.
love: there can be no reason given why God should fence us, and suffer other
places to lie wast, that we should be his Garden, and other places a
Wilderness, that he should feed us with the bread of Heaven, and suffer others
to starve, men of the same mould, his offspring as well as we, and such (did he
conquer to himself) were likely to do him more service, bring him more glory
then we have done. We see something here done in order to such a work, our
Harvest is much over, we see little incomes, there we see the fields are ripe
for harvest; here the ministry is contemned, there the feet of them that bring
glad tidings are beautiful; we have outlived the power and efficacy of
Ordinances, there God goes sorth with life and power we can outfit the most
speaking and winning discoveries of Christ, there every notion, breeds motion
in them; the glory of the Lord is much departed from us, there his rising is
conspicuous and glorious. The blind man found it good to be in the way where
Christ came: And who would be in Egypt when there is light in Goshen? Oh that
England would be quickened by their risings, and weep ever her own declinings!
What a wonder is it that they should do so much, and we so little, that they
should be men in their infancy, and we such Children in our manhood, that they
so active, we so dead? That which was Hieroms complaint may be ours, O that
Infidelity should do that which those who profesle thenmselvs Healquo^ p^^^^^at
in^^delu as, quod non ^^^ (...) sides. Ignis qui in paren^^^s suit Cali^lus, in
nobis ^ucidus.
believers cannot do! We have the light of former times, but want the heat,
knowledge abounds as the waters cover the sea, but we want the salt, we have a
form of Godliness, but want the power: And it will be small comfort should God
continue to us the form, and carry to others the power, to suffer us to wast our
selves with unnecessary brangles (which are the sweat of thetimes) and in the
mean to carry the life and power of Religion unto others.

Let these poor Indians stand up incentives to us, as the Apostle set up the
Gentiles a provocation to the Jews: who knows but Romans 11. 14.
God gave life to New England, to quicken Old, and has warmed them, that they
might heat us, raised them from the dead, that they might recover us from that
consumption, and those sad decays which are come upon us?

This small Treatise is an Essay to that end, an Indian Sermon, though you will
not hear us, poss^bly when some rise from the dead you will hear them. The main
Doctrine it preaches unto all, is to value the Gospel, prize the Ministry,
loath not your Manna, surfeit not of your plenty, be thankful for mercies,
fruitful under means: Awake from your slumber, repair your decays, redeem
your time, improve the seasons of your peace; answer to calls, Open to knocks,
attend to whispers, obey commands; you have a name you live, take heed you be
not dead, you are Christians in show, be so indeed: least as you have lost the
power, God take away from you the form also.

And you that are Ministers learn by this not to despond though you see not
present fruit of your labors, though you fish all night and catch nothing God
has a fullness of time to perform all his purposes. And the deepest
degeneracies, and widest estrangements from God, shall be no bar or obstacle to
the power and freeness of his own grace when that time is come.

And you that are Merchants, take encouragement from hence to scatter the
becames of light, to spread and propagate the Gospel into those dark corners of
the earth; whither you traffic you take much from them, if you can carry this
to them, you will make them an abundant recompense. And you that are Christians
indeed, rejoice to see the Curtains of the Tabernacle enlarged, the bounds of
the Sanctuary extended, Christ advanced, the Gospel propagated, and souls
saved. And if ever the love of God did center in your hearts, if ever the sense
of his goodness has begot bowels of compassion in you, draw them forth toward
them whom God has singled out to be the objects of his grace and mercy; lays
out your prayers, lend your assistance to carry on this day of the Lord begun
among them. They are not able (as Moses said) to bear the burden of that
people alone, to make provision for the children whom God has given them; and
therefore it is requisite the spiritual community should help to bear part with
them. Many of the young ones are given and taken in, to be educated and brought
up in Schools, they are naked and must be clad, they want al things, and must
be supplied. The Parents also, and many others being convinced of the evil of
an idle life, desire to be employed in honest labor, but they want instruments
and tools to set them on work, and cast-garments to throw upon those bodies,
that their loins may bless you, whose souls Christ has clothed. Soine worthy
persons have given much; and if God shall move the heart of others to offer
willingly toward the building of Christ a Spiritual temple, it will certainly
remain upon their account, when the smallest rewards from God, shall be better
then the greatest layings out for God. But we are making a relation, not a
collection; we leave the whole to your Christian consideration, not doubting
but they who have tasted of mercy from God, will be ready to exercise
compassion to others, and commend you unto him who gave himself for us, that
he (...) 9. 14.
might redeem us from all iniquity, and parisie as well as purchase unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Stephen Marshall
Ier. Whitaker
Edmund Calamy
William Greenbill
John Downam
Philip Nigh
Sy. Simpsan
Williamer Cart.
The Goodwin
The. Case
Simeon Asbe
Samuel B^k^n.

THE CLEAR SVNSHINE OF THE GOSPEL, Breaking forth upon the INDIANS in
New England.
Much Honored and dear Sir,
THat glorious and sudden rising of Christ Jesus upon our poor Indians which
began a little before you set sail from these shores, has not been
altogether clouded since, but rather broken out further into more light and
life, wherewith the most High has visited them; and because some may call in
question the truth of the first relation, either because they may think ^^ too
good news to be true, or because some persons maligning the good of the
Country, are apt, as to aggravate to the utmost any evil thing against it, so
to vilify and extenuate any good thing in it: and because your self desired
to hear how sarre since God has carried on that work, which your own eyes
saw here begun; I shall therefore as faithfully and as briefly as I can, give
you a true relation of the progress of it, which I hope may be a sufficient
confirmation of what has been published to the world before, having this as
the chiese end in my own eye, that the precious Saints and people of God in
England, believing what has been and may be reported to them, of these
things, may help forward this work together with us by their prayers and
praises, as we desire to do the like for the work of Christ begun among them
there. I dare not speak too much, nor what I think about their conversion, I
have seen so much falsenesse in that point among many English, that I am slow
to believe herein too hastily concerning these poor naked men; only this is
evident to all honest hearts that dwell near them, and have observed them, that
the work of the Lord upon them, and (what ever it be) is both unexpected and
wonderful in so short a time; I shall set down things as they are, and then
your self and others to whom these may come, may judge as you please of them.

Soon after your departure hence, the awakening of these Indiani in our Town
raised a great noise among all the rest round about us, especially about
Concord side where the An inferior Prince.
Sachim (as I remember) and one or two more of his men, hearing of these things
and of the preaching of the Word, and how it wrought among them here, came
therefore hither to An Indian town so called.
Noonanetum to the Indian Lecture, and what the Lord spoke to his heart we
know not, only it seems he was so far affected, as that he desired to become
more like to the English, and to cast off those Indian wild and sinful courses
they formerly lived in; but when diverse of his men perceived their Sachims
mind, they secretly opposed him herein; which opposition being known, he
therefore called together his chief men about him, and made a speech to this
effect unto them, viz That they had no reason at all to oppose those courses
the English were now taking for their good, for (says he) all the time you
have lived after the Indian fashion under the power and protection of higher
Indian Sachems, what did they care for you? they only sought their own ends
out of you, and therefore would exact upon you, and take away your skins and
your Kettles and your Wampam from you at their own pleasure, and this was all that they regarded: but you may evidently see that the English mind no such
things, care for none of your goods, but only seek your good and welfare, and
in stead of taking away, are ready to give to you; with many other things I now
forget, which were related by an eminent man of that town to me. What the
effect of this speech was, we can tell no otherwise then as the effects showed
it; the first thing was, the making of certain Laws for their more religious
and civil government and behavior, to the making of which, they craved the
assistance of one of the chief Indians in Noonanetum, a very active Indian to
bring in others to the knowledge of God; desiring withal an able saithfull man
in Concord to record and keep in writing what they had generally agreed upon.
Another effect was, their desire of Teacher of the Church of Roxbury, that
preaches to the Indians in their own Language.
Mr. Eliots coming up to them, to preach, as he could find time among them; and
the last effect was, their desire of having a Town given them within the
bounds of Concord near unto the English. This latter when it was propounded by
the Sachim of the place, he was demanded why he desired a town so near, when
as there was more room for them up in the Country. To which the Sachim
replied, that he therefore desired it because he knew that if the Indians dwelt
far from the English, that they would not so much care to pray, nor would they
be so ready to hear the Word of God, but they would be all one Indians still;
but dwelling near the English he hoped it might be otherwise with them then.
The Town therefore was granted them; but it seems that the opposition made by
some of themselves more malignantly set against these courses, has kept them
from any present settling down: and surely this opposition is a special finger
of Satan resisting these budding beginnings; for what more hopeful way of
doing them good then by cohabitation in such Towns, near unto good examples,
and such as may be continually whetting upon them, and dropping into them of
the things of God? what greater means at least to civilize them? as is evident
in the C^sco and Mexico Indians, more civil then any else in this vast
Continent that we know of, who were reduced by the politic principles of the
two great conquering Princes of those Countries after their long and tedious
wars from these wild and wandering course of life, unto a settling into
particular Towns and Cities: but I forebear, only to confirm the truth of
these things, I have sent you the orders agreed on at Concord by the Indians,
under the hand of two faithful witnesses, who could testify more, if need
were, of these matters: I have sent you their own Copy and their own hands to
it, which I have here inserted.

Conclusions and Orders made and agreed upon by diverse Sachims and other
principal men amongst the Indians at Concord, in the end of the eleventh
month, An. 1646.
1. THat every one that shall abuse themselves with wine or strong liquors,
shall pay for every time so abusing themselves, 20 s. 2. That there shall be no
more Pawwowing amongst the Indians. And if any shall hereafter Pawwows are
Witches or Sorcere^s that cure by help of the devil,
Pawwow, both he that shall Pawwow, and he that shall procure him to Pawwow,
shall pay 20 s. apeece. 3. They do desire that they may be stirred up to seek
after God. 4. They desire they may understand the wiles of Satan, and grow out
of love with his suggestions, and temptations. 5. That they may fall upon some
better course to improve their time, then formerly. 6. That they may be brought
to the sight of the sin of lying, and whosever shall be found faulty herein
shall pay for the first offense 5 s. the second 10 s. the third 20 s. 7.
Whosoever shall steal any thing from another, shall restore fourfold. 8. They
desire that no Indian hereafter shall have any more but one wife. 9. They
desire to prevent falling out of Indians one with another, and that they may
live quietly one by another. 10. That they may labor after humility, and not
be proud. 11. That when Indians do wrong one to another, they may be liable to
censure by fine or the like, as the English are. 12. That they pay their debts
to the English. 13. That they do observe the Lord's Day, and whosoever shall
profane it shall pay 20 s. 14. That there shall not be allowance to pick Lice,
as formerly, and eat them, and whosoever shall offend in this case shall pay
for every louse a penny. 15. They will wear their hair comely, as the English
do, and whosoever shall offend here in shall pay 5 s. 16. They intend to
reform themselves, in their former greasing themselves, under the Penalty of 5
s. for every default. 17. They do all resolve to set up prayer in their
wigwams, and to A Wigwam is such a dwelling house as they live in.
seek to God both before and after meat. 18. If any committhe sin of
fornication, being single persons, the man shall pay 20 s. and the woman 10 s.
19. If any man lie with a breast he shall die. 20. Whosoever shall play at
their former games shall pay 10 s. 21. Whosoever shall commit adultery shall be
put to death. 22. Wilful Murder shall be punished with death. 23. They shall
not disguise themselves in their mournings, as formerly; nor shall they keep a
great noise by howling. 24. The old Ceremony of the Maid walking alone and
living apart so many days 20 s. 25. No Indian shall take an English man's A
Canooe is a small Boat.
Canooe without leave under the penalty of 5 s. 26. No Indian shall come into
any English man's house except he first knock: and this they expect from the
English. 27. Whosoever beats his wife shall pay 20 s. 28. If any Indian shall
fall out with, and beat another Indian, he shall pay 20 s. 29. They desire
they may be a town, and either to dwell on this side the Bear Swamp, or at
the East side of Mr. Flints Pond.
Immediately after these things were agreed upon, most of the Indians of these
parts, set up Prayer morning and evening in their families, and before and
after meat. They also generally cut their hair, and were more civil in their
carriage to the English then formerly. And they do manifest a great
willingness to conform themselves to the civil fashions of the English. The
Lords day they keep a day of rest, and minister what edification they can to
one another. These former orders were put into this form by Captain Simond
Willard of Concord, whom the Indians with unanimous consent entreated to be
their Recorder, being very solicitous that what they did agree upon might be
faithfully preserved without alteration.

Thomas Flint.
Simon Willard.

These things thus wrought in a short time about Concord side, I look upon as
fruits of the ministry of the Word; for although their high esteem bred lately
in them, especially the chief and best of the English, together with that mean
esteem many of them have of themselves, and therefore will call themselves
sometimes poor Creatures, when they see and hear of their great distance from
others of the English; I say, although these things may be some causes of
making these orders and walking in these courses, yet the chief cause seems
to be the power of the Word, which has been the chief cause of these Orders,
and therefore it is that until now of late they never so much as thought of
any of these things.

I am not able to acquaint you very much from my own eye and care witness of
things, for you know the near relation between me and the fire side usually
all winter time, only I shall impart two or three things more of what I have
heard and seen, and the rest I shall relate to you as I have received from
faithful witnesses, who testify nothing to me by their writings, but what is
seen in the open Sun, and done in the view of all the world, and generally
known to be true of people abiding in these parts we live in.

As soon as ever the fierceness of the winter was past, March. 3. 1647. I
went out to Noonanetum to the Indian Lecture, where Mr. Willson, Mr. Alleu, of
Dedham, Mr. Dunster, beside many otherChristains were present; on which day
perceiving diverse of the Indian women well affected, and considering that their
souls might stand in need of answer to their scruples as well as the men's; and
yet because we knew how unfit it was for women so much as to ask questions
publicly immediately by themselves; we did therefore desire them to propound
any questions they would be resolved about by first acquainting either their
Husbands, or the Interpreter privately therewith: whereupon we heard two
questions thus orderly propounded; which because they are the first that ever
were propounded by Indian women in such an ordinance that ever we heard of,
and because they may be otherwise useful, I shall therefore set them down.

The first question was propounded by the wise of one Wampooas a well affected
Indian, viz. whether (said she) do I pray when my husband prays if I speak
nothing as he does, yet if I like what he says, and my heart goes with it?
(for the Indians will many times pray with their wives, and with their children
also sometime in the fields) she therefore searing lest prayer should only be
an external action of the lips, enquired if it might not be also an inward
action of the heart, if she liked of what he said.

The second question was propounded by the Wise of one Totherswampe, her
meaning in her question (as we all perceived) was this, viz. Whether a husband
should do well to pray with his wife, and yet continue in his passions; and be
angry with his wife? But the modesty and wisdom of the woman directed her to
do three things in one, sor thus she spoke to us, viz. Before my husband did
pray he was much angry and froward, but since he has begun to pray he was
not angry so much, but little angry: wherein first she gave an honorable
testimony of her husband and commended him for the abatement of his passion;
secondly, she gave implicitly a secret reproof for what was past, and for
somewhat at present that was amiss; and thirdly, it was intended by her as a
question whether her husband should pray to God, and yet continue in some
unruly passions; but she wifely avoided that, l^st it might reflect too much
upon him, although we desired her to express if that was not her meaning.

At this time (beside these questions) there were sundry others propounded of
very good use, in all which we saw the Lord Jesus leading them to make narrow
inquiries into the things of God, that so they might see the reality of them. I
have heard few Christians when they begin to look toward God, make more
searching questions that they might see things really, and not only have a
notion of them: I for bear to mention any of them, because I forget the chief
of them; only this we took notice of at this days meeting, that there was
an aged Indian who proposed his complaint in propounding his question
concerning an unruly disobedient son, and "what one should do with him "in case
of obstinacy and disobedience, and that will not hear "Gods Word, though his
Father command him, nor will not "forsake his drunkenness, though his father
forbid him? Unto which there were many answers to set forth the sin of
disobedience to parents; which were the more quickened and sharpened because we
knew that this rebellious son whom the old man meant, was by Gods providence
present at this Lecture: Mr. Wilson was much enlarged, and spoke so terribly,
yet so graciously as might have affected a heart not quite shut up, which this
young desperado hearing (who well understood the English tongue) instead of
humbling himself before the Lords Word, which touched his conscience and
condition so near, he was filled with a spirit of Satan, and as soon as ever
Mr. Wilsons speech was ended he brake out into a loud contemptucus expression;
So, says he: which we passed by without speaking again, leaving the Word with
him, which we knew would one day take its effect one way or other upon him.

The latter end of this year Mr. Wilson, Mr. Eliot, and my self were sent for
by those in Tarmoutb to meet with some other Elders of Plimoutb pattent, to
hear and heal (if it were the will of Christ) the difference and sad breaches
which have been too long a time among them, wherein the Lord was very merciful
to us and them in binding them up beyond our thoughts in a very short time, in
giving not only that bruised Church but the whole Town also a hopeful
beginning of settled peace and future quietness; but Mr. Eliot as he takes all
other advantages of time, so he took this, of speaking with, and preaching to
the poor Indians in these remote places about Cape Cod: in which journey I
shall acquaint you with what all of us observed.

We first found these Indians (not very far from ours) to understand (but
with much difficulty) the usual language of those in our parts, partly in
regard of the different dialect which generally varies in 40. or 60. miles, and
partly and especially in regard of their not being accustomed unto sacred
language about the holy things of God, wherein Mr. Eliot excells any other of
the English, that in the Indian language about common matters excel him: I say
therefore although they did with much difficulty understand him, yet they did
understand him, although by many circumlocutions and variations of speech and
the help of one or two Interpreters which were then present.

Secondly, we observed much opposition against him, and hearing of him at the
day appointed, especially by one of the chiefest Sacbims in those parts, a man
of a fierce, strong and surious spirit whom the English therefore call by the
name John: who although before the day appointed for preaching, promised very
fair that he would come and bring his men with him; yet that very morning when
they were to be present, he sends out almost all his men to Sea, pretending
fishing, and therefore although at last he came late himself to the Sermon,
yet his men were absent, and when he came himself, would not seem to understand
any thing, although he did understand as some of the Indians themselves then
told us, when Mr. Eliot by himself and by them inquired of him if he understood
what was spoken: yet he continued hearing what was said with a dogged look and
a discontented countenance.

Thirdly, not withstanding this opposition we found another Sachim then
present willing to learn, and diverse of his men attentive and knowing what was
said: and in the time which is usually set apart for propounding questions, an
aged Indian told us openly, That these very things which Mr. Eliot had taugh:
them as the Commandments of God, and concerning God, and the making of the
world by one God, that they had heard some old men who were now dead, to say
the same things, since whose death there has been no remembrance or knowledge
of them among the Indians until now they hear of them again. Which when I
heard solemnly spoken, I could not tell how those old Indians should attain to
such knowledge, unless perhaps by means of the French Preacher cast upon those
coasts many years since, by whose ministry they might possibly reap and
retain some knowledge of those things; this also I hear by a godly and able
Christain who has much converse with them; that many of them have this
apprehension now stirring among them, viz. That their forefathers did know God,
but that after this, they sell into a great sleep, and when they did awaken
they quite forgot him, (for under such metaphorical language they usually
express what eminent things they mean:) so that it may seem to be the day of
the Lords gracious visitation of these poor Natives, which is just as it is
with all other people, when they are most low, the wheel then turns, and the
Lord remembers to have mercy.

Fourthly, a fourth and last observation we took, was the story of an Indian
in those parts, telling us of his dream many years since, which he told us of
openly before many witnesses when we sat at meat: the dream is this, he said
That about two years before the English came over into those parts there was a
great mortality among the Indians, and one night he could not sleep above half
the night, after which he fell into a dream, in which he did think he saw a
great many men come to those parts in cloths, just as the English now are
apparelled, and among them there a rose up a man all in black, with a thing in
his hand which he now sees was all one English man's book; this black man he
said stood upon a higher place then all the rest, and on the one side of him
were the English, on the other a great number of Indians: this man told all the
Indians that God was moosquantum or angry with them, and that he would kill
them for their sins, whereupon he said himself stood up, and desired to know
of the black man what God would do with him and his Squaw and Papooses but the
black man would not answer him a first time, nor yet a second time, until he
desired the third time, and then he smiled upon him, and told him that he and
his Papooses should be safe, and that God would give unto them Mitcheu, (i. e.)
victuals and other good things, and so he awakened. What similitude this
dream has with the truth accomplished, you may easily see. I attribute little
to dreams, yet God may speak to such by them rather then to those who have a
more sure Word to direct and warn them, yet this dream made us think surely
this Indian will regard the black man now come among them rather then any
others of them: but whether Satan, or fear, and guilt, or world prevailed, we
cannot say, but this is certain, that he withdrew from the Sermon, and
although he came at the latter end of it, as hoping it had been done, yet we
could not persuade him then to stay and hear, but away he flung, and we saw him
no more till next day.

From this third of March until the latter end of this Summer I could not be
present at the Indian Lectures, but when I came this last time, I marvailed to
see so many Indian men, women and children in English apparel, they being at
Noonan^tum generally clad, especially upon Lecture days, which they have got
partly by gift from the English, and partly by their own labors, by which some
of them have very handsomely apparelled themselves, and you would scare know
them from English people. There is one thing more which I would acquaint you
with, which happened this Summer, viz. June 9. the first day of the Synods
meeting at Cambridge, where the forenoon was spent in hearing a Sermon preached
by one of the Elders as a preparative to the work of the Synod, the afternoon
was spent in hearing an Indian Lecture where there was a great confluence of
Indians all parts to hear Mr. Eliot, which we conceived not unseasonable at
such a time, partly that the reports of Gods work begun among them, might be
seen and believed of the chief who were then sent and met from all the Churches
of Christ in the Country, who could hardly believe the reports they had
received concerning these new stirs among the Indians, and partly hereby to
raise up a greater spirit of prayer for the carrying on of the work begun upon
the Indians, among all the Churches and servants of the Lord Jesus: The Sermon
was spent in showing them their miserable condition without Christ, out of
Ephesians. 2. 1. that they were dead in trespasses and sins, and in pointing unto
them the Lord Jesus, who only could quicken them.

When the Sermon was done, there was a convenient space of time spent in
hearing those questions which the Indians publicly propounded, and in giving
answers to them; one question was, What Country man Christ was, and where he
was borne? Another was, How far off that place was from us here? Another was,
Where Christ now was?

And another, How they might lay hold on him, and where, being now absent from
them? with some other to this purpose; which received full answers from
several hands. But that which I note is this, that their gracious attention to
the Word, the affections and mournings of some of them under it, their sober
propounding of diverse spiritual questions, their aptness to understand and
believe what was replied to them, the readlinesse of diverse poor naked
children to answer openly the chief questions in Catechism which were formerly
taught them, and such like appearances of a great change upon them, did
marvellously affect all the wise and godly Ministers, Magistrates, and people,
and did raise their hearts up to great thankfulness to God; very many deeply
and abundantly mourning for joy to see such a blessed day, and the Lord Jesus
so much known and spoken of among such as never heard of him before: So that if
any in England doubt of the truth of what was formerly w^it, or if any
malignant eye shall question and v^^^^e this work, they will now speak too
late, for what was here done at Cambridge was not set under a Bushel, but in
the open Sun, that what Thomas would not believe by the reports of others, he
might be forced to believe, by seeing with his own eyes and feeling Christ
Jesus thus risen among them with his own hands.

I have done with what I have observed my self; I shall therefore proceed to
give you a true relation of what I have heard from others, and many faithful
witnesses have seen: and first I shall speak a little more of the old man who
is mentioned in the story now in print; this old man has much affection
stirred up. by the Word, and coming to Mr. Eliots house (for of him I had this
story) Mr. Eliot told him that because he brought his wife and all his children
constantly to the Lecture, that he would therefore bestow some Cloths upon him,
(it being now winter and the old man naked:) which promise he not certainly
understanding the meaning of, asked therefore of another Indian (who is Mr.
Eliots servant and very hopeful) what it was that Mr. Eliot promised him? he
told him that he said he would give him some Cloths; which when he
understood, he affectionately brake out into these expressions, God I see is
merciful: a blessed, because a plain hearted affectionate speech, and worthy
English men's thoughts when they put on their Cloths; to think that a poor
blind Indian that scarce ever heard of God before, that he should see not only
God in his Cloths, but mercy also in a promise of a cast off worn suit of
Cloths, which were then given him, and which now he daily wears. But to
proceed;

This same old man (as I think a little before he had these Cloths) after an
Indian Lecture, when they usually come to prepound questions; instead of asking
a question, began to speak to the rest of the Indians, and brake out into many
expressions of wond^ing at Gods goodness unto them, that the Lord should at
last look upon them and send his Word as a light unto them that had been in
darkness and such gross ignorance so long; me wonder (says he) at God that
he should thus deal with us. This speech expressed in many words in the Indian
Languages, and with strong actings of his eyes and hands, being interpreted
afterward to the English, did much also affect all of them that were present
this Lecture also.

There were this winter many other questions propounded, which were writ down
by Mr. Edward Jackson one of our Town, constantly present at these Lectures, to
take notes both of the questions made by the Indians and returned by Mr. Eliot
to them; this man having sent me in his notes, I shall send you a taste of some
of them.

1 Why some men were so bad, that they hate those men that would teach them
good things?

2 Whether the devil or man were made first?

3 Whether if a father prays to God to teach his sons to know him, and he does
teach them himself and they will not learn to know God, what should such
fathers do? (this was propounded by an old man that had rude children.)

4 A Indian woman.
Squaw propounded this question, Whether she might not go and pray in some
private place in the woods, when her husband was not at home, because she was
ashamed to pray in the Wigwam before company?

5 How may one know wicked men, who are good and who are bad?

6 To what Nation Jesus Christ came first unto, and when?

7 If a man should be enclosed in Iron a foot thick and thrown into the fire,
what would become of his soul, whether could the soul come forth th^^ce or
not?

8 Why did not God give all men good hearts that they might be good?

9 If one should be taken among strange Indians that know not God, and they
would make him to fight against some that he should not and be refuse, and for
his refusal they kill him, what would become of his soul in such a case? This
was propounded by a They hold that their stout and vali^ an^ men have a reward
after death.
stout fellow who was affected.

10 How long it is before men believe that have the Word of God made known to
them?

11 How they should know when their faith is good, and their prayers good
prayers?

12 Why did not God kill the Devil that made all men so bad, God having all
power?

13 If we be made weak by sin in our hearts, how can we come before God to
sanctify a Sabbath?

There were many more questions of this kind, as also many Philosophical about
the Sun, Moon, Stats, Earth and Seas, Thunder, Lightning, Earthquakes, etc.
which I forbear to make mention of, lest I should clog your time with reading,
together with the various answers to them: by these you may perceive in what
stream their minds are carried, and that the Lord Jesus has at last an
enquiring people among these poor naked men, that formerly never so much as
thought of him; which questionings and enquiries are accounted of by some as
part of the whitenings of the harvest toward, wherever they are found among any
people, the good and benefit that comes to them hereby is and will be exceeding
great.

We had this year a malignant drunken Indian, that (to cast some reproach, as
we feared, upon this way) boldly propounded this question, Mr. Eliot (said he)
Who made Sack? who made Sack? but he was soon snib'd by the other Indians,
calling it That is a childish question.
a Papoose question, and seriously and gravely answered (not so much to his
question, as to his spirit) by Mr. Eliot, which has cooled his boldness ever
since, while others have gone on comfortably in this profitable and pleasant
way.

The man who sent me these and the like questions with their several answers
in writing, concluded his letter with this story, which I shall here insert,
that you may see the more of God among these poor people:

Upon the 25. of April last (says he) I had some occasion to go to speack
with An Indian S^^^^m.
Wabun about Sunrising in the morning, and staying some half an hours time, as
I came back by one of the Wigwams, the man of that Wigwam was at prayer; at
which I was so much affected, that I could not but stand under a Tree within
hearing, though I could not understand but little of his words, and consider
that God was fulfilling his Word, viz. The ends of the earth shall ^^member
themselves and turn unto him; and that Scripture, Thou art (...) God that
hear pro^er, unto thee shall all flesh come.

Also this present September I have observed one of them to call his children
to him from their gathering of Corn in the field, and to crave a blessing,
with much affection, having but a homely dinner to eat.

These things me thinks should move bowels, and awaken English hearts to be
thankful, it is no small part of Religion to awaken with God in family prayer,
(as it seems these do it early) and to crave a blessing with affectionate
hearts upon a homely dinner, perhaps parcht Corn or Indian stalks: I wish the
like hearts and ways were seen in many English who profess themselves
Christians, and that herein and many the like excellencies they were become
Indians, excepting that name, as he did in another case, except his bonds: and
that you may see not only how far Religion, but civility has taken place
among them, you may be pleased therefore to peruse this Court Order, which is
here inserted.

The Order made last General Court at Boston the 26. of May, 1647. concerning
the Indians, etc.
Upon information that the Indians dwelling among us, and submitted to our
government, being by the Ministry of the Word brought to some civility, are
desirous to have a course of ordinary Judicature set up among them: It is
therefore ordered by authority of this Court, that some one or more of the
Magistrates, as they shall agree amongst themselves, shall once every quarter
keep a Court at such place, where the Indians ordinarily assemble to hear the
Word of God, and may then hear and determine all causes both civil and
criminal, not being capital, concerning the Indians only, and that the Indian
Sachimsshall have liberty to take order in the nature of Summons or
Attachments, to bring any of their own people to the said Courts, and to keep a
Court of themselves, every month if they see occasion, to determine small
causes of a civil nature, and such smaller criminal causes, as the said
Magistrates shall refer to them; and the said Sachims shall appoint Officers
to serve Warrante, and to execute the Orders and Judgments of either of the
said Courts, which Officers shall from time to time be allowed by the said
Magistrates in the quarter Courts or by the Governor: And that all sines to
be imposed upon any Indian in any of the said Courts, shall go and be
bestowed toward the building of some meeting houses, for education of their
poorer children in learning, or other public use, by the advice of the said
Magistrates and of Master Eliot, or of such other Elder, as shall ordinarily
instruct them in the true Religion. And it is the desire of this Court, that
these Magistrates and Mr. Eliot or such other Elders as shall attend the
keeping of the said Courts will carefully endeavor to make the Indians
understand our most useful Laws, and the principles of reason, justice and
equity whereupon they are grounded, and it is desired that some care may be
taken of the Indians on the Lords days.

Thus having had a desire to acquaint you with these proceedings among the
Indians, and being desirous that you might more fully understand, especially
from him who is best able to judge, I did therefore entreat my brother Eliot
after some conference about these things, to set down under his own hand what
he has observed lately among them: which I do therefore herein send unto you
in his own hand writing as he sent it unto me, which I think is worthy all
Christian thankful ears to hear, and wherein they may see a little of the
Spirit of this man of God, whom in other respects, but especially for his
unweariednesse in this work of God, going up and down among them and doing them
good, I think we can never love nor honor enough.

The Letter of Mr. Eliot to T. S. concerning the late work of God among the
Indians.
Dear Brother,
AT your desire I have wrote a few things touching the Indians which at present
came to my mind, as being some of those passages which took principal
impression in my heart, wherein I thought I saw the Lord, and said the finger
of God is here.

That which I first aimed at was to declare and deliver unto them the Law of
God, to civilize them, which course the Lord took by Moses, to give the Law to
that rude company because of transgression, Gal. 3. 19. to convince, bridle,
restrain, and civilize them, and also to humble them. But when I first
attempted it, they gave no heed unto it, but were weary, and rather despised
what I said. A while after God stirred up in some of them a desire to come into
the English fashions, and live after their manner, but knew not how to attain
unto it, yea despaired that ever it should come to pass in their days, but
thought that in 40. years more, some Indians would be all one English, and in
an hundred years, all Indians here about, would so be: which when I heard,
(for some of them told me they thought so, and that some wise Indians said so)
my heart moved within me, abhorring that we should sit still and let that
work alone, and hoping that this motion in them was of the Lord, and that this
mind in them was a preparative to embrace the Law and Word of God; and
therefore I told them that they and we were already all one save in two
things, which make the only difference betwixt them and us: First, we know,
serve, and pray unto God, and they do not: Secondly, we labor and work in
building, planting, clothing our selves, etc. and they do not: and would hey
but do as we do in these things, they would be all one with English men:
they said they did not know God, and therefore could not tell how to pray to
him, nor serve him. I told them if they would learn to know God, I would teach
them: unto which they being very willing, I then taught them (as I sundry times
had indeavored asore) but never found them so forward, attentive and desirous
to learn till this time, and then I told them I would come to their Wigwams,
and teach them, their wives and children, which they seemed very glad of; and
from that day forward I have not failed to do that poor little which you know
I do.

I first began with the Indians of Noonanetum, as you know, those of Dorchester
mill not regarding any such thing: but the better sort of them perceiving how
acceptable this was to the English, both to Magistrates, and all the good
people, it pleased God to step in and bow their hearts to desire to be taught
to know God, and pray unto him likewise, and had not I gone unto them also, and
taught them when I did, they had prevented me, and desired me so to do, as I
afterward heard.

The effect of the Word which appears among them, and the change that is among
them is this: First, they have utterly fortaken all their Powwaws, and given
over that diabolical exercise, being convicted that it is quite contrary to
praying unto God; yea sundry of their Powwaws have renounced their wicked
employment, have condemned it as evil, and resolved never to use it anymore;
others of them, seeing their employment and gains were utterly gone here, have
fled to other places, where they are still entertained, and have raised lies,
slanders, and an evil report upon those that hear the Word, and pray unto
God, and also upon the English that endeavor to reclaim them and instruct
them, that so they might discourage others from praying unto God, for that they
account as a principal sign of a good man, and call all religion by that
name, praying to God; and beside they mock and scoff at those Indians which
pray, and blaspheme God when they pray; as this is one instance. A sober Indian
going up into the country with two of hissons, did pray (as his manner was at
home) and talked to them of God and Jesus Christ: but they mocked, and called
one of his sons Jehovah, and the other Jesus Christ: so that they are not
without opposition raised by the Pawwaws, and other wicked Indians.

Again as they have forsaken their former Religion, and manner of worship, so
they do pray unto God constantly in their families, morning and evening, and
that with great affection, as has been seen and heard by sundry that have gone
to their Wigwams at such times; as also when they go to meat they solemnly
pray and give thanks to God, as they see the English to do: so that that curse
which God threatens to pour out upon the families that call not on his name,
is through his grace, and tender mercy stayed from breaking forth against them,
and when they come to English houses, they desire to be taught; and if meat be
given them, they pray and give thanks to God: and usually express their great
joy, that they are taught to know God, and their great affection to them that
teach them.

Further more they are careful to instruct their children, that so when I come
they might be ready to answer their Catechize, which by the often repeating of
it to the children, the men and women can readily answer to.

Likewise they are careful to sanctify the Sabbath, but at first they could
not tell how to do it, and they asked of me how they should do it,
propounding it as a question whether they should come to the English meetings
or meet among themselves; they said, if they come to the English meetings they
understand nothing, or to no purpose, and if they met together among
themselves, they had none that could teach them. I told them that it was not
pleasing to God, nor profitable to themselves, to hear and understand nothing,
nor having any that could interpret to them. Therefore I counseled them to
meet together, and desire those that were the wisest and best men to pray, and
then to teach the rest such things as I had taught them from Gods Word, as well
as they could; and when one has done, then let another do the like, and then a
third, and when that was done ask me, etc. and to pray unto God to help them
therein: and this is the manner how they spend their Sabbaths.

They are also strict against any profanation of the Sabbath, by working,
fishing, hunting, etc. and have a Law to punish such as are delinquents therein
by a fine of 10 s. and sundry cases they have had, wherein they have very
strictly prosecuted such as have any way profaned the Sabbath. As for example,
upon a Sabbath morning Cutchamaquin the Sachim his wife going to fetch water
met with other women, and she began to talk of wordly matters, and so held on
their discourse a while, which evil came to Nahantons ear, who was to teach
that day (this Nabanton is a sober good man, and a true friend to the English
ever since our coming) so he bent his discourse to show the sanctification of
the Sabbath, and reproved such evils as did violate the same; and among other
things wordly talk, and thereupon reproved that which he heard of that morning.
After he had done, they fell to discourse about it, and spent much time
therein, he standing to prove that it was a sin, and she doubting of it,
seeing it was early in the morning, and in private; and alleging that he was
more to blame then she, because he had occasioned so much discourse in the
public meeting: but in conclusion they determined to refer the case to me, and
accordingly they did come to my house on the second day morning and opened all
the matter, and I gave them such direction as the Lord directed me unto,
according to his holy Word.

Another case was this, upon a Lords day toward night two strangers came to
Wabans Wigwam (it being usual with them to travail on that day, as on any
other; (and when they came in, they told him that at a place about a mile off
they had chased a Rackoone, and he betook himself into an hollow tree, and if
they would go with them, they might fell the tree and take him: at which
tidings, Waban being willing to be so well provide to entertain those strangers
(a common practice among them, freely to entertain travailers and strangers) he
sent his two servants with them, who felled the tree, and took the beast. But
this act of his was an offense to the rest, who judged it a violation of the
Sabbath, and moved agitation among them: but the conclusion was, it was to be
moved as a question upon the next Lecture day; which was accordingly done, and
received such answer as the Lord guided unto by his Word.

Another case was this, upon a Lords day their public meetting holding long,
and somewhat what late, when they came at home, in one Wigwam the fire was
almost out, and therefore the man of the house, as he sat by the fire side
took his Hatchet and split a little dry piece of wood, which they reserve on
purpos^ for such use, and so kindled his fire, which being taken notice of, it
was thought to be such a work as might not lawfully be done upon the Sabbath
day, and therefore the case was propounded the Lecture following for their
better information.

These instances may serve to show their care of the external observation of
the Sabbath day.

In my exercise among them (as you know) we attend four things, besides
prayer unto God, for his presence and blessing upon all we do.

First, I catechize the children and youth; wherein some are very ready and
expert, they can readily say all the Commandments, so far as I have
communicated them, and all other principles about the creation, the fall, the
redemption by Christ, etc. wherein also the aged people are pretty expert, by
the frequent repetition thereof to the children, and are able to teach it to
their children at home, and do so.

Secondly, I Preach unto them out of some texts of Scripture, wherein I study
all plainness, and brevity, unto which many are very attentive.

Thirdly, if there be any occasion, we in the next place go to admonition and
censure; unto which they submit themselves reverently, and obediently, and some
of them penitently confessing their sins with much plainness, and without
shiftings, and excuses: I will instance in two or three particulars; this was
one case, a man named Wampoowas, being in a passion upon some light occasion
did beat his wife, which was a very great offense among them now (though in
former times it was very usual) and they had made a Law against it, and set a
fine upon it; whereupon he was publikly brought forth before the Assembly,
which was great that day, for our Governor and many other English were then
present: the man wholly condemned himself without any excuse: and when he was
asked what provocation his wife gave him? he did not in the least measure blame
her but himself, and when the quality of the sin was opened, that it was
cruelty to his own body, and against Gods Commandment, and that passion was a
sin, and much aggravated by such effects, yet God was ready to pardon it in
Christ, etc. he turned his face to the wall and wept, though with modest
endeavor to hide it; and such was the modest, penitent, and melting behavior
of the man, that it much affected all to see it in a Barbarian, and all did
forgive him, only this remained, that they executed their Law notwithstanding
his repentance, and required his fine, to which he willingly submitted, and
paid it.

Another case of admonition was this, Cutshamaquin the Sachim having ason of
about 14 or 15 years old, he had bin drunk, and had behaved himself
disobediently, and rebelliously against his father and mother, for which sin
they did blame him, but he despised their admonition. And before I knew of it,
I did observe when I catechized him, when he should say the ^ist Commandment,
he did not freely say, Honor thy father, but wholly left out mother, and so he
did the Lecture day before, but when this sin of his was produced, he was
called forth before the Assembly, and he confessed that what was said against
him was true, but he ^^h to accuse his father of sundry evils, as that he
would have killed him in his anger, and that he forced him to drink Sack, and I
know not what else: which behavior we greatly disliked, showed him the evil
of it, and Mr. Wilson being present labored much with him, for he understood
the English, but all in vain, his l^^art was hard and hopeless for that time,
therefore using due loving persuasions, we did sharply admonish him of his
sin, and required him to answer further the next Lecture day, and so left
him; and so stout he was, that when his father offered to pay his fine of 10 s.
for his drunkenness according to their Law, he would not except it at his
hand. When the next day was come, and other exercises finished, I called him
forth, and he willingly came, but still in the same mind as before. Then we
turned to his father, and exhorted him to remove that stumbling block out of
his sons way, by confessing his own sins whereby he had given occasion of
hardness of heart to his son; which thing was not sudden to him, for I had
formerly in private prepared him thereunto, and he was very willing to hearken
to that counsel, because his conscience told him he was blameworthy; and
accordingly he did, he confessed his maine and principal evils of his own
accord: and upon this advantage I took occasion to put him upon confession of
sundry other vices which I knew he had in former times been guilty of, and all
the Indians knew it likewise; and put it after this manner, Are you now sorry
for your drunkenesse, filthiness, false dealing, lying, etc. which sins you
committed before you knew God? unto all which cases, he expressed himself
sorrowful, and condemned himself for them: which example of the Sachim was
profitable for all the Indians. And when he had thus confessed his sins, we
turned again to his son and labored with him, requiring him to confess his
sin, and entreat God to forgive him for Christ his sake, and to confess his
offense against his father and mother, and entreat them to forgive him, but he
still refused; and now the other Indians spoke unto him soberly, and
affectionatly, to put him on, and diverse spoke one after another, and some
several times. Mr. Wilson again did much labor with him, and at last he did
humble himself, confessed all, and entreated his father to forgive him, and
took him by the hand, at which his father burst forth into great weeping: he
did the same also to his mother, who wept also, and so did diverse others; and
many English being present, they fell a weeping, so that the house was filled
with weeping on every side; and then we went to prayer, in all which time
Cutshamaquin wept, in so much that when we had done the board he stood upon
was all dropped with his tears.

Another case of admonition was this, a hopeful young man who is my servant,
being upon a journey, and drinking Sack at their setting forth, he drank too
much, and was disguised; which when I heard I reproved him, and he humbled
himself, with confession of his sin, and tears. And the next Lecture day I
called him forth before the Assembly, where he did confess his sin with many
tears.

Before I leave this point of admonition, if I thought it would not be two
tedious to you, I would mention one particular more, where we saw the power of
God awing a wicked wretch by this ordinance of admonition. It was George that
wicked Indian, who as you know, at our first beginnings sought to cast
aspersions upon Religion, by laying slanderous accusations against godly men,
and who asked that captious question, who made Sack? and this fellow having
killed a young Cow at your Town, and sold it at the College instead of Moose,
covered it with many lies, insomuch as Mr. Dunster was loath he should be
directly charged with it when we called him forth, but that we should rather
inquire. But when he was called before the Assembly, and charged with it, he
had not power to deny it, but presently confessed, only he added one thing
which we think was an excuse; thus God has honored this ordinance among them.

Fourthly the last exercise, you know, we have among them, is their asking us
questions, and very many they have asked, which I have forgotten but some few
that come to my present remembrance I will briefly touch.

One was Wabb^ko^ets question, who is reputed an old P^ww^^, it was to this
purpose, seeing the English had been 27. years (some of them) in this land, why
did we never teach them to know God till now? had you done it sooner, said
he, we might have known much of God by this time, and much sin might have
been prevented, but now some of us are grown old in fin, etc. To whom we
answered, that we do repent that we did not long ago, as now we do, yet
withal we told them, that they were never willing to hear till now, and that
seeing God has bowed their hearts to be willing to hear, we are desirous to
take all the pains we can now to teach them.

Another question was, that of Cutshamaquin, to this purpose, Before I knew
God, said he, I thought I was well, but since I have known God and sin, I find
my heartfull of sin, and more sinful then ever it was before, and this has
been a great trouble to me; and at this day my heart is but very little better
then it was, and I am afraid it will be as bad again as it was before, and
therefore I sometime wish I might die before I be so bad again as I have been.
Now my question is, whether is this a sin or not? This question could not be
learned from the English, nor did it seem a coined seigned thing, but a real
matter gathered from the experience of his own heart, and from an inward
observation of himself.

Another question was about their children, Whither their little children go
when they dye, seeing they have not sinned?

Which question gave occasion more fully to teach them original sin, and the
damned state of all men: And also, and especially it gave occasion to teach
them the Covenant of God, which he has made with all his people, and with
their children, so that when God chooses a man or a woman to be his servant, he
chooses all their children to be so also: which doctrine was exceeding grateful
unto them.

Another great question was this, when I preached out of 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
old Mr. Brown, being present, observed them to be much affected, and one
especially did weep very much, though covered it what he could; and after that
there was a general question, which they sent unto me about, by my man, as
the question of them all, Whether any of them should go to Heaven, seeing they
found their hearts full of sin, and especially full of the sin of lust,
which they call nanwunwudsquas, that is, mad after women; and the next meeting,
being at Dorchester mill, Mr. Mather and Mr. Wareham, with diverse others being
present, they did there propound it, expressing their fears, that none of them
should be saved; which question did draw forth my heart to preach and press
the promise of pardon to all that were weary and sick of sin, if they did
believe in Christ who had died for us, and satisfied the justice of God for all
our sins, and through whom God is well pleased with all such repenting
sinners that come to Christ, and believe in him; and the next day I took that
Text, Matih. 11. 28, 29. and this doctrine some of them in a special manner did
receive in a very reverent manner.

There is another great question that has been several times propounded, and
much sticks w^^^ such as begin to pray, namely, If they leave off Powwawing,
and pray to God, what shall they do when they are sick? for they have no skill
in physic, though some of them understand the virtues of sundry things, yet
the state of man's body, and skill to apply them they have not: but all the
refuge they have and rely upon in time of sickness is their Powwaws, who by
antic, foolish and irrational conceits delude the poor people; so that it is
a very needful thing to inform them in the use of Physic, and a most
effectual means to take them off from their Powwawing. Some of the wiser sort
I have stirred up to get this skill; I have showed them the anatomy of man's
body, and some general principles of Physic, which is very acceptable to
them, but they are so extremely ignorant, that these things must rather be
taught by sight, sense, and experiance then by precepts, and rules of art; and
therefore I have had many thoughts in my heart, that it were a singular good
work, if the Lord would stir up the hearts of some or other of his people in
England to give some maintenance toward some School or Collegiate exercise
this way, wherein there should be Anatomies and other instructions that way,
and where there might be some recompense given to any that should bring in any
vegetable or other thing that is virtuous in the way of Physic; by this means
we should soon have all these things which they know, and others of our
Countrymen that are skillful that way, and now their skill lies buried for
want of encouragement, would be a searching and trying to find out the virtues
of things in this country, which doubtless are many, and would not a little
conduce to the benefit of the people of this Country, and it may be of our
native Country also; by this means we should train up these poor Indians
in that skill which would confound and root out their Pawwaws, and then would
they be fa^re more easily inclined to leave those ways, and pray unto God,
whose gift Physic is, and whose blessing must make it effectual.

There is also another reason which moves my thought and desires this way,
namely that our young Students in Physic may be trained up better then yet
they be, who have only theoreticall knowledge, and (...) forced to fall to
practice before ever they saw an Anatomy made, or duly trained up in making
experiments, for we never had but one Anatomy in the Country, which Mr. Giles
Firman (now in England) did make and read upon very well, but no more of that
now.

This very day that I wrote these things unto you, I have been with the Indians
to teach them, as I was wont to do, and one of their questions among many
other was to know what to say to such Indians as oppose their praying to God,
and believing in Jesus Christ, and for their own information also, What get
you, say they, by praying to God, and believing in Jesus Christ? you go naked
still, and you are as poor as we, and our Corn is as good as yours, and we
take more pleasure then you; did we see that you got any thing by it, we would
pray to God and believe in Jesus Christ also as you do? Unto which question I
then answered them. First, God gives unto us two sorts of good things, one
sort are little ones, which I showed by my little finger; the other sort are
great ones, which I showed by my thumb, (for you know they use and delight in
demonstrations:) the little mercies are riches, as cloths, food, sack, houses,
cattle, and pleasures, these are little things which serve but for our bodies a
little while in this life; the great mercies are wisdom, the knowledge of God,
Christ, eternal life, repentance, faith, these are mercies for the soul, and
for eternal life: now though God do not yet give you the little mercies, he
gives you that which is a great deal better, which the wicked Indians cannot
see. And this I proved to them by this example; when Foxun the Mohegan
Counselor, who is counted the wisest Indian in the Country, was in the Bay, I
did on purpose bring him unto you; and when he was here, you saw he was a fool
in comparison of you, for you could speak of God and Christ, and heaven and
repentance and faith, but he sat and had not one word to say, unless you
talked of such poor things as hunting, wars, etc. Secondly, you have some more
cloths then they, and the reason why you have no more is because you have but a
little wisdom, if you were more wise to know God, and obey his Commands, you
would work more then you do, for to God commands, Six days thou shale work,
etc. and thus the English do: and if you would be so wise as to work as they
do, you should have cloths, houses, cattle, riches as they have, God would give
you them.

This day they told me this news, that some of them having been abroad in the
Country at Titacut, diverse of those Indians would be glad to know God, and to
pray unto God, and would be glad if I would come and teach them, but some of
them opposed and would not. They asked me this day, why God made the Rainbow.
These things are now fresh in my mind, that makes me so large in them, but I Will
forbear any more of their questions of this nature.

There do sundry times fall out differences among them, and they usually bring
their cases to me, and sometime such, as it is needful for me to decline; where
I may, I advise them to some issue. One great case that has come several
times to me, is about such debts as they owe by gaming, for they have been
great gamesters, but have moved questions about it, and are informed of the
unlawfulness of it, and have thereupon wholly given over gaming for any
wagers, and all games wherein is a lot, only use lawful recreations, and have
a Law against unlawful gaming; but other Indians that are of another mind,
come and challenge their old debts, and now they refuse to pay, because is was
a sin so to game, and they now pray to God, and therefore must not pay such
sinful debts. Now the case being serious, and such as I saw a snare
underneath, the first counsel they had was, who ever would challenge such a
debt should come to our Governor, and he would take order to rectify the
matter. But the Creditors liked not that way, and therefore soon after there
came another case of the same kind, and an issue was very necessary; therefore
I first dealt with the creditor, and showed him the sinfulness of such games,
and how angry God was at them; and therefore persuaded him to be content to
take half his debt, unto which he very willingly condescended; then I dealt
with the debtor, and asked him if he did not promise to pay him all that debt?
and he answered yea, he did so; then I showed him that God commands us to
perform our promises, and though be sinned in gaming, he must repent of that,
but seeing he has promised payment, he should sin to break his promise: at
which he was utterly silenced; but then I asked him, if he would willingly pay
half, if I should persuade the other to accept it; yea said he very willingly,
and so the matter ended: and in this way they usually end such cases since that
time. Their young men, who of all the rest, live most idly and dissolutely,
now begin to go to service, some to Indians, some to Fnglish; and some of them
growing weary, broak out of their services, and they had no help among them for
it; so that some propounded what they should do to remedy that evil; they
were answered, that the English bring such servants to the Court, and our
Magistrates rectify those evils; then they desired that they might have a
Court among them for government, at which motion we rejoiced, seeing it came
from themselves, and tended so much to civilize them, since which time I moved
the General Court in it, and they have pleased to order a way for exercising
government among them: the good Lord prosper and bless it.

They moved also as you know for a School, and through Gods mercy a course is
now taken that there be Schools at both places where their children are taught.

You know likewise that we exhorted them to sense their ground with ditches,
stone walls, upon the banks, and promised to help them with Shovels, Spades,
Mattocks, Crows of Iron; and they are very desirous to follow that counsel,
and call upon me to help them with tools faster them I can get them, though I
have now bought pretty store, and they (I hope) are at work. The women are
desirous to learn to spin, and I have procured Wheels for sundry of them, and
they can spin pretty well. They begin to grow industrious, and find something
to sell at Market all the year long: all winter they sell Brooms, Staves,
Elepots, Baskets, Turkies. In the Spring, Cranebe^ies, Fish, Stawberies, in the
Summer Hurtleberries, Grapes, Fish: in the Autumn they sell Craneberries, Fish,
Venison, etc. and they find a good benefit by the Market, and grow more and
more to make use thereof; besides sundry of them work with the English in Hay
time, and Harvest, but yet it is not comparable to what they might do, if they
were industrious, and old boughs must be bent a little at once; if we can set
the young twiggs in a better bent, it will be Gods mercy. Dear brother I can
go no further, a weary body, and sleepy eyes command me to conclude, if I have
not satisfied your desire in this little I have wrote, let me understand it
from you, and I shall be willing to do my endeavor: and thus with my dear
love remembered to your self and your beloved yoakfellow, and desiring your
prayers for Gods grace and blessing upon my spirit and poor endeavors, I take
leave at this time and rest

Roxbury this 24. of September. 1647. Tour loving brother in our Savior Christ,
JOHN ELIOT.

Let me add this Postscript, that there be two reasons that make me believe
the Lords time is come to make a preparative at least for the coming of his
grace, and kingdom among them. First, that he has bowed their hearts, who
were as averse, and as far off from God, as any heathen in the world; and
their hearts begin to bow more and more. Secondly, because the Lord has raised
a mighty spirit of prayer in this behalf in all the Churches.

This Relation of Mr. Eliots I know many things therein to be true, and all the
rest I have heard confirmed by credible persons, eye and ear witnesses ofthese
things, and they are familiarly known in these parts. I know also that Mr.
Eliot writes (as his spirit is) modestly and sparingly, and speaks the least in
sundry particulars; for in his story of the repentance and public admonition
of his own man, page 23. he says he manifested many tears in public, but I
heard it from many then present that there were so many, as that the dry place
of the Wigmom, where he stood was bedirtied with them, pouring them out so
abundantly. Indians are well known not to be much subject to tears, no not
when they come to feel the sorest torture, or are solemnly brought forth to
die; and if the Word works these tears, surely there is some conquering power
of Christ Jesus stirring among them, which what it will end in at last, the
Lord belt knows. If Mr. Brigbtmans interpretation of Daniels prophecy be true,
that Anno 1650. Europe will hear some of the best tidings that ever came into
the world, viz. rumors from the Eastern Jews, which shall trouble the Turkish
tyrant and shake his Pillars when they are coming to repossesse their own
land, for which they will be wrestling (if my memory fails not, according to
his notion) about 40. years; I shall hope then that these Western Indians will
soon come in, and that these beginnings are but preparatives for a brighter day
then we yet see among them, wherein East and West shall sing the song of the
Lamb: but I have no skill in prophesies, nor do I believe every man's
interpretation of such Scripture; but this is certain, God is at work among
these; and it is not usual for the Sun to set as soon as it begins to rise, nor
for the Lord to Jesus to lose an inch of ground in the recovering times of his
Churches peace and his own eclipsed and forgotten glory, (if these be such
times) until he has won the whole field, and driven the Prince of darkness
out of it, who is but a bold usurper of the Lord Jesus inheritance, to whom are
given the utmost ends of the earth. When Charles the Great had broken the chief
power of the barbarous and fierce Saxons in Germany, he made this the only
article of peace, that they should entertain such a Gospel as good then as the
degenerate Christian world could afford, and for that end admit of a Monastery
among them of such men as might instruct them, and this course prevailed, if
we may believe Crantzius lib. chapter 1, 2.
Crantzius the Historian of those times, and shall we think that when the Lord
Jesus has set up not a Monastery of works but Churches of Saints in these
toasts to encourage the ministry and this work of Christ, that his blessed
Gospel cannot or shall not in these days take some effect since it has broke
so far? I dare conclude nothing, only it will be our comfort in the day of our
accounts, that we have endeavored something this way; and it may be this very
endeavor shall be our peace. Gildas our British Historian observing that one
cause why God let loose the Saxons to scourge and root out the Britains, was
their deep carelessness of communicating, unto them the Christian Religion,
when they had their spirits at fit advantage: but I dare not discourse of these
matters.

One thing more I remember concerning Mr. Eliots conference with a Narraganset
Sachim a sober man this year; after that he had taught this Sachim the Law of
God and had shown Lim the means of salvation by Christ; he then asked him if
he did know And understand those things? and hesaid, yes. He then asked him if
he did believe them? but he could not get any answer from him that way, but
did seem to take them into more serious thoughts. He then asked him, why they
did not learn of Mr. Williams who has lived among them diverse years? and he
soberly answered that they did not care to learn of him, because he is no good
man but goes out and works upon the Sabbath day; I name it not to show what
glimmerings nature may have concerning the observation of the Sabbath, but to
show what the ill example of English may do, and to see what a stumbling block
to all Religion the loose observation of the Sabbath is, however man's shifting
wits may find out evasions, to get loose from out of that net.

But this may serve to satisfy your own or others desires concerning the
progress of the Gospel among the Indians: the Lord Jesus seems at this day to
be turning upside down the whole frame of things in the world, Kings
Parliaments, Armies, Kingdoms, Authorities, Churches, Ministers, and if out of
his free grace he looks not upon these hopeful beginnings, these will be so
turned also; for opposition there is from men and devils against it, and I have
feared in my own heart that within these few months there has been some
coolings among the best of these Indians; but we find it so also among many
people that are English in their first work, but the Lord Jesus revives again;
and therefore Mr. Eliot of late having told them that he was afraid that they
began to be weary. they took it to heart, and propounded in my hearing at a
late Indian Lacture at Noonanetum many profitable questions, viz. When they
prayed and heard the Word aright? and how they might know when they were weary
of them? And what time it might be before the Lord might come and make them
know him? And what the first sin of the Devils was? (He discoursing to them
about the danger of Apostasy) At this time they are (as you may perceive by
Mr. Eliots writings) about fencing in their ground and Town given them some
hundreds of Acres, with a stone fence, for which end Mr. Eliot provides them
Mattocks, Shovels and Crows of Iron, etc. and to encourage their
slothfulness, promised to give a groat or six pence a rod, if they would thus
far attend their own good, and work for themselves: all the poor Indians at
Noonanetum are generally clad with such cloths as we can get them, and the
Wigwams of the meanest of them equallize any Sachims in other places, being
built not with mats but barks of Trees in good bigness, the rather that they
may have their partitions in them for husbands and wives together, and their
children and servants in their places also, who formerly were never private in
what nature is ashamed of, either for the sun or any man to see. It Is some
refreshing to think that there is (if there was no more but) the name of
Christ sounding in those dark and despicable Tartarian Tents; the Lord can
build them houses in time to pray in, when he has given unto them better
hearts, and when perhaps he has cursed and consumed theirs who have disdained
to give that worship and homage to Christ in their seiled houses, which poor
Indians rejoyee to give to him in their poor Tents and Wigwams: I desire you to
gather what stock of prayers you can for them. I had almost forgot to tell you
of Mr. Eliots going up the Country lately with Mr. Flint, Captain Willard of
Concord, and sundry others, toward Merrimath River unto that Indian Sachim
Passaconnaway, that old Witch and Powwaw, who together with both his sons, fled
the presence of the light, and durst not stand their ground, nor be at home
when he came, pretending fear of being killed by a man forsooth that came only
with a book in his hand, and with a few others without any weapons only to bear
him company and direct his way in those deserts, but in it you may see the
guilt of the man, and that Satan is but a coward in his Lions skin even upon
his own dunghill, as also the hatred and enmity against the Word which is in
some, which argues that the attention which others give to it, is a power of
God, and not merely to flatter and get favor with the English: but the rest of
Passaconnawaies men attended to the things which were spoken and asked diverse
questions, the Indians in our parts accompanying Mr. Eliot and giving blessed
examples to the others herein, as also in saying Grace before and after meat,
praying in their Wigwams with them, and some of them singing of Psalms, which
they have learnt among the English: discoursing also with them about the things
of God. It is somewhat observable (though the observation be more cheerful
then deep) that the first Text out of which Mr. Eliot preached to the Indians
was about the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. where it is said, Verse. 9, 10. that by
propbesying to the wind, the wind came and the dry bones lived; now the Indian
word for Wind is Waubon, and the most active Indian for stirring up other
Indians to seek after the knowledge of God in these parts, his name is Waubon,
which signifies Wind, (the Indians giving names to their children usually
according to appearances of providence) although they never dreamt of this,
that this their Waubon should breathe such a spirit of life and encouragement
into the rest of the Indians. as he has indeavored in all parts of the
Country, both at Concord, Merrimeek and elsewhere; but some of the Indians
themselves that were stirred up by him took notice of this his name and that
Scripture together, and the English also have much observed him herein, who
still continues the same man, although we think there be now many others whom
he first breathed encouragement into that do far exceed him in the light and
life of the things of God: Mr. Eliot also professing that he chose that Text
without the least thought of any such application in respect of Waubon.

There have been many difficult questions propounded by them, which we have
been unwilling to engage our selves in any answer unto, until we have the
concurrence of others with ns.

First, suppose a man before he knew God, has had two wives, the first barren
and childlesse, the second fruitful and bearing him many sweet children, the
question now propounded was, which of these two wives he is to put away? if he
puts away; the first who has no children, then he puts away her whom God and
Religion undoubtedly binds him unto, there being no other defect but want of
children: if he puts away the other, then he must cast off all his children
with her also as illegitimate, whom he so exceedingly loves. This is a case
now among them, and they are very fearful to do any thing cross to Gods will
and mind herein.

Secondly, suppose a man marry a Sqaw, and she deserts and flies from her
husband, and commits adultery with other remote Indians, but afterward it come
to pass that she hearing the Word, and sorry for what she has done, she
desires to come to her husband again, who remains still unmarried; Whether
should this husband upon her repentance receive her again? and whether in be
not bound thereunto so to do?

At the last Lecture at Noonanetum this September, there were diverse questions
asked: one was propounded by an old Sqaw, a Widow; viz. If when men know God,
God loves them, why then is it that any one are afflicted after that they know
him? I shall mention no more, but conclude with the solemn speech of a sober
and hopeful Indian at this Lecture, whose name is Wampooas, who in stead of
propounding a question fell into these expressions, viz. That because we pray
to God, other Indians abroad in the country hate us and oppose us, the English
on the other side suspect us, and fear us to be still such as do not pray at
all; but (says he) God who knows all things, he knows that we do pray to
him. To which speech Mr. Eliot replied, that it was true indeed, that some of
the English did so far suspect them for sundry reasons; but I do not so, and
others of us, who know you and speak with you, we do not so think of you; and
then gave them gracious and serious encouragements to go forward and make more
progress in the things of God. This their own testimony of themselves being
propounded with much sweetness and seriousness of affection, may be the last,
although it be the least confirmation of some inward work among them; which I
looked upon as a special providence that such a speech should be spoken and
come to my ear just at such a time as this, wherein I was finishing the story,
to confirm in some measure what has been written; the Lord himself I believe
and no man living, putting these words into their own hearts, to give this
modest testimony concerning themselves. The beginning of this enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom should enlarge our hearts with great joy. If I should gather
and sum up together the several gracious impressions of God upon them from
what has been scattered here and there in the story, I think it might make
many Christians ashamed, who may easily see how far they are exceeded by
these naked men in so short a^ i am thus wrought upon by such small and
despicable means. My brother Eliot who is Preacher to them, proselling he can
as yet but stammer out some pieces of the Word of God unto them in their own
tongue; but God is with him, and God is wont to be maximus in minimis, and is
most seen in doing great things by small means. The Sword of Gods Word shall
and will pierce deep, even when it is half broken, when the hand of a mighty
Redeemer has the laying of it on: and the Scripture herein is, and must be
fulfilled, that as soon as the heathen hear Christ they shall submit, Psalm.
18. 43, 44. and such nations whom Christ knew not shall run unto him, Isai. 55.
5. The fall of the unbeleving Jews was the rising of the Gentiles; my prayer
to God therefore for Europe is, that the fall of the Churches, (little bettered
by the devouring Sword which is still thirsty) may not be the rising of these
American Gentiles, never pitied till now. I wish that Alsted ius prophecy
Alsted in Ap^t,
herein may never prove true; but rather that the rising of these may be a
provoking and raising up of them, especially of the English, to lament after
that God whom they have forsaken; and to lament after him, together with us,
for these poor Indians who never yet knew him.

Sir, I had ended these relations once or twice, but the stay of the Vessel
increases new matter; which because ^^is new and fresh, you shall have it as I
heard of it from a faithful hand: There were sundry questions propounded at
the Indian Lecture at Noonanetum this October. 13. by the Indians: the first was
propounded to Mr. Eliot himself upon occasion of his Sermon out of Ephesians. 5.
11. Have no fellowship with unfruitful workers of darkness, viz. What English
men did think of Mr. Eliot because be came among wicked Indians to teach them?

Secondly, Suppose two men sin, the one knows be sins, and the other does
not know sin, will God punish both alike?

Thirdly, Suppose there should be one wise Indian that teaches good things to
other Indians, whether should not he be as a father or brother unto such
Indians he so teaches in the ways of God? This last question seems to argue
some motions stirring in some of their hearts to pity and teach their poor
Countrymen; and surely then will be the most hopeful time of doing good
among them, when the Lord shall raise up some or other like themselves to go
among them and preach the Word of life unto them with fatherly or brotherly
bowels; and yet I limit not the most High, who can make use of what Instruments
he pleases for this work. I shall conclude therefore with a story I had both
by writing and word of mouth, from a faithful Mr. Edward Jackson.
man which he saw with his own eyes this October. 7. There was one of the
Indians at Noonanetum, has had a child sick of a Consumption many a day, and
at that time died of it; when it was dead, some of the Indians came to an
honest man to enquire how they should bury their dead; the man told them how
and what the English did when they buried theirs; hereupon rejecting all their
old superstitious observances at such sad times (which are not a few) they
presently procured a few boards, and buy a few ^^yles of the English, and so
make a pretty handsome Coffin, (for they are very dextrous at any thing they
see once done) and put the child in to it, and so accompanied it to the grave
very solemnly, about 40. Indians of them: when the earth was cast upon it and
the grave made up, they withdrew a little from that place, and went all
together and assembled under a Tree in the Woods, and there they desired one
Tutaswampe a very hopeful Indian to pray with them; now although the English
do not usually meet in companies to pray together after such sad occasions, yet
it seems God stird up their hearts thus to do; what the substance of their
prayer was I cannot certainly learn, although I have heard some things that
way, which I therefore name not, only I have and shall endeavor to get it, if
it be possible for the poor Indian to express the substance of it, and so
shall send it if the ship stays long, only this is certain by him who was
occasionally an eye and care witness of these things, that they continued
instant with God in prayer for almost half an hour together, and this godly
man's words to me (who understands a little of their language) are these; that
this Tutaswampe did express such zeal in prayer with such variety of gracious
expressions, and abundance of tears, both of himself and most of the company,
that the woods rang again with their sighs and prayers; and (says he) I was
much ashamed of my self and some others, that have had so great light, and yet
want such affections as they have, who have as yet so little knowledge. All
this he saw standing at some good distance alone from them under a Tree.

Thus you see (Sir) that these old obdurate sinners are not altogether
senseless of Gods afflicting hand and humbling providence; and though
natural affection may be much stirring in such times, yet you see how God
begins to sanctify such affections among them: and I wish that many English
were not outstript herein by these poor Indians, who have got the ^art I sear
of many English, that can pass by such sad providence without laying them in
this manner to heart. I confess these and many such things which we see in
diverse of them, do make some to think that there is more of God and his Spirit
in some of their hearts then we yet can discover, and which they hope will
break out in time.

Thus you have a true, but somewhat rent and ragged relation of these things;
it may be most suitable to the story of naked and ragged men: my desire is that
no man's Spectacles may deceive him, so as to look upon these things either as
bigger or lesser, better or worser then they are; which all men generally are
apt to do at things at so great distance, but that they may judge of them as
indeed they are, by what truth they see here expressed in the things themselves.
I know that some think that all this work among them is done and acted thus
by the Indians to please the English, and for applause from them; and it is not
unlikely but so'tis in many, who do but blaze for a time; but certainly'tis
not so in all, but that the power of the Word has taken place in some, and
that inwardly and effectually, but how far savingly time will declare, and the
reader may judge of, by the story itself of these things. Some say that if it
be so, yet they are but a few that are thus wrought upon; Be it so, yet so it
has ever been, many called, few chosen: and yet withal I believe the calling
in of a few Indians to Christ is the gathering home of many hundreds in one,
considering what a vast distance there has been between God and them so long,
even days without number; considering also how precious the first fruits of
America will be to Jesus Christ, and what seeds they may be of great harvests
in after times; and yet if there was no great matter seen in these of grown
years, their children notwithstanding are of great hopes both from English and
Indians themselves, who are therefore trained up to School, where many are
very apt to learn, and who are also able readily to answer to the questions
propounded, containing the principles and grounds of all Christian Religion in
their own tongue. I confess it passes my skill to tell how the Gospel should
be generally received by these American Natives, considering the variety of
Languages in small distances of places; only he that made their ears and
tongues can raise up some or other to teach them how to hear, and what to
spoke; and if the Gospel must ride circuit, Christ can and will conquer by
weak and despicable means, though the conquest perhaps may be somewhat long.
The beginnings and foundations of the Spaniard in the Southern parts of this
vast continent, being laid in the blood of nineteen Millions of poor innocent
Natives (as Acosta the Jesuit a bird of their own nest relates the story)
shall certainly therefore be utterly rooted up by some revenging hand; and
when he is once dispossessed of his Golden Mansions and Silver Mines, it may be
then the oppressed remnant in those coasts also may come in. In the mean while
if it be the good pleasure of Christ to look upon any of the worst and meanest
of these outcasts in these Coasts of New England, let us not despise this day
of small things, but as the Jews did of old, so let us now cry mightily to God
and say, and sing, Let the people praise thee O God, yea let all the people
praise thee, then shall the earth bringforth her increase, and God even our God
will bless us.

I have sent you two witnesses beside my own of the truth of the Indian story
printed, you may publish them if you please as they have writ, and subscribed
with their own hands.

THOMAS SHEPHARD.

FINIS.

