A RECEIPT FOR THE State-Palsie.

OR, A Direction for the Settling THE GOVERNMENT OF THE NATION: Delivered in a
Sermon upon Proverbs 25. 5.

By S. S.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlocke at the Phoenix in Paul's Churchyard, near
the Little North-door. MDCLX.

TO THE Supremacy, and Magistracy OF ENGLAND
Sirs,
IT is presumed that ye ought, and it is hoped that ye do know how, and when
to draw, and wield the sword, which God has put into your hands; But it is
certain, and sad, that it has long lain rusting in the scabbard of partiality,
ease, and error; insomuch that not only your persons begin to be dishonored,
but even so much of God as is in you, your Authority, begins to lie under the
foot of pride and petulancy, God has been emptying you from vessel to vessel;
he seems to be almost ready to pour you out upon the ground, because you will
not be purified from your lees: He has been loosning you a good while, and he
seems to have a good mind to knock you off, because you have not as yet done
that vindication to his name, which the veriest Moses of you all would have
done to your own, if so blasphemed. And certainly, however you may create to
your selves some carnal crutches for a time, and promise your selves settlement
upon them, yet though you were as the signet upon Gods right hand, he will
pull you thence; and if you will not by the sword of Justice revenge the
quarrel of Gods covenant upon wicked men, he will send a sword which shall
revenge it, both upon them and you. Your coldness and partiality have made you
changeable, your change (with many) has made you ridiculous, and if you still
go on to neglect what is the very essence of your duty, and notwithstanding
your changes, yet will not fear God, he will never leave emptying Hodie mih^
Jupiter esto, Cras mihi truncus eris.
you, till he have changed you from the clouds to the clods, from the Throne
to the dunghill, from a temporary Authority to an eternal calamity. Which that
it may be seasonably prevented, and that you Gods, may become all of you the
Sons of the most High, both in the execution of Justice here, and in the
fruition of eternal Crowns hereafter, is the sole intendment of these printed
pains, and the continual breathing of

Your Servant in the Lord.

TO THE Sober Reader.
IT was rightly observed, Rarus est faelix, idemque senex, It is hard to be
great and live long. We in England have had large experience of the
unsettledness of Government, and the daily rotation of our Governors, insomuch
that the Crown has hardly given time, to any of late years that wore it, to
give Judgment, whether it fit the head or no. With much ado many have gone up
to the Throne, only to come down again; and the Government of the Nation may be
put into the Proverb with Seianus his horse, that was still unfortunate to his
rider.

So that if we would soon be rid of a man, it is but bidding him (as God bade
Moses) Get thee up into this Mountain (of Supremacy) and die there. Which
thing, although it be the sport of many ambitious Spirits, who are still
hoping their turn may be next; and the merriment of many rest wits, who love
to Pamphlet out the judgments of God upon the Nation, and put our afflictions
into tune; and the farthest end of the thoughts of others, who observe not the
operation of Gods hands: yet certainly ought to lie near the hearts of all Gods
people, and be a fit occasion unto our Governors and Magistrates, to examine
what Jonah is the lading of the ship, that we labor under such renewed
storms, and to cast him out. For the one and the others sake, I have published
Solomon's Verdict in the case, finding it so applicable to our selves. Thou will
see in the following discourse, Englands unsettlement, settling it self upon
its own bottom, and owning its own Mother, (which is also its Nurse) even the
not taking away of the wicked. I intended to speak truly, not finely,
Scripture, not phrases, oracles, not miracles: And therefore wish only this,
consent to the Sermon, thy prayers for the Preacher, and thy best help (in what
thou can) toward the taking away of the wicked, that the Throne may be
established in righteousness.

A Receipt for the State-Palsie. OR, A Direction for the settling the
Government of the Nation.
PROVE. 25. 5. (...) Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne
shall be established in Righteousness.
AMongst all the felicities which the sons of men lay out their care, and
pains, and interests about, there is nothing either more diligently sought, or
more rarely found, than stability, and settlement; (for there goes more art to
the preserving, than to the procuring of our comforts) Insomuch that the
revolution of a year, does hardly present us with so many new Moons, as new
changes in things sublunary; it being a very stale condition, that is the same
a month together. Amongst other uncertainties, the instability of Power and
Government in the world, is worth our observation, and worth the pains of a
Saepius (...) agitatur ingens Pinus, and celsae graviore casu decidunt turres,
feriuntque summos Fulmina montes. Hor.
Sermon (if it might be) to cure it. The unsettling winds have such a spite
against the tall Cedars, and the distracting Thunderbolts such a design upon
the lofty Mountains, and Thrones themselves lightly are so weakly propt, that
we may justly admire, if not bewayl,

-- Heu quam nulla potentia longa est! As for our own parts, Providence has so
sported it self with our greatest conditions here in England for a long time,
that it begins to be an observation, that exaltation is the nearest cut to
annihilation; and to be preferred, is the next way not to be: And in despite
of all Grammarians, it is become a proper phrase, to ascend downward, to climb
to the ground; Qui jacet in terram, non habet unde cadat. -- been qui latuit,
been vixit. --
whereas they only sit safe, that sit still; and he only that lies upon the
ground, is as firm as the ground he lies on. Solomon long since observed the
uncertaintie of power, and of all other things below, and he has once and
again gone about the cure, and prescribed means to that end. One Receipt for
the cure of this State-palsie, we have in the words here, Take away the wicked
from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness.

It is said, that the great Turk has a Receipt proper to himself; he rivets
himself to his Chair of State, the first time he sits in it, with the bones of
his murdered Brethren. But this of Solomon here, is a more honest and effectual
way: He is likeliest to sit fast in his Throne, who rivets himself thereunto
with the bones of executed Malefactors; Take away the wicked from before the
King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness.

Explication. First, Let us see the meaning of the Terms of the Text.

Take away] The word in the Original (...) is not an Imperative, enjoining a
duty, but an Infinitive, (which ought to be translated by a Gerund in do,
Auferendo) prescribing a means for the accomplishing of some end. The word
signifies, to remove or separate; and does not only import death, but other
kinds of punishment, as banishment, imprisonment, confiscation, pecuniary
mulcts, and any of those ways whereby wickedness ought to be restrained, and
punished, according to the nature of the fault.

The wicked) The word (...) signifies an unquiet, turbulent person, and so a
wicked person in general, whether erroneous or profane. Whether you take the
word in the one sense or the other, in the Original or in the Derivative
signification, for turbulent, or for wicked persons, it still holds, that all
such must be taken away in order to an happy settlement of a Kingdom.

From before] The word (...) does not imply, that wicked men must only be
restrained in the presence of the King: But although they must be universally
taken away wherever they be, yet more especially in his presence; such must
not be of his Council, his Family, or Familiarity: They must be taken away
out of the Country, but especially out of the Court. David resolved to destroy
all the wicked of the Land, he would cut off all wicked doers from the City of
the Lord; but especially he would rid his house of them that worked deceit,
Psalm. 101. 7, 8.

The King] That is, not only the person of the King, but by a Synecdoche
speciei, All Magistrates.

His Throne] That is, by a Metonymy of the Adjunct, his Kingdom, Power,
Authority, Government.

Shall be established in righteousness] The word [righteousness] may either be
understood of holiness and uprightness; he shall have a holy Kingdom: or else
righteousness is put for peace and prosperity; as it is used, Hos. 10. 12. for
a settled and composed State, as it is to be understood, Isa. 48. 18.

The words being thus explained, may be thus divided. 1 An end propounded, viz.
the settlement of a Kingdom. 2 The means prescribed, i. e. The taking away of
the wicked.


Being thus divided, they will afford this natural observation.

It conduces much to the settlement of the Government of a Nation, that wicked
men be punished by the Civil Magistrate.

Before I proceed to prosecute this Observation, it will be needful to premise
a few Rules, that Rules premised Rule 1.
so I may not be taken off to do it in my discourse.

1 That it is the duty of Civil Magistrates to bring wicked men to condign
shame and punishment. This is secretly couched in the words, and elsewhere
expressly taught, as I shall show hereafter.

2 That (notwithstanding) wicked men are to be differently dealt with,
according to the different nature, and degrees of their sins. This taking away
here, is not meant by Solomon, nor expounded by the Learned, of inflicting
death upon all Offenders, but of discouragements and punishments of a lower
nature, bearing proportion to the dimensions of the fault, as I hinted before.

3 It conduces much to the honor, as well as to the settlement of a Nation, to
have the wicked thus taken away; to have the dross purged, the chaff winnowed,
the tares separated; for by such names the Scripture gives us to understand
wicked men. This appears plainly by Solomon's comparison here in the verse
foregoing the Text. As it is for the profit and credit of the Finer to take
away the dross; there will come forth, not only a precious vessel, but a
vessel of honor for him: so it is not only for the gain, but for the glory;
not only for the establishment, but also for the Ornament of a Nation, that the
wicked be taken away from before the King. Wicked Jeroboam, whom God raised
from the Dunghill, is compared to dung, defiling the Chair of State, and
therefore God took him away, 1 Kings 14. 10. Wicked Subjects are as dung,
defiling the glory of a Nation, and therefore let them be taken away. As God
took away the dunghill King, so let the King take away the dunghill Subjects,
and it will conduce to the honor of his Kingdom.

4 It is a duty incumbent upon Ministers also, as well as upon Magistrates, in
their places to take away the wicked; i. e. To discern, discriminate, separate,
declaratively by the preaching of the Word, and executively by Church Censures.
See for this the Apostle treating about the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.
There are many and just complaints of the unsettledness of Church Government: I
wish the work be not obstructed through the neglect of the thus taking away of
the wicked, by the desuetude of Church Discipline. For my own part, I am as
sorry that the wicked are not thus separated, as I am sure that there are too
many wicked separations amongst us; and I fear, for the want of this. God does,
as a judgment upon the Church of England, give up men to disorderly
separations from us, for want of our just separating them from our selves, by
the judgment and censure of the Church. God suffers that to be done sinfully
and disorderly, the orderly doing of which is neglected. Whose doors this
neglect may be laid at, I know not; but sure I am, that God sharply reproves
and threatens the Angels of the Churches of Pergamos and Thyatira for such a
like fault, Rev. 2. 14, 15, 20. Nay for a less fault: for whereas it is said
there, that God had a few things against the Church of Pergamos, because she
had there them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and also them that held the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans; It may be said of us, that we have them that hold
the doctrine of Papists, with many Alsoes; Also them that hold the Doctrine of
the Anabaptists, also of the Brownists, also of the Arminians, also of the
Socinians, also of the Quakers, and also almost every doctrine that God hates.
Therefore God has many things against us; and I fear, that therefore the
Pulpit, no more than the Throne, is established, because the wicked are not
taken away, separated by Church-censure.

These things being premised, we will fetch strength from Scripture, and
Reason, to confirm the position laid down, that it conduces much to the
Settlement of the Government of a Nation, that wicked men be punished by the
Civil Magistrate.

Confirmation from Scripture.
1 From Scripture. See it almost in so many words, Prove. ^9. 4. The King by
judgment establishes the Land. As great houses are established by leaning
upon their Pillars, so a Nation is established and preserved by judgment: As
David says, that by the pure Administration of Justice, he bore up the
Pillars of the earth, Psalm. 75. 3. Upon these two, Jachin and Boaz, Religion on
the right hand, and Justice on the left, does a Kingdom or Commonwealth stand:
Nay the earth (as stable as it is, Eccles. 1. 4.) is said to be established by
the due execution of Justice, viz. When it brings forth abundant fruit, and
sustains the lives of the inhabitants, that do depend upon its increase, as
upon a Foundation: See Psalm. 72. 1, 2, 3. Would you have a Throne established
in righteousness? It must be by righteousness that it must be so established,
Prove. 6. 12. Now the execution of judgment upon the wicked, is accounted
righteousness, Psalm. 106. 30, 31. But

2 Reason will contribute something toward the establishment of this truth,
That It conduces much to the Establishment of the Government of a Nation, that
wicked men be punished by the Civil Magistrate.

Reason forms these following Arguments for it.

The toleration of wicked men is found to have troubled and disturbed the
Affairs and State of a Nation. And the Argument will be Logically this, Quo
lapso aedificium ruit, illud est stabilimentum aedificii, sed neglecta justitia
collabuntur Resp: Ergo justitia est Reip: stabilimentum. If Kingdoms and
Commonwealths be disturbed and dissolved by the taking away of Justice, then
they are preserved and established by the just taking away of the wicked. But,
etc.

Achan not taken away, though as yet not convicted, troubled the whole Camp of
Israel, Josh. 7. Saul's partiality in sparing what God had devoted, and sin had
exposed to ruin, dissolved his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 15. 26. It was Jehoiakim's not
imitating the just proceedings of his Father Josiah, that stripped him of his
Royal Robes; and his not removing the wicked from before him (according to the
Advice here given) caused the Kingdom of Judah to be removed out of Gods
sight, 2 Kings 24. 3. compared with Jer. 22. 15. etc. But what need I fetch
instances so far off? Do not our own long and sad distractions sufficiently
exemplify this? We have many known Malefactors, that have plundered more than
the worth of a Babylonish Garment, a wedge of gold, and two hundred Shekels of
silver, and things as sacred, as those were cursed, and yet not a stone cast at
them. We have spared and tolerated bleating Heretics, under the pretense of
piety and good devotion, as Saul did the Sheep for sacrifice forsooth: And does
any one ask why we are unsettled in our Government? And if we still go on to
spare, and send away with Covenants, and I know not what, those whom the Lord
has appointed to utter destruction, we may justly fear the just doom of Ahab
dismissing Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 42. Life for life, and people for people.

They of all others, have had the most settled Kingdoms, that have had a care
to takeaway the wicked from before them. See David's care in this thing, best
described by himself, Psalm. 75. and Psalm. 101. And who faster in his Throne
than David, whom God nailed therein, 2 Samuel 7. 16? Solomon in the twilight of
his Royalty, being the just Son of a just Father, took away the ambitious
Adonijah, the murderous Joab, and the pestilent Shimei from before himself: And
it follows thereupon, The Kingdom was established in the hands of Solomon, 1
King. 2. ult. Josiah succeeded both these in the same grace, He did judgment
and justice; And it was well with him, Jer. 22. 15. His eyes saw not the
dissolution of the Jewish state, 2 King. 22. ult. Phinehas the Son of Eleazer,
executed judgment, Psalm 106. 30. And therefore he had the like Settledness in
his Government Ecclesiastical, The Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, Numb.
25. 13.

this is the very execution of the Magisterial office, as it is committed to
them by God. So to do, is to discharge that Office aright; And that must needs
bring a blessing with it. It is of the essence of a Kingly office, What? To
live delicately, idly, luxuriously; to oppress, insult, tyrannize, according to
the corrupt manner of Kings, spoken of, 1 Samuel 7? No, but to scatter away evil
with their eyes, Prove. 20. 8. What is of the essence of the Office of
Governors and Magistrates? How runs their Commission from the hand of him that
sends them? To break the Laws that they command others to keep? To commit
things worthy of punishment, by getting into a power of punishing others? No,
but they are sent for the punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2. 14. And
certainly, the honest discharge of an employment before God, will conduce to a
blessing thereupon: God will not dis-commission them that have been faithful in
the Commission that he gave them.

To which I might add, that this grace Justice, is so conducible to the
Settlement of the Government of a Nation, that even the very picture, the very
counterfeit of it, has some tendency this way. Jehu in raging against the
accursed family of Saul, has a lease of the Throne for four lives, 2 King. 10.
30. Now if the shadow of Justice do nail an Hypocrite in his Throne, surely the
grace it self will clench the righteous man, and the righteous powers in their
Government: If the unrighteous executing of a righteous command be of such
strength; of what strength shall we imagine the righteous executing of
unrighteous men to be?

But not to multiply Arguments in so clear a truth, nor to fetch more of
reasons crutches to support a Doctrine which has Scripture for its Foundation;
let us see the grounds or reasons why it conduces much to the settlement of the
Government of a Nation, that wicked men be taken away by the Civil Magistrate?
And these I shall deliver out rather by weight than number.

wicked men, men that are not restrained by any conscience of their duty, will
be the readiest to disturb the peace of a Nation, and to make defections, if
any encouragement be administered, if any hope of gain, or fear of suffering do
appear. They are the most dangerous members of a Kingdom or Commonwealth. They
are Traitors and enemies dispositively at all times, and will be actually in
time, if they be suffered. There wants nothing to make Hazael a murderer of his
Master, but a wet cloth; nothing to make Absalom a delinquent from his Father,
but a little interest in the peoples hearts: which when the one and the other
have got, they soon execute their treacherous and disloyal intentions. The best
men are the best subjects, whose consciences do engage them to the observance
of the Apostles Rule, Romans 13. 1. But as for men of wicked principles, who
only give an eye-service, and think that whilst they keep their Swords within
the scabbards, they have committed no Murder, it is not safe to trust them, nay
nor to suffer them: But rather to execute them, before they can execute their
wicked dispositions: For being men of graceless Principles, they will be also
of faithless practices, and will mercenarily follow Absalom, or Adonijah, or
any one that puts up finger, that blows the trumpet to them.

improbi, are also irrequieti) yet their very being in a Nation proves
oft-times destructive to the being (or at least the wel-being) of the Nation
wherein they are: their very presence is destructive to peace and settlement.
As God could do nothing against Sodom, whilst Lot was there, Genesis 19 22. so
he would do nothing for the Camp of Israel whilst Achan was there, Josh. 7.
12. the remainder of Readiness bloody Family had like to have sterv'd all Israel;
they had nothing but Famines year after year, till the hand of Justice had
revenged the blood of the Gibeonites upon their heads, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 14. And if
it be true what Solomon says, Prove. 11. 11. that even by wicked words a City
is destroyed; it must needs be as I say, that by wicked works it is disturbed
and dissetled. By not punishing the guilty, a Nation devolves a guilt upon it
self; and hence it comes to pass, that many times by suffering one sinner, many
come to suffer. Be wicked men never so faithful, never so free from designs,
yet their very presence is destructive; and therefore ought they to be taken
away in order to an happy settlement, an establishment in righteousness, such
an one as Solomon speaks of here.

if wicked men be not taken away, they will corrupt more. Wickedness not
suppressed, will soon be increased; Sin unpunished, will soon become sin
multiplied. If by the due execution of Justice, the dross be not separated
from the silver, the silver will become dross, or at least very drossie.
Jerusalem was sometimes full of judgment, but that decayed, And what follows?
The silver is become dross, Isa. 1. 21, 22. Know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6? Wicked men unpunisht do propagate their
wickedness, and do corrupt both the religious and civil manners of many
others, make them naught both toward God and Superiors. The incestuous
Corinthian, if not taken away, was likely in the Apostles apprehension, to
encourage many to commit incest. And as for men's obedience, submission, and
loyalty toward Superiors, daily experience tells us, how much it is corrupted
by the impunity of others. Who would not be a Rebel, if rebellious Absalom must
be spared? Certainly David acted the Father, more than the King in that
business. As the Asses doom in the Fable taught the Fox to divide the Prey
aright to his Sovereign; so on the other hand, the safety and impunity of many
wicked Subjects, teaches many Foxes to make a Prey of their Sovereigns; who
afterward will not stick to insult over them, with the Gregarian Soldier, that
killed the edge-tool Emperor, Peris gladio quem ipse fecisti. Not to take away
the Traitor is to hatch Treason, or at least to make a Nest for it; not to
punish disobedience and disloyalty committed, is to encourage to the commission
of it; therefore the Poet concludes upon good reason,

-- Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur. And I
conclude with this third and last reason, that therefore it conduces much to
the settlement of the Government of a Nation, that wicked men be punished by the
Civil Magistrate.

Nobleness, and Pity, and I know not what.



2 As for Pity, I stick not to say, it is foolish pity. And Solomon (who knew
well enough what was Wisdom) will bear me out: for says he, he is a wise King
that scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel ever them, Prove. 20. 26.

Object. 3. from Scripture. Nay, that nothing may be forgotten which will
encourage men to forget the execution of Justice, Scripture must be pretended
too, especially that, Mat. 13. concerning the tares in the Parable suffered to
grow till Harvest.

To which it may be easily answered.

1 That that text is to be understood of secret and unveyled Hypocrites, not of
scandalous and open sinners.

2 Suppose it to be meant of men of notorious and scandalous lives, yet when
the Magistrate has used his utmost care and severity, to pluck up the Tares, to
take away the wicked, yet there will be enough left, to make good the Parable
to the end of the world.



1 See here then the folly of the most of the Kings, Parliaments, Powers that
are in the Christian world. Solomon in one verse convinces the most of them of
a grand miscarriage. Some think to establish their Thrones by heaping together
inexhaustible Treasures, and to be upheld by pillars of gold, as Ammon who
trusted in their treasures, saying, Who shall come up to us, Jer. 49. 4? Some
think to preserve themselves by Pride, and high living, as Jehojakim, Jer. 22.
15. Some think to maintain their Power by oppression, and tyranny, grievous
burdens, and heavy impositions, as Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 9. and Rehoboam with his
young Parliament, 1 King. 12. 14 Some think to keep out changes by Garrisons
and strong Holds, and impregnable Fortifications, as the Jews and their King
did, Isa. 22. 8, 9, 10, 11. Some think to nayl themselves to their Thrones,
with the bones of all of the Blood Royal, as Abimelech did, Judge. 9. 5. Some
think to confirm themselves either by a company of silly ignorant men, that
will be led blindfold upon any design, as Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 11. or vain,
light, desperate fellows, all whose religion it is to have cast away all, as
the forequoted Abimelech did, Judge. 9. 4. Some think to carry all with many
Regiments, as Amaziah with his three hundred thousand, 2 Chronicles. 25. Some think
to stand upon the legs of others, and to be established by confederate
Princes, and Leagues with their neighbor Kings, as Jabin King of Hazor did,
Josh. 11. 1. Some think to stand upon the heads of others, and to be safe in
the multitude of Counselors, and Politicians, as Absalom, making Achitophel
of his counsel, 2 Samuel 15. Others think that the goodness of their Titles will
defend them, their Crowns are made of good and lawful gold, and therefore they
must needs stick fast to their heads. Many other props do many Thrones in the
world lean upon. But Solomon, whose Crown God put on, and Justice kept on,
prescribes to all Kings and Powers whatever, a better foundation than any of
these, and it is here in my text. Be not deceived, it is not the taking of
wicked ways, but the taking of the wicked away, that will establish Thrones in
righteousness.

2 See here one great cause of Englands unsettlement at this day. There are not
more admirations at, than false conjectures concerning it. Some impute our
changes to chances; some lay the fault upon the Court, some upon the Camp, some
upon the City, some upon the Country; nay some stick not to lay them at our
Church doors, to impute them to the Clergy, saying, there was never good world
since there was so much praying, and preaching; being acted with a spirit like
unto that of Ahab, who said to the Prophet, 1 King. 18. 17. Art thou he that
troubles Israel? although that were true directly, Evangelium ciet bellum.
Others say something but not the whole, that Factions do create our Fractions:
For if they were not tolerated, they would not be, or at least they would not
be so intolerable. But Solomon here prescribing the means of settlement, seems
to describe to us the cause of our unsettlement, the not taking away the
wicked. I know that oppression, usurpation, ambition and other sins are fore
shakers of the Government of a Nation: And I know we have a composition of all
these ingredients, and a complication of all these distempers; yet if one
should ask me what is the grand cause, the strongest hand that thus rocks the
Throne of England, and so keeps them that sit in it from sleeping in it, I
should fetch an answer from Solomon, The not taking away of the wicked, hinders
the Throne of England from being established in righteousness. What peace said
Jehu to Joram, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her
Witchcrafts are so many? What peace, may one say to the Powers, and Primates of
England, so long as their Sectaries, Schismatics, Heretics are so many? What
establishment, so long as the wicked, erroneous, perfidious, rebellious,
ambitious, and treacherous are not taken away? Except these abide in the ship,
said Paul (speaking of the Ship-men) ye cannot be saved: except these be
taken away out of the same Ship the Commonwealth, wherein we all sail, as in
one common bottom, we cannot be safe, nor settled. I doubt we are not yet fit
for settlement for a prosperous and composed State, because the accursed
things, the wicked are not yet taken away. Some of our Governors have done
worthy things, as some of the Kings of Israel did, but yet the People sacrifice
still in the high places, every man is left to the free choice of his own God,
and his own Religion, and therefore the Throne is not yet established in
righteousness. One may weep over Englands shakings, and say to it, as the
Prophet sometimes to Israel, O Isa. 48. 18
that thou had hearkened to Gods Commandments! Then had thy peace been as a
river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea; i. e. for duration,
whereas now we are as the waves, tossed to and fro.

The second Use would be to exhort and excite Romans 13. 3
all Magistrates, not to bear the sword in vain, but to use it, for the terror
of evil doers, as the Apostle phraseth it, or to take away the wicked from
before them, as Solomon's phrase is here. What need I more Motives? Therefore
are we emptied from vessel to vessel, because the wicked sit still upon their
lees: Therefore does England lie bleeding, because the Sword of Justice does
not revenge Gods Cause upon the blood of the wicked.

The third Use would comfort all those, that do earnestly and seriously
endeavor the extirpation, and separation of the wicked, according to their
power, place, and interest, although they cannot effect it according to their
endeavor. To these I say, concerning the separation of the wicked, what God
the Father said to God the Son, concerning the gathering of Israel, Isa. 49. 5.
Though the wicked be not separated, yet they shall be glorious. Of such a man
I will say, as God says of David, Though the Crown of England be not
established, yet upon himself shall his crown flourish: though the Scepter of
England shake, yet he shall be fastened as a nayl in a sure place. But as for
all erroneous, idle, fearful Magistrates, that are not a terror to evildoers,
I do denounce against such, that God will one day make them a terror to
themselves for their evil deeds, and either take them away here, or cast them
off hereafter, for their not taking away the wicked, whereby the Throne might
be established.

FINIS.

