A Prospective Glass For the Revolters at Sea, AND New Malignants at Land:

Being a Letter sent from Sir Anthony Saintleger, an Attendant on the Prince,
to a Person of quality in COLCHESTER. Whereby may be clearly discerned how the
Prince does intend to land the Seamen, and ship the land-men that have served
the Parliament against the King, And now serve the KING against the Parliament.

PSALM. 46.3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help.

Aug ye 25 LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

A Prospective-glasse for the Revolters at SEA, and new Malignants at LAND.
Thrice Noble Cousin,
YOU cannot think how it joys my heart, that any of my Kin be so valorous;
ere long you shall see your Father a Bishop, and that function as glorious as
ever. As for those that cowardly left you, they will be as well hanged, as all
the Independent Roundheads; For all that have borne Arms for this corrupt
Parliament, must hang all: An ominous mistake.
and then I doubt not but to have our ancient Land as formerly, in whose hands
soever it is. As for Hales, we have enough of him; speak the Roundheads
fair, and be kind to them till we have all as we would, and then have at
all, take notice of all that run from you.

Had not the drunken Dutch, and cowardly French deceived us, we had relieved
you long since, and then a fig for the Treaty; yet it has taken well for us
of any thing. A pox of the Scots, they have done us more hurt then good, they
are crafty Rogues, but we will order them, if we get but England as we would.
Many here turned cowards or fools, yet hanging on his Highness shamelesly. We
want money, that is the thing; we know not how to trust the turne-coate
Mariners: But his Highness will never forget their forwardness to assist the
Parliament at first, we will pay them at last. The rogues begin to grumble for
want; I. P. is turned Sott, R. H. frenzy, N. C. coward. If we do not
something speedily, or can land, and have some to join with us, all is lost.
We can do no considerable service for the Castle: and if you hold out you are
brave fellows; If that black Tom and Noll were dead, all were our own. We
drink your treble healths every day, I doubt not but you do the like for us.
Yesternight my Master said to me, here is to Sir Walrom Horsemande, Reader,
take it as it is, th^gh this passage seems nonsense.
this or more, or either land or Officer to maintain it. My service to your
three noble Personages with you, Lords or Dukes at the least: However we speed,
our enemies are so disjoynted, that they will never be knit again. Excuse my
have that am ever

Your indulgent Uncle I am Anthony Saintleger.
Downs, 15. July, 1648. Promise land or Offices, any thing for our design,



A short Paraphrase upon the LETTER.
ACtions of Deceit are always recompensed with Deceit in the end, and
treachery to trust is ever rewarded with jealousy in trusting; deceitful
works have deceitful wages, and he that thinks with Judas to multiply his
pence by be traying his Master, shall find that when his accounts are audited,
they will amount to an halter, as do clearly appear by the preceding letter,
wherein you may perceive

First, what their design is in point of Reformation, the expected Presbytery
will be the quondam Episcopacy, witness these words, Ere long you shall see
your father a Bishop, and that function as glorious as ever, and I doubt not
but to have our ancient la^^ as formerly, in whose hands soever it is. Hear
this all ye pious Presbyters, and be ye admonished ye purchasers of Bishops
lands your moneys had been better employed at six in the hundred, and I believe
you had better have given an hundred for six; for you must build what you h^ve
pulled down, and pay dearly for ^our adjudged ^^^riledge.

Second^^ that ^ll Ro^^dheads are Independents, and all (...) h^ve b^ (...) for
the Parliament, are Round heads, a^ (...) all Roundheads must be hanged, for
so says the Letter: As for those that cowardly left you, they will be as well
hanged as all the Independent Roundheads; for all that have born Arms for
this corrupt Parliament, must hang all. Where we may note:

Thirdly, the ominous placing their jocund Language: for in stead of saying
they must all be hanged, their pen stumbled at the gallows, and left
themselves there: for thus it runs, that all that have born Arms for the
Parliament, must hang all, viz. those that have opposed them. If so, festin^t
Deus.

Fourthly, we see their design in courting their fresh allies made up of the
Parliament party, thus, Speak the Roundheads fair, and be kind to them till
you have all, and then have at all.

Fifthly, see their tamperings with other nations to enslave us all: the scum
of other Countries must come to help up Englands interest, Had not the drunken
Dutch and cowardly French deceived us, we had relieved you long since.

Sixthly, their great game, and present advantages by a personal treaty, that
is their Spring to catch Woodcockes withal, A fig for the Treaty, yet it bath
taken well for us of any thing.

Seventhly, their zeal for their dear brethren the Scots, is discerned by
their prayers for them, A pox of the Scots, they have done us more hurt then
good, they are crafty Rogues, but we will order them if we get but England.

Eighthly the revolting Seamen begin to languish, Many here turn cowards, or
fools, yet hang upon his Highness shamelesly.

Ninthly, see their high opinion of the treacherous Seamen; we know not how to
trust the Turncoate Mariners: but his Highness will never forget their
forwardness to assist the Parliament at first, we will pay them at last: the
Rogues begin to grumble for want.

10. Their bravest spirits are dispirited, and their most Capital captivated.
J. P. is turned sot, R. H. frenzy, N. C. coward. By these we presume is meant
not the meanest.

11. See their desperate condition for all their vapouring. If we do not
something speedily, or can land and have some to join with us, all is lost.
And for the better understanding of their present case, know that this letter
was dated the 15. of July, 1648. since which you know in what coin they have
been paid in Kent, upon their attempts of landing once and again.

12. We see the remora of their present hopes; if that black Tom, and Noll
were dead all was our own. Is It not pity that such Traitors should live that
preserve the Kingdom (through God) from utter ruin, and that these should be
hanged, keeping us all from the gallows?

13. See their devotion, prayers and remembrance each of other at the throne of
the Devil. We drink your treble healths every day, I doubt not but you do
the like for us, etc.

14. We see what was the morning star of their expected day; Our enemies are so
disjoined, they will never be knit again; our division is their greatest hope.

By all which the revolted Seamen may see how they finke in their design, that
Princes are liars, and that by sowing vanity, they are like to reap vexation;
when they kept their trust, their trust kept them, their wages were moneys: and
now words are their wages, and care their coin: They have ravelled themselves
in their own ruin, which is most commonly the recompense of treachery;
seldom thrives a Traitor, for his credit is cracked with all he trades with,
penury and misery concludes his days. When all the Traitors at Sea are diven
on shore, and Traitors at Land are put a Shipboard, the Sea will be more
calm, and the Land more quiet, the Wars concluded, and we shall be all
friends.

FJNJS.

