A brief and perfect JOURNAL OF The late Proceedings and Success of the
English Army in the WEST INDIES, Continued until June the 24th. 1655.

TOGETHER WITH Some Quaeres inserted and Answered.

Published for satisfaction of all such who desire truly to be informed in
these particulars.

By I. S. an Eyewitness.

Veritas nudata celari non potest. London, Printed 1655.

A brief and perfect Journal of the late Proceedings and Success of the
English Army in the West Indies, continued until June the 24th. 1655.
IN all Records, ancient or modern (of the actions and transactions of Kingdoms
and Nations) there is not to be seen more suitable successes attentending
strange and occult proceedings, then lately in the West Indies; and although
the managing of so grand affairs (and matters of high concernment) were
committed to some who had the repute of being well principled, valiant and
politic in War, yet there wanted not means to frustrate the design, (and
expectations of most men) the particulars whereof I shall deliver in as brief
and true manner as possibly I may; but before I proceed further, it will not be
amiss to insert these Queries with their Resolutions.

1. Whether or not the setting forth of this Army were really intended for the
glory of God, and propagation of the Gospel.

2. Whether those that were of this Army were fit instruments to be employed in
the exaltation of Gods work, and pulling down of Antichrist.

3. And lastly, whether the hand of Almighty God has not been plain and
manifestly seen in opposition to their actings and proceedings.

To the first is answered, That after diverse serious debates and results ( pro
and con) it was at length resolved (by the Supreme Authority and Council of
State) to send an Army into the Western-Indies: what preparation was made, is
not unknown to most of the Nation; but for what or against whom, was scarce
understood by any (except some few superiors) and for this cause diverse
conscientious men (who preferred the service of God, before that of men; and
treasure in Heaven, beyond riches and honor on Earth) scrupled the design, and
deserted the service: For what zealous heart would willingly embrace an unknown
enterprise, which might perhaps tend to his own destruction sooner then his
Enemies, by endeavoring to pull that down which God has set up, and to set up
that which he never called him unto? Shall a multitude perish through means of
some few particular men, (in fulfilling that proverb) by pinning their faith on
others sleeves? has not God conferred as much of the gifts of grace and nature
on the mean men of the world, as on those of the greatest rank and dignity?
does honor add zeal, riches, valor? or have the most eminent in office and
command, always the greatest eminency of wisdom and conduct? certainly we have
found otherwise, for oftentimes such involve themselves in eminent and
irrecoverable dangers, nor is it always pregnancy of wit, valor and
discretion (although these be famous in war) that gives the victory, but God
that works all in all, and who can say, What do thou?

To conclude the design to be altogether grounded on a wrong and corrupt
principle, were to accuse our Grandees with folly, irreligion, and what not;
when indeed it is beyond the ability of man to pry into the secret thoughts and
intents of the heart, it is only the Almighty can do it; and although there may
be a probable conjecture given of the intent of the workman, by the instrument
he takes in hand, yet God has been sometimes pleased to make the wicked,
instruments of good; but it does not therefore follow, that such should be
employed in good works, neither the servants of God in bad; all created things
move in their proper sphere; the natural man acts in his natural function, and
minds only the things of the world; and the spiritual man (although he be in
the world) is not of the world, but minds the things of the Spirit, and the
fulfilling of the glory of God, whose power and justice is as well seen in the
destruction of the wicked, as preservation of the righteous.

Now to return to the good intent of the Cause whereof I treat, if we reflect
upon the consequence of actions, it will soon appear, there was nothing less
aimed at, then Gods glory, and establishment of the Gospel, nor nothing more
coveted, then gain to themselves, and establishment in the rich possessions of
others; but servants often disobey the command of their Masters, and act
contrary to his will and pleasure, it is possible it might be so now, and that
might cause their greater punishment.

If we look upon this expedition in reference to the lawfulness thereof (as it
is in it self) we may find (by these following considerations) that it was
both lawful, just, and warrantable by the Word of God, and Law of Nations.
First, in regard those they went out against were Idolaters, Heretics, and
Members of the false Church. Secondly, For that they (some years since) most
wickedly and inhumanely murdered and destroyed diverse of our Nation that
traded peaceably with them in the West Indies. Thirdly, There was no breach of
League in the prosecution of this War, there being no Articles of peace or
cessation in force betwixt both Nations, to the southward of the Tropic.
Lastly, Conquest is free to all people, no Law of Nations can prohibit the
power of the Sword, it is only God that sets its bounds and limits, and where
his pleasure is, it should make a final conquest, there is it free inheritance
to the Conqueror, and his successors. By that power did the Normans invade and
conquer England, since which time there has no less then 25. Kings and Queens
successively (although not successefully) reigned: by the same power was there
lately a period put to that government, and a new established: by this power
had the Kingdom of France been subject to the Crown of England, and by the
same power again recovered; by this power are the Turks and Infidels (at this
day) possessors of the best and fruitfullest parts of the earth; and by the
same power Julius Caesar became conqueror of the whole world; Many and
incredible are the difficulties and admirable exploits run through and
performed by this power, and that sometimes by a weak hand, for when the
Omnipotent punishes the wicked, and corrects his own people, he often makes
choice of one and the same means to be instrumental for both.

And thus much for the legality of the cause by which we must not measure the
good intent; if we do, we may deceive our selves, for as has been said, the
very actions and deportments of this Army was such, that no good at all might
be expected from them, either in their intent or proceeding: To condemn all,
because many were guilty, were an act of much injustice, some might be better
principled, otherwise of all Armies were they most miserable, but the bias of
riches and honors many times carries men headlong to destruction.

A Commonwealth of people, is as man's body, some member may be corrupted, and
yet the vitals preserved, and the head not impaired; in such cases the skilful
Surgeon, that takes care to keep and preserve the Microcosm, dismembreth
that part from the rest of the body, that might otherwise destroy the whole
fabric.

Those who are called unto high places, (and bear rule and dominion over
Nations) ought not only to be repleat with true zeal and wisdom, but also
valor and State policy, that so the gifts of Grace and Nature being united,
they may (as pious Patrons, and good Surgeons) preserve the body of the
Nation, in spiritual and temporal health.

God has already begun a good work amongst us, and let not England now despair
of such a Governor, there are yet some consequences to be shown, that the
primary intents of our Grandees, were nothing suitable to the following actings,
or rather misactings of this Army. Grapes could not be expected from thorns,
nor figs from thistles, but rather that the bad tree should be cut down and
cast into the sire. England is now very populous, and the abundance of
fruitless trees so encumber the vines, that they cannot fructify; the late
Civil war has yet left some species of malignancy, the sores and corruptions
of the Nation are not healed, because not cleansed, for the tincture of
ungodliness is yet savoury in their palats; men of desperate fortunes have
desperate means of remedy; they subsist not by sweat of their own brow, but
reap the fruit of others labors, sowing the seed of sedition, and abominable
wickedness in a Land where they have no right inheritance; Can a Christian
Commonwealth flourish either in godliness, plenty, or peace, when it abounds
with such profane vile caterpillars, and corrupters of all good manners? Is it
not justice in God, and wisdom in man to expel such unworthy and unwelcome
guests from among his people? Ireland has already a sufficient share, and
Barbados, (with the rest of those small Islands, subject to this Dominion, who
were wont to be a receptacle for such vermin) are now so filled, that they
vomit forth of their superfluities into other places.

Could there be a less cruel, and more just means used then to employ such in
a Forain War? the Indies are spacious, pleasant and rich, too rich indeed for
either the vicious inhabitants, or no less vicious invaders. But those whom
England sent forth on this first expedition, were not many, their number was
completed elsewhere, and the design being advanced with much secrecy (even to
the Members of the Army it self) manifestly argues what they were which were
intended for that service; even such who willingly proceeded although they knew
not whither.

That which now remains, is the proof of the Cause, whether really intended
for Gods glory, and propagation of the Gospel (as was first propounded) The
arguments and consequences conducing to the confirmation hereof, are briefly
comprehended in this, That if it had pleased God in mercy (for the righteous
sake) to prosper the proceedings of the wicked, and to give the Spaniards and
their rich possessions into the hands of those who were more sinful then
themselves, that then there would be a fair gap opened for the enriching diverse
good people of the Nation, and utter extirpation of all idle, profane and
irreligious ones that should be sent over as soldiers and servants into this
new conquered Commonwealth, that so, (all impediments being removed) the glory
of God (above all things else) might be exalted, and the Gospel have free
passage and recourse throughout the Dominions.

Secondly, whether the instruments were suitable to the work, has been in part
already resolved, but more fully will appear in the following Journal, wherein
is declared what and whence they were that acted, also what and where their
actions were from time to time, together with the manner of success.

In the whole written Word of God may not be seen in any one instance, that
ever he employed those of his people (in his intended work and service) which
remained polluted in their sins and wickedness, but always first brought them
(by some means or other) unto true humiliation and repentance; and this was
sometimes performed by gi^^^g part of them over to be destroyed of their
enemies: in which is seen (that by Gods permission) good is sometimes acted by
means of the wicked; good consequences may be drawn from bad subjects, as in
the former sense; but that ever such should persevere in any good or godly work
(as to the completing thereof) is not only very improbable, but impossible,
for that which is divided against it self, cannot stand: humane reason will
also tell us that any rare and curious piece of work cannot be performed by
dull and unfit instruments.

But to return to the resolutions of the third and last Quaere, That the hand
of God has been plain and manifestly seen in opposition to their actions, does
not only appear in the manner of success, but also of proceeding, and that in
so miraculous a manner, that scantly any age may parallel; God indeed confounds
the counsels of the high and mighty, and turns their wisdom into mere
foolishness: That an Army so numerous, strong and well provided, should be so
cowed out, beaten, and shamefully repulsed, by less then a handful of men, in
comparison, was certainly the work of God, and it is mavelous in our eyes. O
that men could be sensible of the guilt of sin, and humble themselves by
repentance before destruction sweep them hence that they be no more seen; or
that they could take ensample by the destruction of others to persist no longer
in the ways of wickedness! But such was the obdurate hearts, and seared
consciences of this people, that neither blessings nor cursings could mollify;
the golden Calf was already set up in their hearts, and although Aaron were
present with them, yet there wanted a Moses to destroy it, and supplicate the
Almighty to avert his just judgments from a people that were so exceeding
sinful.

Now follows the Journall it self, wherein is described each proceeding and
action in due place as they happened (with all things pertinent thereunto).
Whereby the judicious and impartial Readers may at leisure give that solid and
just construction of each particular matter according as the justness or
unjustnesse of the cause requires, which probably (through have, multiplicity
of business, and a troubled spirit) I may (...) have so well performed in
resolution to the former Quaeres.

AFter it was absolutely resolved to send an Army into the West Indies,
preparations were accordingly made as well by Land as Sea; the Generals
appointed for both were his Excellency Rob. Venables, and the Right Honorable
William Pen; (men who had seen much of Gods actings for his people, in going in
and out before them to their deliverance, and crowning their endeavors with
many glorious and triumphant Victories) Diverse good Ships and Friggots were
allotted for this service, (had they been but as well Victualed and Manned) and
all Seamen that were willing to proceed in the service, received entertainment;
but for want of a due complement, many Fresh Water Sailors, and others, were
pressed. Drums were also beaten up for such Voluntary Soldiers as were willing
to serve the Commonwealth beyond Sea; which gave encouragement to severell who
go by the name of Hectors, and Knights of the blade, with common Cheats,
Thieves, Cutpurses and such like lewd persons, who had long time lived by the
sleight of hand, and dexterity of wit, and were now making a fair progress
unto Newgate, from whence they were to proceed toward Tiborn; but considering
the dangerousnesse of that passage, very politickly directed their course
another way, and became Soldiers for the State. Some sloathfull and theevish
servants likewise (to avoid the punishment of the Law, and coveting a yet more
idle life) followed after in the same path; there was also drawn forth out of
most of the old standing Regiments, (such as were newly enlisted) to complete
the number. For those who were better principled, and knew what fighting was,
were (as it should seem) reserved for a better purpose, some few only excepted,
which were as a mixture of little wine with much water, the one losing its
proper strength and vigor, and the other thereby little imbettered. And thus
went on the preparation by Land whilst the Ships were Rigging, Victualling and
Manning; the general Randevow for the Navy and Army was at Portsmouth and
thereabouts; where (by the 10. of November, 1654.) most of the Ships were
arrived, and such proportions of Victual and other necessaries ordered to be
completed, as each Vessel could conveniently store; some that was defective
was also exchanged, notwithstanding there remained much in the Fleet. There
likewise the Sailors and Soldiers received some wages for better encouragement
before their departure.

On the 18. of December following, diverse Companies of Soldiers were shipped,
and the Rear Admiral (having orders) set sail accordingly with his Squadron
the next day. Within few days after followed the Generals with the remainder
of the Fleet and land Army, consisting in all of about 3000 men, divided into
five Regiments, besides Commissioners, Treasurers and other Officers of the
States. The next Randevow appointed, was the Island of Barbados, whither it
pleased God to grant them a fair passage and safe arrival, and that within
four days one of another, so that the whole Fleet being about 30. sail, (one
half being Victualers) were riding together in Calile Bay by the first day of
February, there remaining behind only two Ships of the Commonwealths (the
Great and Little Charity) which proved afterward prejudicial to the Army, in
their proceeding, not only in respect of the proper signification of their
names, (which indeed in that sense were both wanting) but quality of their
loading, the one being ordered to carry Mortar Pieces, Granado shells, and store
of other Ammunition, and the other, Horses with Arms and furniture for
Horsemen; but through what intent or policy they were left in England, more
then an ordinary capacity cannot apprehend, and although expedition be said to
be the life of Action, yet though inconsiderate rashness, many a gallant
Design and Action are merely overthrown.

Immediately after the arrival of the Fleet (as aforesaid) the Soldiers were
all put on shore, and distributed into several quarters on the Island, where
they had allowed such diet as the Country afforded (which was none of the
worst.) The Carpenters of each Ship were ordered to set up those Shallops with
expedition which were brouhgt over in quarters out of England; and all the
Coopers were busied in trimming and fitting of water casks. In mean season, two
Frigots with a Commissioner and others were dispatched to the Islands of
Christophers and Meaves, for the raising of as many Volunteers there as was
thought convenient; neither were the Colonels and other Officers at Barbados
negligent in completing their Regiments and Companies, and raising new: the
Islanders likewise contributed of free cost to set forth a troop of gallant
Horse, for the furtherance of this service, the carcasses whereof were
afterward (at the Island of Hispaniola) either eaten for want of other food,
or there left behind for the use of the enemy. During the abode of the Fleet at
Barbados, diverse Dutch Vessels (near 20. in number) were made prize, whereof
some were there found at Anchor, others the Frigots that were a crusing at Sea,
brought in, and that in regard they presumed to traffic thither with such
commodities as were prohibited by the late Articles of peace concluded betwixt
both Nations. The Victuallers taken was employed to the use of the Navy, and
the Vessels for transportation of Soldiers.

It Is also remarkable, that in this mean time, there was an order for all Boys
belonging to the Fleet, (although not supernumeraries) to be cancelled out of
the States Books, and for the future not to have any allowance of diet, or
wages, notwithstanding there was no care taken for their transportation
homewards, or disposal otherwise, they still remaining in the Ships, became
burdensome to those on whom they had dependency, in participating of such
Victual as they had sparingly allowed for themselves, but the hand of
providence (as it should seem) willing in part to ease them of this burden, a
Sharke fish devoured at one time two youths belonging to a States ship, as they
were swimming near the Vessel; all that may be attributed to the good intent
of this rigorous order, was for the better Husbanding of vital provisions, and
to prolong the time of Victualling, but this, (with other matters) if it be not
treason to speak it) might have been more seasonably performed at home.

The new Shallops being lanched, and the Fleet furnished with fresh water and
other necessaries, were in a readiness to depart, the field Army was also
drawn down and shipped, they being now so numerous, that each Ships share were
as many as they could well carry.

March the 31. they set sail from that Island, and within two days passed
betwixt the Islands of Martenico and Sancta L^sia, where they anchored that
night; the day following they weighed from thence, and passing by the small
Islands of Dominica, Guardo Lupo, Monserat and Meaves; the 6. of April came by
the Lee under Christophers, where those Voluntary Soldiers that came off from
that Island, and the next adjacent, were already shipped in prizes there taken,
and awaited only the motion of the Fleet, the number of these were about 1300.
which together with the other Barbarians ( viz. men of Barbados) completed
5000. besides Women and Children, whom (out of ill grounded confidence, and
high presumption) they had brought along with them, which made them seem rather
as a people that went to inhabit some Country already conquered, then to
conquer: but for this perhaps they had too good a President.

What manner of Soldiers these Planters proved, may soon be imagined, for if
we look with an impartial eye, upon the major part of those that came out of
England to be (as indeed they were) raw Soldiers, Vagabonds, Robbers and
runagate servants, certainly these Islanders must be the very scum of scums,
and mere dregs of corruption, and such upon whose endeavors, it was impossible
to expect a blessing.

But to return to the Fleet, who now shaped their course toward the Island of
Hispaniola, conceiving it requisite to reduce that by the way, as well for
refreshment of the Army, as to keep men in action until (the long expected)
arrival of more Granado shells, and Mortar pieces, there being only one in the
Fleet, besides some wooden ones, lately made, which were deemed unfit for so
great an enterprise as was intended.

April the 8. they passed by Sanct 1 Cruse, and the day following was ordered
to be observed (throughout the Fleet) as a day of Humiliation for the good
success of the Army, but one day was not effectual for the humbling of those
who had remained so many years obdurate in wickedness. The next Island was
that of Saint John, and having gained the length of the Wester end thereof, the
dtstance to Hispaniola was 22. Leagues.

The Colonels and other Officers were now ordered to get their men in
readiness to land, and to augment the number, there was drawn forth a Regiment
of rugged Sailors, whose manners argued them better fed then either instructed
in the principles of Christian Religion, or rudiments of marshall discipline.

April the 13. they came fair by the Island and plainly discovered the Town of
Domingo, and after some consultation had (with the pretended Pilots and guides)
for the better landing, and conduct of the Army to the Town) the Land General,
with a Squadron of Ships, 7000 foot Soldiers, a Troop of Horse, and three
days provision of Victual) went farther to leeward and landed (the day
following) in safety, some ten leagues to the Westward of the Town.

No sooner were they all landed (having no opposition) but they began to
promise to themselves mountains of gold, nothing busied their minds and
thoughts more, then the riches of the place, their talk was all of the money,
plate and gallant plunder they were like to have; but they were soon taken off
from these vain hopes, Proclamation being then made (in the head of the Army)
to this effect, That when they should enter into the Town (not including the
pleasure of God in the business) they should not plunder any money, plate on
jewels, neither kill any tame Cattle, upon pain of death.

Thus may be seen the Avaritious intents of some (more then ordinary) men, who
desire rather to heap up to themselves abundance of treasure, (enjoy fair
houses, rich Plantations, and all things futable thereunto) then to glorify
God in their actions, making the price of blood their Inheritance, and that
before they know whether they shall first obtain, or afterward live to possess.

The chiefest part of the Army thus landed, gained but evil encouragement by
the late Proclamation, yet (after some signals of discontents) on they marched
in a way that directed through woods of incredible thickness, receiving little
or no opposition, except the excessive heat of the Sun, and intolerable drought
that oppressed them, having not had (in many miles march) one drop of water,
those who took upon them to conduct the Army in the most commodious ways and
passages near water, proved but blind guides, and decived them, so that some
became exceeding faint, scantable to march, (others were necessitated to drink
their own Urine) and all in general so extremely weakened, that it was
wonderful to behold.

The Ships that landed them, soon after turned up to Windward unto the
General, who continued with the Fleet plying to and again within view of the
Town, only one Squadron were commanded into a Bay two leagues to the Westward
of the Town of Domingo, whereinto a large Freshwater River disburdeneth it
self; there the remnant of the Army (being three Regiments) were landed, and
that within two days after the other, the place appointed for conjunction of
both parties was at this River, notwithstanding Collonell Bullard. with those
Regiments, (without any farther order) marched toward the Town, and (for want
of water) soon retreated, performing not any thing worth the memory. By this
time the Land General with the main body of the Army came up, and after some
short refreshment at the River, proceeded also toward the Town, but before
they came withing three miles thereof, a small party of the enemy suddenly
encountered the forlorn hope (consisting of 500 men) and forced them to an
unseemly retreat; the next Regiment (with some others) seconding, were also
repulsed, and the General himself (left in a lone condition) very hardly
escaped; the body of the Army coming up, the Spaniards at length retreated into
a Fort of theirs, not far distant from thence, and some pursuing, were cut off
with the great shot from the Fort, which was situate near the Sea side, and
commanded that passage thorough the wood to the Town. In this exploit some were
lost on either part, but the greatest number slain were English, amongst which
Captain Cox (the chief guide for that place) was one.

The General taking into consideration the disability of the Army at that
time, and exceeding want of water amongst them (there being none betwixt that
and the Town, except in the former Fort, which as it was none of the strongest
fortifications, being only a plain brick wall, triangular and without flankers,
yet was it furnished with nine piece of good Ordnance, and about 300. desperate
fellows to manage them, and there remained little hopes that those who even
then received so much damage by less then half that number (in the highway)
should now storm and take the place by sudden assault, without eminent loss to
the whole Army, being also unprovided of ladders, and other necessaries for
that purpose) whereupon a retreat was made unto the River in the Bay, where
they refreshed with water and such provisions of victual as was daily brought
on shore from the ships, preparation was also made for another march; a
Mortar-piece was landed with Granado shells, and two small Drakes, scaling
Ladders were likewise made, but never used, for being too ponderous for
carriage, they were sent by water, and so to be landed in a convenient place
near the town. All things being now in readiness (as was supposed) the 24. of
April, the Army proceeded on their march, the guides promising to direct them
in a way they had not yet known, which led to a fresh water River, distant but
two miles from the north part of the Town, whither they might pass without
danger of any Fort. That there was such a path was known to be certain, but
taking another to be it, they drew near the way they had formerly gone,
advancing but slowly, by reason the Mortar-piece and small Drakes (for want of
horses and furniture) the Soldiers drew by turns.

The day following (before noon) they approached near the Fort (but with worse
success then before) for the enemy having charged the Forlorn-hope, beat then
clearly to the Generals Regiment, routed those also, executing them in the
backs, in as great numbers as they listed.

Major General Haines being then in the van of the Army, was most unworthily
and shamefully deserted by the Soldiers, notwithstanding that he earnestly
entreated that for Gods sake some few of them would stand by him, if but ten in
number, but such was their vile cowardice and baseness of spirit, that not one
man would do it, whereupon he sacrificed his life (amongst the thickest of his
enemies) at as dear a rate as became a stout Soldier and gallant Commander,
who in his life time was as much beloved of his friends, as feared by his
enemies, such was his worthiness, too worthy indeed to be a member of so
Antichristian an Army.

The Spaniards pursuing this victory, made as great a slaughter as they were
able, and that without the least resistance, near the one half of the Army
flying before them, to the great amaze and discouragement of the rest that were
not as then marched up. Some having broken off the head of their lances,
continued still the pursuit, knocking down some, beating and driving others
along (with their Lance slaves) like slaves and cow-hearted villains, until at
length (being tired with slaughter, not able to proceed farther, like as the
painful workman, after a laborious and hard days labor goes to rest) they
returned to the Town, carrying with them as sure Trophies of victory) 7.
English Colors.

The number (at this time) slain out right, were no less then 600 men, besides
200. more that crept into bushes, and were left behind in the woods, whom the
Negroes and Molattoes soon after dispatched; there were also near 300. wounded,
whereof many were past recovery, most of them all receiving their hurts in the
back parts. As for those that did all this spoil and mischief (O miracle to
believe, and shame to think it!) exceeded not in all the number of 50. men. The
pursuit now ended, these running Regiments stood still, taking opportunity
(with sorrow and shame) to look back on their miserable fellows, groaning with
wounds, and weltring in blood.

The Spaniards manner of onset was thus: After they had fired their volly of
small shot out of the woods (being assisted by Negroes and Molattoes) most
desperately fell in and charged with their sharp steel Lances, which (being
directed by able bodies, and strong arms) found little opposition of the weak
and feeble multitude, parched by the heat of the Sun, and half dead with
thirst, no care being taken to supply this defect. The other disadvantages were
these. The dis-equality betwixt the English Pikes and Spanish Lances were
such, that the one being over long, and top-heavy, could not be managed with
that dexterity, and to so good a purpose (especially in narrow ways and woods)
as the Lance which is about three quarters of that length; neither are the
English half-pikes of sufficient length to reach these Lances; the Spaniards
also (by often use and practice) become more expert and ready in the use of
these weapons then English men, who (although perhaps old soldiers) never made
use of Pike or Lance (except against horse) Diverse likewise in this
expedition, that were of more valor and strength then others, and would have
fought, were so overwhelmed and trampled under foot (by the shameful flight of
the multitude that were about them) that they were not able to make resistance,
but became a prey (with the rest) unto the merciless enemy. But (above all)
the hand of the Almighty was much seen in the business, who struck so great a
terror in their hearts, that they became the people of his wrath fitted to
destruction.

After this sad successs, and lamentable loss, the Army (that night drew up
nearer the Fort, as if they intended to execute revenge upon that; and having
found a convenient place within Musket Shot thereof, (where the Enemy could not
bring any great Gun to bear) the Pioneers cut down the trees, and made a kind
of Breast-worke, (such as the time would permit) and there planted the
Morter-piece, which being then in a readiness to do execution on the Fort;
speedy Orders were given to mount it on another Carriage, (fit to be drawn off)
and to burn that: which being performed, (and the Granado^ shells buried under
ground) the Army began their march back to the old Watring-place in the Bay.
But what ground there was for this action, or what the real intent of the
thing signified, let those determine who have power to punish offenses and
reward deserts.

In this mean season the General of the Navy (with diverse Ships) anchored in
the Road at such a distance as that the Forts could reach them with great shot,
and they both the Forts and Town, and having discerned Parties of men passing
to and fro without the Town, conceived them to be the English Army there
encamped, and thereupon sent in diverse Boats with provision of Victual and
other necessaries for their supply, who approaching near the shore discovered
their error, and found them to be Spaniards, who (as it should seem) had the
leisure to cast up Outworks) and so returned on board in safety, both going
and coming underneath the Fort and bank-sides, from danger of the shot, by
which they manifestly found how good and convenient a place it was to have
landed an Army of men.

The Army lying in the Bay (as formerly) had not that supply of Victual from
the Ships as before, but were necessitated to go abroad in Parties through the
Woods to seek for Cattle; and oftentimes meeting with some few Negroes, were
by them put to the rowt, and diverse slain; others casting away their arms
betook themselves to their heels, and so escaped the fury of these naked
Pagans; and at some times, when neither men or beasts were near, only the
leaves of trees making some little noise, and Crabs stirring in the woods,
possessed them with such eminent fear that (leaving their Weapons behind) they
ran over Clifts into the Sea, but at length this bold Army was grown so
politic that they would no more adventure into the woods amongst these
Cow-killers, (whose sable deformities had often struck as great a terror in
their hearts, as Pluto and all his Infernal rowt could do, had they been
there present to have tortured them) exercising their valor only on Horses,
Ass Necoes, and such like, making a slaughter of all they met, greedily
devouring skin, intrails, and all, to satiate their hungers; and thus were all
the Troop-horses belonging to the Army by them eaten, the Generals own hardly
escaping; this behavior and diet they continued for some days.

What number of men had been lost in small Parties, and by straggling (besides
at the total rowt) was not known, until by a general Muster was found that
of 9700 men first landed, there remained then only 8000 (the Sea-Regiment
included.) Many of these were sick and wounded, and most of them faint-hearted,
not fit for service. To have adventured a third time with such in the face of
the Enemy, were an act of no less rashness than madness, for had the
Commanders been ever so valiant, able and worthy (except it had pleased God
miraculously to perform the Work by them alone) which could be as little
expected as deserved) these sheep like Soldiers (I mean in courage, not
innocence) would questionless have left them in the lurch, experience had
already shown it, and too true they should have found it; And again to have
shipped this wretced rabble, not well knowing whither to go, or how to dispose
of them, would also have been the destruction and losts of the whole Fleet,
having provisions for a short time, for so great a multitude; of these two
evils (it pleased Providence) that the least was chosen, and a place was now
thought on, absolutely fit indeed for such an Army, where they might have food
without fighting, and a Land to inhabit without opposition, and that within
some few days sail. This being resolved upon, care was taken to ship the men;
the Morter-piece, two small Drakes, and two Iron Guns (which were placed in a
small Fortification by them made at the mouth of the River for the better
securing of the Watring-place.) Before the performance of these things, I
should have declared how Adjutant General Jackson (that great man of little
courage) was cashiered for a Coward, and the ceremony performed of breaking his
Sword over his head, for example to others; but my opinion is, that if all of
like nature had been so dealt with, there would not have been many whole Swords
left in the Army.

The third of May, all were shipped, except the bodies of 1700 men (most of
whose Arms, seven Field-Colours, with all their honors (if any they had)
there left behind: It is also observable that as at their landing they had no
opposition, so neither at their shipping off, the Spaniards (with their small
numbers) rather showed themselves defensive than offensive, resting content
with what they had already done, strongly fortifying for the future; whereas if
they had taken but this last opportunity (by the disability, weakness, and
cowardice of the Army) to have charged in with two or three hundred able
resolute men (within few days before, or at their going off) certainly they
had destroyed and spoiled the most part of them all, who were more willing and
ready to run into the Sea, and there perish, than to oppose or look upon their
Enemies.

All the benefit or good the Army had found in this place was only at the
first some few Cattle, and a good quantity of Sugar, Part whereof they made use
of, casting the rest into the River to duleifie that (such was their ignorance
and folly) but this sweet diet had sour sauce.

The Fleet also recruited with fresh water out of this fair and goodly River,
(whose golden sands had bloody price) And the Soldiers being all onboard (as
aforesaid) they set sail that day before the wind, and before they had
performed the least part of their intent or desires.

Having now briefly, but truly, related their manner of proceedings and
success on this unforrunate Island, it will not be altogether impartinent to
describe the situation of the Town and Forts adjacent, with the nature and
quality of the Country, which take as follows.

THe Town of Sancta Domingo (Metropolis of Hispaniola, and Residence of the
Spanish Viceroy) is situate on the South side of the Island, distant from the
Eastermost Cape or Lands end, 28 Leagues, having North Latitude, 18. degrees: 28.
M^n: It is well watered (and in some sort strengthened) by a great River which
passes near the North East part thereof, at the Mouth of this River is a
Harbor, which although of no great Magnitude, yet capable of entertaining
Ships of good burden, The entrance to the Harbor is through a Bay of reasonable
latitude, where there is good Anchorage, and a Road for Ships, on the la^b^rd
side going in, is a Fort strengthened with 12, or more good Guns which
commands the Harbor and Southwest side of the Town, the other parts thereof
(on the Land side) have for their defense an old ruinated Wall encompassed
thick with Limetrees, which is (now lately) well repaired, and strongly
fortified. Within one miles Circumference of the Town, is open ground and
plain Fields, or S^vanars as they there call them, being made by industry and
Art as are all their ways and passages through the Woods, and Fields for Sugar
Ganes, with other open places for husbandry, the whole Land being naturally
over-growne and Covered over with trees, amongst which of Limon, Orange, Coco,
Cabage, Palmeeto, Cedar, Mastick and Lignum vitae trees, there are good plenty.

About two miles to the Westward of the Town, (and near the Bay side) is
placed another Fort, the description whereof, as also the damage it did the
Army in their march toward the Town, I have already declared.

Four miles farther to the West from thence, is that River and Bay formerly
spoken of, where the Army encamped, and the Fleet took in fresh water, which
place the Spaniards had not then forfeited, but it is to be supposed that in
the strengthening of that (and all places else of consequence, in the
West Indies) they have not since been negligent.

The commodities these Rivers afford (besides the goodness of their Water)
consists in the diverse sorts of dainty Fish therein abounding, as also pieces
of Gold mineralls, washed from forth of their banks at certain times,
together with S^nd-gold, a small quantity whereof was found by some English
Soldiers; The discommodities these Streams engender, are Allegators, which
farther up in the Country are in too great plenty.

The whole Land, (except some Hills of great ascent) is certainly very
fruitful, which although it produce not such Fruits and Corn as does England
and other more temperate Climats (the scorching heat of the Sun depriving it of
that happiness) yet of Sugar Canes, Oranges, Lemmons, Bonanoes, Bonuist,
Planrans, Pine-Apples, Puttato, and Cassadra Roots (whereof they make their
bread) with diverse other Roots and Fruits, there is no scarsity.

It is also replenish^d with store of Oxen, and Cowes of good magnitude, as
well wild as tame. Sheep there are some, not many, and abundance of Hogs, and
fair Horses, which last are there of little use or service in War, by reason
of the exceeding thick Woods. But beyond all, the inestimable rich Mines of
Gold and Silver (hidden within the bowels of that Land) makes amends for all
other defect. The North and West parts of the Island are scarcely at all
inhabited, except by some few Cowkillers, Rogues that have been thither
banished for Murder, or some other villainy, who make it their labor to kill
and destroy many Cattle, and that only for their Tallow and Hides, which is
sent in, to the Spaniards; At for the Towns and Villages, in the habitable
parts, they are neither fair nor many, the chiefest whereof, I have already
mentioned, which doubtless (at the time of the English Armies being there) was
very rich, for the neighboring Villages and Plantations being allarumed by
their Landing, they had the leisure to convey themselves, with much Treasure,
Plate and I wells thither, as to a place of their best strength and refuge.

And thus much of Hispaniola. The Island of Jamaica must now be the subject of
my following discourse, whither the Fleet approaching; the 7. of May, was
observed as another day of Humiliation, for all such, whom hunger, thirst, and
the Sword of the Enemy, had not yet given a feeling sense of their presumptuous
wickedness, and disobedience toward God. And considering the great cowardice
that had lately possessed them, it was also proclaimed to the whole Army, that
whosoever should be found to turn his back to the Enemy, and run away, the
next Officer (that brought up the rear of that Division) should immediately run
him through, which if he failed to perform, himself was to suffer death
without mercy. Which strict order, might have wrought better effect at
Hispaniola, there being little probability of engaging with an Enemy in this
place.

The 9. of May they drew nigh the Island, and having sailed about 16. Leagus
within the South side thereof, the day following came to an Anchor in a
spacious Harbor, called also Jamaica, where there was good Ground, and deep
Water, and Manning all their small Vessels and Boats with Soldiers, soon
landed the Army in a Bay, that lay yet farther within the Harbor, and that
without the loss of one man, for the Spaniards having only three or four
small and slight Brest-workes, with some few Guns, and seeing so numerous an
Army in readiness to Land, made not many shot, but fled in have to the Town of
Oristano, which was altogether unfortified, and distance from thence six
English miles, from whence they conveied away all things of value and
concernment, together with their Families, and departed farther into the
Countray, for such was their weakness, and disability for resistance, that
their whole number (on that part of the Island) exceeded not 500. Men, beside
some Negro slaves, but what they could not act by force of Arms, they did by
policy, as too soon will appear.

The English Army being possessed of the Brest-works, and Guns that commanded
the landing-place; A Forlorn hope was drawn forth, and sent toward the Town,
who that night would not adventure to enter therein, until the morrow
following, at which time they found it destitute of Inhabitants, or any thing
else necessary for their entertainment, or accommodation, except bare walls,
bedsteds, chaires, and Cow-hides; Soon after the General with the whole Army,
(consisting of about 7000 men) marched up thither, where there then came in
diverse Spaniards (which seemed to be of quality) to treat, bringing with them
(as presents for the General) Wine, Poultry, diverse sorts of Fruits, and other
rarities that the Country yielded) promising also to send in Beaves sufficient
for the maintenance of the Army, with other large overtures, and high
complements.

This Treaty being continued for certain days, the Enemy had free egresse and
regresse as well into the Town, and English Quarters, as elsewhere, continuing
their welcomed presents, bringing Cattle for the use of the Army, and behaving
themselves with such civil and kind (although feigned) deportment, that they
invited diverse Soldiers of the Army to visit them in their Quarters, where
they had Wine given them, and were much made of; by which means they gained
knowledge (by some overcome with Liquor) that they had been at Hispaniola, and
how they were there dealt withal, as also the extremities and wants they were
driven to in their marches, for want of water and other necessaries in those
hot Countries, whereby they were much disabled: The Spaniards understanding
this, and viewing the present weak condition of the Army, (by which they
guessed at the future, if their wants were not supplied from time to time) were
now animated to put in practice their uttermost endeavors for preservation of
their goods and estates, and not to stand to any Articles of agreement, to
depart the Island, with some few clothes only to their backs (as was expected)
notwithstanding they fairly dissembled the matter, and to avoid all suspicion,
sent their Governor (as they pretended) an old decrepit Segnior, full of the
French disease, and brought in betwixt two in a Hammack) to sign the Articles
of Agreement, which he (with some others) accordingly did.

In this mean season, these subtle and slye Spaniards had conveyed far away
in the Woods, all their riches and b^st goods, which (in some days after the
Army was possessed of the Town) remained in the Spanish quarters near at
hand) and might have been soon intercepted, they also gathered up all the
ablest and best Horses (during the Treaty) as well in the English quarters, as
their own, and the time-limited for their departure from the Island (according
to to the Articles signed) being near expired, they drove away most of all the
Cartell near the Town, and following after their Goods, Wives, Children, and
servants (which were gone before at least three days Journey) swept and
cleared the Country as they went of all vital provisions, leaving their old
pockie Governor as a Hostage for their return.

And thus were they overcome by the subtilty and deceit of the Spaniards at
Jamaica, as well as they had been lately vanquished by their Lances at
Hispaniola, and all the redress that could be now thought on, was to send a
Party in pursuit after them; Colonel Bullard, (with 2000 men) was employed on
the business, part of which number were shipped in small vessels and shallops,
and so conveyed by water unto a Bay (17 legues to the Eastward of that where
the fleet lay) where they came in conjunction with the rest that had marched
thither on foot, The politic intent of this grand design being to surprise
the Spaniards and their luggage (betwixt both parties) as they were shipping
off for the Main, which was supposed would be at that place, but in that they
deceived themselves, for the Enemy had no such intent, but rather directed
their passage through bywaies, thick woods, and over high hills, and large
Mountains, (of which there are plenty) having Scouts and Sentinels abroad in
each passible way and path, to discover the approach of any, It being almost an
impossible thing for an Army (except well acquainted with the Country) to
follow or find them out, and again, the excessive heat of the Sun, the want of
water in many places, with other defects and impediments naturally incident to
the place, and disagreeing to English constitutions, more enweakeneth and
disables them in ten miles march there, than forty in their own Country. But I
shall now leave this pursuing party, to wander in the woods awhile, and there
kill Cattle (if any they find) to preserve life, rather than hazard it at so
great disadvantages against the Spaniards) and show in what posture and
condition those in the Town were in, who (after the departure of the Spanish
Cators) were in so great want that Dogs and Cats was the best part of their
diet, with such sort of food as they had formerly tasted at Hispaniola, as
Horses, Ass Necoes, and such like, there being strict order that on pain of
death none should presume to kill any Cowes or Oxen, and if at any time there
went forth (by especial order) some small party that brought in Beeves, they
were distributed amongst the superior Officers of the Army, the Inferior men
having only inferior meat, the often use whereof made them somewhat
participate of the nature of the Beasts, sometimes living the life of Dogs, and
at other times bearing the burden of Asses, and what other encouragement or
comfort could they have, than to ponder in their minds, thus, Solamen miseris
socios habuisse dolores.

Jamaica Harbor, May the 24.
It was resolved (at a Council of War) That the General of the Navy, and
Reer-Admirall, in the Ships Swiftsure and Panagon (with most of the Flemmish
ships) should return for England, Orders being given for their speedy fitting,
and recruit with fresh water and other necessaries.

May the 25.
There happened an ill accident in the Fleet, the ship called the Discovery (of
the States) a vessel of good force and burden, was unhappily fired by f^^ling
brandy wine in the Steward-room, the flame of the candle taking hold of that
combustible liquor, so vehemently increased the fury of the fire, that there
was no prevention. Wherefore (to avoid further danger) most of the ships boats
that could be had in readiness, towed her off on a bank of sand some distance
from the Fleet, where (after she had consumed about four hours) her Magazine
of powder blew up, and did no more harm; the ship Swiftsure being then ready to
carreen, had most of her best Guns there onboard, which were all afterward (by
industry and art) taken up, notwithstanding that they lay in above three
fathom water.

June the 1.
Colonel Bullard (after a long march to little purpose) returned with his
party to the Town, bringing with him some Cattle, and giving notice of great
abundance that are in the more remote parts of the Country; since which time
there has gone forth diverse Parties, who have also brought in Droves of
Cattle, and amongst the rest a Spanish Lady (with some Attendants) who were
she but as good as great, as virtuous as ponderous, and as fair as fat,
certainly she would far exceed any three Ladies of England in worth, weight,
and beauty.

June the 6.
The ship Cardiffe set sail for England, as the Harbinger of the rest of the
Fleet which were to follow after.

And the 9th following, a general Muster was taken of the Land Army, whose
number was found to be much diminished of late, not so much by any
pestilentiall or violent disease, as for mere want of natural sustenance,
which in common reason may seem strange that (of all men) Soldiers should
starve in a Cooks shop (as the saying is) or perish for want of food in a
Country so abounding with Flesh, Fish, and other vital provisions; but it is
to be hoped that for the future they may have an allowance of better and more
wholesome diet than yet they have had, if the tyranny of their Commanders (or
slothfulness of themselves, or both) prevent not.

There lately arrived at Jamaica diverse Victualers with provisions for the
Fleet, also Arms and Ammunition for the Army, but Hoes and Haschets were more
ficter for them.

June the 20.
There came in hither three small Vessels (Prizes) which were taken by the Selby
and Grantham Frigots (who were ordered to lie plying to and again off the Island
of Hispaniola) some Spaniards (in them taken) reported that at the first
appearance of the English Fleet before the Town of Domingo, the Inhabitants
deserted the place, and went all into the woods (where they continued three
days). leaving their Magazine of powder behind, which they had once intended
to have blown up, but perceiving that in that time neither the ships approached
the Harbor (which they much dreaded) nor any else came to molest them, they
re-entred the Town, and being much encouraged and strengthened by those of the
Country (who daily came in thither) fortified what they might, and blocking up
the mouth of their Harbor with some Vessels which they there sunk, resolved to
use their uttermast undeavours to maintain the place.

Oristano, June the 24.
There was this day a rumor that General Venables was departed this life,
which was but a rumor not real; but his Excellency has not been current
since his being at Hispaniola. The grand business that the Army is now upon,
is to settle each Regiment in their several Quarters, where they have parcels
of Land equally aproportioned unto them, which being subdivided amongst the
Officers, (according to their respective places) some small share is like to
fall unto the Common Soldiers; but what improvement may be made thereof, or
how it will please Almighty God farther to deal with this Army, let time and
truth manifest; the good hand of Providence having taken me from amongst them,
that so (according to my earnest desires) I might no longer be a spectator or
recorder of their actions. I shall therefore now conclude, only including brief
description of the Island of Jamaica, by comparing it (in diverse respects) with
Hispaniola, together with some few passages by the way homeward.

The Island of Jamaica is situate betwixt the Main, and the Isle Cuba, distant
from the one 96. Leagues, and from the other 20, the center whereof lies
directly in the same Lat: with the Town of Sancta Domingo (in Hispaniola)
already described, and has Longitude West from thence, 2 degrees: 18. Min: It Is
magnitude, is scantly one 3. of the said Islands being in length 46, and
breadth 14. Leagues. Notwithstanding for the quality and quantity of Land, it
is no less fruitful, and altogether as plentiful in Fish, Foul, and Cattle
of all sorts; It is more Mountainous and less Woody, Rivers there are diverse,
but the Spring-heads of some arising from Copper Mines, the Water is somewhat
unholsome, and unsavory, unless corrected by boiling (which the Spaniards
used.) Its chiefest defects and impediments are these. It produces not any
Mines of Gold and Silver, as does Hispaniola and other parts of the Indies. It
is also ill situated for Traffic, lying such a distance to Leeward that it
is a most difficult thing for vessels to turn up so far to Windward as to
get clear of the Islands and Rocks, and are therefore necessitated to make
their passage thorough the Gulf of Florida, which is accounted dangerous,
except at some seasons of the year.

June the 25.
The Fleet bound for England, set sail from Iamaica, Vice Admiral Goodson (in
the Torrington Frigot) being left Admiral of that Squadron, ordered to remain
in the Indies, they consisting of all the English Frigots of this Fleet, also
three of the best sailing Flemish Ships, which completed the number of 12
sail, besides victualers and prizes there remaining.

July the 8.
The Fleet gained the length of Cape St. Anthonia (being the Westermost Cape of
the Isle Cuba) and the thirteenth Foll: they plying to Windward (having a fresh
gale Easterly) came near under the Tropic, and short of the Cape of Florida,
about thirty Leagues, where there happened another sad disaster. The Paragon Navy
(a Ship of the second rank, and (at that time Reare-Admirall) took sire, and
consumed to her Powder-room, and so blew up, the Reare-Admirall Dakins (and
some others) with much danger and difficulty escaped, diverse Ships Boats,
(which were nearest) coming in to their assistance, notwithstanding there
perished about one hundred and forty Men. By what means this lamentable
accident was first occasioned, is not yet certainly known, but too certain it
is, that the chief neglect was in the Stewards rooms, from whence the fire
brake forth, violently increasing (past remedy) as the people were assembled
together at Divine Exercise in the forenoon.

July the 19.
Having hitherto had (the Weather variously inclined) many calmes, and some
storms, with diversity of Winds (but all of short continuance) the Fleet now
entered the Gulf of Florida, and the 22 Foll: passed forth of the same, the
extent thereof being (in length) from the Cape of Florida to the uttermost
Islands North of Cuba 68 Leagues, and in breadth from those Islands to the main
20 Leagues, the current there setting N:N:E. the swiftness or flacknesse
whereof depends on the falling of the Raines, (which about the Month of
August are constantly very great) many exceeding large American Rivers (being
augmented thereby) the spacious Bay of Mexico, becomes their receptacle, and so
disburtheneth its swelling Floods, through this narrow strait, into the
Virgivian Ocean, it is therefore of some called the Gulf of Mexico,

August the 4.
The Fleet gained the length of the Barmudas, since when (for the generality)
being favored with fair Winds and seasonable weather. The 22. of this
instant, they had also the length of the Western Islands.

August the 30.
They discried the English Shore (near Lyzard) and having a strong gale S. S.
W. the day following, the Fleet Anchored at Spithead, (near Portsmouth.) three
sail having been separated from the rest by obscure weather in the night
(before their entrance into the Gulf) came in hither also this day, some few
hours before the other.

And now for ever blessed be the Divine Creator, who has dealt thus mercifully
with us, the unworthiest of his Servants, giving us so large experience of his
abundant goodness toward us, and bringing us once more unto the Land of our
Nativity. The Lord in mercy so incline the hearts of this Nation, that those
grand sins of Presumption and Covetousness, may no longer reign amongst
them, lest seaking after shadows, they lose the real substance; or coveting
the good or Gold of others, they incur the high displeasure of Almighty God
upon themselves, and so become the scorn and derision of their Enemies, and a
byword to other Nations. Avertas Deus.

FINIS.

