The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of RARIETIES or the Ingenious Gentlewoman
and Servant Maids Delightful Companion London Printed for N. Bodington and I
Blare


The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet OF RARITIES: OR, THE Ingenious Gentlewoman
and Servant Maids Delightful Companion. Containing many Excellent Things for
the ACCOMPLISHMENT of the FEMALE SEX, after the exactest Manner and Method,
Viz. (1.) The Art of Distilling. (2.) Making Artificial Wines. (3.) Making
Syrups. (4.) Conserving Preserving, etc. (5.) Candying and Drying Fruits, etc
(6.) Confectioning. (7.) Carving. (8.) To make Beautifying-waters, Oils,
Pomatums, Musk-balls, Perfumes, etc. (9.) Physical and Chyrurgical Receipts.
(10.) The Duty of a Wet Nurse; and to know and cure Diseases in Children, etc.
(11.) The Complete Chamber-Maids Instructions in Pickling, making Spoon-meats,
Washing, Starching, taking out Spots and Stains, Scowring Gold or Silver-Lace,
Point, etc. (12.) The Experienced Cook-Maid, or Instructions for Dressing,
Garnishing, making Sawces, serving up; together, with the Art of Pastry. (13.)
Bills of Fare. (14.) The Accomplished Dairy-Maids Directions, etc. (15) The
Judicious Midwives Directions, how Women in Travail before and after Delivery
ought to be used; as also the Child; and what relates to the Preservation of
them both. To which is added a Second Part, Containing Directions for the
Guidance of a young Gentlewoman as to her Behavior and seemly Deportment, etc.

The Second Edition, with many Additions.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Nicholas Boddington in Duck-Lane; and Josiah
Blare on London Bridge. 1687.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
IN consideration that variety is most taking, especially of such things as are
highly necessary; I have thought it convenient, not only for Delight, but for
the Accomplishment of the Female Sex, to set forth what must undoubtedly turn
to their advantage, and consequently more than a Preface can express, or a
sudden conception bring forth, if seriously and deliberately considered, to a
degree of Practice; for indeed without industry, the smallest matter cannot be
brought to perfection. Things Natural and Artificial owe their Original to
Labor and Industry; the first to the visible and insensible Workings of
Nature; the second to that of the Creature: nor without these could the World
subsist. But to come nearer the subject matter.

In the following Treatise you will find not only Approved Rules, Instructions
and Directions for particular persons, whose ability and leisure may contribute
in an extraordinary manner to the highest Acquirement, but such as are suitable
to all degrees and capacities; such as must contribute to the Advancement of
each Individual Female, to a Station that may render her acceptable in the eyes
of great ones, or at least create her a good repute, and pronounce her happy,
though moving in a lower sphere. All that we can term Accomplished in Female
Conduct, is briefly to be found in the following Pages; digested into so easy
and plain a method, that it will, no doubt, insensibly attract the desire of
the Reader to make an Essay; and that Essay being found both profitable and
delightful, will carry her further in the progress of Pleasure and Advantage,
till she confesses the Time and Cost was well bestowed, and becomes an
Admonisher of others to make the like improvement; nothing of this nature being
more exact in directing the Female Sex in what is seemly and profitable from
Infancy to extremity of Age, and is a fit Companion upon all commendable
occasions, in whatsoever state or condition, even from the Lady, to the
inferior Servant-Maid; being a Directory, in which nothing necessary for the
Accomplishment and Qualification of the Sex is omitted, in relation to
Education, Breeding, good Manners, courtly Deportment, prudent Conduct, and
Management of Affairs, being the very Quintessence of whatever has been
practiced or published, and more perhaps than can probably be expected in so
small a Book. But thinking no labor too much to advantage the fair Sex, I have
traveled through the World of Curiosities, to furnish out this Cabinet of
Rarities, in hopes it will find a kind acceptance, and turn to the advantage of
those who rightly consider it. In expectation of which, I remain,

LADIES, etc. Yours to serve you in what I may, John Shirley.

The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities, etc.
CHAP. I.
Rules and Directions for a Gentlewoman in the Art and Way of Alimbecking,
Distilling and making sundry sorts and kinds of Waters Physical, Chyrurgical,
and pleasantly useful on diverse occasions; With the Order, Manner of
Composition, and Quantity of Ingredients, etc.

A Limbecking and Distilling are held by many to be Learned, or taken by the
Ancients from the Operation of the Sun in its effectually Exhaling the Sublunar
moisture, and Rarifying the gross and indigested Vapors in a more subtle
Region; and indeed Distillations participate of a Solar virtue, as being by
their penetrating Qualities, and insensible Operations, more quick, subtle and
enlivening. Wherefore I have thought it highly convenient to give Directions in
this Chapter, how to Distill and draw off such Waters from Herbs, and other
Cordial matters, as may contribute to the preservation of health, and wherewith
a Gentlewoman, being furnished, may be instrumental in saving the Lives, or at
least in doing good to her poor Neighbors: And in this case the Simples that
are to be put into the Still together to draw off your compound Waters, which
indeed are the most effectual in their Operations, ought to be considered: the
several Directions for which, take as follows.

A distilled Water, good to prevent the Danger of Infectious Air, Plague,
Pestilence, etc.
Take the buds, or green husks of Walnuts, or the leaves of that Tree, a
handful; of Rue the like quantity, and as much Baum: bruise them, and add of
Mugwort, Celendine, Angelica, Agr^mony, Pimpernel and wild Dragons or
Snap-dragons, each half a handful: bruise them as the former, and being put
into an Earthen-pot or Glass, pour on them a Gallon and a half of White or
Rhenish-wine, and let them stand four days, afterward putting the Wine and
Herbs in an Alembeck, draw off the Quintessence: or it may be done, for want of
convenience, in a cold Still.

The Famous Water, called Dr. Stevens's Water is made to the best advantage;
thus.
Take a gallon of French Wine, of Cloves, Mace, Carraways, Coriander and
Fennel-seeds, Gallinga, Ginger, Cinnamon, Grains, Nutmeg, Anniseed, of each a
dram: to these add Camomoil, Sage, Mint, Rue, red Roses, Peletory of the Wall,
wild Marjoram, wild Thyme, Lavender, Penyroyal, the Roots of Fennel, Parsley
and Setwall, of each four ounces; and having bruised them, put them into two
quarts of Canary, and the like quantity of Ale; and then having stood sixteen
hours, with often stirring, draw off the Quintessence by Alembeck over a soft
fire.

This Water is a wonderful fortifier of Nature in all cold Diseases,
preserving Youth, comforting the Stomach, and is given with success to such as
are afflicted with the Stone or Gravel.

Cinamon-Water is properly made thus.
Take half a pound of Cinnamon, bruise it and steep it in a quart of White Wind,
a quart of Rose Water, and a pint of Muscadel, twelve hours, with often
stirring; and from this Alembeck three pints, which will not be only pleasant,
but fortify nature, and restore lost vigor.

To make Rosemary-Water.
Take the Flowers and Leaves of Rosemary in their prime, half a pound and four
^unces of Elicampane Roots, a handful of Red Sage, three ounces of Cloves, the
same quantity of Mace, and twelve ounces of An^iseeds: beat the Herbs together,
and the Spices separately, putting to them four gal^ons of White Wind; and
after a weeks standing, distill them over a gentle fire.

Spirit of Wine, how to make it.
To Distill, or rather Alembeck, Spirit of Wine, is to draw off any Wine you
think fit over a gentle fire to what height you please, by often rectifying it;
and is very good moderately taken, in cold distempers, or to mix with Cordial
Waters of a cooler nature.

To make Treacle-water excellent good, in case of Surfeits, or the like
disorders of the Body.
Take the Husks of green Walnuts four handfulls, of the Juice of Rue, Cardus,
Marigolds and Baum, of each a pint; green Petasitis Roots one pound, Angelica
and Masterwort, of each half a pound; the Leaves of Scordium four handfulls;
old Venice-Treacle and Mithridate, of each eight ounces; six quarts of Canary;
of Vinegar three quarts, and of Lime-juyce one quart: which being two days
dijested in a Bath in a close Vessel, distill them in Sand, etc.

A Cordial Mint-Water is thus made.
Take two handfulls of Mint green, two handfulls of Cardus, and one of
Wormwood, and soak them in new Milk; being bruised, and after three or four
hours infusion, draw off the water by way of Distillation, and keep is close
stopped for your use, it being excellent good in case of pains in the Belly or
Stomach.

An excellent Water for Sore Eyes, or to Restore the sight.
Take Smallage, Rue, Fennel, Vervein, Agremony, Scabeous, Avens, Hounds-tongue,
Eufrace, Pimpernel and Sage, of each a handful; Roach-Allum half an ounce,
Honey a spoonful, dissolved in Rose Water: distill them in a cold Still; and
when you use it, put in a little Alum and Honey, and suffer it to dissolve,
washing your Mouth with it Evening and Morning.

An excellent Water for a Canker.
Take of the Bark of an Elder-tree, Sorrel and Sage, of each two handfulls:
stamp them well, and strain out the Liquid part, mingling it with double the
quantity of White Wind; and often with a feather dipped in it, wash the Sore,
etc.

A Water very good for a Fistula.
Take a pint of White Wind, an ounce o^ the Juice of Sage, Borace in Powder
thre^ penny weight, Camphire-powder the weigh^ of a groat: boil them two hours
over a gentle fire; strain them through a Woollen-cloth; and being cold, wash
therewith the place grieved.

An excellent Water to cleanse any filthy Ulcer.
Take of the Water of Plantane, and that of Red Roses, each a pint; the Juyces
of Housleek, Nightshade and Plantane, of each a quarter of a pint: Red Roses
half a handful, Myrtle, Cyprus-nuts, of each half an ounce; of the Rind of
Pomgranate three drams, St. John's Wort half a handful, Flowers of Molleyn
half as much, Myrrh, Frankincense, each a scruple; Honey of Roses a pound and
four ounces: distill them together, and of the Water take a pint, and dissolve
in it six ounces of Conserve of Roses, and one ounce of Syrup of dry Roses,
with twelve drops of the Oil of Brimstone, and wash the place grieved.

An excellent Water for the Heats and Inflammation of the Eyes.
Take of Alloes Epatick, fine Sugar, Tutty-stone powdered, each an ounce; of
red and white Rose Water, each a pint: put them in a double glass, and set them
in Balneo Maria five or six days, often shaking them, and with a feather dipped
in it, wash your Eyes as often as you see occasion, as likewise your Forehead
and Temples.

An excellent Water for a sore Leg, or for a Canker in any part or place.
Take of Woodbine-leaves, Ribwort, Plantane, Abinte, of each a handful
clarified; English Honey three spoonfuls, Roach-Allum an ounce: put them into
three quarts of Running-water, and let them sees till a third part be
consumed; then strain out the liquid part, and keep it in a new glazed
Earthen-pot for your use, washing the afflicted place with it twice a day.

A Water to turn back the Rheum that afflicts the Eyes.
Take of red Rose Water six ounces, White Wind and Eye-bright-water, of each
the like quantity; Lapis-Tuttiae three scruples, Alloes Epatick the like
quantity, fine Sugar two ounces: put them into a Glass with a narrow neck, and
set them in the Sun for the space of thirty days, shaking them twice a day, and
then with the liquid part wash the Eyelids, Temples, Forehead, and the Nape of
the Neck.

An excellent Water to cool the Liver and Heart as also in case of a Fever,
Surfeit, or Ill digestion.
Take two handfulls of Wood Sorrel, the like of Barbary-leaves, half a dozen
Plantane-roots washed and sliced, two ounces of Mellion-seed; of Comfry and
Borrage-flowers, each an ounce: steep them in a gallon of fair water, well
sweetened with Sugar Candy, and distill them, giving the party grieved two
ounces of the Water, with an ounce of the Syrup of Citron or Lemon.

An excellent Water for an Internal Bruise.
Take two handfulls of Scabeous-flowers of Peny-royal, Camomoil, Smallage and
Bay Leaves, each a handful; Myrrh pulverized half an ounce; Hartshorn two
ounces, and two quarts of Malaga-wine: bruise the Herbs etc. in the Wine, and
then distill them altogether, and let the party drink two ounces of the Water
morning and evening.

An excellent Water for the Stone, to provoke Urine, and prevent Stoppage, etc.
Take two quarts of new Milk, Saxifrage Parsley, Peletory of the Wall, Mother,
Time, green Sage, Radish-roots sliced, of each a handful: steep the Herbs and
Roots over night in the Milk, and distill them the next morning: which done,
mingle six spoonfulls of the Water, with as much White Wind; into which grating
a third part of a Roasted Nutmeg, drink it off; and so continue to do diverse
times, and you will find extraordinary benefit thereby.

Poppy-Water, how to make it.
Take two pound of red Poppy-leaves, half an ounce of bruised Cloves, and the
like quantity of sliced Nutmeg: steep these in a quart of Canary, and after two
hours standing, put them into your Still, and draw off the Water over a gentle
fire.

Cordial Angelica-Water is made thus.
Take of Cardus Benedictus a handful well dried, of Angelica-roots three
ounces, of Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, each an ounce; of Myrrh half an ounce,
and one dram and a half of Saffron; of Cardamums, Cubebs, Galingal and Pepper,
of each a quarter of an ounce: bruise them and steep them in two quarts of
Canary, and draw them off with a common Still.

Aquamirabilis is thus made.
Take three pints of White Wind; of the ^ce of Celendine and Aquavitae, each a
pint; Cardamer, and the Flowers of Melilot, a dram of each; of Cubebs,
Gallinga^ Cloves, Mace and Ginger, of each a dram bruise them and put them to
the Liquo^ where soaking all night, the next morning se^ them on a Stiil in
Glass Alimbeck, and draw off the Quintessence.

The Water prevents the Putrefaction of the Blood; is good in case of the
swelling of the Lungs; removes the Heart-burn, and purges Phlegm and
Melancholy, etc.
Diverse other Waters of Physical Virtue I might mention; but having many thing
yet to propose, and intending brevity, shall proceed from Distilled Physical
Water to give Directions for making Artifici^^ Wines, etc. And as for such
Waters as a^ for Beautifying, I shall treat of them in another place.

CHAP. II.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman how to make Artificial Wines and other pleasant
Liquors, necessary and profitable both for Sale, and to be kept in private
Houses for the Accommodation of Friends, etc.

AS there are many pleasant Liquors made rather Artificial than Natural, so it
will not be amiss to say something of them, which for variety may not prove
pleasant only, but profitable, and are very commendable to be kept in the House
for the Entertainment of Friends and Strangers; who being perhaps rarely used
to such, will set a value on them above any other. But to the purpose.

To make Cherry-Wine.
Stone your Cherries before they are too ripe; press them in a Press, or
through a clean cloth, and let the Juice settle, then draw it off, and bottle
it up with half an ounce of Loaf-sugar, and a piece of Cinnamon in each bottle;
and tying the Cork down, let it stand six weeks; and then being opened, it will
drink pleasant and brisk.

Hypocras is made thus.
Take a gallon of White or Rhenish-wine, and put to it two pound of Loaf-sugar,
Cinnamon, Mace, Pepper, Grains, Galingal and Cloves, of each a quarter of an
ounce bruising the Spices, and putting them into the Wine; in which they having
been close covered for the space of ten days, draw of the Wine, and renew it
with other Wine, and an addition of Sugar: and so you may do three or four
times, but the first is the best; nor is there a pleasanter Liquor imaginable.

To make Wormwood-Wine.
Take a gallon, or what quantity you think fit, of the smallest White Wind; put
into it the peel of two Lemons, half an ounce of Mace, and a quarter of an
ounce of Cinnamon; adding a pound of white Sugar to each gallon, and stop them
up close in a Vessel; and after they have stood six days, you may draw off the
Wine, and put it up in Bottles.

Rasberry, Strawberry, or Curran-wine, may be made as that of Cherries, but the
liquor being boiled up with the Sugar before the Spices are put in, will keep
the longest. An excellent Liquor may be likewise drawn from Plumbs, of pleasant
taste, dissolving in some of the Liquor hot two or three spoonfulls of
New-Ale-Yest to make it work; and afterward keep it in a cool place, that it
may Rarifie the better.

Goosberry-wine is made the same way, only adding some blades of Mace, and
slices of Ginger: As for the Wine of English Grapes, only Rarifie it with fine
white Sugar Candy beaten into Powder. And since there ^re other pleasant
Liquors besides these, I ^hink it not improper to say something of those that
are most in request.

To make the best sort of Mead.
Take a quart of Spring Water, and three ^uarts of small Beer, as clear as may
be; add ^o them a pound and a half of clarified Ho^ey, two ounces of the
distilled Water of ^weet Marjorum, three or four sprigs of Rosemary and Bays:
boil them together on (...) gentle fire, ever scuming off what rises to ^he
top, and then put it into a vessel to purge, ^^x days after which bottle it up
for your use.

To make Steponey, a Liquor formerly much in use.
Take a gallon of Spring Water, and stone (...) pound and a half of the best
Raisins of the ^un, and putting to them half a pound of fine ^ugar, press upon
them the Juice of three Lemons; slicing likewise the peel, and ad^ing to the
Water a quart of White Wind; ^il it, and when it is boiling-hot, pour it in^^ a
pot upon the Raisins, Sugar, etc. and ^pping it close, let it stand six hours;
after at stir it about, and let it stand two days more; at the end of which
strain it, and press the Raisins; and when you find the Liquor clear, put it up
into Bottles for your use.

Cock-Ale is thus made.
Take a young Cock, and having stoned four pound of Raisins of the Sun, boil
the^ and him in fair water, and then slice four Nutmegs, adding to them an
ounce of Mace and half a pound of Dates: beat them well and put them into two
quarts of Canary and having added to them the boiled Liquor in which the Cock
must be boiled in a manner to pieces: strain the Liquor, and pre^ what is
solid; and after your Ale has done working, pour it in, and stop it down close
two quarts is sufficient for a Barrel; the bottle it up, and in a month it will
be fit (...) drink.

To make Rack, an Indian Liquor.
Take a quart of Water, a pint of Brand and a pint of Canary; add half an ounce
(...) beaten Ginger, and the like quantity of C^namon, the Juice of four
Lemons, and tw^ ounces of Rose Water, with half a pound (...) fine Loaf-sugar;
put into it a hot Toast, it b^ing well stirred, it is the Prince of Liquors.

Choccolate is made with Choccolate, Mill Eggs, White Wind, Rose Water, and
Mace Cinnamon, which the party fancies, they bei^^ ^ll boiled together over a
gentle fire; two ^unces of Choccolate, eight Eggs, half a pound ^f Sugar, a
pint of White Wind, an ounce of Mace or Cinnamon, and half a pound of Sugar,
^nswering in this case a gallon of Milk.

Many other Liquors there are, as Methe^in, Perry, Syder, Bracket, Tea, Coffee,
etc. ^ut the way of making them being vulgarly ^nown, I shall spare my
Instruction, and pro^eed to Directions for making Syrups.

CHAP. III.
^^structions for a Gentlewoman in preparing and making Physical and Cordial
Syrups, pleasant and profitable on sundry occasions, etc. Highly necessary to
be kept in Families for the preservation of Health, etc.

^Yrups are of two kinds, one Physical, and the other pleasant and useful on
sundry ^her occasions: But of these I shall treat ^^thout distinction, the use
of them being so ^^blickly known, and indeed it is improper ^e to incert it.
But to proceed.

To make Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers.
Take the red part of the Flowers, separa^^^^ from the white, to the quantity
of half a peck; let them soak a night in Spring Water then boil them, and add
to them a gallon Water wherein they were boiled, and in which, after boiling,
they have been strong pressed, twelve pound of white Sugar, an^ half a pint of
Rose Water, then boil up t^^ Liquor with the Sugar into the thickness o^ Syrup,
and keep it for your use. Some the^ are that make it without fire, but in my
op^nion this way must be the best for keeping.

To make Syrup of Violets.
Take the Flowers of the blew Violet^ clipping off the Whites, and to a pound
them add a quart of boiling-water, and for pound of white Sugar; stirring them
to^^ther, and stopping them close in an Earth vessel four days; then strain
them, press^^ out the liquid part; which being moderate heated on a gentle
fire, will thicken into Syrup.

To make Syrup of Wormwood.
Take Roman Wormwood (the Lea^^ only) half a pound; Leaves of red Roses,
Flowers, two ounces; Indian-spike the drams; of the best White Wind a quart,
(...) the like quantity of the Juice of Quinces; for want of it, Syder: bruise
and infuse the for the space of twenty six hours; then being them till the
liquid part is half consum^^ strain out the remainder, and adding two pounds of
sugar; boil it up into a syrup.

To make Syrup of Lemons.
Take a gallon of the Juice of sound Lemons, strain it, and let it clarify,
and boil it up with six or seven pounds of fine sugar, till it be of the
thickness of a syrup, and sweet enough for your purpose.

An Excellent Syrup to preserve the Lungs, and for the Astma.
Take of Nettle-water and Coltsfoot-water each a pint, Anniseed and
Liquorish-powder of each two spoonfuls, Raisins of the Sun one handful, sliced
Figs, number four: boil them together till a fourth part be consumed, strain
the liquid part, and make it up into a syrup, with a pound of white Sugar Candy
bruised into powder, and take two spoonfuls of it each morning fasting.

An Excellent Syrup to open Obstructions, and help the shortness of Breath.
Take Hysop of the first years growth, and Peny-royal, of each a handful; stamp
them, and strain out the Juice, and add of English Honey the like proportion:
heat them in a Pewter dish over a chasing-dish of Coals till ^he Juice and
Honey be well incorporated, and making it continually fresh; let the party
afflicted take early each morning, and late each night, two spoonfuls.

To make Syrup of Roses by Infusion.
Take of the Water of Infusion of white Roses five pounds, clarified Sugar four
pounds, and boil them with a gentle fire to the thickness of a syrup, then soak
two pounds of fresh white Roses in six pound of warm water, suffering them to
stand for the space of twelve hours close covered, then ring them out, and put
in other fresh Roses, and so continue to do till the Water has the perfect
scent of the Roses, and then the Water is fitting for the Sugar to be dissolved
in, and used as aforesaid.

This Syrup draws from the Entrails thin choler, and waterish humors, and is
therefore fitting to be taken moderately by children, aged Persons, and such as
are afflicted with the superabundance of either Choler or Phlegm.

How to make Catholicum Majus.
Take of the four great cold seeds cleansed, and of white Poppy-seeds each a
dram, Gum-Dragant three drams, red Roses, yellow Saunders, Citron and Cinnamon
each two drams, Ginger one dram, of the best and choicest, Rubarb and Diacridum
each hal^ an ounce, Agarick, Turbith, of each two drams, white Sugar dissolved
in Rose Water wherein two ounces of Senna have been concocted, one pound: make
them into Tables of three scruples, and let one Table be the dose.

It gathers humors from all parts of the Body, and expells them without
molesting health, or impairing of the strength, but rather fortifying nature,
etc.

Syrup of Radish; how to make it.
Take of the Roots of Garden and wild Radishes, of each an ounce; of Saxifrage,
Kneeholm, Borage, Sea-Holly, Pettywhin, O Cammack or Ground-Furz, Parsley,
Fennel, each half an ounce: the Leaves of Betony, Pimpernel, wild Time,
Tendercrop, of Nettles, Cresses, Samphire, Venus-hair, of each a handful: the
fruit of Sleepy Nightshade and Jubebs, of each twenty: the seed of Basil,
Burr, Parsley of Macedonia, Carroways, Seseli, yellow Carrots, Grommel, Bark of
Bay Tree Root, of each a scruple; Raisins stoned, Licoras, of each a dram: boil
them in ten pounds of water till four of them be consumed, then strain it, and
with four pounds of Sugar, and half the quantity of clarified Honey, make the
liquid part into a Syrup over a gentle fire, adding an ounce of beaten Cinnamon,
and half the quantity of grated Nutmeg.

This being taken at convenient times, expels Gravel and Stone, and scowreth
the Kidneys, if it be mixed with other lenitive and scowring matters; and also
provokes Urine.

Syrup of Vinegar compound; how to make it.
Take of the best Wine-Vinegar a gallon, boil it, and take off the scum that
arises; then stamp Endive, Maidenhair and Wood Sorrel, with Barbaries or green
Grapes; press out the Liquor, and put it into the Vinegar, to the quantity of a
quart; boil them up till a fourth part be consumed, then add six pounds of
Sugar, or so much as will make it into a Syrup, and give two spoonfulls at a
time with success, in case of any hot distemper or feavorish disorder of the
Body, or to expel gross phlegmatic humors.

Oxymel simple; how to make it.
Take of the clearest Water and clarified Honey, of each four pounds; boil them
till half the Water be consumed, then add of Wine-Vinegar two pounds, and
suffer them to boil to a syrup. This syrup extenuateth the gross humors, takes
away slimy matter, and opens all Obstructions and Asthma, that is, Obstruction
of the Lungs, with Phlegm, from whence arises shortness of breath.

Syrup of Barberries is made thus.
Take your Barberries, picked from the stalks, boil them to a pulp, then strain
and rarifie the Juice; then boil it up, being six pounds, with six pounds of
fine Sugar into a syrup: or if you find that will not thicken it sufficiently,
you may add more.

To make Syrup of Cowslips.
Take a gallon of the Distilled simple Water of Cowslips, and put into it half
a peck of the flowers clean picked, the yellow part only; boil them up with the
Water, and add to the liquid part, after it is strained from them, six pound of
sugar, heating it over the fire till it become a syrup.

To make Syrup of Maidenhair.
Take the Herb so called to the quantity of six ounces, shred it a little, and
add of Licorish-powder two ounces and a half, steep them twenty four hours in
three quarts and a pint of hot water: add five pounds of fine Sugar to the
Liquor, after it is boiled and consumed a third part, and set it again on the
fire till it become a syrup.

To make Syrup of Licoris.
Take of the Root of Licoris newly drawn from the ground, two ounces, scrape it
into Powder of Coltsfoot, four ounces of Maidenhair and Hysop, each half an
ounce: infuse them twenty four hours in three quarts of Water, then boil them
till a half part be consumed: which done, strain out the remainder, and with a
pound of clarified Honey, and the like quantity of Loaf-sugar, boil it up into
a syrup.

To make Syrup of Cittron Peels.
Take of the Peels of yellow Cittrons a pound, of the Berries, or Juice of the
Berries of Cherms, a dram; steep them a night in Spring Water to the quantity
of two quarts, then boil them till a half part be consumed, and taking off the
scum, strain it, then boil it up to a syrup, with two pound and a half of Sugar.

To make Syrup of Hartshorn, or rather Hart's-tongue.
Take of the Herb called Hart's-tongue, the Roots of both sorts, of Bugloss,
Polipodium, of the Oak, Bark of Caper-roots, Tameris, Hops, Maidenhair, Baum,
of each two ounces: boil them in five quarts of Spring Water till a fifth part
be consumed; to which add four pounds of fine sugar, and boil it up to a syrup.

To make Syrup of Cinnamon, (which is excellent good in case of Faintings or
cold Distempers.)
Take of the best Cinnamon four ounces; bruise it and steep it in three pints of
White Wind, and a pint of small Cinamon-water, three days by a gentle fire, add
three pound of Sugar when it is strained, and boil it up to a syrup.

To make the Syrup of Quinces.
Take three quarts of the Juice of Quinces, let it be well settled and
clarified; boil it over a gentle fire till half be consumed, then add three
pints of Red-wine, with four pounds of white Sugar, and a dram and a half of
Cinnamon, and of Cloves and Ginger two scruples, and boil them up into a syrup.

To make Syrup of Hysop.
Take a handful of the Herb so called Figs, Dates and Raisins, of each an
ounce: boil them in three pints of Water till a third part be consumed, strain
and clarify the remainder with the Whites of two Eggs adding two pound of fine
Sugar, and so make it up into a syrup, and it will continue good a twelvemonth.

To make an Excellent Syrup for a Cough or Cold, or to restore decaying Lungs.
Take two quarts of Spring Water, put into it an ounce of Sydrack, half an
ounce of Maidenhair, two ounces of Elicampane-roots sliced: boil them in an
Earthen-vessel till half be consumed, add more to the liquid part, strained off
two pound of Sugar, and boil it up into a syrup; two spoonfulls of which, take
morning and evening, being a wonderful restorative.

To make Syrup of Elder, now greatly in use.
Take the Elder-berries fresh, when they are full ripe, strain out the Juice,
boil it till a third part be consumed; scum it clean, and add to a gallon, an
ounce of Mace and six pound of Sugar, boiling it up to a syrup.

To make Syrup of Roses.
Take a gallon of fair water, and a quart of White Wind, put into them when
they boil, a peck of red Roses picked, and let them boil till they appear white:
then press them, and put them into the liquid part, and boil it often, adding
the Whites of two Eggs well beaten, and a pound of Sugar to each pint of
Liquor; and when you find it sufficiently thick, preserve it in Glasses or
Earthen-vessels close stopped, for your use.

To make Syrup of Vinegar.
Take of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Endive, of either three ounces; of the
Leaves of Anniseed, Smallage, Fennel, Endive, half an ounce of each: boil them
gently in three quarts of Spring Water till half be consumed, then strain and
clarify it with three pound of Sugar, and add a quart of White Wind Vinegar,
and boil it up to a syrup.

To make Syurp of Saffron.
Take a pint of Endive-water, two ounces of Saffron finely beaten, steeping it
in the Water for the space of two days; at the end of which, strain out the
Saffron, and with a pound of Sugar, boil it up to a syrup.

To make Syrup of Mint.
Take the Juice of ripe Quinces, and of Pomgranets, of each a pint and a half:
dried Mint half a pound, and of the Leaves of red Roses two ounces; let them
steep a day and a night in the Liquor: boil it then till half is consumed, and
add four pound of Sugar to make it into a syrup.

These, as the most material, I thought fit expressly to mention; what remains,
a Gentlewomans discretion, by these Rules may direct her to perform. And so I
proceed to give Directions for Preserving and Conserving, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman in Preserving and Conserving Fruits, Flowers,
Roots, and what else is useful on sundry occasions for setting out Banquets,
etc.

PReserving of Fruits, Roots and Flowers, etc. to be at hand for ornament or
taste, is, no doubt, a curious Art. Wherefore that a Gentlewoman should not be
ignorant of such curiosities, I shall incert many Directions worthy to be
observed, and at the same time speak something of Conserving, etc.

To Preserve Mulberries.
Strain two quarts of the Juice of Mulberries, and add to it a pound and a half
of sugar; boil them together over a gentle fire, till they become in a manner a
syrup, then put into it three quarts of Mulberries, not over ripe; and after
they have had one boil, take them off, and put them together, with the Liquor,
into an Earthen-vessel, stop them close, and keep them for your use.

To Preserve Gooseberries.
Take them before they be over-ripe, cut off their stalks and tops; and if you
have leisure, stone them; then laying in an Earthen-vessel a Layer of sugar,
lay upon it a Layer of Goosberries; and so do between every Lay, till your
Vessel be almost full: then add about a pint of Water to six pound of
Goosberries; and the Goosberries having before been scalded, set them in this
manner over a gentle fire, and let the sugar melt: when being boiled up, you
may stop them up, and reserve them for your use.

To preserve Cherries.
Take your Cherries when they are in their prime, and scattering some Sugar and
Rose Water at the bottom of your Preserving-pan, put them in by degrees, still
casting in your sugar, remembering there be put an equal weight of either; and
being set on a quick fire, you may add a pint of White Wind, if you would have
them plump; and when you find the syrup boiled up sufficiently, take them off,
and put them into your Gally-pots for use.

To Preserve Apricocks.
Observe when they are moderately ripe to pare and stone them, laying them a
night in your Preserving-pan amongst Sugar, it being laid in Lays, and in the
morning put a small quantity of fair Water or White Wind, and set them on
Embers, and by increasing a gentle fire, melt the Sugar; when being a little
scalded, take them off, and letting them cool; set them on again, and boil them
up softly till they are tender and well colored, at what time take them off,
and when they are cool put them up in Glasses or Pots for your use.

To preserve green Walnuts.
Observe to gather them on a dry day, before they have any hard shell, and boil
them in fair water till they lose their bitterness; then put them into cold
water, and peel off their Rine, and lay them in your Preserving-pan with
layings of Sugar to the weight of the Nuts, and as much water as will wet it,
so boil 'em up over a gentle fire; and again being cool, do it a second time,
and put them up for your use. This way Nutmegs, with their green Husks, are
Preserved.

To preserve green Pippins.
Observe to take them e're they are too ripe, choosing the greenest, pare them
and boil them in water till they are exceeding soft, then take out the cores,
and mingle the pulp with the water, ten Pippins and two pound of Sugar, being
sufficient to boil up a Pottle of water; and when it is boiled to a thickness,
put in the Pippins you intend to Preserve, and let them boil till they contract
a greener color then natural. And in this manner you may preserve Plumbs,
Peaches, Quinces, or any thing of that kind that you are desirous to have green
and pleasant.

To preserve Barberries.
Observe that you choose the fairest bunches, gathered in a dry day, and boil
several bunches in a Pottle of Claret till they are soft: strain them then, and
add six pound of Sugar and a quart of Water; boil them up to a syrup, and put
your Barberries scalded into the liquor, and they will keep the year round.

To Preserve Pears.
Observe that you gather those that are sound, not over-ripe, and laying at the
bottom of an Earthen-Pot or Pan; a laying of Vine-leaves, lay another laying of
Pears upon them, and so do till the Pot is full: then to a pound of Pears add
half a pound of Sugar, and as much fair Water as will dissolve it over a gentle
fire; where suffer them to boil till they are somewhat soft, and then set them
by for your use.

To preserve Black Cherries.
Pluck off the stalks of about a pound, and boil them in Sugar and fair Water,
till they become a pulp, then put in your other Cherries, with stalks,
remembering to put half a pound of Sugar to every pound of Cherries; when
finding the Sugar to be boiled up to that thickness, that it will rope, take
them off and s^ them by, using them as you see convenient.

To Preserve Eringo-Roots.
Take of the Roots that are fair and kno^ty two pound, wash and cleanse them,
the^ boil them over a gentle fire very tender, after that peel off their
out-most Rind, but b^ware of breaking them after they have lai^ a while in cold
water; put them into you Sugar boiled up to a syrup, allowing to eac^ pound of
Sugar three quarters of a pound o^ Roots; which boiling a short time over (...)
gentle fire, you may set them to cool, an^ then put them up for your use.

As for Elicampane-Roots, scrape and cu^ them thin to the pith, in lengths
about you^ finger, and put them into water, which yo^ must often shift to take
away the bitterness at which rate, being used twenty days, pu^ three quarters
of a pound of Sugar to every pound of Roots, the Roots being first boiled
tender over a gentle fire till you find the Sugar has sufficiently taken; and
then being cool, put them up in a Gally pot or Glass; And much at the same rate
may manage any thing of this or the like nature, as Grapes, Peaches, Plumbs,
etc.

Conserving Flowers or Fruits is somewhat different from this: Wherefore for
the better instruction, I shall say something concerning it.

^o Conserve or keep any sort of Flower, as Roses, Violets, Cowslips,
Gilleflowers, etc.
Take your Flowers well blown and clean ^cked, bruise them very small in a
Mortar, with three times the weight of Sugar; after which take them out, and
put them into a ^ipkin; and having thoroughly heated them ^ver the fire, put the
Conserve up in Gally-^ots for your use.

To Conserve Strawberries.
Strain them, being first boiled in fair wa^er, and boil the pulp in White Wind
and Sugar as much as is convenient to make them ^iff, etc. And thus you may
Conserve any ^ort of Fruit, the difference not being great ^etween this and
making Fruit Paste; of which I shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. V.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman in Candying Fruits, Flowers, Roots, etc. As
also in drying Fruits, and other things necessary to be observed, after the
exactest and newest Mode and Method, etc.

CAndying Fruits, Roots and Flowers, being an excellent way of gendering them
pleasant and lasting, is the next thing intended to be discoursed on:
Directions for which take as follows.

To Candy Ginger.
Take the fairest pieces, pare off the rind* and lay them in water twenty four
hours and having boiled double-refined Sugar to the hight of Sugar again; when
it begins to be cold, put in your Ginger and stir it till i^ is hard to the
Pan; when taking it out piece by piece, lay it by the fire, and afterward put
it into a warm Pot, and tie it up close* and the Candy will be firm.

To Candy Orange-peel.
Take Peels of the best Civil Oranges, the meat being taken out, and put them
into Water and Sugar boiling hot; where being well softened, boil Rose Water and
Sugar up to a hight, till it becomes Sugar again; the^ draw your Peels through
it, and dry them in an Oven or Stove, or before the fire.

To Candy Cherries.
Take them before they are full ripe, stone them, and having boiled your fine
Sugar to a hight, pour it on them gently, moving them, and so let them stand
till almost cold, and then taken out and dried by a fire, etc.

To Candy Elicampane-Roots.
Take them from the syrup in which they ^ave been Preserved, and dry them with
a ^loth; and for every pound of Roots, take a ^ound and three quarters of
Sugar: boil it ^o a hight, and dip your Roots into it when ^ot, and they will
take it well.

To Candy Barberries.
You must take them out of the Preserve, and wash off the syrup in warm water,
then ^ift fine Sugar on them, and put them into ^n Oven or Stove to dry,
stirring or moving them the mean while, and casting more Sugar upon them till
they are dry.

To Candy Grapes.
You must take them after they are Preserved, and use them as the former.

To Candy Eringo-Roots.
Take the Roots pared and boiled to a convenient softness, and to each pound
add two pound of fine Sugar, clarify it with the Whites of Eggs that it may be
transparent; and being boiled to a hight, dip in your Roots two or three at
once, and afterward dry them in an Oven or Stove for your use. And in this
fashion you may Candy any thing as to Fruit or Roots, to which, Candying is
proper. And as for Flowers, which that w^ are pleasant and ornamental, you may
Ca^dy them after the following manner wi^ their stalks and leaves, viz.

Take your various sorts of Flowers, (...) the stalks, if they are
extraordinary long somewhat shorter; and having added abo^^ eight spoonfulls of
Rose Water to a pound^ white Sugar, boil it to a clearness; and as begins to
grow stiff and cool, dip your Flowers into it; and taking them out presently
lay them one by one in a Sieve, and hold over a chasing-dish of Coals, and they
wi^^ dry and harden.

To dry Plumbs, Pears, Apples, Grapes, or the lik^
You must first Preserve them, then was^ or wipe them; after which set them
upon Tin Plates in a Stove, or for want of it a^ Oven, not to hot, and turn
them as you see occasion, observing ever to let them have their Stalks on.

These things more especially being fit to be understood by a young
Gentlewoman, (...) have spoken of them in order: And since there are many other
things necessary, o^ which I have said nothing, I shall proceed to give
Instructions, as they occur, which I hope will prove altogether as profitable.

CHAP. VI.
^^structions for a Gentlewoman in making of Marmalade, Paste of Fruit,
Artificial Fruit, Jellies of Fruit, Quiddanies, Fruit-cakes, Honey, Conserve
for Tarts, Maccaroons, Comfits and Confections, after sundry forms and manners.

To make Marmalade of Oranges.
^Are your Oranges as thin as may be, and let 'em boil till they are soft in
two or ^ree waters, then take double the number ^f good Pippins; divide them
and take a^ay the core; boil them to pap without lo^ng their color: strain the
pulp, and put a ^^und of Sugar to every pint; then take out ^e pulp of the
Oranges, and cut the peel, and boil it till it is very soft: bruise it in the
^^yce of two or three Lemons, and boil it up (...) a thickness with your
Apple-pap, and half pint of Rose Water.

To make Paste of Cherries.
Boil the Cherries till they come to be ve^^ soft, and strain the pulp through
a fine ^eve, and add a pound of Sugar to a pint; ^ffen it with Apple-pap, and
boil it up to a ^ght, then spread it upon Plates and dry it.

To make Marmalade of Grapes.
Take the ripest Grapes, gathered in a dr^ day, spread them upon a Table where
the Air and the Sun may come at them; afte^ which, take from them the stalks
and seed boiling the Husk and Pulp, or Juice in a Pa^ with often scuming,
whilst it is reduced to third part, and then let the heat be gentle and when
you find it thickened, strain (...) through a Sieve; and boiling it once more
add a small quantity of fine sugar, or the Powder of white Sugar Candy, and so
put i^ up in Pots covered with Paper for you^ use.

To make Honey of Mulberries.
Take the Juice of the black Mulberries and add to a pound and a half of their
Juyc^ two pound of clarified Honey, and boil ther^ up with often scuming till a
third part be consumed.

To make Jelly of Quinces, Currants or Gooseberries
Take the Fruit, and press out the Juice clarify it, and add to each quart a
pound o^ sugar, clarified and boiled up to a Candy hight; then boil them
together till a thir^ part be consumed; then add a pint of White wine, wherein
an ounce of Cherry-tree o^ Plumb-tree Gum has been dissolved, and i^ will make
it a perfect Jelly.

To make Lemon-Cakes, or Cakes of Lemons.
Take fine sugar half a pound, to two oun^es of the Juice of Lemons, and the
like ^uantity of Rose Water; boil them up till ^hey become Sugar again, then
grate into it, ^e rind of hard Lemons; and having well ^^corporated them, put
them up for your ^se into coffins, etc. being cold, and cover ^m with Paper.

Artificial Walnuts are thus to be made.
Take a Sugar-plate and print it like a Wal^ut kernel, yellowing the inside
with Saf^on; then take seraced Sugar and Cinnamon, and work them with
Rose Water, in which ^um-dragon has been steeped, into a Paste, and print it in
a Mould made like a Walnut-^ell; and when the kernel and shell are dry, ^ose
them together with Gum-dragon or ^um-Arabick, and they will deceive the ^uest,
who will take 'em for real Walnuts.

To make Artificial Oranges and Lemons.
Take Moulds of Alablaster made in three ^eces, bind two of them together, and
let ^em lie in the water an hour or two; boil^^g to a hight, in the mean time
as much su^ar as will fill them: the which being poured to the Mould, and the
lid put quickly on, by suddenly turning will be hollow: And so in this case to
the color of the Fruit yo^ cast, you must color your sugar in boiling.

To make red Quince-Cakes.
Take the syrup of Quinces and Barbarie^ of each a quart; cut into it about a
doze^ Quinces free from rind and core: boil the^ till they are very soft, then
strain the pu^ or liquid part, and boil it up with six poun^ of sugar till it
be Candy-proof; then take out and lay it upon Plates, as thin as yo^ think
convenient, to cool.

Clear or transparent Quince-Cakes are man thus.
Take a pint of the syrup of Quinces, an^ a quart of that of Barberries: boil
and cl^rifie them over a gentle fire, keeping the^ free from scum; then add a
pound and quarter of Sugar to the Juice, Candying a^ much more, and putting it
in hot, and (...) keeping it stirring till it be near cold, at wha^ time spread
and cut it into Cakes as the forme^

To make Marmalade after the Italian fashion.
Take about thirty Quinces, pare them take out their cores, and put to them a
quar^ of water and two pound of sugar; boil them till they are soft, then
strain the juice and th^^ pulp, and boil them up with four pound o^ sugar till
they become sufficiently thick.

To make white Quince-cakes.
Clarify your sugar with the Whites of ^ggs, putting to two pound a quarter of
a ^^nt of water; which being boiled up, add ^^y sugar, and highten it to a
Candy: then ^^e Quinces being pared, cored and scalded, ^eat them to pulp, and
put them into the ^iling sugar, not suffering them to boil long before you take
them off, and lay them on ^lates.

To make Maccaroons.
Blanch a convenient quantity of Almonds, ^y putting them into hot water: beat
them ^e in a Mortar, strewing on them as you ^eat fine seraced Sugar; and when
they are ^ell mixed, add the Whites of Eggs and ^ose-water; and when they are
of a conve^^ent thickness, drop the Butter on Wafers ^yed on Tin-plates, and
bake 'em in a gen^^e Oven.

To make a Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of Almonds blanched, ^eat them in a Mortar, and add a pint
of ^^w Milk, and strain them; add more, two ^^oonfulls of Rose Water, and a
grain of ^^usk, with half an ounce of the whitest ^^ng-gass, and strain them a
second time for our use.

To make Sugar smell like Spice.
Lay lumps of Sugar under your Spice, sprinkle them with some of the
Distilled-wat^^

To make a Quiddany of Plumbs, Apples, Quin^ or any other Fruit that is proper.
Take a quart of the Liquor of the Preseved Fruit, and add a pound of the Fruit
ra^ separated from the stone, rind or core: b^ it up with a pound of Sugar till
it stands upon a knife-point like a Jelly.

To make a Conserve for Tarts of any Fruit the will keep all the Year.
Take the Fruit you intend, peel off t^^ rind, and remove the core or stone,
the put them into a Pot, and bake them with small quantity of Water and Sugar;
bei^^ baked, strain 'em through a strong cloth adding Cinnamon, Sugar and Mace,
very sinly seraced, boil them on a gentle fire t^ they become as thick as a
Jelly, and the put them up into Pots or Glasses stopp^ close, and they will
have their proper ta^^ at any time.

To preserve Medlers.
Take the Fruit and scald them in fair w^ter till the Skin may be easily taken
off, the stone them at the head, and add to ea^^ pound, a pound of Sugar, and
let them boil till the Liquor become ropey; at what time take them off, and set
them by for your use.

To make Sweetmeats of any Apples.
Make your Jelly with those that are most soft and pleasant, then cutting other
Apples round-ways, put them into a Glass or Pot, and let them stand six days,
then boil 'em with the addition of a quarter of a pound of Sugar, to a pound of
Liquor, not breaking them, but seasoning them further with the Juice of Lemons,
Oranges, Cloves, Mace, and Perfuming them with a grain of Amber-grease.

To make each sort of Comfits, vulgarly called Covering-seeds, etc. with Sugar;
observe as follows.
You must provide a Pan of Brass or Tin, to a good depth, made with Ears to
^ang over a Chafing dish of Coals, with a Ladle and Slice of the same Metal;
then cleanse your Seeds from dross, and take the finest Sugar well beaten: put
to each a quar^er of a pound of Seeds, two pounds of Sugar; the Seeds being
first well dried, and your Sugar melted in this order, put into ^he Pan three
pounds of Sugar, adding a ^int of Spring Water, stirring it till it be
moi^tened, and suffer it to melt well over a clear fire till it ropes, after
that, set it upon hot Embers, not suffering it to boil, and so from your Ladle
let it drop upon the Seeds, and keep the Basin wherein they are continually
moving, and between every Coat rub and dry them as well as may be; and when
they have taken up the Sugar, and by the motion are rolled into order; dry them
in an Oven, or before a fire, and they will be hard and white.

Thus, Gentlewomen, have I let you understand the depth of Curiosities of this
kind, and such as are suitable to be done by your self, or at least to be
observed whether they are done as they ought, by those you employ to perform
'em, whether your Housekeeper or Woman; for if your self appear ignorant
herein, those that perform it will either have your want of understanding in
contempt, or not perform as they ought. Wherefore leaving them to be considered
and practiced by you at leisure, I shall proceed to the remaining Curiosities
in their order. And first, as to what belongs properly, especially in many
cases, to your self, lest by too long abstenance your Appetite should be
paul'd. I invite you to a Table furnished with dainties, and really let you
understand what your Behavior must or ought to be abroad or at home; and how,
if it comes to your turn* you must handle your Knife and Fork, etc. in Carving
the several sorts of Fowl, Fish and Flesh, of Beasts, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman in her Behavior at the Table, abroad and at
home, with the Terms and Manner of Carving Fowl, Flesh, of Beasts and Fish,
with Directions to know the choicest pieces in either, and such as are most
acceptable.

THough you may think it strange, and altogether a matter that might have been
spared to instructed you as to Behavior in a Marriage state; yet let me tell
you, though I shall hereafter say something as to this Point, yet the Behavior
of Youth differs from that of riper years; and since it is an Introduction to
other matters, let your wonder cease, and observe what follows.

Being at the Table in your due place, observe to keep your Body strait, and
lean not by any means with your Elbows, nor by ravenous Gesture discover a
voracious Appetite: Know no bones, but cut your Meat decently with the help of
your Fork; make no noise in calling for any thing you want, but speak softly to
those that are next, or wait to give it; nor be so dis-ingenious as to show.
your dislike of any thing that is before you, if strangers be at the Table;
especially at another Table; Eat not your Spoon-meat so hot that it makes your
Eyes water, nor be seen to blow it. Complain not of a queazy stomach; wipe your
Spoon every time you dip it in the dish; if you eat Spoon-meat with others, eat
not too fast, nor unseemly; neither be nice or curious at the Table by mincing
or mimping, as if you liked not the Meat or the Company; where you see variety,
yet reach not after them, but stay till you have an opportunity, and then show
an indifferency as to your choice; and if it chance to happen you have a Plate
with some piece you fancy not presented, wait your opportunity till it be taken
away and changed; no^ be inquisitive (for that is uncomely) to know what such a
Fowl or such a Joint cost, no^ discourse of Bills of Fare; take not in you^
Wine or other liquor too greedily, nor drink till you are out of breath, but do
things with decency and order. If you are abroad a^ Dinner, let not your hand
be first in an^ dish, nor take your place unseemly; neithe^ be induced to
Carve, though the Mistress (...) the house out of a complement entreat it
unless you see a necessity for it; and where ever you Carve, keep your fingers
from your mouth; throw not any thing over you^ shoulder, neither take or give
any thing on that side where a Person of Quality, or one much above you is
seated; nor reach your arms over other dishes to reach at what you like better.
And so leaving what else is requisite in this kind to be observed, I proceed to
give you, First, the Terms of Carvers: Secondly, the manner of Carving: and,
Thirdly, Directions to know the best pieces, etc. And of these in their order.

First, That you may the better be enabled to direct those you appoint to
Carve, if you Carve not your self, the most expert in that dextery give the
following Terms, by way of distinguishment, and properly in the cutting up all
manner of small Birds: the direction for it is Thighing them, as Larks,
Woodcocks, Pigeons, etc. Directions for cutting up a Plover, is to mince it; a
Quail and Partridge, to wing them; a Pheasant, to ^lay it; a Curlew, to untie
it; a Bittern, to unjoynt it; a Peacock, to disfigure it; a Crane, to display
it; a Hern, to dismember ^t; a Mallard, to unbrace it; a Chicken, to ^n frust
it; a Swan, to lift it; a Goose, to ^ear it: And so in Flesh of Beasts, as
Creek that Deer, Unlace, that Coney, Leach that ^rawn. So in case of Fish; As
Chine the ^almon; String the Lampry; Splat the Pike; ^awce the Place and Tench;
Splay the ^ream; Side the Haddock; Culpon the Trout; Tusk the Barble; Transon
the Eel; Tame the Crab; Barb the Lobster; Tranch the Sturgeon, and the like, or
much to the same effect, in case of others not mentioned. But passing them
over, for brevities sake, I come to the second thing to be considered, which is
the manner of cutting up.

If you take it upon you to Carve a Swan, called in the proper term Lifting,
slit him downright in the middle of the breast, and through the back, from the
neck to the rump, laying the slit sides downward in the dish, without tearing
the flesh, and serve the sauce up in Sawcers.

The term of Carving a Goose is to rear or break her in this manner. Take off
the legs very fair, then cut of the belly-piece round, close to the lower end
of the breast, and with your knife, lace her down on each side a thumbs breadth
from the breast bone, taking off the wings with the flesh you first laced,
raising it cleaver from the bone, then cut up the merry-thought, and another
piece of flesh which you formerly laced; turn the carcass, and divide it at the
backbone above the loin; then lay the rump end of the backbone at the
fore-end of the merry-thought with the fleshy side upward, and the wings on
each side contrary, that so the boney end of the legs may stand up in the
middle of the dish, and the wings on their outside, putting under the wing
Pinions, the two long pieces of flesh, etc. and let the ends meet under the
leg-bones.

In carving or dismembring a Hern. Lace her down the breast, and take off both
the legs; then raising up the flesh, take it clean off with the Pinions; then
sticking the head in the breast, set the Pinion on the contrary side of the
carcass, and the legs on the other side, so that the ends of the bones may meet
cross over it.

In cutting up a Bustard or Turkey. The leg being raised up very fair, open the
joint with the sharp point of your knife, and lace down the breast on both
sides, without taking off the leg or the pinion; then raise up the
merry-thought, and between the top of the breast bone and the merry-thought,
lace down the flesh on both sides, and raise up the flesh called the Brawn;
turn it outward on both sides, but neither cut it off nor break ^t; then cut
off the wing-pinions at the body ^oynt, and stick on each side the pinion, in
the place where you turned out the Brawn, cutting off the sharp end, and taking
the middle-piece, that will fit the place. And ^n this manner a Capon or a
Pheasant may be cut up, but cut not off the Pinions of the former, the divided
Gizard serving to supply ^he place where the Turkies wings were ^ut.

In unbracing a Mallard. Observe that you raise up the pinion and leg, not
taking them off: raise likewise the merry-thought from the breast, and lace it
down sloapingly on each side the breast, and loosening the joints, leave it
undivided.

In displaying a Crane. Unfold the legs and cut off the wings by the body
joints then sauce both the wings and legs with powder of Ginger, Mustard, Salt
and Vinegar: and so a Bittern may be unjoynted, o^ any other Fowl of that
nature.

Your Partridge or Plover minced, etc White Wind, Powder of Ginger and Salt i^
a proper sauce.

In unlacing a Coney. Turn the belly upwards, cutting the belly-pieces from the
Kidney, then with the point of your knife loosen the kidneys, and flesh
between, to either side of the bone; when turning up the backside of the
Rabit, cut it cross between the wings, and lace it down close by the bone on
eitherside; then open the flesh from the bone against the kidney, and opening
the legs, slit them from the Kidney to the rump^ and lay them close in order.

A Pig being chined, is generally divide^ into four quarters, the Head divided,
an^ the Ears taken off, and the rest left to the discretion of the Carver.

A Salmon is chined down the back, or laced on each side the backbone, and
divided into Mediums and Extremities, greater or lesser, at discretion. And
thus far having given you an insight into the terms and methods of Carving; I
shall let you, in the next place, know what is to be done in the distribution
of what is carved, that it may find the better acceptance: As,

Thirdly, If you have a friend at the Table you would oblige more than another,
and if Chickens boiled be the first dish, the breast is to be preferred, and
next the leg; for in all boiled fowl, the leg is accounted better than the
wing; though in roasted ones, if they be wild-fowl, the wing is chief: and the
reason that is given is, because it is exceeding tender by means of its
continual motion; and add, as a curiosity on the other hand, that the legs of
tame fowl not using the wing, but too often scratching, are to be preferred as
the best nourishment; though it is generally held in wild and tame fowl, as
Pullets, Turkies, Capons, Geese, Duck, Mallard, Pheasant, Dotril, and the like,
that the merry-thought and the wing is best, however they are most acceptable,
and the next part, that which is laced on the breast bone.

As for Butchers meat. In roast Beef, that which is within side the Surloin is
most prized; and in other pieces, that which is curiously striped with fat and
lean; and so in boiled Beef.

In a Loin of Veal the Nut-piece or Kidney-piece is the best to be presented.

In a Leg of Mutton, there is a little round bone on the inside, above the
handle, that is fit with the meat upon it to be presented, and is in great
esteem among the curious: As it appeared by a Gentleman, who after long
Coursing, being extreme hungry, and finding that bone untouched in a cut Leg of
Mutton, refused to eat by reason he fancied Boorish people had had the first
handling of it, or otherwise their discretion would have directed them to have
taken that piece.

A Shoulder of Mutton being cut between the handle and the flap, the fat Nut
there found is the choicest piece, and worthiest to be presented. And in a
roasted Pig the Women especially prefer the under Jaw and the Ear, though on
the other hand the Neck and middle-piece is preferrable.

In a Hare, Coney or Leverit, the back-piece, just in the middle, is held of
great esteem, though some nicely covet the piece by the side of the tail,
commonly called the Huntsman's piece.

In all Fish without shells, the Jole, or that part next to the head, is to be
esteemed; and in a Lobster or Crab, the claw.

If Fish or sliced Flesh be in Paste, it is proper to touch it with your Knife,
Fork or Spoon; and raising it conveniently, lay it upon a Trencher or Plate in
the best order, not by any means, delivering it to the hand of the party with
your Knife, Fork or Spoon, but on a Plate.

All sorts of Tarts, Custards, wet Sweetmeats and Cakes, being cut in the dish
wherein they were served up, must be laid likewise with the point of a Knife,
handsomely on a Plate and presented.

Thus having showed you how to behave your self, and, in some part to manage
good cheer; it will be highly necessary to consider, that a young Gentlewomans
Beauty is an Ornament next to that of her Virtue; and though Nature is
prodigally lavish in furnishing your Faces with charms, yet seeing she is
deficient, and casualties impair the perfection of you lovely Sex, I think fit
to impart such Secrets, as by harmless ways what is wanting or disordered, may
be supplied or repaired: In which, the following Treatise will direct you.

CHAP. VIII.
The Closet of Beauty, or Modest Instructions for a Gentlewoman in making
Beautifying Waters, Beautifying Oils, Pomatums, Reparations, Musk-balls,
Perfumes, and other Curiosities: Highly necessary and advantageous in the
Practice, etc.

GEntlewomen, Imagine not that I undertake this Treatise to create in you the
least self-conceit or extravagant opinion of your Merits, by putting into your
hands an opportunity to render your selves more beautiful, if possibly it may
be, but to preserve what you have, at least from the ruins of time, or any
unfortunate accident, for neatness on this side the Region of Pride is to be
observed in that as well as in Apparel; nay in a cleanly observance, even
Health it self is concerned. But to proceed.

If Hair, that comely Ornament of your Sex, be wanting, occasioned by Sickness
or defect of moisture, etc. To recover it.
Take the Ashes of Hysop-roots, the Juice of Marshmallows, and the Powder of
Elicampane-roo^s, of each an ounce: boil them in half a pint of White Wind,
with a dram of the Oil of Tartar, till half be consumed, and with the remainder
Anoint the ball'd place, and the hair will be restored.

To preserve the Hair from falling off.
Burn Pigeons dung to Ashes, of which take the quantity of an ounce, put them
into (...) pint of water where Wood-ashes have ^oaked: then add two ounces of
the Juice of ^enegreen or Housleek, and one of fine Sugar Candy, and half an
ounce of Rosemary ^lowers: boil them together, strain them well, and wash the
place six or seven times, and the Hair will not only remain firm, but what is
fallen off will renew.

Of Hair grow too thick or unseemly in any part of the Body.
Take Gum-Arabick, and boil it to the ^hickness of a Salve in the Juice of
Hemlock, and lay it on the place Plaster-wise; and when it is taken off, which
must not be un^er two days, it will bring off the Hair by ^he roots, not
permitting any more to grow ^n that place.

To make the Hair fair and beautiful.
Cleanse it from dust by washing it in Rose-Vinegar, then boil an ounce of
Turmerick, the like quantity of Rubarb, with the leaves of Bay Tree cut small,
to the quantity of a handful, boiled in a quart of water, wherein half a pound
of Allom has been dissolved and by often washing your Head with the decoction,
it will make your Hair fair an^ lovely, unless it be a deep red, or exceedin^
black.

To cleanse the Skin of the Face and make beautiful.
Take and distill the Blossoms of Pease an^ Beans with the like quantity of the
flowers o^ Fumitory and Scabeous, and wash the Fac^ with it morning and
evening, anointing it a^terward with a small quantity of Oil o^ Myrrh; and by
often using it, you will have cause to admire the effects. Rosemary flowers
boiled in White Wind, have likewise their wonderful quality in this kind.

To take away Freckles.
Take the Galls of two Cocks, a handful^ of Rye-flower or Meal, a pint of
Verjuice^ two ounces of Plantane-water, and one o^ the Oil of Bitter Almonds:
boil them, an^ strain out the liquid part, when a third part is consumed, then
boil it again till it become^ a kind of an Ointment; and often anointing the
Face therewith, will remove 'em.

To make a clear, white and smooth Skin.
Take an ounce of Barrows grease, the Whites of two Eggs, half an ounce of the
^shes of Bay Tree roots or leaves, a quarter ^f an ounce of Honey of Roses, and
a quarter ^f a pint of Plantane-water: boil them till ^hey become an Ointment,
and use it to the and abovementioned.

To take away Sun-burn.
A handful of Spanish Salt dissolved in the ^uyce of two Lemons, is a speedy
remedy, ^he Face and Hands being often rubbed with (...), and it as often
suffered to dry upon them

To take away Wrinkles, and make the Face look youthful.
Take of Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, a quar^er of a pint; of Bean-flower and red
Rose-^ater, each four ounces; Water of Lillies, our ounces; the Juice of
Briony-roots, two ^unces; and of the decoction of Figgs, two ^unces:
Incorporate them over a gentle fire, and use it as a Wash.

To take away the Red Spots, occasioned by the Small Pox.
Wash your Face with Juice of Lemon, (...) which beaten Allom and Bay Salt has
been ^issolved; and to wear out the Pits, or pre^ent them gnawing deeper, as
you grow in ^ears, Take half a pint of the Spirit of Vine^ar, an ounce of
Mustard Seed, a quarter of (...) pint of the Juice of Marshmallows, and a
handful of Bran: boil them together, an^ put the liquid part in a Viol, with
which wash your Face morning and evening, an^ you will find the effect will
answer the trouble.

To take away Pimples and Redness in the Face*
Dissolve half an ounce of Alom in the White of an Egg, and a spoonful of
Vinegar: beat it together till it is well mixed, an^ when you go to bed, lay it
Plaster-wise upon the place, and your desire will be effected.

To take away the hot swelling of the Face.
Boil Rosemary-blossoms, or leaves o^ Groundsil and Chamomile in White Wind and
not only wash your Face in the Juice but lay the Herbs stamped with a small
quantity of Oil of Roses, Pultis-wise, to the plac^ afflicted.

To Restore a Ruby Face to its former Complexion*
Take the yolks of two Eggs, an ounce o^ fresh Butter, four drams of Camphire,
ha^ a pint of Rose Water, an ounce of the Oy^ of Bays: mingle them well by
heating then over a fire, and anoint the Face with the Ointment, for they will
produce, if well bea^^n and kept stirring, and strained through a ^oollen cloth
an, Oil, etc.

To make the Hands soft and white.
Take of Bean and Lupin-flower, of each handful; of Starch, Corn, Rue and
Orice, and sweet Almonds, two ounces: beat or ^rind them together, and with the
Powder ^ash your Hands often.

To make an Excellent Wash-ball for the Hands and Face.
Take two ounces of Calamus aramaticus, of Rose-flowers, and the flowers of
Lavender, each a handful; three ounces of Orice, and ^n ounce of Cyprus: beat
them well, scrape unto the Powder of them, being sifted as much Castle soap as
will make it into Balls, when mollified with Rose Water.

To prevent marks of the small Pox, in the Face.
Boil Cream and Honey of Roses to an Ointment, and therewith anoint the places,
during the Patients sickness, where you fear the deformity.

To make Teeth white and continue sound.
Take of the Powder of Roach-Allum a quarter of an ounce, the like quantity of
the Powder of fine Pumice-stone, half as much Bay Salt, and half a quarter of a
pint of the Juice of red Sage: boil them over a gent^ fire till they appear
thick, and with the redue rub your Teeth every morning, washin^ your Mouth with
Water and Honey.

For want of this, boil a like quantity Rosemary, Sage and Allom, in
Spring-wate^ rub your Teeth therewith, and wash you Mouth with the Juice or
Water of Ladie^ Thistle root, or the root of Hore-hound, an^ it will restore
the Gums, and preserve the Teeth white and firm.

A fine Pumice-stone only will make Teeth if found, as white as Ivory, by
gentle rubbing.

To cause a sweet Breath.
Take four ounces of Cummin-seed, a^ much of Anniseed, with half as much of the
tops of Lavender: bruise them and boil them in Wine, sweetened with white
Sugar-candi^ drink, when you rise and go to bed, an ounce of the liquid part,
and in ten or twelve days your Breath will be as sweet as ever, unless the
Lungs are putrefied.

If your Eyes are Blood-shot, to remove that unseemly grievance.
Take two ounces of the Roots of red Fennel, stamp them and press out the
Juice, and mingle it with half an ounce of clarified Honey: heat them gently
over the fire till they ^^come an Ointment, anoint therewith the ^e-lids, and
drop a drop with a feather into ^ch Eye: and in so doing, and washing ^em with
White Wind or Eye-bright-water, ^e redness will vanish.

A rotten Apple, Bole-armorick and Bread, ^ade into a Poultis, by braying them
in a ^ortar, and laying them over the Eyes, wet^d a little with
Eye-bright-water, between ^o fine cloths, will do the same; as also move an
Inflammation.

^^ by the Wind, or sharpness of the Air, clefts happen in your Lips.
Take Deers Suet an ounce, the like quan^^ty of Spermaceti; add thereto an
ounce of ^^e Juice of Housleek or Senegreen, and ^ake them into an Ointment,
and anoint ^our Lips, or any part of your Face so af^^cted; it will likewise
serve for your Hands, etc. doing it when you go to bed, and draw^^g on a pair
of soft Gloves.

To restore a singular Complexion in the Face where it is wanting.
Take green Hysop, when the Flowers are ^n it, stamp it, and strain out the
Juice: ^weeten it with white Sugar-candia, and boil (...) up with a third part
of the Juice of Pomgranets; and when it is clarified use you^ self to drink six
spoonfulls of it in warm A^ morning and evening, and you will find the
advantage.

To remove any ill scent from out of the Nostri^
Snuff up or inject with a Sirringe, White wine, wherein Ginger, Cloves and
Calamin^ have been boiled, and provoke your self t^ sneeze with the Powder of
Piritum, steep in the Juice of Senegreen, and afterwar^ dried to it is original
dryness in the Sun.

To make a sweet Water to be used by Gentlew^men on sundry occasions.
Take a pint of the Water of Mugwort^ half a pint of the distilled Water of
Peach-blossoms, drop into them, when warm eigh^ or nine drops of the Oil or
Spirit of Cloves and as much of Nutmegs: stop it close, and shake it when you
use it.

To take away Warts, very troublesome, on sundry occasions.
Take the Juice of Senegreen and Purslain adding to it an ounce of both
together, ten or twelve drops of Oil of Tartar, and wash the Warts with it when
hot, and they will fall away.

^o kill Black-headed Worms in the hands or face.
Take half a pint of Wormwood-water, an ^unce of the Ashes of Suthern-wood, and
^alf an ounce of black Soap: boil them till ^he moisture be so far consumed,
that they ^ome to a thickness: then add an ounce of Oil, make them into an
Ointment, and a^oint the place where they be, which you ^ay perceive by their
black heads, and they will, by often doing it, dye and waste away.

To take away Freckles, Morphew or Scars in the face.
Take half a pint of the Spirit of Wine, Rosemary-flowers two ounces, the Juice
of Elder-leaves two ounces, and the Marrow of Sheeps-feet or Hogs-feet two
ounces; boil them till a third part be consumed, and anoint your face
therewith. Or for want of it, Take of the Oil or Ointment of Cittern four
ounces, and two of Pomatum; anoint your face with them when well incorporated,
and six hours after wipe it off, and wash your face with Bean-flower or
Rosemary-flower water.

In case of a Ring-worm in the Face.
Take half a quarter of a pint of the Vinegar of Squills, a quarter of an ounce
of the ^uyce of Sellendine, three drams of the Oil of Tartar, and as much of
the Powder of Alloes: heat them over the fire till they come thick, and lay
some of it Plaster^^ to the place grieved.

To cleanse the Body and make it comely.
Take red Roses two handfulls, of red Sa^ and Lavender-flowers the like
quantity handful of Featherfew, and as many B^leaves: boil them in
Spring Water, adding handful or two of Salt, and wash your as warm as with
convenience you may.

To Curl the Hair.
Take three ounces of Pine-nut kerne^ dry them and beat them into Powder, the
add to them half a pint of the Water of Wa^ flowers, and two ounces of the Oil
of My^tle: boil them into a thickness, and strain^ out the liquid part, anoint
the Hair, and (...) it up; and so you will find it will in twice thrice doing
keep the curl.

To make Hair black.
Take two ounces of the Juice of gre^ Walnuts, as much of that of red Poppey^
an ounce of the Oil of Myrtle, and of the of Costomary, the like quantity: boil
'em an Ointment, and anoint the Hair therewi^^ often, and it will effect your
desire.

Gentlewomen, your Breasts be over-large, (and by that means troublesome) to
reduce them.
Make an Ointment of Roach-Allom and ^yl of Roses, with a small quantity of
Scabe^s-water, and they will contract themselves (...) being often anointed.

To make a sweet Bath.
Take the flowers or peels of Cittrons, the ^^wers of Oranges and Gessamine,
Laven^^r, Hysop, Bay Leaves; the flowers of Rosemary, Comfry, and the seeds of
Coriander, ^dive and sweet Marjorum; the Berries of ^yrtle and Juniper: boil
them in Spring-^ater, after they are bruised, till a third part (...) the
liquid matter is consumed, and enter in a Bathing tub, or wash your self with
it ^arm, as you see occasion, and it will in^^ferently serve for Beauty and
Health.

(...) make Musk-bags to lay amongst your Clothes.
Take the flowers of Lavender-cotton six ^nces, Storax half an ounce, red
Rose-^aves two ounces, Rhodium an ounce: dry ^^em and beat them to Powder, and
lay them (...) a bag wherein Musk has been, and they will (...) an excellent
scent, and preserve your oaths from Moths or Worms.

To make Musk-balls.
Take of the flower of Almonds six ounce Castle-sope six ounces: wet them in
Ro^^-water, and infusing two grains of Mus^ make the Paste up into balls
without he^ing.

To make burning Perfume.
Take an ounce of Storax, the like quanty of Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmeg: bru^
them together, and add the Powder of C^sa, and two ounces of the Oil of Myrrh,
more if that suffice not to make it into roll or instead of it, you may use
Virgins Wa^^ and being set on fire, it will cast a precio^^ scent.

To make a scent of Rosemary.
Take your Perfumer, and heat it over chasing-dish of coals; put into it, being
pr^ty hot, two spoonfulls of Rose Water, h^^ a handful of Rosemary-tops, and
six dra^ of Sugar, and all the house will be scented.

Another excellent Perfume; how to make it.
Take a quarter of a pint of Rose-wate^ two grains of Amber-grease, two penny
weig^ of Sugar, and a grain of Civit; beat them t^gether, and put them into
your Perfumin^ pot over the fire, and it will send forth a d^licate odor.

An Excellent Perfume good against Infectious Air, and exceeding pleasant; how
to make it
Observe to take half a quartern of Spike-water, as much of Rose Water; a
quarter of an ounce of Cloves, with seven or eight Bay-^eaves shread; and six
grains of Sugar, and boil them in your Perfumer.

To make Musk-Cakes.
Take half a pound of red Roses; bruise them well, and add to them the water of
Basil, the Powder of Frankincense, making it up with these a pound; add four
grains of Musk: mix them well to a thickness, make them into Cakes, and dry
them in the Sun.

Thus, Gentlewoman, have I made you sensible of such Curiosities, as are not
only pleasant, but as highly advantageous. And now least you should be wanting
in what is further necessary in the preservation and restoration of Health, I
shall give you some admirable Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, that you may
be helpful to your self and others: Such they are, as have been often
administered, and used with success; and such as, if rightly and seasonably
applied, can do no harm; nor are they unfit for the Closet of a Gentlewoman,
therefore accept them in good part.

CHAP. IX.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman in many Excellent Receipts, Physical and
Chyrurgical, tending to the restoration and preservation of Health, in old and
young, according to the bes^ approved Rules and Methods, safe and easi^ in the
Application, and successful in the Operation.

IF any person be afflicted with the Griping of the Guts, Take Juniper Berries,
Fennel, Anniseeds, Bay Berries, Tormentilo, Bistwort, Balaustius and
Pomgranet-seeds, o^ each an ounce: bruise them adding of Rose-leaves a
handful: boil them in Milk, pres^ out the liquid part, and add more the yolk
o^ an Egg, and six grains of Laudanum: prepare it warm, and give it
Clister-wise.

For Pains in the Head.
Take a Rose-cake, steep it in Bettony water, and apply it to the Forehead and
Temples cold, often wetting it, and the Pai^ will abate.

In case of an Ague.
Take Rye-meal, temper it well with the yolk of an Egg, then spread it
Plaster-wise and strew upon it the Powder of Juniper berries, and lay it to the
parties Wrists, giving him to drink a draught of hot Ale, wherein blew
Lilly-roots have been steeped a night, and a white Flint-stone red hot
quenched, and let him or her thereupon go into a hot bed; and by several times
using it, the advantage will appear.

Or, Take two quarts of small Ale, shread into it a handful of Parsley, and
the like quantity of red Fennel, of Centory and Pimpernel, each a handful: boil
them in the Ale till a third part be consumed; sweeten it then with
Sugar Candy, and let the party drink it hot upon the approach of the cold fit.

For the yellow Jaundice.
Take a large Onion, make it as hollow as you can; put into the cavity a
quarter of an ounce of Venice-Treacle, and as much Honey, with a dram of
Saffron: set the Onion on a gentle fire, and when by often turning it is
sufficiently roasted, press it together with what was in it, and let the party
grieved take a spoonful of it for three days together in White Wind.

For the black Jaundice.
Take Sage, Parsley, Groundsil and Smalage, and boil them in Pottage with
Swines-flesh; and in often eating it, the grievance will be removed.

For a dry Cough.
Take Anniseeds an ounce, the like quantity of Ash-keys, as many Violet-flowers
and the Powder of Licoris: beat them together, when dried, till they be a
Powder then put them into a pint of White Wind sweetning it with two ounces of
white Sugar candia: boil them into an Electuary, and le^ the party take the
quantity of a Walnut every morning fasting, drinking after it a glas^ of warm
Ale or Milk.

To make a green Ointment.
Take a pound of Barrows-grease, add (...) it an ounce of Verdigrease, of
Salgem ha^ a scruple: make them up into an Ointment over a soft fire, and it is
used with success i^ case of old sores or bruises.

To break an Imposthume or Swelling.
Take an ounce of the Roots of White Lilies, half a large Onion, and half an
ounce of Barrows-grease; stamp them together and being fried, lay it hot to the
place.

To remove the humor that occasions the Green sickness in Virgins and young
Widows.
Take a quart of Claret, a pound of bles^ Currants, a handful of young
Rosemary-top^ with half an ounce of Mace: bruise them and boil the liquid part
to a pint, and let the party afflicted drink half a pint hot morning and
evening for a week together.

Sir Philip Parry's Emplaister; how to make it, and its Virtue.
Take of Olive-oyl two pounds, red Lead one pound, white Lead one pound; beat
and serace them; of Castle-sope twelve ounces: incorporate them in an
Earthen-pot well glazed, then set them on a gentle fire for an hour and half,
stirring them continually till the matter become the color of Oil, and
somewhat dark. Try it on a Plate, if it cleave not thereto, it is enough, then
spread it on your Linen, or dip the Linen into it, and smooth it with a
sleek-stone, and it will not lose it is Virtue in many years.

This Plaster, applied to the Stomach, provokes Appetite, takes away the
grief or pain. Applied to the Reins, it stops the Bloody Flux, the Running
of the Reins, the Heat in the Kidneys, and the weakness of the Back, and is
good for Swellings, Bruises, Aches, etc.

A most Approved Plaster for the Rupture.
Take of Alloes and Cittron one ounce, Dragons blood an ounce, Myrrh an ounce,
Mastick, Bole-Armonick, Gum-dragant, of each three ounces; make them into a
Powder, and with the Juice of red Housleek, work them into a Plaster.

A Salve Excellent to draw and heal, etc.
Take a pennyworth of Turpentine, as much Virgins Wax as a Walnut, the like
quantity of fresh Butter, a spoonful of Honey melt them into a pan, and strain
the substance into fair water, and make it into a Roll for your use.

An Excellent Emplaister for a new or old Sore.
Take of Rosine four ounces, melt it, then of Turpentine take an ounce, and two
ounces of Wax, the like of Sheeps-suet cleared from the skin, and a spoonful of
Olive-oyl: boil them over a gentle fire, and then strain them into water, and
apply them as a Salve.

Dr. Morsus Emplaister, commonly called Oxecrotium.
Take Ship-Pitch, Saffron, Colophony, Beeswax, of each three ounces;
Turpentine, Galbanum, Amoniacum, Myrrh, fine Frankincense, Mastick, of each an
ounce and three scruples: lay your Galbanum a night in Vinegar, then boil and
strain it; melt your Gums, and mingle them by stirring: put in last your
Turpentine, and being well incorporated, make it into Rolls, and use it in case
of Pains, Aches, Bruises, Strains, Dislocations, and to strengthen the Nerves,
etc.

Oil of Rosemary-flowers; how to make it, with its Virtual Operation.
Take a good quantity of Rosemary-flowers stamp them and put them into a Glass
with strong Wine: stop the Glass close, and set it in the Sun six days, then
distill the Flowers and Wine with a soft fire, and the effect will produce both
Water and Oil; separate them, and keep the Oil close in a Glass.

This Oil is good against the inveterate Headache, it comfort the Memory, and
perserveth the sight, by being drunk in a Glass of Wine, or dropped into the
Eyes: being dropped into the Ears, it helps Deafness, and is good in case of
the Dropsy, yellow Jaundice, Rising of the Mother, etc.

An Excellent Powder to provoke Urin, and send forth the Gravel and Stone.
Take a Flint-stone and beat it in a Mortar to a fine and subtle Powder, serace
it and keep it in a Bladder till you have occasion to use it, then take half a
dram fasting in a Glass of White Wind or Ale, and keep your self warm.

A Powder to ease the Pains of the Gout.
Take of fine Ginger two drams, four drams of dried Elecampane-root, Licoras
half an ounce, Sugar Candy three ounces beat them to a fine Powder, and serace
the^ drinking off the Powder, a dram at a time fasting in a Glass of Ale.

A Water for easing the Pains in the Teeth.
Take of red Rose-leaves half a handful, Pomgranet-flowers the like quantity,
two Galls thin sliced; boil them in three quarters of a pint of red Wine, and
half a pint of fair Water, until a third part be consumed; strain them, and
hold a spoonful at a time in your mouth, and lay a hot cloth to your cheek
dipped in the liquid part, etc.

An Excellent Water for the Ulceration of the Yard.
Take Water wherein Iron has been often (...) ^^^ces of Pomgranet-piles and
flowers of each, three drams; of Plantane and Housleek, each an ounce and a
half; of Honey of Roses, Turpentine, each half a pound; Alum six ounces, white
Copperas three drams: boil them till half be consumed, then add Verdigrease
three ounces; strain them, and gently boil them again; then letting them
settle, take the thin and rarified part, and inject it with a Syringe,
anointing the place grieved with the other part.

An Ointment to cleanse Sores either old or new.
Take two ounces of Turpentine, wash it well in a Barly-water, put it to the
yolks of six new-laid Eggs, Honey of Roses, or common Honey four ounces: mingle
them well over a gentle fire till they become an Ointment, and then dip the
Tents or Pledgets in it, and apply them.

Flos Unguentorum; how to make it; together with its Excellent Virtue.
Take Rosin, Perrosin, of each half a pound; Virgins Wax, Frankincense, of each
four ounces; Mastick half an ounce; Stags-suet four ounces; Camphire two drams:
Pound, and melt them over a gentle fire, then strain them into a Pottle of
White Wind; and when it is lukewarm, put thereto three ounces of Turpentine,
stirring it till it be cold, and then put it up for your use.

It is exceeding good for old Wounds, in order to the ingendring good flesh,
and cleansing them; wasting likewise the bad flesh, and is good for all manner
of Imposthumes in the Head, and in the Body; also for Strains in the Sinews: It
draws out Thorns or Splinters of Bones; it heals Botches and Scabs, and is
good for the Noli me tangere; and is an excellent Sear-cloth for the Gout,
Sciatica or Aches in any part of the Body.

For a Scald, or any Burn, an Excellent Ointment
Take of Cream a quart, Fern-roots a handful: slice and wash the Roots, and
the^ boil them in the Cream in an Earthen-pot till they Jelly, and at what time
there is an occasion to use it: Ferment it with a Spatula, and apply it on a
Linen Cloth, often renewing it.

An Excellent Ointment to assuage Pain, and coo^ any extraordinary Heat by what
means soever it happen.
Take of white Carrate four ounces, Oil of Roses ten ounces, red and white
Saunders, red Roses, Myrrh, Olibanum and Mastick, of each two drams; Camphire
half a dram, Turpentine two ounces and a half, and make them into an Unguent.

A Tobacco-Salve for any fresh Wound.
Take of the Juice of green English Tobacco a quart, of Olive-oyl a pint, of
Wax and Turpentine, each an ounce and half; an ounce of Verdegrease: boil them
over a gentle fire for an hours space, and make them up in Rolls for your use.

Note, That the best Cloth for Plaster is new Lockram, and the worst Calico,
or such cloth as has been starched.

For the shrinking of the Nerves or Sinews, a Plaster.
Take of Watercresses and Cammomile, each a handful; stamp them and fry them
with a handful of Wheaten-meal, and two ounces of Honey; then spread them on a
cloth, and apply them to the place at hot as may be well endured.

A Dredge Powder, that purges Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy.
Take of Turbith one ounce, Ginger, Cinnamon, Mastick, Gallengale, grains of
Paradise, Cloves, Anniseeds, the Herb called Mercury's Finger and Diagr^dium of
each half an ounce: the leaves of Senna two ounces Loaf-sugar four ounces; dry
them that the^ may be pulverized, and mingling them well take a dram in a
morning fasting either in a glass of White Wind or warm Ale.

An Excellent Powder to purge the Head by Sneezing.
Take of the Roots of Sneezing-wort o^ Bartram an ounce, Castorum half an ounce
of white Hellebore and black Hellebore each an ounce; Marjorum a handful: dry
them and make them into a Powder, using the Powder moderately as you see
occasion.

An Excellent Powder for the Falling Sickness.
Take a Man's Scull that has not ben above a year buried: bury it in hot Embers
till it become white, and easy to be broken: Then take off the uppermost part
of the head to the top of the crown, and beat it into Powder; then grate a
Nutmeg, and put it to it, with two ounces of the blood of a Dog dried and
powdered: mingle them together, and give the grieved party a dram morning and
evening in White Wind or new Milk.

An Excellent Powder for hollow Ulcers.
Take Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Bole-armorick, Dragons blood and
^arly-meal, of each an ounce: make them unto a Powder, and sprinkle a little of
it in the Ulcer, etc. and bind it up: which often doing, will fill it with
flesh.

A Powder to Incarnate any Wound.
Take of Hog-Fennel half an ounce, Flowerdelize five drams, Myrrh three grains,
^he greater and lesser Centaury, of each two ^rams: Round Aristolocia, Tuttioe,
Oppoponax, Meal of Orobus, each two drams and a half: ^eat them into fine
Powder, and strew them upon the wound as you see occasion.

An Excellent Powder to stay the bleeding of Wounds, etc.
Take Quicklime, Dragons Blood, Al^es, Frankincense, Copperas, of each four
^rams: incorporate them, and being finely ^owdered with Cobwebs, and the White
of ^n Egg: apply the Powder by sprinkling it ^n the wound.

An Excellent Poultis for any Ach, Sprain or Dislocation.
Take of Smallage, Marshmallows, Cammomile and Groundsil, each a handful well
^icked: stamp them and fry them in six ounces of Barrows grease with the yolks
of two Eggs, and apply them as hot as may be well endured to the place grieved.

An Excellent Powder in case of the Small Pox, or any Infectious distemper.
Take half an ounce of English Saffron, dry it till it may be pulverized, add
to it six grains of Bezoar-stone, a dram of Myrrh, and an ounce of white
Sugar Candy: Incorporate them, and let the party take a dram at a time in
White Wind, not exceeding a spoonful.

An Excellent Confection to preserve against t^^ Plague, or any Pestilential
disease; as al^ from the effects of bad Airs.
Take green Walnuts, number six: Bau^^ and Rue, of each a handful; Plantane
an^ Bettony the like quantity: bruise them wit^ fine Sugar and Spirit of Wine
then dry the whole matter in an Oven or Stove till it becomes as solid as
Conserve of Roses, and le^ the party take fasting as much as a Hazle-nu^

For the Consumption, an Excellent Receipt.
Take the Hearts of three Sheep new killed, cleansed from the blood and strings
soak them a night and a day in White Wind dry them again, and put them into a
new glazed Pipkin, covering them above and below with Rosemary-branches: then
add Cloves, Sugar, Hartshorn, of each three ounces, and four ounces of white
Sugar Candy, and as much Asses Milk as will cover them; then stop them close
with Paste, and let them stand in an Oven the Baking o^ Houshold-bread; after
that press out the liquid part, and take a spoonful morning and evening.

An Excellent Drink for the Windiness of the Stomach or Spleen.
Take a handful of Broom-buds, the like quantity of Anniseeds; of the Roots of
Scabeous an ounce: boil them in a quart of new Ale, sweeten the liquid part
with brown Sugar, and drink half a quartern hot at a time morning and evening,
or when you find your self oppressed; and in so continuing it for a week, you
will find great relief.

The Lord Denise's Excellent Medicine for the Gout; how to make and apply it.
Take four handfulls of Burdock-leaves, with the stalks on, shread them and
bruise them: strain out the Juice and clarify it, adding half the quantity of
Olive-oyl, and keep it close stopped in a glass; and as you use it, apply it
with a hot cloth to the place grieved.

To make Gascoign-Powder.
Take of white Amber, Seed, Pearls, Hartshorn, Eyes of Crabs and white Corral
of each half an ounce; of the black Thighs of Crabs, calcined before they are
boiled, two ounces; adding to every ounce before mentioned an ounce of
Oriential Bezoar: bruise and serace them to a fine Powder, and it is excellent,
two scruples of it drunk in a spoonful of Wine, to expel evil vapors from
the brain to comfort and corroborate the heart, and restore a decaying
constitution; and for the better keeping, you may make it into Lozenges with
the Jelly of Hartshorn and Saffron.

For the Dropsy.
Take Setwell, Calamus-aromaticus and Galingale, of each an ounce; of
Spikenard, hal^ an ounce: bruise them, and hanging in a bag, let them be
covered with two gallons o^ Ale, the which at four days end let the party drink
morning and evening.

To make an Excellent Water for any Disease in the Eyes.
Take half a pint of White Wind, and as much of white Rose Water; of the Water
of Celendine, Rue, Eyebright and Fennel, each two ounces; of Prepared Tuttiae
six ounces: of Cloves as many; of Sugar-Rosate a dram: mix them over a soft
fire, and being clarified, wash your Eyes therewith as you see occasion.

To break the Wind.
Take the Juice of red Fennel and Anni-seed in warm Ale.

To prevent spitting Blood.
Take Rue, Smallage, Mint and Bettony; boil them in new Milk, and drink the
liquid part as hot as you can.

To stay bleeding at the Nose.
Take the Juice of Bettony, with a small quantity of Salt in it, and snuff it
up your Nose, ^^d stop it in with the Herb, the Juice of ^^ung Nettles; and
Sugar is good upon the ^^e occasion.

To kill a Fellon.
Take the hard roasted yolk of an Egg, ^^d beating it with a roasted Onion, lay
it to ^^e place grieved.

^^ make an Excellent Salve for a Scald, Burn, (...) Cut or any old Sore.
Take a pint of Olive-oyl, half a pound of ^ees-wax, red Lead three ounces, red
Wine ^wo ounces, and Deers-suet three ounces; ^oil them together in a glazed
Earthen-vessel ^ll they are of a darkish color, and then ^ake it up into a
Salve for your use.

To remove the Pain of the Toothache.
Take Henbane-seed, Hysop-seed, and the ^owder of the root of black Helebore:
bruise them together, and make them up into small ^ellets with a little Tar or
Turpentine: If ^^e Tooth be hollow, stop it in with Lint; if ^ot, let it lie
between your Cheek and ^um.

For the Fever.
Take two handfulls of Wood Sorrel, the ^ke of the Leaves of Barberries: boil
them (...) Spring Water, sweeten it with Sugar, and give the party two scruples
of Bezoar-po^der in a quarter of a pint of it, and it wond^fully prevails
against the distemper.

Many more things there are that rem^ fitting for a Gentlewoman to know; but
(...) to be tedious, I shall refer them to your S^^vants in their several
places and station* And supposing you by this time to have re^ed the fruits of
a chaste and happy Marriag^ and blessed with a tender, yet smiling, O^ spring,
that it may flourish. Taking my lea^^ Madam, of you, I shall proceed to give
yo^ Nurse and Nursery-Maid instructions and ^^rections; and so to the rest in
order.

CHAP. X.
The wet Nurse her Duty and Office; and how s^ought to be qualified that
undertakes so gre^ a charge: With directions how she ought to (...) her self as
to her Diet; and by what means keep her Milk in good temper, etc.

AS for Directions to a dry Nurse, who^ business it is to look after a
Gentlewoman when she lies in; it will not be ami^ to wave them, since few that
undertake su^^ a charge are ignorant what is necessary as (...) Usage and Diet:
Nor is the Midwife in the case wanting to give Directions, if the Ge^tlewoman
her self (as few are after the first ^ing in) were ignorant in that affair.
therefore intending to say something of it, treating of the Duty and Office of
a Mid^fe, I willingly here omit it, and proceed to ^e Charge and Office of a
wet Nurse, whose ^re it is to bring up Children till a conve^ency offer to wean
them: And first, I shall ^scribe what manner of Person a good ^urse ought to be.

In this case, a good Nurse ought to be of a ^iddle-stature, plump of body,
though not ^ver corpulent; of a sanguine complexion, ^easant and cheerful,
clear skinn'd and well ^oportioned.

For her Conditions, they must be suitable: ^nger must be a stranger to her, and
her de^ght naturally in Children; not drowsy nor ^lf-conceited; her Age must
be a Medium, ^etween five and twenty and forty, being ^ne that has been well
Educated; and see ^e want for nothing; for if she be necessitaed, the Child
must pine; or if Sickness hap^en through accident or disorder, her Milk ^s
injured thereby: Yet Temperance must ^e her greatest care, for fear by excess
of ^eat or drink the Milk be corrupted or in^amed; and in all things her care
of her ^harge must let her Prudence appear. Take (...) Woman whose Child was a
Boy, to Nurse ^ne of that kind, and on the other side the contrary, considering
she ought not to (...) with child during the discharge of this g^^ Office,
least she spoil both her Nursery a^ that she goes with.

A Nurse in this case ought in her Diet avoid salt Meats, Onions, Garlic, Lee^
Mustard, too much Salt, Vinegar or Pepp^ and such like things as create bad
nutrime^ or inflame and heat the blood. Strong dr^ immoderately must be
shunned, for that w^ occasion a super-abounding of Choler in t^ Child, as
Cheese and Fish, will Melancho^ and Phlegm: nor ought she to sleep sudda^ly
after Meals, but be active and in motion, (...) create a natural digestion; a
good Air oug^ to be chosen for the more kindly respiratio^ for a gross Air is
frequently the occasion o^ dull wit and much corpulency, and a pu^ thin Air of
the contrary, the Air on man occasions being advantageous or disadva^tageous to
the faculties of Life, or passions the Mind in their several operations, it
bei^ a kind of a food to the Intellectuals.

As for the Milk, diverse things are to (...) considered, but the chief is
wholesome a^ moderate Diet; and to correct defects, L^ her observe if her Milk
be too hot, which often appears by the Child's frowardness; if let the Nurse
take in her Posset Drink Salad (...) Pottage, Endive, Succory, Lettice, Sorr^^
Plantane, or such like cooling Herbs: If s^^ ^d it too cold, which will appear
by the ^^ilds over-drowsiness, let her do the like ^th Cinnamon, Vervine,
Bugloss, Mother, ^ime or Burrage.

To cause Milk where it is wanting, Take ^art of the Hoof of the fore-foot of a
Cow ^^lcined to Powder; a dram of which let ^e Nurse drink morning and evening
in ^arm Cows Milk or Ale.

For want of the former, Take Lady-Thistle; stamp it, and squeeze out the
Juice; which boiled in Milk, an ounce to a pint you may conveniently take,
drinking it off warm. And thus being careful in seasonably order^ng the Child
in dressing, undressing, and what ^n the like nature is convenient, no doubt it
will thrive and come to perfection.

The best Color of a Child, when newborn, is red, which soon turns to a Rosey;
for those that are white, if they live, will be subject to diseases. A little
crying, if not too often, eases the brain of watery-matter, and inlarges the
Lungs; but too much crying occasions Catarrhs and Ruptures. The first month it
must only suck often, changing the breast, but not over-charging its stomach;
after which a pap of white Bread and Milk seasonably given, between whiles,
will strengthen it; and let there be an hour between sucking and feeding, using
it in that manner till the Teeth come.

The Teeth coming forth by degrees, gi^^ it more solid food, not denying it
Meat th^^ is small cut, and may be easily chewed Keep it well swathed, and
beware it stan^ not too soon for fear of distorting the Leg^ In such places as
bathing of Children is co^venient, omit it not; from the seventh month twice a
week, till it is weaned.

At a twelvemonth old, if it be health^ wean it, not giving it suddenly strong
food but by degrees; and the first seven years Diet ought to be such as, by
it is nourishment causes growth.

And from this I shall proceed to say somewhat of Diseases incident to
Children, and prescribe Remedies which Nurses ought to use on sundry occasions.

CHAP. XI.
Of Distempers in Infants; and how to Remedy them: Together with Directions to
the Nursery-Maid in the discharging her Duty and Office, etc.

CHildren in their tender age are subject to many distempers; wherefore a Nurse
ought to be skilful in Medicines, such as are prevalent on sundry occasions, by
reason (...) Child may be lost before a Physician can be ^^d. Wherefore I shall
give her Instructi^ns what to do in the most dangerous cases.

For the Epilepsis or Convulsion.
Take Majestery of Cole, a scruple, of Male Piony-roots a scruple, and as much
of ^eaf Gold; work them into a Powder, and ^ive it the Child in a spoonful of
Breast-Milk.

For the Chasing of the Hips.
Change the Clouts often, sprinkling on them Litherage of Silver, Seed and
Leaves of Roses, Frankincense and burnt Alum made unto a Powder, or anoint
them with white Ointment and Diapompholigos.

To remove the Stoppage of Urine.
Take Saxifrax-roots six drams, Calcine them with an ounce of the Blood of a
Hare: bruise them into a Powder, and give the Child from a scruple to half a
dram in a spoonful of White Wind.

For the Strutting of the Navel.
Use a Plaster or Poultis of Cumming, Lupins and Bay Berries beaten into
Powder, and wet with White Wind.

For the Inflammation of the Navel.
Take a quarter of a handful of Mallows, stamp them with half an ounce of Bar^
meal, and with Fenugreek and Lupins, t^ ounces of each: make them into a
Ca^plasm with Oil of Roses, and apply them the place grieved.

To destroy Worms.
Take of Worm-seed two drams, and Coralline and Hartshorn prepared, each dram;
Roots of Piony, Dittany, Majeste^ of Coral, each a scruple: make them into
Powder, and give a scruple at a time in spoonful of Peach-flower water.

For Vomiting.
Take a quarter of an ounce of Honey Roses, and the like quantity of Syrup
Mint, and give it the Child at four times.

For the Hickets.
Take Mastick an ounce, Dill and Fran^incense, of each two drams; Cummin-see^ a
dram: make them small, and apply the with the Juice of Mint upon a plaster or
sod^ of Flax.

For Hard breeding of Teeth.
Rub the Gums with your finger dipped Honey, or give the Child Candle made o^
Virgins Wax to nable on, and Foment the cheeks with the Decoction of Althaea,
Camm^mile-flowers, and the seed of Dill.

For the Bladder in the Gums.
Take Lintills husked, beat them into powder, and lay them upon the Gums, or
take half an ounce of the flower of Mellium; make it into a Lineament and apply
it.

To prevent Squint-Eyes.
Hang a Picture, and set a Candle on the contrary side; or use to cocker the
Infant on that side, till the Eye-strings contract.

For a Scald Head.
Take the Scab off gently with a cleanser, moistning the skin with Hogs grease
upon Colewort-leaves; or rather take the Juice of Fumitory, Dock, Coleworts and
Elecampane, of each half an ounce, with Litherage, Oil of Rue, Hog's Grease and
Wax, make a mollifying Ointment: then take Starch two ounces, Rosin half an
ounce; boil them in water, and lay them upon the scald places Poultis-wise,
suffering them to lie there several days: then suddenly pull them off, and use
mollifying things to correct the distemper, etc.

In case of a Fever.
Give the Infant a quarter of an ounce of Syrup of Violets, and as much of that
of Wood Sorrel, for the Measles or Small Pox; Give them Saffron, and a small
quantity of Manna in Milk, or a spoonful of White Wind. And thus much for the
principal Distempers in Children.

As for the Nursery-Maids business, to whose care Children are frequently
committed, when capable of running about, it is to love and cherish them, to
see they have wha^ is fitting in due season, to keep them within compass and
government, to see they carry their legs and bodies strait and even, and that
they disorder themselves by no untoward tricks and actions, but that they be
cleanly and neat; and if she discovers any alteration in complexion,
constitution or habit of body tending to sickness or other discommodity, either
to apply fit remedies her self, or inform those of it who delivered them to her
charge without delay, least a Remedy come too late She is to keep them within
bounds, but no^ be churlish nor dogged to them, but rather to be merry and
pleasant; contriving such Pastimes as may best suit with their age and
constitutions; keeping their Apparel in goo^ order, and not showing too much
love t^ one, nor disregard to the other: And by thi^ means a Maid will gain
Love and Applaus^ from all parties.

CHAP. XII.
The Complete Chamber-Maids profitable Instruction as to her Behavior in
Managing of Affairs, making choice Spoon-meats, Pickling Sawces, Washing and
Starching Tiffany, Lawn, Sarsenets, Silks, Point, etc. Scowring Gold and Silver
Lace; taking Spots out of Silk, Woollen, Linen, Stuffs, Perfuming, etc.

A Chambermaid that would be preferred, gain or continue a good opinion, must,
in the first place, be grave and respect^ull to those whom she serves, neat in
her ^abit, loving to her fellow servants, and affa^le to all declining wanton
gestures that may ^ender her suspected of Livity; that she ^eep all things in
her Chamber in good or^er, and have them in readiness on all oc^asions to take
off the care of the Mistress: killed likewise she must, or ought to be, in
^^ying fine knacks, and be just in returning ^^er accounts: If there be no
Butler, she must ^e all things decently managed for the Ac^ommodation of the
guest in the Parlour and ^ining-room; and, above all, have a regard (...) the
Linen, Plate, and other Furniture un^^^ her Command: And besides her skill in
^ressing and Attiring her Mistress, be skillful making Spoon-meats, Pickling
things useful for Sawces, or Garnishing, Washing and Starching Tiffanies,
Lawns, black and whit^ Sarsnet, Points, and other curious Lace: A^ likewise she
ought to be skillful at making such scowring Materials as will cleanse Si^ver
or Gold Lace, Silver or Gold Plate, take Spots out of Linen, Silks, Stuffs or
Cloth* And because these are in a manner secrets, shall lay down Instructions
for as many a^ are materially useful: And first of Spoon meats.

To make a French Barley-Posset after the newest fashion.
Boil half a pound of French Barley in tw^ quarts of new Milk; and when the
Milk (...) near boiled away, add three pints of swee^ Cream, then boil it a
quarter of an hour, an^ sweeten it with fine sugar: put in three o^ four blades
of Mace and a piece of Cinnamon this done, take a pint of White Wind, an^ pour
the liquid Cream into it, frothing it up.

To make an Excellent Broth.
Cut off the wings and legs of two Cock wash and parboil them till the scum
appear take them out, and wash them in cold wate^ then with a pint of
Rhenish-wine, and tw^ quarts of strong Broth, put them into a Pikin; add two
ounces of China root, an oun^^ and a half of Hartshorn, with a small qua^^ity
of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, whole Pepper and Salt: stop the Pipkin close,
and setting it in a pot of boiling-water, so that that water get not into it
for the space of six hours; then pour out the Broth, and squeese the Juice of
Lemons into it, and serve it up.

To make Pottage of French Barley.
Take a pound of Barley very clean, put it into three quarts of Milk whilst
boiling; then add a quart of Cream, an ounce of Salt, six blades of Mace, and a
piece of Cinnamon: let them boil a little, and become thick: serve it up with
white sugar scraped thereon.

To make Pannado, after the best fashion.
Take a quart of Spring Water, which being hot on the fire, put into it slices
of fine Bread, as thin as may be; then add half a pound of Currants, a quarter
of an ounce of Mace: boil them well, and then season them with Rose Water and
fine Sugar, and serve them up.

To make an Excellent White-pot.
Take two quarts of Cream, boil in it, in a short time, half an ounce of Mace,
a piece of Cinnamon, and half a Nutmeg; then cut a white penny loaf exceeding
thin, then lay the slices at the bottom of a dish, and cover them with Marrow:
add likewise a dozen yolks of Eggs to the Cream, well beaten in Rose Water, and
sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of Sugar: then take out the Spices, beat
up the Cream well, and fill a broad Basin in which the Bread, Raisins and
Marrow was laid, and bake it: when it is enough, scrape white Sugar on it, and
serve it up.

All strengthening Jellies are made by boiling such Flesh as are of a tender and
gluttenous substance, till it is in a manner dissolved in the Broth; and adding
Wine, Sugar, Spice, Salt, or as you will have it seasoned, and serving it up
with Sipits, or alone. More I might mention of this kind; but intending largely
to treat of Cookery, I shall wave them, and proceed to the next, which is
Pickling Fruits and Flowers, etc.

To Pickle Cucumbers, so that they may wear a lasting Green.
Take your Cucumbers, of a moderate size, wash them in Water and Salt, there
letting them steep six hours; then boiling Wine-vinegar, Dill and Fennel-tops,
Coriander-seeds, Cloves and Mace, with a little Bay Salt, and a pint of the
Juice of Mint: put them into it when warm, and stop them up for a month.

To make French Beans a lasting Green.
Boil them in Water, and a small quantity of Salt, till they are a little soft;
then having sharp Vinegar, Pepper and Bay Leaves ready boiled, with some blades
of Cinnamon: put them into it, and stop them up as the former. Thus Broom-buds,
Ash-keys, green Grapes, green Plumbs, Gooseberries, Currants, and the like, may
be Pickled, though the latter must be only Scalded.

To Pickle Barberries.
Take the fairest Bunches, dip them into warm water, and then make a Pickle
with a pint of sharp Vinegar to a gallon of Water that has been well boiled and
scummed; and to each gallon add a quart of Bay or Spanish Salt; and putting in
the Barberries, keep them down with a stone. So Quinces, Apples, green Walnuts
and Olives are Pickled.

To Pickle Mushroons.
Take a quart of Water, and a pint of Vinegar; put your Mushroons, the
smallest, boiling-hot into it: and when they have contracted a kind of
softness, take them out, and put them to the sharpest Vinegar, with whole
Pepper, long Ginger, Mace and Bay Leaves. And thus you may Pickle
Clove-Gilliflowers, Prim-Roses, Roses, Cowslips, green Peaches, or the like.

As for Sampher, it is boiled in Salt and Water to a little tenderness, and
then put up with a Pickle made of half Vinegar, and half water and salt, boiled
up to a hight. And thus much for Pickles.

To Wash Tiffanies.
Take the finest Crown-soap; soap them on their Hems or Laces, and with a
gentle hand pass them through three Lathers, forbearing to wring or wrince
them, but keeping them from the Air; dry them over the flame of Brimstone: then
to a pound of Starch, add a quarter of an ounce of Smalt, if you think
convenient, but on necessity as much Alum as a Hazle-nut: boil it to a
fineness, and charge it lightly on your Tiffanies, and dry them, being wet
therewith, by a fire, still clapping them in your hands; and when they are very
clear, shape them by the pattern you took before they were washed, and iron
them with a smooth, though quick Iron, till they shine, and you will find
little difference as to the gloss between them and new. Some there are, that
instead of Starch, use Gum-water.

To Wash Sarsnet.
If white, spread it upon a smooth clean board long-ways; soap it well, but let
the Soap lie thin; then with a small hard Brush raise a gentle Lather, by
brushing it the right w^^ of the Silk; and turning it in order, do the other
side in the same manner, then cleanse it with fair water, and make a new Lather
hot, and renew it three times with turning; then cast the piece into hot water,
where Gum has been dissolved, and a small quantity of Smalt infused; let it lie
there covered a convenient time; then folding it smooth, dry it as well as you
can by clapping it between your hands, then dry it over Brimstone; and
spreading it on the Table, iron it with a hot Iron on the right side.

Black Sarsnets, in Washing, are managed the same way, only they are wrinced
generally in small Beer, without any Gum, and ironed upon a Woollen-cloth.

The Modish way to Wash and Starch Point-Laces.
Put your Points into a Tent, and make a strong Lather with Castle or
Cake-soap, then with a small soft Brush dipped therein, rub your Point well,
continuing to wash it on both sides till it have passed four Lathers: wrince it
then in fair water, and afterward pass i^ gently through blew water; then
starch it over on the wrong side lightly with very thin Starch, and follow it
with your brush; after that suffer it to dry, and with a round bodkin open the
holes or parts that in washing were closed; as also the Gimp or Over-laying,
and not suffering it to be too ble^^^ gently iron it on the wrong side, and set
it out to advantage.

Colored Silks may be Washed as white Sarsnet, avoiding the blew water, or
drying over Brimstone.

To take a Spot or Stain out of Silks, Worsted or Woollen.
Take two ounces of Castle-soap, half an ounce of Bone calcined, half an ounce
of Camphire: make them up into little balls with the Water of Betony, and
Lather the place with a small quantity of warm Vinegar, and it will effect your
desire. Cake-soap, Lemon-juyce, and Roach-allum, will do the like.

To take Pitch, Rosin, Tarr, or soft Wax, out of Stuffs or Woollen.
Take Oil of Turpentine, and suffer it to soak in a while; then rub the Cloth
or Stuff together, and it will crumble out.

To take the Stain of Fruit, Ink, or the like, out of Linen.
Take Castle-soap, boil it to a Jelly in Milk; lay it upon the Spot a night,
then pour upon it the Juice of a Lemon: and in doing so, after a Washing or
two, the Spot will disappear.

To cleanse Silver or Gold Lace.
Take it off, and dipping a Brush continually in burnt Alum: rub it gently
over, and the Color will be restored.

An Excellent way to Perfume Gloves, is this.
Take of Storax and Calamint, each an ounce; of Benjamine two ounces, the first
and the last being to be beaten by themselves; add to them an ounce of the
weaker Cinamon-water, and four ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds: mingle them
with a Muller on a stone; and having first wetted your Gloves with Hysop-water,
gently anoint them with the Perfume, and it will smell beyond expectation.

To cleanse all sorts of Plate.
Lay it in Soap-lees a night, then with Salt and Vinegar rub out the Spots,
after daub it over with Chalk and Vinegar: dry it by the fire, and with a warm
Woollen-cloth rub it off, and it will look as bright as new. Thus have I
unravelled, or at least exposed to some such secrets as are not common; From
whence I shall proceed to give the Virtuous Cook-Maid Instructions.

CHAP. XIII.
The Experienced Cook-Maid and Cook, or Directions for the newest and most
Excellent way of dressing Flesh, Fish and Fowl of all sorts, and in diverse
manners; As also making Pyes, Tarts, Custards: Likewise what relates to the
under Cook-Maid and Scullery-Maid; with other variety.

SInce the Cook-Maids charge and care is no less than the former, and her
labor more, I shall give her what encouragement I can in rendering matters
plain and easy: As for her skill, it must chiefly consist in dressing all
sorts of Meat, as Flesh, Fish and Fowl, in preparing of baked Meats and Pastry,
and to be expert in making Sawces, and garnishing proper to the several
varieties that must consequently offer. And therefore these things I shall
consider; she, in the first place, considering to have all her
Kitchin-materials in good order.

A Capon, or Chickens and white Broth, being frequently the first dish, dress
it after this manner.
Boil the Capon, etc. in water and salt, then take three pints of the strongest
Broth, adding to it a quart of White Wind, and a quarter of a pound of Dates:
stew it in a Pipkin, and add half a pound of white Sugar, and a small quantity
of large Mace; the Marrow of three Marrow-bones, and of white Endive a
handful: stew 'em leasurely, and strain the yolk of ten Eggs with part of the
Broth before the Capons or Chickens are dished up, observing that the Eggs
curdle not: the Fowls being dished up, garnish the dish with Dates, Mace,
Endive, and Preserved Barberries.

Red or Fallow Deer, how to Roast.
Take a Side, or half the Hanch, and parboil it; so doing, stuff it with all
manner of sweet Herbs, mingled with minced Beef Suet; day the Caul over, and
roast it in that manner: when it is enough, serve it up with Vinegar, Bread,
Claret Wine, Ginger and Cloves boiled up with a few sprigs of Rosemary.

Neats-Tongues roasted.
Take a large Tongue, boiled tender, blanched and cold; make a hole at the
large end, and take out a great part of the Meat: mince it, and put it in again
with sweet Herbs, hard yolks of Eggs, Pippins, Ginger, Beef Suet, all minced
small, and stop up the hole with a Caul of Veal: Lard it, and being roasted,
serve it up with Butter, Gravy, and Juice of Oranges; garnishing the dish with
Barberries and slices of Lemon.

Neats-Tongue and Udder, how to boil.
Let both of these be fair and young, indifferently seasoned: boil them in
Water, a little seasoned with Salt and Pepper; and when you find they are
sufficiently done, blanch the Tongue, slice it in half, lay it on each side the
Udder: serve 'em up with carved Sipits, run over with Butter and Vinegar:
garnish your dish with Parsley, Barberries and Marigold-leaves.

How to boil Land or Sea-Fowl.
Take the larger sort, half roast 'em, put them after that into a Pipkin with
Claret Wine, the Gravy, and as much strong Broth as will cover them; add
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, a slice or two of Onion, and a little Salt: all
being well stewed together, serve them up with Sipits and green Garnish, as
Violet or Marigold-leaves, etc.

The smaller sort of Wild-fowl, as Blackbirds, Plovers, Quails, Rails,
Thrushes, Snites, Larks; cut off the heads and legs, truss and boil them; scum
your boyler, and add White Wind, Currants, Dates, Marrow, Pepper and Salt: being
all well boiled or stewed, dish them on carved Sipits; sauce them with
Rose Water, Sugar and beaten Almonds; garnish the dish with Almonds beaten
small, Rose Water and Sugar.

To roast a Hare.
Observe when she is cased, not to cut off ^er hinder Legs nor Ears, but thrust
one Leg through the Ham of the other; and making (...) slit, do the like by the
Ears, and so roast her as you do a Rabit. The proper sauce is Marjorum, Thyme,
Winter-savory, Beef-^uet, hard yolks of Eggs, sweet Butter, Sugar, Nutmeg,
Water and Vinegar; minced and boil up to a sauce, serving your Hare up whole.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton the best way.
Take Oysters parboiled, mince Winter-savory, the yolks of hard Eggs, grated
Bread: mingle them together, all but the Oyster, being small; and then making
holes in convenient places, stuff them in as you see convenient, about five or
six and twenty Oysters being sufficient, and the other Oysters, with the like
Ingredients, put into half a pint of Claret; add three or four slices of Onion,
and a couple of Anchoveys; to them put the Gravy, with the yolks of two beaten
Eggs, and a sufficient quantity of Nutmeg and sweet Butter: garnish your dish
with Lemon Peel and Barberries.

To boil Pigeons with Rice.
Observe to stuff their Bellies with sweet Herbs, then put them into your
boiler with Mutton-broth; boil a small quantity of Rice in Cream, with a blade
or two of Mace: which being seasoned with Sugar, lay them in the dish with
their Breasts upward, and lay it thick upon them; squeese in the Juice of two
Lemons; garnish the dish with Marigold-flowers, and serve it up.

To roast an Udder.
First let the Udder be boiled, and stuck full of Cloves: spit it when cold,
and baste it with sweet Butter; being sufficiently browned, draw it back: make
sauce of grated Bread, Butter, Vinegar and Cinnamon; lay it in the dish with
Sugar as a garnishment, and serve it up.

To Stew a Carp.
Take the largest well-trimmed Carp, gut it, wash it and lay it in a
Pewter-dish; take half a pint of White Wind, with a piece of Butter, Mace,
Parsley, Thyme and Winter-savory minced small; put them into the fishes belly,
and let it stew a quarter of an hour: mince then the hard yolks of two Eggs;
lay it with the Herbs about it, and sprinkling on Sugar, serve it up.

To bake Steaks in the French fashion.
With Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, season your ^eaks lightly; take the lean part of
a Leg (...) Mutton, mince it small, with some Beef-^et and sweet Herbs, as
Thyme, Peneroyal ^d Marjorum; take grated Bread, yolks of ^ggs, Raisins of the
Sun, of each a like quan^y: work them into rolls, and put them ^n the Steaks in
a deep round Pie: sprinkle ^em with Verjuyce, and close them up, li^uoring it
with the Juice of two or three ranges.

To boil a Fore-Loin of Pork the best way.
Season it indifferently, and boil it well, ^en have in readiness Sorrel
stripped a con^derable quantity: beat it, and put to it ^me crumbs of Bread and
hard yolks of ^ggs, with Mustard and Salt, and so serve it (...), the dish
being garnished with green ^aves.

(...) dress a Leg of Mutton to the best advantage.
In salt and water boil it for the space of an ^our, then cut it into thin
slices, set it in a ^sh over the fire, adding a little Salt, grated ^utmeg,
Shalot, Thyme and Winter-savo^; placing another dish upon it, and stew^g it;
adding a piece of Butter, serve it up, ^e dish garnished with Pickled Oysters
and ^rberries.

To boil a Brisket, Surloin, Chine, Rump, Flan^ Fillet or Buttock of Beef, to
the best advantag^
After a week or ten days powdering, it left to your discretion, whether or not
yo^ will stuff them: which if you do, it must (...) done with such sweet Herbs
as are sutabl^ mingling minced Suet and Nutmeg with (...) and thrust them in at
convenient place^ and being well boiled, serve them in on Brui^ with roots
boiled in Milk.

To Stew a Leg of Lamb the best way.
Take the Meat, slice it and put it into yo^ Stewing-pan; season it well with
Salt a^^ Nutmeg; add Butter, Raisins in the Su^ Currants and Gooseberries: it
being w^ stewed, take the yolks of four Eggs, a qua^ter of a pint of
Wine-vinegar, two ounc^ of Sugar: beat them well together over gentle fire,
place it in the sauce; strew S^gar over it, and serve it up.

To boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon the best way.
Take and Lard the former with Bacon, a^ a small quantity of Lemon Peel; take a
c^^venient piece of Bacon and boil with it; a^^ when your Bacon is boiled, cut
it in piec^ and season it with dried Sage and Pep^ small beaten: lay the Bacon
about the Ve^ and serve it with Sawcers of green saw^ ^arnished with
Marigold-flowers, Barberries ^^d Parsley.

A Rump of Beef to Stew the best way.
Let your Beef be seasoned with Salt, Pep^er and Nutmeg; lay the fat side
downward (...) an Earthen-pan, then put in an equal po^on of Water and
Elder-vinegar, to the quan^y of three quarts; add two Onions, and ^alf a
handful of the tops of Rosemary; and ^^ewing it three hours over a soft fire,
take it (...), and dish it with Sipits; garnishing with ^emon-peel, and sawcing
with the Gravy, ^^e fat being scummed off.

To bake a Hare the best way.
Take a large Hare minced, and well sea^^ed with beaten Mace, Salt and Pepper,
^aking a proportion of the head and shoul^rs, and lay in a layer of Flesh, and
Lard, ^^d Butter above and beneath, and serve it with Gallentine sauce, in
Sawcers.

To roast a Rabit with Oysters, the best way.
Take a large fat Rabit, wash it and dry (...) then half a pint of Oysters
after the same ^^nner: put them into the Belly of the Ra^^ with a couple of
shread Onions, large ^^ce, whole Pepper, and sprigs of Thyme: (...) 'em up; and
when the Rabit is roasted, ^^ce them with Butter, and the yolks of hard Eggs,
and dish the Rabit up; garnishing the dish with red Beet-roots and Orange-peel.

To Carbanado Hens or Pullets, the best way.
Take half a dozen hard yolks of Egg^ half a pint of White Wind, and the Gravy
mince the Eggs, and boil them up with On^on, or some Shalots; add grated Nutmeg
with a Ladle or two full of drawn Butter dish your Fowl; pour the sauce on them
garnishing your dish with Lemon Peel an^ Violet-leaves.

To set off a dish of Marrow, etc.
Take a pound of fine Paste, roll it ve^^ thin, and the Marrow taken whole out
(...) four bones; cleave it in quarters; season with Pepper, Salt and Dates,
all minced; la^ing one piece in your Paste, framing it peacodwise; and so use
the rest: then fry the^ in Butter and Sugar, and serve them up, ga^nished with
Borage-flowers.

To stew a Pheasant, the best fashion or way.
Take a large Pheasant, roast him till enough, then boil it gently in
Mutton-bro^ adding whole Pepper, Mace, the slice or t^ of an Onion, Pruins,
Currants and Vinega^ sufficient to make it sharp; then color (...) Broth with
bruised Pruins, and serve up Pheasant in it.

To Carbinade Mutton, the best way.
Broil a breast or shoulder of Mutton, scot^hing it with your knife; strew on
them minced Thyme, grated Nutmeg, and a little Salt, with Claret Wine, Capers,
Gravy and a shread Shalot, garnishing with a Lemon Peel.

To roast a Pig.
Take a fat one, cleanse his belly, put into it minced Sage, Currants, Mace, and
gra^ed Nutmeg: roast him indifferently by a soaking fire, then make up a brisk
fire to crackle him, and serve him up with Currants, Bread, Sage, Butter and
Nutmeg, made into a thin sauce, with Rose Water.

To stew Venison, the best way.
Take fat Venison, either raw or potted, slice it and put it into your
stewing-pan, with Claret Wine, Rosemary-tops, Cloves, Sugar, Vinegar, and
grated Bread: being well stewed, add grated Nutmeg, and serve it up, garnished
with Luke-Olives.

To make a Fricacy of Chickens, the best way.
Take four or five Chickens about two months old, scald and flea them; put them
in Water and White Wind; then take a large Onion, ten or twelve blades of Mace,
and the quantitity of a Nutmeg grated: tie them up in a cloth, with a bundle of
sw^^ Herbs and Salt; put them into an Earthe^-pan, and let them simper a while;
then ta^^ three or four Anchoveys, five or six Egg half a pound of the best
Butter dissolved (...) a pint of Mutton-broth; shread the Spic^ small, with a
quarter of a pound of Caper^ mix them with the other sauce, and layin^ the
Chickens upon it, serve them up with S^pits, garnished with sliced Lemon. Thus
yo^ may dress and dish up Partridges or Pigeon^ with only the abatement of the
Eggs.

To Stew a Fillet of Beef, the newest way.
Take the tenderest, and remove the Ski^ and Sinews; steep it in White Wind,
scattering on it a small quantity of Pepper and Salt* then covering it with
Wine, add more Pepper; and keeping it close down with (...) weight, suffer it
to steep two nights an^ a day: when taking it out, put it into a^ Earthen-pot
with Beef-broth, cover it on (...) gentle fire; adding a few Cloves and Mace^
and standing over the fire till it is tender, i^ will be of an admirable taste:
serve it u^ with the Broth.

The newest way to boil a Wild-Duck.
The Duck being half roasted, take her of the Spit; put her into a Pan with a
pint o^ Claret, and as much Mutton-broth; three Onions cut, and a bundle of
sweet Herbs; ^ee or four slices of Bacon, and some whole ^pper: cover the Pan
with another; and ^hen it is stewed or boiled sufficiently, ^^ve it up with the
Broth.

To bake a Pig the best way.
Take a Pig, and dress him well as for roast^g; mould him up in a coffin of
Clay, but^ed a little within: put him into an Oven ^ght hours, so that the Clay
being dried, the ^g will be very crisp; then serve him up ^th sauce as for
roasting.

(...) boil a Pullet, Capon or Chicken, the best way.
Truss them, and put them into Mutton-^oth, with Mace, Spinach and Endive,
Ma^^gold-flowers, Bugloss, Borage, Sorrel and ^^rsley: and when they are
enough, garnish ^^e dish with Borage and Marigold-flowers, ^^d serve them up in
Sipits.

To boil a Capon or Chicken with Sugar-pease.
Take the Pease when young, and dry ^^em in the cods, taking them from thence
(...) the quantity of two or three handfulls; ^^t them into an Earthen-vessel,
with about ^^lf a pound of fresh Butter, and near half a ^at of fair Water; add
whole Pepper, Mace ^^d Olive-oyl, of each a small quantity: and ^ur Capon and
Chicken being well boiled, strain the Pease and other Ingredients, a^^ serve
them up as sauce with the yolks of t^^ or three Eggs, and half a quartern of
Sack.

To hash a Capon or Pullet, the best way.
Take either of them cold, after havi^^ been roasted; take out the brains, and
min^ them small with the flesh of the wings; the take off the legs and rump
entire, then a^^ strong Broth and Gravy, sliced Nutmeg Onion and Salt, and stew
the divided part in a large Pipkin; and when they are w^ stewed, add some
Oysters, Juice of Orang^ and a yolk of an Egg, and serve them up (...) Sipits;
garnished with Oranges sliced, a^ Flowers. And thus any Fowl of this or t^ like
kind may be hashed.

To boil a Pullet or Capon with Asparagrass.
Boil the Fowl in fair water; put bruis^ Mace, chopped Parsley and sweet Butter
in its belly, tying up the vent: being boile^ take out the Parsley and Mace,
garnishi^^ the dish with it; in which have Asparagra^ ready boiled, place it in
good order.

To fry a Rabit with sweet Sauce.
Cut it in pieces orderly, and wash it wel^ then dry it in a coth, and fry it
with swe^ Butter: being half fried, slice some of it v^ry small; put it into a
quarter of a pint (...) Cream, the yolks of two Eggs, some grated Nutmeg and
Salt: when the Rabit is thoroughly fried, pour them upon it, and keep 'em
stirring, adding Verjuyce, fresh Butter and Sugar a like quantity, and serve
them up with Sipits; garnishing the dish with any green thing.

To Stew a Mallard.
First let it be half roasted, then cut it into small pieces, putting it into a
dish, with Gravy, fresh Butter, and a handful of minced Parsley, with two or
three Onions and a hard Lettice: let them stand an hour, then add Pepper, Salt
and Lemon-juyce, and serve it up with Sipits, and a garnish of Lemon Peel.

To fry a Neats-Tongue the best way.
The Tongue being boiled and blanched, cut it, season it with Cinnamon, grated
Nutmeg and Sugar; then add yolks of Eggs and Lemons cut in small pieces, frying
them in spoonfulls with sweet Butter; then heat it hot, pour on your Tongue the
sauce and sugar, and serve it up.

To boil a Haunch of Venison in the best manner.
Stuff it with sweet Herbs, Parsley and Beef Suet minced small, as likewise
with the yolk of hard Eggs; the stuffing materials being seasoned with Salt,
Nutmeg and Ginger, and the Venison being powdered, boil it in strong Broth, and
in another pot two or three Colleflowers, adding to them a quart of new Milk;
and they being taken up, boil in the same liquor a handful or two of Sorrel o^
Spinach; then part of the Broth being taken away, put in Vinegar, sweet Butter,
grated Bread and Nutmeg; then lay the Spinach upon sipits round the dish,
laying the Venison in the middle, and Colliflowers in order* garnishing the
dish with Parsley, Spinach* and Marigold-flowers.

To roast a Goose in the newest fashion.
Draw your Goose, and put her on a Spit laying her to a gentle fire, which you
must increase by degrees: then take nine or ten soft Apples, or Pippins for
want of them; boi^ them in a pint of White Wind, sweeten them with Sugar, and
then add a small quantity o^ Mustard when they are come to a pulp, and a
spoonful of Rose Water: stir them well, and put it in Sawcers apart; though
for gree^ Geese the sauce is generally the Juice o^ Sorrel, scalded
Gooseberries, Butter and Sugar.

To boil a Pike the best way.
Wash and gut it, bring the head and ta^ together in a circle, scotching the
back t^ make it pliable; boil it in Water, Salt an^ Vinegar, putting it in when
the water boils; it being enough, take it out, and serve it up with Ginger,
grated Bread, Butter, White Wind, Oysters, Dates, and the Juice of Lemons;
garnished with green Leaves or Flowers.

To Stew a Pike the best way.
Wash out the blood, flat it, and lay it in a dish, cover it with White Wind;
add, when it boils, whole Cinnamon, Mace, Salt and sweet Butter, and dish it up
on sipits.

To boil a Salmon the best way.
Cover it with Water, add Rosemary and Thyme-tops, Winter-savory and Salt: then
add more a pint of Vinegar, and serve it up with Butter, the Juice of Lemons
and Anchoveys made into sauce.

To roast an Eel the best way.
Take one pretty large Eel, take out the ^ntrails after it is skinned, then
fill the belly with sweet Herbs and Butter, beaten together ^n a Mortar; after
that draw the skin over again, and fasten the Eel with strings to the Spit, and
moderately roast it; then with the Herbs, Anchovey-sawce and Butter, together
with the Gravy, serve it up.

To roast a Lobster the best way.
Take a large one, whilst alive, bind up the claws, and fasten it to the Spit
before a gentle fire; baisting it first with Water and Salt then with Butter
and Claret Wine; and when it is enough, break the shell, take out the Meat and
serve it up with Anchovey-sawce and stewed Oysters.

To roast a Pound of Butter.
Lay your Butter in water till it be ver^ stiff, then fix it upon a small Spit;
lay i^ down before a gentle fire; and as soon as i^ begins to drop, dredg Bread
on it, and so continue to do, adding a little beaten Cinnamon and Sugar till the
Bread has soaked up all the Butter: which done, make the outside brown and
serve it up in the nature of a Quaking pudding, with Verjuyce, Butter,
Rose-wate^ and Sugar.

To make Sauseages the best way.
Take a Leg of Pork, divide the fat from the lean, and chop the latter small,
with Ma^jorum, Peny-royal, Thyme and Winter savory, adding Salt, Pepper, and a
little Ginge^ together, with half the quantity of Meat (...) Beef Suet; and
being very small, fill it i^ Sheeps-guts with a Whalebone-fescue, an^ dry them
in a Chimney for your use.

To dress a dish of Anchoveys the hest way.
Take the best Leghorn Fish, about a year ^ld, not being rusty, wash them, and
smooth ^ff the white and scales; divide them equally (...) four quarters at
length, lay one laying wa^ing in and out, and between them another ^rait, in
the figure of a Star, making of the ^ones the figure of a Crown, and placing it
(...) the center of the dish: garnish it with L^^ois, Olives, Sampher, Pickled
Barberries, Pickled Broom-buds, Mushroons, Capers, and slices of Pickle
Cucumbers, in what form ^ou please; adding a sufficient quantity of Oil and
Vinegar.

How to dress a dish of Caveer the best way.
Take that which is not rusty nor over^ried, steep it in the best Florence-Oyl
for ^he space of an hour; then take it out, and work it with a little Vinegar
and Pepper into (...) form or figure as best fancies you, and then garnish it
with Olives and Barberries, ser^ing it up with Oil.

The best way to dress a dish of Pickle-Herrings.
Take new Herrings, or the best you can get, take off the skins, and take out
the bones, ^^ice the Herrings, and mince them very small; ^hen shread
Pickle-Cucumbers, Shalots or Onions, Lemon Peel, Codlings, Pippins or
Pome-waters: mix the whole matter with Capers, Barberries and Broom-buds:
garnish the dish with Olives, French-beans and Mushroons: make it into a
figure, add Oil, Vinegar and Pepper, and serve it up: or, if you please, you
may garnish it with Pickled-Oysters.

To set out a dish of Pickles.
Place in the midst your Cucumber, then your large Olives, then French-Beans at
length, and small Olives between them, then Mushroons and Capers, and on the
edges of the dish Pickled Grapes, Pickled Gilli-flowers and Broom-buds, and so
serve them up.

How to Pot Fowl in order to their keeping by Sea or Land, etc.
Roast Ducks, Mallards, Teals, Widgeons, Pigeons or Chickens: drain them from
the Gravy, and put into the bellies of them a little Pepper and Salt, with a
little bruised Mace and some Cloves; then take the fat that came from them,
press them a little flattish, and mixing the fat with sweet Herbs; when you
have laid your Fowl in order in a glazed Earthen-pot, pour the melted Butter,
etc. hot on them till they are covered; on that strew some Pepper and slices of
Nutmeg; then cover it with Bay Leaves, and close it up with Leather: and being
fast tied down, rub a little Butter on the Leather to keep it moist, and the
Fowl will keep a twelvemonth.

To dress Kid with the color and taste of Venison.
Take a Haunch well fleshed, and indifferent fat, pluck away the skin and
superfluous fat; open it from the bone, and thrust in some Peter-salt, then lay
it two hours in water that has been newly heated; after that dry it, and put it
on your Spit, or bake it in a Pasty, and it will have the color and flavor of
Venison.

An Excellent way of Hashing any sort of Meat.
Take your Meat, slice it thin, sprinkle it with a little Salt, Pepper, and
shreaded sweet Herbs, put it into your Pan with a piece of fresh Butter and the
Juice of a Lemon; add a few bruised Cloves, Oysters, and an Anchovey: garnish
your dish with Parsley and slices of Lemon, and serve it up.

How to roast a Salmon the best way.
Take a Jole or Rand, and divide it into four pieces; season it with Salt and
grated Nutmeg: stick on it a few Cloves, and fasten it on a small Spit, putting
between it a few Bay Leaves; stick in the outside little sprigs of Rosemary;
baste it with Butter; save the dripping; sauce it with Butter, Verjuyce, and
Juice of Oranges; garnishing it with some slices.

To fry Salmon the best way.
Take a Chine, Jole or Rand, fry it in the best Butter; and finding it crisp,
let your sauce be made of Claret Wine, sweet Butter, grated Nutmeg,
Orange-juyce, and the liquor of Pickled-Oysters: heat them together, and pour
them on the Fish: and for a garnish, lay Parsley and Sage-leaves fried in
Butter.

How to recover tainted Venison, and make Mutton, Beef or Lamb, pass for
Venison.
As for the first, wrap it up in a clean cloth a little dampish, dig a hole in
the Earth, put it in, and let it lie twenty-four hours, and the scent will be
gone, the Earth drawing it away.

As for the latter, Take your Mutton, etc. and dip it in Pig's blood, or any
wholesome warm blood; then parboil it in small Beer and Vinegar, and let it
stand all night; then put to it some Turnsole, and bake it, and it will look
and eat like Venison.

To roast a Carp the best way.
Draw and wash him alive, taking out his Intrails, and with Lemon-juyce,
Caroways, grated Bread and Nutmeg, Currants, Cream, Almond-paste and Salt, make
a Pudding, and put it into its belly, insomuch that it may fill it full, the
Pudding being put through the Gills, and fasten them: and when it is roasted,
make sauce with what drops from it; adding the Juice of Oranges, Cinnamon, Sugar
and Butter, and dish it up.

To Stew a Carp the French way.
Take him alive, and bleed him; then take out all his Intrails, and scrape the
Scales from off the back; then take a quart of Claret, Mace, Ginger, Cloves,
Nutmegs, sweet Herbs, a large Onion and Salt: let them boil in the Stew Pan,
then put in the Carp, with half a pound of sweet Butter; it being enough, lay
it in a dish, and make a sauce of grated Bread, Lemon-juyce, beaten Butter, and
what remains of the liquid part in the Stew Pan, and garnish it with green
Spinach and stewed Oysters.

To Stew Oysters after the best manner.
Take the largest, parboil them in the water that comes from them, and
afterward wash them in warm water; put them into a Pipkin, adding Onion, Mace,
Pepper, Nutmeg, and a pint of Wine, with as much Vinegar, if you have two
quarts of Oysters; add likewise a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful of
Salt; then dish them up with Sipits, having stewed them, and garnish with
Barberries and Lemon Peel.

To Stew Flounders.
Take the largest, draw and wash them, giving them a scotch or two on the
belly; put to them, being in your stewing-pan, small Oysters, Pepper, Ginger,
an Onion, sweet Herbs, Salt, suffering them to stew as soon as may be, then
dish them up with sipits: And for sauce, take beaten yolks of Eggs,
Lemon-juyce, Butter, and a little Ginger; garnishing with Lemon Peel.

To roast an Eel the Dutch way.
Strip her, put into her Belly grated Bread, sweet Herbs and Butter; then draw
the skin over her again, and fasten her to the Spit; baisting her with salt and
water: being enough, take off the skin by ripping it up, and serve her up with
the Herbs made into a sauce, with Butter and Juice of Lemons, and a little
Claret Wine.

To Stew Breams.
Draw, dry them, and let them be well salted; lay them on a Grid-iron over a
Charcole fire; suffer them to be brown on both sides; then put half a pint of
Claret into a Pewter-dish, set it over the fire to boil, add three Anchoveys,
two sliced Onions, a pint of Oysters, and a little Thyme: when it has boiled,
put to it a little melted Butter and Nutmeg; then dish up the Fish, and pour
the sauce on it, with yolks of hard Eggs minced.

To boil a Mullet the best way.
Save the Liver and Roe, and scald him; then put the water on boiling-hot,
adding half a pint of Claret, and a bunch of sweet Herbs, Salt, Vinegar, and
two Onions, with a sliced Lemon: take a Nutmeg, quarter it, with Mace and
Butter, drawn with Claret, dissolving in it two or three Anchoveys: season the
sauce with salt; dish up your Fish; and serve it up with a garnish of stewed
Oysters and Bay leaves.

At one and the same charge, as to the Sawces, you may dress a dozen of either
of the last mentioned Fish.

How to dress a Cods-head the best way.
The Head being cut fair, boil it in water and salt, adding a pint of Vinegar,
that the Head may be a little more than covered; putting into the mouth of it a
quart of Oysters, a bundle of sweet Herbs and an Onion, binding the Jaws with a
thread: when it is well boiled, set it a drying over a chafing dish; then take
Oyster-liquor, a sliced Onion, and two or three Anchoveys; adding a quarter of
a pint of White Wind, and a pound of sweet Butter: pour them on the Head, and
stick the Oysters where they will enter: scatter over it grated Bread and
Nutmeg; garnish the dish with sliced Lemon, or any green thing.

And thus have I given you Instruction as to the Dressing, etc. Flesh, Fish,
and Fowl: And now proceed to the remaining necessary part of Cookery, which is
Pastry.

CHAP. XIV.
The Cook-Maids Directions in making Pyes, and managing Pastry to the best and
Modish manner and advantage.

AS Pastry is the most curious part of Cookery, so it is to be considered even
beyond what I have mentioned in other matters, and chiefly in these
Observations.

1. Observe your Flower be fine, and free from Bran, or any defect; and having
laid it on a smooth Table, or in a Kneading-Trough,

2. Heat your Liquor, suffering it to simper, scumming off what arises; and if
it be for Tarts, Custards, or the like, let it be fair water, with a small
Ingredient of Rose Water and Malaga-wine, so that it taste of either: But for
larger Pyes, made with Meat or the like, add Butter a pound to two quarts of
liquor, and to either of them, in moulding Eggs or New-Ale-yest, according as
you would have ^our Paste light or solid; which I leave to your discretion.

3. As for those that are to be raised very ^hin, work them up cold; but those
of largeness, that will admit a good substance, for the more ease and
pliableness, let the Paste be warm, working them into a form with your Hands,
Roaler, Nippers, Spur-iron, Knife and Plate: Mark the Garnishing, or flourish
on ^he lid or sides, I leave likewise to your discretion. But that you may the
better understand the form of the most curious thing of this nature, I have
caused them to be incerted in the following Pages, and so proceed to the
filling them, etc.

To make an Oyster-Pye.
Let the Oysters be parboiled in their own liquor; wash and dry them; season
them with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and the hard yolks of Eggs; and the Pie being
made Oval, put into it Currants and sliced Dates, and on them lay the Oysters;
add large Mace, Barberries, sliced Lemon and Butter; and when it is baked, put
into it White Wind, Sugar and Butter.

Flourishes to be drawn on the pastry of pies.

Flourishes to be drawn on the pastry of pies.

To make a Veal-Pye the best way.
Raise your Paste well, cut a Leg of Vea^ in slices, season it with Salt,
Pepper, and Nutmeg, adding some large Mace, laying the Meat with Raisins of the
Sun and Currants in the Pie, and fill it with Butter; and when baked, serve it
up hot.

The best way to make a Carp-Pye.
Draw, scald and wash a large Carp or two, season him or them with Salt, Pepper
and Nutmeg, then fill the Pie with them, good store of Butter, Raisins of the
Sun, slices of Orange, and Juice of Lemon: close it up and bake it.

The best way to make a Chicken-Pye.
Truss your Chickens, and flat the Breast-bones; and having raised your Paste,
lay them in order, filling their bodies with Butter, laying above and beneath
Raisins, Currants, Pruins, Cinnamon, Sugar, Mace and Salt, with a convenient
quantity of Butter; and when it is baked, pour in Rose Water, White Wind,
beaten Cinnamon, Sugar and Verjuyce: with the which serve it up, etc.

To make a Warden-Pye the best way.
First bake your Wardens gently in a little Water and Claret, adding a pound of
Sugar, covering your Pot or Pan with a lid of dough; ^d when they are cold, lay
them into your ^ye with Cloves, Cinnamon, Sugar, and a ^art of the liquor, and
bake it gently.

^o make a Pie with Sweet-breads and Lamb-stones.
Slit your Lamb-stones, skin and wash them, ^ke the Liver of a Lamb, shread it
small, and slice an Udder-part of a Leg of Veal; which being seasoned with
Mace, Cloves, Salt and Nutmeg made small, as also Pepper; ^read into it three
or four Pippins, and the ^ke quantity of the peels of candied Lemons and
Oranges, five or six Dates cut in the mid^le and stoned, with Currants,
Carraway-^eeds, white Sugar, and half a pint of Rose Water and Verjuyce; add
more a couple of Eggs: make it into balls, and with the Juice ^f Sorrel green
it, laying a Sweetbread and (...) Lamb-stone till it is nearfull, covering
them with Citron-peel, Dates and slices of Lemon; and being baked enough, pour
in Butter, White Wind, Sugar, and the beaten yolks of ^ggs, scraping Sugar on
the lid to set it off.

To bake a Turkey the best way.
When your Turkey is parboiled, Lard ^im, season him with Pepper, Salt, Cloves
and Mace: flat the Breast, and put him into ^our Coffin or Pie, and fill it
with Butter, when it is baked and cold, and so serve it up.

To make an Artichoak-Pye the best way.
Take the bottoms of half a dozen Art^ choaks, boil them tender, season them
wit^ Ginger, Mace, Salt and Sugar: lay Marrow at the bottom of your Pie, and
them upon it; cover them with Marrow, sliced Dates Raisins of the Sun: and
being half baked put in a quarter of a pint of Canary, wherein Orange-peel has
been boiled, then bake it well

To make a Marrow-Pudding the best way.
Blanch a pound of Almonds, beat them small with Rose Water, take a pound of
fin^ Sugar, grate a penny white Loaf and a Nutmeg; add a pint of Cream, the
Marrow o^ two or three bones, and a grain or two o^ Amber-grease: mingle them
with a little salt; fill the skin you intend it shall be in and boil it
moderately.

The best way to make a Custard.
Take and boil a quart of Cream wit^ whole Spice; beat the yolks of ten Eggs
and five Whites, with a little Cream: put them into the Cream when cold, then
put it into Paste; strew Comfits on it, and bake it.

To make an Umble-Pye the best way as has bee^ Approved.
Take Beef Suet, mince it and lay it in you^ Coffin, or, if you please, slices
of Larded Ba^on; then take your Umbles, and cut them ^to small pieces as big as
Hazle-nuts, and ^our Bacon about the same bigness; then ^ake grated Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt; strew them on the top, then lay a laying of Bacon, and on that
another of Butter, and so close it ^p: and being baked, liquor it with stripped
^hyme, Claret and Butter well beaten together.

A Venison-Pasty, the best way to make.
Having well powdered your Haunch or ^ide, and cleared it from sinews, bones
and ^kin; season it with Pepper and Salt, and beat (...) with your Roaler,
making it proportionable for a Pasty; then make your Paste with ^^ne Flower,
allowing to a peck three pound ^f Butter and twelve Eggs: work it with ^old
water to a convenient stiffness, suffering ^t to be as thick as your thumb;
then take it upon your Roaler, and open it again upon a ^ouple of sheets, or so
much as will serve of ^ap-paper: and having your White minced, and beaten with
water, lay it proportionably upon the Pasty to the breadth and length of ^he
Venison: then in the White lay the Veni^on, and wash it round with a feather;
put on ^he border, season the top of the Venison, and ^urn over the other leaf,
and so close your ^asty: then drive out another border for garnishing the Pasty
from the sides to the top; the device of which is left to your di^cretion: then
vent it at the top, set it into (...) well-heated Oven, and suffer it to soak
as i^ ought, viz. four or five hours; then draw it and pour Butter well melted
in at the top.

To make an Excellent Minced-Pye.
Take Neats-Tongues, parboil them till they may be peeled; then mince them with
a like quantity of Beef Suet, stoned Raisins and picked Currants: make them in a
manner like pap, then mingle a little fine Sugar, with a glass or two of old
Mallaga; then add slices of candied Citron-peel, and put the whole, being well
mingled, into a coffin, the form o^ which is left to your discretion, and strew
on it a few Caraway-comfits, and so bake it moderately.

To make an Eel-Pye the best way.
Take the best silver Eels, indifferent large, strip, gut and wash them: cut
them to pieces at about a fingers length; shread a handful of sweet Herbs,
with some Parsley and an Onion; season them with Pepper, Salt, beaten Cloves,
Mace and grated Nutmeg; when the coffin or crust being reared and fashioned to
your mind, put them in, and strew over them some Currants, and a few slices of
Lemon over that; put a laying of Butter, and ^lose your coffin with the lid;
and when the Pie is baked, put in Butter melted with a ^ittle Vinegar, and
beaten up with the White of an Egg.

The best way to make a Gooseberry-Tart.
Take your Gooseberries before they are ^ipe, being well picked, scald them
till they will break in a Spoon; then strain out the ^ulp, and beat it up with
half a dozen Eggs, and stir them well together on a chafing dish of coals;
adding Rose Water, and sweetning them with Sugar; and when it is cold, you may
put it into your coffin, and moderately ^ake it, or serve it up in Plates
without baking.

To make a Pippin or Codling-Tart, or of any such like Fruit.
Take your Pippins, gathered before they are over ripe, pare them, and take the
core clear off, strew some Sugar and Rose Water on them; and each Pippin being
cut in four quarters, lay them in order between every ^aying; place thin slices
of Quince, then add syrup of Quinces, or of the same fruit; after that strew
over the Sugar, mixed with a little Cinnamon; and closing all up in the coffin,
bake them gently, that they may be well soaked.

To make a Paste of Marrow, etc.
Take the Marrow of six bones, shrea^ them with a considerable quantity of
Apple^ well pared and cored; then add a sufficien^ quantity of Sugar, and put
them into a Puff^ paste; and having fried them in a Pan wit^ sweet Butter,
serve them up with Sugar an^ Cinnamon.

To make a Pie of Calves-feet, the best way.
Having boiled your Calves-feet well, tak^ out the bones and grissles, as many
as are convenient; shread them as small as you can, an^ season them with Cloves
and Mace; add t^ them a good quantity of Currants, Raisins and Dates, the latter
well stoned, then with a sufficient quantity of sweet Butter, put the^ into
your coffin, breaking on them some whole Cinnamon and sliced Nutmeg; the scatter
over them some Salt, and close the^ up, leaving a vent to pour in when the Pie
i^ baked, a quantity of Verjuyce, beaten Cinnamon and fresh Butter well beaten
together.

To make the best Cakes.
Take a sufficient quantity of fine Flower a quarter the weight of it in picked
and washed Currants, a pound of Carraway-comfits half a pound of Marmalade of
Oranges, the ^olks of a dozen Eggs, half a pint of Malm^y or Mallaga, a quarter
of a pint of Rose Water: Mould them together with a little New-Ale-yest, and as
much Milk as will ^ake them up into Cakes; then Ice them ^ver with Sugar, or
wash them over with ^anary, well beat, with the yolk of an Egg, and bake them
in a gentle Oven.

To make the best Cheese-cakes.
Take new Milk, and put as much Runnet ^o it as will well bring it to a Curd;
then ^rain out the Whey in a cloth, between two ^atts: which done, beat up the
Curd with ^he yolk of Eggs, White Wind, Rose Water and Sugar; after that, add
as many Currants ^s you see convenient: then having made ^our Puff-paste of fine
Flower, Eggs, Milk, and New-Ale-yest, put it into a fashion; and ^eing well
knit at the corners, and rolled ^ith a Pastry-spur, put in the Curd, and wash
(...) over with the yolk of an Egg, using a fea^er for that purpose.

CHAP. XV.
How to make several Sawces for Roast or Boil on all occasions.

AND now since many have been des^rous to have an account of Sawces i^ General,
I think it not amiss to place it as a Appendix to Cookery; and further, to give
the Reader an account of the seasonable Bills o^ Fare, much observed by the
Curious for every Month in the Year: But of these in the^ order.

The general Sauce for green Geese (...) Gooseberries scalded, and colored
again with the Juice of Sorrel strewed over wit^ Butter and Sugar, and served
up on Sipits and for most Land-fowl, the pulp of stewe^ Pruins, the Gravy,
Cinnamon, Ginger and S^gar boiled up to a thickness, and served (...) in Sawcers.

For roasted Mutton, the general Sawc^ are Capers, Sampher, the Gravy, a sliced
Sh^lot, and a little Pepper stewed together: (...) Claret Wine, Ginger, the
Gravy and an On^on.

For boiled Mutton, Take Verjuyce, Bu^ter, Currants, Sugar, and a little Cinnamon
mix them well over a fire, and serve the^ up with Sipits or White-broth, made
of gr^ted Bread, Currants, Rose Water and Sugar, with the yolks of two Eggs.

The general Sauce for roast Veal is Juice of Orange, Butter, Verjuyce, grated
Nutmeg and Claret Wine, or sweet Herbs chopped small, with the yolks of two or
three Eggs boiled hard in Vinegar, Butter, and grated Bread, Currants, beaten
Cinnamon and whole Cloves; for boiled Veal, Green-sawce.

For red Deer, sweet Herbs chopped small, the Gravy, with the Juice of an
Orange or Lemon, and grated Bread or Vinegar, Claret Wine, Ginger, Cinnamon and
Sugar, boiled up with a sprig of Rosemary, some whole Cloves and grated Bread;
and if you stuff or farce your Venison, let it be with whole Cloves, sweet
Herbs and Beef Suet, the two latter cut very small.

For roast Pork, Apples quartered, boiled in fair water, and the pulp mixed
with Butter, Sugar, and a little Verjuyce; or Sugar, Mustard, Pepper, and the
Gravy: For boiled Pork, chopped Sage, boiled Onions, Pepper, Mustard, and
grated Bread, or Mustard, Vinegar and Pepper.

For Rabits, Sage, Parsley, Butter, Vinegar, and the Gravy; or beaten Butter,
Vinegar and Pepper: For a boiled Rabit, Onions, sweet Herbs, Pepper, grated
Bread and Sugar, served on Sipits.

For Hens roasted, the Gravy, Claret Wine, Pepper, and an Onion, boiled with
the Head Neck, or Gizard: or beaten Butter, the Juyc^ of a Lemon, Pepper, and
the yolks of hard Eggs: For a Hen boiled, white Broth and Sipits, with
Lemon Peel and the yolk of a^ Egg minced small.

For roast Chickens, Butter, Verjuyce, the Gravy or Butter, Vinegar, boiled up
with Sugar, and the substance of an Anchovey, served up on thin slices of
Bread: For boiled Chickens, strong Mutton-broth, grated Bread, chopped Parsley,
and the Juice of a Lemon, with a good piece of Butter, wel^ mixed, and served
up on Sipits in order.

For roasted Pigeons, Verjuyce, Butter, and boiled Parsley shread into it, and
beaten thick: or Claret Wine, stewed Onion, Gravy and Pepper, seasoned a little
with Salt: For boiled Pigeons, strong Mutton-broth, the Juice of Sorrel, the
yolks of Eggs beaten i^ raw, and a sprig of Rosemary: or Sprout and Bacon.

For a Peacock, Turkey, Partridge, Pheasant, or the like roasted, Boiled
Shalots, Pepper, Salt, grated Bread and Gravy: or On^on, grated Nutmeg,
Manchet, the yolk o^ Eggs, Salt, and the Juice of Oranges, boile^ up to the
thickness of Water-grewel: o^ bruise the kernels of small Nuts, with grate^
Bread, Nutmeg, Saffron, Cloves, the Juyc^ of Oranges and strong Broth: boil
them up to a thickness.

For a stubble Goose, slice Pome-waters, boil them soft; Mash them in
White Wind, and add to the pulp Butter, Sugar, Verjuyce, and the Gravy.

For a Mallard or Duck roasted, Take Oyster-liquor, the Gravy of the Fowl,
divided Onions, Nutmeg, and an Anchovey: stew them together, and serve it up in
the liquid part: or Vinegar, Cloves and Sugar, a blade of Mace and a Shalot: If
boiled, take slices of Carrot, shread Parsley and Winter-savory, Mace, Verjuyce
and grated Bread.

For any kind of Sea-fowl roasted, Take grated Bread, Cinnamon, Ginger and
Sugar, Claret and Wine-Vinegar: boil them with Rosemary and Cloves to a
convenient thickness; strain them and serve them up as a very good sauce: or
Gravy, Claret Wine, an Onion and Pepper, with a small piece of Butter.

For roasted Salmon, Take Oyster-liquor, a slice of Nutmeg, the Gravy, and the
Juice of Oranges and Butter; beat them up to a thickness: or beaten Cloves, the
Gravy, grated Nutmeg and grated Bread, beat up with Butter, the yolk of an Egg
and Vinegar: For boiled Salmon, Butter, Vinegar, Nutmeg, and the Intrails of
the Salmon.

To make an Excellent Green-Sawce, to serve o^ any occasion wherein it is
requisite.
Take large Sorrel, white Bread grated pared and cored Pippins, some sprigs o^
Mint, a quantity of Verjuyce sufficient t^ moisten it; and being stamped very
small scrape Sugar on it, and mix it well together and so serve it up, with
Pork, Veal, Chickens, Kid, Lamb, Gosling, or the like, the^ being boiled.

For all sorts of small Birds roasted.
Take the Gravy, Pepper, Butter, an^ their Livers and Gizards, minced with
Parsley, or the Gravy of a Capon, Ginger, an^ the yolk of an Egg beaten
together, wit^ a little Butter and Vinegar. And thus much may suffize for
Sawces, so necessary to b^ known by all that pretend to Cookery.

CHAP. XVI.
Directions to know what is in Season throughout the Twelve Months of the Year;
and what ought to be served up as the first and second Courses, etc.

March.
NEats-Tongues and Udders. 2. Boiled Chickens. 3. A dish of stewed Oysters with
Anchovey-sawce. 4. A dish of young Rabits. 5. A grand Sallad.

Second Course.
1. A dish of Soles or Smelts. 2. A dish of Marinate-Flounders. 3. A Pie of
Lamb^ones. 4. Asparagrass, if to be gotten. 5. A Warden-Pye.

April.
1. Green-Geese, or Veal and Bacon. 2. A ^oasted Haunch of Venison. 3. A
Lumber-Pye. 4. Rabits. 5. Tarts.

Second Course.
1. Cold Lamb. 2. A cold Neats-Tongue Pie. 3. Salmon, Lobsters and Prawns. 4. A
dish of Asgaragrass.

May.
1. Boiled Chickens. 2. Roast Veal. 3. Roast Capons. 4. Roast Rabits.

Second Course.
1. Artichoke-Pye just out of the Oven. 2. Westphalia-ham. 3. Tarts. 4.
Sturgeon, Salmon, Lobsters. 5. A dish of Asparagrass. 6. A Tansey.

June.
1. Boiled Neats-Tongues, or a Leg of Mutton and Colli-flowers. 2. A Steak-Pye.
3. A Shoulder of Mutton. 4. A Fore-quarter of Lamb.

Second Course.
1. A Sweetbread Pie. 2. A Capon roasted. 3. A Gooseberry-Tart. 4.
Strawberries and Cream, or Strawberries, with Rose Water, White Wind and Sugar.

July.
1. A Westphalia-ham and Pigeons. 2. A Loin of Veal. 3. A Venison-Pasty. 4. A
Capon.

Second Course.
1. Green-pease or French-beans. 2. A Codling-Tart. 3. Artichokes, or an
Artichoke-Pye. 4. Roasted Chickens with Summer-sawce.

August.
1. A Calves-head and Bacon. 2. An Olio, or grand-boiled savory Meat. 3. A
Haunch of Venison. 4. A fat Pig well roasted, with good sauce.

Second Course.
1. Marinate Smelts. 2. A Pigeon-Pye. 3. A dish of roasted Chickens. 4. A
Pippin-Tart. 5. Codlins and Cream.

September.
1. Boiled Hens and white Broth. 2. Neats-Tongues and Udders roasted. 3. A
Powdered Goose. 4. A roasted Turkey.

Second Course.
1. Potato-Pye. 2. Roasted Partridges. 3. A dish of Larks. 4. A dish of Cream
and seasonable Fruit.

October.
1. A Fillet of Veal. 2. Two roasted Brand-geese. 3. A grand Sallad. 4. A
roasted Capon.

Second Course.
1. Pheasants, Pigeons and Pouts. 2. A dish of Quails and small Birds. 3. A
Warden-Pye. 4. Tarts and Custards.

November.
1. A shoulder of Mutton stuffed with Oysters. 2. A Loin of Veal. 3. A roasted
Goose. 4. A Venison-Pasty.

Second Course.
1. A Larded Her^, and another not Larded. 2. A sowced Tarbet. 3. Two
Pheasants, the one Larded, and the other not. 4. A Collar of Beef. 5. A sowced
Mullet and Base. 6. Gellies, and Tarts of Fruits in season.

December.
1. Stewed Broth of Mutton and Marrow-bones. 2. Lambs-head and White-broth. 3.
A roasted Chine of Beef. 4. Minced Pyes. 5. A Turkey stuck with Cloves, roasted.
6. Two roasted Capons, the one Larded, the other not.

Second Course.
1. A young Kid or Lamb roasted whole. 2. A dish of Partridges. 3. Polonian
Sausages, and a dish of Anchoveys, garnished with Mushroons. 4. A dish of
Caveer and Pickled Oysters. 5. A Quince-Pye. 6. A dish of Woodcocks.

January.
1. A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A couple of Pullets boiled with
White-broth. 3. A roasted Turkey. 4. A hashed shoulder of Mutton. 5. Two Geese.
6. A Surloin of Beef. 7. Minced Pyes. 8. A Loin of Veal. 9. A Venison Pasty.
10. A Marrow Pie. 11. A couple of Capons roasted. 12. A Lamb roasted. 13.
Woodcocks, Partridges and small Birds dished up with sauce.

Second Course.
1. A soused Pig. 2. A Warden Pie. 3. A cold Neats-Tongue. 4. A soused Capon.
5. A dish of Pickled Oysters and Mushroons. 6. A Jole of Sturgeon. 7. A Goose
or Turky-Pye.

February.
1. A Bacon-chine. 2. A Loin of Veal, or Beef roasted. 3. A Lamb-pye or
Minced-pye. 4. A couple of Wild-Ducks roasted. 5. A dish of fried Oysters. 6. A
couple of Rabits roasted. 7. A Skirret-pye.

Second Course.
1. A roasted-Lamb. 2. A dish of Pigeons. 3. A Pippin-Tart. 4. A Jole of
Sturgeon. 5. A cold Turky-pye.

And thus having in all its Material parts, or what is most requisite, given
such Directions to an Ingenious Cook-Maid, as may qualify her, if duly
observed, for the Service of Persons of Worth. I might say likewise something
of the under Cook-Maid and Scullery-Maid; but they being both dependants upon
the former, and their business consisting in helping the Cook-Maid, the
greatest matter beside is to keep themselves and the Kitchin-Materials neat and
clean. And so I take my leave of them, and proceed to the Dairy-Maid.

CHAP. XVII.
The Accomplished Dairy-Maid, or Directions to make all manner of Junkets and
pleasant things wherein Milk, Cream, etc. is an Ingredient, the Modish and
Experienced way; plain, easy, and exceeding necessary.

THE Dairy-Maids place and office, though not so universal, is little inferior
to that of the Cook-Maid, in making variety of Junkets: besides which, her
chief business is to go neat and cleanly, and to keep all so under her
Jurisdiction; observing the Kine are well fed; and that Butter and Cheese are
made of proper Milks, and in their proper season: To make which, few that
undertake that business being ignorant, I shall proceed to give Instructions
for the making of Junkets, the most curious part of her office, and for which
Persons of Quality peculiarly retain such Servants. But to proceed.

To make fresh Cheese of Cream.
Take a Pottle of new Milk warm from the Cow, Almonds blanched half a pound:
beat them small; add a pint of Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, half a
pound of Sugar, half an ounce of beaten Cinnamon and Ginger; then add Runnet;
bread it up and whey it; press it in a Mould, and serve it up in a dish of
Cream.

Cream and Codlings, how to order in the best manner.
Scald your Codlings, take off the skins, and cut the core; mix the pulp with
Sugar and Rose Water; add a quarter of a pint of Canary, and a quart of Cream,
and serve it up.

To make an Excellent Junket.
Take Goats or Ews Milk, put them over a fire; and when they are a little warm,
then add Runnet, and let it cool; then strew on it Cinnamon and Sugar, over that
cast Cream, and strew Sugar upon the Cream, with Rose Water.

To make a Whipped Syllabub.
Take a pint of Cream, six spoonfulls of Sack, the Whites of two Eggs, two
ounces of fine Sugar, and with Birch-twigs beat it till it froth well; scum it
and put it into your Syllabub-pot.

To make Cream of Codlings.
Sealed them and peel off the skin, scrape the pulp from the core, and strain
the pulp, mixed with Sugar and Rose Water, through a course lin^^n cloth: lay
your Codling-pulp in the ^idde of a dish, and raw Cream round it; adding more
Sugar and Rose Water.

To make a Cream-Tart.
Take Manchet, chip it and grate it; mix it with good Cream and sweet Butter;
take a dozen yolks of Eggs, beat them well with Cream, adding four ounces of
sugar: boil them altogether till they come to a thickness; make two leaves of
Paste as thin as can be raised, but very shallow: put the Materials before
mentioned into it, and cover it with the lid; then bake it, strew sugar on it,
and serve it up.

To make Curran-Cream.
Bruised red Currants in boiled Cream, strain them through a Sieve; add Sugar
and Cinnamon, and so serve it up: And so you may by Rasberries or Strawberries.

To make Cream of Eggs.
Take a quart of Cream; and when it is hot, beat into it the Whites of five
Eggs, and let it boil, adding two spoonfulls of Rose Water: being enough, let
it cool, and add a little salt, and scrape on it fine sugar.

To make Curd-Cakes.
Take a pint of Curds, four Eggs, leaving two of the Whites; add sugar and
grated Nutmeg, with a little Flowe^: mix them well, and drop them like ^^itters
into a Drying Pan, in which Butter is hot.

To make fresh Cheese.
Take a race of Cinnamon, scald it in new Milk or Cream; and taking it off,
sweeten it with sugar; then take a spoonful of Runnet to two quarts of Milk;
cover it close, and let it stand till the Cheese comes: strew then upon it
Sugar and Cinnamon, and serve it up with sipits dipped in Canary or White Wind.

To make Gooseberry-Cream.
Let your Gooseberries be boiled; or for want of green ones, your Preserved
ones will do: and when your Cream is boiled up, put them in, adding small
Cinnamon, Mace and Nutmeg; then boil them in the Cream, and strain all through a
cloth, and serve it up with Sugar and Rose Water.

To make a Cream Fool.
Heat two quarts of Cream; when it is boiled, add the yolks of twelve Eggs,
having first beat it in the three or four spoonfulls of cold Cream, straining
them into the hot; stir them to prevent burning: when having boiled a pretty
while, take them off and let them cool, adding two or three spoonfulls of Sack;
fasten sipits to the dish with syrup of Rasberries: sweeten your Cream, pour it
in, and serve it up.

To make Clouted Cream.
Set new Milk on the fire twelve hours, without suffering it to boil; add Sugar
and Cinnamon, with a third part of Cream, and serve it up.

To make a Gooseberry-Fool.
Pick your Gooseberries not ripe, boil them in clean water to a pulp; take six
yolks of Eggs, a quart of new Milk, Rose Water and Sugar; put the latter in
when the former is well boiled, and suffering them to boil a while, serve the
whole up in a large dish when it is cold.

To make a Tansey.
Take six Eggs, but the Whites only of three; beat them in Cream, then stamp
green Wheat-blades, Violets, Spinach, Succory and Strawberry-leaves, of each a
handful, with a few Walnut-tree-buds; adding Cream as you beat them: strain
out the Juice, and add it to the Eggs, and more Cream; as also crumbs of Bread,
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Salt and sweet Butter, the latter being put into the
Drying Pan; adding, lastly, the Juice of Tansey and Sugar: fry them like a
Pan-cake, very thin, and serve it up with Rose Water and Sugar.

To make Snow-Cream.
Take the Gleer of half a dozen Eggs and Rose Water, beat them with feathers
till they ^ecome like Snow; lay it on heaps, and Cream that has been boiled and
cooled, with scraped Loaf sugar: heat it again, and serve ^up as soon as it
comes to be cold a second ^^me, upon Rosemary or Bay-branches to ^hicken; that
it may stick the better, add ^^me grated Bread.

To make a pleasant Syllabub.
Take two quarts of Milk come newly from ^he Cow, half a pint of Verjuyce being
ad^ed, take off the curd, and put to it more a ^int and a half of Cream: beat
them together with Sack and Sugar, and put them in^o your Syllabub-pot for your
use.

To make a Cream, called Quince-Cream.
Roast four or five ripe Quinces, and pare them; cut them from the core in thin
slices; ^oil the slices in a pint of sweet Cream, with (...) root of whole
Ginger: when it is boiled to pulp, strain it; and adding Sugar, serve it ^p
cold.

To make the best Jumballs.
Take a handful or two of Wheat Flour, and a pound of white Sugar; mix them
well, adding the Whites of two Eggs, and a poun^ of blanched Almonds well
beaten, with ha^ a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful o^ two of Rose Water:
to these add more, ha^ a pint of Cream; mould it till it become a Past; roll it
into what shape you please and dry it a while, then gently bake it: O this
quantity you may make twenty or more

How to make an Angellet.
Take a pint of Cream, and double the quantity of Milk, putting to them a sma^
quantity of Runnet; and when it thickens take it up with a Spoon, and put it
into a Fa^ there let it continue till it is very stiff, the salt it; and when
it is so, let it dry, and a^ the end of three Months eat it.

To make Sage-Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, boil it well, the add a quarter of a pint of the Juice
of re^ Sage, half as much Rose Water, and a qua^ter of a pound of Sugar, and it
will be a excellent dish. And thus you may use (...) with any sweet Herbs,
which will render pleasant and healthful.

Messeline, or Mixture, of rare and curious Receipts, Things and Matters; Added
as an Appendix to this Impression, for the better encouragement of the Buyer,
not any of them being to be found amongst the Curiosities of the first Edition
of this useful Book.
Most Approved Physical Receipts.
^n Excellent Balm for the Epilesie, Vertigo, Palfie, Cramp, and Pain in the
Back; and all cold Afflictions of the Nerves and Joints.
TAke of the Red sort of Old Tile-stone, in small pieces; Calcine or burn them,
and quench them in the purest Olive-oyl; after which beat them into fine
Powder, and ^ut that Powder, sprinkled with a little Mus^adel, into a Cucurbite
of Glass, Luting the ^oynts well together; and it being in that ^anner set over
a gentle fire, the Balm will ^rise: which being taken away, and used by
anointing the afflicted part, or snuffing u^ the Nostrils, will ease the Pains
premised.

A Receipt to make Orvetine, or the famous Antidote against Poison, Infection,
by being amongst diseased persons, or suddenly coming into infections or
noisome Air, and to prevent o^ eraducate any contagious Disease, disperse Cold
and prevail against Agues and Fevers.
Take of the Powder of Bezora-stone two drams, the Powder of dried Foxes Lung^
half an ounce, the Oil of Cinnamon a dram half an ounce of the Juice of
Herb-a-grace the Powder of Red Corral a dram, and two scruples of beaten Peel;
add to these half an ounce of Elecampane-roots, and two dram^ of Storax bruised
into Powder: put them into half a pint of Red-wine, and let them simper over a
gentle fire till they are well incorporated, and then make them into an
Electuary, keeping it as close as may be from the Air, and take, as occasion
requires it, about the quantity of a Hazle-nut, and after it some warm Broth or
warm Posset Drink; keeping your self close for an hour or two after, and it
will effect wonders.

An Excellent Wine, or Medicinable Drink, against the Pox, Plague, Measles,
Small Pox, Spotted Fever, or any infectious disease.
Take of the best Old Mallaga a quart, add it a pint of Rhenish-wine; Then take
of ^um, Sage, Rue, Red Sage, Maidenhair, ^d the Leaves of Germand, each an
ounce: ^uise them and boil them gently in the Wine (...) a third part be
consumed, then add Pep^er, Ginger and Nutmeg, of each three drams ^^ll beaten,
and of Venice-Treacle an ounce: ^astly, put in a quarter of a pint of Saffron
^d Angelica-waters, and Morning and Even^g take a spoonful to your great
advantage, (...) thereby you will be eased of the oppressi^ that Nature labors
under, and be enabled (...) conquer the disease.

Rare Curiosities, not before made Public.
Marmalade of Pruins, Raisins, Currants, etc. how to make it of an Amber Color,
capable of keeping a Year.
TAke your Fruit, and steep them in a proportionable quantity of Water, till ^y
being over a gentle fire they become soft and pulpy; then stone the Pruins or
Raisins, and put them into as much Canary as will yet them; after that press
out the pulp, and ^oil it up with some slices of Quinces; then strain it again,
and put to each pound h^ a pound of Sugar, and half a pound of c^rified brown
Sugar Candy in powder; also putting the pulp, well mixed with the a^dition, and
sprinkled with Rose Water, into glazed-pot: dry it a little in an Oven or Ston^
and keep it for your use.

A Perfume wherewith to Perfume any Confect^ons, etc.
Take of Myrrh a scruple, Musk the lik^ quantity, Oil of Nutmeg the like: infu^
them in Rose Water, and with it sprinkle you^ Banqueting preparatives, and the
scent w^ be as pleasant as the taste.

To make a Dish seem a pleasant Garden, or pleasant Hill of Fruits and Flowers.
Take a dish that is somewhat large, cove^ it with it with another of the like
bigness, an^ place the uppermost over with Paste of A^monds, in laid with red,
white, blew an^ green Marmalade or Quiddany, in the figur^ of Flowers and
Banks; then take the Branches of candied Flowers, and fix them up right in
order, and upon little Bushes erected and covered over with Paste, fix your
preserved or candied Cherries, Plumbs, Pears, Apples, Gooseberries, Currants,
and the like, each in his proper place: and for Leaves, you may use colored
Paste, Wax, Parchment or Horn ^d this, especially in Winter, will appear not ^y
gloriously strange, but even strike, if it be ^ll ordered, admiration in the
beholders.

^e Approved way to keep Gooseberries, Cherries, Currants, Cornelian-Berries,
Plumbs, Apricocks, Grapes, and the like, all the Year, in their substance,
color, and proper taste, in order to make Tarts, or the like, at any time of
the year, as if it were at the proper season.
Take Stone-bottles, glazed within and without; boil them well in fair water,
then dry ^em in the Sun; after which, having gather^d your Fruit somewhat
before they are ripe, ^^ke them free from Leaves, and with but indifferent
Stalks, and put them whole, without any bruising, into the Bottles: then take
^ir water, and boil it till no more scum will ^ppear; after that let it settle,
and so draw (...) off, adding to each quart a quarter of a ^ound of white
Sugar Candy in Powder, and (...) boil it up again with a quarter of a pound ^f
Loaf-sugar till no more scum will appear; ^hen the liquid part being cool, fill
up the Bottles; after which stop them with sound Corks; and having pieces of
thin and pliable Lead, clap them over the Corks, and wyre (...) down under the
bearing or rising of the Necks, and set them in a close Vault, and when you
open them the Fruit will be fresh and sound. Some there are that hold this may
be done without any Liquor, but t^ I hold the best and surest way to prese^
them either from shriveling up for want moisture, or becoming musty.

To make Frayse appear like Rashers of Bacon*
Take of fine Flower half a peck, ming^ one half by it self with Water and
Butt^ and to the other add Milk wherein Turnso^ has been steeped, with a little
of the Powd^ of Lake; and having cut them out into ^ces, fix a slice of the one
to a slice of the ^ther at your discretion; and when they a^fryed gently, or
rather baked, they will d^ceive the most curious as to the sight of the^

Curiosities, rare and new, for the Beautifying and Adorning the Female Sex,
with other matte^ of moment.
To make a young Face exceeding Beautiful, an^ an old Face very Tolerable.
TAke of Benjamine two handfulls, Scab^ous the like quantity, the Roots (...)
Comfry a handful, Peny-royal and Rosemary, of each a handful: wash and pick
them ^an, then steep them a day and a night in White Wind, sprinkling them
afterward with ^wder of Myrrh; and so put them into a ^ld Still, and the Water
so drawn off will ^ceed any Wash in use, and not at all pre^^dice the party
when she leaves it off, as ^ose which are Chymically prepared do, (...)
rendering those old and withered even the prime of their youth, who accustom
^^emselves thereto.

A sweet Wash to cause the Body to cast a fragrant scent when washed therewith.
Take Hysop a handful, Baum the like ^antity, Garden-Musk and the Bloom of
Peach-tree, of each half a handful: in^se them, with the Powder, into
Frankin^nse, and a small quantity of the Oil of ^ikenard, in running-water,
over a gentle ^e, and so with the liquid part wash or bathe ^e Body, and it
will over and above create (...) fresh and pleasant color.

^^ Excellent Ointment to Beautify the Hands and Face, and take away any
Deformity: never before Published.
Take of the Oil of Myrrh half an ounce, ^o ounces of the Marrow of Hogs or
Calves^^t, an ounce of the Water of Tartar, and ^lf an ounce of the Oil of
Spikenard: mix them well over a gentle fire, and alla^ their heat with two
ounces of the Oil (...) sweet Almonds: and being cool, anoint t^ Face or Hands
therewith, and it will not only take away any Spots, Morphew, or t^ like, but
create a lovely color, and rend^ a pleasing or tempting softness.

Such Power, you Beauties, I thought fit to give*
That killing others, you might let me live.
To make a Rough Skin smooth, and Wrinkles d^ appear.
Take of the Oil of Swallows an ounce, t^^ like quantity of that of the
Mandrake; ha^ an ounce of the Oil of Pomgranet, and ha^ a pint of Ews Milk:
incorporate them to moderate thickness over a gentle fire, an^ then add a
quarter of a pint of the Crea^ of Almonds, and with it supple and anoi^ the
rough part; and in so often doing yo^ will find it restored; as also the
wrinkles an^ wither'dness to be filled up and plump'd.

Rare and new Experiments relating to Lawndering, etc. never before Published.
To restore Linen that is scorched by hanging, or being too near the fire, etc.
TAke half a pint of Vinegar, two ounces of Fulling-Earth, an ounce of Hen's
^ung, half an ounce of Cake-soap, and the ^uyce of two Onions: boil them to a
thick^ess, and spread the substance Plaister-wise upon the scorched place, and
it will (if the ^corching be not quite through, so that the ^hreads are not
dissolved) recover the scorch, and render it, after a Washing or two, as before.

To make Clothes that have been abused in Washing, Yellow or Mildewed by lying
in damp places, white and fair.
Take of the Oil of Orpine two ounces, the Water of Plantane the like quantity,
and of ^he Juice of Burdock-roots two ounces: ^crape into them half a pound of
Castle-soap, and a quarter of a pound of the best Fulling-Earth, with a like
quantity of Chalk: infuse them in hot water, and let the Clothes soak in it
over a gentle fire; and so washing them out in other water, five or six hours
after you will find them exceeding white.

To recover Lawn, Tiffany, Musling or Lace, when they are faded.
Take of the Water of Vervine a quart half a pint of the Water that distills
from the Vine, a handful of the Roots of Primroses and as many
Rosemary-flowers; add to these a quart of new Milk; boil them together, with
the further addition of two ounce^ of Allom-powder, and steep the things
therein a night and a day, by which means they will in Washing not only prove
much whiter, but contract themselves, grow stiff^ and continue a gloss or
luster, for a time, a^ if they were new.

These things being exactly performed by those for whose sake they were written
will, no doubt, turn to their credit and advantage.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Judicious Midwives Advice, or Directions relating to the Delivery of Women
in case of Natural or Unnatural Births; dead Children, etc. Also how they ought
to be used before and after Delivery: With Excellent Receipts and Applications
in diverse cases; and for Curing distempers incident to the Sex, etc.

AS this undertaking ought to be performed with modesty and caution, so I shall
^bserve both; and though it may seem brief ^o some, yet it cannot but be
necessary and ^sefull: Wherefore I have placed it as an ^ppendix to this
necessary Book, and in all, ^onsulted the Opinion of the Learned.

As for a Midwife, she ought to be well ^ualified, knowing and expert before
she ^ndertakes so great a charge; not too hasty, or too slow in the performance
of her office, and ever have the fear of God before her eyes, (...) the
Egyptian Midwives had, when they re^sed to destroy the Hebrew Male-children,
(...) regarding their Oaths on Earth, which is, (...) doubt, bound in Heaven.
But not longer (...) prologue, I shall proceed to the material ^atter; and,
first, what ought to be observed upon the lying down of a Woman in Child^ed.

If her Travail be hard and tedious, to inliven her spirits, and keep her in
heart, giv^ her Cordial Essence, Syrups or Cordial Waters, such as are suitable
on such occasions* She may also take Chicken-broth, seconded by a poached Egg,
or such like-matter; no to excess, but moderately. As for the postures in case
of Delivery, few are ignorant of them; therefore, to avoid abscenity, I shall
wave them, and proceed to what is more necessary and material.

In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wit^ patience expect the assistance of
Nature, which on that occasion wonderfully operates, an^ not abruptly break the
Membrane, lest the life of one or the other be endangered, unle^^ a great
necessity require it, but rather suffe^ the Child's head to do it; and when that
(...) done, and the pangs come gently, draw fort^ the Birth, if it be the right
way forward; (...) not, means must be used to turn it, as the motion of the
Woman, and the diligence (...) the Midwife. Walking up and down the Room, in
this case, if the Woman be able, (...) not at all amiss, nor sudden turning her
sel^ whereby she may reduce the Infant to a rig^^ posture, and so have an easy
Delivery: for Children in the Womb lying cross-way or sprawling, not only
occasion danger to the Woman, and hard Labor, but sometime^ by reason of an
unskilful Midwife, Death (...) ^he one or the other, the Natural Birth being
with the head foremost; and when a Child ^s so taken forth, commonly with the
face ^ownward, lay it upon its back for the ad^antage of respiration, and then
with an In^^rument very sharp let the Midwife cut the Navel-string about four
Inches from the fast^ing, tying that that remains with a piece of ^ilk string;
cover then the Child's head and stomach, not suffering any thing to press the
^ace.

The Child being thus ordered, let the Midwife commit it to the Nurse, or the
Woman that assists, and take care of the Womad in bed, in taking from her the
Secon^ine or Afterbirth with care and caution, which is easiest done, they
being contracted Membranes, by easily moving till Nature effect the rest; and
if there appear a difficulty ^herein, many are of the opinion, that the Woman's
holding Salt in her hand fast grasp^d, it is much available in facilitating the
^usiness. Breathing hard, or rather straining when the Breath is held, is
another expedi^nt; or by straining to Vomit; all being helps ^o Nature: But if
these prove ineffectual, the ^cent of Assa-foetida is an Expedient, or drink^ng
the Juice of Elder, especially if the Woman be troubled with the Wind-colick,
cha^ing the Belly is not the least expedient to forward the matter, for thereby
the Wind that obstructs, is dispersed or expelled: (...) these fail, the
Midwife, by her discretion must gently draw them forth.

Many Births, there are that are called Unnatural, because they by accident, or
the evi^ situation of the Womb come not forward the right way, some lying
cross, others with their feet downward, others sprawling; some with their necks
bowing, and others wit^ their arms stretched out, so that they creat^ great
pain and trouble: Therefore of these I shall speak and give Instructions to
those of the profession that herein are ignorant.

In many of these cases, great caution mus^ be used to turn the Child, not only
by the motion of the Woman, but by Fomentations if occasion require, and by the
hand o^ the Midwife, either to turn the Child in the Womb the right way, or to
contract the Members, that it may be brought forth by delating the Womb, and
thereby making sufficient way to do it, removing what obstructs the passage;
and having by degree brought the Infant into a convenient posture if it may be,
tenderly move it, the hand being before that attempt anointed with Pomatum the
weakest, or what is more convenient fresh Butter; letting forth the Waters, i^
they are not come down; and whether i^ lie cross or sprawling, feel for the
feet; and having gotten them, by degrees draw the ^nfant gently forth,
encouraging the Woman ^o strain, and giving her leave between whiles (...)
breathe; and that in such a case the hold ^ay not fail, a linen cloth about
the Thigh ^f the Child will not be amiss; and after the ^irth, do as in case of
a Natural Birth.

If a dead Child be in the Womb, and Nature be deficient, as in that case
mostly it is, ^rt must be used, and the Child, if it cannot be otherwise, must
be drawn forth with ^n Instrument hooked and fastened in the Scull ^y the
Eye-hole. This likewise must be done with caution, and the Woman after it
care^ully regarded; encouraging her, and not being dismayed at any cross
accident, but rather recollect her senses, that she may be the ^etter able to
perform her office, Wit, in the ^reatest Exegencies, being most needful: And
when she is cased of her burden, give ^er for her further comfort a Toast in
Ipo^ras or Canary: or in case she cannot be de^^vered with convenience, the
better to enforce it, let her take the following Drink.

Cut blew Figs six or seven; Mugwort, the ^eeds; of Rue and Fenugreek, of each
two ^rams; Water of Peny-royal and Mother-wort, six ounces: decoct them till
half be consumed; strain them, and add of Saffron ^hree grains, and the
Trochises of Myrrh a dram, and a dram of beaten Cinnamon: swee^en the liquid
part, and suffer her to drink it not.

Resting a while, let her again try her strength, but not put it out to
extremity, lest she become too feeble; and then if she be not eased of her
burden, it will not be amiss to make a Suffumation of Oppoponax, Castor
Sulphur and Assa-foetida, of each a dram beaten to Powder, and wetted to a
stiffness, with the Juice of Rue burnt on a chafing dish o^ coals, and the
smoke pass through the narrow end of a Funnel, so as to affect the Matrix only,
and so wait the good time.

A Woman being delivered either of a Natural or Cross Birth, it will be
convenient, i^ she have had hard labor, to wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep,
the fleshy side being warm toward her, especially to her Reins and Belly: or
for want of it, a Coney or Hare's Skin newly flayed and warm, chafing her Belly
with Oil of St. John's Wort, and swathing her Back and Belly with fine linen a
quarter of a Yard broad, covering her Flanks with a Quilt or little Pillow,
applying a warm cloth to her Nipples, but use not presently striving by any
Application to drive back the Milk, lest it cause an Inflammation by the
continuing of the evil humor twelve hours at least, being allowed by
Physicians for the circulation and settlement of the Blood, and what was cast
upon the Lungs by vehement agitation; for in this case Nature is wonderfully
out of frame, there not being a Vein nor Artery but what is stretched and moved.

About six hours after Delivery, or less, a restorative may be made of the
yolks of two Eggs, a pint of White Wind, a quart of Milk, of Oil of St. John's
Wort and Roses, each an ounce; Plantane and Rose Water, of each the like
quantity: mix them well, and dip a cloth into them folded; warm it and apply it
to the Breasts, and it will much abate the pangs.

To sleep immediately, though the Woman be inclinable, is not at all
convenient; four hours after Delivery give her Caudles and nourishing Liquids,
and let her sleep if she is minded: And in case of a Natural Birth, no more is
required, unless some more than ordinary indisposition happen.

But in case of Unnatural Births, or extremity, other things are to be
considered; As to observe a temperate diet, which must consist for the first
five days of Penados-broths, Jelly of Chickens or Calves-feet, poached Eggs,
French Barley-broth, etc. and as she strengthens, so let her increase her
eating. If no Fever afflict her, she may, as she sees occasion, drink Wine
moderately, Syrup of Roses or Maidenhair, and suchlike Astringents: And so
the danger being past, Broths of Meat, or Meat it self, will not be amiss, that
she may the better recover her strength, the eighth day being the soonest to
venture on them, the Womb then, for the most part, purging it self; avoiding,
as much as may be, sleep in the daytime. And in case of Costiveness, or the
like obstruction, which too frequently happen, a Clyster of mollifying Herbs
are a present removal: And in all such cases, and many other, what follows is
held material.

Marsh and Field-mallows, Peletory of the Wall, Camomoil and Melilot-flowers,
of each a handful: boil them in Water wherein a Sheeps-head has been boiled;
strain them when boiled, and into a quart put an ounce of course Sugar, and as
much Honey, with an ounce and a half of fresh Butter; and if it opperate not to
the purpose, half an ounce of Catholicum will not be amiss.

It is usual for Women to Wash after Delivery; and how to make these Washes,
not being vulgarly known, I shall give directions.

For the first Wash, Take a handful of Chervil; which being boiled in a quart
of Water, add a spoonful of Honey of Roses, and wash with it eight days, and
then use another, viz. Take red Roses, put them in a Linen bag, boil them in
half a pint of Water, and as much White Wind; strain the liquid part, and use
it. Some require a third, and that may be made of the Decoction of Roses, and a
pint o^ Myrrh-water.

To make Astringents useful on this occasion, Take the Seed of Pomgranet,
Roach-Allom and Galls, of each two ounces; Red Roses, and the Roots of
Knot-grass, of each four ounces; the Rinds of Pomgranet and Cassa, of each
three ounces; Water-Roses, Myrrh and Burnet, of each an ounce; half a quartern
of White Wind; and of Smith's-Water a quarter of a pint. Take two bags of a
quarter long, and half the breadth; boil them in Water, with the Drugs, etc.
and apply them successively, as is convenient. To make an excellent Plaster,
Take Venice-Turpentine, Spermaceti, Rose and Plan^ane-water, of each an ounce
and a half, with eight ounces of Beeswax: bruise and melt them, adding an
ounce of white Lead: make a Plaster of it, and apply them to the Belly and
Nipples, anointing them first with Spermaceti, and it will remove the
Inflammation, and afford much strength.

Cleansing before rising being convenient, I shall not omit to give Directions,
as thus:

Take half a pound of bitter Almonds, blanch them and beat them into Paste,
with Powder of Grise, and the yolk of an Egg: put it into bags of Shammey, and
dip it into Red-wine, and apply it to the places whence the Cere-cloth was
taken, and wash it in the Wine wherein Orange-flowers have been steeped.

To prevent the curdling of the Milk in the Breast, Boil the Roots of Althaea
in White-wine-Vinegar, strain the liquid part through a Sieve, adding
Bean-flower an ounce, Oil of Mastick two ounces, Powder of dried Mint and Rue,
of each a dram: make them into an Oynment, and anoint the Breasts.

To dry up the Milk, many ways are used, but this the best, viz. Take new
Honey, the Juice of a Sparemint and Shepherds-purse, of each an ounce, and put
half an ounce into Chicken-broth each morning.

To renew a pain in the Breast, Take two ounces of Beeswax, Oil of Nutmeg and
Rape-oyl, of each half an ounce: make them into an Ointment; spread them
Plaster-wise, and apply them to the Breast.

In case the Belly swell, which after delivery often happens, Take Barley and
Bean-flowre, finely sifted, of each four ounces; half a pound of Spanish Figs;
of the Powder of Brick, two ounces; one ounce of Cyprus-nuts: boil them well in
the Water of a Smith's Forge, and apply them as a Linament to the Belly.

If an Inflammation of the Breast happen, make a Cataplasm of the Leaves of
Melilot and Nightshade, each a handful, boiled in Spring Water; adding two
ounces of Bean-flowre, of Oil of sweet Almonds and Oatmeal, each an ounce, and
make a timely Application.

To cure a Tumor in the Breast, which ^oceeds from a thick and unnatural
Vapor ^ising from the Menstrual blood, the Wo^an must be moderate in diet,
drinking Wa^^r wherein Cinnamon and Anniseeds have ^een concocted; as likewise
the Rind of Ci^on; observing evermore to take such things ^s are proper to
provoke the Courses; as the ^uyce of Celendine, Groundsel, Camomoil, and
Ground Ivy boiled in White Wind: and (...) often so doing you will remove the
pain, and render ease to the part.

Additional Experiments, or the Judicious Midwives farther Instructions, not
published in the former Edition.
And first of Weakness, etc.
IF it happen that the Woman after her Delivery be very weak, then, to prevent
her much striving, the Nurse, with other help, must turn her as occasion
requires, lest the whole frame being out of order, the dispersed humor gather
to one place, and create a relapse, which is very dangerous: notwithstanding,
for a farther prevention of it, she may take at the end of (...) days the
following Cordial, viz.

Take of the Syrup of Violets half an ounce the like quantity of that of
Citrons; add t^^ these two drams of the Powder of Rhubarb and an ounce of
Treacle-water, with as much Diascordium dissolved in it as will lie upon (...)
Sixpence; and to all these add half a pint o^ Hysop-water, and let her take an
ounce at (...) time, and after it some Broth or warm Posse^ the Midwife being
ever careful that nothing of the Afterbirth remains, lest thereby Fits and
Obstructions may be occasioned.

The Woman in this case ought likewise to be very careful of her self till the
Body, that by any violent or unnatural Birth especially is much distempered and
disordered be settled, and in good temper; for often by a too timely rising and
stirring, the cold has opportunity to penetrate and settle in the open parts of
the Joints, causing numbness and pains in Limbs, and sometimes by such violent
intrusions ferments the Blood to the degree of a Fever.

To prevail against which, Take of the Powder of Elecampane an ounce, Conserve
of Red Roses two ounces, Pomgranet-seeds beaten to Powder an ounce: dissolve
them in White Wind, two drams or somewhat more at a time, and drink the Wine as
warm as may be convenient.

New and rare Experiments in Cookery, not before made Public; as also in
Dairying.
To roast a Salmon whole the Italian way.
TAke a middle-siz'd Salmon, draw him, and scrape off the Scales, drying him
without and within with a cloth: Then take ^^ne grated Bread, grated Nutmeg,
the Juice of sweet Marjorum, Currants and Butter, ma^ing them up with new Milk
into a Pudding, ^he which you must thrust in at his Gills till ^he Belly be
pretty well stuffed; then with white Filliting bind him to the Spit; and at
first baste him with a little Salt and Water, then with Verjuyce and Sugar,
and, lastly, with Butter and Red-wine beaten up together: when being enough,
open his Belly, slit him in two halves, and lay the Pudding one half on one
side, and the other on the other side, and serve him with a Garnish of whole
Spices and Anchovey-sawce.

To roast a Turkey, Swan, Heron or Bittron, the French way.
Draw your Fowl, put sweet Herbs, shread into a Linen bag, with Butter and
Spices: put that into its Belly, then with hot water baist it till it is in a
manner parboiled on the Spit; after that dry it with a cloth, then bai^ it with
Butter and Ginger till it is roasted, and serve it up with Butter, Anchoveys,
and the sweet Herbs; garnishing the dish with Lemon Peel and green things, etc.

To make a Spanish Syllabub the best way.
Take new Milk a gallon, the Flower o^ sweet Almonds half a pound, Rose Water
two ounces, Lime-juyce half a pint, the Juice of Strawberries or Raspices a
pint, and a quart of Canary-wine, with two pounds of Sugar; beating them and
stirring them together till they froth and become of a pleasing color.

The Dutch way to make Orange-Butter.
Take new Cream two gallons, beat it up to a thickness, then add half a pint of
Orange-flower Water, and as much Red-wine; and so being become the thickness of
Butter, it retains both the color and scent of an Orange. And thus have I
performed my promise in this kind; from whence I shall proceed to the Second
Part.

THE SECOND PART, OR, Appendix to the foregoing Work. Containing Directions for
Behavior, as to what relates to the Female Sex, on all occasions, etc.
The Author's Admonition to Parents, or such as have the Tuition of Children,
etc.
AMong all the Temporal Blessings, God out of the abundance of his Bounty and
Goodness has bestowed upon Mankind, Parents, in dutiful and obedient Children,
have the greatest: Great indeed it is to have Children, and so it was held and
acknowledged by the Fathers and Wisemen of Old; insomuch that Barrenness was
not only looked upon as a Reproach, but a more immediate Mark of Heavenly
displeasure. Sarah's heaviness was turned into joy when Isaac was born. Rachel
was so impatient, that she desired Jacob (as not considering they were the
immediate Gift of the Almighty) to give her Children, or she should dye. The
Motber of Sampson, when the Angel told her (who had it seems been a long time
Barren) that she should conceive a Son, greatly rejoice Hannah praying before
the Lord with an uprig^^ Heart, and pouring out her Supplications to hi^ to
take away the Reproach of her Barrenness had her Petition answered in bringing
forth S^muel. Great was the joy of Elizabeth, the Wi^ of Zacharias, and Mother
of John the Baptis^ when she found she had conceived; insomuch the she cried as
in a Rapture, Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looke^ on
me, to take away my Reproach among men. And one of the chief Blessings the King
Prophet pronounces to the just and upright Man is, That his Children shall be
like Olive branches round his Table. If the having Children creates such joy,
how ought it to multipl^ in the Hearts of Parents, who are appointed by God to
watch over them for their good, when through their encouragement and industry
they se^ them arrive, in some measure, to a perfection, in the knowledge and
practice of Divine and Mora^ Virtues, whereby they are rendered not only
capable of an Immortal state, but of gaining a good Repute and lasting Memory
amongst Men: The consideration of which, doubtless, made Solomon deliver it as
a Maxim, That, A wise Son made a glad Father. And in this case Children are
more bound to their Parents for their Education, than for their Bearing them:
Nor is it a Duty less incumbent on Parents in the discharge of their Duty
toward God, to see, to their utmost, those Children has entrusted them with,
as pledges of his kind^^ss, brought up in his fear, by a timely seasoning ^m in
the ways of Virtue, than it is on the Chil^^ens to make grateful returns and
acknowledg^^nts for the care and cost they have bestowed on ^^m, in nurturing
and bringing them up; imagi^^ng, that upon the receiving of every such
Blessing, ^^ey hear the Almighty Donor speaking as Pha^^ah's Daughter did to
the Mother of Moses, ^ake this Child and Nurse it for me, etc. ^hese things
rightly weighed and considered, may ^duce those Parents, who would be happy in
their ^osterity, to be more than ordinarily diligent in ^ying a good foundation
for Virtue to build upon, ^^eir own good Example being ever the Corner^^one of
such a Structure; for nothing sooner makes (...) impression in tender years,
than Precedents in^mcy, like Wax, taking and retaining the figure of that Seal
which first impressed it, unless it be rude^^ defaced by another, or purposely
destroyed.

On this occasion much more may be said, but Parents naturally inclining to do
what may turn ^o the advantage of their Children, I shall in this place press
it no farther, but proceed to lay down Rules and Directions for the Carriage
and Conduct of Young Gentlewomen, etc. That climb^ng by degrees to the Summit
of Internal Adornment, they may raise themselves a lasting Monument, seeing
Virtue survives Time, and shakes Hands with Eternity.

Yours to serve you, J. S.

CHAP. I.
Admonitions to Young Gentlewomen, i^ the first place, to observe their Dut^
toward God.

TO be inflam^d with the Love of Sacre^ Things, is undoubtedly a foundation for
early Virtue to build on, and i^ frequently an Introduction to whatever w^ can
justly or truly term Good or Great Therefore as you first owe your Duty to Go^
who made you, and on whom depends you^ Being and Well-being, not only here, but
here after; you must, above all things, conside^ his Glory, and endeavor, as
much as in yo^^ lies, to render him tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving
imploring the assistance of his divine Grace to instruct and enable you to
supply your defects, and increase your knowledge, and in so, Remembering your
Creator in the days of your Youth. That God, who loves the early Sacrifice of
the Heart, will not be wanting to over-shadow you with the Wings of his
Providence, and keep you from falling into those snares Satan lays to entrap
you.

To induce you to holy desires, and confirm you in the way of Truth, as you
increase in strength. As soon as you are capable to read well, (which ought to
be in the sixth year of our Age at farthest, for otherwise you or our Parents
will be subject to a censure of ^nowledge) you must apply your self to the
reading of good Books; and strive, the more ^^u read, the more to conceive a
delight and ^leasure therein; that growing up, you may ^^y with Holy David,
From my Youth have I ^ved thy Law. And in seriously considering that you read,
it will be very profitable for ^ou to retain in your memory such comfortable
Sentences as, being repeated, raise in ^ou a holy joy, or more than ordinary
desire ^o meditate and enter upon a Contemplation ^f those things that are
thereby expressed; and these must be chiefly taken from Holy Writ: But, above
all things, be not remiss ^n the duty of Morning and Evening Prayer; and that
you may be the better prepared for such holy Exercise, get by heart, and retain
in your memory the Paternoster, or the Lord's Prayer, the Belief, or the
Apostle's Creed, and other good Prayers suitable to your capacity. Get by heart
likewise the Churches Catechism, but especially the Ten Commandments, that you
may the better understand the Will of that God that made you, and the World;
and be cautious to offend him in breaking any of his Laws by thought, word or
deed, considering that from him, who is the searcher of hearts, nothing can be
hid; for to him Darkness is as Light, and before him all the secre^ of our
hearts are laid open. Lying, abov^ all things, must be abhorred, and the Nam^
of God never mentioned but upon pious an^ lawful occasions, (and then too with
the profoundest reverence.) The company o^ naughty Children, whose words and
manner may offend or tend to corrupt Youth, thoug^ your near Relations, must
not only be reproved by you, but growing incorrigible or in reclamable, shunned
and avoided; and, as often as stands with your convenience, especially every
day between the Morning an^ Evening Duties of Prayer, read little or more some
portion of Scripture with heed, reverence, and a comely gesture, as considering
it is the Word of God, Written by Holy Men inspired for our Learning. And if it
be in private you read, where none but your self i^ present, pause and meditate
on those Sacred Truths as your Heart is most inclinable.

As for the Sabbath Day, a Day holy set apart by God, as more peculiarly
designed for his Worship, though it ought on no day to be omitted. Observe to
keep it with the greatest strictness, keeping not only you^ Actions and Words,
but, if possible, your very Thoughts within compass; and spend tha^ day
especially in Praise and Thanksgiving both in private and public Devotion,
with a firm Faith, and full relyance on God's mercy and goodness, for your
protection and preser^ation in this life, and for his promises of a ^etter life
in the World to come.

When you are at Church, let not your ^yes by any means wander, nor your Body
love in an unseemly gesture; but in all things (...) behave your self, that you
may be an ex^mple to others. If at any time you are ex^osed to Melancholy or
Discontent, pray to ^od to remove it; if to Mirth, let it be harm^^ss and
innocent, avoiding lewd sights, or ^aring Songs that may tend to corruption ^^d
debauchery; but rather follow on this, (...) well as the former occasion, St.
James's ^rection or advice, viz. If any be afflicted, (...) him pray: if merry,
let him sing Psalms, c. 5.13. And in thus doing you will treasure up ^^essings
to your self; for if you carefully per^^rm your duty in serving God as you
ought, ^e will not withold from you any thing ^^at is necessary; for to those
that seek first ^^e Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness, all ^^her things
shall be added.

And thus much may briefly suffice to in^^ruct you how you ought in duty to
behave ^our self toward your Maker: From which shall proceed to the next
incumbent, which your Duty toward your Parents, etc.

CHAP. II.
Instructions for Young Gentlewomen (...) Behaving themselves dutifully towar^
their Parents.

AS our Parents are those from who^ next God, we have our Being, and b^ whose
tender care and inseparable love w^ are nourished and preserved from
innumer^ble dangers and hazards; therefore oug^^ we to render them suitable
returns, as far we are able, and more expressly in a grat^full acknowledgment by
our duty and obse^vance. Therefore, young Gentlewome^ take notice that you
should no sooner arri^ at moderate years of understanding, but yo^ ought to
understand your Duty towar^ your Parents; and that you may not plea^ ignorance,
I will briefly lay down such Rul^ as may inform you what is necessary to
observed.

In the first place, your Reverence, Lov^ and Obedience, is strictly required,
not only by the ties of Nature; but by God's ho^ Word, as sundry places in
Scripture ma^^fest; nor can their Infirmities in any-wise a^ solve you, or
dispense with your non-perfo^mance; but in such a case you ought to doble your
observance, that thereby, as much ^s in you lies, with Shem and Japhet you may
hide their weakness and defects, from ^he eyes of others, lest the Curse that
befell Cham, the unnatural discoverer of his Fa^hers nakedness, fall upon you:
or the more ^readfull threat of the Wiseman, in Prove. 30.^7. The Eye that
mocketh his Father, or despi^^th to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley
shall pluck it out, and the young Eagles shall eat (...) up: That is, the very
fowls of the Air, who are mindful of those that gave them be^^g, shall
testify against the disobedient, and ^ecome their Enemies. But nearer to the
^urpose.

You must observe at all times to obey the Will of your Parents (if it be in
your power, and not contrary to God's Command) without repining, seeming
unwilling, or entering unto dispute, performing what you do with ^heerfulness,
showing by your willing mind your ready obedience, and by your quick dispatch
demonstrating the pleasure you take ^n the performance, shunning all occasions
of giving them any disquiet, pacifying their ^nger, if it at any time arise,
with submission either in words or by behavior, tempering ^our actions with a
moderate sweetness of disposition and silence, for too much osten^ation or
loquicity is displeasing; when your Parents grieve, be you sad; when they
rejoice be you pleasant, as sympathizing wit^ them in heaviness and joy; yet be
not over inquisitive into the cause; but if you are desirous to know it, wait
their leisure to revea^ it, or learn it from some other hand.

Forget not to pray for your Parents as often as you put up your Vows to Heaven
beseeching the Almighty to shower his Blessings upon them, that in multiplying
they may redound to their advantage and you^ comfort; which is one great
advance by which a Child endeavors to make his Parents restitutien for their
care and tenderness; for nothing without calling God to you^ assistance can in
that nature be effectual, the difference being otherwise so vast between what
has been done for you, and what you can do to deserve it.

Let not the hopes of Riches, no, nor the severity of your Parents, imprint in
you^ mind a desire of their Death, lest the Almighty be offended, and shorten
your days frustrating you not only of what you so earnestly desired, but of
that, which, without those unlawful desires, you might in his good time have
enjoyed.

Shun those that speak ill of your Parents and would make them seem
contemptible in your eyes: Nor let their Poverty, should you be advanced by any
means to Riches or Honor, render your Duty and Obedience ^ess, for they cannot
be but the same in all ^onditions: If they be poor, you ought to ^elieve them,
if it be in your power: If they ^re weak of understanding, you must (if you ^e
it absolutely necessary, or be required so ^o do) assist them with your
Counsel: If they ^e injured or oppressed, you must, as much ^s in you lies,
endeavor to succor and re^ress them, for no years can exempt you ^om
observing your Duty to your Parents; ^or ought you to dispose of your self in
Mar^age, nor otherwise, without their allowance and consent, your Person being
indispensi^ly theirs in a lawful way to dispose of, as ^ey for your advantage
shall think fit. And (...) it was under the Law of Moses in relation (...) a
Virgins vow; the which, though she ^ad made, yet if her Father approved it not,
(...) was void; as in Numbers, chap 30. verse. 5. ^ut if her Father disallow her
in the day that he ^eareth, not any of her Vows nor her Bonds wherewith she
has bound her Soul shall stand; and ^e Lord shall forgive her, because her
Father dis^lowed her. By this we see the great Power that Parents had over
their Children, even (...) a degree of cancelling and rendering of ^on-effect
the obligation of a Vow, which ^ower was given by God himself: Nor is it
^bservable that those who disobey their Pa^^nts in any thing that is lawful,
or neglect or despise them in their distress or poverty ever prosper: Or if
they flourish for a time yet are they generally fitted in the same way for
Children cannot fathom the joy and sorrow of their Parents in this kind, till
they become Parents themselves; and then, too often, they bewail their
remisness. But to conclude as to this Particular.

Certain it is, that no poverty, fault or unkindness of Parents, can dispense
with tha^ Duty and Obedience which, by the Law o^ God and Nature, Children owe
their Parents for the tender care, labor and cost bestowed on them: Nay,
though Parent^^ should prove unnatural, and expose them even in their Infancy,
to a desperate fortun^ of hazard and danger; yet still those Children are bound
to perform their duty, and look for their reward from him who is the Author of
all Blessing; who, for so doing has promised us length of days, and seldom
fails to make those days comfortable to us.

CHAP. III.
Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman at the Age of Six, or upward, how to
behave her self toward her Parents, Superiors, Equals and Inferiors, and
upon sundry other occasions; as Learning, etc.

HAving briefly discoursed the two main Points, I shall now proceed to give you
a Scheme of decent and comely Behavior in General, to render you Accomplished
in your Nonage, and introduce you to that which is more materially to be
observed and practiced.

In all your undertakings, let it be observed that you are an enemy to Sloth,
not only by your early rising, but by your activity; for having neatly dressed
you, or caused some other to do it, having prostrated your self before your
Maker, and refreshed you with what was appointed, fall upon your Knees before
your Parents, and receiving their Blessing, hasten to School; or else betake
your self to such business as your Parents or Governess (if you are under one)
shall appoint you at home, doing it with cheerfulness, and respect those that
are over you, as well in their absence, as when they are present; and whether
it be Reading, or any curious Work observe that your Face and Hands are clean
and that you handle no dirty or greasy things; neither presume to eat before
those who are your Instructors; whilst you are at your Work or Lesson, if there
be more under the same Tuterage, as in such cases is usual, behave your self
kindly toward them; call no unseemly Names, nor make unseasonable Complaints:
Defraud them not, though of trivial things; nor take the least matter by force
that is not your own; be courteous and mild; win a decent and winning
Behavior. If your Mistress or Governess be sharp and severe, strive by your
diligence to prevent displeasure or correction; and as you approach or return
from her, make your Reverence, and the like, to your Parents; when you come
into their Presence, or retire, make your obeisance in the most becoming and
obliging manner, to your Superiors and Equals; nor forget at any time to be
courteous to your Inferiors: Besure your Tongue run not too fast, but in
Discourse be moderate; Speak with deliberation, and well weigh your Words
before you utter them; and where you are seated, observe that you continue till
you are called thence, or it is time to leave it. In reading, upon any
occasion, use not a Tone, but read distinctly, observing your Stops, that you
may ^he better understand what you read. In Writing, beware that you blot not
your Pa^er, but imitate your Copy in cutting your Letters fair and even; Let
not your Work, of any sort, be soiled or dirty, and keep what things you use in
good order, and render your Parents an account of your improvement.

When you are to be at Meat, be not out of the way, but attend the Grace, and
then taking the place that is appointed you: After having done your Reverence
to your Parents and Company, see that your Napkin be fastened about you, or
pinned to save your clothes from greasing, and thankfully take what is given
you without craving; nor is it seemly for you to speak at the Table, unless you
are asked a question, or there be some great occasion. Cut your Meat
handsomely, and be not over desirous of Sauce, nor of another sort of Meat,
before you have disposed of what is in your Plate or Trencher. Put not both
your hands to your Mouth at once, nor eat too greedily: Let not your Mouth or
Fingers be greasy no more than needs must; and when you are satisfied, take
your Plate or Trencher with you, or give it to those that wait, and retire, but
not out of the Room till Grace is said, and the Cloth taken away; at what time
making your obeisance, you may depart, unless you are desired to stay: Nor must
you sit before your Parents, Governess or Superiors, unrequired, unless you
are at your Meat, Needle, Writing, or the like; and observe that you attempt
not to drink in any company till you have emptied your Mouth; and that you
breathe not, nor blubber in the Cup or Pot. As for your Recreation, when
leisure hours permit, let it be innocent and moderate, never staying late
abroad; and, above all, be wary in the choice of your Companions; and as you
grow up, shun the Conversation of those that have a report of Lightness, lest
they draw you into a snare, or bring a scandal causlesly upon your good Name,
but choose those whose Reputations are candid; Converse with those who are
modest, yet affable; Stay not, at any time, where the least occasion of
Lightness and Wantonness is administered; nor lend your Ear to discourse tending
to Lewdness; and, for the generality, rather choose to be seen than heard.

For your Carriage, in the general, let it be a Medium, not expressing too much
reservedness, which, by some, is interpreted Pride; nor too much freedom or
familiarity, which, on the other hand, will be looked upon for Fondness. Be no
Makebate between your Parents and their Servants; nor at any time tell a Lie to
excuse a fault, or keep you from the hand of correction. Go to bed in due
season, without any noise, and never be seen in unseemly Laughter; nor in
pointing with your Finger, or nodding with your Head, especially in company, or
in places of Divine Worship: Honor Age, and pity those that are distressed by
Poverty, or any other Affliction; Speak not at any time scornfully, or in a
taunting way, but be courteous to all; and in so doing you will gain a good
repute, and forward your self in those things that will render you
Praiseworthy.

CHAP. IV.
Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman how to behave her self toward her
Governess and Servants, etc.

BEing come to more years of discretion, there are many things requisite to be
known that I have not yet mentioned; an account of which, as they offer, I
shall deliver in their proper places: And, in the first place, I shall say
something of a Governess, appointed by Indulgent Parents to instruct a Young
Gentlewoman; as also of the Maidservant that is to attend her, etc.

As for your Governess, if discreetly chosen, she must be a Woman of gravity
and discretion, one that is learned in curious Arts, such as you are desirous
to improve; and although her Age render her reserved, yet must you not censure
her as ridged, but comply with her lawful Commands; and by your mildness and
industry move her to gentleness, refraining by all means to make Complaints,
especially unjust ones; for in disapproving of her, whom your Parents has
thought fit to set over you, you tax them with Imbecility in choosing, and by
that Complaint will either incur their displeasure, or, by removing your
Governess, perhaps procure a worse: which causing, undoubtedly, a second
Complaint, will possess your Parents with a jealousy of your untractableness
and ill disposition.

Some there are that covet to be under a young Governess, with whom they may
have the more familiar conversation, though to their small advantage; for it is
somewhat improbable that a Person, who cannot perhaps Govern her own youthful
frailties, should discharge so great a Trust as she ought; Nor is it Morally
possible for any Person to be a good Governess, unless she has her self been
the Mother of Children, and had the bringing them up; for then, and but till
then, can she be fully sensible of Youthful frailties, and know what
tenderness, and what Correction ought to be used: However, consider with your
self, that in being comfortable to her, you obey your Parents, who thought fit
to commit you to her charge; and that if you do otherwise, you disobey God, in
abusing or slighting their care and indulgence, who study your advantage:
Therefore let not the Servants, nor any other, create a misunderstanding
between you and her, but in Prudence and Charity forget or forgive what ever
you conceive to be an injury, as wisely considering you are no competent Judge
in your own case.

To the Servants you must be courteous and affable, but not over-familiar, lest
it beget contempt. Tell no Tales of them to your Parents, but rather strive to
hide their failings, unless they be such as are prejudicial or unseemly; and do
them what good you can. If at any time you find occasion to reprove them, let
your Reproofs be rather Admonishments than Reproaches: Be not peevish nor
froward in your Dressing, or in any other office done you by the Maid, that
more immediately attends you, but by gentle words let her know her Error, that
she may amend it: which method will oblige and command a constant diligence,
which otherwise would be but Eye-service; and if your Parents be angry with
their Servants, or any of them, do you become their Mediator: And turn not, by
any means, your Face from the Poor; but if it be in your power, without
offending your Parents, relieve them; or, as you see occasion, petition on
their behalf: by which demeanor you will command Love and Reverence, and gain
the Character of an humble Spirit: In which you may rest satisfied, that it is
better to be Good than Great; and that Humility forcibly commands Love and
Service, when Pride, on the contrary, begets Hatred and Contempt. If Heaven has
endowed you with a large Fortune, and a noble Birth, let your Virtues shine
with the greater luster; and, above all things, give God the praise, and use
what you have to his glory, and your own comfort.

CHAP. V.
Instructions for Young Gentlewomen how to behave themselves in all Societies,
upon sundry occasions.

WEll to deport and behave your self in Company, upon all occasions, requires a
sound judgment, and much caution, few being capable of bringing themselves
within that compass: yet, for your better Instruction. I shall lay down what I
think most necessary to be observed.

And first, to qualify your self to under^^^nd the quaint, modish and courtly
Ex^^essions, it is convenient that you learn the ^^tin, French and Italian
Tongues, not only (...) Rote, but by Rule and Grammar, the bet^^^ to understand
them, since the most resi^d English has borrowed from these Lan^^ages, and
without this Knowledge you ^^ll be at a loss to understand those that ut^^ high
Phrases in the Court-Air, as they ^^rm it; nor in this case must you be
igno^^nt in Singing, Dancing, and Playing upon ^^ch Music as is suitable to
your Sex; though (...) Exercising your self herein, you must be ^^ry modest and
moderate, your words, on (...) occasions, being but few, yet to the purpose;
Discretion, Silence and Modesty be^^g the Ornaments of the Female Sex. And
(...) Society is that which all Creatures naturally covet, so, if it be well
chosen and ma^aged, it is recreatory to the Body and Mind: ^ut as bad Society
is worse than none, so is (...) to be avoided.

Wherefore be not easily won to enter into ^iscourse with those you know not,
unless ^ome urgent business require it, lest you be suspected of Levity and
Indiscretion. Always observe to consort your self with your Betters or Equals,
knowing them to be virtuous; and avoid too much familiarity with Inferiors,
unless you find them very discreet, lest you fall into contempt, if Female or
if Male, lest you give them encourag^ment to make their Addresses of Courtshi^
and by subtle ways to insinuate themselves i^to your good liking: for Love,
that tak^ the Diadem from Queens, is blind; an^ Passion distinguishes not
Servility from Grea^ness: by which means, though you are hig^ in Birth and
Fortune, you may be brought t^ a yielding, which may turn to the grief o^ your
Parents, or perhaps to their and you^ own disgrace. And in this case presume
no^ too much upon your own strength, by inte^changing Gloves, Rings, Ribons, or
suc^ things which you may term Trifles, lest, by this kind of familiarity, Love
by insensibl^ ways opens a passage to your Heart; alway^ consid^ring it implies
weakness, or want o^ discretion in the besieged, to parley with the besiegers.

Be not over-desirous of being seen often* for ostentation sake, especially in
places o^ resort, lest you expose your self to the assault of the Tempter, and
purchase that curiosity with the loss of your Honor, by giving Licentious
Amorists liberty to meet you in your Walks, and by powerful persuasions to
listen to their Syreens Charms, whilst you are no longer capable of mastering
your Affections, but let them loose at a venture, to your undoing: Nor trust
too ^^ch to Female-Confidents, lest, for their ^n advantage, they persuade you
to a ^lding: and in Speech be not over-lavish ^any.

As for your Dress, let it be neat, but not ^^dy, for Virtue is comely in any
Dress; (...) be content to appear in your native Beau^^: Let your Dressing-time
be short, and ^ur Recreation moderate: In your Speech (...) Behavior shun all
Affectation; and be not ^er-fond of new Fashions, especially such (...) are
Apish or unbeseeming: and in that ^se let your Dress make known you are no ^end
to Formality. When you enter a ^oom to pay your Respects to your Parents,
^^periors or Equals, let it be done with a ^ave and modest Countenance, making
your ^urtzies at three Approaches; and in the ^^me order retire. When you sit
or walk ^ith any, observe that you do not rudely ^^ke the upper hand, nor
express any words ^^at may give offense. Never speak evil of any behind their
backs, for those you speak (...) to, may imagine you will do as much by ^^em.
Keep your Eyes from wandering. ^tare not Men full in the Face, nor cast pri^ate
Glances. Do not Flout, nor be loud in ^aughter, lest, by straining your Mouth,
Wrinkles appear in your Cheeks and Fore^ead, you thereby become deformed, or
appear much older than you are. Wherefore in all things observe to behave your
s^ modestly and discreetly abroad and at hom^ that you may become an Example to
other and thereby deserve the Imitation and A^plause, not only with those you
associat^ but of such as shall have knowledge of yo^ Virtues and good Conduct.
And so leavi^^ you to consider of what has been said, I sha^ proceed to
Particulars of great moment.

CHAP. VI.
Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman Manage her Gate and Gesture; to G^vern
her Eyes and Tongue, etc. upon sundry necessary occasions.

AS there are many other nice matters requisite for the true Accomplishment of
Young Gentlewoman, I shall endeavor to la^ down what is Material in the most
easy Method: And first of the Gate, or Gesture, tha^ ought to be observed upon
sundry occasion*

And in this case observe that you walk no carelessly or lightly, shouldering,
as it were your Companions, nor strutting or jutting i^ a proud manner; Keep
(in your walk) you^ Head steady, your Countenance not to^ much elevated, nor
too much dejected (...) Keep your Arms likewise steady, and throw ^^em not
about as if you were flying: Let ^ur Feet rather incline a little more in^ard
than outward, lest you be censured ^lay-footed; for by the motion of the Body,
^e thoughts of the Mind may be discovered: (...) whether the Party be of loose
or proud ^^haviour, or humble and complacient. Do ^t run or go extreme fast in
places of Con^urse, unless great occasion require it; for such violent motions
it is not always in ^ur power to keep your Body steady; nay, (...) too much
haste you may chance to fall, ^d expose to view what you would con^al. And as
the Gesture of the Body is ^mly and commendable, so is the Manage^nt or
Government of the Eye; in which any things are to be observed, and chiefly ^^se.

Keep your Eyes, as we may call it, with compass; that is, let them not be too
^ch fixed upon idle and vain objects, nor ^^wn away by unseemly sights; roll
them (...) about in a careless and lascivious man^; nor stare Men in the Face
as if you were ^king Babies in their Eyes; Send not pri^e Glances; or look, as
they call it, with ^f a Face, turning your Head, as it were, a^e: Look not at
any time over your Shoul^e: if you have opportunity to turn you: ^en not your
Eyes too wide, thereby to ^ort your Countenance; nor keep them in a manner half
shut. Wink not too often nor cast your Eyes ascance, as if you squinte^ neither
keep them too reserved; nor scor^fully turn them away when any Object ^fers.
Look not too much downward; n^ with a more than ordinary Elevation. Ga^ not
often against the Sun, nor on the Fir^ both of them being things that impair t^
Luster of the Eyes. When you discour^ with a Woman, look her in the Face with
(...) much composedness as you can: but if wi^ a Man, to look a little
downward, for M^desty is commendable, lest your earnest g^zing in his Face be
interpreted in the wo^sence: But, above all things, as often as o^portunity
will permit, lift up your Eyes (...) your Redeemer, and, with holy David,
i^plore him, to turn them away from Vanity for the Eyes being the Windows of
the So^ lets in Good or Evil, according as it fixes, (...) is intent upon good
or bad Objects; the^fore choose the former, and refuse the latt^^ And the better
to enable you to look up t^ to him upon all occasions, God has giv^ Man and
Woman five Muscles to move a^ guide the Eyes, and the Principal of the to draw
it upward without pain; Where all irrational Creatures have but four turn their
Eyes about, as being made for other end than to revert the dust from whence
they sprung, whilst the noble rat^ Creature, endued with an immortal Soul,
(...) capable of those blessed Mansions of which (...) has a prospect, and
toward which he ^^ght to lift his Eyes. But leaving the rest (...) your
discretion, I shall pass on to say some^^^ng of Speech and Complement, etc.

In this case, let all your Discourses be to ^e purpose, and suffer not your
Comple^ents to be high-flown, extravagant, blunt (...) nonsensicial; but, in
all, suit them with ^odesty, to the capacity and quality of the ^rson to whom
you utter them; and see they ^^one upon fit occasion, and in season; be^e not
to Congratulate persons, when you ^ould Condole them; use in your utterance
(...) Hems nor Stammerings; Sputter not as ^u speak, nor speak many Sentences
be^een breathings; use no Tautologies or ^ected words or lispings; neither
speak ^th a Tone, nor too much confidence; ^up not, nor stare with your Eyes;
Point (...) with your finger, nor express in your ^course those insipid and
insignificant words (...) de-ye see, de-ye hear, understand-ye me, ^rk-ye me,
sed-she, sed-he, or the like; for ^u can never be an Oratress, if you accu^me
your self to 'em; never talk too long, ^ereby to tire your Auditors, nor broach
an ^seasonable discourse; observe that you in^rupt not any person when he or
she is speaking; and what you speak, let it be wi^ deliberation. Some there are
that affect s^lence, and are little heard in any compan^* Let me tell you,
Ladies, this is an erro^ and implies the party extremely reserved and not
desirous of Society; or that her u^derstanding is so weak, she dares not tru^^^
her Tongue to utter the sense of her Sou^ to whom the Words of the Philosopher,
u^tered upon his observing one sit silent in (...) great Assembly, may be aptly
applied, vi^ If thou art wise, thou art a fool: If a for wise in holding thy
peace. Never strain yo^ words to a pitch of Eloquence, that the sound is more
admired than the sense; b^ let a moderate flourish rather suffice, an^
comprehend much in a few words: Decli^ to speak much before Gravity, and
multitu^ of years, unless urgent occasion require i^ and beware that you speak
not till you a^ bidden to hold your Tongue; for inde^ Women's discourse should
not be much, because Modesty and Moderation is her Orn^ment, and are in
themselves a moving R^^torick. And when you have opportuni^ of discourse, let
it not taste of Confidenc^ Affectation or Conceitedness, nor border upon
Obscenity. These things considered a^ practiced, will render your discourse
a^ceptable, and free you from the censure the Wise and Judicious. And thus mu^^
these Particulars: From whence I shall ^oceed to speak something of Habit, and
its ^ecency; as also of Fashions commendable ^d discommendable.

CHAP. VII.
Directions for a Young Gentlewoman how she ought to be seen in her Habit or
Apparel; and what Garb is most commendable, and otherwise, according to the
Quality of the Wearer.

THough God has framed Men and Women beautiful and feemly in every part, yet
it is no ways disagreeable to his Will, that Nature should be improved by ^rt,
to render a Creature he highly regards ^he more commodious: as appears by his
Clothing our first Parents with more du^able Garments than they themselves had
provided to cover their nakedness; nor is it (as some Cynical persons have it)
Pride to go neatly attired, for by that the parties discretion is better known
than her Fortune, and the Body kept in a due proportion and order.

It matters not, Ladies, of what Stuffs o^ Silks your Cloathings are made, so
they b^ decent and civil; neither by their ridiculousness discovering the
Wearer foolish an^ slovenly; nor by their gaudy and carele^ putting on, to
render her suspected of loos^ or light behavior, or at leastwise subjec^ her
to the censure of the ignorant. Appare^ may be rich, and yet decent; and indeed
whether it be rich or not, if decent, the matter is not great; though, in this
case, leave it to the discretion of Young Gentle women, or those that provide
them Apparel, to let it be suitable to their Quality o^ Fortune; and will not be
of the Morose and Cynical temper of some, who either believe^ or spitefully
give it as their opinion, tha^ gorgeous on glittering Apparel is the Attire of
Sin, and suits with the Pride of the Wearers heart; but am persuaded that the
Quality of the Person extenuates the Quality thereof, and renders that opinion
vain and frivolous. Since we read that Noble Women, in all Ages, went in
sumptuous Attire; nor was it indecent nor unbecoming the Character they bore;
yet rarely find they were given to cove^ various Fashions, but contented
themselves with such Adornments as became their modesty; for indeed what avail
they, unless to show the profuseness of ^e Wearer, or should it be to attract
the ^ves of Mankind. Know, Gentlewomen, ^at Men of sense are not taken with
glit^ing Apparel, no, nor External Beauty, so ^uch as with the Internal
Adornment of ^e Mind. And if by these Allurements ^lf Wits and Idiots should be
captivated, ^^ur Triumph would not be worth the cost.

Yet, I must confess, there is a kind of pri^ledge in Youth to go gay; which
should ^oo severely reprove, I might justly merit ^ur displeasure; yet that
Gaity may as well (...) in Decency as otherwise, the use of Ap^rel being to
dignifie the wearer: Nor does Virtuous demeanor more lively appear, ^an in
Look, Speech, Gesture and Habit, ^ithin the compass of Modesty, though ^amonds,
Gold, and other precious things, ^re made for use; and without being im^oyed,
would be ineffectual: Therefore to ^ear them, in my opinion, is one of the
^iefest Ends for which Nature produced ^em, or Art brought them to a fuller
per^ction. The Pride in this case being only ^ntered in the Mind, and not in
the Exter^l Ornaments; which is rather known by ^e Carriage and Deportment of
the Wearer, ^an by the Garments. And though to af^ct Novelty, and run into
every Fashion, be not commendable, yet Moderation is n^ amiss; For two Reasons:
As first, shou^ you always keep in a fashion, though d^cent, it would be looked
upon as a conce^ted singularity; or to continue in any strang^ garb, after the
fashion is altered, would a^pear ridiculous, and cause laughter, espcially
amongst the ruder sort; as much as Woman of fourscore to be habited in t^ Garb
of a Gentlewoman of sixteen; or (...) see a Dairy-Maid in her Ladies attire
Therefore whatever you wear, let it (...) proportionably to your Body, and
sutab^ to your degree.

In a word, Let your Virtue appear (...) your Gesture, by Humility and a mode
behavior; In your Looks by a compose sweetness; In your Speech by Affabilit^
comprehended within the bounds of Mod^ration; and in your Habit by decency, an^
a regulation suitable to your Birth and Fo^tune; whereby you will gain an Estee^
more valuable than whatever you can other ways propose to your self on this
side Ete^nity.

CHAP. VIII.
Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman how to proceed in their Seasonable
Recreations; and what is to be observed therein.

SInce moderate Recreation is not unbecoming a Young Gentlewoman, I think ^t
not amiss to give my Opinion in that case, what is most commendable, and what
to be observed therein, as well relating to their Seasonableness, as to the
Carriage and Behavior that ought to be observed there^n.

A Ball, amongst other Recreations, is much ^n esteem with Young Gentlewomen,
because ^here they are sure to meet their Compeers ^n merriment; yet lest at
such a place a Young Gentlewoman by her folly or unadvisedness expose her self
to Laughter or Contempt, observe, that if you understand the Rules of Dancing;
yet be not too forward to engage your self therein, lest you entangle your self
so far, that you are puzzled, and at a loss, perhaps for want of understanding
the Rules and Formalities practiced in that place. And as you ought not to be
too forward, so be not too hard to be persuaded, or abruptly, in a huffing
humor, force your hand from any that offers to accommodate you, but rather run
the hazard of an error or mistake in your performance, than let the least pride
or rudeness appear; or give those that are present, occasion to think you are
subject to either.

In this case be not, by any means, affected; nor when you undertake to Dance,
be not tedious, but perform what you undertake with Modesty and Moderation,
that by a quick dispatch you may give way to others.

As Dancing is an External Accomplishment, so Vocal Music is an Internal one,
yet they may indifferently serve for either, though the last is preferred;
therefore if you are expert in your Notes, etc. and can Sing well, when you are
in company, upon the entreaty of a Friend, who knows you so qualified, be not
obstinate in complying; yet be brief, and let your Song be such as may give no
offense: and when you have done, look not as if you expected Applause, but
keeping your Station with a composed Countenance, give way to another to second
you, if any present is desirous, or can be prevailed with to do it; observing
never to cough nor strain when you enterprise it, nor to stop in the middle to
crave Attention: And the like observe in your playing on Instrumental Music,
not in that Point being tedious in commencing your Harmony, when others do the
like: give attention, not interrupting them with discourse. And in this case
let both your Songs and Tunes be modest, ingenious and pleasant, avoiding, by
any means, what may tend to the corruption of good Manners: And as Dancing is
the best and readiest way to put the Body, upon all occasions, in a graceful
posture; so Music is that which tempers the Soul with mildness, and disposes
it to sweetness.

In Limning, or Drawing to the Life, many Young Gentlewomen, as well of former
as latter times, have exercised their Parts, and in that Curiosity found much
Recreation; it being, in my Opinion, an Art suitable to the accute Wit of the
Female Sex: Nor is Poetry to be rejected, for by that is the Mind enlivened, as
it were, and tuned to the harmonious Numbers of the Muses, and furnished with
lofty Expressions.

Next to these, Engraving may take place, a thing practiced by many Virtuous
Gentlewomen: but amongst solitary Recreations, if they may be so termed,
Reading of History, or such Romances wherein Virtue and Gallantry are lively
Portrayed; or such as contain Stories of chaste and virtuous Love, are to be
preferred.

These being allowed, I think it not amiss to advise Young Gentlewomen, at
leisure hours, to recreate themselves in seeing Stage Plays, wherein many
things are represented, that by due construction, may redound to their
improvement in understanding; though some are so Stoically severe, to condemn
this kind of Recreation, as altogether tending to the corruption of good
Manners; yet they can give little reason for it.

These and suck-like Recreations being to be preferred, there is something more
to be considered; which is the fit Time or Season, etc.

The principal thing to be considered in this case is, how you ought to keep
within compass, and not run into excess, or any ways give offense, damage,
prejudice or scandal to any; or by immoderate pursuing it, impair your Health
or Reputation, which too often falls out; besotting a cheerful Complexion,
and overwhelming, in a manner, the principal Virtue. And if you rightly
consider this, and consequently recreate your self with Moderation, at
seasonable hours, and in proper seasons, it will not only quicken your
Apprehension, but contribute much to your bodily Health; and cannot be any-ways
offensive to the Almighty, who debars us from nothing innocent and harmless
that is for our advantage. So that from hence I may draw a conclusion, That Men
and Women may enjoy those Pleasures to which they, with Modesty and Moderation,
incline; with a proviso, they launch not out so far as to abuse them.

CHAP. IX.
Instructions for the Guidance of a Young Gentlewomans fancy, in relation to
Love; and how she ought to behave her self toward those that seek to gain her
in Marriage, etc.

HAving laid down many things highly necessary, and mainly conducing to the
Accomplishment of a Young Gentlewoman; I shall now proceed to a more difficult
and weighty matter than what has hitherto been mentioned; and that is, to
direct her how to guide her Fancy in the Mighty business of Love; A thing,
you will say, somewhat strange to propose: But what cannot the Merits of a
virtuous Woman create in the Mind of her Admirer. This indeed, if it proved
happy and successful, will undoubted make her amends in her former care and
diligence, and render her an entire felicity on Earth; for Love is the Concord
and Harmony of the Universe, nothing subsisting in its proper order without it;
nor can there be any happiness when it is wanting; yet there is, as in this
case, as in many others, degrees, or rather counterfeits; for Love it self, in
its purity, admits of no Adulteration or mixture, but is essential and
unlimited: but many there are that would appear to wear the badge of this
sacred Virtue, who only make it an Umbrage to obtain their unlawful desires
and advantage: And though they may indeed, for a time, express an extraordinary
Passion, and, not to speak the worst of 'em, entertain a feavourish desire;
which is to be known by their earnestly gazing upon the Object they at that
time perhaps admire; yet it being only a Passion, and not founded upon Virtue,
it is not properly Love, nor can it render the expected felicity; but blazing a
while in the enjoyment it sought, spends it self; and being spent, like a false
Star or Comet, expires: or, on the other hand, not obtaining its ends, changes
into disregard or mortal hatred; and of such a Passion, whether at the time it
is proposed, real or feigned, you must beware.

That Young Gentlewomen, arriving at maturity, are prone to Love and Liking; it
would be insignificant for one to relate, seeing it is so well known. The Eye
and the Ear being seldom wanting to convey to the Soul what is desirable; the
one charming it with beautiful sights, and the other with rhetorical and
melodious sounds; yet give not these official members too much scope on this
occasion, lest they insensibly ruin you, by betraying your Affections to what
is sordid or inconsiderable; but keep, as it were, a guard upon your Heart, to
prevent the entrance either of a lawless or disadvantageous Passion. Consider
well before you give way, even to imagination in that kind; weigh deliberately
each particular, and be seriously intent on what is to come, as well as what is
present, not suffering your self, for the present satisfying your Appetite, to
be carried away with the Torrent of a Passion, that will unavoidably carry you
into the Gulf of Misery. Man indeed is a noble Creature, and for his sake Woman
was made, and therefore ought to be complacient; but being left at liberty to
choose where she thinks fit for her advantage, it is more than common prudence
to make such a choice to her humor. The former of which may, but the latter
cannot be quickly discovered: But, above all, let not a Young Gentlewoman for
Interest, or by over-perswasion, give her self to one she cannot affect, lest
she dearly repent at leisure what is past redressing, there being nothing more
grievous than a loathed bed, for that, most commonly, cancels all other Earthly
felicities; nay, many times shakes the very foundation of Modesty, and
struggles with Virtue, till it enters at one door, and drives it out at the
other. And this is too often the Parents cruelty to their Daughters, who being
past the youthful pleasure of a Reciprocal Love, aim rather at their Greatness
than their Happiness; though contrary to the opinion of Wise Themistocles, who,
on the like occasion, preferred an honest Poor Man, before a Rich vicious Man;
in these words, viz. That he had rather Marry his Daughter to a Man without
Money, than to Money without a Man. And much to the same purpose was the Answer
of the Magnanimous Portia, Daughter to Cato, upon her being demanded when she
would Marry; said she, When I find one that seeks my Love more than my Riches;
that is, one that she could meet with an equal Passion.

As for your Behavior in this case, it must be grave and modest, though not
sour or too much reserved, lest it be interpreted for Pride, or want of
discretion. Blushes, upon sundry occasions, are very seemly; which, like moving
Oratory, let your Lover know the little Flames of Love are playing about your
Heart, and silently betray your Passion.

A kind of pleasing Love there is, which, though it have taken possession of
the Heart, is either through modesty, or fear of failing if it were proposed,
desirous to be concealed; not but that if these Obstacles were removed, they
would freely discover it. And this, Gentlewomen, is on your part, who love
those that are ignorant of your Passion; yet did they know it, would be more
transported than your selves. And this you strive to express by the silent
Language of the Eyes, for Lovers Eyes will talk; nor is it always in their
power to keep them from wandering. But in this, as in all the mystery of Love,
move with deliberation, and let Caution be the scale of your Affection.
Consider your happiness, or its contrary depends upon the cast; and that there
are many consequent matters or circumstances that a discreet Woman will not
only discourse, but discuss, before she enter upon that Honorable, but
hazardous, state of Matrimony: And these chiefly are to be taken notice of,
viz. Disparity in Descent: Fortunes and Friends frequently beget distraction in
the mind: Disproportionable years create dislike; and loathing obscurity of
Descent, begets contempt; and unequality of Fortune, discontent. These are the
hazards to which unconsidering Lovers expose themselves; these the Rocks on
which they shipwreck their Peace: And yet herein you ought to be contented, if
once it is past redress.

As you ought to be slow in entertaining Lovers, so be constant in retaining
one that is worthy, that you may thereby gain a greater esteem. Boast not of
the multitude of your Suitors; nor be proud that you are admired above others
of your rank and quality. Give not those you cannot fancy ground to believe you
do or will love them; neither by rudeness, unseemly words or carriage, any
affront, but decline, as much as with modesty and civility you may, their
company; giving them as little opportunity as may be to find you alone; nor
receive any thing from them by way of Presentation, lest, when they find they
are rejected, they exclaim against you as mercenary, or one that gives way to
Courtship for your advantage. Be not covetous of Strangers acquaintance on this
occasion; nor rely too much upon a Female-confident, lest the one prove
troublesome, and the other pick-locks your Breast of those Secrets you are not
desirous to publish. Whining and sneaking Pretenders are likewise to be
avoided; as also such as strive with Tears and Imprecations to possess you with
an opinion of their good meaning: But where Manly Beauty, bravery of Spirit,
Moderation in Speech, and a greater readiness in performance, than in
promising, are centered in one Person; who tempers his Actions with discretion,
humility and sobriety, you ought to be complacient; and if such a one fall to
your share, imagine your Lot is cast in a fair Land; and till you find such an
one, let not your Affections loose, if you can possibly restrain 'em; shun^
Temptations; Avoid, above all things, Ease, Idleness, the Reading of Debauchery
in Books, or too much pampering your self with luscious Fare; for these are
Incitements to wanton Love.

Ease makes you Love, as that o'er-comes you Wills;
Ease is the Food, and cause of all your Ills.
Gentlewomen, Let me entreat you never to be so desirous of Marriage, as
desirous to be Married well, for that is the center to which Discretion ought
to tend; though some, more forward than wise, think, if they get a Husband,
they have their Ends; though, by sad experience, they are too frequently
convinced of that mistake. And before you enter into this Honorable Estate,
lay aside all childish behavior, wanton fancy, and what else is inconsistent
with Gravity: and so being happily Married, you may promise your selves many
days of pleasure and true felicity. And now, the better to encourage such as
are cold and reserved, or at least have the subtilty to dissemble it with such
coyness, as if Nature had benumbed them, and rendered in a manner useless the
faculties of Life; I shall proceed to say something of the Honorable State of
Marriage, etc.

CHAP. X.
A brief Discourse of the Honorable State of Matrimony or Marriage, etc.

THat Marriage was ordained and appointed by God himself, is beyond all
peradventure; who, in his Eternal Wisdom, thinking it not fit for Man to be
alone, made him an Internus sensus, a second self, to be the sweet Co-partner
of his pleasure, and Companion in the easy labor that was first assigned: A
Cabinet, in which he might repose his in-most Secrets, and be delighted with
the last best Blessing; nor could he be accounted entirely himself, before this
Conjunction, which made them still but one Flesh; the Wife by every virtuous or
honest Husband, being to be termed as she was by our grand Parent, Bone of his
Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh. Nor was it less the care of the Almighty, for two
Causes, to ordain so near a Union: First, for the increase of Posterity; and
secondly, to prevent Lawless Lust, by bounding and bridling the inordinate
Affections and wandering Desires. We find it in the Economy of Zenophon, That
Matrimonial Conjunction, even by the Appointment of Nature, is not only the
pleasantest, but the profitablest kind of life.

Wherefore, seeing the Estate of Matrimo^y is the most sure, safe and
delightful Sta^on, altogether pleasing to the Almighty, it ^ught not to be
declined. Our Blessed Sa^iour highly commends it, and expressed is Approbation
by working his first Miracle at that of Canaan in Gallilee; and Saint Paul
styles a Virtuous Woman the Crown and Ornament of her Husband; Commanding him
^o cherish her. And that this strict Union may have greater force upon eithers
mind, ^he makes the most sacred Comparison imaginable; affirming, That the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, as Christ is the Head of the Church.

In this case there is comfort in Adversity, as well as pleasure in Prosperity;
by such a contexture of Souls, if I may so term it, an Elysium of Happiness is
created; and, in some measure, Paradise restored. Where Virtuous Love unites,
what can make a separation? Not the Terrors of Death, nor Hell's black Legions,
by temptation nor affrightment, can destroy it. Great indeed is the Blessing,
and more than can well be expressed; in the World there is nothing more
beautiful or comfortable; it is a sweet Society, full of Trust and unshaken
Loyalty; A Fellowship, not of unruly and distempered Love, but of entire and
indeared Affection* the one being as different from the other, a^ heat from
cold, dryness from moisture; a^ the inflamed disorder of a Fever, to the
temperate and natural heat of a healthful Body Wherefore I pronounce those
that Marry to their content, and are united in the chas^ Indearments of
Reciprocal Love to be truly happy; the Wife being the Joy of the Husband, and
the Husband the Consolation o^ the Wife, who takes care to protect her from
Violence and Reproach on all occasions, and is as tender of her Fame, as his
Life: And beside these, this happy State produces a happy Offspring, the
Pledges of chaste connubial Love, not only as a present Blessing, but a comfort
and support in old Age. So that whatever by loose and lascivious persons, whose
Debauches have corrupted them beyond recovery, may be said of Marriage, it was
and is held, both by Christians and Heathens, the consummation of Earthly
felicity. From which I shall proceed to the Relation of what is requisite to be
observed by a Virtuous Wife toward her Husband, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman, when Married, how to carry and behave
her self toward her Husband, etc. as becomes a Virtuous Wife; or
Family-Directions in order to a Happy Life, etc.

AS Marriage is an Honorable Estate, so are there many weighty things to be
observed by those that enter upon it; though Love is the supreme matter, yet it
ought to be attended with Prudence, Care, and Diligence, or else it will waste
it self, and totter in its Sphere; and, above all things, repine not at your
lot when it is fallen to your share, but weigh your condition in the scale of
Content and Discretion, and it will be the better supported.

If your Husband be very young, and given to Excursions incident to youthful
frailty, let your riper experience bring him to a better understanding, and
your usage more easy, than to attempt by extremities to wean him from what he
affects; but rather let your good Example, modest Reprovements, and the course
of Time work upon his headstrong Nature; and either through shame, or a reform
of Judgment, he will be brought to be himself; for doubtless Conjugal duty,
tempered with softness and affability, is of force to conquer the Morosest
temper.

If your Husband be much superior to you in Years, so that he is not as
complyable able as Youth, yet let his Years beget in you a greater Reverence
and Respect; and let his sage Instructions be your Rule, and the square of your
Actions; keeping in all things his Counsel, and not suffer so much as an
unchaste Thought to defile his Bed; Locking up his Counsels in your Breast as a
sacred Cabinet of Trust, and bear with his infirmities, being in his Age a
Staff to support him, and a Hand of help upon all lawful occasions.

If your Husband is Exalted in the World by Riches or Honor, let not your Mind
be puffed up, nor Pride come near your Heart, but be affable, humble, courteous
and charitable, which will gain you a Name not to be purchased with Treasure;
and wink not at your Husband's over-lavish profuseness; nor at his
over-penurious or covetous inclination, but mildly admonish him of the ill
convenience and danger of either, that so he may be persuaded to reserve a
provident Care for his own, and avoid Excess; and, on the other hand, enjoy
what is fitting, and shun baseness.

Though after Marriage you find your self ^ot so happy in the things of this
World, as Riches and Honor, etc. as you expected; but that, on the contrary,
you are griped with the pinching hand of Poverty, let the poor condition of
your Husband add to your Virtue, in furnishing you with Patience and Meekness;
for there is not that dangerous want, some imagine, where there wants no
content: and in this, by any means, cross the unadvised Proverb, of Loves going
out at ^^ne Door, when Poverty comes in at the other: And so consequently
falling into a cold and Aguish distemper, dies unlamented. And let your
Affection contemporize in all Affliction; nor be shaken with the Winds of
Adversity, seeing no improsperous Affair ought to divide you from him to whom
you have vowed your Faith, and unto whom you have individually tied your self.

These things resolved, and well expostulated, your Christian constancy will
make you fortunate in spite of opposition; nor will the bitter encounter of
unseasonable or undue Repentance struggle with your Mind, or ever prevail
against your Reason. In this case the Example of some Women have been famous.

Sulpitia, the Wife of Lentulus, though she might have lived at ease, sold all
her Possessions; sold all she had, and followed her Husband into Banishment;
nor could any thing restrain the Noble Ipsicrates from accompanying her
vanquished Husband in al^ extremities.

Theogina, Wife to Agathocles, voluntarily partaking of her Husband's miseries,
and accompanying him when he was forsaken of al^ others, generously declared,
That she had no^ only betaken her self to be his Companion in Prosperity, but
in all Fortunes which possibly might befall him. Many more I might name, but
these may suffice to a Virtuous mind.

The more particular Duties of a Wife, or rather Obligations of Love to him, to
whom sacred Ties have bound her, are chiefly these viz. To esteem him above all
others, not to entertain any mean or low thoughts o^ him or his Actions, but in
all things to give him a due respect; and in due observance of what is lawful,
strive to increase his repute amongst Men, rather than in the least to diminish
it, that in so doing you may own him the superior Virtue, and not by your
indiscretion betray his weakness, or rather your own; for so have the wise and
virtuous Women of all Ages done; and those that do otherwise, are highly to be
censured of imprudence.

Be peaceable and pleasant toward your Husband, not being angry when he is at
any time so, but pacify him with winning and obliging words; and if you should
carelessly, ^r otherwise, raise him to a Passion, be not ^ong ever you apply
your self to appease it, by showing a regret, or kind relenting, for what has
occasioned it, or by sound reason ^et him understand his error; and prepare for
him what is necessary in due order, with all ^maginable neatness and advantage;
shew^ng, above all things, respect to his Friends and Relations, whether abroad
or at home, which must of necessity create in him a grea^er portion of Love and
Respect for your self.

Suffer, by no means, your Ears to be pene^rated with idle and detracting
Stories of him ^n whom you ought to delight, but banish and detest against such
Makebates, whom the power of Darkness sets on work, to overthrow your Peace, or
to move you to a separation, which is not lawful; for those whom God has
joined together, let no Man put asunder. Nor is it less expected, that a Curse
will fall on those that attempt it.

As for your Children, bring them up in the fear of God, and in duty and
obedience to your selves, that it may be well for them and their posterity, for
those are the indearing pledges of Connubial Love, that more nearly cement the
hearts of Man and Wife, and are the sum of their Earthly felicity.

Observe, that what your Husband commits to your Management, let it be done
cheerfully, carefully, and with prudence, to the best advantage, and that
nothing be waste and spoiled to his detriment by your self o^ Servants; but so
live, that the springs o^ Love, if not of Prosperity, may ever flo^ to water
your Hearts with joy, and rende^ Life comfortable; and you thereby be the
better enabled to serve your Maker, and su^port your selves in what condition
soever.

CHAP. XII.
Instructions for a Gentlewoman Married how she ought to carry her self toward
her Servants, and in the ordering her Household Affairs, etc.

AS a Gentlewomans care, next to tha^ of her Husband and Children, ough^ to be
in the Well-government of her domestic Affairs, that cannot consequently be
done without a due regard in her proper Person, the ill convenience of too much
confidence in second Management, being too frequently apparent: And this must
be done, besides what you set your helping-hand to, by inspecting the Actions
of your Servants, and by behaving your self toward them as you ought, that
your good Example may be their Guide.

If you find by experience you have a Ser^ant faithful and ingenious in her
Station, ^ve her encouragement, by letting her know ^ou are not unsensible of
her industry; by which, if she be of a sweet disposition, you ^ill animate her
to proceed with alacrity; ^ough some there are, that finding them^lves well
accepted, will grow proud and ^onceited, and imagine they by their Service ^y
such obligations on those they serve, that ^ey cannot conveniently be without
them. and in this case too much familiarity will be^et contempt, though
encouragement, where is deserved, even on this occasion, ought ^ot altogether
to be wanting, but be pro^ortioned to a degree of advantage; not by any means
dis-heartning a good Servant in ^he performance of her duty, by often find^g
fault, or being continually over them, ^ut rather bear with light faults, if
they be ^ot a means to create greater.

If it be your misfortune to have a bad Ser^ant, whose negligence turns to your
displea^ure or disadvantage, and no gentle Admo^itions and convincing Arguments
are of ^orce to reform her: Fret not your self, nor ^e heard unseemly to
exclaim, but rather let ^er upon fair warning, and such as will stand with your
convenience, take her lot in another place, not disparaging your self to retain
from her what is her due, nor giving an ill character of her when she is gone;
by which she being rejected as an unfit Servant, may through necessity, be
obliged to take evi^ courses, and thereby be brought to sham^ and disgrace.

In this case, and any other, avoid Passion and be not Rixarius, for either of
these ill become a Gentlewoman; your main busine^ with your Servants being to
see they do wha^ is fitting, and that they lavish not out, no^ waste that
wherewith you entrust them; for this being neglected, the fault will be charge
upon your self.

It is an unbecoming thing in Servants t^ be affected with flaunting Fashions,
and gaudy Attire, above their degree, and indeed no suitable to their station;
and to restrain thi^ a Mistress ought to concern her self, yet eve^ allowing
and encouraging them to go nea^ which will redound to both their credits; for a
Maid that goes careless and slutternly i^ her Attire, cannot be cleanly in her
Office of employment; nor must a Mistress by an^ means confine or restrain her
Servants from serving God, but rather dispense with busine^ to give them
opportunity; nay, Exhort the^ to return Tribute of Praise and Thanksgivin^ to
their Maker for all the benefit they have received at his hands; and see that
goo^ hours be kept upon all occasions.

Other things necessary to be observed an^ that your Cattle and Poultry are fed
in due ^eason; and that your Stables, and all other ^ut-places, be kept
cleanly, especially your ^rew-house and Bake-house; and that nothing ^herein be
wasted or squandered away by the ^esort of idle people, that too frequently
flat^er and wheedle your Servants to your disadvantage. In the Kitchen it is
requisite that you see no Necessaries are wanting, nor the seasoning of Meats,
and other things, in due time neglected, lest by that defect you happen to be
disgraced at your own Table. And ^arther, that the Cloth be laid in due season,
whereby there may be no excuse for those that spoil what is provided by
over-doing.

The Chamber, above all things, must be kept neat, and the Furniture regarded,
that (...) be not injured by Dampness, Dust or Moths; considering, as occasion
requires, to Air them ^oth by the Fire within, and the Sun without, and cleanse
them from Dust by beating.

The Cellar and Pantry too must be regar^ed, that in Frolicks and extravagant
Mer^ments great spoil and waste be not made by ^ervants and their Visitants;
and weekly or monthly take an exact account of what is expended, that so your
Expenses may be proportioned to your Estate or Income; and in all things carry
your self prudently, as becomes the Character of a Gentlewoman and a good
Housewife.

FINIS.

