portrait of Sir Thomas Fairfax You that your Country love, and do wish well
Unto the peace of troubled ISRAEL,
Behold this Picture, and behold the Man,
That, under God, both Peace and Truth has wan
For this our Isle, Honor and love his Name
Reading this Book, that does his worth proclaim.


The Year of Jubilee: OR, ENGLANDS RELEASMENT, Purchased by GODS immediate
assistance, and powerful aiding of Her renowned Parliament and the Forces
raised by them: Under the command of the Right Valiant, Prosperous, and pious
General, Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Being a Summarie of all the Achievements, Victories, and remarkable
procedings of the Armies aforesaid, from the late famous Battle of Nasby,
fought June 14, 1645, to the late reducement of Oxford and Faringdon.

Together with a true and perfect List of the Prisoners, Arms, and Ammunition,
taken at each Fight, and in each Garrison. And published at the desire of many
Worthy persons of this Kingdom.

BY S. SHEPPARD.

Arma virumque cano, Aeneidos Lib. 1. And that these days should be remembered
and kept in perpetual remembrance throughout every Generation. Ester. 9. 8.
Printed according to the Order of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. 1646.

TO The Renowned, Valiant, Pious, and worthily Honored, SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX,
Captain General of the Forces raised by the Parliament of England, for the
defense of His Majesty's person, and privilege of Parliament, and the liberty
of the Subject.
SIR,
HAving for the satisfaction of some Friends of mine, penned a Summary or brief
collection of your worthy Acts, and never to be forgotten Archievements, for
your Country, this last remarkable year, as, I hope, I truly say, and we
effectually find of our deliverance from those calamities which some few years
since we had little reason but to expect. I could not find a worthier or
meeter person to whom I might dedicate these my labors, then your self: one
principal reason therefore, that you whose name is a terror to the enemies of
Christ, might also be as a Buckler to defend this Work, which I ingeniously
confess was not compiled by me, wholly for lucre of gain, but out of an ardent
and hearty affection I bear to your person, and the honor that I and all men
ought to acknowledge your due. I know, Sir, that my language has not fitted a
matter of high concernment, which would deserve the pen of another Tacitus: But
I hope, Sir, that your Honor will as cordially accept the endeavor of the
meanest Soldier under you, as of the noblest Captain: Thus, Sir, not desiring
to be guilty of writing a large Epistle to a short Treatise, I cease, and shall
ever remain, as is my bounden duty,

Your Honors most humble Servant; S. SHEPPARD.

An ACROSTICK on the Name of that Valiant and Pious Commander, Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Captain General of the Forces raised by the Parliament of England,
for the safety of his Majesty's Person, the privilege of Parliament, and
liberty of the Subject,
THou whom the Highest, surely did ordain,
HIs Glory and true Worship to maintain,
OUr endless thanks for aye, is due to thee,
May thou be honored by Posteritee,
ANd let thy name for ever be inrold,
SInce we by thee have comforts manifold.
FIght on brave Knight, and never stint til Thou
ARt wholly Victor, and have made to bow
Illegal Romes upholders, who dare vie,
Ruled by the fiend, with those who choose to die
FOr God and for his Cause, and venture all
Allotted them on Earth to make as thrall,
XTorted power, and Laws tyrannical.
THE YEAR OF JUBILEE: The first Book.
CHAP. I. Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament
of England, for the Defense of the true Religion, the safety of His Majesty's
Person, the Privilege of Parliaments, and Liberty of the Subject, overthrows
and totally routeth the Royal Army at Knasby, in Northamptonshire, takes in
Leicester, relieveth the distressed Town of Taunton, beleagured by the Kings
Forces, and takes the Town of Bridgwater; by a desperate storm.
IT was an excellent, and true saying of an Ancient and Pious Father, That the
pleasing aspects, and allurements of prosperity, ruins more men then, then the
frowns and storms of Adversity; Which Adage I pray the Almighty, prove not
authentic by us, and that having by Gods assistance, overthrown; and almost
totally touted and subdued the common enemy we should at last jarr with our
selves and give our enemies cause to rejoice, that what they could not perform
with all machinations and strength we should do for them, and sheath our
swords in our own bowels. I greatly fear the Almighty has not yet done with
us, and without doubt the enemies hand is deep in our daily distractions,
whence else arise our hourly disturbances, why else are blown abroad so many
rumors -- the contents whereof, are destructive to our proceedings, let us
pray continually, and with fervency to God, to guide and strengthen the hearts
of the Parliament, to aid and further their proceedings, and to bring to pass
the work they intend, which will be for the advancement of his glory, the
settling of his Truth, and the honor and welfare of his Majesty, would he be
pleased, with them to concur, in the mean time that the Faithful may have
cause to rejoice, and the wicked and malicious, either converted or confounded
in heart, by reading and hearing the great works, that God has wrought for his
people: and that but in the compass of one year, I shall proceed to set down
in order, the wonderful victories, unparalleld Achievements, and unequald
proceedings of the right valiant General Sir Thomas Fairfax, from Nasby fight,
which was June 14, 1645, till late sitting down before Oxford, May the second,
1646.

BOth Armies being set in Battle array in a great field neet Nasby, both sides
very strong and numerous and very eager of fight; in so much that they had not
patience to play their Canon, but charged speedily, and with great Resolution.

The General of his Majesty's Horse, that fatal Firebrand to this Isle,
Prince Rupert commanded at least two thousand Horse more then Sir Thomas could
make, the Dragoons gave the onset; flanking the right wing of the enemies
horse, as they charged Sir Thomas his right Wing, the foot were commanded not
to charge till they came within twelve paces of one another, they having
charged twice came to push of pike, the enemies foot gave back, and then the
right wing, wherein Sir Thomas himself was charged, in the Flank of the Blew
Regiment, of the foot of the enemy, who fought resolutely, most of them slain,
some few of them surrounded and taken, at this the horse and foot of the enemy
gave back, and the General after one charge more became Master of the
Infantry, and took three thousand prisoners, the enemies horse fled, while the
King was heard to call after them, saying, Face about once more, and give one
change more, and recover the day, but they would not harken to his exhortation,
but like men fear dampt from heaven fled apace, Lieutenant General Crumwell
having them in pursuit twelve miles, the gallantry of those three faithful
Commanders, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Crumwel, and Major general
Skippon, deserves to be engraven on the bed role of fame, and their names to be
kept in perpetual remembrance: The fight continued three houers, the prisoners
taken first and last, were in all 4000, with many thousands of Arms, the Kings
own Pistol where with he Against those that love his Weal.
charged, his papers and cabinet of letters himself hardly escaping, for the
achievement of this great Victory, the praise, properly and primarily is due to
God, and next to the instruments of his glory.

A List of the Commanders taken by His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, at Nasby
Fight.
Four hundred Officers of mean Quality, as Lievtenants, Sergeants,
Corporalls, etc. Four Colonels, Many Majors, Sixty Captains.
There were taken in the field.

Eight Pieces of Ordnance, whereof two were Demicannon, one whole Culverin, the
rest of the carriages bag and baggage, great store of provision.

The Soldiers brought to the General about 40 Standards and colors, he to
reward them for the past, and to encourage them for the future gave each man a
liberal reward.

The Colors taken were these
1 A Lion Rampant with a Crown. 2 A Lion Passant with a Crown. 3 A Dragon and a
Crown. 4 A Percullis and a Crown. 5 The duke of York's Standard, and six other
Colors, four of the Queens colors white, and double crosses on each of them,
209 Ensigns with staves.
Slain on both sides.
Of the enemy according to the nearest computation 5000, On the Generals part,
150.
On Monday June the 16, Sir Thomas Fairfax lay before Leicester and sent in a
Summons to the Town, to require the Governor to surrender it to him for the
use of the Parliament; and putting it to them to consider how the King was
routed, and showing them what use they might make of that Clemency, with diverse
other very gallant expressions to the summons, to advertise them how much
better it was for them to surrender, then to force him to take it by storming.

To this summons the Enemy sent a negative Answer, positively this, that they
would not surrender it; whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax called a Council of War
to consult about the Storming of it, which was soon concluded on; that they
should prepare all things in readiness to round it the next day: which was
done with all expedition not losing any time.

So they fell presently to raising of Batteries, and doing all things that were
necessary for the storming thereof according as they had appointed, and
continued providing every thing that was requisite for the doing thereof, to be
in a readiness to batter it the next day, and sent into the Country
thereabouts for such helps as were necessary for the work, which went on with
great speed both night and day; so desirous we are to have a speedy end of the
work that there may be an end of these wars if possible.

On Tuesday the 17th. of June, we drew down our Ordnance and played with our
Pieces against the Town, we stormed it playing with our Ordnance very hot on
the Newarke side, which we conceived was their greatest strength? And in short
time we made a breach in their works, which struck such a terror into the
hearts of the Enemy, that the Governor sent to us to desire a Parley, and
offered to surrender upon very fair terms; as upon capitulation should be
agreed upon.

To this request (Sir Thomas Fairfax being willing to save the spilling of
innocent blood as much as may be) he assented: and promised speedily to send in
Commissioners for the treaty, and called a council of War, and it was agreed
that Colonel Pickering and Colonel Reinsborough should go into Leicester to
treat with the governor about the surrendering the said Garrison to Sir Thomas
Fairfax. And accordingly a safe conduct was desired for them, which being sent
they went to Capitulate with the Governor about the surrender thereof.

In the mean time Sir Thomas Fairfax was not idle, nor did he lose any time;
but went on providing and furnishing himself with Pittars, Carts, Hay,
Grenades. Ladders, and other things necessary for storming; resolving to fall
on at their return, in case that they should not agree, not knowing how things
might fall out, during which time there was both great pains and care taken by
all in their places for the going on in the said work.

The ARTICLES for the surrender of the Town and Garrison of Leicester to Sir
Thomas Fairfax, for the use and service of the Parliament, agreed on June the
18th. 1646.
Between Colonel Pickering, and Collonell Reinsborough.

1 THat the Lord Loughborough shall have quarter granted him, and have
protection for his Person to be safely conveyed to the Garrison of Ashby de la
Zouch.

2 That all field Officers, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeants, Majors,
and Captains, and Lieutenants of Horse, (but not of Foot) shall march away with
their own particular single horse and arms, with protections for their own
persons.

3 That all the rest of the Officers shall be conveyed safely to the Garrison
of Lichfield with Staves only, and no other weapons in their hand.

4 That all common Soldiers have quarter only for their lives, and be
conveyed to Lichfield without any other weapons, save only staves in their
hand.

5 That before 10 of the clock the said morning June the 18. the Governor of
the Town, and the Lord Loughborough, and all the rest of the Officers, and
Soldiers march out of the Garrison according to the agreement aforesaid.

6 That Sir Thomas Fairfax be permitted to enter in at 10 of the clock the said
Wednesday morning aforesaid, with his Forces, and take possession of the
Garrison.

7 That all the Pieces of Canon, great and small now in the Garrison of
Leicester, be left to Sir Thomas Fairfax.

8 That all the Arms, and Ammunition now in Leicester be left to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, save only what is agreed to for the Officers of Horse aforesaid.

9 That all the Provisions, Colors, Bag and Baggage be also left to Sir.
Thomas Fairfax.

10 That all the Horse (save only those excepted for the Officers aforesaid)
that are in the Garrison of Leicester be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
for the service of the Parliament.

11 That all the Officers and Soldiers have quarter for their lives.

12 That all the Prisones of War that are in Leicester at the same time, be
released and set free to serve the Parliament.

With these Articles the Commissioners returned to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
certifying further how joyful that poor Town of Leicester was at the hearing
of the said agreement, and that they should be rid of the Cavaliers.

Thus you see the Lord does wonderfully for us, above the reach of man's
wisdom. Truth we cannot but much admire the goodness of Almighty God tous, in
doing so great things for us, we cannot ascribe it to any but to the hand of
God Almighty, who is the Lord of Host.

And it is to be admired to see the carriage of our General, and indeed all the
Officers, how lovingly we agree, how full of Courage all men are, both
Officers and Soldiers when we are in array, what heavenly expressions, there
is from all 3 and our General does carry himself in so excellent a manner
that it rowsed up the Courage of all that see him; and the like also did Major
Skippon, who by reason of his wound could not be herein the taking of
Leicester, but we hope that he will recover; for in all Designs, by his
wisdom and Valor, his very name is a terror to the Enemy.

A List of what was taken at LEICESTER.
14 Pieces of Ordnance. 30 Colors. 2000 Arms. 500 Horse. 50 Barrels of
Gunpowder.
And all their Ammunition and Provisions with bag and baggage.

After this, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax having refreshed his Army, with
some few days rest, resolved for to relieve the Town of Taunton, which was
straightened and besieged by a part of the Royal Army, under the command of
Goring, the General advanced to Buminster, twelve miles from Dorchester, where
he fell on there are of the enemy, took prisoner a Lieutenant, and diverse
others of Sir Robert Welches Troop, another party the general sent to get
between Sherborn and Somerton, and to fall on their Van, which they accordingly
did, and took some prisoners, the enemy flying broke down the bridges after
them, to hinder pursuit, nevertheless, the General sent out parties after
them, to learn whether they intended, and such was the love of his Soldiers to
the distressed Townsmen of Taunton, that they willingly without the least
instigation, marched 60 miles in five days, the Enemy hearing of their
approach, raised their siege, and departed from before the Town, and Sir Thomas
took possession thereof, for the use of the King and his Parliament.

After this, the General with his victorious Army advanced toward
Bridgewater, intending the reducement thereof, but for as much as he heard and
thought, the Town was so well stored with victual, as that they might be able
to endure a long siege, he resolved to storm it, was unanimously agreed unto
July 21, at two of the clock in the morning the Generals Regiment began the
storm, which they prosecuted with such vigor, that they soon got on the top
of the works, and there displayed their colors, gained the pieces that before
played upon them, and let down the bridge, whereupon with a Company of horse,
entered that part of the Town, and took 500 prisoners, which he placed, for the
present, in the Church, and here let all men take notice, and admire the good
providence of God, that though they fiercely stormed, and were as resolutely
repulsed for the space of an hour, yet the General lost but twenty men, the
obstinate and malicious enemy were so far from relenting or pitying their own
misery, that with Grenades they fired that part of the Town which was taken,
the fire so far prevailing, that three houses were not left standing together,
the General enraged, and withal grieved at this their villainy, summoned them
once more, but they were such deep enemies to themselves, and so hated their
own welfare, that they would not so much as hear the summons, nor yet return
any answer, whereupon the General commanded to storm on this side, the morrow
morning that valiant and experienced Commander Colonel Massey.

The next morning by break of day, they stormed that part, and but that the
tide was up, had gained the Town, now least that the guiltless should suffer
with the nocent, the General sent a Trumpet to the Governor, willing him to
let all women and children come forth of the Town, which was accordingly done,
then began the great Guns and Morter-peeces, those fatal Instruments of ruin,
to play against the Town, and fired it in some places, and the fire increased
so, that all was on a flame on a sudden, this so astonished the Inhabitants,
that, as amazed they ran up and down, when one Elliot came running to the
General, and desired a parley, this man was the chief occasion, by whose
wicked Oratory and persuasion the Townsmen became so obstinate, the General
returned answer, that the last night he proffered to treat with the Governor,
and he refusing, it was now, But Justice to make him smart with the rod he had
gathered. and that he would admit of no Treaty, yet if he would accept of
mercy he should have it, when suddenly, all the Soldiers cried out, Mercy
for the Bridgwater taken.
Lords sake, so it was agreed on, and quarter they had for their lives, and the
general gave them liberty and exhorted them to quench the fire, least the Town
should be utterly ruinate, this strong Town and stubborn people reduced to
obedience, the General resolves for other Exploits.

CHAP. II. The General coming to Dorchester, the Boors or Club-men of
Dorsetshire and Wiltshire, with their Leaders came unto him, desiring a pass
from him, and that they might be allowed, to dispatch some selected persons
with Petitions to His Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, the routing of
Goring by Sir Thomas Fairfax Forces near Langport in Somersetshire, the
Contents of the Club-mens Petition.
AFter the gaining of Bridgwater, Sir Thomas after several marches, came to
Dorchester, where being arived, there resorted unto him four Agents from the
Clubmen of Dorset and Wiltshire, who as if the two strong parties already in
Arms, were not of ability, ruinating themselves, to destroy this poor, and
more then miserable Kingdom: Those fellows of Dorset and Wiltshire, rose in
Arms to make a third party of Newters, their pretense was to defend themselves
from being plundered or annyed, by any ^ide, either of the Kings or
Parliaments, they wore white ribands in their hats, with PEACE and TRUTH
interwoven, they were Armed, some with Muskets, some with Forks and Staves, and
some with Clubs: Their names, Clubmen.
original, or rather as Britanicus.
one wittily and truly says Knaves of Clubs, to the general Master Hollis,
the chief speaker declared his business, which was to procure a pass from
him, for These to the King. Doctor Henry Gotch. Mr. Tho: Browall a Divine. John
Saint Lo. Peter Hoskins, Esquire. M. Tho: Young Attorney. M. Robert Pawlet to
the Parliament. Mr. Melchisedeck woltham. M. Rich: Hook, Divines. Tho.
Trenchard Rob: Culliford, ^squires. George Hawles, Rich. Newman, Gentlemen.
persons selected to go to the King and Parliament with Petitions, After some
debate the General returned this Answer.

Although the paper brought to me, being not subscribed, cannot challenge a
return, yet to clear my self from any averseness to the satisfaction of the
Country, who are pretended to be interessed in these Petitions, I return this.

That my affections, and the affections of this Army, are as much inclined to
peace as any men's whatsoever, and we are obliged to prosecute this war, for no
end, but for the establishment of a firm and happy Peace, by opposing the
enemies thereof, and that I shall be ready so far as concerns me, to further
all lawful and fit means to procure it, but having seen the Petitions, for the
conveyance of which a Letter is desired, I must profess my self not to be so
well satisfied with some things contained in them, as to concur to their
delivering by any Act of mine.

In particular, that a cessation is desired, by Letters written by the King and
Queen, taken at the late battle of Nasby, it evidently appears that contracts
are already made, for the bringing in of ten thousand French, and six thousand
Irish.

It is further desired, that the Garrisons in these parts whereof there are
Seaports, should be delivered up to the Petitioners, which to grant, were for
the Parliament to quit part of the Trust reposed in them by the Kingdom, and
considering those foreign preparations, to run very great hazards to these
parts, to themselves and the whole Kingdom.

Thirdly, it is propounded, that liberty be given to all Soldiers, to disband
and return to their own homes, if they desire An unreasonable request.
it, which may with equal justice be desired, by all parts of the Kingdom, and
so the Parliament made unable to manage the war, before peace be settled.

These considerations with some other, yet to be debated, will not allow me to
grant this desire of the letter.

But as for that part of the Petition, that declares the grievance of the
Country by plunder and violence, committed either by Garrisons or Armies, I
do hereby promise and undertake, for the Garrisons and Armies under the
command of the Parliament, that whatsoever disorders are committed by them,
upon complaint, making known the offenders and the offense, justice shall be
done, and satisfaction given, I also shall endeavor that the Parliaments
Garrisons may be regulated according to any reasonable agreement with the
County, and without doubt the Parliament will cause them to be slighted, so soon
as the condition of those parts and the public good shall permit, and that the
Army under my command shall be ordered, as may be most for the good of these
Counties, and the whole Kingdom, of which some reasonable testimony is already
given, in their quiet and orderly passage, through these and other Countries,
without many of those complaints that usually follow Armies.

I further request that in publishing this my answer, all assembling the people
to public Randevouze may be forborne, that copies hereof may be dispersed to
several Parishes, and that the County may be acquainted therewith.

THOMAS FAIRFAX.


Wisdom and Valor, are two singular and extraordinary gifts of God, and he
that has the one has a greater gift then he that has the other, I mean the
gift of wisdom: Ulysses words prevailed more with the Grecian Princes then
Ajax Deeds, but where both are injected, there the man is incomparable, and fit
to undergo so great a Task as our famous General does, Who not only by valor
quelleth and pasheth to pieces the strength of the Enemy, but also by his
Prudence, appeaseth and mitigateth the fury of some, that spurs on by their own
rashness, after to do things inconvenient and destructive to themselves: This
I am constrained to say, in reference, to the moderate, free and ingenious
answer Sir Thomas sent the Club-men.

AFter the Dispatch of Master Hollis, the General advanced, and after some
marches; not without apposition, came to long Sutton in Somersetshire, where
being arived, a Council of War was called to debate on this Quere, whither to
draw up before Langport, or withdraw toward Sherborn or Evil, when unlookt
for the Enemy gave them the alarm, under the command of Goring, whereupon the
General drew out of his forces of Foot.

Weldens, Herberts, Inglesbyes, Fortescues, Major General Russels, Hamonds and
Rainsboroughs Regiments, all the Horse but three Regiments of Sir Robert Pie,
and Col. Sheffield were with Massy.

With these Forces they drew into the Field, about ten of the clock in the
morning, the Enemy had the advantage both of the Hill and Wind, the General
commanded the Canon to play, which did extraordinary execution, after the Horse
charged Major Bethel, gave the onset, his first charge routed them, Goring
routed.
but being over-powred, he retreated to Major Disbrough, who commanded the
Generals Regiment, and charging them again, he so disordered them that they
could never rally again, part of the Enemies got in a disordered manner into
Langport, the rest fled, some into the Corn, some into Woods for shelter, in
this fight the whole foot were taken or killed; there were also taken those:

The Ordance they had; Two Colonels of Horse, Slingsby, Hevingam. Beirtridge,
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, Some other Lievtenants, Colonels and
Majors, 1200 Prisoners.
And the gaining of this, through the assistance of God, lost the General but
twenty men, and whereas we spoke of erst, the Petitions the Clubmen intended
for the Kings Majesty and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, we will here
insert it word for word, as the Malignant spirit of the Author contrived it.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, at Westminster.
WE the Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others, all Protestants The Clubmens
Petition
and peaceable Subjects, of the County of Dorset, Somerset, and Wiltshire,
beholding with unexpressable grief of our souls, the many and terrible shakings
of that well built State of England, which our wise and careful fathers left
unto us, that their Generations after them under the blessing of God might keep
it up for ever, are most humble suitors to your sacred Majesty, and the said
Honorable Lords and Commons, that our so long and so much tottering Kingdom,
may speedily be reposed upon her sin foundation, which we conceive to be, the
free and full conveening in Parliament of your Majesty's Royal Person, and all
the Lords together with the Commons, as well as all them, which have heretofore
been duly elected to this Parliament, and do yet survive, as others who ought
to be selected thither made void by death, your Majesty's Royal Progenitors
the Kings and Queens of this Isle, environed with their free and full
multitude of Counselors from all parts thereunto, have ever been that Rock of
safety whereon the good providence of God, for so many years past, has
established this Realm, in despipht of all former tempests, that have beaten
against it, therefore this the greatest of all that ever rose upon us, or our
Ancestors, we cannot but with our inflamed devotions, to superstition, to God,
deprecate out of all men's hearts, all thoughts of saving us, rather upon some
new made grhunds, then that of the old one which God yet never suffered to fail
us, or of limiting our Refuge (fine Sophistry) to part of our Rock when our
advantage and help must be the more, when we had the whole to help (you had
reason to rejoice that the ill, or part of the whole departing the rest
remained, to mayntain the Gospel of Christ and the liberty of the Subject) as
the most glorious body that is visible in England is the Parliament of England,
so, who can think it so perfect, who can hope to find it so strong to work for
the honor, peace and happiness of England, as when it consults in full peace
of its Royal Head, and with all the other good members thereof, and with all
ardency of our affections, we kneel unto your Majesty's Kingly wisdom, and to
the wisdom of the said Honorable Lords and Commons, that for the speedy
Integration, both in Head and members of this body, which is the soul of
Englands welfare your Parliament (the King believes it not) It may graciously
please your Majesty, and the said Honorable Lords and Commons to send, they
unto your Majesty, and your Majesty to them, your several, that is to say,
your Majesty's and their Commissioners, and to hasten them to meet, to treat
and agree (as at Uxbridge) of time and place, when and where your Majesty shall
be with your Houses of Lords and Commons, both of them in the beautiful
fullness of all the members, we most humbly beseeching, that no place may be
thought, for this purpose like Gideons fleece (a fine policy to draw away the
members of Parliament, from a place of security, to a place where they may be
subject to the tyranny, and ore-swaying Power of the Royal Party) either the
only spot Explain your meaning.
of England, that shall be capable of the dew of heavenly blessing, and that
all the Land besides will be dry upon any Town or City; God will give down his
dew, and for the security both of your Majesty and the honorable Houses, in
any place we shall lay down ourlives (your deeds confute your words) and that
which is left of our estates, to your Majesty for the houses, to the houses for
your Majesty, and that we and the whole Realm, may no longer want the benefit
of those Laws which are well known to us, by the undoubted seals of Kings,
Lords and Commons upon them, and may not still starve and bleed our selves to
death, for such as could not yet pass the threefold test, we humbly pray that
the comfortable beams of justice, which have been so long obscured and clouded,
may at length break forth to the refreshment of this drooping Kingdom, now
grown weary and weak through long impunity of all sorts of sin and injury, and
that Judges and Officers may be authorized and secured in their administrations
of Law and Right to all people (if this has not been, your selves have
occasioned it, the two Houses of Parliament prostrates their lives and
fortunes, to to purchase you, and all Counties this) and that all field Armies
may be dissolved, all controversies; for which they have been
raised: being laid down to be awakened and determined, or to sleep and dye
undecided, in the free and full Parliament, and that all unnecessary Garrisons
be slighted, and such as shall be thought fit and necessary, either by your
Majesty or the said Honorable Lords and Commons, to be continued, to be
trusted in some hands of those Counties wherein they are scited, the Trustees
to be equally named by your Majesty and the said Honorable Lords and Commons,
and no Trustee to deliver up his charge, but by the joint assent of Kings,
Lords and Commons, until we may see that happy day Will your infamous
sedition, and unlawful rising produce it.
when the King, Lords and Commons shall declare, that there is no more use of
such warishnesse between the King and his people; and we beseech your
Majesty's Princely clemency, and the fatherly and fraternall love of the said
Lords and Commons, to all their equal and inferior Countrymen, for the sweet
and necessary condiscention for all that have been in arms, or otherwise
assistant to this destructive war, and to all that are imprisoned by any
occasion of it, and to all that absent themselves from their dwellings upon
fear thereof (you petitioned for justice ere-while, recant you now) may be
permitted to return home, and all men to enjoy their Liberties and Properties,
and their wonted freedom of commerce through the whole Realm.

Lastly, we humbly beseech your Majesty's most tender heart and the feeling
affections, of the said Honorable Lords and Commons, to their poor and
bleeding Countrymen, to take notice of the many importunate Agitants, which
have beaten us together, in these our unusual meetings, not only the worship
(a fair Cloak) of God but the honor of your Majesty, the native liberty and
right of the Subject, the wealth and strength of the whole Land, and whatsoever
is virtuous, or laudable in it self, but also our intolerable slavery, under a
most insolent Soldiery (this is notoriously known, as also the rest of the
allegations to be false and suborned) an universal poverty by endless
contribution, and plunder the cursed sacrilege (the Idol of the Commons) the
common Prayer Book taken away) done unto holy places, defacings, and ruinings,
the grievous persecutions of grave and reverend Ministers, the many bloody,
tragical, inhumane rapes and murders that have been acted, and more are
threatened upon peaceable Subjects, all sorts of wickedness before every where
impudent and shameless; in a word whatsoever is dreadful, or miserable to us,
is still growing upon us, under the reign of this Civil War, by all these so
many, and so powerful considerations we have been drawn together, as we
contest the searcher of all hearts, not for sedition, but the public peace;
ha, ha, he, and in order thereto together, to meet in this our humble Petition,
to your Majesty, and the said Honorable Lords and Commons, and to put our
selv^^ in a general readiness at the City of the County, to pursue all
robbers and murderers (one Thief attach another) under whose continual
oppressions we could no longer endure; We therefore humbly pray and beseech
your Majesty (and the said Honorable Lords and Commons) and all our Superiors
and fellow Subjects, that we may be mercifully and favorably judged, in (these
your seditious and abominable proceedings) these our innocent intentions, and
according to our capacities, and our wisest endeavors, we continually pray, to
the God of peace and love that we may be revived, and the whole Realm by a
speedy and indissoluble union, of the strength and saving health of England)
next under his heavenly Majesty, your sacred Majesty, the right honorable
Lords. and the honorable House of Commons, in a full and free, which cannot
be, but an happy Parliament.

Thus far the Author of this malevolent Petition, which because I have already
somewhat canvased, and all wise men reading it will easily behold, the main end
and scope of these club-mens Petitions and intentions without an interpreter, I
shall here cease to say more of it, I return to my History.

CHAP. III. Sir Thomas Fairfax receives the Town of Bathe by composition: A
Narration of the Kings entertainment at Huntington, and of the carriage of his
Army there.
HIS Excellency the Parliaments General, intending the reducement of Bristol,
a Town of great concernment, after some days easy march, ariving near
Sherburn Castle blocked up
Sherborn, and resolving to use all the means of man, not doubting of Gods
assistance, to put a period to the sad, and to be bewailed civil war, resolved
to send one party to Sherborn, to block it up, at least til time and ability
served to proceed more violently against it, he therefore appointed Colonel
Pickering, a man right valiant and pious, to prosecute the intention as
aforesaid.

A Council of War being called, to consult what design would be most
advantageous, most safe and speedy, for the reducing of Bristol, it was
concluded, that the taking of Bathe, which would else be an obstacle, was first
most requisite, and if not made a Garrison, yet it might serve for a strong
Quarter, and be much assistant to their Design.

The General approved the advice, and resolved to prosecute it, and the next
day with his whole Army advanced to Wels, where being arived, he heard news
very much unexpected, to wit, that their trouble of besieging, or danger of
storming the Town of Bath, would not be required, for the Enemy had quitted the
place, and unconstrained the reasons these.

The Townsmen not willing to bear Arms, nor yet to harbor Soldiers that came
from Bristoll, dreading infection, the plague being then and had been before a
long time, there very hot, and raging, the soldiers they had of their own
being too few to man the Works, the Governor Sir Thomas Bridges, resolved to
quit it, which thing he had surely done, had there not arived at that present
an 100 men from Prince Rupert, with orders willing him to stay and defend the
Town. Sir Themas upon probability of quitting it, thought fit to spare his Foot
an unnecessary march, and sent two Regiments of Horse, commanded by Col. Rich
and two Troops of Dragoons with Col. Okey, to take a view of the condition of
the Town, that he might do as occasion served: They came near the Town and
were opposed, when they presently Summoned, but the Summons slighted, they
resolve to enter by force, the Dragoons encountering the Enemy on the Bridge,
prevailed against them and gained it, and setting on fire the South west gate
burnt it down, which the Governor seeing, was willing to surrender,
conditionally, that he and his Officers might have liberty armed to march to
Bristoll, which was granted them, and they speedily departed, leaving behind
them many soldiers prisoners.

Twenty barrels of powder, Three hundred arms, A Tun of match, Six Iron Pieces
of Ordnance.
Col. Rich and Col. Okey having entered the Town, sent the General notice of
their prosperous proceedings, and desired him to repair to them, which he
accordingly did, and coming to Bathe, having bestowed some time in settling
thereof, and having placed a strong Garrison, returned back to Wels.

About this time his Majesty being in a strait, and doubting of the ability to
engage with the Parliaments Forces, whom he unworthily and caulesly brandeth
with the names of Traitors and Rebels, comes as in Progress into
Huntingtonshire, though in truth to levy force, and to borrow or to take sums
of money, of which he was in much want, and coming to Huntington, a Town
notorious for Malignancy, and averinesse to Reformation.

The Major of Huntington, and two Bailiffs of Godman-chester, a Town near
adjacent, as being wrapped and to congratulate the Kings arrival, taxed their
Towns at ten and fifteen shillings a man, some of them mean men and poor
householders, who were constrained to borrow the money, and to work hard and
fast withal, to regain their impaired ability: the Major and Bailiffs and
forty three of his Brethren presented his Masty with a great sum of their
extorted money, who, whether misdoubting their fidelity, or some great ones
about him spleening them, or what other reason might be, I know not, but sure I
am they were constrained, as prisoners to pass in the conduct of the Army, so
soon as the King came, Proclamation was made, that no soldier, upon pain of
death, should plunder, which peradventure might be a watchword to warn them
thereto; for no sooner was it proclaimed, but soldiers fell to plundering on
heaps, carrying out of shops and houses, whole loads of Goods and Wares, and in
some houses left naught to adorn them but barewalls, the Townsmen were forced
to billet some twenty, some thirty in one house, and to afford both horse and
man's meat for twelve pence a day, and to give all the World a true character of
them, they knocked off all the Irons from the Prisoners and Fellons in
Huntington Goal, many of them condemned for murder, who all took up arms for
the King, and is this the mayntaining of the Laws (so frequently protested) and
here let the Reader take notice that the Cavaliers and Royal party (Fight
neither for God, nor for his Majesty as they pretend) would they else deal so
hardly and tyrannically with his Friends, that favor his proceedings, in all
parts where they come, as in particular this Town of Huntington, plundered by
them, without distinction or exception of any, carrying with them many known
Royallists as Prisoners, for that they denied those sums of money, which their
unconscionable and uncharitable selves demanded, so that it is, or What the
Cavaliers fight for.
may be apparent, to all not wilfully blind, that they fight to mayntain and
uphold, so long as they may, their pleasure and rapine, their debausht and
luxurious living, to which they are so accustomed and bewitched, that they are
resolved, with it their lives shall terminate, but they have but a short time,
I trust now the wheels of the Chariots are taken off, so that they march but
slowly and in Despair, against GOD.

CHAP. IV. Sir Thomas Fairfax takes the strong Castle of Sherborn, a List of
the Arms and Ammunition, taken in the said Castle. He fights with, and
discomfiteth the mutinous. Clubmen, takes their chief Leaders. A List of their
names.
HOw has the Lord assisted, the Forces, fighting for his Cause, this memorable
and never to be forgotten year, Sir Thomas Fairfax resolving, for the
Reducement of Sherborn Castle: Drew out his Officers and Soldiers, in despite
of the Enemy, to their very walls and works, and prepared to undermine;
battering Pieces arriving from Portsmouth, which they wanted before, a Battery
was raised, and they began to play very fiercely, and before night had made a
large breach in the Castle, on the East part thereof) after the breach so made,
the General out of his noble inclination, to prevent the effusion of blood,
sent another Summons to the Governor, willing him to surrender, or to expect
the worst extremity, the Summons this:

Sir, I have been as willing to gratify you as any man with honorable
conditions, having expressed so much Gallantry in defending your self, but the
advantage I now have, by being possessed of the breach, and some of the Towers,
as it may with reason induce you to surrender the place, so it obliges me in
Honor, to agree to no other conditions then quarter for your lives, which I
would be glad if you would accept, that so the effusion of blood which will
inevitably follow upon a refusal; might be prevented.

Sir, It is against my nature to threaten or insult over your condition, but I
must tell you, and I wish you may have an heart to believe it, that if you
refuse this my offer, you and those with you must know, I will hear of no
terms for the future.

THOMAS FAIRFAX.

The malicious and wicked Governor hardened to his ruin, would not vouchsafe
to return an answer, save with great and small shot that played upon and wounded
many of the Soldiers, the General commanded for a storm, the Soldiers
resolutely fell on, and placing their Ladders in a trice got over the Walls and
Works, which the desperate Enemy seeing, snatched down their Colors, and with
lamentable cries, desired quarter, which they had afforded them, but not out of
any zeal, to save their lives, but the Soldiers chose rather to cram their
pockets with silver and gold, of which there was store, in the Castle, rather
then to sheath their swords in their Enemies bowels. The General stayed there
one day to settle things in order, and after fortifying and mending the
breaches, placed another Garrison of Soldiers to keep the Castle for the use of
the King and Parliament.

A List of the Prisoners taken at Sherborn Castle.
Sir Lewis Dives. Sir John Walcooth. Col. Strangeways of Horse. Col. Thornhill.
Lieutenant Colonel Strangeways of Horse. Major Balton. Cap. Hamon. Cap.
Bright. Cap. Norris. Cap. Hodinot. Cap. Speed. Cap. Strangeways, of Horse. Cap.
Bond. Cap. Hoddar. Cap. Brisco. Lieutenant Jenings Lieutenant Mallet.
Lieutenant Tailor. Lieutenant Rogers. Lievten. Townsend Lieutenant Joliffe, of
Horse. Coronet Devonet, Reformado. Ensign Gale. Ensign Hoyes. Ensign Harris.
Ensign Tool. Ensign Collins. Ensign Mullins. Ensign Tod. George Walker
Provost Marshal. Chyrurgions these: M. Stuckey. M. Payley. M. Robinson.
Ministers. Doct. Cockson. M. Wild. M. Townsend. M. Ford. Gentlemen these. M.
Chaffine. M. Buckland. M. Barns. M. Brown. M. Griesley. M. Forsell. M.
Richlands. M. Wiborn. M. Huchins. M. Carleton.
Three hundred forty four common Soldiers.

The General having gained Sherborn Castle as aforesaid, and about to advance,
news came, that the Leaders of the Clubmen, were met together at Shaftsbury to
consult and give counsull how they might best thrive in their Designs,
whereupon the General sent a strong party of Horse, commanded by Colonel
Fleetwood, to apprehend them, who accordingly coming to Shaftsbury, compassed
the house where they were, took every man of them and brought them to Sherborn,
where his Excellency yet abode, their names I shall give you ere I finish this
Chapter, this being the Lords Day. On Monday morning the General received
Intelligence, that the Clubmen had appointed several meetings, which moved Sir
Thomas to send Lieutenant General Cromwell, with four Regiments of horse to
trace them, and to spy out whether they intended, who being on his march
toward Shaftsbury, they might descry flying Colors, surrounded with a
numerous company, on the top of an exceeding high hill, a Lieutenant was sent
with a party of horse to know the reason of their unlawful assembling,
whereupon their Leader one Newman descending the hill, said, that the reason of
the meeting was to know where they had disposed those Gentlemen wete taken at
Shaftsbury, the General returned this Answer.

That he held it not fit to inform them of the reason what was done, being done
by authority, but that they might know a reason of their surprizall those
persons so met, were the occasioners and stirrers up of Commotions and
unlawful Assemblies destructive to the peace and safety of the Kingdom, Mr.
Newman desired to go and inform the people of the Answer, the Lieutenant
General thought it convenient, with a party of horse to accompany him, where
being come, he had some conference with the seditious, the substance, that they
did very ill to disturb the peace of the County, upon small or no ground, and
that whereas they pretended, they armed themselves to save their goods,
themselves would occasion the losing of them, by absenting themselves from
their dwellings, and he further promised and protested unto them, that justice
should be done one any that had done them wrong, and as for their Leaders taken
at Shaftsbury, they were laid hold on, and were to be kept in custody, only
till they should clear themselves of some accusations charged on them, and then
they might return again to them; the Bores were all well satisfied, and
promising never to assemble again each man departed to his home.

AFter this matter, so well handled, the Lieutenant General with his party set
forward to Hamilton, still near Strawton, on this hill were assembled a
numerous multitude of Clubmen having for their defense an old Roman work deeply
trencht, the Lieutenant General sent a Lieutenant with a party of horse to
demand the cause of their meeting, who was answered by the rude and barbarous,
only with a dozen of shot: whereupon the Lieutenant General sent once again
to them, requiring them to lay down their arms, or he would fall upon them,
they refused his message with scorn, thereupon order was given for the
Generals Troop to fall on them, who did so and were repulsed, not without some
loss, and that by reason of the disadvantage and unaccessablenesse of the
place, the Clubmen shot as thick as hail from the bank, and defended the
passage very valiantly, then the valiant Major Disbrough with his Troop
adventured, and with much difficulty got up the Hill, and charging their Rear,
they began to run, throwing down their arms, in the pursuit sixty were slain,
two hundred wounded, four hundred of them taken and brought to Strawton, and
kept all night in the Church, for the next morning the General commanded them
to be brought forth, and after examination, the Lieutenant General advertized
them to live peaceably, was most conducing and available for them, and wished
them to live peaceably at home, they saw the calamity that their Risings had
brought upon them, and moreover he gave them license to oppose any that should
go about to plunder or annoy them, and so dismissed them each to his home. The
names of their Leaders, and the principal Sticklers in this business were
these Gentlemen.

Master John Saints. M. Richard Buckeridge. M. William Smith. M. Thomas Gervis.
M. John Lovell. M. John Eastmond. M. Francis Craddock. M. Edward Davis. M.
Henry Haynard. M. Lawrence Hyde. M. Thomas Benet. M. John Pope. M. Thomas
Rosse. M. Henry Gouge. M. John Every. M. John Carty. M. Edward Boore. M.
Nicholas Bingham. M. Thomas Rolph. M. Robert Squire. M. Richard Alborn. M.
Charles Symmes. M. Francis Abbot. M. Robert Gapit. M. Thomas Marvel. M. Robert
Hollis. M. Samuel Forward. M. William Fireall. M. Charles Studley. M. Thomas
Brook. M. John King. M. Edmund Clarke. M. Martin March. M. Thomas Bun. M.
William Saunders. M. William Blunt. M. John May. M. John Corbet. M. Richard
Craddock. M. John Pill. M. Robert Fry. M. William Ford. M. Matthew Mar^in. M.
William Laining. M. Henry Goodwin. M. Rock. M. Williams. M. Hollis. men chiefly
noted for malignancy M. Young, men chiefly noted for malignancy M. Ieloff. men
chiefly noted for malignancy
CHAP. V. Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX gains the famous City of Bristoll, the Articles
of agreement between the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of the
Governor, Prince Rupert and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the
surrendering of the City. Ruperts Entertainment at Oxford.
THe victorious General Sir Thomas Fairfax being Sir Thomas lays siege to
Bristoll.
commanded by the Houses of Parliament, to siege, and God assisting, take the
City of Bristoll, out of their Enemies hands, the General to command
obedience, advanced with his numerous and courageous Army to Bristoll, and what
by valor and policy incroached each day nearer and nearer their outworks, and
in many places got within Pistol shot, and had many desperate and hot firings
with the Enemy, who often made diverse furious, but fruitless sallies to their
own loss and disadvantage, the strong Port called Portshead Point was taken by
assault, to the great discouragement and disheartning of the Enemy: the
General perceiving the potency of the Foe, and the strength of the works, and
knowing to too well the pitiless and implacable inclination of the Governor,
Prince Rupert, to prevent the inevitable ruin that would else happen on both
sides, sent him this Summons, which for the elegancie and excellency thereof,
is worthy to be read by posterity, which was this.

To his Highness Prince Rupert.
SIR, For the service of the Parliament, I have brought their Army before the
City of Bristol, and do summon you in their names, to render it, with all the
Forts belonging to the same, to their use.

Having used this plain language at the business, Requires I wish it may be
effectual with you, as it is satisfactory to my self, that I a little
expostulate with you about the same, which I should not have used, but in
respect to such a person and such a ploce, I take into consideration your
Royal birth, and relation to the Crown of England, your honor, courage, and
fidelity, and the strength of that place, which you may think your self bound
and able to maintain.

Sir, the Crown of England is, and will be, where it ought to be, and we fight
to maintain it there, But the King misled
by evil Counselors, or through a seduced heart, has left his Parliament and
his people, under God, the best assurance of his Crown and family, the
maintaining of this Schism is the ground of this unhappy war on your part, and
what sad effects it has produced in all the three Kingdoms, is visible to all
men to maintain the rights of the Crown and Kingdom jointly, a principal
part whereof is, that the King, in supreme Acts,
concerning the whole State, is not to be advised by men of whom the law takes
no notice, but by his Parliament, the great Council of the Kingdom,

In whom, as much as man is capable of, he hears all his people, as it were at
once advising him, in which multitude of Counselors lie, his safety, and the
peoples interest, and to set him right in this, has been the constant and
faithful endeavor of the Parlioment: Note, and to bring those wicked
Instruments to Justice, that have misled him, is a principal ground of our
fighting.

Sir, If God make this clear to you, as he has to us, I doubt not but he will
give you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding, all the other
considerations of honor and courage, because of their consistencie, and use in
the present business, depends upon the right or wrongfulnesse of this that
has been said, and if upon such conviction you shall surrender it, and save
the loss of blood, and hazard of spoiling such a City, it would be an occasion
glorious in it self, and joyful to us, for the restoring of you to the
indeared affection of the Parliament, and people of England, the truest
assurance, under God, to your family.

But if this be hid from your eyes, and through your wilfulness, this so
great, so, famous, and ancient a City, and so full of people, be, by your
putting us to force the same, exposed to ruin and the extremities of War,
which yet we shall in that case, as much as possibly in us lies endeavor to
prevent, then I appeal to the righteous God to be Judge between you and us, and
to require the wrong, and let all England judge, whether the ruining of its
Cities, burning of its Towns, and destroying its people, be a good requital
from a person of your family, which has had the prayers, tears, and purses,
yea, and the bloods of its Parliaments and people, and if you look on either as
now divided, has ever had that same party both in Parliaments and amongst the
people, most zealous for their assistance and restitution, which you now appose
and seek to destroy, and whose constant grief has been their desires to serve
your Family, have been ever hindered and made fruitless, by the same party
about His Majesty, whose Counsel you act, and whose interest you pursue in this
unnatural War.

Your Highnesses humble Servant THOMAS FAIRFAX.

THe Prince having received this summons, returned no Answer, but desired he
might have leave to send to His Majesty: But Sir Thomas returned answer, that
he might not fulfill his desire in that point of sending to His Majesty, and
desired a speedy and positive answer, but the Prince desirous to hold the
General in suspense, and to gain time, hoping of relief from the King, would
not return an answer as was required, but sent some Propositions to the
General, the most essential whereof were to have exception from
sequestration, Cathedral men to continue, the works to be demolished, and no
Garrison hereafter, by which the General perceiving his averseness and
policy, and having experience of his wonted wiles, gave order to storm the
Town, the manner of storming was agreed on, which was to be after this manner.

Colonel Welden with his Brigade, Col: Twooldbies, Col: Fortescues, and Col:
Herberts Regiment, whose posts were to make good Somersetshire side, was
ordered to storm in three places, viz, 200 men in the middle, 200 men on each
side, as forlorn hopes to begin the storm, twenty ladders to each place, two
men to carry each ladder, and to have five shillings a piece, two Sergeants
that attend the service of the ladders, to have twenty shillings a man, each
musketteir that follows the ladder to carry a faggot, a Sergeant to command
them, and to have the same reward, twelve files of men, with fire, arms, and
pikes to follow the ladders to each place where the storm is to be, those to
be commanded each by a Captain and Lieutenant, the Lieutenant to go before with
five files, the Captain to second him with other seven files, the 200 men that
are appointed to second the storm to furnish each party of them, 20 Pioners who
are to march in their rear, the 200 men to be commanded each by a field
Officer, and the Pioners each by a Sergeant. The manner of the storm being
thus contrived, the General to encourage and animate the Soldiers, saw the
Commissioners pay to each of them six shillings, which they accepted very
thankfully. Tuesday, September 9, at twelve of the clock at night, all the
Army Horse and Foot surrounded the City to fall on, Bristoll stormed.
at two of the clock in the morning the storm began and for a while on both
sides many fell, the one party striving with their utmost might to enter, and
the other to repel them: Major Rainsborough's Brigade that stormed the P^iors
Fort, by reason of the unnecessiblenesse of the place spent near three hours
in desperate sight, but at length maugre their enemies they wan it, and
entering the fort cut in pieces the Soldiers, giving no Quarter to Major
Price, and became Master of the Town, that Brigade under Colonel Welden fell
on on Somersetshire side, but their ladders being set to the works proved too
short and unserviceable, so they only gave the enemy a sound Alarm: The
loss of men on Sir Thomas his part, was not in all above forty. Colonel
Tailor wounded mortally, Captain Ireton sore wounded: Prince Rupert seeing
this, with some force took the Castle for shelter, against which the General
planted his Ordnance, intending to batter, when lo the Prince sent out for a
parley, which the General accepted, and after some few hours these Articles
were produced.

1 THat his Highness Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers,
Gentlemen and Soldiers and all other persons whatsoever now residing in the
City of Bristoll, the Castle and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said
City, Castle and Forts, with Colors, Pikes and Drums, Bag and Baggage, the
Prince his Highness, all Noblemen, Gentlemen and Officers in Commission, with
their Horse and Arms, and the servants with their horses and swords, and common
souldiess, with their swords: the Prince his Lifeguard of Horse, with their
Horse and Arms, and two hundred and fifty Horse, to be disposed by the Prince,
and his Lifeguard of Firelocks, with their Arms, and each of them one pound
of Powder, and a proportion of bullet, and that none of the persons that are to
march out on this Article, be plundered, searched or molested.

2 That such Officers and Soldiers, as shall be left sick or wounded, in the
City, Castle, or Forts, and shall have liberty to stay till their recovery, and
then to have safe conduct to go to his Majesty.

3 That the persons abovementioned, who are to march away have a sufficient
convoy provided for them, to any such Garrison of the Kings as the Prince shall
name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoll, and shall have eight days
allowed for their march thither, and shall have free Quarter allowed them by
the way.

4 That all the Citizens of Bristoll, all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and
all other persons residing in the said City and Suburbs of the same, shall be
saved from all plunder and violence.

5 That in consideration hereof the City of Bristoll, the Castle and all other
Forts thereof without any slighting or defacing thereof, and that all the Arms,
Ammunition, and all other provisions of War, except what is before allowed, be
delivered up to his Ezcellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, without any diminution or
imbezeliuent: his Highness Prince Rupert then naming to what Army or Garrison
of the Kings he will march.

6 That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Thomas Fairfax, such as he shall
approve who are to remain with him till the City be surrendered.

7 That upon the delivering of the Town sufficient Hostages be given for the
performance of the Articles on both sides.

Signed by us the Commissioners, in the behalf of Prince Rupert,

John Min, William Tillyer, William Vavasor.

Signed by us the Commissioners in the behalf of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax;

Edward Mountague.

Thomas Rainsborough.

John Pickering.

Turn over all the volumes of Histories, reciting the Battails, besiegings, and
gainings of Towns by storm, and see if it be^ recorded in any one place, that
so strong a City, manned by so powerful and numerous an enemy, has been
taken by assault, with the loss of so few, and so small a number of men, as
this famous City was: and what is more to be admired, the Prince and his
Soldiers were provided within with all sorts of necessaries, accommodated also
for the defensive, with fortifications of the best sort victuals in abundance,
four score or an hundred run of beer bread sufficient for an hundred thousand
men a day, and in a word, all things abling a people to hold out a long siege,
but it was the Lord, the Lord God of Hosts, strong and above all, that
strengthened the one party, and disheartened the other.

The Prince made choice of Oxford for his refuge Garrison, where being arived,
he was entertained with slow regreet, the King not vouchsafing to see him, and
what was surely to him unlookt for, confined him to his chamber, and it was
motioned by some Lords near his Majesty, that he should be tried and examined
by a Counsel of War, why and upon what terms he so easily surrendered Bristol,
some said, fear and timerousness of heart made him yield up, others judged that
gold had corrupted him, and that he played Legerdimain, receiving a sum of money
to surrender the Town, but all concluded that through his proper default was
occasioned that great and weighty loss, but the King, contrary to the minds
and Counsel of his Lords, accepted him again to grace and favor.

The end of the first Book.
THE YEAR OF JUBILEE: The second Book.
CHAP. I. Sir Thomas Fairfax takes by storm the strong Castle of Tiverton,
overthrows and routeth two Ragiments of the Kings Horse near Bowytracy.
IT may perchance appear to some men folly and The Authors Apology.
want of judgment in me, that I do not set down in order, all and singular
every Battle and Overthrow given the King, whether by Sir Thomas Fairfax or
any other inferior Officer: and that I break and mayme my History by
overpassing many remarkable Victories attained by Col. Genesis Pointz, and others,
I answer:

Be pleased to take notice, that this is not an oversight in me, but a thing
done wittingly and willingly, yea of set purpose, and that for three Reasons:

First, the scope of my intensions, when I began this Work, was wholly to set
down in order the Achievements and prosperous proceedings of our thrice
renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, and to pass by and take no notice of the
Deeds of any other were they never so glorious and meriting.

Secondly, that in so doing I might the more delight and solace my Reader,
while I pitch upon one particular person, and bring in no other to vie with or
partake of his merit, which I should do had I done otherwise, and have eclipsed
the brightness of his glory, under whose command, and by whose peculiar
direction, all the Achievements, Victories and gainings, by me recorded, were
attained.

Thirdly, that in viewing his honorable deeds we might have cause to rejoice,
yea and boast, so we derogate from the glory of God, that this latter Age
affords a man, whom it has pleased the Almighty so to prosper and assist,
that he has ever since he received his Commission, and apposed the Enemy,
been a continual victor, and what General of any Nation ever could say as he
can and that truly.

Sir Thomas hearing of the Enemies advance to Axminster, being two thousand
Horse, resolved to engage them if it were possible, and hinder their plundering
progress what he intended, he put in execution, and with his whole Army
marched after the Enemy who were then at Hunnington, meaning to hinder, if they
should attempt it, to march Eastward, the Enemy marched over the River Ex,
whereupon the General caused a part of his Army to be disposed along that
River, so to prevent the Enemies return with the rest of his Army he advanced
to Tiverton, whether he had sent before Major General Massey, who found the
Governor very obstinate, whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax commanded to storm it,
which the soldiers were in a readiness to do, when the Canoneer with a great
shot after a wonderful and unparalleld manner broke the chain of the
Drawbridge, which falling down, the Soldiers on heaps entered, and in a trice
were got over the Works, the Enemy took the Castle for shelter, and had only
Quarter for their lives. There were taken these prisoners, October the
nineteenth, 1645.

Sir Gilbert Talbot, Governor. Major General Sadler. Major Moneuch. Major
Wilks. Major Pain. Captain William Sturgeon. Master Thomas Whitby. Captain
Markas Whitby. Captain Edward Kemp. Captain Richard Philips. Captain Richard
Mattock. Lieutenant Thomas Sadler. Lievte. Haniball Westcoat. Lieutenant Thomas
Whitby. Lieutenant Thomas Sibley. Lievten. Francis Moneuch. Lieutenant John
Hawks. Lieutenant Evely. Nicholas Kemp. Richard Mutisin. William Sharp, Letter
Carrier. Ensign Francis Skidmoore. Ensign John Martin. Ensign Francis Wilks.
Ensign Francis Pollard. Ensign Davis. Ensign Kerrey. Sergeant Nicholas
Collins. Sergeant Rounsell. Sergeant Thomas Nichols. Sergeant Giles Geffrey.
Sergeant Tobias Hickman. One hundred sixty eight common soldiers.
The General having intelligence that two Regiments of the enemies Horse
quartered near Bouytracy, sent a party to surprise or fight with them, who
ariving where they were, after some hot disputation, put them to flight, and
took four hundred

Horse, five Colors.

The next morning the General kept his Randevouz at Bouytracy, from whence
they marched on an other design.

CHAP. II. The General obtains several Conquests in the West to keep many
Prisoners: A List of the names, He stormeth the Town of Dartmouth, and takes
it with many Prisoners.
THe General knowing the enemy had fortified Kenterbury, and at Saint Bordeaux
Church, he therefore with five hundred foot, and one hundred horse to visit
the said enemy, and if the Summons were refused, to storm it, and enter
perforce, which they did, fair terms being proffered but not accepted of,
where they took all the enemies nine horses, of which they had store; men,
ammunition, and whatsoever else was there: the first work they took without
any loss, but the other occasioned the loss of five men: of the enemy were
slain twelve; the officers of horse and foot that were taken, were these.

Major James Suppley. Captain Peter Lapp. Captain Richard Price. Captain Thomas
Baker. Lieutenant Richard Marley Cornet Thomas Hayne. Cornet George Gammis.
Quartermaster Oliver Franklin. Corporal John Mucwell. Corporal George Dent.
Corporal Geo^ge Earl. Major Robert Baul. Captain Hugh Edwards. Lieutenant
Peter Mark. Ensign Esdras Micheal. Ensign Christopher Carne. Sergeant John
Christophers. Sergeant Jacob Rogers. Thirty three Troopers. Forty six Horses.
The General for a while quartered about Bouytracy, to hinder and oppose the
enemies Incursions, very brief in these parts, had often skirmishes with them,
and each day took prisoners, one time 200, another time 80, all horsemen, having
been a time, here the General called a Council of War, who generally agreed
for the reducing of Dortmouth, a Town very near them, the General drawing up
his forces against it, sent them a summons, which being refused he gave order
to storm it, and appointed the manner of the storm thus, on the west gate by
Col. Hammond, on the North end of the Town, by Lieutenant Col. Pride, and on
Trustall Church and works by Col. Fortescue, the storm began in the evening,
the Soldiers assaulted with great courage and resolution: Col. Hammond gained
the West gate, his Soldiers flusht therewith, went on, and beating down the
enemies, possessed themselves of many Forts one after another, viz. Mount
Fleggon, the West gate, Paradise Fort, where they took four Lieutenant
Gollonels, and possessed themselves from the West gate to little Dartmouth;
neither was Fortescue this time idle, though more strongly repulsed then his
associates that stormed elsewhere, yet inspight of blows he entered also, and
possessed himself of the place, so that now the miserable enemy were beaten out
of all, save only the great Fort on the East side of the River, called
Kingsworth Fort, to which the Governor and the Earl of Newport for safety
fled, wherefore the General ordered some Dragoons, with two Companies of
Firelocks, and some Sea men to give an Alarm to that Fort, but the enemy
doubting their own strength, desired to come to composition, and to yield upon
terms, which the General condiscended unto, and suffered Sir Henry Carry to
march away, leaving the Arms, Ammunition and all in the Fort to his disposing,
being thus master of all but the Castle, he sent another Summons to the
Governor, who was very pliable and willing to accept of any terms Dire need
enforced him, wherefore he sent out as Hostages Mr. Seamor, Mr. Denham, with
whom came also the Earl of Newport. There were taken 11 Guns in the Harbor,

103 pieces of Ordnance, 100 Horse, 600 Prisoners, Soldiers. A good proportion
of Arms and Ammunition.
Men of Quality taken these:
Sir Hugh Pollard Governor. Earl of Newport. Colonel Seymour. Lieutenant
Colo. Codrington. Blunt. Wadland. Searle. Majors. Fulford. Hooper. Captains.
Pollard. Woodly. Sampson. Duke. Fowell. Colefin. Ford. Blewet. Start. Dewning.
Horton. Conway. Reynolds. Philips. Lievtenants. King. Pollard. Hunt. Duncalf.
Many Country Gentlemen, Ministers and inferious Officers, all the common
soldiers as aforesaid.

CHAP. III. The General receives Poutheram Castle by composition, and
prepares for to fall on the City of Exceter.
HAD we any reason to expect, or could our behavior challenge the least of
those infinite mercies the Lord has been pleased to bestow, and does still,
upon our unworthy and sinful selves, who even when we were pressed and sank
under our burdens, when we expected to be delivered into the hands of the
malicious and cruel enemy, even then, I say, who was he that truly and
sincerely humbled himself under the afflicting hand of God, were not then the
ale-benches pressed with the weight of Drunkards till they groaned, who mixing
oaths with Ale, made an ingredience, which quaft of, might surely destroy the
health both of their bodies and souls.

Did not that capital sin of pride reign as kingly, and was borne in as
magnificent pomp on the backs of men and women, as ever before or since: Was
not the Sabbath as frequently and wickedly profaned as before? And in a word,
were not all sins obnoxious and destructive to a Nation, then predominant? and
since it has pleased God to take his hand off from us, and to burn the rod
wherewith he erst so sorely scourged us? Who is he that rendereth thanks as he
ought? are we not frozenin our dregs, and abide in our wretchedness still? well
let us take heed and look to our selves, least it happen to us as whilome to
that now scattered The Jews.
Nation, whom neither judgemements would convince, nor mercies allure.

AFter the taking of Dartmouth, the General advanced to Powtheram Castle,
situated within three miles of Exceter, and having sent a Summons to Major
Fletcher the Governor he accepted thereof, and surrendered the Castle on these
terms, that every man should go to his own home, armed with swords only, the
other Arms, Ammunition, and whatsoever else was in the Castle, to be delivered
up to the General, There were in it 1200 Soldiers.

Taken, 1400 Arms, 4 Horses, Match and bullet proportionable.

FRom Pawtheram Castle the General advanced toward Exceter, with a resolution
to reduce that City, but here the Soldiers undrwent much sorrow, a scarcity of
all things necessary: for the enemy having been but a little before them here,
had eat up the Country, and as their manner was, and still is, left nothing of
worth behind them, so that the General was forced to purvey for his Army, and
to fetch provisions from places and Towns far distant from them, the Governor
of Exeter doubting of the fidelity of the Townsmen, and of their coherence with
the Parliament, to make all sure, and strengthen himself, as he thought,
framed, and imposed on all the Inhabitants this Oath.

I AB do freely from my heart swear, vow and protest in the presence of
Almighty God, that I will use my best ondevour to mayntain and defend the City
of Exceter against all Forces raised, or to be raised without his Majesty's
consent, and perticularly against the Forces new under the command of Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX, or any other that shall command them, or any other Forces
against this City, all Forces which do or shall adhere to them or their Party,
and I will neither directly or iudirectly give, nor as much as in me lies
suffer to be given any intelligence, advice or information to the Army, or any
of those Forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, or to any other Forces
not raised by the Kings consent, which shall now, or hereafter come against, or
lie before this City, but will from time to time discover to the Governor of
this City, all treacherous Plots, Designs, Conspiracies, or Attempts, which I
shall know, heareof, or probably suspect to be plotted against his Majesty's
person and this City, or any of his Majesty's Armies, Towns, or Forces, neither
will I, nor shall any other by my procurement, directly or indirectly, by
words, or otherwise dissuade or discourage, any of the Soldiers or Inhabitants
of this City from engaging themselves or persisting in his Majesty's service,
or the defense of this City, against the Forces aforesaid, and this I vow and
protest, according to the usual sense and meaning of the words, hereof without
any equivocation, or mental reservation, so help me, and by the contents of
this Book.

Thus this cruel and tyannicall Governor, not content to force diverse honest
and godly men, which were known to be in that City, to expose their lives for
the defense of those, who complead and furthered all means and ways,
destructive to reformation, but also by this did his utmost to kill their souls
by imposing upon them, an unconscionable an wicked oath, but in such cases it
is doubtful, whether we may or not, cheer our selves saying, votum extortum,
non esse servandum.

CHAP. IV. The General forsaking Exceter, advances at Torrington, meets
with the Lord Hoptons Forces, whom after abloudy fight he vanquisheth and
routeth and after advances for Cornwall.
THe Parliaments General Sir Thomas Fairfax, hearing of the execrable
proceedings of the enemy about Torrington, resolved to march thither, and
either by fight to impair their strength, or by the terror of his approach, to
force them out of those parts, the Leader and Commander in chief of the enemy
was the Lord Hopton, a man more rash then valiant, he commanded an Army of
four thousand horse, and two thousand foot, who being come to Ring-rash, there
pitched his Camp resolved to fight, should the General engage with him.

Sir Thomas having left the City of Exceter, begirt with a strong siege,
appointing Colonel Hamon to block up the East and West side of the River, and
to raise some Sowthams to lie about Totnesse, for the securing of the Coungrey,
drew his Army toward Torrington, with purpose, to fight or dislodge the Enemy
as aforesaid, the Lord Hopton had all his horse drawn together about
Torrington, and with his foot prepared to defend the Town, which he fortified
strongly, the General drawing near within two miles of the enemy, received
intelligence that a hundred Dragoons had possessest the lodge in the Park, and
were fortifying it, who upon the Generals nearer approach forsook the house and
fled, the Forlorn Hope perceiving took many of them prisoners, and so eagerly
chased them, that unawares they came so near the Town, they could not retreat,
whereupon the General sent a strong party to bring them off, whose approach
the enemy perceiving, they fell upon them, and they on them, so that there
happened a bloody skirmish betwixt them, the General fearing the enemy would
ore-power them, and hemming them in, cut them to pieces; sent a Colonel with
three Regiments of foot and some horse, to lie for Reserves unto them who after
long fight, quitting themselves like men put the enemy to flight, and returned
the next day: the General apprehending by certain evident signs that the
enemy doubting their strength, intended to quit their place, if it were
possible without fighting, wherefore the General sent forth small parties, to
the end of the Town to make a certain discovery, who incroaching near their
Works, and being viewed by the enemy, they entertained them with a volley of
shot: the General hearing it, and thinking they were engaged, sent a strong
party to assist them, and after three Regiments more, after a long fight, and
many hot firings Sir Thomas his Soldiers prevailed, and maugre their enemies
came up, even to the Barracadoes and line, where at push of pike they continued
long in disputation, but at length God assisting them, they beat their enemies
from their Works, who flying they entered with them, the middle of the Town,
where they endured a hotter skirmish with the horse then erst with the foot,
who charged them very resolutely, insomuch, that they were almost forted to
forsake the Works again, but that Colonel Hammond, with a new party entered to
their assistance, rallyed anew the scattered party Major Stephens with his
Forlorn hope coming up to second them, charged the enemy again and put them
to flight, the enemies horse making good their Retreat out of the Town toward
the Bridge, a place was very advantageous for them, and occasioned their
preservation, the Bridge they went over lying so beyond the Town, as the
Generals horse could not reach them, but through the Town, which by reason of
straight passage through several Baracadoes was very tedious, by means
whereof, and of the continued straight lanes, the enemy had to retreat by,
after they were over the River, as also by the advantage of the night, and by
their perfect knowledge of the Country, and Sir Thomas his soldiers utter
ignorance therein, they could do little or no execution upon the pursuit, but
parties sent out several ways: did the best they could, and took some
prisoners. There were taken in all about 600 common soldiers, the enemies
horse, with the foot that were not taken or killed, fled into Cornwall.

A List of the Prisoners taken.
Lievtenat Colonel Wood. Captain Prideaux. Captain Cowley. Captain Bowne.
Captain Minne. Captain Mount. Captain Bennet. Captain Moulin^. Captain Weeks.
Commissary Bovey. Lieutenant Hoakie. Lieutenant Kirton. Lieutenant Morris.
Lieutenant Green. Lieutenant Mason. Lieutenant Gering. Cornet Wels. Ensign
Fielding. Ensign Huggins. Ensign Williams. Allen, Mackmalen. Sergeant
Boswell. Sergeant Trevor. Sergeant Pewelly. Sergeant Sheffield, General of the
Princes Lifeguard. 68. Troops of the Lord Hoptons Lifeguard. Of Culpppers, 7
Of Stukleys, 3 Of Colonel Webs, 2 Of Colonel Huntington, 2 Of Colonel Slingsby,
2 Of Colonel Hoptons, 2 Of Colonel Hoopers. 3 Lieutenant Cleulands, 2 Of
Colonel Crisps, 1 Of Colonel Gettings, 2 Lord Capels servants, 5 Colonel
Champeroons, 1 Colonel Collins, 8 Colonel Shelleys, 9 Colonel Slaughters, 3
Colonel Arundels, 5 Colonel Trevamors, 5
After the taking of Torrington, the General having placed a strong Garrison of
soldiers in it, whom he bound by an oath to keep for the use of the King and
his Parliament, he advanced with his whole Army into Cornwall, of whose
proceedings, read more in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Sir Thomas Fairfax with his Army ariveth in Cornwall, has diverse
Skirmishes with the enemy there: the Lord Hopton having recruited himself,
commits many outrages. The Cornish Petition to His Excellency, who having
surrounded the Lord Hopton, summons him to yield on Honorable conditions.
Hoptons Answer.
FRom Torrington his Excellency advanced to Launceston, where he abode two
days to refresh his wearied men, and then advanced six miles further to Bodnam,
and sending out a forlorn hope, they happened to encounter with the enemies
Scouts, whom they took, not one man escaping, and being brought to the
General confessed, that they belonged to a Guard of 300 horse, that kept on a
pass, within three miles of Bodnam, whereupon the General gave order to
advance near that place, who on their journey descryed where this body of the
enemies horse stood, who faced them for a while, but when they saw them make up
to them, they retreated back to Bodnam: Intelligence came now to the General,
that the two Companies of Dragoons that were sent toward Camelford, the day
before to gain the possession of an house, to the intent that they being there
might not fail of Intelligence, whether or no the enemy intended to break
through Eastward, I say Intelligence came that these Dragoons were in danger of
surprisall by a great body of the enemies horse, who had watched their
opportunity, and got between them and their Rendevouz: hereupon the General
sent a thousand horse to relieve them, but before they came the valiant
Dragoons had repulsed and put the Enemy to flight, and returned with the Horse
aforesaid. The next morning the General drew up his Army upon a Heath, within
two miles of Bodman, and sent a party to discover whether the enemy were yet in
the Town or not, who brought word, they had quit the Town the night before
both horse and Foot, the Lord Hopton bringing up the Rear himself, the people
of Cornwall were generally possessed with fear of Sir Thomas arrival, but when
they saw his clement and fair carriage, and that he so ordered his Army, that
not the least outrage or villainy was committed, they changed their minds,
saying, They found them Friends, and not Enemies, The Lord Hoptons soldiers,
after their quitting of Bodman committed many violent outrages, and forced the
Country before them plundering all of Ability to nothing, so that now they
began to be abhord, and stink in the nostrils of the Cornish, who now intended
to break their yoke and free themselves from the Egyptian bondage they erst
sustained, they therefore unanimously agreed, to put themselves under the
protection of the Parliament, and for them and their cause to live and die.

The General having received Bodman, thought it fit in his journey to reduce
mount Edgeombe, and for that end sent a Summons to the Governor, willing him
to surrender the said Mount into his hands for the use of King and Parliament,
the Governor at that exceedinly straighmed for provisions, gladly accepted his
offer on this condion, the Fort surrendered to disband his Regiment, and depart
to his own dwelling. There were taken these Gentlemen whose names are here
inserted, who desired to be under the protection of the Parliament.

The Lord Mohan. Sir John Trel^^ny. Sir Nicholas Lower. Pierce Edgcombe
Esquire. William Scawer Esquire. Master Corriton. William Bond Esquire. Richard
Edgcombe Esquire, Master Glanvile Esquire, Major Nicholas Saul, Captain William
Bond, Captain Bourne. Alexander Lower Esquire. M. Francis Saul Esquire.
Nathaniel Trevanion, of Tregerthen Esquire. Major William Trevisa of Crookdon.
Esquire. John Batershy Esquire. Richard Spur Esquire. John Roe Esquire. Master
Rashly. Master John Trevery. Master Bagley. Master Walter Hele. Lieutenant Col.
Fortescue. Major Warren. Sir Richard Prideaux High Sheriff of the County. Also
M. Arrundell the Papist, a man of means, desires to be under the Parliaments
protection.
I spoke a little before of the intensions of the Cornishmen, to submit
themselves to the Parliament, proffering to rise in arms for them, and to serve
under their Noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax, now as a witness of their real
intentions, they sent one Master Vivian, and others with a Petition to the
General, the contents whereof were these:

To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Fairfax Captain Generll of the Forces
raised by the High Court of Parliament, under his command, and other the
renowned Worthies of the Army.
Right Honorable:
WE though not an acceptable number of a more unaceptable County, have by Gods
blessing so fair an advantage of giving our due respects to your Honor, do
with them present our persons also, which we most unfainedly protest have been
hitherto by us, most unvoluntarily separated, as our former readiness, and
frequent endeavors, to advance this service, besides imprisonments, fines, or
other most miserable sufferings, can evidently testify, and therefore we
humbly bless the great Lord of Hosts, by whose providence you are made such
victorious Instruments of our deliverance from such intolerable bondage, and
next to our great and wise Counsel, by whose public care and mission, we
have the happiness this day to see you conquerours, for the preservation of
our religion so long violated, and restitution of our liberty so long
inthralled: neither may we omit a grateful acknowledgment of the unattempted
valor and vigilance which has been so magnanimously exercised for the
reducing of this unhappy Kingdom, from the woeful condition of a blody war, to
so fair hopes of an assured and happy peace: and since it has pleased God,
thus to bless us, we presume not to motion, through difference their future
care of his glory, and of the Commonwealths good, having so many rare examples
of your readiness to defend both: however give us leave as a people, that to
our great grief and misery, have a long time wanted the happy influence and
equity of the Laws to mention our desires of their reparation, whereby also to
distinguish our selves from those, who have with an high hand endeavored to
subvert them, and as hitherto have not wanted our prayers to God for a blessing
on your Counsels and actions: So now your Honor shall not want the ready
though weak assistance of our lives and fortunes, etc.

The wonderful and admirable providence of God, in so short a time to turn the
hearts of an averse and diversovelent people, and to make them become pliable,
conformable and desirous of that good, of that good which before they contemned
and abhorred, the renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, having pursued, ore
taken, and almost surrounded the enemy, commanded by the Lord Hopton, who since
his last discomfiture at Torrington, had recruited and made up a more numerous
Army then before, thought it good, no doubt, moved by the spirit of God thereto
to send him a summons, the acceptance whereof might hinder the inevitable ruin
that else would happen on both sides: the summons this.

Sir,
the goodness of God to his people, and his just hand against Hopton summoned.
their enemies your forces, being reduced to such a condition as to my sense,
the same hand of God continuing with us, they are not likely to have
subsistence, or shelter long, or to escape thence, or if they could have whither
to go for better, I have thought good for the preventing of more bloodshed, or
of further hardship or extremity, to any but such whose hearts, God shall
harden to their destruction, to send you this summons for your self and them
to lay down their Arms, withal a tender of such conditions, as upon present
surrender, and an engagement never more to bear Arms against the Parliament,
it may be better then any thing they can rationally expect, by farther standing
out.

First, therefore to Soldiers in general, whether English or Forraigner, I
shall grant liberty either to go beyond sea, or to their homes in England, as
they please, and to such as English, as shall choose to live at home, my
protectton for the liberty of their persons, and for the immunity of their
estates, and all to go their ways with what they have, save their horses and
sword.

But for the Officers in commission, and Gentlemen of quality I shall allow
them to go with Horses for themselves, and one servant or more suitable to
their quality, and with arms befitting Gentlemen in a condition of peace.

To all Troopers and the inferior Horse Officers bringing and delivering up
their horses and arms 20 shillings in liew of their horses, to carry them home.

To English Gentlemen of considerable estates, my pass and recommendation to
the Parliament, for their moderate composition.

Lastly for your self, besides what is before employed to you in common with
others, you may be assured of such mediation to the Parliament on your behalf,
both from my self and others, as one whom for many gifts and personal worth
we esteem above any other of your party, supposing you more swayed with
principles of honor and conscience, we most pity, and whose happiness so
far as is consistent with the public welfare, we should delight in more then
in our long sufferings.

These things not from any need or other end then humane, having offered I
leave to your consideration, and those whom they concern. Desiring yours and
their speedy resolving, which I pray may be such as may be most for the honor
of God, and welfare of this poor Kingdom.

Thomas Fairfax.

This summons being sent by a Trumpetter, to the Lord Hopton, he received it
with meekness, and used the Trumpetter very courteously, and dimissed him with
this that he would send an Answer, by a Trumpetter of his own, which the next
day he failed not to do, the General perusing the Letter, found the contents
thereof, such as emplyed a willingness to end the business of the West
without more bloodshed, also he desired in his letter Commissioners should be
appointed on both sides to meet together, and treat of their conclusion and
final agreement, see at large in the next Book.

The end of the second Book.
THE YEAR OF JUBILEE: The third Book.
CHAP. I. Sir Thomas Fairfax conclusion and final agreement with the Lord
Hopton, for the disbanding his forces and submitting to the Parliament, the
Articles of Agreement betwixt Sir Thomas Fairfax and him.
THough we must confess, and ought with all thankfulness and humility to
acknowledge, that the mercies of God in assisting the forces of the Parliament,
fighting for his cause have been many and great, yet not any one of them, as I
may speak with reverence, may be compared, or were equivalent to this great
favor of God, that he should give the General of the enemy an heart, not
being plunged in any great or extraordinary misery, not wanting a considerable
and strong party: which according to the best information, and by the
confession of our enemies; was not less then four, some will have them five
thousand horse, that thereby not only so great a body of Cavalry was broken,
but so many both Officers and Soldiers, disobliged from taking arms, and at
such a time, when they expected a foreign aid to join with them, I say that
God should do so for us, and make him to compound, may convince the most
malignant spirit, and give notice to the whole world, the Parliaments real
intentions: but to our History.

I spoke before of the Lord Hoptons desiring Commissioners, might be appointed
on both sides to treat, which the General Sir Thomis Fairfax willingly agreed
to, and nominated in the behalf of himself these, viz.

Colonel Ireton, Colonel Lambert, Colonel Aubin, Comissary General Stane,
Captain Edward Herle, Richard Dean Comptroller of the Ordnance.
On the behalf of the Lord Hopton these:

Col. Charles Goring, Col. Marcus Trevor, Col. Thomas Panton, Col. John Bovill,
Sir Richard Prideaux, Major Got^^re,
During the Treaty, and before the Articles were confirmed and ratified by the
Commissioners on both sides, these Gentlemen came to the General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and desired to be under the protection of the Parliament.

33 Lieutenant Colonels, Sejeant Majors and Captains, Forty Gentlemen of
quality, The Gover. of Man's C^s^^.
Also the Cornish soldiers prostrating their arms and (...) at the Generals
feet, protested that they would never be wrought or persuaded, by any
whatsoever for the future, to fight against the Parliament.

The Lord Hoptons soldiers, especially the Foreigners hearing of the noble
proffer that the Parliements General Sir Thomas Fairf^^ had made, pressed on
Hopton, and urged him with vehemence to accept of the rare offer, which he did
not, or to say truth, Durst not gainsay, but sending another Letter to Sir
Thomas, desiring him to hasten, and that the Articles being penned might be
ratified and confirmed, the General though if he would have been rigorous and
implacable, considering the former fury and rage of the enemy, he might at his
pleasure have killed or taken them, yet he would not give way to passion or
revenge, esteeming it a disparagement to his Honor, to insult over a dejected
or disabled foe: the Heathen could of that noblest of beasts,

Magnanimo, satis est praedam prostrasse Leoni,
Pugnasuam finem, cum jacet hosts habet.
Paraphrased:

The noble Lion does his power lay by,
And counts it glory, if his foe he has
Brought low, and scorns to hurt his enemy
If he submit: he will not harbor wrath.
The Articles between the Lord Hopton, and Sir Thomas Fairfax were these.
1.
THat the Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, shall within
six days after the date hereof be wholly disbanded and discharged by the Lord
Hopton, and the Generals, Colonels, Captains, and allother Officers, according
to the several charges hereafter expressed.

2.
That all Troopers, Corporals of Horse, Farriers and Sa^lers, shall bring in,
and deliver up their Horses, with bridles, saddles, and all the arms unto his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, that all Troopers and
Corporals, that shall appear Gentlemen of worth, shall be allowed to carry
with them their swords.

3.
That upon performance hereof they shall receive 20 shillings a man, and shall
have passes if they please to go beyond Sea.

4.
That those Commission Officers of Horse under the Lord Hopton, and all
Trumpetters belonging to them, shall have liberty either to go to their on
homes in England, or beyond the Seas, with their bag and baggage, and shall
have such number of Horse and Equipage, as is hereafter allowed, according to
their several qualities.

5.
That is to say,

For those that shall choose to go beyond the Seas, the full number of horses,
and five arms, if they have so many of their own.

To Trumpetters one horse a piece, and their trumpets.
To Quartermasters two horses, and one case of Pistols.
To Cornets three horses, and two case of Pistols.
To Lievtenants four horses, and three case of Pistols.
To Captains, Majors, and Lieutenant Colonels six horses apiece, and four case
of Pistols.
To Colonels eight horses, and six case of Pistols.
To the adjutant General six horses, and four case of Pistols.
To the other adjutants, of Brigades three horses apiece, one case of Pistols.
To the Major General twelve horses, and six case of Pistols.
To the Scout-master General six horses, one case of Pistols.
To the Quartermaster General four six horses, two case of Pistols.
To the Martial General four horses, one case of Pistols.
To the Comissary General of horse-provisions, three horses, and a case of
Pistols, etc.
Every Officer having Arms and Horses more or less according to his degree,
which were needless and tedious to express, being subscribed unto by the
Commissioners on both sides, and hestages given and received for the true
performance: the Lord Hopton disbanded.

The news whereof so much discouraged Col. Trevanton, Governor of the Fort and
Harbor at Pe^rin, that he sent to the General, desired to surrender, and
prayed that he might be included in the Treaty with the Lord Hopton, and enjoy
the benefit of the Articles agreed, or, for the dissolving of Hoptons Army, by
which means the West was cleared of a Field Army, and the hearts of the Royal
Party did quail.

CHAP. II. Sir Thomas Fairfax receives the famous City of Exceter by
composition, and begirteth the City of Oxford, with a strong siedge.
HAving brought our famous and renowrned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the
Walls of the chief and grand Garrison, of the enemy, the City Oxford, he
having by Gods assistance, all others of worth and validity: So that now the
cause of God, and the Defenders of his Truth are exalted, and his enemies
subdued and brought low. It is meet I should give thanks to God, and laud his
name for his so great mercies.

An Hymn to GOD.
O Thou who art Etern, from whose bright eye nothing can hidden lie:
Who rul'st the things above, and oak below, And all men's hearts do know.
Enter my frozen breast, and let there be A warmth infused in me
That I may laud thy Name, as it is meet, Extol thy mercies sweet.
First, that thou Lord were pleased for to give An heart to some to strike:
And seek thy glory, when alas we thought In bondage to be brought.
And when we trembled, these things for to see, Adhered to Popery*
Next that thou have been pleased for to bless, And crown with good success
Their just endeavors, so that now we may Serve thee without gainsay.
And have subdued thy foes, so that theirs non^ Thy truth to tread upon.
Go on our God, we pray, and crown the and, Thy goodness still extend.
So shall those that hare thy ways convicted be, To see how wondrously:
Thou have supported us through dangers, great, And troubles that did threat.
But let not us, we thee entirely pray, Be not brought unto decay.
By David's Division, but so order thou And such prudence allow
Unto the State of England, that they may Be able for to stay
Aided by thee, all ills, that else would hap, Are laid us to entrap:
That having settled thy true worship, We May have CONFORMITY.
We spoke before in the fourth Chapter of the second Book, how the General
having left a strong party to block up Exceter, advanced after Hopton into
Cornwall, and having obtained a bloudlesse Victory over him, and settled
Cornwall under the Parliaments protection, he returned with his whole Army from
the West, and finding the City of Exceter not yet reduced to the obedience of
the Parliament, he drew up his Army before it, and sent the Sir John Be^kley.
Governor this Summons.

Sir, being retured with my Army from the West, where it pleased God to bestow
a dry and bloudlesse Victory upon me, to the great peace and quiet of those
parts, and conceiving it my duty likewise to endeavor the good of this County,
which by occasion of your Garrison, is necessarily obstructed, I thought fit
once more to send you a summons, to deliver up to me the City of Exceter, with
the Castle, Forts, Arms and Ammunition, believing by this you are satisfied of
the relief you expected of the Princes Army, and may equally be of any relief,
to come from any other place if your intelligence and knowledge, were the same
with ours, there is nothing more induces me hereunto, then an unfeigned zeal,
to save any further bloodshed, and as much as in me lies to preserve that
City, which has already suffered deeply, in these unnatural distractions,
though I shall not boast of my number or strength, yet I must needs tell you
that I doubt not but the same power, which has formerly made difficult things
easy will answer this, and will quit me from being counted the occasioner of
those inconveniences and miseries that will necessarily ensue upon your
refusal: Sir, I shall expect your speedy and positive Answer, I rest your
Servant, Thomas Fairfax.

Sir John Berkley upon receipt of this Summons, called a Council of War, who
after long debate, concluded that Commissioners should be chosen to treat,
whereof one part should be for the Gentry, another for the Soldiery, a third
part for the Clergy, and the fourth part for the inhabitants of the City, the
Commissioners nominated; they sent their intentions to Sir Thomas, he yielded
thereto, and appointed a place of meeting to be at Poultermore house, three
miles from Exceter, the Commissioners on the behalf of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax were these:

Lieutenant General Hamond. Colonel, Sir Hardresse Waller. Colonel Lambert.
Colonel Harley. Colonel Pry. Commissary Stane.
The Governor Sir John Berkley appointed these.

Sir Henry Berkley. Sir George Carry.
Col. Will. Ashburnham, Col. Godolphin, Cap. Fitzgarret, Master John Weres, Mr.
Robert Walker, Mr. Thomas Knight, Mr. Thomas Kendall, Mr. Thomas Foord, Sir
John Berkley.
The day appointed, the Commissioners met at the place aforesaid, two for the
Gentry, two for the Soulderie, two for the Clergy, and two for the Inhabitants
of the City, and Sir Thomas his Commissioners aforenamed, Articles were
performed as agreed on, and the City delivered unto His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, there were found therein

30 Pieces of Ordnance, 3 Murdering pieces, 100 Barrels of powder, 500
Muskets, 100 Pikes, 80 Tun of wine.
Sir John Berkley marched out of Exceter with 200 of the enemy toward Oxford,
which place he had nominated for his refuge Garrison.

The Parliament knowing that the Princess Heneretta Maria with her Governesse
resided in this City, gave the General notice, she should go with a
sufficient convoy, with their plate, money, and goods, wheresoever her
Governesse pleased, the King hearing hereof desired she might be at Richmond,
which was assented to.

From Exceter Sir Thomas Fairfax was desired by the Houses of Parliament, to
advance for Oxford, and to lay siege to it, and God assisting to take it, at
that present his Majesty being in person there, the reason, he had no place of
strength else to be in, some Lords exempted from mercy in the propositions to
be sent to the King for peace, desired the King to pass with them out of
Oxford ere the siege was planted: Answer was returned by some other Lords, that
the King needed not to fear so sudden a siege yet, but notwithstanding when
they saw Sir Thomas in truth intended the siege, all of them were desirous to
have him gone, peradventure hoping thereby, to make the better conditions for
themselves.

However, the King left Oxford, it was said by some he went toward Wales, and
so for Ireland, others for the North, and so toward Montrosse, but the House
of Commons Apr. 9. received intelligence that the King in a private manner
departed out of Oxford, his beard shaven close, and not after his wonted
manner, his own hair turned up, and a periwig on his head, of a black color,
accompanied only with three, and one of them his Majesty waited on, after the
manner of a Servingman.

His bosom friend the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Lindsey, the Kings
Cup Bearer, Sir William Fleetwood, The Kings Standard Bearer and Knight
Marshall, Sir Edward Sydenham, and Mr. Carew of the bed chamber, came to
Colonel Ramsborough, and cast themselves on the mercy of the Parliament, who
ordered they should be committed as prisoners to Warwick Castle.

CHAP. III. Sir Thomas Fairfax receives Bostell Garrison by composition,
likewise Oxford and Farrington, the Articles agreed on for the surrender of
each of them.
NOw gins the impetuous shock of War to abate its strength and fury, and as the
tired Garrisons yet untaken do faint and quail, (so gathers England spiret and
new life) thou that have honored those that honor thee, and those that
regarded thee not thou hall lightly esteemed, what dull and Lethargick humor
puzels our sense, that yet we fare as those Israelites, who having vanquished
their foes, fled from their own shadows, why sing we not Hymns to the
highest, and out-joy joy it self? knowing that what our forefathers durst not
imagine, our selves some years past despaired to attain, is now accrued: and
God assisting like to continue to the incredible good of our posterity. What
spirit of diffention tyrannizeth over the minds of some, that they instead of
giving Thanks, they have not been devoured by the All-devouring Sword? murmur
and repine that they are impedited from following after their Ignes fatuus,
which will lead them to the whirl-poole of decay: and as if they envied their
own happiness. Some instead of honoring and putting their hands under their
feet to do them good, who have under God been the savers of their lives and
states: I say instead of so doing, some stick not to accuse those worthy and
ever to be renowned Patriots the House of Peers, as desirous of Illegal and
Tyrannical power, rail against their Sovereigne, whom though he has been led
away to the hurt of his people by his and their enemies, yet we hope that the
spirit of disaffection abandoned, he may yet comply with his and their
Countries lovers, and put to his helping hand for the repairing of Sions
breaches, and make them stronger then before, but all this time I shall but
delay the Reader from more pleasing discourse.

Sir Thomas Fairfax having sent a Summons to the Governor of Bostoll Garrison,
Sir William Campion Britanicus once termed him the brother of Campion the
Jesuit whether or no is not material, at first he was some thing peremptory
in his answer, but by degrees he declined, and began to talk of accommodation,
Commissioners on both sides were appointed to treat, and to agree on Articles
for the surrender of the Garrison.

The Commissioners for Sir Thomas Fairfax were Quartermaster General Gravener,
Major Harison, Major Huntington, Major Shilborn.


The Commissioners for Sir William Campion were Sir George Anglingby, Captain
George Kingsbey, Captain David Wyrell, Edward Campion.


These Commissioners being met, after sometime of Debate they came to a
conclusion, and agreed on Articles for the surrender of the Garrison, with all
the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, the heads of the Articles these.

1 THat the Garrison of Bostoll with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and
all other provisions and furniture of War be delivered to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax.

2 That the Governor with his proper servants, and all Officers in Commission
and Gentlemen shall march away with their Horses, Arms, and Goods, properly
belonging to them.

3 That all those that desire to make composition with the Parliament, shall
have the Generals effectual recommendation.

4 That all those that are desirous to go over beyond the Seas, shall have the
Generals pass for that purpose.

To the Scholars of the now surrendered Oxford.
RAve not nor be discontented ye men of Art, Mars has a long time usurped even
the Muses Bower, Clio and her sisters have sat weeping, Apollo having thrown
away his Harp, despaired ever to strike on his Lyre, but now the surly Music
of the Drum, horrid to female cares leaves talking, they will resume their
pristinate order, and chant as loud as ever before.

Why should you lament, or wearing your gowns only on one shoulder, your arms
folded with all, to see you shall enjoy your ancient rights, and receive not
the least damage by being under the power of Parliament?

What though you part with your Organs, whose enchanting melody you whilome so
highly advanced, the harmony of your well tuned voices, will equal if not
excel the other, and God will be better pleased there with?

What though the gorgeous Copes be out of fashion, and men are so far
enlightened, that they desire not to see one representing Caiphas kneeling
before an Altar by Taper-light, and mumbling to himself Mattins not worth the
hearing? Is it not worth the hearing, is it not better to see on kneeling, clad
in plain black cloth, making an oration to God pithy and pious? What though
your Crosses are demolisht, and the pictures of dead Saints removed, alas, this
will occasion you no damage at all, never doubt but crosses enough will cleave
to you more then you would, for as that holy Apostle, the Holy Ghost
witnesses, says he, that bonds and afflictions attend me, so I and you and
you may say, that experience teaches, that poverty is the patrimony of the
Muses, and that troubles and neglect, contumelies and vilifyings attend the
learned, but bark on you Wolf-fac'd worldlings, as the height of the Moon
surpasses the earth, so far different are you in worth from the knowing,
handsome pictures, walking shadows, and indeed comely beasts, but I run the
hazard of severe censure from some shallow Critic. Now to my History.

Sir Thomas as aforesaid having begirt the City of Oxford with a strong siege,
his wisdom in managing Military Affairs for the reducement thereof is to be
admired, to speak of Oxford, it was very strongly fortified (should I err if I
said impregnable, the chiefest Town of strength the King had: a summons being
sent into the Governor Sir Thomas Glemham, but slight ed, the General called
a Council of war to consult what course would be most expedient for the
present, some talked of storming, others of starving them out, but the prudent
and renowned General maturely considering the strength of the Town which he
knew was so fortified, that it was almost unaccessible, next their provisions
of victuals in the Town, which he was certainly informed would last them six
months. And thirdly, considering that the propounding honorable terms might
save the bloodshed would inevitably follow by assauking the Town, and impede
the ruin and destruction of so famous a City: I say on these considerations,
the General with the consent of all his Officers in chief, sent them Articles,
and an exhortation to yield on terms, the Governor accepted the proffer of
treating, and Marston was the place appointed where the Commissioners were to
meet and treat, the Commissioners on both sides met, and after some days spent
in pro and con at length these Articles were assented to and hostages given on
both sides for their true performance, the Articles these.

1 THe Duke of York is to have liberty to come to London; with attendance and
necessaries fit for his Highness his Majesty is to have notice of it, and his
Highness is to remain at such a place, with such attendance as the Parliament
shall appoint, within the compass of fourscore miles of London.

2 The two German Princes, to have Passes to go beyond Sea, not to come within
20 miles of London, nor remain in England above four Months, nor do no act
against the Parliament.

3 Sir Thomas Glemham, and all other Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, to
march out with Horse, Arms, Colors, Trumpets, Drums, Matches light, and
Bullets in their mouths, every Soldier to have 12. Charges of ponder, and
their proper Goods, and so to march 15. miles whither Sir Thomas Glemham will,
and there to lay down their Arms and deliver them to his Excellency, or to
whom he shall appoint, and as many as will are to go to the own dwellings.

4 That all Officers and Soldiers and others, that shall go to their own homes
shall act nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament, and are to have Passes
for their protection, etc.

That they shall have free quarter in their march to their own dwellings. That
each man shall carry with him that which is his proper goods: that any Officer
or Soldier that shall have desire to serve any foreign Prince shall have
pass to go, and free quarter for 28 days, That such shall have liberty to
pass to London to treat with any foreign Ambassador, and have liberty to
come in equipage suitable to his degree: That then they shall have pass, and
to be transported, etc. That none of the Soldiers shall be reproached or
abused, nor forced to serve against their will. That those that are sick or
wounded have liberty to stay and care taken of them till they be recovered.

That whosoever they have taken as lawful prize since the siege was before
Oxford shall continue in the hands of the possessor.

That the Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Clergy men, shall have liberty to
compound for their estates, and not exceed two years revenue: That all persons
whatsoever during the time agreed upon, for their stay in England, may have
liberty to stay in Oxford, or with other friends as they will, and without
prejudice to there friends that receive them.

Let God have all the glory for this mercy and all other infinite mercies,
which after a special manner he has showred upon our unworthy heads, this
last and never to be forgotten year: and let the name of the worthy Instrument
of his glory Sir Thomas Fairfax be had in perpetual honor.

FINIS.

