Twelve strange PROEHESIES, Besides Mother SHIPTONS, Predicting wonderful
events to betide these years of danger in this Climate, whereof some have
already come to pass well worthy of note.

Most of them were found in the Reigns of Edward the fourth, and Henry the
eighth, Kings of England, and are these which follow: Viz.
1. Mother Shiptons Prophesies. 2. The Blind man's Prophecy. 3. Ignatius Loyala
4. Sybilla's Prophecy. 5. Merlins Prophecy. 6. Otwell Bins Prophecy. 7. M.
Brightmans Prophecy. 8. M. Giftheils Prophecy.


With five other Prophesies, never before Printed.

Whereunto is added the Predictions of M. John Saltmarsh, to his Excellency the
Lord Fairfax, and the Council of his Army: As also the manner of his Death.

Now Printed and published for the satisfaction of those who have been abused
by false and imperfect Copies; with Marginall Notes on Mother Shiptons
Prophesies.

York.

Mother Shipton.

Wolsey.

outside the walled ciy of York, Mother Shipton holds a staff in her hand, and
indicates with the other toward Cardinal Wolsey and another man, who look out
from a tower

LONDON, Newly Printed for Francis Coals at the sign of the Half-Bowle in the
Old-Bayly.

The Prophecy by Mother Shipton.
When she heard King Henry the eight should be King, and Cardinal Wolsey
should be at York, Note, that this Prophecy was never exactly Printed before.
she said, that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York with the King: and
the Cardinal hearing, being angry, sent the Duke of Suffolk and the Lord
Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the Kings House near York:
where leaving their men, they went to M. Besley to York, and desired him to go
with them the Mother Shiptons house; where when they came, they knocked at the
door; she said, Come in M. Besley, and those honorable Lords with you, and M.
Besley would have put in the Lords before him: but she said, Come in M. Besley,
you know the way, but they do not: this they thought strange, that she should
know them and never saw them. Then they went into the house, where there was a
great fire, and she bid them welcome, calling them by their names, and sent for
some Cakes and Ale, and they drank and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said
the Duke, if you knew what we came about, you would not bid us so welcome; she
said, the messenger should not be hanged. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you
said the Cardinal should never see York; yea said she, I said he might see
York, but never come at it: but, said the Duke, when he comes to York thou
shall be burned; we shall see that, said she, and plucking her handkerchiefe
off her head, she threw it into the fire, and it would not burn; then she took
her staff, and turned it into the fire, and it would not burn; then she took
it and put it on again: then said the Duke, what mean you by this? she
replied, if this had burned, I might have burned, Mother Shipton (quoth the
Duke) what think you of me? My Lord, said she, the time will come The Duke was
afterward beheaded.
you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Piercy said,
And what say you of me? My Lord, said she, shoe your horse in the quick, and
you will do well, but your This proved true, for he rose in Rebellion in the
North, and by not flying when he might, he was taken and beheaded at York,
where his body was buried, but his head was stolen away, and carried into
France temp. Eliz. R.
body will be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be stolen from the
bar, and carried into France; at which they all laughed, saying, That would be
a great lope betwixt the head and the Body. Then said the Lord Darcy, And what
think you of me? she said, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it
will do you no good; you are going to war, you will pain many a man, but you
will kill none: so they went away. Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood,
and going to the top of the Tower, he asked where York was, and how far it was
thither, and said, that one said he should never see York; nay, said one, she
said you might see York, but never come at it: he vowed to burn her when he
came to York. Then they showed him York, and told him it was but eight miles
thence; he said, that he would soon be there: but being sent for by the King,
he dyed in his way to London, at Leicester, of a Lask. And Shiptons wife said
to M. Besley, Yonder is a fine Stall built for the Cardinal in the Minster, of
Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, go and present one of the Pillars to King
Henry; and he did so.

M. Besley seeing these things falling out as she had foretold, desired her to
tell him some more of her Prophesies: M. Besley, said she, before that This
came to pass; for Trinity Steeple in York was blown down with a Tempest, and
Owes, Bridge was broken down with a great Flood; and what they did in
repairing the Bridge in the day time with the stone of the Steeple, sell down
in the night, until they (remembering this Prophecy) laid the bishest stone of
the Steeple for the foundation of the Bridge, and then the work stood. And by
this was partly verified another Prophecy of Mother Shipton, (viz.) That her
Maid should live to drive her Cow over Trinity Steeple.
Owes Bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it
shall fall in the night, until they get the highest stone of Trinity Church to
be the lowest stone of Owes Bridge.

Then the day will come when the North shall rue it wondrous sore, but the
South shall rue it for evermore: When Hares kennell on cold hearth Supposed to
be meant by the suppression of Abbyes and other Religious Houses: And at the
Lord William Howards House at Naworth, a Hare came and kindled in his Kitchen
upon the Hearth.
stones, and Lads shall marry Ladies and bring them home, then shall you have a
year of pining hunger, and then a dearth without corn, a woeful day shall be
seen in England, a King and a Queen.

The first coming of the King This was fulfilled in K. James his coming in;
for such a multitude of people stood at Holgate-Bar to behold him, as that to
avoid the press, he was forced to ride by another way.
of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come through the Bar; and
when the King when K. James was at London, his children were at Edenborough,
preparing to come to England.
of the North shall be at London, his tail shall be at Edenborough.

After this shall water This is verified by the conducting of water into.
York-streets through boared Elmes: And the Conduit-house has a Windmill on
the top that draws up the water.
come over Owes Bridge, and a Windmill shall be set on a Tower, and an
Elme-tree shall lie at every man's door; at that time women shall wear great
Hats and great Bands.

And when there is a Lord Mayor A Lord Mayor, whose house was in Minster-Yard
in York, was killed with three stabs.
at York, then let him beware of a stab.

When two Knights Sir Tho. Wentworth and Sir Joh. Savil, in choosing Knights for
the Shire in the Castle-yard in York, did so fall out, that they were never
ascer well reconciled.
shall fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives
after.

When all Colton Hag Colton Hag in her time was a Woodland, a ground full of
Trees, which bore Corn seven years, and the seventh year after that was the
coming in of the Scots and their taking of New Castle,
has borne Crops of Corn, seven years after you shall hear news, there
shall two Judges In the year 1616. two Judges of Assize went out at a gate in
York, where never any Judges were known to go out before or since.
go in and out at Walmgate-Bar.

In 1039. King Charles raised an Army in the Spring,
When wars shall begin in the Spring.
Much we to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry well away,
That ever we lived this day.
He that had any thing, knows this to be true by experience.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most:
you shall not know of the war overnight that you shall have in the morning;
and when it comes, it shall last three years: between Cadron and Air shall be
great warfare; when all the world is as lost, it shall be called Christ crossed.
When the battle begins, it shall be where Near Leicester, where Richard the
Third was slain in battle, there Colonel Hastings was of the first in Arms,
endeavoring to settle the Commission of Array, in opposition to others that
were then setting the Militia.
Crook-back Richard made his Fray.

They shall say, To warfare for your King for half acrowne a day, but stir
not, They will say, To warfare for your King on pain of hanging, but stir
not; How many Welsh and Irish has the K. lost in this War? very few have
returned to their old habitations.
for he that goes to complain, shall not come back again. The time will come
when England shall tremble and quake, for fear of a dead man that shall be
heard to speak; then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the
one is down, they will go to London Town: Then there will be a great batted
between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time; and when
they come to Brammamore they sight, and are again pacified for a time: Then
there will be a great battle between England and Scotland at Stockmore, then
will Ravens fit on the It is to be noted, and admired, that this Cross in the
North in Mother Shiptons days was a tall Stone Cross, which ever since has
been by degrees sinking into the ground, and now is sunk so low, that a Raven
may sit on the top of it, and reach her Bill to the ground.
Cross, and drink as much blood of Nobles as of Commons: then woe is me, for
London shall be destroyed for ever after.

There will come a woman with one eye, and she shall tread in many men's blood
to the knee, and a man leaning on a staff by her, she shall say to him, What
art thou? And he shall say, I am the King of Scots: and she shall say, Go with
me to my house, for there are three Knights; and he will go with her, and stay
there three days and three nights: Then will England be lost; and they will
cry twice a day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knights in Petergate
in York, and the one shall not know of the other: there shall be a child borne
in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him three
horses There was a Child not many years since, borne at Pomfret, with three
thumbs.
to hold while they win England; and all noble blood shall be gone but one: and
they shall carry him to Sheriff Nuttons Castle, six miles from York, and he
shall dye there: and they shall choose there an Earl in the Field, and hanging
their horses on a thorn, rue the time that ever they were born, to see so much
bloodshed. Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they shall keep them
out three days and three nights, and a penny loaf shall be within the Bar
at half a Crown, and without the Bar at a penny and they will swear, if
they will not yield to blow up the Town Walls. Then they will let them in, and
they will hang up the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and they will go into
Crouch-Church: there will three Knights go in, and but one come out again, and
he will cause Proclamation to be made, That any man may take House, Tower, or
Bower, for 21 years, and whilst the world endures there shall never be
warfare again, nor any more Kings or Qeenes, but the Kingdom shall be
governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this, shall
be a white Harvest of Corn gotten in by Women. Then shall be in the North,
that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have seen a man to day; and
for one man there shall be a thousand women. There shall be a man sitting on
Saint James Church hill, weeping his fill: And after that, a Ship come sailing
up the Thames, till it come against London, and the Master of the Ship shall
weep, and the Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he has made so
good a Voyage? And he shall say, Ah, what a goodly City was this I none in the
world comparable to it, and now there is left scarce any house that can let us
have Drink for our Money.

Unhappy he that lives to see these days,
But happy are the dend, Shiptons Wife says:
In the Worlds old age this woman did foretell
Strange things should haep, which in our Times have fell.
A Prediction of King Richard the Third.
IN the Reign of King Richard the Third, his Majesty with his Army lay at
Leicester the night before the battle at Bosworth field was fought. It
happened in the morning as the King rode through the South Gate, a poor old
blind man (by profession a Wheel-wright) sat begging, and hearing of his
approach, said, That it the Moon changed twice that day, having by her
ordinary course changed in the morning, King Richard should lose his Crown,
and be slain: and riding over the Bridge, his left foot struck against a stump
of Wood; which the old man hearing, said, Even so shall his Head at his return
back hit on the same place; which so came to pass: And a Nobleman, that
carried the Moon for his Colors, revolted from King Richard; whereby be lost
that day his life, Crown, and Kingdom: which veresied the presages of that
poor old blind man.

The Prophecy by Ignatius.
IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four or five.
After the E. is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a Plot
Prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall till many a day.
The Ninth shall dye young, and the first
Perhaps shall reign: But oh accursed
Shall be the time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three;
For then the Eagle shall have help
By craft to catch the Lions whelp,
And hurt him sore, except the same
Be cured by the Maidens name.
In July month of the same year,
Saturn conjoines with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prize,
And sure much alicration
Shall happen in Religion:
Believe this truly, if then you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be.
The Prophecy of old Sybilla.
WHen Scotlands hundred and ninth unconquered King,
The sixteen hundred thirty and ninth year,
Into his age of thirty nine shall reign,
Then shall the Papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire,
For Scotland shall that blessed work begin;
Then shall the Whore of Babel we had here,
Be banished quite, which Bishops did bring in.
Then thou brave England, which wast led so bland
By their perverse Episcopapall pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed, which cruelly have cried;
So that, that sacred Prophetess Sybilla,
Shall shortly come to pass, she tells Tom Millae
And Tom tells me, and I must tell't again,
Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France, and Spain.
Merlins Prophecy.
ON Boreas wings then hither shall be borne
Through Week ore Tweed, a Prince Unicorne,
Who brought into the world his own fair Crest,
A rampant Lion figured on his breast,
And to his Arms six Lions more shall quarter,
With six French flowers environed with the Garter,
Joining by Fates unshangeable dispose
The Northern Thistle to the Southern Rose;
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain, shall be,
With pious zeal during his blessed reign.
That Lincoln was, that London is, that York
Brave London prays those days she never may see.
The Prophecy of old Otwel Bins, kept by Mr. Smith, Vicar of Hudderfield 40
years.
THen James shall se^ke a second Crown,
In pu^l^ng Pope and Papists down;
But James shall vanish from their face,
At half Enzabeths Royal race.
Then using foreign Policies,
Grudgings and discontents arise:
Yet shall they assemble at the Seat
Of Parliament, for a Work most great:
But strange Opinions there shall sow
Dissension, that too high shall grow;
And Laodicea's Englands Church
Of grace and beauty some shall lurch:
And Sm^ths of Policy shall invent,
To cast new Moulds of Government;
While vulgar B^rds of weakest wing,
Grow stout against the Eagle King,
Whose just integrous heart shall prove
The Adamant of Subjects love:
Then Pride shall some in Prison lock,
And lop a head off from a Block;
By honest Power they shall bring down
An aspirer that assumed a Crown;
That he whose Power did Laws contemn,
Might find a Grave, no Diadem.
Some Comic Scones shall then be acted,
By vulgar Players much distracted:
(...) Another.
ENgland! thy proper Native thee betrays,
Because all Nations hate thee and thy ways:
Spain does undermine thee, France does gnaw,
Wales threats, the Irish thee by snares does awe.
Thy bravest men do on a sudden dye,
And thou thy self do wholly rnin'd lie,
Yet see it not; but under feigned Peace,
Do thine own misery still more increase.
M. Saltmarshes Predictions declared to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and
the Council of his Army; with the Motives that occasioned it: and the manner
of his Death.
HE being at his house near Yilford in Essex, December. 4. 1647. told his Wife,
that he had received a Command from God, to make known to the Army what the
Lord had revealed to him: The like be said to Sir H. M. Knight, a Member of the
House of Commons, as soon as he arrived at London. The next day (being the
Lords day) he found some difficulty to procure a Horse, but after Dinner he got
one, and rid alone toward Windsor: but missing his way, lodged that night 7
miles short; where he declared. That the great and dreadful Day of the Lord is
n^er, when all men shall be judged by Jesus Christ, and then shall the ways
and actions of all men appear, etc. Early the next day, December. 6. he again
miffed his way in a Forest, but espying a house, rid to it to demand his way,
and there made known, That God was purposed to destroy the wicked, and draw the
Saints to himself, with much more: after which he departed, and about 9 of the
clock came to Windfor; where M. A. an Adjutator, saluting him, he said, M. A.
Depart from these Ten^s lest you perish with them, for the Lord has revealed
to me, that he is angry with this. Army because they have forsaken him.
Another, a Captain, asked him how he did? To whom he replied, That he had
nothing from God to say to him, because he had always been a seeker of
himself under specious pretenses. Then seeing one C. D. another Officer, he
said, He could not own him, for he was for destruction. Then going to the
General Council, where many Officers were met in expectation of the General,
he told them, That he was come thither to reveal the Lords Command; That
though God had done much for them, and by them, yet he had left them and their
Councels, because they had forsaken him; That God would not prosper their
Consultations, but destroy them by Divisions amongst themselves; That formerly
he came like a Lamb, but now God has raised in him the spirit of a Lion
because they had sought to destroy the people of God. Some said, that he
lookt-like one distracted, and that he had been sick, and was not well
recovered; to whom he replied, That he had been sick, but well in health then,
and sensible of what he said, and that should be the last time that ever he
should speak to them. Afterward he went to the General, not moving his Hat,
and told him, That he had no command from God to honor him, That he had
honored him so much, as he offended God in doting on his person, and that God
would no longer prosper him, etc. Then going to the L. Genesis who asked him how
he did? He (without any respect) answered him, That God was very angry with him
for abusing the Godly, and that the Armies falling from their first Principles,
would occasion their ruin and destruction, etc. After which he departed, and
on Tuesday, December. 7. went again to the L. Genesis and declared, That he was
sorry to see such obstinacy in him, and wished him to be mindful of what God
had declared to him. Afterward he took his leave of the Army, and said, He
had done his Errand, and must leave them, never to see the Army more. On
Wednesday, December. 8. he came to London, and took leave of some friends, to
whom he recommended his Wife. On Thursday, December. 9. he went from London to
his house at Yilford, not sick at all. and told his Wife what he had done. On
Friday December. 10. he said, He had finished his course, and must go to his
Father. In the afternoon he said his head aked, and laid himself upon his
Bed. On Saturday, December. 11. he was taken speechless, and about four or five
a clock that afternoon dyed.

FINIS.

