DIA, A POEM; To which is added Love made Lovely. By WILLIAM SHIPTON. Published
by a Friend.

Haec dedit ut Pereant.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Tyus, at the Sign of the Three Bibles on the
middle of London Bridge, 1659.

To the Truly Noble, EDWARD TROTTER. Esquire.
Honored Sir!
I Must confess, a better Artist should have scanned the Jacobs-Ladder of your
favors, a more famous Archimedes have taught his star-gazeing eyes to feed on
the Sunshine of your Courtesies, for the mere folly of Presumption, degraded
the Cream of the Creation from Commencing Nobles in that Celestial Athens;
And the high Element of perfection, where your Highness sits Enshrined, DEITY
is a Pitch above the sorage of my scarce-Penfeathered Muse, to fly without the
strong ambition of Eagles wings, whose Quicksighted eye, no Comet-Ray can force
to obliquity. Yet I fear not, Gemms never were Sullied for want of Cabinets,
and Rosy-flowers, find always some engrafture Caesar by chance came an Executor
to Virgills Poems, and if you deny, a courteous entertainment, a Graveburiall
may be had by any Saxon, Maecenas Patronized one from death, in the Living
Monument of his breast, who himself said -- Non tumulum quaero, sepelit Natura
Relictos -- I do Congratulate that from the Chaste debts, I owed to your
goodness, an Incomparable, and new Phaenix is Produced to cancel the Bonds of
obligations, who (while she intends no further a Progress, then to live and
die, in the Perfumed Indy of your breast) can never be aboriive, I do
Congratulate, that this new Star does appear in our Horizon to adaequate your
Superintendent merits; before I wanted a Mathematick staff, to take the Pole
and high Elevation of them. SIR, as she is the Paragon of all Ladies, be you the
Patron of all Patrons, would you be a resolved Paris; well, she is a resolute
Hellen: Are you a chaste Platonic, then she is a chaster Vestall, frowns or
smiles disray from the Caelestiall Orb of your brows. She is in your
Protection. While I rest Hers, and your Adorer.

William Shipton.

SIR!
IT was a sufficient salute for the Atherian Prince, to entertain the Roman
Emperor in bidding him welcome to a banquet of Orations. Strange dainties
indeed! And a new invented Rethorick to express Congratulation: I wish it were
so now, then might I only go into the Verdent Bowers of Helicons Elysium, to
gather the Crimson Roses floreate in their chiefest blossom, to crop the gaudy
Lillies Liveried, in the rich Diapry of Flora's Wardrobe, to make Sallets for
the feasts of your appetite, but such shadows please not with refreshing
coolness, nor can the Painted Superficies of Apollo's Language court a nice
Daphne; that is, allure your Fancy in the Enamouration of this beauty. I have,
Read it was a Veneration for goddess Fortuna, if the Romans could have leave
to express their Engagements, as if the Flexanimous Suada of their
Complementive Eloquence, could cancel all obligations, and Cramp the Largest
Indentures into Articles dormant, but here (though a Nobler favorite is my
friend) that is, the smiling Oratory of your goodness gives an invitation, if
I should break forth into a confession, it would be the confusion of lisping
Eloquence. Yet grant the insufficiency, Humane instinct concludes the Epilogue
of our lives, with the Epiphonema of gratitude, if a Cobler's Crow (taught by
an Eloquent Grammar) Natures documents, could Complement this Languae with a
salve Caesar, if the melodious Queristers turned Papists in their wooden
cloisters can express their humble addresses to the Spring-Deity, with the
cantation of an Ave-mary as we see Philomel in melancholy devotions adoring
her shrine, and the rest like courtiers, enamoured on her beauties when she
appears in the Virgin gayities of Maiden blushes; well may Rationality teach
me a new Logic and make it the only Proprium of a man to be grateful, the
silent Rivers, who in their soft murmurs already speak the tone of affections,
can return their derivations to the Primitive Fountain, and you, who are the
Original spring from which my Rivolets do flow, may well expect a return with
usury, whereas my mites Widowed from other moneys adds nothing to your
treasure. Yet I see you expect congratulation. Poor Phoebus, thy Castaly runs
not with the same Nectar, as Pactolus his streams: our Parnassus has nothing
but the regal Garland, and that is no sufficient present to commend your
favors, or speak the Highness of your deserts; I should have with Hercules
pursued the golden fruit (if I would follow the famed Querps of those brave
Politicians, whom Love could never out wit) and present those Hesperides which
times past, and Virgill's Amorist thought, sufficient to allure a lover, thus
he Vants.

Aurea mala december misi, cras altera mittam,

I should have with Trojan Hero attempted the Auriate bough which transported
his ravished Genious before death to glorious Thessaly, and inoculate it in the
Garden of your bountyes, that so by the sweet breathing Zephirs playing two and
fro it is leaves, your pleasures being wafted to a Paradise of smiles; I might
find a mild Purgatory to refine me to gratitude. But that is a second Aeneas
his labor to perform; therefore I cannot sleep the same Dream, (that is) have
the like felicity. How then shall I Ransack Indy of it is Opall glories, for a
satisfactory Done; When as the Ship of my intelligence cannot imbarke
necessaries for so long a Voyage, or how should I Rifle the Phoenix her
Fragrant Cabinet to offer Perfumes as a grateful Hecatombe? when as our
Pegasus Icarian wings faints in the Sunshine, and my Short-handed
expressions, cannot reach the Incense treasured on the sublime Magazine. I must
condole my hard infortunes, or else invoke the Benign Stars for a more
favorable influence. Yet stay darling Muse, Why so mleancholly? Here Is one
preservatives whose Balsam Ingredients will cure the malady; Here Is a fortunate
Orpheus, that by his powerful melody will make thee return from those Stygian
shades of despair, the pale Violet can be entertained in the same Symposie,
where the Ruby Roses have their sweetest allay. The Jesamine can refresh it is
homely Colors, where the pure Lillies resoliate their Superlative beauties,
and so may the Raisin-tree of thy desires grow in the Felix Arabia of his
breast, and consequently prove the (...) perfume, in which the chaste Phoenix
of his goodness, intends to suffer expiration, though by a Promethean coal she
gets a second birth, as he who leaped into the Sea, left his Mortality behind
him coming forth, animated with a new Creation; the Elephant adores the Sun in
rejoicing under those glorious Rays, and I shall pay your favors a requital
while this Dia dresseth her braveries in gay smiles at the Sunshine of your
Celestial eyes, I will not therefore spin a Web of Eulogiums, and interweave
it with fine threads of Hyperbolies, to praise you for those courtesies I
cannot congratulate, least I should be (like the pretty Orator making a
Panygerick in Hercules his Commendations) bafled with a Quis Unquam
Vituperavit. Only I will entreat Dame Rhetoric, to dress me in her gaudy
attirements, that I might still Ravish your Genious for more gifts of smiles,
though I still Remain,

Your servant, W. S.

To the Author on his POEMS.
HEt Geny how they live! thou Poet has
Encomioniz'd them, as the old Saints was
Who to the highest Hemispheres did blaze,
Known Co^met-glories, in an unknown praise;
She Is shrin'd in verse, while the sond Pagans did
Eternize Ladies in Art's Pyramid:
For want of Poetry, what Ovid can,
More merit the honor of Rome's Vatican.
How to the Remote Poles, do thou define
Thy Dia's heavenly essence, she is divine;
Or else in this low Orb, we grant no one
Scanned the Climacterick of perfection.
Astrologers espied a star of late,
What did it but thy Love Prognosticate,
Venus her Progress is now known, but we
Fair Dia made a Planet, guess it is she.
Learned Galilaeus when he viewed a star
About bright Sol, that East'ran Charitoer:
Was a predictive type, which did fore-run,
Rare Dia a star, you friend the Sun.
Hence let her shine! That Lovers may discry
How by her smiles they live, by frowns they die
Sometimes a Comet blazing forth their fate,
Sometimes a ^^ar, the rage to mitigate:
Sometimes to suffer, sometimes to endure,
Loves Hellespont, without a Palinure.
Tiber and Thames did only echo forth,
Sydney's stella, and Castara's worth:
The aequilibrio's poised betwixt them here,
Rivers are Tacent, but the Poets bear;
A louder Breath, in verse for to proclaim,
Saint-DIA'S, title 'bove a puny-name,
She soars aloft, to a perfection higher,
Where we ca^'t praiseher, but we may admire.
Jo Cook, Cont. Aulae Clar.

To the Author.
Y Yes! Now I know thy lines do trace
A lineage from great Phoebus race:
Whose Magick-words co^pels al times
To venerat o^ stars, from the climes;
Of the Spicy East, to fall and turn,
Melodious at thy Dia's Urne:
While Cinthia from her glorious sphere,
Salutes Earth's gloomy Cone to hear;
That Harmony stay, and think 't right,
To be a Shade, to Dla's Light.
And grant the Olymprans feast their Pallats,
With poesy Parnassus-sallets:
Rich like Ambrosia, and their dishes,
Of Cancra, Taurus, Capra, Pisces.
Yet we will presume for to admire,
Not praise that Sumptuous attire:
We praise thy Verse, not dote upon,
Those Rays of wits invention:
We Will joy to see, not strive to give
A charracter Superlative.
Thy fame in Quartoes thou do raise,
Whose Comments must in Folioes praise;
Wish that his Pen (as one of old)
Should drop words, Stin'graphiz'd in gold:
Compendious Metaphors to glaze,
From Pole to Pole, a worthy's blaze.
But that in vain! Thy verse is such,
As scorns an unbald Critticks touch;
Thy Anthems Sugared in such strains,
Pactolus-like, no dross contains.
And now (Learned Poet) we le not hire,
Delphick, Eolick, Lesbick Lyre;
To court thy Geny, in brave phrases,
Tuning our senses in amazes:
To rear up Hecatombs requires,
The existance of Poetic fires.
No; with us silence speaks the most,
While thou'le in thine own praises boast.
RICHARD SHIPTON.

APRILL'S ROSE; OR, The sight of his LADY.
AS the Vermilion blushed Aurora's grace,
So Rich infused through her Candid face,
Emparadis'd the world at that rare sight,
Revealed from dull Canopy of Night:
And the great Phoebus at the day's ascent,
Peeps from his Ivory-vernist Element;
Into his golden Chariot, while the Don,
Was welcomed with each Persian Orizon.
Sweet Dia with her gorgeous robes invest,
Rose from the Perfumed Incense of her East;
Enameling all the ground with Starry light,
Beamed from the Candors of her Eyes most bright;
That had not Sol been present, you would have said
She was the Luminary, he the shade.
Such was the great similitudes to us,
Phoebus and she are words Synonemus:
Such was the various beauties she put on,
The Orient figures her Complexion.
^ere was a Diamond luster, Pearly-eye;
This was a Saint, that was a Diety?
While thus the shined, in gaudertes so rare,
Like Cynthta, in Diaphenous Clothes of Air.
Each winged Chorester pou'rd forth the choice,
Of ravishing Music in a well-tuned Voice;
Quavering divisions with so swert a note,
As Swans Condole it in a dying throat.
First Philomel touching the Warbling Lute,
Give her Approach a harmony-salute:
Resounding sweet Corrantoes to the Skies,
That they might Ecchoe his loud Symphonies.
Next followed all in order to display,
Their valiant Sonnetts in a Ranting Lay:
Brave-breathed notes, which only could descry,
How the spheres act their silent melody.
The Roses plush'd with Flora's Purple dye,
Tinctured with the Heaven's gallaxy:
By Aprill's Pencill, did their lives renew
I ately Entombed in the Pearled dew.
Distilled from the Limbek of the Sky,
In the rare Quintissence of Chemistry,
Grow odoriferus at her Sunny Eyes,
As if incensed for a Sacrifice.
The Virgin-Lillies who did much condole,
With cold Antipodes their Amorist Sol.
Received new birth dressed in a fresh array,
Perfumed the ground as they would tribute pay:
With richness of their gallantry which might,
A too, too-high Ambitious Jove invite,
To rest on that fair Ganopy supplied,
With famed attendance of their glorious pride:
My Dia, worthy of so great renown,
Courted by those enamored Flowers laid down
Her blushing beauties, for to take repose
Of The Scarlet-violet and the Crimson-rose.
Too-meritorious that their leaves might be
Pressed with so rare a Treasury as She.
A happiness denied where they possessed
The Elezian fields of Canaan most blessed:
'Twould ravish one to speak, but then to see,
Would start a Stoic into Ecstasy;
And as inspired with new-affections tell,
Each wonder in a high-flown Miracle.
Thus sweetly taking rest, the wanton wind,
Traveled amongst her glories, which refined
By Lov's Calcining flames, did forth expire
Incense like gums hallowed in Vestall fire.
The Ubiqueous air fanned her limbs which lay,
A cooling in those July-Groves of May:
(Envelloped in the same pure extent,
As Constellations in the Orient)
Viewing Exactly what I looked upon,
By (ameer Lattese-sight) reflection:
Here one might see her Indy-brest unfold;
What treasures we desire of Spice and Gold;
What Genious would not act the famed pursuit,
With Hercules to attempt the Hesperian fruit:
Which as transplanted in her bosom grew
More Sweet, more Rich, more Glorious to view;
When she made loose her gay attirements then,
I did expect a Paradise again:
And consequently saw, for at that open,
There was the deckings of a Heavenly shop,
Where praises stood mute, Orators and sense,
In admiration only did Commence:
Student of Arts Science, enough to know,
What in mysterious types her features show;
Sometimes like the Christ allick Star does shine,
Her Ophire beauty in an Jvory shrine,
Sometimes like blazing Meteors which display,
Their Rough faced Omens in a bearded ray.
That still the future hopes I had of bliss,
Was dashed by Antiperistasis.
Here her Bespangled tresses seemed to deck,
The Lovely Tempe of her Corrall neck;
With rich Embrodery begun to stray,
In curious Labyrinths at the Roundelar:
Of gamesome wind dallying by such sort,
Those curled Maeanders into amorous sport;
How had I Captive been in those small Bands,
Like Cupid fettered by Diana's hands:
But the strong Magic of another grace,
Drew me from doting on her beauteous face;
How had my Fancies roved for ever ^n,
Her breasts that Hony-planted ^elion.
Whose balmy sweets had showered me with desire,
Those sacred fields got on the Roman Pyre:
When incense flames the glorious Conducts be,
To waft a light Soul to Eternity,
But when as one enjoined I thought to keep,
Those pleasures 'twas the idle dream of sleep.
A Quaery.
Quest. HAs beauty Pearls from golden Eyes,
In Rich-dig'd Mines of grace;
Has it Glowworm Embroderies,
Enjewell'd in a face.
Then Let Us disrobe.
That heavenly Globe.
Of all these Gems possessed,
And so Enshrined,
Like Saints divined:
For ever we will be blessed.
Answer. It wants no Ruby-bossed Gemms
Distilled from a tear;
Nor Onyx-Saphir Diadems,
Th'attire of Royal wear.
No Bristoll shine,
But Diamond-fine,
Such Jove-like fame besets,
Who for their Dooms,
Obtains such Tombs
Enclosed are Mahomets.
Quest. Has beauty's blushes sugared feast.,
Sweet viands sweeter taste!
Rare welcomes for approved Guests,
With Praised Ambrosia graced.
Come to the skies,
Rant Eulogies,
Sip of those Wine-fed Pleasures;
It Is Pity we,
Should let Love be
A Miser in her Treasures.
Answ. It wants no banqueting delights,
Quilt up in Rich estates:
The Epecurian Appetites
Sucks their brave delicates.
And he who is lips,
Such Nectar sips.
By an Immortal fame,
At one Career,
Mounts the top-Sphere
Of Bacchus Sack-bowld name.
Quest. Has beauties Cheeks brave Aprills bowers,
Enthroned with spicie breath;
Is Flora Pregnant with her flowers
Raised from the sick-bed-Earth.
Then Cheeks of Or,
We must adore
Those Argent-crested glories,
His tomb excells
Who Is closed in smells,
And not in Poet-Stories.
Answ. It has the Persum'd Rosy sweets,
The gold-array of Verses,
The Virgin-Lillies Morpheus greets,
To deck our fun't all herses.
And if we be
In livery,
Clad of such amber-cloves:
However we dye,
It Is sure we lie,
Like God, in Persum'd Groves.
Quest. Has beauti's brows no frowns but smiles,
Life and no killing Courtesies,
Dove-Lillies have their serpent-guiles,
Stings with the sweetest honey lies.
Mount the high-Sphere
Of glory there
True fulgence of whose Rays,
Like Sol's famed wings
N'Intempure flings,
But fragrant blasts displayes.
Answ. It wants no Zephirs intermixed
With golden joys of Loves,
Their Halcion in her Center fixed
In downy Pleasure moves,
A smile disrayd,
From a Coy Maid
A monument's most clear.
Avaunt, Avaunt,
Thou Troy-Novant
Westminster-Tombs are here.
Quest. Has beauty's face no tuned voice,
So Ravishing the sense,
The Spheres harmonious notes have choice
Of Songsters to Commence
Even at a lay,
The Gods array.
As with Condensed air,
That heavenly bliss,
Immortal Is
Superlatively Rare.
Answ. It wants no Notes the high-flown Lute
Quavered from those Quires,
Makes extasized men amute,
Like the Phebeian Lyres.
Here but the throngs,
Of Musick-songs,
At Sirens we do stay,
Were not Prophain,
I Would say each strain,
Chants Halleluiha.
Quest. Has beauty's eyes the golden darts,
Consentrick in a breast;
This is the wound which cures hearts,
Makes melancholy blessed.
Tho some in love,
Do swear they prove
Distempered by that shot.
It Is sweet to me,
Although it be
A poisonous antidote.
Answ. Though It has, they win the fields,
Whosoever those arms Impale,
At Briseus shrine the stout Greek yields
His Vulcan-coat of male.
A biting kiss,
Is the same bliss,
As feasts high Joves great Palate,
Give me the dart,
A joyful smart
Like weeds in Rosy-sallat.
Quest. Has beauty's skin no downy beds.
For Lovers wantom^ings,
Jove dallieth with his Ganymeds,
On Rose-lac't flowers of Springs,
Who in a trice
Sees Paradise,
In Lillies men Reside,
As Poets feign
The Elezian Plain,
Souls have no other Pride.
Answ. Yes, that it has, the Purple seed
Of Velvit-violets-sent
Unsoyled Ermins gloss the weed
Her Royal Ornament,
From Aprills bower,
A verdant flower.
But mean attirings is,
On gaudies blaze
Let no man gaze,
The Gods go naked in bliss.
Chorus.
IF then a face a feature have,
Such full Conserves of blisses.
We will our famed Embalment crave.
A donative of kisses,
Platonic Soul,
Does but control.
His great Immortal flight,
While his coy breath
Is spent in death
Of an Oblivious night.
Let Us Rant Eucomiums to the skies,
Salute this Lady Beauty;
He who is undaunted Spirit tryes
This Master-ship of duty
Clips Cupids wings
Makes blunt his stings,
Which turns of Push-pike are,
Or if they dye,
Transcribed on high,
She Is Comet and he is stare
On a blush which Rising like Aurora Modestly Colored his Lady Dias Face
THe vanting Stoics by the ambitious thought,
That their unpassionate Poor fools unfraught
Themselves by that high and undaunted Rage,
What Riches are enthroned in the Equipage
Of a well-featur'd blush, or when a Pale.
Visard does their faces circumvail:
For when a blush tinctures her face, we seek
The Orient Jewels on her Ruby Cheek.
The Parian-marbled Ophir, or the store
Of Eastern Gemms gloss'd with bright Indies Or,
When she unto a Color Pale's confined,
Christallick Pearls, white Chrystolite's combind,
In that sweet Passion Margerites besets,
Her face with Saphirs-glimmering Quarelets.
A blush and Pale, why? then I may behold
Enough of Silver, and enough of Gold:
Or else upon her fragrant breasts May's bowers,
Lillies commingled with the Rofie-flowers:
Blew veined Violets as the Pale for Red
Carnation Tulips rarely figured;
And in those dazzling eyes with high-sprung light,
Adonis bathed in blood, Venus in white.
Thus with the impression of an nobler Coin,
Rubies with brightest Christols do Conjoin,
Thus fiery Commets wantonly keep wars,
With cold Virginity of snowy Stars:
Sometimes behold her visage and you will see,
Her lustres hid in a Red Canopy.
As when Aurora's blush signs forth the day;
Byth' famed Appearance of a Rudish ray:
Sometimes out prying judgments do confess,
Pale Cinthia's mounted in a sable dress;
And then we see by that miraclous sight,
A sullen Cypress typifie the night?
So the fond Persians and the Pagans may,
Adore the Moon, adore the break of day;
While in her starry face we do descry,
Those lights of Heavens Phisiognomy.
The author of Love Melancholy drew,
Her features in their party-colored hew;
And here the pretty Pale the blush include,
The Boy as sometimes chaft, is sometimes rude;
And so reverst, the sense may thus be graced,
The Boy is sometimes Rude, as some times chaste:
What need my Hoof-beat-traveller mus^, or (...),
Seek Tyrian colors when that Purple dye
Lints all my garments, Crimson not the faint,
Cassock watchet of an English Paint.
What need for brightest Diamonds? If I was,
A Scholar sprung from old Pythagoras:
I would enjoin my metempsuchos'd fate,
Within her Pearled eyes to transmigrate.
A great blot is a Giant, red a ruby, white,
Demonstrateth the shining Chrysolite;
So if in Hyroglyphicks, I Would reveal.
My mind, a blush a ruby were, a pale the Pearl.
June's gayeties: OR, A Posy in his Lady Dia's breast.
SEe how the Ruby Roses seeks,
A fresh Ingrafture on your Cheeks;
T'injoy the balmy fragrance there,
Distilling from a Sugared tear;
New-startled blush of Flora's bower,
Plush interlaced Tulip flower:
Smiling upon the gaudy breast;
Swears that th'Elizian Confine's blessed;
Cause flowers in Loves-sportings-greet,
Whilst they salute each Lady's feet:
Tho here they would insweetness spent,
Attempt a higher Complement:
But that the Sunshine of her face,
Anticipates that heavenly grace:
For should her eyes that bright-glor'd gem,
Once blaze on their Carnation stem;
Like a Red commet would protend,
No Augury but their own end:
Burnt by that Radiance hot, and dry,
Evaporating from an Eye:
Gold-mantled Lillies Robbed in white,
Grew glorious to that Lady-light.
Sprung from an eye so sweet, so thin,
As Aprill's Spic'd Incarnadin;
Here grows a Pinck there is a Rose found,
This Clitephon that Rosamond.
The Sisterhood of flowers do bring,
Their vernall bloomings from the Spring:
To Parallel a sent, a taste,
Sugared Cream, with spice prefac'd:
But that is in vain it is feared each one,
Will dye by aemulation.
And so upon your lips theytd have,
A funeral life, or geneall Grave.
Say they do die, the burialls would,
Out-rant, high Pyramids of gould;
Embalmed in fragrants of your breast,
As the East wonder's in her nest:
Say, they do live in perfumed breath,
Out-lasting Monuments of death:
They might the Solisequium Scorn,
Who Courts the Pale-blush tinctured morn;
For on your Cheeks fair type of bliss,
They have an everlasting kiss;
So that the Stoic here would try,
His Axiomized Apathy;
As abor^ation to admire,
A smooth-fac't smile, not rough-skind Ire.
The Cynick leave his tub, and trace,
Sweet inspiration in her face;
Call himself happy so to be,
Blestwith that rare Divinity,
What ere he think, I, I, would change,
My shape to flower, say I might range:
That face, that Cheek, the show to come,
Of lovers best Elisium.
Ambrosia. OR, His Lady DIA's Kiss.
FAir type of Heaven, and I wish it were,
My happiness to be Constellate there.
And if it be a flame, then my desire,
Was rapt like the old Prophet in a Fire:
To that Pavilion where Jove-like bliss,
Like Sainted deities Enthroned is.
Nor would I be Profane, as to aver
It Heaven, in a well-made charracter;
Least the Platonicks Ignorant before,
Now by their superstitous ways adore;
Or else the Puritans Religion teach,
As well to Kiss the Pulpit, in it to preach:
And so the use at hand they will apply,
When the wanton doctrine of the text lays by.
Or were I Prodigal of words, I might,
Our great professed Libertines invite,
To lash their tenets, at a luscious kiss,
As the strict Christianity of bliss.
Although some make it Pagantry, the sense
Is true distilled to a Quintescence;
For at the first appearance unto me,
Her face was Heaven, her self a Deity.
Her Radiant eyes like Pearled-stars that shine,
In a degree compared 'bove Christalline,
Her voice tuned in so rare Concordance there,
As Angels accents in the Sky tuned sphere;
And may not then a kiss, so sweet a grace,
Type of Heaven, cause type of her face:
Be styled forth least we like Atheists call
Truth nonsense, and believe no heaven at all;
And say we did her form would check that rise.
Of Ignorance and show us Paradise,
Bloomy with ravishing sweets so rare each one,
As innocence in the first Creation.
In Pagans Language, kiss was a perfume,
Whose vitalls when Imbalmed did consume:
In a sweet cloud of Incense, which breathed at
The feigned place of rest, they knew not what,
And if in Poets metaphors to come,
It Is the bright Sunshine of Elysium:
Then tell me you stern Critticks why not I?
Date it in the liberties of Poetry.
Authentic, by Poetic license we,
Can talk (as truth) impossibility;
And yet I would not have the Reader write,
'Cause in sight of a kiss, within the sight
Of Heaven, thus blind fools do often mistake.
And call it noon, when it is but the daybreak.
Parnassus. OR, His Lady DIA'S praise.
LEt Amorists dote on
Chimaera's feigned worth,
Who sips up Helicon?
A Lady's name sets forth:
With a more noble shrine,
Then Deities that shine;
In crimson Robes divine.
Who sees her beauty-rays,
For's Ink, must Nectar quaffe;
To reach the stublime lays,
A Mathematick-stasse.
The longest Pole of night,
Will serve but to indite;
Above the common flight.
That we adore it is vain;
Those muses much admired:
Who wants a high-pitcht strain;
Even at her face's inspired.
Their couchant always lies;
Up-rais'd Hyperbolies:
Beyond a vulgar prize.
Sol's pinions, if extract,
Made by a cherubs skill;
As glorious as exact:
As is an Angel's quill.
But fits enough to tell,
Each wondrous miracle:
In superhumane spell.
Bright Legends of the gods,
Those dignities t'unfold;
At least would be at odds,
In registers of gold:
I love a havenly Lute
To sing, men are a mute
That is beyond dispute.
Those Hierarchy of maids
Breaths to the star fed skies,
From their Pierian vades,
But fond Tautologies.
And it is a common face
That wants a beauty-grace,
As poor men Herauld's blaze.
A face so rich, so rare
In Spicy-fragrant sents:
Here Is Alabaster-air,
There Is the perfumed Orients.
The rosy phaenix nest,
In Sabian odours dressed
Or flowrings of the east.
The Indies gilded were,
At her divine approach,
When she'^ (brave flowers appear)
In Summer's verdant Coach:
Rude S^tyres learn to trace,
Sweet welcome in each place,
At her bay-browed face.
And Autumes dying crest
Dismantled of all fame,
Her rich-weaved robes invest;
At the echo of her name.
All has an appetite,
To relish the delight
Of her desired sight.
Columbus Cloystred dwells,
Within her glorious breast;
Thence the golden miracles,
Discovers East, and West.
And in her bosom gay,
A man may, still survey;
Newfound America.
Nor is it strange that thance,
At her incensed breath,
Into rare quintissence,
Trees should their gums unsheath:
And flowers sweetness yields,
In The rose-adorned, fields;
From forth their strongest shields.
Since what men men't of old?
That Oaks should honey spill;
By her happy featur's told,
'Cause all their sweets distill.
Deucalion's Flood,
Runs from the smallest bud
Of the most dry-grown wood.
How fair that face will be,
Would not the stoics fly,
For to enjoy this rarity:
Their mad-strain'd Heresy.
Sure they would confess
Love, could they but guess
It Is only happiness.
Would not the barbarous state,
Against nature's precepts war,
Should beauty's compared fate;
Some can did virtues spare:
Yes, they would sure unite,
In a most amorous spright,
Brave Hymen's famed rite.
Had Homer Eyer, how he would disgrace
The blind mistakes he writ,
On curious Hellens fairest face:
With his skie-towring wit.
For you're the same,
I know that brow, that name
Speaks Paris only Dame.
As Greece, and Troy inspire
Me, with a Heavenly sense;
Carthage, and Rome in fire
Shall fierce-made wa^rs commence:
Here shall an Hector lie,
There an Achilles dye:
By false-fac't treachery.
Here shall great Priams wall
With Tragedyes be crushed;
There the famed Palladium fall;
In monumentall dust:
And chaste Penelope
Shall living be,
A thrice-fam'd Dietie.
Come Sophos now, and drain,
The Hippocrenian fount,
Into a well penned strain,
A sorage, 'bove the mount.
Parnassus, for a theme,
Sugr'd milky-way cream.
Days glost with the Sunbeam.
Fetched Metaphors from thence,
The seat of Eulogies,
For Panegerick influence,
A high-strain'd spear outvies,
Strong notes above,
Ela does prove
But sing-song for great love.
Compendiums cannot contain
Those Orient jewels bright,
Sol in's Meridian
Eclipseth but this light:
Poetick-sounding praise
Must have a high-strung raise;
Beyond Seraphick blaze.
All ancient Poets strains
Rapes prophanations writ,
Puffed up in merry veins
From Heliconian pit;
Whereas their verses prate
That the most holy state
Of Jove's adulterate.
Had they but seen, they would said
In ranting Charracters,
Her virtuous beams displayed
Souls paramount by here is:
All colors else are faint,
But that celestial paint,
Which shadows forth this Saint.
May's Cabinet. OR, His Lady displayed.
SO grows the sweetened Genious of May,
When Sol's Eoan-dye colors the day
Into a Purple Pompery, whose Rays
Dame- Tellus flowery Progeny displayes;
So grows the rare-set Eastern spicy flowers,
Conserved in the sugared Indian bowers.
Whose Candid odors highly do commence,
More Incense then the balmy frankincense.
As does her breath which exhalations be
Of all those sweets the famed Epitomie.
Thus the early Lark, best Herald of the day,
Summons up Phoebus with her lovely lay,
When by her Angell-voyce she singe on high.
Her purer Mattins, to the purer sky.
Tho we poor sacrilegious men cannot prize
The Anthem, it is her morning Sacrisice.
While we in lethargy of sleep are drowned.
She from her Rose-quilt bed with Lillies crowned.
In Flora's gorgeous fields, betimes on wings.
Her Orizons in brave Corrantoes sings.
As does my Dia in a Cherubs note,
Her high-Rais'd ditties to the Heavens quote.
So all the Stellate beauties called divine,
Within the Orbs illustrious vizards shine
Like Tytan through a cloud whose splendors rise
With more illumination to our eyes.
Just when he peeps (his beams with glory fills)
Over the shady trees, by th'Eastern hills.
And at one instance flag'd with light appears,
No more he is Rayed in the sublime Spheres.
So Constellations shine in the Center fixed,
Perti-per-pale, heat light intermixed.
As does my Dia's fair unblemisht face
Conspicuous shine, in each translucid grace.
The Ruby Coral, and the diamond cliffe.
Swelled in a marble large as Teneriffe.
Follisht with Ivory, artifice that vyes,
Those monumentall old Immergeries,
Like Rhetoric flourisht in a gaudy name,
By miscellanious metaphors of fame:
Does vaunt the Highness of it is beauties bright,
More luminous in the obscure vaults of night:
As does my Dia's eyes scorning to dwell
Like Orient gemms hid in an Oyster's shell.
Thus sugared Hybla with it is gumms appears
To cloud the lustres of those Hemis-pheers,
And shrine Sol in it is fragrant-Winding-sheets,
Like Phoenix coffined in her fun'rall sweets.
Arabia's Candia-Cassia, what rich smells
In The Aromatick-flowry mountain dwells?
What Rosaries does Sabian Coasts digest,
Or spice which i'th'odoriferous West.
What Europe, in Perogatives of bliss
Has famed, is Dia's sweet Periphrasis.
For her breasts Redolent do much excel
The Amber, or each Ambrosaick smell.
Adonis, OR, The Lovers Complaint.
AH fair Dia, why so Proud?
Rich attirements only crowd
Your beams in a masquing hood,
As the kelder of a cloud.
Sol sometimes does overshad;
And the Spheres in vain are (...)
If their virtues be'nt displayed
In their Oriental trade.
And that is glaring forth the bright
Modest excellence of light,
Or else Cinthia's dimmer sight,
Is as pure in darkest night.
Ah fair Dia, why do you
Shine, in such divined hew,
Last those gauderies renew
Me, it is but skie-coloured blew,
More false-hearted, then it is true.
Why do you sweet fair impart
Frowns, for pretty smiles my heart
Grieved, indures the living smart,
Made by 'th wanton's golden dart.
Rather let me be embraced
With your amorous fouldings chaste,
From that gallaxied wast,
Where all future blisses placed
In eternal joys are graced.
For I wish not Aprills bloom
Great Pyramidalls of Room,
For my Mahumeran-brave tomb,
At the fates displacant doom,
But, but your Elysium.
Some have doted on the dry
Pictures of Anatomy,
In a Virgin-coloured dye;
And sweet Lady yield, least I
Love th'impossibility.
Ixion did his fondness prove
To catch Juno's cloud, who will move
Ith'large circuits of a Grove,
Where that great Olimpique Jove,
Found Calistoes fit for love.
And he is but a dulman for it,
Who to the well-Ladyed Court
Of dame Venus, does resort
If it be not for brave sport.
Not the Cyprian wanton spruce,
Would make Gallants so profuse;
But the hopes of richer Juice,
Which those Venusses produce.
For my Part, it is my own mind,
To approve those fruits I find
Ruby Apples in a rind,
On a Lady's cheeks combind,
Or those eyes-glar'd could refined
Taste must here like sight be dimmed.
Ah fair Dia why so dressed
In perfumes of spicy East,
Phoenix-like, i'th'dying nest.
All those sweets by you possessed
Don't your fragrant name invest,
Lest we smell them in a breast.
Chorus.
THen afford him your bright eyes
Shining lights of beauties skies
To revive him, where two tryes
Consorts, there is best melodies.
Mahomet. OR, A fly buried in Dia's tear.
MAd Courtier! was it not a Pitch too-high
For weak ambition's wings to soar, or fly?
Methinks a Pole of honor, so fublime,
Fits only Pearls of this our modern time;
For to salute and complementive sit
Inshrined in that Royal Cabinet.
Did thou want heat? and thy feathers raise,
To warm th'intempure at her ardent Rays,
She might permit, the Sol does often embrace
The dusky surface of an Aethiop's face.
What? Phaeton, did not thy valor fear
The hot-fac'd Phoebus of that Hemisphere?
If by his beams thou fall, it is thy fault,
Giants now penance for their lewd assault.
What Icarus? wa'st thy vanting pride to rise
With waxen wings up to those fulgent skies?
Presumptuous boy, thy destinies condole
A lesser Sun corusk a lower Pole
Then this high Orb of fame, might serve the turn,
Where now thy fates a placant victim burn.
There was no hopes but as thy pinneons felt,
That purer heat must into sorrows melt,
And drowned in sadder griefs, thy joys disrobe,
In aiming at that high-sprung arched globe.
But thou art dressed in fun'rall blacks we see
Th'intomb'd in gildures of tears purity.
Here Is then the glory, his brave martyred fall
Shall have the praise of great memorial,
For never in the balmy beds of spice,
Could dying lovers catch this Paradise.
The Eoan Lady never could richer lie
Imbalm'd with sweetened fumes of fragrancy,
When she is resolved her chaft thoughts to expire
Ith'pregnant incense of perfumed fire.
Had Natures Jewels bin congealed to one,
And metamorphos'd to a diamond-stone.
That marble for thy costly tomb might be
No monarch-Epitaph of dignity.
Or had the tall Piramides of fame,
Bin consecrated to thy dying name.
The Pincely gallantry would not at all
So rare enriched have that funeral.
A tear, why, why? that is a Pearled Shrine,
T'inclose a Saint a Deity divine.
A Saphire-Sepulcher a ruby Jet.
T'Interre that great Almighty Mahomet.
Those Mausolaeums Cleopatra would
Scorn, burnisht up with costly globes of gold.
Might her rude f^me be monumented by
The Elixar-Jewells, of an amber-Eye.
Our shallow Praises, glossed, pure, bright,
Are but dim shadows of that glimmering light.
Lest we coin Heavens, by the Heaven's mint,
And Diamond-Plumes on diamond feathers print.
He whose last destiny's entombed there,
Knows only the high ambition of a tear.
Aurora's blush, OR, The morning-sight of his Lady.
AS Sol encircled in a ray,
Summoned those Heranlds of the day,
To mount their eastern steeds, and clear
Nights Curtains from the veiled sphere:
In a most gorgeous intent,
To chase th'enamel'd orient;
Near by the silent silver tides,
Where Neptune in's attirements glides;
Along the Meads which did transpire,
Life perfumes hallowe'd in the fire;
There smiling sweets fits on fair bowers,
There Cloris tinsileth the flowers:
The earth seemed clad in May, to scorn,
Don Phoebus, and his rosy-morn:
Whose oriency did far excel,
Rich-loaded Cassia's fragrant smell.
I viewed a Paragon whose bright,
Appearance seemed the Queen of light;
Ray'd with such splendors here she bore,
A commet, there a Meteor
Disheveled from a frondent brow,
With Venus-myrtles, Cupid's yew.
Her spangled tresses, tied in hairs
Legends of Cupid's Prisoners;
Whose Darts dispiled, all became,
True vot'ries to her sacred name:
So that the Poets god's divine,
Adores a female's mortal shrine;
Her eyes empearl'd in rosy-heat,
Adonis well might bathe in sweat:
Of the Milky-way, her breasts upon
Venus, her Offa, Pelion.
Rivolets of Elixar did meet,
In combination, kisses sweet;
Strove through her eyes, that Crystal sluice,
Like Alpheus courting Arethuse.
Her candid beauties which arise,
Compounds of Lillies Rosaries;
As Sol in's element displayes,
The banks to Sunshine floods of rays.
And as the Hyblean Bird, who flings,
On each sweet flower his painted wings:
Cul^ the mellifluous springs, and spreads,
His ravishments on April's meads
By curious chemistry and jetts,
On Flora's Hyblas or Hymets,
She with her Ivory hands presumed,
To rob each fragrant-sweet perfumed;
Each ruby blossom on the stem,
Presenting her a diadem;
First on this bower, And then on that,
Cupid's Venus-Ararat:
Pinking her face, a gem more worth,
Then Homer's swaggering lines set forth;
Oth' Grecian Hellena, her fights
Puling Platonic souls delights.
What could I think but that she was,
True godhead of that Pearly less;
The gold-ruin'd fountains standing by,
Like the sea-daughtered deity;
Or Queen of June, from Aprill's race,
And Tempe was this pleasant place,
Where a yery Organists did throng,
Their sweet voic'd Anthems to a song;
As the shril-luted echoes might,
Salute Heaven, in a canting plight.
But sad mistakes did every one,
Act in their veneration:
For Ave-maries unto her
Sung. He, but she-birds, salve vir
Here odoriferous Gums red-white,
Damask-tinctured Margarite:
Rosy conserves, blooms of West,
Spiceries, which bruised smells best;
Or-discolouring argent pearl,
Beautyfi'd that summer-girl.
But least Phoebus should impair,
Her worth, by kissing such a fair;
With his Auriferous beams, she hies,
To yonder banks of strawberries.
Under those Myrtles which appears,
Saddest mementos of Love's tears.
I followed after the brave Dame,
In those mild groves, cooling the flame;
Of fiery- Sol's expansive-rayes
Which caused in those shades delays:
Here I Adonis showed, and there
Venus blushing form, her sphere,
As ancient Am'rists did interre,
Saints-loped in bark's calendar:
Here great Apollo tomb'd, we find,
There Daphne corporate to a rind;
But as those speeches, she was gone.
Like an exhalation:
Whether a sleep, I cannot tell,
Or wak't I cannot, so Farewell.
Hymen, O Hymanaee; OR, An invitation to the Nuptial.
UP with the morning Lark, my Dia, rise,
From th'odoriferous beds of Rosaries,
While we expect a more celestial fight,
By th'day-break of your face disvaild from night:
To a vermilion-morn whose blushing head,
Like Lillies are, with scarlet roses spread;
Laureat- Apollo his high Orbs out scans,
As climant in the full Meridians:
Scattering the creamy-springs, with sugared rays,
As Zephtrus mild smiles on flowers displayes;
Each winged Querister, has raised on high,
The dulcid Anthems of his melody:
At Phosphorus shrine riding the early coach,
Proud harbinger of Ruby-Sol's approach;
And you fair Dia, still desire to spread,
On Flora's drowsy flowers your sleepy head.
But now awakt, richly your self array,
With the Injewel'd sweets of Lady May;
So rarely verdant in the Purled fields,
Where maiden April, her famed fragrant yields
In blushing glories, let the immortal seed
Of Jove's great brain, (envy the gaudy weed
Adorns your features) caught at thinner air,
Condensed to an Angels garb most rare:
In imitation, the robe to presume,
Must mount in feathers of Seraphique plume;
Whose rarefaction, though it cannot excel,
That filken garment, may be parallel.
And first ransack rich July's wardrobe place,
In Tellus flowery bosom highly grace;
With redolentiall herbs, conserved sweets,
Where red-fac'd Tulipt, Pale-face'd gilloes greets:
And in a Rose-quilt coronet combine,
Crimson-incarnat new-sprung J^zamine:
Each parts-coloured Panucy Damask-flowers,
Panting for incense, on those neighboring bowers;
Breathed odors from your breast, from yees the dew,
Would soon with fame their Sunshine-lives renew.
Next rifle Tire for purple, and the sleek
Eastern velvet, like her ruby cheek:
The famed Licilian Seas where Coralls be,
Woods inter-grown with Affrick's Ivory,
Of which compose a garment, never seen
To cloth the ambition of Olympus Queen:
With Aromatique spices, balm the best,
Those sweetened raisins fragrant in the East;
All compounds of May's simples by intent,
TO enrich that incompar'd attirement.
And now adorned hence, hence perfumed smells,
Hence, hence Arabian-Ambers, which excells;
The rosy-bloomings of a July-morn,
Or rich Ambrosias which Jove's feasts adorn;
Here Incense of an Holocausted fire
The crimson flowers in their plush attire:
Vermilion-Amithists, hot-Amulets,
Pomander, Nardes, rare-Balsom, violets,
You speak her artificial sweets, a name,
But not at all her native-gusts proclaim:
So sugared as dame natures curious quill,
Pencil'd exactly, by an untaught skill.
Begone large Di'mond rocks, ye pearls adieu,
We fondly dig for pleasures in Peru;
We seek the Orient gems, the Adamant,
The Jewels which exotic nations vant:
Too strictly there is no splendors like to hers,
They Are only rich, who are the compettitors;
To some you may add fame, but here is an eye,
A Crystal pure shining transparently;
Let Indy boast the same. It, it shall be
Mirror of wonders to eternity.
Lastly, go forth my Dia sweet, my sweet,
Your lovesick Am'rist at the altar meet:
Where to your face, beauty's chiefest skies,
He immolates his heart a Sacrifice;
Embrace he will your world, and yet partake,
Only of Virgo in the Zodiac.
And if what Poet feign you strictly prove,
Then there is no Heaven, but in sacred love.
The Nuptial.
SLeep Phoebus; sleep, we don't expect the day,
Should summo^'d be with Herald of a ray;
From the vestall Nunnery of Hermit-night,
As a famed Ganimed, to attend the light:
For Sunshine glimmers in each Virgin-eyes,
Rare, as Climacterick of the beauteous skies;
When modest Titan gold-gem'd raise extolls,
To highest Hemisphaeres from the lowest poles,
The rosy Bride decked in Aurora's weeds,
Whose ruby blushes mounts the morning steeds;
To luminate the Sphaerick-orbes has drawn,
The tiffany Canopies like vails of Lawn:
From celiall Phoebe's features, ushering on,
A day in it is well-measured motion;
We see the Earth perfumed, and grown too proud,
As misted with veil of a gummy cloud:
While the Sea-musickt Sirens songs rejoice,
Their incantations with a warbling voice;
The grape-crown'd god, his heels are tripped up,
And Ivy-strength imbrewd in each full cup;
And Bericinthia's dulcid Lust resounds,
It Is past^rall Tympanies oth' flowery grounds;
Made rich by Aprills blossomings which be
Apparellings, of Flora's Liverie.
Where Satyr-Corobants the Orgies dance,
Where Bacchus-Priests the Jovial-Thyrce advance.
Where Birds concenter in a sweetened note,
Such admiration to the Heavens vote.
Now Is a new Jubilee this sacred day,
As crowned with Chapelets of verdant May,
We Will rarely consecrate and it combine,
In The fame of an Encomiastick line.
We Will rant forth in Eulogiums and interre
It in the Rubricks, of our Calendar.
While thus we celebrate in one consent,
Accustomed Rites of this brave merriment.
Fair Venus shall, the divine Queen of Love,
Make those transcendent joys Pathetick prove.
Confirm their heavenly happiness to be
Fastened with Gordian knots of unity.
Nor shall the Sea-Nymph frown since they have possessed
The Elizian Port with wanton glories blessed.
Rather since Halcyon-dayes appear in state,
The Rosy Less should Loves congratulate,
The Maiden Phoenix fe^cht a far no more,
Shall the Sea-traveller Argo wet it is O^r,
To seek a Paragon, a Master piece,
She Is silver Meda and the Golden-fleece,
Nor shall sweet Phillis from Demophoon be
Confined by a Clovstred secrecy,
Rich Cloris wedded to the spring shall try,
Her pregnant tillage by flowers progeny,
And Virgin'd Lillies decked in Hymen's weed,
Bright Gardens with a pure production spread.
The Rose his plush, while smiling July yields
Silke-blossomings ith'crimson-laced fields,
Tinctured in that curious-trim'd allay,
By flower-Superlatives of gaudy- May.
Cypros her silver doves their loves protest.
By billing one each others amorous breast;
In Imitation of your minds which are
Trans-copied to a body singular.
Now Hymen shall adumbrate your sweet brows
With shady Garlands made of myrtle-bows;
Till trains of Virgins as they laurel tie,
Sing forth this pleasant Epithalamy.
Wanton Amorists do not seek
After superficial fair
Room or Carthage, in the air,
Painted dainties of a cheek.
Touch the inward joys refined,
Instruments are for the Play,
Sunbeams guild a cloudy day,
Hidden Pleasures cloyes the mind.
Steal no Commet to discry
Solar glories of a glance,
Blazoned beauties Radiance.
Darted from a Pearled eye.
But with sweetest love embrace
Those Red-mantled beams which be
Rayed in rich Oriencie,
Off a starr-discoloured face.
Rob no more brave Phoenix nest,
Or the Indian sugared breath,
From the spicy gumms unsheath
To perfume the Lady's breast.
But entomb your lovely arm
In those Rosarie-set groves,
Like the sky renowning Joves,
By a Cyprian-weaved charm,
Do no more those Rays admire
Which dame Nature does bestow
On a face by Cupid's bow.
Darting an unvanquisht fire.
Foolish lover rather try,
How you may those flames despise,
Beamed from the Sunny eyes
Of the Wanton's Chivalry.
It Is pure madness to obey
The misteriall charm of loves,
Whose divinest glory moves.
In the Porp'hry chair of sway.
Come divest that candidate,
And untie that Gordian thread,
Or that Nymph a triumph lead;
From that vestallized state.
None inslaved ever was
To that Mirror of all hearts,
Guided with the blind-mans darts;
That most Deified Less.
Much less to the forms which live
In our modern times so rare,
Black Swans flying in the air,
From that face derivative.
Do not emulate but get
That ^o immateriall soul,
Which lives now without control
In a sweet brest's Cabinet.
For a feature will expire,
As the Diamond-Diadem,
Grafted in an Oyster's stem.
Cannot glore in rich attire.
Gourt not fading beauties here,
Like Platonicks for the sight,
The delicious appetite;
Feeds within an active Sphere.
Puling gamesters use no tilts,
To confist the wanton maids,
They have none but rusty blades,
Though they show the golden hilts.
For in Hymen's sugared feasts,
All the viands served in dishes,
Are more then some honey kisses
Tabled up to Amorous guests.
Here Is a sweet-fac'd Ganymed,
Here Is a potion to apply
Against grief, sickness, malady;
There Is a downy-Carpet bed.
Then join Combat with that Dame;
Caesar Pompey here lies blessed
In a Potent arm a breast
Of an Amazonian frame.
And the field Pharsalia is
Loves Pavilion, where the heart
Suffers by the Cupid's dart
Taking mark first at a Kiss.
Nor is it a Gygantick fight,
Venus love-enamouring hum,
Is Spanish-pike Danaish Drum.
Which does muster up delight.
No wounds in this battle may
Bleed, but kisses which career
At the lips, each trembling spear,
To a fierce Aceldama.
CHORUS.
IS it so? then let delight
Wait upon this wedding Night.
To one who was drawing forth the lineaments of his Lady Dia.
STay Painter her to limne, each part
Requires a more mysterious Art.
That judgment shallow is, unless
Each Paint a Metaphor express;
A Common Beauty here decayed,
May by thy Ret'rick be displaid
In curious flourishes as trim.
As Phydias did Minerva lymne:
So may an Artist bravely spread
Dame Bausis, in a Virgins weed;
And where before a Satyr was
A Venus or some Pearly Less:
But here is a form except thy paint
Could shadow forth a perfect Saint.
That Pencill really would seam
Goliath, with his Weavers beam.
But thus begin, if thou wilt go on
To finish forth this Paragon,
Prescribe a Heaven in the circuits there,
Raise here a moved and a fixed sphere;
Of Characters a brave compack,
Sol riding round his Zodiac.
Cynthta Silvering every place
As Umpire of the night's sweet grace.
Stars-Orient, spangled in a robe,
As th'mantled surface of the Globe:
Bright Constellations beaming by
The E^an-Creamed Gallaxie.
And all to typisie the bright
Sunshine-face, of Eye-sprung light.
Next paint her voice, but tha'ts a theme,
For those who on Parnassus dream,
A Cherubs Quill did never declare.
Wonders, to write, how flowers are
Sweet, it is no Pitch, but to disclose
In Paint the fragrance of a Rose.
A Rapture is, a man may tell,
No Pencill lymn, the Lillie's smell,
Avoyce so sweet, a voice so clear,
As the Harmonia of a Sphere.
Angellick-breath, more famed, more rare
Then all the Hallelujahs are,
It to descipher, get that note
With which the Prophet seemed to quote,
A Cherub Sing, ^^t fear least thence
This Siren Extalize thy sense.
Then to her breath, where fragrant comes
An Indy sugared up with gums;
Rich Rosaries, spice-Purled flowers,
Gorgeous trimmed Posies on the bowers:
Point it like the Arabian Coast,
Which only does of sweetness boast.
Where Is perfumed dainties for the taste,
Enough for sight, most rarely placed.
Then to her breasts sweet Gallaxie,
Where all her Am'rists joys to be;
Relisht with Raisins, which grow on
That sky-saluting Pe^ion.
Here place Dame Flora's Chapelets
Balm, Hyblas-honey, Hyomets;
Sabean-Cassia, Ruby-mould,
Fetched from our Hispanian gold.
Here let banks or Lillies grow,
There let cups of Nectar flow,
To feast a palate, say he were,
Descended from high Jupiter.
Now the sum total well perform,
By this artificial Norme;
A Rose in tincture must descry
The cheek, a star the shining eye;
Her lina^ments will then surpass,
That godnesse, who halfe-shadow'd was?
Yet draw a curtain, least each one,
Who sees her? be Pigmalion:
And so, enamoured of that paint,
Embrace the picture for the Saint.
To his Lady persuaded she was not fair.
WHy? say you were (but you are fair,
And of a beauty singular)
The orient di'monds Cloystre'd dwells,
In The confines of the rugid shells;
The nitreous Jewel always set
Within a duskie Carkanet,
Does shin^ transparent, purest whites,
Seems Lillies by black opofites.
So Cynthia in the night appears,
More stellate then the Hemispheres;
For our rare beauty spots in fashion,
Are the sky black-tinctur'd illustration;
Hellen did not her warts condole
See's Venus, Venus by her mole.
Give me a mistress whose bright eye,
Like Sol is veiled in canopy;
Whose lips and fragrant cheeks discloses
A June of pinks, a May of roses,
Though on those spiceries be drawn
A Vizard, made of Cherry-lawn;
For such a face with blackness closed,
Is as the Moon when interposed
She is a pearl Compas'd with glass
As Rosamond in the Labyrinth was,
For Phoebus as the Car he rides,
His beams Opacous Terra hides;
From our weak sights, and makes dim,
Those candid glories comes from him:
So may your excellencies be,
Dull veiled with obscurity;
And since your face, our Sun is made,
Lady, let me be your shade.
On his Lady Dia's weeping.
I Often hard fond Am'rists but never would
Believe her eyes as Pearl her face as gold;
Till from her eyes struck with her beauty-beames,
Run cristall, mingled with Pactolus-streams:
It Is strange to some, her glories thus alone,
Should be our greatest Phylosophick-stone;
No, but it is true, her virtue-candors should,
Turn stony lovers to a Ruby mould:
For by the silent lawrells as I stood,
She wept of Jewel'd Elixar a flood:
In such a pearly Diamond as did rant,
It Is orient lustres, with the Adamant,
A tear was the same-spreading herball whence,
Distilled the extraction of a Quintissence:
And then a sigh resulting from't was the
Ruby, well made by that rare chemistry.
First, as a long she walked the summer-meads,
Where Aprill's Lillies boast their maiden-heades,
She made their colors mary-golds to embrace,
The splendent ardors of her Sunny face:
They blushed to see her virgin-looks so red,
Which tincture with their whites commingled,
And so transformed at those golden sights,
Like Heliotrops became her proselites.
Next to the murmering currants did she go, love
To pleasant Rivers sembleing silver Po;
Where gliding streams speak dearest loves of
As to her golden beauties they did move,
And then the Poet's fictions did command,
Truth from the existance of this ruddy sand;
Changed by her tears to that new-fashon'd state,
As did Pactolus, Tagus, Ants-date:
So stories which did admiration thunder,
Are shrunk into a lesser cloud, then wonder:
So have I seen an Optique glass to the eye,
A Ladies glorious beauties multiply;
Which when reversed to the other end
Did, in less contract, that same form commend:
So have I seen bright Sol's Eoan ray,
Into a miracle it is beams display:
When most in vanting state, of lustures proud,
Soon peep ith'v zard of an envious cloud;
Thus having wept, each golden flower paid,
Their rich-st^t^ibutes gallantly arrayed,
The silken Tulip, Velvet-violet,
In their famed robes her Ornaments beset;
By an obedience to her form, which give
Original sweets to them derivative:
Plush-roses come, in skarlet dye to seek,
From native Rubric of her corrall cheek:
A higher color, of which fame possessed,
Retired to the Cloister of her crimson-brest;
And rivolets kissed her beauteous garb, while she
Set, frothy Venus in the foamy sea.
But do not weep the floods to pearl,
Be thrifty of your tears, proud girl;
If we in Crystal swim, or should
Like Mydas nothing touch but gold;
It were a torment, and each sense
Misconstrue it, for pestilence.
Minerva's Progeny when they
Should drink up Hippocren, and sway,
In The Prop'hry chair of their own wit;
Will find no wine at all in it,
And how then? it is not ale inspires
Our muses with Poetick-fiers:
We must want Verses, you want praise,
The Poets laurel, Heralds blaze.
The Cygnet who on silver Thames,
Sits Prophesying death, the streams
Turned into gold, will soon forget
His name, and swear he is Mahomet
Entombed in Pearl, brave Neptune might*
Be richer in his Amphi^rite,
Yet, be not frugall least some Sage,
Sybill of this Iron-age:
Say (as by Rain the World of old)
Deucalion's race should drown by gold.
The Auriate Rivers opened lies,
In fabulous, Mythologies,
But fictive were that Crysian store,
That Hermus running purest Ore;
Unless you would lived in those days,
And weeping glost them with bright rays;
For all affirm, a golden sphere,
And what is your eyes, if fixed there.
Perhaps my Dia, this you did,
To build a glorious Pyramid:
For Venus, and the Non-ey'd Boy,
Spare such intents, a childish toy:
First, make Parnassus rich, and we
Who are called, poor by Poetry;
When as we reap our fruit, and bear
The golden harvest of a tear;
Erect an altar to your shrin,
And Incense, Sacrifice divine.
To his Lady at the Departure.
NOw sets Sol's candors, all my daybreak light
Is clouded in Oblivion's misty night;
By an Ecliptic shade, made like to these,
Phoebus-denounced cold Antipodes:
For say what sadness could my noblest mind
Have in the Labyrinths, of grief confind;
Then such a Complementive harm, which proves,
Rebellious Rivers in our sacred loves.
But will you go fair Maid, I Will never be
Cured with cordialls of a Jubilee;
If on your Ruby lips, I take upon,
A Farewell, Farewell salutation;
Unless that dead, and Widowed kiss invite,
Espousing Nuptial^s to your appetite.
So many sweets of yours breathed forth a May,
And now those bloomy fortunes must decay;
Ere they be ripe, like early flowers which are
Decrescent, as pale Luna rides the Car:
The morn, their birthday celebrates and the
Night Solemneth their sunerall, Obsequie:
So many lustrious beams corruscant by
The ardent Sunshine of your glorious eye;
Emparadis'd my mind, and must I be
Disvailed from that heavenly Majesty.
Must the great Phoebus, in a doleful cloud
Of sorrows, his Eoan lights enshroud;
As he climbes up the Eastern hills to bring
Rays, for the day odours to in rich the spring:
And shall the glimmering candors of my hope,
Sink to the depth of morning's Horoscope;
Where fates, malignant honors never, are,
A bearded commet, or a smooth-face't Star.
No no, my Dia; It Is a homely dress,
The russet coat, of a grave Sheperdresse;
Becomes the rural Meads in their best show,
Let Galatea drive poor Virgills plough:
Or wash his Jambs with an attentive heed,
Whilst he sings dit^ties on his oaten reed:
Should clod-pate Tytyrus his rustic swains,
Espy your beauty on their flowery plains;
In admiration they would conclude, you would bin
A Diety, no pretty sheperlin.
But stay my Dia, and we will garlands weave
The golden stalks, of spices lawrell-leafe;
In a Rich chaplet, while each winged bird prates,
The simpathies, of their most lovely mates:
Where Flora her gay pleasures sporting yields,
In The pearly buskins of Injew'led fields.
So in a famed commixture there we will see
Lillies of the Court, Roses of the Country.
To his friend, on the sight of his Lady
SEe where she comes behold, espy,
A second Hellens beauteous face,
A front of thunder lightning eye;
Transmorphosing Acteons case.
Just in my breast, for now I feel
The golden dart no leaden steel,
Ixions ever-turning wheel.
Forbid it Jove, or how shall I
At sacred Altars pray;
When I am Venus Votary,
Conducted with that Ray.
Impossible to quench, I burn
In flames less I return,
Chas^e Phoenix from a dying Urn.
Is Coelia fallen from above,
To Court some humane race.
Here is no Ganymed of Love,
A Paris, Jove like grace,
To wanton with the sweetest sport
As Petulants who do resort
To the admired Roman Court.
Is the Worlds Paramour in mind,
In this undaunted wrath,
Her childish Amorist to find
Wildred in some Path.
Of woods where noxious creatu^s lie,
And so in aequipage to try
If he be void of Jealousy.
To wander thus, is but in vain,
What secret Phillis proves,
That heaven which mad Poets feign
Elizium's but in Loves.
Blessed Indy's there, but every grace
Of happiness dwells in the place
Of a rare-welcomed embrace.
There is an injewled May,
On the odoriferous bowers.
There is Aprills Courtiers gay,
Dismantling royal flowers.
June's Juli's golden crest.
All spiceries which verdant rest
Ith'rosealls of the perfumed East.
Elixar-fragrant blossoms rise
With the impregnant sweets,
Fair Types of flowery paradise,
Pure Roses Lillies greets.
And all to satisfy the sight
Of her eye-viewing Appetite,
Still hunting pleasures with delight
But now we have seen enough I know.
Gods often are in humane show.
To Dia on a vision.
DId dreams in fair truth's garbes appear,
I Would then acquaint each curious ear
What beauty fancy represents,
In concaves of benighted tents.
Nature it seems puts on the dress
Which Madams in the days confess;
Deludes the Lovers wandering sense
With shapes of seeming innocence.
Mycillus dreamt until the Clock
Struck Morning by Pythagorus's Cock:
And thus Old Esop's tales does say,
Gold found in the night, was dross in the day.
All hopes are vanished, thus we might
No better warm at Gloe-worm light.
Yet grant I credit give, will you,
Admire or wonder it were true.
Believe me (Dearest) 'twas a She,
Deserves more praise, then flattery;
A feature pure, whose splendors win
A sacred Quill from Scraphin:
Commends a style no low, no less
Then the grand Sophos could express.
I gently viewed her by her Ray,
The time was night, but she was day.
Aurora's blush, her cheek, her lip,
Where Phoebus did his Nectar sip.
Ambrosia taste, a brow, an eye
Like Luna in the spangld sky:
Where like great Jove to dive in bliss,
I did Court, Complement and kiss
Her Lilly-breast embost with red,
As Mars when took in Vulcan's bed.
Chaste Characters in blushes drew,
Which made my lips mild language show.
For say I did desire to drink
Wine sugared from the Coral brink.
Her lips, It water were if one
Presume it from that Helicon.
Though often I did by Venus charm,
Embrace that Lady in my arm,
'Cause he that plays the wanton-boy,
Confesses only love is joy.
He plucks the Hesperides and more
Then Dragon chastity before.
Yet Stay fair Dia, I Will not draw
Those lines in metaphors, I saw
None but your self, I joy the fates,
My misery commiserates.
You are only She, I speak
In so much flourishing Rhetori^k,
And when we two by love are one.
In happy bands of Union.
By calmest Halcion days of Love
We Will make our joys Pathetick prove.
To his Lady.
IT is a Quaery often told,
They cannot dye who do unfold
Strong cordialls, strange, has every note
A long, a Poison Antidote?
Here Is death, here is a corosive
Physician, first see that you live.
Yet such restoratives I find
In the retirement of your mind,
As that my sickness need not fear
A Potion, if your self be near.
In conserves sweet, like Charon's boat.
I may to glorious Tempe float:
For it is your breath I live upon,
As the airy-suckt Camelion.
And since it blows so Rare a sent,
From your fair face it is Element.
Not p^trefies it is profane,
To say in Angel, earth remain.
Come grant your beauties, then that I
May worship the divinity.
In your face couchant, as men's hearts
Hung Trophies upon Cupids darts,
Oblations to a Deity
Cannot Idolosisme be.
I think by you, that frame will sure,
No such base Pagantry endure:
It molded of a better blood,
Is more defusive unto good.
Yet say 'twill Idolation be.
(As is great Saints Apostacy)
A Sacrifice to you would infer,
Pish, I Will be made Idolater.
Come, Autumn will a rival be,
To those who seek your Treasury.
And who would sail to Indy set,
When there is no gold at all to get.
When those Roseall cheeks composed
Of sweetness is in dull age closed.
Who Will call it Eden, then no flower
Mellifluous in the fragrant bower.
Who Will call you Paragon (not he,
None else but Hellen, fair may be.
None chaste but Phoenix knows) unless,
We by her Moles a Venus guess.
Who to the tree will make pursuit,
When Hercules has got the fruit.
It Is not a superficial thing,
Our fancies can to pleasures bring.
^Tis Richer motions we throw in
^ur Hymenaeall Magazin.
But stay, methinks in your eyes glance,
Two Cupids are at dalliance,
Those glimmering beams darting I see,
Just as his holden arrows be.
Sure they do strive, shall we divine,
Whether of us must first resign,
Venus grant it, be you long since,
My Passions fierce, I did convince.
I was in Love, Oh! Oh! it is true,
And with no goddess else but you.
See you not the sweet Marigold,
Her gaudy colors does unfold:
At Phoebus splendors every day
To gild her leaves with his rich Ray.
She like his Daphne drops the boughs,
He takes and Crowns his laurel brows.
Learn of this flower, you shall not fear,
I Will prove your Sun in every Spheer.
You say I Am Scholar by my looks.
Know I delight in two-leaf books.
Hence you conjecture right, what man
Would not attempt your Vatican.
It is a treasure not a loss,
That library each day to toss.
Nor is it false Latin to decline
My case with your sex toeminine.
Women no Heteroclits are
That serve a Number singular.
Tho not Quae Genus is in Rate,
Then every one would please his Pate.
Yet the Grammatian must allow
Your sex to be the Common of two
Cease then sweet Lady for to be
More stony then old Niobe.
Least I Pigmalion Court a Dame,
Made of some wood insculpted frame:
For tell me why, was love confined
Into one Object virtuous mind
But Lovers should as bodies may
Carry their motions in one way.
Who would not build an amorous nest,
In The Hyblas of your fragrant breast.
Residing there, till he does spy,
All bliss and true felicity.
There in that Center he may move.
By Juno's or Diana's Love.
And sit like Halcion in that calm,
Let Cupid bring a wound, you balm
To cure the malady, hence
As scorning loves antipathy.
Will your embracement, have, of old
As Jove did Danae's in gold.
Cupid made to see, and Love made Lovely.
SIrs, it is a Received Maxim, there is no new thing under earth, how many old
things have we then above ground? and yet I could instance in this Protean
Kingdom, still putting on pluralities of new-fashioned shapes, though amongst
the nice scruples of ancient Philosophers; it is as true as the ^n doubted signs
of Mathematick demonstrations Quod, nihil dicitur, quod non suit dictum prius.
It is evident then, therefore what Gigantick fables I have borrowed from this
ga^agantain age, will not appear downright ^he^^; I do but disvail the beauty
from a clou^^ed face, and make those Rays transparent, which vulgar heads
could no way prize, because hid in a viz^rd, like the Oriental Diamonds,
Cloysted in the strict Nunnery of in Oyster's shell. I do but dissipate the
envious cloud, to a clear beam, and interprets the dusky types from
unmysterious umbrages, for it is only Lust which huddles in the wanton twilight
of dark expressions, whereas love scorns to be a Taper at the Worlds Torch;
which soaring in the high Element of vanting ambition, discovers her great
Justres to undiscerning Conceptions. Look at Venus, she shames to flutter in
Cynthia's AEthiopick attirements, but displayes like Juno's bird, her proud
gayeties on this spacious Theater. Look upon Cupid, though blind, yet always
flatters his beauties in the Crystal glasle of a Lady's eye.

I must confess the total invention is not my own, yet where I borrowed any
wit, I lent the composure of my fancy; Lux est umbra Dei, says the Platonist,
and yet how often do we admire that shade, Virgil in the Heroic Language of
his noble attempt, made conspicuous the dim over sights of blind Homer, though
we conclude him but the glimmering shadow of such a Sol, and no sublime honor
to enthrone him in the meritorious Pavillion of high-flown fame, as he who
Charractered the light, to be the supreme desty's shade, thence made it more
illustrious by such an Ecliptic brightness. I offer this to ^o man's Perusal,
but whose amorous breasts are fit entertainments for this guest, for nothing
but a Di^mond will make impression upon a Diamond (that is) None but a Lover
regards the features of love. I therefore saulte you in i'ts Language, kiss
your hands. And if you ask me what Love is

I thus Answer.
I Confess, now could I lash forth into the Coined streams of an Elegant
Hyperboly. ^t were but sufficient to flatter your ambitions; But should I
strive with the, winning persuasions, of smising Oratory, to ravish your
suncses with the rare beauties of this high born Nymph, were but in vain,
because I know you are not of the Platonicks who diets their Appetites, with
the notion of mingling Souls, when their bodies are at no other brookage, but
a doting on contemplation. Away Adulterate speeches, like harlatory faces,
painted outsides, to insinuate affections; Hence sweet Luliab^es, Ve^us Charms
to impale madness with fair Alarements, the reality of such a sul^^nce is
current coin, when slattery's Eulogies are undervalued. Lov's beauties are
able to melt the Adamantine heart like the Pumix-stone to sweat water, though
she proves imperious in the end, and by a wanton tyranny usurps, a Dominion
greater then the World, till that rigor congeale them again to flint: Yet what
a claim did the grand Sophoy attribute to this creature, while Parnassus was no
Hill for their walks, and Helicon no Fount for them to swim: Methinks I see
Socrates sad, in the glimering twilight of his twinkling Candle, in the
invention of this love; while it shows him nothing but his own obscurity:
Methinks I see the swaggering Platonist bedewing his watery cheeks at Laethe's
R^volets, by the oblivion of this rare Idaea. We see the Stagorite impearling
his face with the Embroadery of an injewelled tear, because his inventions was
so eb'd as not to know the tide-motions of this Euripus; We see the Naturalists
heads veiled with sorrow, because not able to withdraw the shadowy curtain from
this occult quality: We see the moralists pulls. beating slowly, in the
attainment of those animate Ethics. And we see the Eagle-eyed wits of this
age, the more they soared at, the sooner loose sight of those rays: I hear the
Poets say, since the golden funeral of their happy times, love like Astraea
flew into heaven; This would have quelled the aspiring attempts of those
Amorists, had not the Interpreters made it dross in false Annotations; Aesop's
Cock found a Pearl, but he wished it a Barley corn, yet it is probable love is
on earth, for when I behold a Picture, how do some symptoms animate my duller
spirits: And when I look upon a Picture, how do I commend the superficial
Paint Rhetoricated in curiou^ flourishes, and daighnes, an Eulogium on the
ruder metaphors of the Artificer's shallow Judgment, which unpolite lineaments
are in some sense beauty spots, to set a greater gloss upon the form, like
those Solary motes which makes his Irradiant lustres diffuse a more glorious
splend or, and therefore now I cannot hate a Lady for the nice disapprobation
of deformity; the shadowy lineaments of dark colors, well lymns a Picture in
it is noble paint; natures landscape is fainedly drawn when a sable curtain
vailes the orient riches, and were Apelles pencill set to the Pourtraiture, of
a fair Nymph he would form her nigh the rough outfide of a misshapen Satyr,
thus roses grow sweeter befides stinking weeds, thus by the sullen
Antiperistasis of a shade, Phoebus is splendant in the starr-rayed Meridian;
thus Grammatick figures are not false Orthograpl^y. Hellen may have a stain,
the purest Venus a mole, and the finest lawn an ignoble fret: hence a crooked
rod may be figured into a Mathematick staff, hence the distorted, Caverns of
an old face are the grave charracters of fame's Rubric, most sweetly Inbalming
wrinkled cheeks, with bloomy roses, the decrepid form reversed, is but the
studied Anagram of Pretick glory, and I think the pretty Orater did no way
flatter the mean beauty of his homely Lady, when he told her in the
complementive Rhetoric of a high expression, Res sacra est deformitas: for
indeed it is more divine then the winning Oratory of charming Pulchritude, which
Philter, was magic enough to conquer a Romanceing Spirit, whose brandishing
blade scorn^d to turn edge to a half-shadowed beauty, so then it may be good
reason, why the puling Platonicks would only live in contemplation because
Venus her picture was half drawn. A reverend age is the very shape enstamped
upon the perfect feature of Angels, whose superlative excellencies, rich in
their natural Indowments, without the adulterate Chemistry of invention, to
guild them with the tincture of an noble Paint, deserves to be adored as well
as loved; For whatsoever seems so specified in the glorious modification of
form, as requires our chiefest embraces, it results from this principle, that
first of all it must be very lovely, now if any thing be deformed then it
boasts the sage Records of an ancient antiquity, the rigid Stoic, whose Satyr
robes looks more Prodigious then the old Synicke hudled in his rotten Tub, if
he would retort his eye by a wanton Reflection would not be afraid at the
unaffectionate light of his stony face: So that I congratulate the indulgent
generosity of Madam nature who made my soul a Rasa tabula, where I might
engrave the divine impression of a heavenly Lady, though I did never salute
her, but in the murmuring tones of affectionate silence, I may feast the
Insatiate appetite of my eyes, with the banqueting dainties of her presence,
but I would not in the polite garb of gaudy eloqence, court a metaphorick
oration from her ruby lips, Since the Poet has told me.

Portentum est quoties Caepit Imago logus.
What a Prodigious wonder it is
To see a Picture speak, Court, kiss.
But for me it is more easy to love, then to describe the existance of love,
for it inhabitates the inward recesses of chaste hearts and therefore scorns
the outward wantonings of petulant tongues, the Painter represented nature
appeating to Aristotle masqued in a sad veil, and he as other Philosophers
left her clouded in an obscure form and mufled up in the slip-cloaths of
Materia, and I neither can draw the curtain from love's face, the better to
admire it is beauties; it is hid from the prying notions of my Quill; though it
is Sainted in the white robes of Radiant light, perhaps we may semble her by
some other objects, but such colors are dim, and such similitudes but weak
demostrations; for what is it of Hyperboly to say in yonder Ruby-rose sits
enthroned her golden cheeks, in this blushing tulip, discolored with various
Aparellings her violet veins, run in a modest current: In this Maiden-lilly,
her virgins-skin glanceth a smiling blossom, and in this crimson Incarnadin
waves the rich Ambrosia of her Cortall lips. No, no, In representation of this,
the Heathen who studied so long as the blinking candle would glimmer to his
nocturnall Lucubrations said that Lamp did show him only his own darkness,
like the old Cynick with his Lanthornesplendor, at Noonday seeking a good man
in Athens: Neither did the exemplary documents, of Lascivious Poets give us a
distinct evidence of this ray; It is better heard in the harsh melody of
mournful sighs then seen in the young face of smooth effeminacy, and it is
seen as well in the smooth face of young Effeminency, as heard in the harsh
melody of mournful sighs; Yet mount the Top-Element of love, and you will see
Canaan by a Pisgath-fight; Cry aloud into the rebounding Caverns of it is holy
Nunnery, if you will hear it speak, for an Echo will not follow the weak
voice. The old Astrologer was laughed at, who by looking intensively upon the
Heaven's Physiognomy fell into a pit of waters.

Inputeum Stollidus decidit Asirologus.
The Astrologer into a Well,
By looking at the Heavens fell.
Whereas in the crystal glass of that rivolet he might have seen the skies
brightest beams uncurtained by an unconceived luster, thus some in the
description of Love have discovered their own folly, those who have striven in
the Anatomy have only touched the superficies: A short Mathematick staff may
reach the low Planets, but the Sun shine of Love is blazoned in a higher Pole,
and therefore the ravished Archimedes may shoot forth his (...) when he takes
the elevation. Who ever did Paint the fragrancies of Aprill's Rose; it is a T^x
beyond the Pen, as Pencil's Performanc^. I d^re give him leave who sees Love to
fall in imoraces, and salute it with a (...) welcome thou Lady Light; as the
old Epicures desired to sip up their Quintisence in a (...) if they could,
which impossibility made the raging Stoics angry with Fortuna, in cheating
them with the Lotte yof blind ^ncertainties, and the unpassionate Stoic were
dashed on Rocks of ansery, whien made their Wise Man who held an Apathy in his
tenets, it a storm on Sea look pale, yet howsoever I cannot speak, alorions
things are spoken of ^hee O Love! It was of thee that the famed Philosopher
raised his Panygerick to a Map of the World, writ Hollinsheads, and spoke
Folios. It was of thee, that the great Historian swelled his brain, till it run
forth a second Helicon. And it was of thee, that the Morallist raised, this
Hyperbolicall Eulogium, who can comment upon so Seraphick a a Text without an
Angell's sublime pinneon. What Jove in his Regal magnanimity would not be
Captived with so ^^^re a beauty? what Adonis would fear to melt into so
delicate a flame? What Apollo would not entertain the kind welcome of such a
golden dart? Some have presumed to Paint the Little Wanton blind; and I dare
avouch that Cupid too without tongue, Hence the sporting delicacy of words, are
the sad tone of a sigh, breathing forth such fluttering expressions as the
Paphian Doves do echo in the pleasant groves of Myrtle-boughs. Hence their
fingers talk Love-ditties, and dialogues, are weaved in their Virgin-Garlands.
Hence the accustomed Character of a glance, the pleasant eloquence of a chaste
smile, are Loves vocal messengers carrying the sweet Ambassy of a kiss.
Sometimes their laughter like so so many Rhetoricating figures are composed in
a legible Idiome; and sometimes the contracted cloud of a supercillious brow
typified the indignation of a frowning Lover. It seems to some a glory, above
weak humanity, that like Angels they should discourse by sight, without help
of an Intellect, as if souls had their course, and recourse into diverse bodies
and in silent eloquence most learnedly to Complement, but alllove has it is
vizards, and Venus her sectaries, can go unseen circumfused with Aeneas his
cloud, through Public Assemblies. I therefore learn this one thing, Cupid
wounds the heart with his false treachery, by the compulsion of an invisible
dart, so he still possesses the native Countries of his Primogenious
habitations, as traduced from the Cimmerian vault of the Pimitive Chaos. Love
thus flies the grand Rays of a hot faced Phoebus, and like the Owl flutters in
the shady glimmerings of dark Twilight. For my part, I know not what Magic did
not only include Impetuous Pasiphoe in the circled Meanders of a crooked
Labyrinth, but also cloystred this secret Love in an obscure Hermitage; so
heard is it without Ariadnes clew to find forth the inextricate windings, it is
so hard a Riddle to interpret, that every one who loves, dotes on a Aenigme,
and becomes a problem to him self; just like those, who in a wastage of dreams
are carried to Elysium and when they wake be still in Bridewell, Now it tosseth
him in the furious tyranny of the watery Sultan, and now it dandles him on the
Calm lap of an Halcion-day, so that by the fluxes, and refluxes, of diverse
Protestations never taking firm Anchorage in the disturbed Port of his breast;
he will confess from wind, and weather-beaten waves the goddess Cyprida
derives her generation, and not from the sweet Amber Greece of perfumes, as
some in a flatter to that wanton Deity blazed forth an attribute* Thus, those
whose delicate heads are surfac't with the Rich Diadem of Roses, are Crowned
with the mock-Scepter of Royalty of thorns, As Churches are painted with antic
Creatures to show mysteriall glory, and the Beast with ten horns, are the ten
Tribes of Israel. The Cob-web face, of a smooth Lady, who intangles Lovers in
such tiffany threads, is Domitian's Compeer who made it his Royal labor to
catch flies. So cruel is the obsequious Empory of of Love, that to be it is
Subject is to live and dye; Just as Maiden Phoenix builds her self a vital
pyre in which Enfranchised flames, she refines her aged gravities. So malignant
is it is favors, that it strikes a man into the dull malady of disasters,
whereby it may have a high prerogative of honor, in applying preservatives, so
dubious a Benefactor, that with Reciprocal heats, and colds, and various
paraoxysmes, it inflames and Refrigerates breasts consecrated to such hallowed
fires. It casts a Lover into those flames that it may thence snatch him, or by
some providence let him burn, as flies who circumlude the raging Tapers,
sometimes suffer martyrdom, and sometimes scorch their wings,

The pale faced Miser he seeks himself in himself, like our Roaring gallants so
ignorant of observations, in sailing the compass of this Worlds Circuit, as
they would seek Rome in Rome. It is hard for him to love, It is hard for him
not to love: but it is hardest for him to enjoy the delicate embraces of love,
What infelicity implies his contradiction to wish he might not enjoy his
wishes, the Majestic feature of a Lady's brow, adorned with the Laurel
Chaplet of verdant chastity does allure and affright the excellent claritude of
a serene face, like Sol's Eoan Candors, does refresh, and make blind his gazing
eyes; The lightning of a beauty would make him fall in veneration of such a
divinity, and yet like the gigantick Cyclops, he fears to be struck with a
Thunderbolt. It intermingles joys with the antipathy of sorrow, that the
compounds of pleasure might be more delighting; and it intermixeth grief in
sympathy with mirth, that it might the more torment: So that he but dreams,
who thinks his palate enough banquetted at the sweet meats of such felicity;
For when his stupefied senses are discharmed, from that magical Lethargy, he
will find a hungry Appetite: Therefore you must not expect a Carpet-way to
this Canaan, without the Red Sea of afflictions: You must not expect a Lady
whose waxen arms are melted into a sweet compliance of delicate Imbraceings,
without the hard opposition of a stony heart; A Lady whose breath always
exhales the fragrant odours of Incensed Cassia, without the least obnoxoius
smell of unredolency, upon whose cheeks, nothing but smiling Roses, breathing a
Panchaian air, and sweetest Lillies survive in a glorious gorgery, or from
whose lips nothing but harmonious Diapazons distills the coranting notes of
unparalled raptures for some times Love's morose, and flames like
shaggy-disheveled hair of bearded Comets, which again appear beauteous as the
smooth-fac't stars.

Yet I have often heard, and I pray you tell, why do you complain it is blind
and mad, all those ill favored warts add an illustrion to this Hellens Beauty;
We see the Moon canopyed in a black masque: And the stellate Spheres have
their glimmering Candors bright oriency, of which, lustres are never displayed
in the glory of a full Orb: The lawny vizard of modesty vailes loves face, as
the thin Robe of a condensed cloud, through which, Phoebus darts his morning
Radiums, Before Aurora's glisterings are unsheathed from the dark scabbard of
night. how do we like the Antipodes despair in dull melancholy, till she is
discurtained from those dead vailes, to the full Zenith of a Noonday glory:
Thus when the pretty smiles of love's refreshed flowrings are unclouded from
the envious Aparellings of misterial umbrages, how do we triumph in exultation:
For some things are but clothed with the gay Robes of orient colors, but she
is flourished with Sunbeams, bespangled with the twinkling stars of rich
Embroidery, Anaxagoras there, should not make me dis-believe my eyes. What if
only to Phylozophise were to contemplate the small Ideas of nature, then this
high endeavor of love, is the great work of Philosophy, though he who loves
but what he knows, changes his Philosophy into Logicks scientifical
demonstration, and I truly think one may be satisfied, as soon with a bare
Skeleton of syllogismes bones As be filled with the notion of glorious beauty,
nothing, Nothing. You believe love is mad hear but the fallacies, Lovers use in
disputations, and you will say it is without mood and figure: See these
distriumphing Virgins huge trophies on the victor's bow, and you will say they
are first circum-binded in cords of anger, then impaled in imbracements of
pleasure; the wanton heat of a lustful breast teaches them to chant the sweet
notes of a melodious Lyrick, before it lets them Rant in the Lascivious harmony
of soft Epigrams, For Love is made with reason, and all those doteings of a
Captived mind, are the secret mysteries of divine rage: To Love, and to be mad
are relatives in reciprocal terms; Thus Jove descended from his high
Olympus, to enjoy the Heavenly features of an earthly Lady, and the action
might be commendable; for conjugal Rights of Lovers, as our marrying solemnites
admits no shame, and the foolish Poet was drunk with too much Nectar, when he
said,

In Caelum est meritrix, in Caelum turpis adulter.
That starry Palace, Royal state
Of Jove, is but adulterate.


But thus much for the Proin, a long Prologue, I fear will have a short scene,
a shorter Epilogue, and therefore it is time to make a leg, and Exit, least the
City Run forth at those Myndian gates, then first, to describe this Deity,
listen and you will hear, Dionisius the Syracusian Monster by the Logic of his
genuity defining Love to be a circle, a bono, per bonum, in bonum redeuntem;
and I wishly concur with that Emblem, I confess as well as kisses, Rings,
complements, the pledges of love, we have our Hyroglyphicks too: that very
circle does express Cupid drawing his crooked Bow at my breast, already struck
with the golden dart: That very circle does represent the perpetual heat of
Lovers, commingled with blood (as it is the Probatum est of Physicians)
Circumrotated by a gyre, just like the Aetherian, fire moving in the Similitude
of an Orb, So that whosoever loves, he is carried by a sphaericall motion which
like the Egyptian Serpentine year.

Sua per vestigia Revolvitur.
Does to such Circ'lar motions tend,
As it begins where it does end.
And as it is motion, so it is self is without end, for who knows not the last
fate of a man to be his dyeing testament, while his soul is exhaled into his
dearest friend's bosom, as a farewell Legacy, the Romans I am sure were no
less confident then superstitious in this custom, when as they would catch the
last breath of their dying lovers, by laying mouth to mouth: So that I think
Pythagoras did rightly Phylosophize, when he fell in Love with a
Metempsuchosis, and sacrificed to the birthday of that Lady Transmigration his
great brain, had in conception, whose desultory Soul divesting it is Painted
slip-cloathes the body flew into some noble entertainment which the old Pagans
in their foolish tenets baptized an Elysium. before we take our vltimum vale,
from this sorrowful Theater there is none happy, whom love and Philosophy
does not inspire, or ravish the Soul into an amazement of ecstasies, and
therefore without it, I conclude with the poet, Dici beatum, ante obitum, Nemo.
None without Love can ever be
Happy, till death end misery.


The one hales the admiring man into the astonishment of Contemplations, The
other sets the lovely soul into the great wonder of embraces; the the one
carries you into the pleasant Tempe of Heaven-sprung flowers whose dew watering
those Rosy leaves is Nectar spilled from the Gallaxey at Ganymed's fall, where
you may feed the nice desires of a stolen glance, or satisfy the curious smell
with balmy incense of perfumed sweets. And p^ay you tell me, How can you deny
the transcourse of souls, when bodies are at a distance: Have you not seen the
Amorist's eye, always looking that way, his Lady sits enshrined, like a
stately Diety; If they join hands, then the soul dines it is Appetite in
figurative speeches by twisting of fingers, if they sit together then the heart
leapes up in exultation, and Running forth with a whole Troop of thoughts (as
rustic fellows salutations, are with a good blow) knocks at the weak fort,
till it surrender. Or what other Annotation is the Ruby-blush, coloring one's
Sanguine face, with a purple dye but the passionate soul, which in its
crimson-robes presently leaps into the Velvit cheeks as the Plush-index of a
wounded heart: See but how desirously the soul lurks, into the Labyrinth of an
ear, catching the silent Complement, in an Eloquent language, and then
answereing it again, in a silent echo, see but how the soul ingulphes her
self in the large theater of a glance, and you will say, it dies in continual
speculation, for some say Love is blind, but Democritus put forth his eyes,
the better to live in contemplations. Thus man himself shrinks his whole
composure, into the little vail of an eye, and sometimes confines it in the
little Cloy ster of an ear, as we see some Animals content with the small
function of one sense.

Listen, Methinks I hear Aristophanes say, it is the whole Sacrament of Love to
reduce men to that Principle, from which they were extraduced. Thus by natural
progress, the Occidentall Sun returns to his spicy East, when as the new
Morning is but a Revolution of the old day; thus Rivers by their filial
gratitude ingulphe the vast Treasures of their pleasant streams, at Neptunes
acceptance, to whom they are derivative. But thou O Thales in water! and thou O
Empedocles in fire leaping, made too much have not only Philosophy, but the
Philosopher himself was resolved into the principles, and the vital particles
of souls ingurgitated in their own Elements. Thus the errors of Philosophyzing
spirits, excuse the errors of raging Lovers; and while the Mentes famelicae
were nourished of what they consist. One would swear Bacchus his soul is made
of a liquefied matter. One would swear the Red soul of Tyrant Caligula is made
of blood, who wished the world but one neck, in which he might glut the hungry
Appetite of his ravenous blade. One would swear the muck-worm soul of a
Country-fellow, is made of dirt, and his body to be the strong clay-walls, and
one would swear the barbarous souls of Stoics rising from a hard quarelet of
stones, to be carved into the lovely statues of men, Or what if we should feign
with the Platonicks, who durst not touch the chastity of a Woman, that by the
mere notion of mingling souls (ut ex communi seminario.) Men do result in a
strict Epithalamy of Nuptial; it is a pleasant invention, indeed that without
putting their bodies to any brookage, they have generation by kissing of hands,
and twisting of eye beams, yet this persuades us, that souls at the first
approach, run into embraces, like friends who not forgetting their
once-acquaintance can entertain souls at a dreaming separation, and meet in
salutations before their bodies be in sight, so now the Platonic takes his
Metempsuchosis into memory, for it is his Love and Philosophy.

Cui amare, ac Philosophari est Reminisci,
For to Remember what is a kiss,
Not to approv't is all his bliss.
Yet to whom, to love, and to Phylosophize is all one, it is to erect the
lapsed estates of Angellick creatures with a perpetual speculation of Heaven
(and as the birds of the Sun are fed only with it is Rays) it feasts them with
a continued desire of eternity. This is that, I know not what candor, makes
mortals in the aemulation of gods, scan the high sphaere of divinty. This is
the eye whose splendors discover more newfound Treasures, then e're Sol was
able to view without tiring his swift-flown Steeds; this makes us as
circumscribed in no Parenthesis of age, like a Posthumus being as spirits who
enjoy the vast Kingdoms of th'ubiqueous air without limitation. Love thus does
all things, knows all things, yet in it is description I must write Encomiums
on the Deo Ignoto as the Pagans scuplted it on their altars.

Some say Cupid is no real being, but a Chymaera. Yet Plato degenerates from
such Principles, allows him something, though it is only the desire of
Pulchritude in a fair Lody, and I make account too, the attempt of an
ill-favored feature, is not Love, but lust. How does that Ignis fatuus bemire
the Lilly soul, in the dirty bogs of Quag-mire folly? How does that melancholy
distemper, like Don Quixots, fight with Wind-mills of fancy, and summons a man
up to death, as Brutus his Malus-Genius did him to Plutos Praetorium. If thus
rash Phaeton-lust, as an intelligence move in the brain's golden Chariet, It
will soon destroy the Micre-cosmman. Each Amorist who adores this Lust as a
white Swan, will find the silly Goose Painted, as Aesops Crow in the rich
Attirement, Peacock feathers, Like the Devil sanctified in the bright Radience
of condensed air. Such a darling Dalilah will blind the eyes of Sampson Love,
and then expose it to scorn of the Worlds Philistims. Such a wicked Athenian
mounts the high pole of honor, by firing the costly state of Love's Diana
temple but that verified Axiom of Logicians proves loves glories.

Nihil dat quod non habet,
Amor nec habet, nec dat malum.
Things must be ours, before we give
First breath and then you will sur'ly live.
The Poet durst not uncloath his body, least the wind, as the Eagle did
Ganymed, should Rap him into the air, but he I am sure who unloades himself of
lust's mantle, will then with Eliah fly into Heaven. Methinks Plato's
philosopher digested dark divinity, (without the commotion of a recoyling
stomach) for the glorious Candle of the transparent soul (says he) was thrust
into the blind-Lanthorn body, as a punishment for her Virgin lust: O had love
bin in those days, how had these glimmery shadings been dissipated to clear
beams: how had that Maiden in her gay blushes bin restored to primitive glory;
for love is not ashamed of her beauties as the proud Corinthian Lais was who
broke the looking-glass at sight of her aged front, carved forth with pale
wrinkcles. Lust indeed may adorn it self in royal loves attirement, yet no
jot the less lust for that, thus a Parrat in imitation of men, may dispute a
Syllogism. Persius in excuse to his lisping Satyrs Authoratizeth this.

Corvos Poetas, Poetridasque Picas,
Cantare Credas, Pegaseium melos.
A song is hard, yet Daws may easy do it,
A Crow's an Orator, a Goose a Poet.
But they conclude like the Roman bird, whom the Cobler's Grammar had elegantly
taught when by an Extempore speech, she cried forth.

Oleum and operam perdidi.
For me to speak is all in vain,
You loose your labor, I get pain,
We delight only in the fruition of a fair beauty, and scorn the Lotteries
of Penelope's wooers, who flew in a soarage of impossiblity; A picture lymned
in the brave excellence of gaudy Symetries, may persuade the eyes of a gazing
Spectatour, but not a Lover. And he who looks on a Lady only to observe the
fair tablature of her face, may as well deate on a Picture. Love is the only
Orator whose smiling Rhetoric allures me to the felicious salute of embraces.
Here I bring the old Philosopher Socrates to witness who would have the very
carved Effigies painted in the insinuating colors of Love's bravest tinctures,
how often with his sweet Appellatives in the Schools, as if in Venus
Gymnasiums, has he styled his Company Formosos auditores, such waxen minds, on
whose melting Amorosities, the Signet of his eloquence might make impression:
So then the flattering Complement of a merry countenance may conquer the
fortyfied Ilium of a Regal Lady. Hellena may be surprised by a pleasant
Robbery, without the aemulation of so many Rivalls; though once the high
ambition of enjoying that unheard of form racked Troy in a decimall Torment of
fire. A mild Hero may lead Venus a Trophey to his wanton bed, as a stern M^rs
enjoy her in Vulcan's lodgings. The dirty Soul of a Clod-pate swain who knows
nothing besides the beautifying of a goodly farm, can dive so far into Royal
Loves Cabinet as to snatch the best Pearl he there finds enclosed; else our
wanton Deity had never wished for the enjoyments of an Iron-side Vulcan, but he
was mettle to the back, and therefore would not stand bent to his work.

Pray tell me, if you, do not love, how can you think to be happy; for love
like the Stoics has a Domestic Pleropheria an unavoidable happiness,
although the felicious Heathens could never reach Summum bonum beyond an
imaginary conception. Thus by a Piece of Politic Stoicisme can allay the
raging infortunes of disquieted passions (as the sturdy Rocks quells Neptunes
Proud waves) and makes them retire worsted. Some have canonized men whose
radiant works sparkles in the Orient luster of day beams, Aristotle was set up
as a Pope in Philosophy, while his sectaries thought other writings but Err
a-Patris neither gospel, nor law, but at Lov's rich strains rarely interlined
with golden notions, all nations may fraught their Vessels, where the Heaven is
made Heaven by it is presence. The old Philosopher said, other Creatures were
writ in Prose, but Man's soul was a perfect Poem, thus indeed we read, Tully's
fiddler said his body never danced but when his soul played the Lessons, and if
the soul be in Poesy, when love sings consort, then is the best melody, give me
Poetry, music in words, and give me music, Poe^ry in sound, and what Queen of
Shaeba would not hear the wisdom of such a Solomon. The Pagans Jupiter was
maximus, because he was optimus, and whatsoever like love would be great, must
be first good, And methinks those all-Religious Romans who tie their tutelary
Angels in the large Pantheon with chains of gold, did but shadow forth this
love, though in the form of a golden dart, it is entertained in the consecrated
Vestry of a Man's heart; should we but see this glorious Planet, I can then
tell how it would move in the Zodiac of our embraces, till by a Chymicall
touch of virtue, the strict imp^ings were turned to golden threads. Great
Aristotle thought his strong drawn Arrow hit the mark, when he gave the
definition of love, to be one soul in two bodies, methinks I might act the
Philosopher, and say, it is two souls in one body, but those weak Raptures come
short of an Hyperboly. This I would say, Plato in it is features might see his
ravishing virtue exist Incarnate This I would say, All the accurate
accomplishments in the inferior World (as Cebes his famous piece of morality
hung in the curious Temple of Saturn to confess the greater wisdom of that
God) are but shadows of this Deity. For a little Attome may express this great
World clouds of perfumes lodge their vast glories in the circumference of a
grain, a small dath speaks Sol cli^enant in the large Meridian; and a round O
notes the broad fact Moon, in a full Orb. In Maps points spells Parnassus, and
a line great Helicon: Methinks it was but a fond vapouring of the Old P^er, and
only fit for the proud vaunts of an undaunted Stoic to say Primos in orb
deos fecit timor.
'Twas fear at first which did create
Gods, in their sanctified state.
With his good leave, I would alter the phrase and say Primos in orb Deos
fecit amor.
'Twas the immortal name of Love,
Made Gods on earth, in Heaven above.


Love is a great Magician. Hence (as Inchanters) Lovers by shady umbrages and
dark representations of a Lady burn themselves by a senseless Rapture carried by
a delusive waf age into the air of fancy. Hence beauteous eyes, like the
bewitching Basilisks stupefie the lovers mind, till by an unvanquished
inflammation of desires, with Regulus in his barrel, he dies by looking at
those sunny Rays, what else is, I pray, the soft allurments with which
Endymion made Luna descend from her high sphere to his homely Cell. What else
are these oft-repeated groans, but magical terms, charming philters, and
Amatory numbers. Nay, and I know not whether to admire the strong motions in
that which is beloved, or in the Lover, those delineaments of flatteries, those
smiling faces moving with enchanting persuasions, where Love a circle, there
exercises his execrations. Why Rosamond in her flourishing Epit^th was called
Rosa-mundi may be thus noted, that Loves powerful Magickneverscrued her
beauties to a higher perfection then the sading flower. Had Demosthenes bin
inspired with this love, as he was with eloquence, the Old Heathens might have
hummed him with the deserved applause of (...).
See where he goes in learned fame,
It is Demosthenes by name.
Which Persius Englished in Latin by a mild Satyr.

Et Pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier hic est.
It Is a grand honor (...) be known,
(And that is the man) with fingers shown.
The Poets Libri were their Liberi which after ages put to Nurses use, but when
they are the Offspring of great love, all things comes to suck honey from their
breasts, for my part I would have my last fate survive in it is memorial, which
speaks more then a glorious Urn, though I were entombed like Pompey with a Hic
citus, est magnus.
Here Pompey dead,
Lies rarely buried.


For I do remember, Alexander when he came to the Tomb of Achilles and saw
that stout Greek shut (like a mirror in a Cabinet) in sobasea Mausolaeum,
presently weptin words Haeccine sunt Trophaea? Can the World afford no better
honors, had he bin monumentized with i'ts Oriental gems he would have bin the
Son of Jupiter, whose mother is Immortality. My scrip is always open, O for
that, this great Maecenas would throw in some crumbs, the Channel of my life is
almost dried, O for this Spring of flowing goodness, for it is charity is not
grown cold, nor does those lustres here dwindle like the Morning stars into an
Eve; as the Caldeans writ their good men in Hyrogliphicks and intelligible
words, that they might mould away in the rust of oblivion. For it was not the
immortal Poesy of laureat Homer, nor the dippings of Lethe's Rivolets, but
Love's ever verdant florishings, which deified the great Greek, as Poets,
Kings, did always survive in the rare-living flowers of their Gardens. When
some Poetasters were callow, and their scarce Pen-feathered Pinneons knew a
soarage of an airy travel. Homer had got wings and mounted the top-Eliment of
immortallity, while his flaggy Muse scans the brave ditties of Hellens
Amorofities, beyond humane dispute. When the transcorporating Pithagoreans did
but lisp forth their broken language, Plato could speak and had bin surely
entombed in the monument of love, for an everlastang Pyramid but that foolishly
he expected a Revolution, the Platonic year. Happy Aristotle well stamped his
Eutelechia, for love is harmony, and harmony is the soul, and both together
make the sublimest persection, and this made the laughing Philosopher waft his
intellect to so high a grade as to think upon another life. This made Socrates
bid his friends bury his body, but not think they had buried Socrates. This
made the Stoics scorn their Welch-Pedegree whose tenets after death are to eat
the green Cheese Moon. Here comes a Pollitick Plato and he will have Verses for
his Sepulcher-stone; but let it be that Heroicon of Ovia. Here lies the Master
of loves. Here comes Democritus with ages windingsheet, gray hair, entreating
the Athenian to be Embezelled in honey, but let it be with Loves Rosaries, and
such embalment will make his name fragrant to all posterity. Here comes a
Roman, to have his Urn arrayed with sweet-smell'd flowers, fading vanities.
Venus her Myrtle shall adorn my Hearse as an ever-verdant Cypress. For I can
only shadow forth Love by Paradise, a bank of Lillies, a Garden of Roses.
Caesar's Motto was a book and a spear, and at every onset, Love with the great
Roman can subscribe on the book with the point of it is sword. Veni, Vidi, Vici.
I came, I saw, I overcame.

Love is the extension of the soul, and lives defused through the glorious
Microcosm man now here, now there, now every where. Whosoever loves, by that
reason because he loves he is a number and no more one. In Love's Arithmatick
he is more then a Cipher. Inlov's Music he is more then a Semi-quaver. In Loves
Geography he is more then a small point and in Loves laws he is no Ignoramus.

Souls entertain souls, and Moralists who Sometimes graze with herds of
Philosophers say, nunquam solus, quam cum minus solus, as if their
bonus-genius, guardian Angels were their Comrades, and I think they might
indeed lash forth into superstition, who were downright Pagans, and though
amongst the Petulant Romans, young men were only to act Venus her interludes
because a Crown of Roses did not become the gray-head yet how often have I seen
the Stoick-looks of a dogish old man, quell the natural affections of a young
Amorist (like a little Boy, pursuing the painted gaieytes of a Butterflyes
wings) that upon the assault, he might prove his only rival: How often would
the old wanton desire to survive, like Mezentius in his Funeral Tomb, that he
might espouse his second birth to the World in amorous celebrations; How often
would the Antiplatonick desire to live Retro to embrace a beauteous Lady,
though it be beyond the possibility of love, to prescribe an Apotheosis to any
humanity. I have Read that noble Lycurgus made an Edict for every one to love,
and no irrationality: For Venus her Myrtle, as Bromius his Ivy, can court the
Male with winning embraces, still weaving her self to and fro, in his boughs:
And those feasting Symposists, I mean the devouring Epicures, could live in the
world without adjuvances of an Omnipotent power, but not without the Omnipotent
power of Love's Providence whose Godhead, they did invoke with strict Religion
of their Christianity, though it was but a brutish Zeal, as by the fond tenets
of superstition, the Egyptians worshipped Cats and Dogs, Onions and Leeks,
Serpents and Crocodiles But Gellia impatient at her absent lover, would have
been Prostrate to an Image (so sung the Cambo-Brittanian, Epigrammatist) which
was a higher Crimen then ever Egypt committed, with his Nilean Monsters, yet it
is a piece of Piety to pity her madness, for some will love foolishness,
rather then not love, the Poet argues the fact as Innocence; because.

Semel Insanivimus Omnes.
None can hinself commend for all,
Are lame enough since Adam's fall.
It is impossible to dim the Radiant light, of love's splendors, or give those
glimmering Rays a total Privation, for we admire at the inviolated beams of
translucent Phoebus; so may we the hot sparks of Cupidinian fire, whose
Vestall flames have no extinguisher, It Is refulgent illustrations which lies
darting in a large Lature of an Orient Pearl, will never be abbreviated in the
small Epitomy of a spark, Those vigorous beams, which luster forth in the
highest Meridian of a Noonday glory, will never glimmer in the Matutine blush
of a Rudish dawne, Love it fell from Heaven (where Prometheus stole his animate
fire) and though it halts a little, for want of Immortallity, like the Poets
Mythology of limping Vulcan, it asspires to the same center: If your unruled
presumption scorn to ride, with a small bit, but in an unbridled passion
Curveight a loft, to the nullifying of this Sun beam, either it will fire your
desires into a correspondency, or dazzle your dull eyes, in the black veil of
obscure night, and the next morning, reclused from that intolerable Purgatory,
turn Persian, and fall into adoration: It is just like the proud boughs of the
Palm, the more they are trodden down, the higher the rise: And in a delicate
complement, wantons with your oppression: Says the commick.

Quis desiderio, sit Pudor aut modus.
No measure for desire, mad waves,
Rocks, adamantine strength out braves.
And indeed my desiers, when they lash forth, tends by a natural motion, to
the fairest Center; and thinks never sufficiently they embrace a Lady, by
embraces, or injoyes enough of her enjoyments: As now it is impossible but to
love, so I would not have you love diverse objects, Penelope (that quoted
Matron of Chastity) is figured plaiting her loose tresses into one Embroidery,
to show we must not diffuse our affections, on various pleasures, Alexander
when he had got one World, like a Child, cried for another, but the great
armies of such inconsiderate desiers, you may disband, which but aggravate the
fruition, if you be men, in whose Heroic natures all courteous entertainment,
for brave Ladies, do generally concenter, and combine sine tongues, melting
into amorous speeches still Perioded with the sweet Catastrophe of a kiss.
Smiling faces, Ravishing their eyes Peircing those Sunny beams, with
secretaemulations; And composed of all other virtues by your deserts, which in
others would appear an Hyperboly. Then seek brave Paragons, equally endowed
with rarest excellencies, let their bloomy cheeks outvye Aprill's carnation
Roses, fragrant in freshest buds, let their white hands, Excel the finest
Lillies of flowery May, like Virgin sweets, enthroned in July's bosom; Let their
ruby lips be the banqueting Table of pleasure; Whose balmy dainties are more
rare then that Ambrosia, long since I heard a Poet talk of, I may believe it,
though I never see it: There like Mount Hyblas Lord Paramount, whose Epicurean
stomach, like the strict Publican, takes the Tole of spicey flowers, and at
last Entombes his aery-body, laden with riches in a Honey comb, you may
feast, and then be interred in the rareties, more famous then those sparkling
Adamants. Cleopatra Pyramized for her costly Marble, such Ladies you may love
at the first sight, yet make use of second considerations, for sometimes we are
deceived by the adulterate paint of pulchritude, and are miserable indeed, when
we think our selves happy: He darkened his house, who made sullen the Sun, with
writing too often Fiat lux in his windows, Pygmalion was enamoured on the
Picture he had so beautiously figured, and really thought it Divine: The curled
locks of Epicurus-opinions brandishing the rare outsides of a sophisticated
face which clothed in the gayattirement of Silken robes, peeped from the
spruce Nunnery of a naked breast; knew no other blandishing of virtues, or
torments of death, but the kisses of Venus: He who is dwellings are in a Garden,
cannot crown his wanton head in Rose-buds, without the pricking coyness of
surly thorns. The carrousing merry Anacreon, that quaffing Greek, whose tippling
Cups were crowned brimmers, in full Canary, at the health of his Paramour, was
by a most Emphatical Tautopathy choked with the dry husk of a Grape, Ixion
affectionately Embraced the cloud for Juno, therefore folly is the property of
a man, as humanum est errare. Here we see some men dote, in their predominant
passions, and others no way love enough, as to arrive at that unfortunate
happiness Men like Hymetta's Birds, culls only sweet flourishings, distilling
the Elixar of them to a cunning Chemistry; to whom (as it is true amongst
Pylosophers) it is sceptically propounded to love, and so by that inconstancy
to extract flower, ever and anon, another flower, till by a various
mellification, they suck all the redolent sweets from Flora's sields: Indeed,
it is confessed, we cannot always live in embraces, those virtues we behold in a
Ladies beauty, or in a Picture, where we see drawn her breasts, the pretty
Images of virtue, here Ossa bedewed with milk, there Pelion Embalmed with
Honey, the more we gaze upon them without any intervall in beholding another
object, the sooner our weak eyes are dazzled from any glances; But do you firs
suffer those little rays of love. I once stood amute to see, to illustrate,
their splendors without any glimmerings, for I am not envious to see your
brightest beams glare small splendour more glorious, then the small vapors of my
twinkling twilight, rather with the Elephant I will rejoice, to hover under
such blazeing Sunshine. Tapers thus adumbrate their light at the Meridian
candor, of a Torch, and Stars in their highest Orbs, thinks it an honor to be
shaddows of a morning Phoebus.

Love it is not the only prerogative of men, but other inferior creatures
have it in a natural indowement: Hence Clite salutes the Sun with her golden
leaves, invelopeing the bright Radiums of hear, evaporated from his Rosy wings,
in the Crystal Cabinet of her chaste bosom, till she becomes a Vagative star;
With the same aemulation of affections, the very stones drawing from the
Vbiqueous air, his rarest Refulgences do in a sollid and concrete light from
their flinty Materia dissolve into an orient Pearl, brandishing no less a
beauty, when like a Satyr it is rugged in snaggy deckings, or when it is
gloriously burnished in chains of gold: Thus while Neptune receives silver
Cinthea's famed motion on his pearly waters, rejoices no less, in the
Caelestiall intelligence of that Orb, then he was before amazed with the
beauteous approach of that lovely Venus; we want indeed a Phylosophicke herb
but we have a Philomathematick flood, which furer then the strict Ephemerides
of water, shows us the sable deliquiums of pale Luna. We have Astronomicall
flowers which demonstrate the Sunn's high motion; Horologically denoting each
point of the declining day. The superlative brightness of splendant Cinthia
courts the Super-superlative Radiance of resplendant Appollo, and
Taper-glimmerings salutes Torch, brandishings, as the Hispanian Plebescites
immitate the royal Majesty of their high Emperor: Look at the white
Superficies Angel-glory on silver Doves, with what wanton contentions do they
sound the noise of clamorous complaints. Hear the murmuring Turtles, who by a
humane instinct Carolls the Epithalamy, when April begins to cast her Nun-like
skin and present her self to open view for a bloomy Virgin, and you will
confess these are the lively Emblems of men whose heat, of love should make
them chant a song, to see a Lady in whose refreshing bosom, you might cool the
burning flames: Yet some dote on the superficial pleasure, Loves but for a
day. Neither how to answer that Religion, can I any way determine, sure if the
world be blind, they will have women to be the Expletive Particle of that
Homer: They find forth a new way of Imbracements, and by the Petulant Method of
such wantonings, divirgineth Love, the feigned stories of Poetic fury, that
single souls wandered on the happy bowers of Elysium, (add this Comment to
brighten the Text) that the very flowers gorgeously arrayed in fresh
Apparellings, of summer-triming April, wheresoever those Sainted Ladies troad,
grew up, and thence derive their generations, who (while they immured a little
by meditation) fell in embraces with their tender feet, as Heliotrops at the
morning Apollo.

Non alia Coeli gaudia amare, aut amari, Nen alia terrae.
To love, and to be loved is the
Heaven, and earth's Inbile.
For the Divine Artificer, (before this World's fabric was made by the
Architectonicall power of his word, from the preexistent Chaos) had but this
solace to live, in love and contemplation; which is felicity enough, and more
Perfection then was on this side Heaven. Those too fortunate stars do not
appear so welcome to the banqueting devotions, of poor Mariners, as they are
at the entertainment of their own selves, they leap into one body (while the
one gives half of his Immortality to the other) and like Hypocrates-twins
cries and laughs, lives and dies, at one breath: Hence for a secret embrace (as
Venus her votaries were carried to their Nuptials like the Roman Ladies in a
silken veil ( Hercules was voted a Demigod in Love's Registers, and had more
Treasures of honors, entailed upon his valor, when he conquered the Monster
Women, then when he shook his sharp-darted Lance at the cruellest Hydra.

What need the Soul seek stately Divinity, if it have but love, The Ethnicks
vanted Nature in such Hyperbolicall vaporings, as if that only Deity could
make them happy: What some of their sect whispered forth, some spoke aloud
(...)? What are other things to us? yet who wonders at a Panygercik
Encomionized in the praise of the Moon, with them who never beheld the
Sunbeams, but such felicity is dormant; neither can those high-flown wings
soar at the far stretched eliment of perfection, but with one hand pitched up
to Heaven, like the Boy in the Emblem, has the other hand stretched down to
Hell. The Stoics, happy men, whose holy eyes still looked through the windows
of light, never did adventure so high in towering expressions to make their
souls- Pinneons, mount the top-sphere of felicity; they indeed dared to call it
a spirit as in some sense, dim-twilight reason issuing from dark-Lanthorn
Nature showed them it was separable from the body, and Pythagoras before had
took his transmigration into a Frog. But Love needs not such false Herauldry;
whose name long since was blazoned on Incarnate Deity, and should she again (as
divine Plato thought of virtue) assume a Corporal being, the least glance of
such a brave Paragon, would dazzle our Ruffling gallants into the dimest Night
of wonder, while I my self might Chant this dirge -- Vt vidi, ut Perij.

The starr-fed Mathematicians would scorn Heaven's illustrious Physiognomy,
while the long Jacbos-staffe of their desires, aims at their skye-like face.
The Philosophers would scorn their threadbare Coat of Physiology, to blazon
the rare composure of her Metaphysicall features. And the wearied Pilgrim,
whose weak head is decayed in the Elaborate travells of Religion, would sing a
Requiem to his journeys, and fall in adoration of such a shrine. The Poet he
^ells, us Jupiter est quodcunque amas: Whatsoever we love, is a Godhead to our
selves. And is it so? Then the covetous man, who courts his Decoy Gold, till it
looks Red in anger, or when he falls to adore't, blusheth at his Idolatry, he
kisseth Jove in a piece of money. Yet, for Jupiter was metamorphosed to a
golden shower in the attempt of a silver Danae. And is it so? then the good old
man who kissed his Cow, was Jove in one sense; thus was Eurpa dismounted on
Cretas florulent Plains by a wanton Bull: And is it so? Then the epicure
devours Jove at his Sumptuous Bacchinalls changed to a Lilly-Swan. Yet
luxurious in those chaster plumes, he sips up Jupiter, wantoning with Ganymed
in Nectar and Ambrosia. The Heathens did deifie the worst of men, that they
might color the black aspersions of sad crimes, with that pure tincture of
innocence, because their alligation was made in immutation of those gods; thus
the fool in the Comedy seeing Jupiter acted in Adultery; would needs commit a
Rape, because Jove did so; but love is of a better temper, and to falfifie
those glories of it is goodness by our equality is a piece of folly, for the
Indians can paint the Devil white, that he in those innocent Robes might seem
their God in a higher degree of Perfection, and indeed the Camelion-as can
appear in any color. Thus we may know divine love (all created excellencies
shines with borrowed beams, for when the Heathens beautified their nature as a
Goddess they went a gathering Hyperbolies in the Poets gardens, to flourish
forth that Entity, as the Painter run with his bill of Items, from one a Cheek,
from one a Lip, from another an Eye, (to represent the most beautiful Venus)
she blazeth forth in her own lustres, and other beauties would but like great
blots deface the Copy, or by a tedious Parenthesis check, and eclipse so rare
a Sunshine. I confess the grunting Epicurians by the vain froth of foamy
imaginations, would model for their Diana according to their own corruptions;
but those garlick-pallates sauced with Onionsmells are banished this
Respublick, (as Poets were, who made adulterate their gods from Plato's Idaea)
for will we new-mold Love in a worse Effigies, that were to tae^ Rural
pleasures, for Angelical dainties; Avaunt! Avaunt such madness! We will not
Court the flint for a flowery arbor, whenas we have Hebes to make our downy
beds and Love's Ganymeds to attend our Royallties, yet here my feeble wings
only flutter a Toarage, nor can they scan the high pole of it is deserts, here
like Geographers, who in describeing the Terra incognita fill a Map with Antic
creatures, Monsters, and prodigious sights: So I must either write Mysteries, a
Rose, a Cheek, a Crystal, a Tear, a Ruby, a Lip, a Comet, an Eye to describe
Love; or leave a space to be filled by a better Artist. For the stout
Aristotelans, who thought Sol's Rays, to their Prying curiosities, were but
atendants, and the Pla^onicks, who raised their flanting wits to a higher
bravery, by calling his illustrations their shades, could never touch the ^igh
sphere of this glory; like moyling Muck worms they gruffle in the dust, and ^o
return to their first Nothing, which ^mmateriality after annihilation, love
only can make immortal. The Egyptians Hieroglyphick for Legislative power was
Oculus ^n sceptro. And if we mortals were Cur^ained from the fair Prospect of
Love by the cloudy vizard of ignorance, how would the World look like the great
Polyphem in his dark Cave without an eye.

Monstrum horrendum, ingens, cui lumen ademptum.
To see a man without an eye.
Does argue much deformity.
And now although Love may be wandering, proved by so many instances, like the
steel touched with the attractive virtues of two Loadstones, tends to neither,
and yet to both: First hovering over those pleasant thickes where it pryeth
with constant devotions, and by and by flapping it is falcon-wings to yonder
groves as resolute in fervent vow, still at the last fixes it is Moral
constancies in one end. Feign an imperious or obsequious supremacy in Love
(then those brave Eteocles and Polinices rules in subalternate courses) both
are but one singular possession entertaining one Master. Feigh love in it is
high attributes to be a deity, then it is but agent in the theheavenly
bondaries of one Paradise. Feign this tenuous Love melting into the aerie
felicity of kisses to be fire, then it is motion is concentrick in one sphere.
And feign it to be a gift, then it is sent to the acceptance of one Lady, as
Coesar shovelled in his Indian pearls at the consecration of Lauretto's
shrine, as heavenly Sydney breathed his sublimest Eulogiums in the Panegerick
of immortal Stella deified by his Angel-Quill, and as the Roman Petrach
solicited only the glorious fame of Laura's beauties. For not to be Resolved
in one object is to aver the Plurality of Nuptials in soul^, and admit of a
Poligamy in Hymenealls of friendship, this were to tie and loos, Nubere and
denubere, and they that use that graduation; I would have them cried up for mad
men, or begged for fools.

Some have thought this Love which distinguishes men from bruits should turn
men into bruits. A pretty Metamorphosis indeed! Sure Ovid was of a better
temper, then to libell against that Saint he much adored, to think so as a
Stoics barbarity whose unpessionate soul is but the dirty excrements of stone.
Can humane Love shrink into the black Rays of an inhumane Apostasy? Forbid it
Jove. They merely dream and therefore fancy such infelicity, for dreams are the
fancies of men asleep, and fancies are the dreams of men awake. No, No, None
can love too much, when none can love enough, for although its Rays are
displayed to some in a greater Meridian as Phoebus his beams by a peculiar
influence inaureates the Rodian Kingdoms, yet in case there is no fear of a
beautifying condition, for some in the very hot Sphere of their imbred desires
can live untouched like the Cold Salamander in her house of fire. And in other
some love is the assistant form as those Ethnic Philosophers ascribed an
Intelligence to the Heavens, and since the old Pagans would attribute no
oblivion of life unto love, it must have a Rational body wherein the vital
spirits might live Posthumus, as a shade circumludeth Apollo's lustres.

Yet perhaps in spite of Cupid you scorn to love, well, say it were so, that
his infant Lad-ship could not strike sparks from that flinty Resolution. The
very Magnetic brow of a stately Lady would fire that snowy chillness to an
amorous heat. Her winning affections would invite your Appetite, as an Orator's
swelling metaphors to feed upon fancies, the starry Splendances of a Radiant
eye (where the little boy sits enshrined, darting his flamy shafts) would force
your Captive Genious to embraces. And yet how often in catching at her beauty
(the fair shade of her body) shall you be deluded like birds who pecked at the
tempting allurements of Zeuxis his Painted grapes, how often shall you freeze in
hot embers of the torrid Zone. How often melt in heat under the cold blasts of
the frigid Orb, so that as Agrippa bought the Roman Empire for Tyrant Nero with
the Prize of her own life. Occidat modo imperet -- You would desire to be laid
on the funeral Pyre suppose those perfumed flames would wast your second
resurrection to her Elysium. It Is Cupids Revengements indeed, yet to be
excused, for he follows the judgment of his eyes, more then his mind, and
therefore falls into it by a blind ignorance. For my Part, I would crowd into
the hot sparks of a Lady's eye, in ambition to scorch my wings with the proud
fly. For my part, I would verdure like the Purple Roses on her Crimson cheeks,
Say, May leaves were dulled by those eye-lightning beams.

Nil dulcius est amari, aut amare, praeter hoc ipsum amare, aut amari.
Nothing's like love, but love, a beam, a beam,
Aequalls, Gallaxia Milkey-Cream.
For tell me, have I not seen Xerxes and Polydorus crave their Statues instead
of nobler objects, and fall into a complement. I mean a kiss. Like women of
Gauls, whom brave Caesar's Curbed with one word for playing wantonly with
little dogs. Have I not seen Lesbia by a solemn matrimony embracing the
Sparrow, and as often have, as she wished for a transmigration making good our
Poetical Metamorphosis, which would have Rationalls migrate into stones,
trees, fishes, birds. Neither is it strange to me! that any man at Cupid's
entreaties should become votary to a Woman's shrine. For Love is a God
persuasive enough in an oily language first inspired from the Romans
mellifluous Suada, and therefore the old Phylosophizing Poets, who preserved
the Epethite from Lethe's sponge did not color, their expressions with the
least false Paint of flatteries. This he has of god head to reient into
commiserations at the reared Hecatombs of his adorers. This he has of
godhead to bestow his favors on each amorous dotard who entreats him for the
sweet Tempe of a silver-breasted Lady. This makes me believe, a Deity is
infinite, and Love like a circle is without end. And this makes be believe,
since his Secretaries as Pious Converts sacrifizeth their victims in sacred
Rites of Reve^entiall venerations. And while men's breasts are the Altars, Love
himself turns into fire: Where the offered heart s^ans heaven in Perfumed
incense: So indeed it is, when I hear Dirgicall Threnothreambicks foot it away
for haste in a Lover's breath. It represents fire Circumcepted in a cloud, each
groan, thunder asp^reing into flames: as often as I see the boiling bubles of
tears, then I think on Aetna's burning Incendaries, or the Vesuvian Coals
sparkling in midst of snow, like Tapers made to burn in waters. As I see Love
put on the shaggy flames of despair, then I confess the Ruggy fates of a
bearded Comet like the disheveled hair of Heavens stars aemulated in those
Rageing sumes.

Methinks I hear Love claim a Heriotdue in the Tenements of Heaven, while
souls desuninated become derivative from the favorable stars appearing at
their festival Natalitiums, as often as the fiery natures of those Lascivious
Planets desires Injunction, as Mars with Venus, and Jupiter with Luna, Men by
wanton effeminacy, are Vxorius Requiring the gallant conjunction of Hymenealls.
so that, those benign Meteors don't ominate the successive fortunes, but
espouseth their faint hopes by Real enjoyments. Yet to pass by those proud
wantonings in a sphere above my humirepens Muse, and to Phylosophize in the
least Punctilios. It is not the heat of Heavens, but of a Lovers breast which
congregates the Homogeneall wonders, for man and wife are but in a canonick
Phrase an Hermophrodite, it is not the celestial influences which drives a
man into the sweet Ocean of pleasures, but the heady streams of Natures zeal,
though by not understanding the card by which he avoideth Shipwreck, sometimes
sets sail into the mare-mortuum of sorrows: And thus by a delight of deception,
not only beauty but the similitudes of beauty he joyfully adores. He sucks the
liquid honey distilling it is sugared sweets from a Roseall lip, though he be
pricked with an obnoxious sting, as Cupids plumed darts, feathered with gold, the
more they please, the more they torment for Roses grow on the surley brier, and
sweet meats are allayed with sour sauce. So that old Maro was a Coujurer to
confine his reaons, to a circle where there was no Vacuum left to be filled
with contradictions: The fairest flower has a bad Redolency and by Flora's
meads Jacet anguis in herba. Thus the sweet Music of Rhetoricating figures,
does by deosculating our mouths, taint them with the Red-tincture of
flatteries, and then from the honey filth, of poisonous Roses, steal the white
extraction of Lilly-kisses. When a Lady's Dovemind purples her cheeks Argent.
Or, there you may behold the rich-bowers of Damask-Pancies, or if her Crimson
cheeks were colored with the Sanguine dye of a Velvet-blush, the pretty shape
of Cupid coms taillured forth from that Artist, though no otherwise then the
Mellancholick body, feignes distinct Species of shades sembling those whom
great Poetastors told of long since, to wander this fide Styx, which vanish at
the approach, and disappear at the action of enjoyments, but when the Crimson
Canopy disvailed her brightest beauties; beholding the ravishing felicities of
that Divine form by amolestious Quaery, it makes transparent my cares, how I
should be entertained in those sporting pleasures, the sweet Thessaly of a
love-dyeing soul, where her Regal brow is the great dining House of
Hospitallity, and those pleasant Rays trajected from a Sunny eye, the Sugared
dainties, Where if you listen to the silent Oratory of Smilespoken expressions;
you may catch at the silken-wit, Oracles wrapped up in rich Eloquence, where
the brave force of manners being represented in the Epitomy of her face, with
your intelligent eyes, you may ^ead, the animate System of Ethics. Where When
you see her Orient beauty bound in the Diamond-garment of a Pearl, in a wonder
you may exclaim, O Netts! O Vulcan! behold Venus diprehended in Mars his stony
arms; And O Beauty! say I, not worthy the dishonor of this Empire. We
congratulate love, and his Rapacious Eaglet which did not envy this earthly
Pulchritude, Plato might here ravish himself with this Philosophy; and
contemplate a purer Idaea with his eyes, then purblinde Meditations; thou might
^t have set thy young man, O Socrates in the transparent lustres of her Cheeks,
as in a glass, to make gaudy his flattering beauties, and for thee O Eudoxus,
it is lawful, Sol's Rays being outvyed, at this great Luminary to speculate
(like Minippus in the Moon) the Natures of humanity. Orpheus his Lyre was but
Predominant to wild beast, but here is a Voice would curb Philosophers of a
Rational being, Phoebus his splendors has lost the prerogative, for here is a
Ray, able to force obliquity in the best-sighted Eaglet, Here Is a face able to
ravish a man, though of a Platonic tenet, and we who cannot love this
perfection, just like little boys become Enamoured on our own Pictures, for it
is not the folly of one Narcissus to fall in love with the body's shadow,
neither answer me thus, it is a shade, how can it love again, know it is a
necessity of nature, to light one Incendarie at another, one flame at another
flame: And it is an Approved Magic beyond the aequipollent power of Charming
Philters.

Si vis amari ama.
First ask, and then an Answer takes place, Salute, and then is a Resaluting
grace.
Lastly, as it is an Indigne thing to give a reason of love; So that love is
most condign which (as on some flowers grow no seed) has the existance of
Eternity. It comes from no cause, and like the heaven's is moved with an
invisible intelligence, for there is an occult Sympathy, where without
Propinquity the familiar souls sit hand in hand, as Planum does adhere to
Planum by a concinnious glutany, if we may believe our Mathematick
demonstrations. And now though Love by an Astronomicall deliniation is a circle
without end. I by a Geographicall description will make a full point.

On the death of his Friend TAOMAS SHIPTON Drowned.
AN ELEGY.
TO drown thee twice in Water, and in tears,
Is double sin, and the Histriographers
Would write it Chronicle, that Readers may
At it their tributary wonders pay:
But peace dear ashes, it is not our intent
To bury the in the watery Element;
Of our sad eyes, as by a tear Pearl'd,
Into a Marble monument congealed,
Then might our grief, as deluged by woe:
With sorrows aquae-ducts so over flow;
As now Entombed (in the same Sea perplexed)
Dye mourning Comments, on a mourn'd-for text.
We don't condole thy fate, nor roses bring
The Velvet-Violets, of the Maiden-spring:
Nor the gay Lillies of a gaudy verse
In rich attirements, to adorn thy hearse;
Thy fragrant glories (without flowers of same,)
Is Spicery enough, to embalme thy name:
And make it like Neptune's Amber-grace which may?
But touch the watery surface of the Sea.
We Will not bemoan thy obsequies, nor get
Those relics closed in a rich Mahomet,
Who Is grave is air, more sainted like does lie
Betwixt two Magn^t^, earth, and Loadstone-skye.
It is a soil to wear no robes but black,
And shows that age did it is perfection lack;
Whenas thy fall Anteus-like, does rise
With greater fame, then our strait souls can prize:
It is not beauty, tincture, and that dye,
On sullen cheeks lymn'd with griefe's agony;
Nor is it the best Persume, to smell the sent
Of incense on his grave, most Redolent:
For with those Thracians, Revellings of mirth,
Were cries Produced at each young man's birth
But high-sung Aieres in corranting breath
Of harmony, was Caroll'd at their death.
We may admire that burial not lament
The Antumne of his June, and April spent,
In too-too ripe a blossom, with delight,
Rich Rose-buds are decayed in a Night:
Spring-Lillies, in their nonage thus do fade,
Like Heliotrops, at Sol's declining shade:
E're May December meet, and so do vary
The Year to a continnued January.
Now happy Soul, who from the floods appear,
TO have gained the purchase of a better sphere;
And sits enshri^ed in those sublime skies,
Amongst the h^aven-bred-holy Hierarchies
Of Angels, who in rapsodies of love
Chants Hallelujahs to the Gods above:
Though we with the proud and ambitious fly
Kiss the world's flames and so as Martyrs die.
The body, as the Prophet's mantle fell
In rageing Rivers, which with billows swell;
By all transcendancy I dare avouch,
Thou scanned Heaven, in Elia's fiery Couch.
On the death of the most Heroic Lord SHEFFIELD, AN ELEGY.
ANd why a tear in tune from Poets Eyes?
Words holocausted up in Elegies,
Like to his Corpse Embalmed in perfumed spice,
Were to strew flowers upon Paradise.
A Comment pleases, to dark things annexed,
But mysteries Reveals this unknown text;
Inteares we the Red Sea pass, but wit's Twilight,
Comes short of Canaan, in it is Pisgah-sight;
Nor can the Cloud which us poor Isralites guides,
(Part per-pale Rainbow) cleared be on both-sides
Eye-beamed streams dissects yet we do try.
Ope-Superficies as Anatomy.
For those who Angels would embrace, thus they are
Gulled with fair seemings, of Condensed air;
Nor is his nature less, Man-sprung-divine
Saints would do homage, to's immortal shrine;
Persians adore his eye, Indy his Cherubs face,
Emparadiz'd with white Seraphick grace;
O, for Old Plato, that his eyes might see
The Non-created, wish made Entitie;
He Would swell in Cups of Nectar, for to seek
Virtue Incarnate, on that Heavenly cheek:
O, for Pythagoras Ravished Soul to swear,
He Is metempsochos'd to a starry sphere,
Since he deserves the sky lamenting Rome,
We Will grant the Horizon but his proper Tomb:
Though we cannot say therelyes great Sheffield's soul
Enshrined in the Pyramid of that high Pole;
Cause constellations from their orders be,
Roul'd by the Havens large Cosmographie
Nimrod. Orion swallows Comets are
Often shrunk, Osyris lost in the Dog Star:
'Twill please to say, his deified fate
In Mars, in Jove, or Phoebus did translate.
Could Caesar dye, said some, (or tell me can
Any survive) the voice fits God, not man:
If they do live as Saints, as men they talk,
Who e're did yet in Sempiternum walk:
The platonists are surs to die, who were
Unsure to have their great Platonick-year;
Great: Aristotle spoke, as if he went
A sorage 'bove the highest Element;
Methinks that Etelechia stampt^unknown,
His body was a little too-high flown;
The Roman-urns outlasts the men unborn,
As Pagans-evening were the Antipod's morn.
Death's but a sleep, and bodies when they dye,
Divests the slip Clothes of mortallity:
For t'h Soul's Eoan lustre's rarely kept,
When'ts from dark Lanthorn of the body crept;
And old Methusalem might much surpass
Times registers in monumentall-brasse:
He Is now Entombed and therefore let him lie,
The Immortal relics of a Deity.
On his honored Friend Mr. ROBERT WILSON, a Famed Musician.
GReat Phoebus spent large rivalls every day,
TO inspire the muses with a well-sung Lay;
As if the way to banqu'rupt their control,
Were to amaze, then ravish the blind Soul.
Thus our Coy-maiden, thoughts had in suspense
Those sublime Raptures of's inteligence;
Till he committed Rape by sweet desire
Affected with that am'rous-courtier Lyre:
And like (chaste Daphne) to his high renown,
Our vestall minds becomes his flowery Crown;
It Was Phoebus large prerogative to men,
The famed Musician he is Apollo then.
What rare Eulog^^ms did the Poets paint
(Whose words now shallow are, and Colors faint)
On Orpheus modulations Philters proved,
To make rude Satyrs, like fair Nymphs beloved,
With his harmonious strains, as almost dye,
TO enjoy the feature of this rarity.
Feature said I! ^es. They saw him sit
Like the inspired Oracle of wit:
Those sensitive adorers thought indeed,
Some beauteous Sybill hid in the oaten reed.
But those were highflown fond Hyperbolies,
And Pearled praise, of Diamond flatteries;
For all those attributes could never raise
His glories to a Panygerick phrase;
What we do wonder call, is but his due,
And types transparent, to a better view:
Orph'us is but his Echo, we may give
A note 'bove Ela's breath superlative:
To style him Anti-Orph'us which word were
Too narrow to extend that charracter,
Had we a riper Judgment to discry,
The cripled state of lame Tautology.
Melodius, Daulia, Histories do feign,
Proud Ter'us did to Terquine's sport constrain,
It Is fiction so, but that his winning Lay
Sold ravish her, in the verdent fields of May:
Does verify the story since't holds good,
She breathes the high-wept harmony in flood:
As if condol'd, the rape rejoyc't the gain
Of honyed Ditties, in a sugared strain:
For as by Metenpsuchosis his fate
Did in this nice Platonic transmigrate:
She seems to tune her pleasant notes, and sings,
As he, brave Music to the harmnnious strings;
She aemulates those tones, but being outv^'d,
Like Sapho's birds, does quote him deifi'd.
Ask not what Sirens are! Here Is harmony,
(Riddles Oedipean there opened lie)
And you will say, these Sougsters all agree
In the high-breath'd notes, of his Suaviloquie;
Sober Ulysses Envious at his Charms,
Mercuri^an would impale, in his joy'd arms;
Those dulcid concords, arrogant to be
A part'ner in the enchanting Symphonie.
Ask not what Angels are, or any choice
Of Superlun'ry, Saints list^n to his voice;
And you will conclude, that dulciloquious lay,
Chants forth their holy Haleluiah.
Ask not how Cherubs their sweet aites distills
From the unheard Oracle of silent Quills:
Or spheres speaks Music in the tong-ty'd mind,
But Wilson quote, and then the word's defined.
S^. Andrew.
Hail Rosy-morne, from forth thy Lilly-bed,
Like milk-way Cream with rud strawberried
Hail to those beauteous features pea^^'d in the sky
Like N^ptun's brave Sea-daughtered Deity.
Is this sweet Plato's, great admired return?
Chaste Phoenix rising from that Roman Vrne,
After Embalmed, on that funeral Pyre,
Comes recreated to Prometh'an fire.
And here is a Revolution, Old age spent,
Tends to a youth-renewing Eliment.
While Pagan Gods, but fond interment gets,
Days are the tombs out lasting Mahomets.
But stay, a Comet in the skies alone,
Is it this Genious resurrection:
Whose Torch- Apolloes fiery beams displayes,
Disheveled in the flamy-bearded Rays,
Or is it the starr by Scripture-Miracles,
Which of some hidden mistick Manna tells:
Diviners let us know, it soon we will be
Magi t'observe this rare divinity,
Or English Persians turned by holy state
Adore this Heaven having candidate.
Speak Planitaries, you who Nectar quaffe.
With Jove cannot a Methematick-staffe
Reach the sublimest Hierarchies, is it him,
Cherub, Angel^, Saint, or Seraphim,
Who mounts the Eastern Coursiers to out s^an
Sol in his Climinant Maridian
For were the Grecian Augurs Pliant here,
T'anatomize the surface of this Sphere.
They Would say in yonder bright-disvailed Pole.
Inshrined lies, an Immateriall soul.
This holy Morn (indeed looked red) espied
A Blush of him appeared as deifi'd;
Beam sdarting mildly in the smiling breasts;
S. Andrew sure in Sagitarius rests.
We might believe, but Virgo farr-off shines,
I mean weet Mary in our Gospel-lines;
'Twas not in vaine^t, his dawn of day to greet
The unseen Saints our heard-discourse did meet:
For spirits though invisible they be,
Yet always moves in an Vbiquity,
Suppose S. Andrew's soul, a Rose we seek
It in the Orient morning's blushing cheek:
For there is a Paradisiall Type, just now to come,
Of flower-^mbroidred Fair-Elizium:
Say it is Tulip, Lilly, or the Damask flower,
Those party-colours, of Aurora's bower:
blazons the Herauldry, here Or indites
There Is the same Copy in it is Argent whites.
On a Lay Clergyman, who in stead of his Sermon-notes, pulled forth a Paper
thus written. Item for Hens and Cocks, Item for Bacon and Beef.
ANd what a Priest? An Elder, Yet profane,
O sweet mistake, the Prodigal must gain;
The fatted-Calf, and that in Gospel-sence
Speaks Morrally, a good benevolence:
And grant this was your mind, yet the intent
Slipped, and brought Christmas in the midst of Lent.
For then the Heaven's signs did Pisces note,
Not Aries head, or Taurus neck and throat,
Was the Church marted by our Ruling states?
Strange Reformations bears unwonted dates!
Cathedral Epicurians in each place,
The Psalme-Book should be turned to a Grace.
I never Read but of a Turkish Crew,
That disht Scripture-meats of porke: a Jew
Would bridle here is mouth, because that their
Great Synagogue, though but an open fair,
Has nere a Boar in use, it is not divine,
Say they, for Satan entered into Swine.
Did M. Lilly teach you this Decorum,
Old Sermons baked in Horde^ farra forum;
Will wrap Que-genus up in Pudding-pye,
Such Antichrists, by Lyden's Prophecy;
On Christmas day will preach, beloveds dine,
My flesh is bread (Ambrosia) my blood (Nectar) wine:
Will smile, Pheoebus passing Phoebes horn,
From feast of Cancer, into Capricorn,
Will touch no sign but Taurus Claret red,
Drink, which Aquarius draws from Ganymed:
As Country-farmers, at the stellid-train,
No commet would espy but Charles-his-Wain,
Sure such Gramatick Ars, no rules affords,
In right construction of the double words;
They Are Heretics (let us the correction pause)
Who errs in search of the fundamental cause.
The Caba isticall divines had got,
Against hungers poison, a strong antidote;
For a Horse-stomack, is a beast unseen,
(It Would eat Parnassus, and drink Hippocren)
That in their Temple stood, a Crane, a stork:
Here Limbs of Capra, there Westphalia-pork:
And the pure Innocence has her command,
(All Doves, no Serpents fosters in our Land;)
Yet you will be superstitious, you will be sinner,
And Jew too, for a Circumcision dinner;
Expound the fragments of five loaves, though thence
You bring no baskets full of Inference.
Hence is it so! Then give me leave to try,
One point of Scripture, and I will apply;
Your head the Zodiac is, your mouth the Center,
Where ^aurus, Capra, Pisces, all do enter;
O poor Phylistims, I much doubt they pass,
Sad Execution, Jaw Bone of an Ass.
'Caus flesh is grass, do y'eat that Hixy-dox
You learned by fothering of the Egyptian Ox:
And well may't be, for he who stood a-mute,
At Romulus, admire may you as Brute;
Rome's Church, and our's in all Extremes agree,
The Kirk of Scots, in this has simpathie;
We these, and they compelled to a strict last,
Some's business is to ear, and some's to fast.
But Sir, what Crumbs of Comfort do you Preach?
That Grand-impostor-Mahomet did teach;
(Always people feast) you will be made,
By Goose, and Capon Brother of the blade,
You take the tole of meats, do what you can:
The Pharisee, becomes a Publican:
For all this time, your Tex^ displayed we,
Call it true Mince-meat of Divinity.
Gun-Powder-treason.
Dark Lanthorn Lights of fate, what prodigy
Vizard's the morning Sol, in sable dye,
Of an Ecliptict shade? it is Faux, in vain,
Sad-canopying our Meridian.
Dusk twilight, glimmers in the darkest cells,
As Diamonds in their rugid Confines dwells:
And yet as shaggy Commets, fiery, flaming are,
Prognostics in their mad-dishevelled hair;
So those incircled Rays of taper's were,
But falling stars, in our low Hemisphere.
We see time's, Monsters play the Hypocrite,
D^ssembled in the heat of glowworms light;
We see Dame-Natures face from a thick cloud,
With a bright blush of pretty smiles, grow proud:
As Phoebus peeps his Rays, from milk-way cream
And then displayed is to a Noonday beam;
As Orient Rubies in a spark's disguize,
It Is lustrious Candors does Epitomize:
And presently dishadowed from that night,
Enjewels glories, like the Margarite:
Thus the pale Candl's colored a red torch,
We kiss the Foun^, who but adored the porch;
Thus Tant'lus, told Joves high decree's concealed
A Plot is but a mystery revealed:
A Text gloss't with dark Comments, a coined word
Of phrase, true Antitype of Jonah's gourd:
Now Radiant in a high sprung Sunny flame,
Now glimmery Ganopy'd, with lesser fame;
The Roman rusty blades; with golden hilts,
Like Christians walking in the Pagans stilts:
Mount Hyblas Epicure, which culls the flowers,
Virgin-like bloomy, on May's maiden bowers;
After he sucked those hony-creamed breasts,
Leaves them fit entertainmen^ for more guests;
Their gaudy weft of rich attirement seams,
To glare in gildure of as noble beams,
And if the nice similitude hold true,
We flowers our chaster Phoenix-age renew;
Compiled in large Hecatombs t'expire,
In sweetened perfumes without rageing fire.
It Was but vain Policy to veil the bright,
Unblemisht beauty of our Lady light;
Sol in a shadowy Masque, his beams displayes
The Popish Candle never out-went those Rays:
That were a tapers flanting flames to give.
A Commendamus most Superlative:
That were to say the star's dimlights amaze,
More then sierce Meteors in a furious blaze:
That were to speak the New-sprung dawn of day,
Like vapouring Morn in vanting colors gay;
And then it were large Egypts coasts to swell,
With the vast treasures of brave Israel.
But thanks to Jove? hatred's Reformed to love
The Roman Eagle's shrunk into a Dove:
The uncircumsised Phylistins head is made,
A Trophy carried on his brandished blade:
Nero sung Rome in dieant, while's his hate,
Lamed the Pantheon, to a Cripled state;
But we by miracles laid on the Pity,
Sing Romans Martyerd on the tyrant fire.
Yet say those Rebel-Catholicks intent,
Had brought the World to an astonishment
Without the Red Sea torment, no one man,
On Carpet-wayes, did pass to Canaan;
He but condol'd his Pimples the next morn,
Whom beds of Roses did all night adorn:
Had we bin burnt, it is nothing to admire,
Eliah scanned Heaven thus in flames of fire.
Christmas day.
ANd do we Poets need to blaze the fire,
(Strung from famed Liricks of great Phoebus lyre)
Thus elimentall in our breasts that sphere,
Where god-Apollo laughs but once in the year:
No, no such madness Micro Cosm-man,
May turn into a red sea Canaan:
When as this day's rash Phaeton will bring,
And he as Nero, on Rome's burning sing,
The World to dissolution Heaven's bright
With earth's dark vanit into combustion one,
Here to bemoan this Tragique Scene thought these
Make legs, and Ex'unt without Plaudites:
While wiser Solomon at the fabrick's stations,
Would chang his Canticles in's Lamentations:
For sparkling sack (Red fire) look mad to burn
Men Romanized on our Englands Urne:
I mean the Pitcher interlin'd with best;
Ruby-Renish broacht from hogs-head west;
Or do we Painters need, for to display,
In Hieroglyphics this mysterious day;
As Ancients represent Church secret features,
By Giants Sphinxes, and such antic Creatures;
Some Monsters Epicene and Mascaline's grace,
With Taurus neck, but Aries head and face:
Name but one single word, in two sense tryes,
Christmas, Bacon-Beef, as Pudding-pies;
Or say we'ave Metaphors from nature's stocks,
A Capon this day noats, and shrovetide Cocks.
It Was mad conceits? When our forefathers had
Naught else but crumbs and voiders, richly clad;
With painted daintes, so that days at last
Were kalendred, with Rubricks for a fast.
Alas? we Sons of our great Adam's age,
Could banquet in a dish his he^tage;
Of Pulse and water, such weak fair as that,
Would nere like Daniel, make our English fat:
Our appetites on divine Saint-dayes seeks
TO adore Egyptian-as sweet onions, Leeks;
Of loavs the Scripture speaks, and we would twist
Fishes to them, as Quakers Lyden's grist.
Is good-meat Antichrist? No! No such thing,
Dove's heads do never bear the Serpents sting;
Hear but it Preach a text, flesh bread, blood wine, cheer,
Is a Theanthropos man-sprung divine.
Then welcome Christmas with thy wonted
I Would bring a ranting Carroll in March-beer;
And Sacrifice't to thy December-name,
By glasses sparkling with the Red-shrine flame.
Only I fear Sack-Hecatombs appease
Not once those Manna-eating Deities:
I Paper want too, for offense 'its meet,
One penance should, in compass of a sheet.
St John.
BLaze forth great star, Nor are we sad to see,
That famed Platonic Reminiscencie:
Brought to a truth, thus Sol retires to feast,
From the west'ran Climates, in his spi^ie East.
When the new-morn brave Herald in a ray,
Is the Pevolution of an ancient day:
For gaudy lustres mantled, Ruby-bright,
Were never Eclipsed by the pale-shrin'd night;
In Occidentall fates, but would appear
Superlative-endow'd, ith'high-pol'd sphere.
When Mosesses do dye, for the bodies-stations,
Those Devils summons up hot disputations;
With the Archangels cause the spirits then,
Scorns to degenerate in Lapsed men.
And let the body fade it is a divine,
Endowment, must Immortal parts enshrine:
Eltah lost his mantle, Camel's hair,
In The sky not like those shaggy Commets are;
A Leather-girdle, Capra-like, Cannot be,
As Taurus signs of man's eternity;
Souls throw their slip-cloaths off to holy state,
Earth's Winding-sheets are most impropriate;
For in the sacred volumes I learn this,
That Heavenly Angels do go naked in bliss;
Or grant his body walks, It Is like the dead,
(On one S. day) fair shadows without head.
But can it be! Was the great Lord of light
Disvail'd, from Morning, to a Noonday bright;
Ere this small beam had one sweet smiling spent,
In orient blazes from the Element,;
I should have thought this day star, John, did ride,
Rare Harbinger of that great Sun-shine's pride:
Enamelling all the Orbs before the ray,
Did in a full Meredian-Zenith sway.
John Prophesied first, Divinely born,
As pearly S^ars, foretell the Ruby morn;
He chants plain-song, by a well Luted noat,
Breathed Hallelujahs, of a Cherub's throat:
And then Christ's Chorus (rare Harmonia)
Run sweet divisions on the sugared Lay.
Fond Pagants now t'out last death's fatal doom,
In vain erect Piramydalls, of Rome;
The large Pantheon, days are the only bliss,
Where Genij live in Apotheosis.
A Letter.
SIr, Seeing my modesty has been dumb, Necessity must speak, and every word turn
Orator, nor need they wish (as the foolish Roman in Caesar's Ampitheater) to
have your Ears the Auditors tied to their lips, since Oratory is more
persuasive then, when Pytho inspired the Grecian Comaedians, on the pretty
stages, with Flexanimous Eloquence; yet, I will grant my Demosthenian Learning
but lisping wit: That my entreaties may be the more necessary Evacuated, of
supersluous Complements; Pray, therefore send me Doctor Brown's Vrn-Buriall, as
a courtesy I have promised, and by your Courtesy you shall ever engage me,

Warly: your servant.

The Answer.
SIR! Had not your silent noats spoke, the words had looked for a Pyramid, my
breast to resound their Echo as Virgill's Hylas was by all the Neighboring
Shoars, but they survive as the Romans genij when their bodies are entombed in
a dispute of Contra-Resurrection. Strange! that when the words salute the death
bed of a grave, the sense should walk, and Penance in a sheet of paper to
expect their Vrn-buriall. First, Let the sense be dead, as is the Letters, and
I will sing my Conclamatum est to them, as you must Vale! Vale! To his Urn.

WILLIAM SHIPTON.

SIR, No wonder if my Noats be silent, conferred with the boisterous
inundations of your Stentorian words, and are not as Nilus proud streams kept
in the banks of order, your breast you called a Pyramid (and the Egyptians lay
up their Corn in Pyramids) in my opinion you might better have called your
belly the Pyramid, which is the Receptacle of Corn minced into bread.

Your belly might the Echoes too rebound,
'Cause emptiness affords the greatest sound.
I thought your words had been asleep, And so I will speak few charms, least
they prove Contra-disputants of their Resurrection by confining them to a
perpetual Night. Methinks the adulterous lines were more fit to do penance
in a sheet of paper, and with my connivance been buried in the Vrn of oblivion.
And seeing I am weary of your clamorous words I must cry Conclamatum est, or
bury them with an Vltimum Vale in the fiery Urn of a Chimney.

J. W.

The Answer.
HOw wishedly did you second my voice and it were sin to say any mean noat,
played Basse on a troublesome string. How wishedly did the Chorus of your fancy
run divisions, on my plain-song wit. Your noats conferred sweetly without
jarrs, only you sung Elegies and so drowned my sweet Hylas in Nilus his
streams, by a Seaburiall, and take heed least you like i'ts Rivers bring forth
impersect productions, your brave lays will all be penned from a large-long to
a Sembrief's-Semiquaver, but I will take no more notice of them, only I should
be a^t to quarrel at this word Boisterous, but that it was fixed in the round
Zodiac af your anger and charms confining things into a circle makes them
burst forth into wind; besides your humi-repens Muse was in the Low Countries
of wit, and so might well with those Lap-land Inhabitants bag up air in the
strong Caxvas-phrase of a sentence. But stay methinks your Law plays the
Ignoramus, your Gospel acts for Erra-Patris, Nilus writ for Hilas, gross
Logic has no Reason, if it be not Irrationallity to forget the Proprium of a
man, though here if I laugh, I still keep my own denomination. Your good
decorum runs against tide, while Nilus is the fit Hellespont for those Leanders
(your writings) to swim. I cannot think you were drunk with Nectar, when you
read that word, because your Tapster-Muse forgot the barrel, as to a spire unto
the Eliment of water, besides your rants had been Poetical liberties, and here
you are restrained by the strict gaul-signification of this word in the
Imprisoment of folly, it is true enough therefore in Warley (your name) we will
change the Letter L. to T. and then the watry-strains might well be
dischannelled from some Fountain, Yet to wave that, your Letters are too
Heroic to deny a Pyramid, fresh-mens minds are always hungry, and if Pyramids
were the Egyptian Corn store houses. I may allow you such a Tomb, for it were
no way an enshrinement insufficient to your honors if the place would contain
so great a loaf to lie buried, if it could not, how would the Echo of your
name have open air to fancy abroad without infection. It would decease without
a bond, and so by no conditions, be bound to appear at the day of Resurrection,
you talk of my Muse being asleep (though yours was awake) I dreamed what the
language would be, a little Harlatory-Oratory, and yet because they were forced
from your Epigrammicall wantonnings (as you verif^^e it, in two lines) they
shall not Penance for being ravished, and though you would have buried those
adulterous lines (as you term them) in the Urn of oblivion you might have
drowned them) as the Gotham's Sophoi did their water serpent) in Laethe's
Rivolets when you talked so much of a raging River, and say you had done so, I
would not have forgot to lament my farewell-salutations; nor had you need to
have exclaimed against my Vales to their souls transported to Elysium when
those Romans used a more hideous noise of conclamations, and I thank you for
burning them in the fire because those Pagans had of a Christian, the custom
of proper burial.

WILLIAM SHIPTON.

To his Friend who drew the Pencill's lineaments and Pens Encomiums of His Lady
Dias
A Pollo or Apelles? speak,
Decyphering Art with Rhetoric;
Thy Pencill in well-fashioned trim,
Does praise and yet her features Lymne
How could it be? and yet you do it,
At one time Pictor both, and Poet.
It Is just as Phydias carved his name,
By Verse within Minerva's frame,
Or as Vlysse's Peddler felt,
Here the needle, there the sword and belt.
Methinks at light of her, I gaze
On Venus and Minerva's face.
In such brave tinctures as does lie
Hyppocrates his Gemini.
The difference 'twixt them, thus imparts,
Here Is beauties Moles, there is beauties warts.
For in her compofition's placed
Vesta's blushes, Lucrece chaste.
Just if we should in paint disclose,
One cheek a Lilly, the other Rose.
Poem and paint, did here inspire,
True substance with Prometheus fire.
Which nobler is, then Pyrrha's stones
Halfe-made, hal^-Carkasse, or half-hones,
Here could we love, if that we might
View Hellen's, not Diana's sight,
But that thou drive us in delays.
For but denies, what the other says.
Fair Contradictions ^ull us here
In secre^ charms 'twixt hope and fear.
Yet since thou'st lymned her we will grant,
Thee best Painter, she best Saint.
A Monster.
STrange shape of man! dame Nature sure does try
Erratas in her own Philosophy,
That the great Stag'rite stumbled who foresaw,
Uncertain Physics at a certain Law.
The Beast unnatural is, and therefore may,
Make humane matter Metaphysica.
Were he our Native Englands doubtful sight,
I mean both man and wife Hermophradite.
It would less wonder speak but him to see,
Notes Africa, Arabic, Welch-Pedigree.
Only that at Sol's Rays in the high-blaz'd noon,
He scorns to toast the lovely green-cheese moon.
Least Jove should in a great Bravado say
It dropped from Heaven pressed in the milky-way.
Is he a Logic Creature man and brute,
We Have no half- Rationalls without dispute,
Either in sigures he is understood,
Or plainly dressed in notions A^la mood.
It Would vex an Argument demonstrative to see
Vagum Individium, He, nor She.
It Is Probable, not Cogent, for who can
Say this He, woman is, that She Is man.
Look in his face, a sky, and you will consent,
Here lies the East of th'day, there th'Occident.
Here lies Sol blushing in his Morning Plight
There Cynthia masqu^d with dull-vizard night.
Sure at his birth were tragi-Comick, plays,
As Sunshine glimmers in the Cloudy days.
'Twas feared this Janns should be a fates loss,
Because the Pile enstamped was with Cross.
And when in kelder (that is within the womb)
A Caroll for his life, a Dirge the Tomb.
Was chanted forth, a large, a long-Relief,
And then a Semi-quaver, a Sembrief.
This for his Generation now I fear,
Corruption of this Monster draws near.
However, nor Sea, in earth, nor air he lye^.
We Will dole his burial with our laughing cries.
To his Friend concerning the Perfections of DIA.
WHat if my Ladies glories I
Should blazon in art's Herauldry.
Calling that Crystal globe her eyes,
The Constellations of the skies.
Where Venus and Adonis are,
Signs shining in their Charracter.
Her breast the Indies whence we spy,
Those fragrant banks of spicery.
Whence balmy Nectar's sweets distills
From Limbecks of those gummy hills.
Majestic neck, whose Roseall Ray,
Baffles the Cherub's Milky-way.
Or say her lips I glaze with Red,
And call them Cupid's Nuptiall-bed,
Speak them the Phylosophick touch
(To burnish gold and Ruby such)
As Alchimists) if my heart be
Robbed by their kissing Chemistry.
Prometheus flames they came too late,
Her He'ven-bred soul to Animate.
So the instinction of a coal
Inspired her (which was never stoal)
Ah! too divine her Nature is,
Created by immortal bliss,
In her composure Venus fair
Minerva's, Juno's Fiats are.
Too too sublime are these, each strain,
Wrapped in a Metaphorick vein,
And yet, if in the chaste-sprung Love,
But once she will correspondent Prove.
I must confess my Ink a dye,
Too fiant to scan Hyperboly.
DIA Praying.
AS sweet Aurora blushes spreads
The harmonious spears in golden weeds.
Whence Phoebus in his Chariot hurled
Rides the round Circuit of the World.
The Minstrells wakened by that Ray
Of Ruby Sol in's Pearly day.
Assumes their pinnions to the skies,
With a mellodious Sacrifice,
In curious Anthems as they sing
The Vernall Aprills of the spring.
My Dia glorious by her Light,
(From the obscure Chaos of dull Night
Reclus'd) through the Enamelled sky,
In have on winged Zeal did fly.
The Elements were mute to hear
The Articulate Accents of her there,
Displaying speeches with intent,
To breath them to astonishment.
Stars turned Argus-sights to spy,
Her footsteps in the Gallaxy.
Proud that their Rays were trod upon,
By her Perambulation.
They viewed (as he described aright,
Blessed Canaan with a Prospect-sight.
Smelt you the sweet-breathed Ruby Rose,
Which on the stem of sugar grows.
Whose Rubric color does abound,
Fresh Nard in an Exotic, ground,
Smelt you dame Flora's wardrobe Rare,
Perfumed with Alabaster air:
Whose sweet Conferves are far above
The Mus-cat of a Lady's glove.
Smelt you the dying Phaenix nest,
Which is with Sabian sweets oppressed.
Like Paradise, just so divine,
So Rare, so precious is each line;
Each word a sweet perfumed gums,
As sugared spice from Indy comes.
Each Monosyllabon may be
Balm, honey from Mount Hybla's tree.
Saw you the Pearls in high renowns,
Which decks Romes great Imperial Crowns,
Sprung from Rocks-Diamond every Gem,
Speaks Caesar and his Diadem.
Saw you the Rubies Indy brings,
As donatives to it is Rude Kings.
The sparkling Chrysolites rich shrine,
Glimmering flames in'ts golden Mine.
Such was an eye whose pearly streams
Run Tagus, dartings, Crystal beams,
Which famed appearance forced no less,
Then Angels to subserve her bless.
To DIA asking him concerning the supremacy of her beauty.
HAve you not heard, when April did invest,
With Roseal flowers mount Ida's lovely crest
As that it is fragrant sweets might well invite
Sick stomachs of a Maideos Appetite.
And Regal Paris in old Russet gray.
Coversed with the Ilian flocks each day.
Joves righ ambitious Ladies did contest,
Whose beauty worst, whose beauty was the best.
Each swag^^ing Vant, coranting highly forth,
In great gran^does grandeurs of their worth.
And whith their disputations could not end
Thee from the sublime Court of Heaven descend,
To plead with mortal, and the Immortal Race,
Made Parts inde to State the questioned Case.
But he poor soul, did only gaze upon
The rich approach of each rare Paragon.
Till Juno first advanced on to speak
The sweet Appellatives of Rhetoric.
Have she the imperial Crowns and D'adems,
Voted to him the attire of Regal stems.
What Indy brings, what has the Arabtan coast?
What Ruby Pearls does golden Tagus boast?
Is he for wealth, then she would his glories Vant,
A Di'mond-Rock, rich Crystal, Adamant,
Is be for fame? then she would raise his might,
As Besili^ks eye to conquer with the sight.
Or with the Roman Caesar in the field,
Brandish his triumphs to a batnass'd shield,
Would he attempt high honor in the Court,
Or seek ambition at some nobler sport.
she would bring him gallant Courtigrs for delights,
Rare flatteries of smiling Proselites.
To climb the stately Cedar without fall,
For th'great-swell'd honor of the little ball.
Next came Minerva whose great trimphs sit
Crowned Laureat in the Porphery chair of wit.
Drinks Hellicon at every thirsty Lay,
Cramps large Parnassus in one stalk of Bay.
Here in the gaudy garbes of congues she would
Lint with fine Metaphors of Rhet'ricks gold.
Have dressed this Princely Boy more Rare
Then Cob-web Ladies decked in tiffany-Air.
What lawrells has the two top lofty hill,
What Nectar does from Hyppocren distill?
What spring with flowery fragrants purled shows?
What Hyhla with it is honyed sweets o're-flows?
She promised, and the clouds-aspiring fame
Of conquests which in virtues shrine does flame.
And all such glorious Treasures she would display,
^^so be crowned Lady in this warring-day.
Next Lovely Venus from the wanton sphere
Of golden beauty glorious did appear.
Elixar-Presence changed him to bliss
By Phylosophick Metamorphosis.
First from those luscious breasts she slipped down
Her brave enriched flower-embroidered gown.
This show those pleasant dainties did invite
The ravished taste as almost ravished sight.
Love so persuasive motives there did find,
He who was dimn'd before was now struck blind
And as the sight she charmed the other sense
Of hearing by a Swan-sung Eloquence.
Say Royal Prince what is honor but the scar
Of Chivalry in the Registers of war:
What Is wit but babbling Echo of false fame,
And only happy in it is Coined name.
For you Sir it is the Praevalentist charm,
To wanton in a Ladies Lilly arm.
To give ambition glut and it is own fill,
Or with Worlds Eaglets soar Promotion's hill:
Here such a candid beauty I Will unfold,
Sol in his travells never could one behold.
So amorous for delight, each lovely part
Speaks her perfections drawn from natures art,
And needs not the adulterat shrine of Paint,
To write her Diety, or lymne her Saint.
Then happy Wanton for your mind she will be,
As you to her a constant Votary.
It is sublime enough, and grand Renown
For you? Let but the golden prize me crown.
Now Paris scru'd up to the full extent,
Of wonder at each Courting blandishment.
Beauty's fair Madam spoke in winning grace.
With kind acceptance did her words embrace.
How could the Auditor but stand amute,
When the Orator attempted a salute.
In such rich strains of speech as to invent
An Answer needs a studied Complent,
The Judge was silent, but a speaking kiss
Proclaimed this sentence, your face fairest is,
He Crowned with Myrtles she with golden ball,
Dame Venus stood the conqueror of all.
Now Dia fair those Premises ^ore-see
What the coclusion of your self will be,
Brave vanting Learning glorious fame despised
Sweet faced beauty for the best was prizd.
Then all ambitions will your form embrace
The Cyprian-feature in your Vestall face.
On the death of the truly Noble.
ANd is He dead! then must his fall
Require great Englands's funeral.
To mourn in tears from doleful Eyes,
In sad breathed notes of Elegies.
How can we but lament his fate
The Gods seem to Commiserate.
They Would turn him to a Swan, a Stone,
Like Niobe, Don-Phaeton.
The Sun seems sullen grown that we
Expect the Worlds Catastrophe.
Less by a Cat'rackt dimmed then might
Our eyes have darkness, Sol have Light.
Perhaps he grievs, as the Element,
Drops dewy tears at's Occident.
The Orbs since he their hold is gone,
St^ps and do set the motion.
Grant we Pythagoras doctrine true.
Souls Metempsuchosed renew.
Their substancy, and shapes return,
Like Phoenix in a dying Urn.
We Will not condole to paint in dye;
Eulogiums of Hydography:
Nor sorrow from our saddest eyes,
In water-verse faint Elegies;
But that we hope not for, How then!
We Will say here lies the best of men;
And since't no Superstition writes,
For to perform the Funeral Rites;
In Zealous acts of Pomp Let Us try
His great Renown of, Obsequie.
To DIA a Sacrifice.
BRing sweet fragrants, costly gums,
With Odors which from Indy comes,
Like spicy balm, which candyed lies
Amongst Sabea's richest Rosaries;
That generous wine whose mirth distills
Fair Jubilees, in the East'ran hills:
The Western climate, or the skies,
Which long 'bove the Antipodes rise;
For their Mole-natures has a birth,
Down in the lower parts of Earth.
Let the sweet Diapasmes be
Brought to the Incense, and that tree
Which the Chaste Indian choose to have,
For Gen'all bed, and Fun'rall grave;
Those spiceries, which on the Pyre
Embalms her corpse, till she expire;
Ravish Odoriferous all
Our Hecatombs, excessive shall,
Perform their vows, of the Altar this,
Where Dia's name Insculped is.
Let all the Vestalls who admire,
Love can posesse such a chaste fire;
Bring sugared Nectar, honey smells
Which in the Americk confines dwells;
Famed Aromaticks Amber juce,
Which the Exoticke fields produce.
Mixed with their purest zeal shall flame,
A Perfume glorious as the same;
Shall rarifie our Orbs, at least
That Angels may behold the feast:
Though Jove, as bashful for his rapes,
Transfigur'd, to obtain escapes:
Will scarce descend (as he has graced,
Some Lovers) unto ours so chaste:
Yet purer Detties admit,
At this great Symposy to sit;
The Eastern Rivers thus intent,
To yield the sweetest, rarest sent:
And Oriant Pearls joy'd for to same
The Alter with, a Ruby frame.
While sacred Virgins in the height,
Of service shall the Tapers light;
Which like the Vestalized fire,
Will never in 'its flames expire.
I Will then on it (the Priest) Intery
My heart, Sole Sacrafice to her.
A Flower in DIA'S Bosom.
HOw can it be? That Is not thy sphere,
I think you are but translated there
And too-sublime, a course does run,
To be the flower of such a Sun.
For tell me who does not entwine,
A second Synod Cateline;
In Pills, and Powder-works to spoil,
Thee, in that Jove-enamouring soil.
The Astrologer will sure envy
That height, of thy felieity;
When Is Mathematick staff coms short
In reaching, such a Heav'n-sprung Court.
The Lover too, he thinks thy fate
Is happy, his unfortunate;
Unless what spells Thy name he know
Whether the Hyaci'nth or no;
Then it is Apollo who will enjoy,
His Daphne, once a Virgin Coy.
Perhaps the regal flower, which brings
The Inscript names of Lords, and Kings;
Then it (as Hieroglyphics) show
Such Subjects to her shrine must bow.
Or is it the flower Adonis best
Thus verdent, in his Venus breast;
Where a mild April does renew
His blossoms, with a balmy dew:
And bids him suck the pearly Juice,
Which fragrants in her hands produce;
I hate his blessedness, if so
The Lad my Rival, there do grow.
No, it is my DIA. I who close
Your Eye-beames look Pale as the Rose;
Which when Apollo shows no Ray
It Is verdures in a night decay;
You guild my glories more and more,
(Like dross refined into Oar)
H^th' Radiums of your sunny-eye,
My deadness, but again supply.
And since it is no flower, but is
A Jove in Metamorphosis;
A Love transformed by a devise,
A man (yet flower) in the Paradise;
Let my leaves have Expansion,
In The Odors of your b^est alone,
Nor shall I Burial want, when I
In Perfumes live, In Perfume dye.
To DIA, Concerning his Sacrifice.
HOw could you but Fair DIA praise,
The Crystal Pyramid, the Bays;
Whole Helicon of wine, burnt to a flame,
In paying debts to your De'fied name.
Did you not wish Catullus nose,
To swell the perfumes which arose
From the pure Incense, and the smells
Panchaian broacht from gummy shells.
To see it, it would scarce suffice,
With Argus to be called Eyes:
To view the glories, Lyncaeus might
Be counted a dull Pisgah-sight.
The Arabian's Bird, sweet Roseall nest,
Of Myrrh was rifled, as each breast,
Was in such great amazements thence
Clad with rich Robes of frankincense.
Those Aramatick sweets, the best
Bright Oriency, dishoar'd from East;
With Storax offered in brave gemms,
Beset with Lillies, on their stems;
All burnt in Odors, were till the day,
Rich seam'd as Faelix Ara'ba.
And though the purest Virgins came,
To light the Torches into flame:
None as your self, were half Divine,
In glory dignities, or shrine.
Hence beauty, conquering strongest Art,
The best Oblations of my heart:
Devoted to your self, I made,
And Socerdotall office played.
Receive it Dia, for alone
My hearts with you, it is from me gone.
FINIS.

