THE VVEEPERS: OR, The bed of Snakes broken.

Wit Vitiated, and made a Pander to Wickedness; Instanced in a Pack of Knaves
(calling themselves Servants to the late King) worthy the Anger of the present
Age; and the wonder and indignation of all Posterity.

Six CUPPING-GLASSES, clapped to the cloven Feet of the six Demons, who Govern
the times by turns from Monday to Saturday Annually.

To wonder at past Prodigies forbear,
Egypt and Africa are blended here.
-- Dajustum Sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
By S. S.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bucknell, at the Sign of the Golden-Lion in
Duck-lane. 1652.

READER,
IF thou ask me what I mean to trouble the World, that is already under such
a glut of Books, thou may easily perceive, that I consulted not at all with
advantaging my Name, or wooing public Esteem: For what I now write, I know
there was much of naked Truth in it, and might possibly find a more than
common acceptance, as well for the Rarity, as the Reality of the Subject, etc. If
any Simplician take exceptions, let him turn the Buckle of his Girdle; he that
manifests distemper at the perusal of these Sheets, must of necessity be a
Knave or Fool, or both: If any man deny me the liberty of speaking Truth, I
will take it I say, I will take it: I am an Independent, I fear not: Some I
doubt not so much dote upon a dirty Diurnall, a Weekly Account, or a
ridiculous, non-sensicall Mercury, that they will condemn me to no worse
Penance than to bathe in blew Flames, for presuming to bid Defiance to so
reverend a Rabble -- pew -- mew -- view -- A Degenerate, besotted, insaniated,
ignorant People, a Monster only fit to feed on such Raffe and Garbage. I fear
the Censure of Virtuous and Judicious Men: But I laugh at, and contemn the
rage of these Cumane Asses, Masquers, Mummers, painted Puppets, outsides
Whiflers, walking Pictures, Shadows, Gulls, Vizards, Butter-flies; I owe thee
nothing, (Reader) and look for no favor at thy hands.

God buy.
THE WEEPERS.
IS not this Mundus furiosus, a mad World? Is it not manifest that we are
fallen into the dregs of time, we live in the ^ust of the Iron Age, and must
accordingly expect to feel the Dotages of a decrepit World? What is become of
Truth, Sincerity, Humility, etc. Those Antiqui mores, whither are they gone?
Did they attend Astrea into heaven, and have left such degenerous Successors,
as Cruelty, Pride, Fraud, Envy, Oppression, etc. Such qualities as abundantly
justify the worst of Heathen. When all things are ruffled and confused, it is
the Devils Holy Day; and therefore Knaves Work Day. Pausanias tells of a
Chapel in Acrocorinth Dedicated to Fraud and Cousenage: those Twin-Goddesses
may be fit Objects for the worship of Heathen; but it is pity they should be so
much adored by Christians.

Thou have here (Reader) a full discovery of such foul Impostors, that thou will cease to wonder at any Monstrosity or Prodigy upon Record: take heed of
being blasted, for I present to thy view the Pests of the Age, men that live as
if huge Sins would merit heaven by an Antiperistasis: We know that a good
aim, much less a good pretense (such as these Harpies use as a Cloak for
their egregious, and most unparalled couzenage) cannot justify a bad Action,
and therefore we ought to be as solicitous about the lawfulness of the means,
as about the goodness of the end Those Gentlemen already bitten may possibly
rescue themselves from future Circumventions, if they examine the lawfulness
of every Circumstance leading to the end propounded, before they are tickled
and transported with the beauty of their pretense.

The World must know, and more especially the English Nation, that Providence
tolerating the lines and lineaments of Monarchical Government, (here in our
Borean Clime) to be blotted out, that that which is new written might be more
legible: some pretenders to the late Kings service, as of his Bedchamber, his
Wardrobe, his Guard, his Kitchen, etc. have thought fit to make an Improvement
of these turbid Intervals; and under pretense of of gathering money for the
late Kings distressed Servants in general, have pocketed up many pounds for
their own private uses; and while those, for whom they seem to obsecrate,
languish, environed with all those fatalities incident to indigent men: they
feed high, sleep soft, wear rich Apparel, and wallow in all excess of Riot:
It were vain to inform these Latrocinians, that while they abuse others, they
forget that self-couzenage, with which in the interim they abuse themselves,
God permitting the Devil to revenge the Imposture. My task is (in order to my
obligation) so to paint forth their cursed contrivances, their putrid policies,
and fraudulent insinuations, pointing at their persons so punctually that no
man, if but Master of one eye, shall fail to distinguish them severally, though
mingled amongst thousands of men more honest; that so those Gentlemen, those
Citizens or others who have tasted of their traps may be sensible of their
abuse, and prosecute accordingly: These subtle Vipers detected and delivered up
to public, deserved infamy, who committing a Rape upon the body Politic,
seem to put out the Laws, as others upon a like occasion, put out the Lights.

I must confess that person is very rare, that can boast of such an absolute
Saintship whilst he is amongst Mortals, but that now and then there are some
Actions will fall from him which confess Humanity, and require Candor, some
Leaves in the Volume of the fairest life, that call for a clement censure;
there will be common frailties: But cannot fix too rigid a censure on these
treacherous Mendicants, who to purchase a flame of Triumph, a frolic for some
sew days, not only deprive many distressed Families of a present relief, but
render them (by this damned delusion) incapable of future reflections; such
has been the casinesse and credulity of some Gentlemen and others; such the
subtilty and dissembled Sanctity of these Quacks, that they have met with as
great a pronesse in them to be cozened, as they brought willingness to delude;
but I shall damn their design down to the lowest Hell from whence originally
it came; and turn their feigned Tears into real Contrition; not that they can
be pensive for their pernicious practices, but my meaning is in reference to
the blazing of their several basenesses, to the utter ruin of their golden
Income; when in stead of Charitable Compensation and Compassion, they shall
meet with Contempt and Castigation. The Prime Ringleaders, the Master-Theeves,
the Plowers, the main Wheels upon which this Prodigious Machine moves are in
all seven. You will think it strange to find some Pulpit-men in an high degree
accessory to this guilt: but do not we a^l know that there has been no flood
of misery that has happened this dozen years, but did spring from, or at least
was much swelled by their Holy Water: And I rank the Rogues (for they march
like Noah's unclean beasts by paires.) Thus, 2 Priests. 2 Citizens. 2 Lawyers.
2 Linsey Wolsey men. 1 Soldier. (Of either grain.)
There Is the Sum.

These (like the seven Deadly Sins) have their several Exuberances, some ten
or twelve underlings, Auxiliary aides whom these miscreants maintain at a joint
expense these are to them like tools to the Mechanic, they can do nothing
without them; they are their wings, their wheels the properties that they act
with, who earn their livings quite contrary to divine appointment, viz. by the
sweat of their eyes they will command you tears as facilely as Politicians can
vary shapes, the Irish or French Mercenaries (hired to bewail the dead) are
mere meacocks to them, they will houle a Requiem able to reverse the doom of
Fate, and unite an Enlarged soul to his buried body, a woman interring her
seventh husband cannot blirt briny drops more methodically: these Liquids
while their Lords are Courting the Gentleman of the house, who cannot choose but
afford them eare-favour, for they seem Substantialists wearing good apparel,
and they take special care not to fast till they look like withered Apes
sowed up in parched Kid-skins; they are seemingly men of much worth and they
want no delusive Oratorie, having their set forms of speech which they con
Nocturually with as much diligence as players do their parts; I say while
their conducters are in colloquie within, these stand without conspiring in a
full and dolorous harmony, raising a loud and and piteous cry (hence they
receive their Denomination viz. WEEPERS) some a bemcaning the loss of their
deceased master, the late King, others deplore the starving condition of their
wives and children and some not minding any method, send forth deep groans
and sighs, so that you would think your self little better then a Burgess of
Barachrum, were you within ken of their yelping the servants of the house mean
time amazed at this melody, endeavor to stint their Earth-din (which they
pity as real) with what fare the house affords, each contributing a piece of
come, by which time the master of the house being sufficiently satisfied with
what he has heard and seen, dismisses (perhaps not without tears) his Honored
guests (having besought them with much earnestness not to think five or ten
pounds too trivial a sum) who take a Solemn farewell with sad countenances,
and at the next Town within ten miles (for they are so politic not to Revell
in that very place where they receive their Rents (as they have the Impudence
to call it) and there they riot like so many younger Brothers.

It Is the boast of the Dutch man, that he can sail with all winds, these
unparalleld cheaters carefully observe the Quarter from whence the fairest
Gales of profit blow, and spread the Sails of deceit to entertain them.
Cornwall and these countries that have been most eminent for their loyalty to
the late King, are only cursed with their approach, where not a Gentleman of
any eminency, but has had notice of them, nor can the Compass breath more
varieties, (I speak it to their praise as glorious Villains) than their
dextrous souls have Changes and Garbes, and suitable Compliances: What the
Orator calls his top, and perfection to make happy Application to the several
humors and Genius of all sorts of men, qualifying his address with what he
knows will most charm the person he treats; you may find all his Figures and
Tropes digested into their Actions: They have this advantage of the Camelion,
that they can assume whiteness; for you may find them wearing the Vest of
Innocence, to conceal the ugliness and blackness of their attempts. These
are fellows that have long since abjured their God, Religion, and Conscience,
and all that shall interpose and serene them from those beams that may ripen
their avaricious aims. O how finely they can compose their Garbs and Gestures;
It Is a great matter to tell a lie; with a grace: and when they see opportunity
to reveal themselves they do it gradually and by peece-meale; for that which
at one view would appear horrid, give it by parcels, and it will be digested
well enough.

The truth is, they are the most accomplished, the most polished, the nearest
and most politic knot of Knaves, that ever were famous for fraudulent
Machinations: And indeed how can they be otherwise, having so Venerable a
Doctor, and so Clancular a Priest for their Lawgivers? These two Raven-Coated
Flammins, like Mahomet and his Monk, are the cunning Contrivers of this
hotch-potch Alchoran, and what is worth your notice, seem very sanctimonious,
they will pray with much fervency, but this always in public; they know well
enough that privacy for a Sin, and cleanly convayance for a Cheat, makes it
as white as Innocence it self; for they are near of Kin to that Thief, who
always before he went about the Work of his Calling, (for so he called
Stealing) went to prayers, That God would bless and prosper him. So these say
Grace to the Design be it never so wicked, and give thanks for the Success be
it never so abominable.

Having taken a view of their performances, be pleased now to peruse their
Persons.

Enter -- Doctor -- Chaplain to the late King; and sometimes Pastor of a place
near Chertsey, now In-mate with a Widow, near St Peter's Paul's Whatffe,
indifferent tall of stature, Motley-headed, his Crown covered with a swarthy
Cap, fashioned like a Monks Cowle, of an Adust Aspect, a mincing Gate, and
mimmick Gesture.

There Is the first.

The next much younger in years, but far older in knavery --

A MEAGRE LEVITE.
WHo will sell God, and all his Saints for sixpence, the very Picture of
Antichrist, once Curate (under one Don't) of Kings-cleere in Hampshire. This
fellow taking occasion to Revel with Dorts wife (whom he converted to his own
faith, with many other of his Masters movables) was therefore (by him) clapped
up in Winchester Goal^, where he lay along time, having his Anckles laden --
This f^llow will cheat any man save his Father, (who is not living) and tell
Lies as big as Elephants; he will knock his breast, attest God, and Invoke
Imprecations upon himself; if he does not do that which he never intends he
can cog the Die, and make the Word of God speak what he list: if you ask after
his Topics, Ex Officina Carnificium argumentum petit. He is very gracious with
a good Woman in Snore-ditch, with whom he resides, In ordine ad spiritualia.
Behold next.

A Brace of broken CITIZENS.
THe one an Apothecary, and (till his Vinal and Venereous temper, opened the
little Wicket for the five other Deadly Sins to enter) Housekeeper in St
Thomas Apostles; His face is as brown as his soul is black, little of Statute,
and something Hairlipt: His Companion (a fellow that has surfeited on so many
Functions, that his Intellect is as foul, as an Irish Firkin of Bonny Clabber)
may pass for an Exorcist for Complexion, his fellows often make him their
Oracle, and well they may; for the Devil hangs upon his Lips: this face is of
the same Metal with his yellow Trumpet. But to the rest.

Two LAWYERS
COuld you contract five thousand such as these into one Volume, the sordid
^ulk could not make up Marriots shadow; and you will say, Hes better at Beef than
Barriers: These two differ in Stature, as much as Hercules did from Jeffery;
but what Nature scants the last in talneste and bulk, he more than satisfies in
treachery and baseness: this is he that (pretending to follow her suit
gratis) jugled the widow Messenger out of her whole estate: you may find these
pair of Serpents most commonly at their Rutting place, near the Flower-de-luce,
in Vinegar Alley: And then follows,

Two DRAPERS.
THe one of the Blanket, the other of the Sheet: Fellows that having tired
Ludgate, and the Kings Bench, are now resolved to lay claim to the Pillory;
they are neat Forgers, and can shake any man by the hand, though at an hundred
miles distance: the one has combed away all his hair, (which he supplies with
a Periwig, as broad as the Branches of a Beech tree) as the other has forfeited
his Dowcets to the Surgeon. You may know him (in order thereto) by his thin
Beard and Ashey Aspect.

But now enter the man of Iron.

A MAJOR
IN his Minority. This Gentleman is yet but half a Knave, and became an
Asassinate rather by a wile than his own innate wickedness: he is yet (in
reference to this business) but a young Sinner; and therefore I shall spare
him, and conclude with this

PALINODE
To the WEEPERS.
VVEep now until you waste into a Dew,
The Nation mournes and bleeds for such as you.
(Super Olympic Knaves,) by you the dead
Embalmed King does once more lose his head.
Widow^s sigh out their souls and Orphans cry
For what you waste, in refluent Luxury:
But we shall give new luster to your lives,
And purge your putrid souls with Gags and Gyves.
CVPPING-GLASSES, Clapped to the cloven Feet of the six Demons, who Govern the
times by turns, from Monday to Saturday, Annually.
MONDAY. BRITANICVS-DIVRNALL.
THis Well goes with two Buckets, and it were loss of time to tend the pouring
out of either. This Novel- Britanicus is but the little Toe on the left foot of
that Gigantick Paper-spoiler, who (like the Dragon in the Apocalypse) vomited an
Hue and Cry after the late King: This fellow because Hair is no Emblem of Wit,
affects baldness to admiration. He is never constant to one Habit: and
therefore you may (perhaps) not err in calling him Changeling, Prag, Mock --
Prag -- tanicus -- any thing: The River in Athenaeus is his Emblem, whose
upper waters were sweet and grateful, but toward the bottom brackish. But I
leave him, concluding him witty and a Scholar: but then follows the

DIURNAL.
A Piece of much Antiquity, but had never plagued the Nation with so prolix a
Date, if the least grain of Wit had grumbled in its Entrails; It is the
Country man's Chronicle, who believes its Narrations to be as Canonical as the
Scriptures; A dull, drossie, dirty piece; it is strange if once in six weeks you
find three lines of sense: the fellow that writes it, is no doubt of the humor
of the Samseans, in Epiphanius, who were neither Jews nor Gentiles, not
Christians, but preserved a commodious correspondency withal: He is very
impartial in his Intelligence, which shall excuse him from further Castigation.
The next is on Tuesday.

The COMMONWEALTHS WEEKLY INTELLIGENCE,
THe only Pamphlet worth countenancing, and yet least read: The Author
deserves a more pellucid Employment; There is worth in him: The occasion of his
poverty -- which puts me in mind of a story worth your notice, viz. Fortune
and Virtue, Wisdom and Folly being their Seconds, upon a time contended for
the Supremacy; every man thought that Fortune and Folly would have the worst,
and pitied their cases, but it fell out otherwise; Fortune was blind, and cared
not where she stroke, nor whom, etc. Folly rash and inconsiderate, esteemed as
little what she said or did; Virtue and Wisdom gave place, were hissed out by
the Common people. Folly and Fortune admired. And so are all their Followers
ever since: Fools and Knaves commonly fare and deserve best in Worldlings eyes.
Would not it congeale any knowing man to stone, to see a withered face, a
diseased cankred complexion, a rotten carcass, a viperous mind, and Epicurean
soul, set out with Orient Pearls, Jewels, Persumes, curious elaborate Works,
as proud of his Clothes as a child of his new Coats; and a goodly person of
an Angel-like divine countenance, an humble mind, a meek spirit clothed in
Rags, beg and ready to be starved? to see a silly contemptible sloven in
Apparel, ragged in his Coat, polite in his speech, of divine spirit, and wise:
Another neat in Clothes, spruce, full of courtesy, empty of Grace, or wit,
talk nonsense, etc. Our Gallants (forsooth) contemn Scholars as Idiots,
Fools, and Asses; and as often are they rejected and derided, because they cannot
ride an Horse which every Clown can do, Carve at Table, Cringe, and make
Congies, which every common Swasher can do: they are laughed to scorn, and
accounted silly fools by the Gallants of our times, and to say truth many
times they deserve it, A mere Scholar, A mere Ass. But of all professions (in
this Age) the Scholar is the worst; Fine times the while. But enough of this,
the third in order -- on Wednesday is --

DEMOCRITUS.
A Curre passing through a Village: if he clap his Tail between his legs, and
run away, every Whelp will insult over him; but if he brisse up himself, and
stand to it, give but a Counter-snarle, and not a Dog dares meddle with him:
This fool (who names himself Democritus) some weeks since made merry with
Phreneticus (a Pamphlet I continued that week to pleasure some fine friends of
mine) which had been passed over as not worth a Retort, had not the notorious
Cuck -- exulted and made his Brags to diverse in particular, I could have made
my Pity my Pillow, and have slept away a Design: But now Mr Metropolitan I
cannot wave you.

The Man in the Moon having thrown him into the Gate House, his first action
after his Infranchisement (by which you may guess the constitution of the
fellows soul) was to rail at the present King of Scots, inveigh against the
Ashes of the late King, and load the distressed Royal Party with all the odious
Epethites possibly to be vented from the venomous jaws of a Mercenary
Scribler, but that not answering his expectation, the Kings worst enemies
hating the turn coat for his levity,) Mercurius Democritus found Production
from his tainted skull: and under that notion pray look upon him in this Glass;

The very name of Democritus intimates, A Pasquill, or some ridiculous
Treatise. Democritus, (or the laughing Philosopher) was a little wearish old
man, a general Scholar, a great Student, a man of excellent wit, of profound
conceit: and is it not an insufferable shame, that this Impostor should broach
so many insolent Fictions under the name of so noble a Philosopher. Democritus
was an expert Physician, a Politician, an excellent Mathematician; He knew the
Natures and differences of all Beasts, Plants, Fishes, Birds, and (as some say)
understood the Tunes and voices of them; and to the intent he might the better
Contemplate, he put out his eyes, and was voluntary blind, yet saw more than
all Greece beside. If this Quack would make him his example, no man should love
him more than my self, I could then be content to be one of those Idle fellows
who read what this Idle fellow writes, that base Illurate Scribler who lards
his lean Pamphlets with the fat of other Books; A Rascal that cares not whom
he calumniates, and has the Impudence, though himself be a known Wit -- as
well as an unparalleled Cuc -- to asperse men of generous tempers, and who hate
nothing more than such Swinish servility. What is his Pamphlet else, save a
Rhapsody of Rags gathered together from several Dung-hils, harsh, raw, rude,
iale, dull, and dry, Stylus virum argit: whom, if I find cause (for the
future) I shall retalliate rather Argumento Bacillino quam Aristotlico. I
confess there was never so much cause of laughter as now, never so many Fools
and Mad men: it is not one Democritus will serve to laugh in these days: We
have now need of a Democritus to laugh at a Democritus, one J^ster to flout
another, one Fool to fleare another; a great Sten^orian Democritus, as big as
that Rhodian Colusses: This fellow has all the smptoms of a Beast: He kicks
like an Asse^ neighes like a Horse, ravens like a Bear, rakes and houles, (he
is troubled with that Lupinam insaniam, a Woolfe-madnesse,) like a Worse, and
is as impudent as a Dog. Nature has given him O^om^zes Enchanted egg
inoculated in his cheek, perhaps as the badge of his etc. But it is time to have
done with him; Good-mo^row to your Metro-simplesh^p, I mean Metropolitanship.
Then next, on Thursday,

POLITICUS.
TAcitus, and the rest of the Roman Historians, never intended their Annals as
this Gentleman's Aphorism's -- I owe much Gratitude here -- I wish to live to
retalliate his favors -- My Liberty was once won by his industry.

Charus erit Verri qui V^rrem tempore quo vult
Accusare potest --
Veres even Hugs and Courts him that has power
to controvert his liberty each hour.
And then follows on Friday,

The SCOUT; PERFECT PASSAGES.
SUre the Devil has gained that Grub street for his Grand Garrison; The very
air is infected with those rank, rotten pestilentian lies, that each day
muster from that Augaean Stable, the S^out. Why he that reads that Sheet but
^a^fe, must needs be an entire Fiend, and love Lying better than Lawyers love
money. Never so prodigious a Pamphlet -- Each Page is a Pest, and each Line a
Li^ell. But sure we shall not find it so in these,

PERFECT-PASSAGES.
THis Red-bearded Chronicler has found so happy a Metamorphosis, as from an
Hebrew Iron-Monger to become a Paridoxical Divine: You would think (if you
heard him preach) that he had his Text from a Gazet, you heard so much of a
Curranto. O he is excellent in private, at Parlour-Sermons, and Meeting Houses;
and here commonly he is more Enthusiast than Scripturist. His Auditors believe
his Dreams to be as Canonical as the Revelation: Like those Melancton speaks
of, Quicquid somniant volunt esse Spiritum Sanctum. But what have I to do with
this Venerable man; Fames Fingers are too foul to touch such holy Rites. He is
very sententious, fluent and sublime in his weekly Intelligence; and so I leave
him.

POSTSCRIPT.
LIke that Albanian Dog, sometime given to Alexander for a Present, Vindico me
ab illis solo contemptu. I shall securely contemn those malicious and scurile
Obloquies of Railers and Detractors. I Will lie still and sleep, and vindicate my
felfe by contempt alone; Flecti potest, frangi non potest. 'Twas an
extraordinary occasion put me upon this Pamphlet. But now farewell for ever:
Thou can not think worse of me (Reader) than I do of my self; I fear thy
Vote, if thou be a competent Judge,

-- Et linguas Mancipiorum contemno. This will serve to put under Pies, to lap
Tobacco in, and keep Roast-meat from burning.

VALE.

