Profane Liberty
Envious Hipocresie
Iesuitecall Policy
Three Grand Enemies to Church and State Sins captive, grace abuser
Covenant beaker souls deceiver
Void of zeal filld with sin
Given up to die therein
To precious truths an enemy
Filld with pride and cruiltie
And fills larg Tracts with foul disgrace
Of truths dear ones that her embrace
Till Ante christ shall ruind be
Great combustions we must see
With errors shall the world be led
But christ his spouse himself will guide


The times Displayed IN SIX SESTYADS: The first A Presbyter, an Independent.
The second An Anabaptist and a Brownist The third An Antinomian and a Familist
The fourth A Libertine and an Arminian. The Fifth A Protestant and eke a Papist
All these dispute in several Tracts, and be Divulgers, as of Truth, so
Fallacy. The sixth Apollo, grieves to see the Times

Scribimus indocti, Doctique Poemata Passim.

London, Printed and are to be sold by I. P. at his shop near the Sessions
house in the old Bailey. 1646.

To the Right Honorable Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook.
VOuchsafe great Lord, that art our Nations pride
In whose rare Virtues, they alone conside
To be the Patron, of my humble Muse
Who does thee only, her Maecenas choose:
This work displayes the times, therefore it is meet
I should present it, humbly at thy feet
Who art no sever of the times, but thou
Will serve thy Nation, and thy help allow
For to maintain their Privileges and be
A propogator, of Gods verity.
To thee therefore great Lord, this work I give
That I and it, may in thy favor live.
Your Honors most obedient Servant, S. SHEPPARD.

An Anagram on the Name of the Right Honorable Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook.
EARL PHILIP HERBERT Anagram Pear help all Liberty.

Pear help all liberty, Great Lord we find
How well thy Name, has suited to thy mind.
When England was in danger slav'd to be
Then thou great Lord, did help all Liberty
And by thy circumspect, and prudent wit
Sawst evil coming and diverted it;
To thee therefore a trophie I will raise
And sing in Verse, that aye shall last (thy praise.)
THE TIMES DISPLAYED IN SIX SESTIADS.
THE FIRST SESTIAD:
The Argument,
An Independent and a Presbyter
Their several Tenants, each do here prefer;
And while they, pro and con do argue, we
May judge of both, and which most erreth see.
INDEPENDENT AND have we spent our bloods to gain no more
We are as wretched as we were before
When as the Lordly Prelates, ruld the Land
Making Gods Truth, to stoop to your command
O thou immortal Rector when shall we
Be as we ought, and have our conscience free
From men's Injunctions.

PRESBYTER, "See man's nature is
"Never contented, though he be in bliss.
"He would have yet more joy, why know thou not,
Or has thy shallow memory forgot,
What great immunities are purchased
Since the great, little Prelate, lost his head
Are we not free from Papists lordly Reign
Who ruld, Charles only called Sovereign;
Is not the throst of Inovation cut
Are not our Enemies, in pinsolds that;
Are not those Courts, that rackt the Commons purses
"Receiving often, their silver, with their curses
Abolisht, i^ not that some fatal court
Star Chamber called, where six Lords could extort
What they would from the Common, now put down
And in the stead mercy and Justice shown.
Are not all envious suckers.

Independent He, whose this
My utter enemy, I ween it is,
As the ill boding Scrilch-owl I do hate
Thy speeches, tell me art thou Consecrate,
An Elder, whom I may dechipher thus
Hodie Clericus, cr^^ Lui^us:
Thee and thy tenants I abhor and hate
As errors, do all mischief properate
Perhaps thou art an Expactant, luch there be
Who wait Election, in the Presbytery
I hold the Rule, of your Archi-synagogie
To be a cruel, Rigorous Tyranny
Your high Sanhedrim, by which you undertake
Your Fellow Commoners, mere slaves to make
Your great Assembly is above all power
And what you please, you turn, and change each hour
So that I de rather choose, a slave to be
And vassaild, to the Bishops Hierchie
Then unto you subjected, pray whence rose
Your Reformation, but from Knox, and those
Seditious ones Melvill and Lisley, and
Peter Carmichael, who once did stund
In open opposition against all Law
In ordine ad Spiritualia.

Presbyter O Thou deluded, that art enemy
To God, does not the sacred verity
Confirm, and eke command the Church should be
Guided by a Judicious Presbytery
Thy Allegations are most false and naught,
Such as the Feind into thy mind has brought:
Thou art a Libertine, and would have none
To govern thee, but thy false heart alone
Woe be to England, had thou thy desire
Whose thoughts are swords, whose actions are fire
To ruin thine opposers, praised be
To the Almighties Sacred Majesty
Our prudent Parliament, do now proceed
To settle

Independent. What they have decreed
Theil find when they have settled it most sure
It Is built on sand, and cannot long endure.

Presbyter. Well go thy ways, let Satan and his crew
Theu most of your wicked ends pursue,
God will preserve his Church, and maugre all
Will have his own will to be principal
After so long obseurity, he now
Is pleased unto his servants light to show,
The true light of his face, the government,
He gave to his Apostles, with intent
They and the true Church, ever should observe
Which having purchasd, grant Lord, nere swerve
Therefrom, but us and ours embrace it may
Until the last, and dreadful Judgment day,

The end of the first Sestiad.
The Second Sestyad.
The Argument
An Anabaptist and a Brownist here
Unmask themselves, and make the filth appear,
The while the one contendeth for himself
Averring he ought not baptize his elfe
Till he is of age, the other worse deluded
Says, Godhath England from the Church exculded.
Anabaptist. After so long a night, of woe and sorrow
Behold a fair, and delicious morrow
After so many years, when we oppressed
Were fined imprisoned, and could never rest
For the Beast, Image, the hated Bishops (now)
We openly, and without, dread avow
Our tenants, dipping maids, and wives each day
Their natural concupicence to allay,
And although some we drown, those drowned so
Do but by water unto heaven go,
And --

Brow. I Will not believe the Church of England is:
A true Church, making my assurance this,
When Bishops and their government did stand
And Popery was used in the Land
By singing, cringing, worshipping of tables
Christning of bells, with many other Fables,
It Was then an The Brow nists hold our church to be Antichristian and Heretical;
that because we have no Church, they are to sever themselves from us, that
without civil authority they are to erect a Church of their own.
Antichristian Church, and now
They seem those errors, for to disavow
Instead thereof the English Parliament.
Set up a worser, fiercer Government.
The spawn of Bishops, now must rule, I gather
The wandering issue, of a misled Father
For the Presbytery, the wise can tell
We justly may with Bishops parallel,
From them their Power's derived

Anabaptist, All hail to thee
Dear Brother of our NONCONFORMITIE;
Both thee and I, like Sampsons Foxes do
Burn up Gods vineyard, work the Church much woe,
Why then are we estranged each from other,
Let me embrace thee, in my arms my Brother.

Brownist. Stay good, my friend, and know twixt thee and me
There is a very vast Antipathie,
I do not hold that Beasts from death shall rise
At the last day, nor yet in any wise
Can I believe, that ere the Damned shall
After some torments be released all,
And placed in heavenly joys, for so you hold.

Anabap. Why then my Friend thou have the worst on's told
By manifest *, that they may proved be,
Thou now recitedst, as an heresy, Scriptures

And this assure thy self, who ere is not
Of our Society, shall have his lot
Amongst the Damned, evermore to dwell,
Wailing his error, in the lowest Hell.

Brownist. Rashly concluded, thus each Sect does say
He that treads not their paths, errs from the way.

The end of the second Sestiad.
The third Sestyad.
The Argument
One of the Family of Love
With an Antinomian meets
And diverse questions they do move
Not parting without threats.
Familist. A Mor omnia vincit, 'twas that which moved
God for to come on earth, because he loved
The sons of men, it is love that all creates
It Is love that men and creatures propogates
Did men but know the sweet society
We do enjoy are of loves family
They would reject their burdensome Estate
And make themselves with us Incorporate,
How many Queens, and princesses of might
To be made one of us, have taken delight,
As Messalina, Cleopatra, FLORA
She
Romes vulgar honor as a Dietie
Lais and Thais, O I Am ravished
To think upon the pleasant Lectures read
To us, when we in full Assembly met,
The sisters on the brothers laps being set
Nothing but love our harmless souls desire
With love, each of our hearts is set on fire
This love we cherish, by all ways we may
For it is good our loves should ought decay
And therefore Oysters, Lobsters, we prepare
Eringoes tatoes, and such toyish fare,
And this we do, to preserve love in us
For sine Cerere and Bacho, friget Venus.

Anti, My ears are blister'd; O what have I heard
And art thou not thou beast at all afeard
Of Hell, or think thou the Almighty sleeps
Why he a bedrole of thy baseness keeps
And will take vengeance on thee that do make
Religion cloak thy evils.

Familist. Do thou take
In hand sin to reprove, whose sins are such
That of thy blasphemies, there cant too much
Be spoken, thou deniest, the Law was given
To be man's Rule, although the Lord from heaven
Girt in bright flames, with awful Majesty
The while the Trumpet sounded from on hie
Denounced Death, to him the same should break
And yet you dare with boldness for to speak
And to divulge, you from the Law are freed
And you of naught but faith do stand in need.
Again, you teach, averring impiously
Your sins are pardond, ere committed be
Why then it seems Christ Jesus, to no end
his heavenly pater noster did commend
To his Disciples, bidding them desire
Forgiveness of their sins, as the just hire
Of their forgiving others, some there be
Of your sweet Sect, that do unanimously
Conclude there is no strict necessity
Of our receiving that holy Of the Lords Supper.
mystery
Of our salvation (Why are we tied thus)
Say they to shaddows, when Christ dwells in us
Already, why on pictures must we feed
When we possess the substance.

Antinom. Twere indeed
Agreivous crime in me, for to confer
With one whose ways, are so Irregular,
Untie those bonds, do chain thy soul and be
No more pertaker, of loves family
And were it not, that I have hope thou may
Converted be, ere thou of death do taste
I would discover thee,

Familist. And I but that
I would not people draw to wonder at
Thy self and me, I would unto thy woe
First bang thee soundly, and then let thee go.

The end of the third Sestyad.
The fourth Sestyad.
The Argument
A Libertine and an Arminian
Each make known, your fond opinion;
And by the stories, which they tell
We may Judge both, are fit for hell.
Libertine. GIve me the Joys on Earth, and tell not me
Of after hopes, future felicity
I tire to think on, the time present I
Will spend in mirth, and pleasant jollitie
Sit round my hearts, our heads with Ivy crowned
Let quasse Lyeus, and the healths go round
And singing pearls, unto Ceres, we
Unto the Harp, will foot it lustily
While here I live, I Will spend my time in mirth
Time is no more, when I am gone from earth
This night I Will clip a beauty, would tempt Jove
Equal to Juno, or the Queen of Love
Away with this same fond Philosophy
That tells, the soul lives to Eternity
Away with such vain fancies when we fall
The soul dies with the body, etc.

It has been foretold by the Prophets and Apostles that such men the latter
days shall afford, and our own age has verified, their speech unto us, and
even for the main question of the Resurrection whereat they stick so mightily.
was it not plainly foretold that men should in the latter times say, where is
the promise of his coming an level at this present time is there not exceprions
taken against the Creation, the Ark, and diverse other points, the ground
whereof is superfluity of wit, without ground of learning, which may be truly
termed, Matter eirorum et vitiorum nutrix, now the chief cause of Atheism is
SENSUALITY, which makes men desirous to remove all stops and impediments of
their wicked life, among which, because Religion is the chiefest, so as neither
in this life without shame, they can persist therein, nor if that be true
without torment in the life to come, they whet their wits to annihilate the
joys of heaven, wherein they see (if any such be) they have no part; and
likewise the pains of hell, wherein their portion must needs be very great; they
labor therefore, not that they may not deserve those pains, but that deserving
them there may be no such pain to seize upon them, but what conceit can be
imagined more base, then that man should strive to persuade himself, even
against the secret instinct (no doubt) of his own mind, that his soul is, as
the soul of a beast, mortal, and corruptible with the body, against which
barbarous opinion, their own Atheism is a very strong Argument. For were not
the soul a nature separable from the body, how could it enter into discourse of
things merely spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining to the body; surely the
soul were not able to conceive any thing of heaven, no not so much as to
dispute against heaven, and against God, if there were not in it somewhat
heavenly and derived from God, Thus much by the way.

Arminian. There Is no man shall,
Persuade me, but man has, an Innate will
Power of himself, to commit good or ill,
I Have set before thee, fire, and water, choose,
Says God, even which thou wills, which plainly shows
Man's power's of himself, to take or leave,
To take the good; or else the ill receive,
POPE PIUS, had a vision on a day
As after Dinner on his couch he lay
A glorious Angel did before him stand
Bearing a graven Schedule in his hand
On the right side, was in a figure placd
The heaven of heavens with the Almighty gracd,
While all his glorious angels standing round
Loud Allelujaes, to the THRONE, resound:
On the left hand was ORCVS placed where sat
Grim Pluto, placed in a throne of state,
Foshiond of burning brass, the Damned Crew
Howling in flames, their forepast Acts did rue,
Just in the midst, betwixt both these there stood
A man well shapt, and of proportion good,
Before whom hung a tablet, in which words
Of letter Capital, this sense affords;
Behold, o man, before thee two ways lie,
The one to joy, the other to misery
Does lead; choose which thou will, therefore it is sure
Man may his sorrow, or his bliss procure
By his own inclination; Ergo, I
Will in this my opinion Live, and Die.

THE AUTHOR. Ah do not so, trust not to thine own strength,
For fear it plunge thee in Abisse at length.

The end of the fourth Sestyad.
The fifth Sestyad.
The Argument.
A Papist on Pilgrimage he went
Meets with a true believing Protestant,
Twixt whom there diverse propositions be
As bout the Mass and popes Supremacy,
Til in the end, they both agree as one,
And do extol the true Religion.
Papist. Holy Saint Christopher be thou my guide
And aid my speed, that I by eventide
May arive safely at Saint Francis shrine,
That holy Francis that by aid divine
Conversing in the solitary wood
Making wild fruits and water be his food,
O be propitius

Protestant, See it is my chance
To meet with one will give me cause to advance
Gods truth above the unwritten verity,
Worshipful Pilgrim, all hail to thee
That wrapped in errors do thy journey take
Bare footed, while the sirly thorny brake
Often draws blood.

Papist. By Saint Sebastian
I now have met a A Protestant so termed by them, because they place their
chief confidence in the Act of faith --.
SOLIFIDIAN;
Why thou deluded, how long will thou be
Unto the holy Church an enemy,
And still persisting in thy w^^^^ed state
Dye as an Heretic, excommunicate
By Christ's Vicegerent.

Protestant. My good pilgrim hold,
Enough and each too much, thou now have told
I Am not deluded, but with settled faith
I tie my self, to what the Scripture says
Which in no place mentions the papal throne,
That Septred Kings, must yield subjection
To mytred Bishops, that false power do vaunt
That Christum simulant, and contrachristum pugnat
Nor do I weigh, how me, the pope shall handle
No though, he curse me, with bell book and candle.

Papist. The airs infected, O that I had now
Some holy water, for to cross my brow
O sire I blasphemy have heard thou soul
Who art infected so, with errors foul,
It Is hard to cure thee.

Protest. Nor do I desire.
Thou should as my Physician gain thy hyre
Which will be more, then all the world affords
My precious soul,

Papist. Although to bandy words
With thee an Heritick, were fond and Vain
Yet so I see, thart learned I Will not abstain
But I will converse a while, know then that Rome
Is the most ancient Church (where martyrdom)
Diverse Apostles did receive, and there
By Christ's appointment, is S. Peter's chair
Where Christ's Vicegerent, Peter's seat does fill
And what he does Command, even Christ does will
He cannot err in ought, for on this stone
Christ builds his Church (all opposition)
Shall not prevail against him, every state
Al Kings on Earth to him subordinate;
He to the glorious fun I may compare.
Kings to the Moon, who of his luster share.

Protest. I hear toomuch, although it is truth Rome was
Once called the mother Church, but truth did pass
From Rome, drove thence by erring fallacies,
By ground less fables, superstitious lies,
When Gods love was relinquisht, and instead
Thereof, was man's traditions honored.
Nor is the Pope to sit in Christ his throne.
For Christ himself does rule his Church alone;
Nor can we find by what our Savior said
(To Peter) that on him alone he laid
A charge to rule his Church, but when he spoke
To Peter, he did the rest his Partners make,
And not on Peter, but upon his faith
Christ builds his Church, when on this rock he says
I Will build my Church, and whereas you compare
The Pope unto the Sun, you grossly err,
But rather we full aptly render may
The Pope as Moon, for as one well does say.
-- Fratri contraria Phabe
Ibit and obliquum, big as agitare per orbem
Indignata, diem poseit sibit totaque discors
Machina convulsi, turbabit foe dera mundi.
The Moon disdeigning of her rule by night
Would needs rule Phabus Carr the day to light,
And by this civil, and unnatural Jarr
Enforced natures bands to fry in War.
Even so at first, the Aspiring Popes of Rome,
When they would Kings as well as Priests become
Laid claim, and urgd it their Prerogative
For to dispose of Crowns, and those did strive
For to make frustrate, Their so il Intent
They presently deprivd of Government,
And then being seated in the Suns bright Carr
They straight involvd all nations in War,
And now the sole Incendiaries be
For to set Crown and Crown at enmity.

Papist. I do find something in me prompts me now
The Popes usurped power to disavow.

Protestant. This man of sin does hold the world in hand,
He holds his Papal power by Christ's command
And lest the vulgar should into it pry
He does lock up the sacred Verity,
And feeds the peoples minds with outward glosses.
With pleasant music, Images, and Crosses,
With Pilgrimages, Offerings, and Oblations,
With holy Rood days, and such recreations.
With holy water, wafer, cakes, and challices,
With Copes, and Mitres, Crosiers, such like sallacies
Bewitch the people so, they blindly run
To all excess of Superstition;
Again, that he his Priests may magnify
To win them honor in the peoples eye
Their told, when once the words of consecration
Are uttred, just upon the elevation
Of the bread God, it is very Christ even he,
Who for their fins, did suffer on the tree,
O horrid, that a mortal should create
Even his Creator.

Papist. I now see the state
That I am in is wretched, and by thee
O happy friend I am converted, see
I am not as I was, I here lay by
This weed of shame, and now entirely I
VVil be a Protestant.

Protestant. If so
Thy tongue and heart in equipage do go,
Come follow me, and thou will find there is none
Of true Belief, but Protestants alone.

The end of the fifth Sestyad.
THE SIXTH SESTYAD.
The Argument.
Apollo rages that the noble bay
Is worn by those that do not merit it,
He and she Muses an amer cement lay
On some, that trusting to their sor did wit
Do undertake, of things most high to say,
Yet cannot words unto the matter fit:
Mean time Urania does in tears deplore
Her Quarles.
Peets loss, whose like shall be no more.
1.
HE that does bear the silver shining bow
Whose music does surpass, that of the spears
Who slew great Ovids Metamoi. Lib. 1.
Pythan, and did Vulcan show
Where Mars and Vanus, were, to increase his fears.
Jove and Latonas son, whom Readers know
In heaven he of Sol, the title bears:
In earth he Liber Pater called is,
And eke Apollo in the shades of Dis.
2.
One time, as on the spire of's * Temple he At Delphos

Did sit, he cast his most refulgent eye
Toward Pernassus Mount, where he might see
The sacred Nine, not now melodiously
As they were wont, to chaunt in Jollitie
Apolloes praise, and the great Jupiter
Diety,
That turned IO to a Cow, but now they were
With sorrow overcome, did joy forheare.
3.
With speed to Hellicon he took his flight.
Where being come, the Muses did arise
And made obeaysance, as was requisite,
To whom said A name of Apollo.
Sminthus, why, with downeast eye,
Are your fair Aspects clouded, and why dight
In sable weeds, the reason I surmise,
Which does afflict me more, then when my Phaeton.
son
By those unruly Steeds, to death was done.
4.
Shall part of Daphne or the bay tree.
her, whom once I lovd so dear,
Be worn by those whose for did minds I hate;
Why do I, for to shoot, the slaves forbear,
And with my Arrows, their breasts penetrate;
Who for to claim the Laurel do not fear.
Due only unto those, whose happy fate
Has raised them, my Prophets for to be,
Or else can claim the same by victory.
5.
Each fellow now, that has but had a view
Of the learnd Phrygians Fables, grows bold,
And name of Poet does to himself accrue;
That M. P.
Ballad maker too, is now extold
With the great name of Poet, J. T.
He that knew
Better far how to row, then pen to hold,
His sordid lines, are sweld to such a weight,
Their able for to make, his Boat afreight.
6.
The god of waves has been my enemy,
Else that base Fool, had Haddocks fed ere now.
And Fennor might have wrote his Ellegy,
(Another coxcomb) that his wit, to show
Wrote many things, the best not worth the eye
Of any schoolboy, does his genders know;
But while the Fools I rate, let me not be
Forgetful of those writers lovd by me.
7.
Although the Bard, whose lines unequalled,
Who only did deserve a Poets name
To my Eternal grief, be long since dead,
His lines for ever shall preserve his Fame.
So * his who did so near his footpaths tread Samuel Danniel.

Whose lines as near as Virgils Homers came,
Do equal Spencers, who the soul of verse
In his admired Poems does rehearse.
8.
But ah whose this whose shade before me stands
O it is the Man, whose Fame the earth does fill,
Whose virtue is the talk of Foreign Lands
While they admire his Feats of Arms his skill
In Poesic, while he bove all commands
The Muses, who so waited on his Quil
That like to Sidu^^; none ere wrote before
His birth, not now he is dead shall ere write more.
9.
See him whose Tragic Sceans EVRIPIDES
Does equal, and with SOPHOCLES we may
Compare great SHAKESPEARE ARISTOPHANES
Never like him, his Fancy could display,
VVitness-he Prince of Tire, his Pericles,
His sweet and his to be admired lay
He wrote of lustful Tarquins Rape shows he
Did understand the depth of Poesy.
10.
But Drayton.
thou dear soul, whose lines when I behold
I do astonished stand, of whom Fame says
By after times, Thy Polyolbion.
songs shall be extold
And mentioned be as equalling my lays
Thou who so sweetly EDWARD'S woes have told
When other Poems; though of worth decays,
Thine shall be honored, and shall aye subfist
In spite of dark oblions hiding mist.
11.
So * His that Divine PLAUTUS equalled Ben. Johnson.

Whose Commick vain MENANDER nere could hit,
Whose tragic sceans shall be with wonder Read
By after ages for unto his wit
My self gave personal aid I dictated
To him when as Sejanus fall he writ,
And yet on earth some foolish sots there be
That dare make Randolf his Rival in degree.
12.
All hail eke unto Mr. May.
thee that did translate
My loved LVCAN into thine own tongue,
And what he could not finish snatched by fate,
Thou have completed his ingenuous P^^^salla.
song
Thy Fame with his shall nere be out of date
Nor shall base Momus carpe thy glory wrong,
But of mine own tree, I Will a garland frame
For thee, and among my Propets rank thy name,
13. Mr Brown.

So * thine whose rural quil so high does sound
Theocritus or Mantnans ere could be
So sweet and so sententious ever found
As are thy Pastorals of Britanie,
Thy fame for aye shall to the skies resound,
And I pronounce Thy fluent Poesy
Singing of shepherds is the best ere wit
Invented, and none ere yet equalled it.
14
Nor thine O Heywood worthy to be read
By Kings, whose books of eloquence are such
Enough in praise of thee, can nere be sed
Nor can my Verses, ere extol too much
Thy real worth, whose lines unparaled
Although some envious critics seem to grutch
Shall live on earth to thy eternal Fame
When theirs in grave shall rot, without a name.
15
So eke shall yours, great Davenant, Sherley and
Thine learned Goffe, Banmont, and Fletchers to
With Mr Philip Massenger.
his that the sweet Renegaddo pend
With Mr Allen.
his who Cressey sang, and Poycters to
Your works, your names for ever shall commend
Joined with Mr Nabbs.
his, that wrote how Scipie,
Orethrew great Hanniball, his ingenious lines
Shall be a pattern, for the after times.
16.
Nor will I Mr withers.
thee forget whose Poesy
Is pure, whose Emblems, Satyrs Pastoralls
Shall live on earth even to Eternity,
Nor * Thee whose Poems loudly on me calls
For my applause, which here I give, and I Mr Randal

Pronounce Mr Mills
his merit, that so high ^^^tals
The Muses, in his Night-watch, great to be,
And times to come shall hugg his Poesy.
17.
But why, Urania, hangst thou so thy head,
What grievous loss has rest thy Joys away;
Quoth she, knows not Apollo QVARLES is dead
That next to BARTAS, sang the heavenlist lay,
And who is he on earth, his steps can tread,
So shall my glory come unto decay;
At this she wept, and wailing wrung her hands,
The Muses mourning round about her stands.
18.
Quoth then Apollo, lay this grief aside,
I do assure thee, that thy honor shall
Not fade, but be far greater Amplified;
There Is one who now upon thy name does call,
Who has by Clio formerly been tried,
And by her well approvd; He surely shall
Succeed great Quarles, if thou not fate to inspite
And warm his Bosom with thy hottest fire.
19.
Hereat she cheared was, and now a^ erst
Apollo in the midst, the Mules Nine
Began to sing, CLIO, Joves Deeds rehearst
When he the Giants pasht, her song Divine
Apollo shapt his tire unto, where first
I did set sorth I must again decline:
What shallow fools shall prate I do not care,
Fly Thou my Book to those that Learned are.
Nunquam me Impune lacessit.
The end of the sixth and last Sestyad.
FINIS.

