True and happy News From IRELAND, Being the Copy of a Letter Written from
Sir W. Saintliger Lord President of Munster, to the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND.

Relating several Vallorous defeats given to the Rebels, wherein many of them
Were slain, the rest put to flight and much pillage taken.

Read in the honorable House of Commons on Tuseday April 25. 1642

Martis 25. April. 1642.
It is this day ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that this
Letter be forthwith pub^^shed in print.

H. Elsinge Cler. parl. Com



London printed for John Wright. 1642.

TRUE AND HAPPY NEVVES FROM Ireland.
Right Honorable my very good Lord.
SInce my last by my Lord of Dungarvan, my own indisposition and imbecility
has been such as in mine own person I have not been able to attempt any
thing, but have by my sickness been confined to my chamber, but the forward
earnestness and zeal to the service in my Lord of Inchonqid. Colonel
Vavasor, Captain ^^rpson, and the rest of the Officers of the small Army here,
has accomplished some exploits, whereof you may please to receive the ensuing
relation.

I being besieged on the north side of the City by my Lord Mu^kry, M. Carty
Lea^h, and all rest of the western forces, and having notice that my Lord
Roche, my Lord of Ikarne Donbay, the Baron of Loghmay, M. Richard Builer, and
all the tipperary forces were drawing up to beleager me on the south, I
dispatched away the two Troops then newly landed, under the command of my Lord
Inchequid, and Captain I^phton into the Lord Roches Country, in expectance to
divert him from his intended course hith^rwards, which sorted to so good
purpose as that I since understand the tipperary forces have forsaken him, and
that he remains himself upon his keeping in his own Country. During the stay
of these Troops there, they were desired to the relief of a Castle called
Rathgogan by one M. Meade, which M. I^phson having performed with a Squadron of
each Troop, and 80. Musqueters drawn out of his house and mine. In his retreat
he was encountered by two or three Companies from Mimeallock, on whom he with a
horse, and another officer with a Foot charged in several places, and routed
them, slaying about 150. beside 50 slain in relieving the Castle On the
thirteenth of this instant my Lord of Muskry (who has kept this Camp a long
time at Rochforts Town three miles from this City) caused a part of his Army
to chase home our scouts to the very suburbs, where in a bravado they made a
stand, whereat my Lord Inchequid, Colonel Vavasor, and the rest of the
Officers being much incensed, obtained my leave to issue forth immediately with
300 musketeers, and two Troops of Horse: upon the sallying out they found the
enemy retreated, and pursued him to his quarters, where the main body
consisting of 36 colors as they were numbered forthwith appeared, and after
several parties sent from the maine body to skirmish with our men, had been
beaten back, they began to pack up their Baggage, and forsook their Camp,
after whom our men made all the speed they might: and having chased them two or
three miles, charged upon the Rear, routed the whole Army, which betook it
self to flight over a bog, unpasseable for our horse, and took all their
carriage and luggage, whereof the Lord of Moskeries own armor, Tent, and Trunks
were a part, slew about 200 of their men that took to firm ground, and retired
without loss of a man. Whereby it is very easy to observe with what facility
the enemy might now be dealt withal before he can recollect himself anew, or
receive foreign supplies, which they daily and hourly expect, and being once
come to their hands, it will not then be trebble the charge and expense both of
blood and treasure that will suppress them, which now would reduce them to a
very great straight.

And therefore I do most humbly beseech your Lordship, that speedy supplies of
men, moneys, arms, munition, and artilery, with all necessaries depending
thereon, as Conducters, Pyoners, Mattrosses, Carriages, Tackle, Horses and Oxen
for draught, and all other appurtenances may either be sent over, or Commission
and means to raise and maintain them here, here being but one Canonere, and
one Clerk of the store in this Province: without these your Lordship knows
that it is to no boot to march into the field, where if the enemy be not too
hard for us, he will certainly retire to his holds, and so secure himself
against our forces.

The necessary use of Fire locks and Dragoones, and of a competent supply of
victual, the stock of this Country being totally wasted, will deserve serious
consideration: and if I had been so fortunate as to have received any succors
by those late Easterly winds it would have so discouraged the enemy now newly
routed and animated the Protestant party, as that I am very confident by Gods
assistance I should have given your Lordship a good account of the quiet of
these parts. Whereas the observing that this fair opportunity has conveied us
no relief do begin to muster up their forces afresh, and to take heart at the
apprehnsion of our being deserted in England and left wholly to our selves,
wherein I cannot sufficiently express how miserable our conditions is; for
having from the beginning of these troubles supported the forces mentioned, in
the enclosed list with moneys gained upon several hard terms and engagements
(besides what I have impressed to the succor sent thence) I was at last
constrained to seize upon 4000. pounds b^longing to Sir Robert Tynte* and ready
to be transported out of the kingdom (and which he refused to lend upon the
public faith of this state, which nevertheless I gave him upon the seizure)
merely to preserve the Army from disbanding, which otherwise it must have
undoubtedly done. And therefore I humbly desire, that money may be sent over not
only to discharge that and other engagements, amounting to 4000 pounds more
but that there may be order taken for the entering of those men into pay, and
continuing them therein ever since the beginning of the present troubles which
I raised at first (by direction from the Lords Justices) for this service, and
that the same course may be taken for them as for the rest.

The height of insolency and arrogance in the enemy will appear by the
enclosed Remonstrance which they sent me after a motion made for a cessation,
which in the condition I was in, I had some inclination to condescend unto, in
case it had been sought for in befitting terms: to which purpose I willed
them to adresse their humble Petition to his Majesty, and in case I did
approve thereof, I would give way thereunto, and to a cessation until his
pleasure were known; whereupon they transmit me that, whereof the enclosed is
a copy: at which I took (justly as I conceive such offense as caused me to
return them the enclosed answer which I should have seconded with such further
testimony of my aversion to their insolency as would tend much to their
disincouragement were I enabled with any reasonable strength so to do, which I
earnestly desire I may be, and with instructions what hand to carry in the
procecution of them, and how to manage the war against them for that every
day they increase in insolency and riot, hanging such prisoners as are not able
to pay ransom, ransoming others, hanging old women, and stripping all they can
lay hold on. All that is lest in this Province is the City of Cork, the Towns
of K^ngsale, Youghall, and Bandonbridge; the Cities of Limricke and Waterford
being f^llen into defection, save that the Fort in the former is able to
command the Town if provided with Munition, wherewith I have sent to supply it.

For persons in Action it is far less difficult to nominat those that
adheare to the Crown, which are the Earl of Barrimore, (an industrious
servitur) the Lord Viscount Killmallocke, Sir Andrew Barret, and Edmond
FitzGerald of Ballmarter commonly called the Senescall of Imockilly, by whose
care and countenance (joined with my L. Barrimores that barrony of Imockilly is
kept in due subjection, and the passage betwixt this City and Youghall thereby
open. But whilst we stand on these unable terms to stir out of these
walls, the enemy is at liberty to range and forage over all parts of the
Country. And indeed our wants of money are so great and pressing, as that for
defect of entertainment and encouragement, the officers both of Horse and
F^ote daily flock unto me, and importune to be dismissed and left at liberty
to seek their preferment in England: and so soon as this little which is left
me to feed the soldiers with from hand to mouth is spent, I know no way to
prevent their sudden disbanding: and therefore I do again beseech your
Lordship to endeavor that I may not be exposed to the dishonor and misery of
being abandoned by the Kings forces, and left my self single to the mercy of
the enemy; but that moneys may be speedily transmitted unto me with directions
what pay to allow the horsemen, and officers of the foot, with an overplus of
money, as I have formerly desired, for extraordinary and emergent occasion,
about either the Ordnance or Forts whereas yet nothing is in a right posture,
but things only shuffled together for a shift by reason we had not
wherewithal to the work as it ought

Your Lordships most humble servant, W. Saintleger.

FINIS.

