Mr. St. JOHN'S SPEECH, OR ARGUMENT, IN PARLIAMENT; Showing, whether a man may
be a Judge, and a Witness in the same CAUSE.

By way of Preface, I shall return a distinction between a doubtful and a
scrupulous CONSCIENCE.



Mr. St. JOHN'S ARGUMENT IN PARLIAMENT, showing whether a man may be a Judge and
a Witness in the same Cause.
THe former assents to neither of the two opinions wherewith it is distracted,
and by his means suspends the action. The latter enclines to one of the two
opinions, and goes on to the performance of the Action, but neither so
cheerfully and roundly as it ought to do, but with some reluctancie in regard
of that consideration it still retains of the contrary opinion. As a man that
has a little stone or some gravel got into his shoes (which is a scruple in the
proper and gra^atical sense) maks a shift to get ho^e to his house, though not
without some pain and molestation: these scruples if we cannot cast them out, by
reason and better information, Casuists advise us to forget them, if it be
possible, or how ever to pass them over, and fall to the Action,
notwithstanding their jogging and interruption of us, in the cheerful
performance of the same, Amesius de Consc. li. 1. cap. 6. regularly and in
ordinary proceeding, one and the same man, in one and the same cause may be
excepted against for being both Judge and Witness. For Deuteronomy. 17. 16. (which I
take to be the ground whereon the Resolution of this question is to be erected)
the Judges in the gate, and the two witnesses are not the same, but several
and distinct persons.

And Testatus his opinion that under the old Testament, one and the same man in
one and the same Cause, might be a Judge and a Witness. As the two Elders were
against Susanna, 6. and 34. verse, is as Apochryphall as the Book it self from
whence it is quoted. For they are not the Judges or Elders, but the Assembly
which pronounce the sentence, so the 41. verse. And we live under the new
Testament where it is not permitted that a Man shall be a Judge and a Witness
against me, says the same Testatus, in 23. Exodus Where he quotes for his
opinion, Greg. 9. in his Decretals, Lib. 5. de verborum, signific. cap. forus.
And of this opinion the Civil Lawyers gives these reasons.

1. First, because this were for one man to usurp two functions, which ought to
be several and distinct, as that of a Judge, and that of a Witness, Jelinus,
and Auferius in Hut. Aemilius his tractate, de testibus, page 208.

2. Because by this means the same Agent might act and operate upon it self, by
becoming both the Judge imposing, and the Witness receiving the oath, to
deliver the whole truth, which is not convenient, says Albericus de Rosate,
Tract. Doctor Wol. 1. page 260. And Pawfrancus ab Arrad. Tract. Doc. Vob. 4.
pa. 157.

3. Because this were for a man to judge as God, say the Schoolmen, that is,
out of his own private knowledge. Whereas, says Cajetan, Man ought not to be
judge as God, but as God would have him to judge: that is secundum Allegata and
probata, and by a public not a private knowledge. The Act of judging is a
public Act, and must arise from public Causes, a public person a public
power, a public knowledge (from others and not from himself) and a public
will: and this cannot be when a man judges upon that, which he only knows
himself as a private person, Cajestan in 22. De. 4. 67. Act. 2. And it is the
conclusion of all the Doctors, that a Judge non potest testeficare coram se,
can give himself no convincing evidence. Alber. de Rosate in Tract. Doctor Vob.
1. page 260. Testatus gives a reason hereof, because no man can do as God does,
that is, infuse into the Prisoner at the Bar, Cogitationem memorem omnium
factorum, A glimpse or thought that shall cause all the Actions of his whole
life to appear before him, when he beholds the Judge in the face, nor unto the
hearers probations, cogitations, a clear and naked evidence of all the proofs
in the Cause. This God only can do of himself, other Judges cannot without the
help of witnesses. Tract. in Math. cap. 25. quaest. 334.

4. That old observation of the Cannonists, and of St. Augustine, would fail if
a man could be a Judge and a Witness: that a false witness is injurious to
all these three, to God, to the Judge, to the party, which would fail, if the
Judge himself might be a witness.

Lastly, as they exclude him that has been a Counceller in the Cause, because
he is like to make good his own Plea, so do they conceive the Witness to be
excluded with much more reason, lest he should be too much wedded to his former
disposition.

These are the reasons why Regularly and in ordinary proceedings a Witness
may be excepted against from being in the same Cause.

But I do not find in any Lawyer or Casuists, that a man is bound in
Conscience, to except against himself, for being a Judge in that cause,
wherein he had been produced in a Witness; And I find rather the contrary
opinion in good Authors. And that if both parties be content, and take no
exception to it, a Witness may be a judge in the same Cause. It is the
opinion of that great Jurisconsultum Felinus, but quoted by Hutor Aemilius,
Tract: de Testibus, page 213.

And this without al question to be made thereof, if he have Contestes, that is,
some Witnesses more besides himself, that concur in the Evidence; Hut.
Emilius de testib: page 200.

Provided always, that when he comes to giv^ Judgment: He must never ground
his sentence upon any private knowledge of his own, but upon what is alleged
and proved before him, by the Testimonies and depositions of other witnesses,
that is, as the Schoolmen speak it, he must not sentence out of his private,
but out of his public knowledge, acquired generally from the Municipall laws
of that Country wherein he lives; and more particularly from matters of Record,
Writings and depositions of Witnesses: Aquni. 22. de quest. 67. act. 2.

For the Jury of the voisinage, I do under favor conceive them no Judges at
all; they are to inquire out and to find a fact; They are not to apply the
general Law unto a particular fact, which properly is to judge and determine
it. Whether the Lord Cobham was first produced as a Witness, and afterward
sommuned as a Peer in the Trial of the Lord Gray, I know not, nor ever heard
of it before this time; But I do believe that upon the Rolls of 50. of Edw. 3.
it will appear, that John Duke of Lancaster, was Accuser, Witness, and Judge,
in the Trial of Alice Peirs, which many alter the Rules of the Law, in
Parliamentary proceedings. 23. of March. 1641.

FINIS.

