A Short Catechism FOR All the KINGS Majesty's Loyal SUBJECTS, FITTING To be
used by all Families, within this Kingdom of ENGLAND.

Together With diverse Papers for the Preservation of his Majesty KING CHARLES
the Second.



LONDON, Printed for William Gilbertson. 1660.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, I have here set down a short Treatise, or a Dialogue between
the Father and the Son, of their Integrity, Fidelity, and Loyalty to their
Sovereign; take it and peruse it, though it is short it is sweet, and being but
little therefore the price is but little, and in reading it over your time will
be but little. I question not but it will lead you into the right path of
Allegience to your Prince, and you will find a great deal of delight and comfort,
for God does know with what fear and trembling we have been in for the space of
twenty years together, in horror, bloody wars, calamities and confusion; and
now at last we are bound to give thanks to the Almighty for his unspeakable
mercy in restoring us our Gracious KING again; then let us give Custom to whom
Custom is due, Fear to whom Fear belongs, Honor to whom Honor pertains, so
shall we in the end be Subject, Not because of wrath only, but for conscience
sake, Rom: 13.5

The first Instruction for a Subject.
Father. Son.


Father. TThou have been hitherto instructed my Son, according to holy writ in
Scripture in thy Catechism concerning thy first instruction in the true
Christian Faith, wherein thou have learned thy duty toward God, and thy duty
toward thy Neighbor: Tell we now what precepts have thou learned there, of
Faith and due Allegiance that is due to thy Prince?


Son. To submit my self whether to the King, as the chief and supreme, or unto
Rulers as to them that are sent of him, 1 Pet. 2. and so to be subject as the
Apostle teaches, not because of wrath only but also for conscience sake, Romans
13.5.


F. How is that subjection declared and testified?


S. Thus it is declared and testified. First in the Heart. Secondly in the
Tongue. Thirdly in Action and Doing it consists; but briefly Faith and true
Allegiance rests in thought, word and deed; in either which the subject is
discerned, and so adjudg'd to be true or false.


What Allegiance is.
F. What call thou faith and true allegiance?


S. Honor, fear, obedience, tribute and defense.


F. This thou say is declared first, and secondly is testified in the heart.


S. So it is.


F. Shall not thought be free?


The first Precept of Allegiance.
S. No, the first precept of allegiance is lodged in the breast as it is
written, Curse not the King no not in the *thought, Eccles. 9.


*Of Thought.

F. Indeed it is even so; for mischief is conceived first, and then iniquity is
brought forth, according to the prophet, Their webs shall be no garment,
neither shall they cover themselves with their labor. Again, desolation and
destruction is in their ways, Isa. 59. How prayest thou therefore my son to be
confirmed according to that precept in thy thought.


Son. Thus.

A Prayer for thought.
O Thou everlasting and eternal God, who hold all men's hearts in thy hands,
and art the governor of all my whole life, set my heart, I beseech thee on the
Governors of Israel in fear, love and obedience, and suffer me not to perish
in the council of my own thoughts, but correct thou them O Lord, and put the
doctrine of wisdom into my heart, lest my ignorance increase, and my sins
abound, to my own destruction, but retain in me thy servant, obedience, that I
might continually desire to serve thee, and reverently to think on thine
Anointed; so shall I not perish through my own lips, nor be hurt by any wicked
works.




The second Precept of Allegiance.
Of the Tongue.

F. What of the tongue?


S. Death and life are in the power of the tongue, Prou. 17. and herein
consists the second Precept of Allegiance, to this effect; Beware of
murmuring, refrain thy tongue; will thou (says Job) say unto a King thou art
wicked, or to Princes ye are ungodly, Job. 34.


F. Verily (says the Wiseman) the judgment of reproach shall never let him
escape; for the sound of his words shall come unto God, for the correction of
his iniquities. And again there is no word so secret as shall go for naught:
Michaell the Archangell, when he strove against the Devil, durst not rebuke
him with cursed speakings, Jude 8. let me therefore hear thy prayer in this
behalf, and so go on to action.


S. A prayer for the Tongue.
O Lord, open thou my lips, and my heart shall sing forth thy praises: Grant
me, O Lord, the light of the Kings countenance, for it is life; and his favor,
for it is a cloud of the latter rain; but his wrath is Messengers of death. O
Lord, I call upon thee, hear my voice when I cry unto thee, let my prayers be
directed unto thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hand as an evening
sacrifice; set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips;
for the tongue is as a fire, or as a world of wickedness, set amongst our
Members like a flaming camel in a wheat field, that even it defiles the whole
body, it is as an unruly evil full of deadly poison; and as the Apostle says,
earthly sensual and divellish, James 3.

Guide thou therefore, O heavenly Father, my tongue, that it might be a sweet
instrument to bless the Lord's anointed* so that thy servant might be of the
Number of them that makes peace, Amen.




Of action or doing.

F. What have thou gathered touching action or doing?


The third Precept.
S. I have gathered this wherein does consist the third precept of Allegiance;
namely, will thou be without fear of the power, then do well; for he is the
Minister of God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil, fear; for he bears not
the sword for nothing: he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that
does evil; and for this cause only ye pay also tribute, Romans 13.


F. Let me hear thee pray accordingly?


S. A prayer for action or doing.
O Heavenly Father that give the knowledge and understanding to Princes, and
make their Kingdoms peaceable for all men; grant me thy humble servant the
inspiration of thy holy spirit, that all my actions may agree with thy most
heavenly will: and remember O Lord in all my actions and doings thy scepter,
and the scepter that rules me, that as the King when he turned the Cronicles
found the fidelity of Mordecay; so let never King nor Queen in this land find
the Infidelity of thy servant: but strengthen me O Lord to disclose as Mordecay
did to the King all those that would betray him, and that Bigthan may appear,
and perish that may seek to lay hold on the King; or Haman that inventeth to
destroy Queen Hester and her Nation. This kingdom O Lord thou have preserved
it hitherto, to our Gracious King Charles the second, preserve it still, both
scepter and he that swayeth it, so that he may Reign in peace, and thy servant
live in thought, word and dead, in all subjection, Amen.




F. Whereas thou have called to mind my son, the Faith and Fidelity of Mordecay
being a loyal subject to his Prince, and Bigathn Teresh, and Haman traitors
again their prince. Now show me these examples also what ensued the one and the
other.


Of Example.

S. When Hester found favor in the sight of the King Ahashuerus, more then all
the Virgins that were, insomuch that he set the Crown of the kingdom upon her
head, and made her Queen instead of Vasti. Hest. 1. in those days Mordecay
sat in the Kings gate, when Bigthan and Teresh had conspired together to lay
hold on the King, this was known to Mordecay, the conspiracy being wrought at
the gate near him: and he told it unto Hester who certified the King thereof in
Mordicaies name: and when inquisition was made concerning this plot against the
King, it was even as Mordicai had said, therefore they were both apprehended
and hanged on a tree, and it was written in the book of Chronicles before the
King, Hest. 1. Then the King magnified Mordecai, afterward as it is written in
the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia. He became second unto king
Ahashuerus great and mighty amongst the Jews, and accepted amongst the
multitude of his brethren: so thus were traitors punished and true subjects
received a good reward, Hest. 10. Even so were the sons of Barzilai the
Gileadite for that fidelity performed to David when he lay at Mahunaim, Sam.
2.16. for they succored David when he fled from Absalom.


F. What was there reward and honor for it?


S. When the days of king David drew nigh, that the should dye, he charged
Solomon his son saying, show kindness I pray thee to the sons of Barzilai the
Gileadite, and let them be amongst them that sit at the Table; for so they came
to me when I fled from Absalom, thy brother, 1 Kings 2. Thus true subjects
never go without a reward, no not to the dying day of the prince. Absalom
proving Traitor and Rebelled aginst the King his Father, was hanged between the
heavens, and the earth in a thick Oak running away in the battle, Sam. 18.
Touching Haman in the copy of the letters of Artexarxes, he is accused thus, a
man of Macedonia, the son of Amadathus being indeed a stranger from the
persians blood and far from our goodness, was received of us and has the
friendships that we bare toward all nations: insomuch that he was called our
Father and honored of every man as the next person to the king, but he could
not keep himself soberly in this great dignity but went about to deprive us of
our kingdom and our life, with many foul deceipts, also has desired to
destroy Mardocheus our preserver which has done us good in all things, and
innocent Hester the partaker of our kingdom with all her Nation, for his mind
was, when he had taken them out of the way then to lay wait for us; and by this
means to translate the kingdom of the persians unto them of the Macidonia,
Est. 16. So this for Hamans practice and treachery against his Sovereign was
hanged on a Gallows that he prepared for Mordecai, Est. 7. and this ensued in
Haman.


F. The like ensued Shimei the son of Gera, Adoniah and Joab, for Shimei was of
the house of Saul, and he cursed king David when he came to Bahurim and threw
stones against him, and his men af War, and cast dirt, 2 Samuel 16. and Adoniah
exalted himself saying, I will be king: and she gate him Charets and Horsemen
and fifty men to run before him, 1 Kings 1. and Joab he took part and
counseled with Adoniah. As Achithophel did with Absalom whereby Shimei,
Adoniah and Joab perished under king Solomon, by the hand off Benaiah the son
of Jehoida, whom Solomon sent, and so he smote them that they dyed, 2 Kings 2.
of these therefore as of the residue thou have already mentioned my son; of
what were their actions and what were their ends, whose examples verily may
suffice, that how precious in the sight of the Lord, is the Lords anointed, in
whose confusions, for their imahinations, cursed speakings and evil doings
against the Princes of the Nations so unnaturaly that no question can be made
but the very finger of God had a stroke on them, so precious were the Lords
anointed then, and so precious be they still. Now let me hear thy prayer to
make thy benefit of these Examples and so I rest satisfied.

Son, thus I pray in thy behalf.

A prayer to make benefit of example.
Whatsoever is written, O Lord, is written for our learning; grant me therefore
thy humble servant grace, that by inspiration of thy holy Spirit, the examples
I have learned, and all other examples may be profitable to me; so shall my
heart be set on the Governors of Israel, thine Anointed CHARLES, O Lord, our
supreme Head and Governor; let my tongue be a fountain of sweet water, and
evermore remembering thy holy scepter, and the scepter that rules me. Let me
sing, O Lord, as David prayed with heart and mouth for the prosperous estate of
the Kingdom of Solomon, on this wise.

Psalm 72.
Lord, give thy Judgments to the King
therein instruct, him well;
and with his son that princely thing,
Lord, let thy mercy dwell:
That he might govern uprightly,
and rule thy folk aright;
and so defend with equity,
the poor that have no might.
And let the Mountains that are high,
unto the folks give peace:
and eke the little hills apply
in justice to increase.
That he might help the weak and poor
with aid and make them strong:
and eke destroy for evermore
all those that do them wrong.
And then from age to age shall they
regard and fear thy might:
so long as son does rule by day,
or else the moon by night.
Lord, make the King unto the just
like rain to fields new mown:
and like to drops that lay the dust,
and fresh the land new sown.
The just shall flourish in his time,
and all shall be at peace:
until the Moon shall leave to prime,
wast change and to increase.
He shall be Lord of sea and land,
from shore to shore throughout:
and from the floods within the same,
throughout the earth about.
The people that in desert dwell,
shall kneel to him full thick:
and all his enemies that rebel,
the earth and dust shall lick:
The lords of all the Isles thereby
great gifts to him shall bring:
The kings of Seba and Arabie
give many a costly thing.
Here ends the first part.
The conclusion of the last Verses and the second part of this psalm.
Praise ye the Lord of hosts and sing
to Isreal's God each one:
which have restored our gracious King
with his right hand alone.
Then blessed be his holy name,
all times eternally:
that all the earth might praise the same,


Amen, Amen say I.



Here ends the Dialogue.
A prayer by order of the Church for the Kings most excellent Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty King of kings and Lord of Lords,
the only Ruler of princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon the earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our
most gracious sovereign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace
of thy holy spirit, that he may always incline to thy will and walk in thy
way: endue him plentifully with heavenly gifts; grant him in health and wealth
long to live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies:
and finally, after this life, he may attain everlasting joy and felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.



A prayer to the holy Trinity for the general estate of Christ's Church.
O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us; we beseech thee to hear us prosper and bless, preserve and keep the
holy Catholic Church, despersed over the face of the earth; and especially
the Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland, the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Ministers of Gods holy will and Sacraments, as well Archbishops as
other pastors and Curates; the Kings most honorable Council, and the Nobility
and Commons of this Realm, that they may live in true faith and zeal of their
allegiance and humble obedience to the prince, and in christian love and
charity one toward another, that from the highest to the lowest, both prince
and people, may with one heart and mouth, in one truth, and in peace, unity and
concord, confess, praise, and bless thee, God the Father unbegotten, God the
Son only begotten, God the Holy Ghost the Comforter, an holy and inseparable
Trinity, to thee the glory world without end. Amen.



FINIS.

