A SHORT BUT FULL DISCOVRSE Of the POWER of PARLIAMENTS: AND How far their
entrusted power may extend.

AS ALSO The great Interests of the KING therein, acknowledged heretofore in
all Ages.

SENT From the ARMY to a worthy Friend in London, and written there by a learned
Divine, who upon some high Employments has been conversant late amongst them.

Printed in the Year 1647.

A short discourse of the power of Parliaments written in a letter from the
Army to his noble friend in London, by a well-willer to Parliaments.
IT is not with me, (noble Sir) as with many in these times, who only study to
make a wicked thing seem good, by clothing it in a garb of the newest fashion,
and strive to cover a false heart with an eloquent (though flattering) tongue;
but all I shall endeavor in this discourse, is to set forth truth in
sincerity, even in its natural colors, and not cloth it with a painted
eloquence; only that it may not be known. To come to purpose, I must entreat
your patience, while I present to your view a rough drawn Map, discovering the
jurisdiction of the high Court of Parliament.

But first I shall do my endeavor to satisfy them that hold hold the House
of Lords to be only interessed; so that the House of Commons may be thought to
make an in-rode upon their privileges: Let those know, that anima est tota in
toto and teta in qualibet part: and judicature is the soul of this great
compacted body: the times were when both Houses sat in one place, and had one
Speaker: And since the power of judicature must be founded upon a preparatory
impeachment, and that must be framed by the Commons House, we may justify them
not guilty of extrajudiciall proceedings.

The Lords are under his Majesty the chief, but the Commons must be admitted
for members; and the help of those does much advantage the preservation of the
whole compound. Having thus cleared this objection, and shown that the Commons
House has a power of judicature, let us proceed to see how far it will extend:
For the better effecting of it, I think it first necessary to give a
description or definition of them, which in brief is this.

The House of Commons is neither more nor less then the Representative body of
the people elected and sent up by the several Shires and Burroughes
respectively, (and joined with the other two estates) are of capacity to make,
alter, and abrogate laws as occasion shall require, to hear and relieve the
grievances of the people, and to reform what is amiss in the Common wealth.

In this description you may plainly see two bodies of the people, the
Representative and Represented, which together make up the body of the
Commonwealth: Of the latter, every freeborn Englishman is a member. Now for
any man to imagine, that the shadow is more worthy then the substance; the
Representative then the Represented; or the House of Commons to be more
valuable or considerabl, then the body for whom they serve, is all one as if
they should affirm, that an Agent or Ambassador from a Prince, has the same
or more authority then the Prince himself, which I presume no rational man
will allow. I assure you, that in this I go not about to raise division
between the people and their Agents: for they should be linked together by
common interest, and mutual respect of common preservation; yet thus much I
cannot forbear to intimate, that the one is but a servant of the other: the
Commons House to the people, as being elected by them to provide for their
welfare and freedoms against all inbred tyranny, or foreign invasion;
which by reason of their number they cannot do conveniently in their own
persons, without hazard both of confusion and desolation. Thieves and murderers
taken in flagrante delicto, in the very act of a heinous crime, are not more
hardly dealt withal; for the cause is declared before they are committed.

Object. Some may say, How shall we mend our selves since we have given our
selves, lives and liberties, properties and all into the Parliaments power?

Answ. It is answered, that this free and abandoned course of ours, whereby
they are entrusted with all that is dear unto us, ought rather to oblige them
to a tender and conscientious care of the dispensation of that power: For the
Sovereign and Legislative power (now used) is not lent them for the ruin and
destruction of our laws and liberties, but for edification and strengthening
of the same in particular: and the abuse and overflowing of this power is
odious to God and man, as degenerating, and Viper-like tearing out the bowels
of them, who gave them power, only to attain to some ambitious ends.

Object. Yes but some will say, the Parliament have a power above the Law, and
so cannot exceed or overflow.

Answ. I answer, they have no power but what they derive from others: Now no
man can give that to another which himself has not: for it is an old and most
certain Maxim, That quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale. Now the King from
whom they do and ought to derive all the power they have, if it be above the
Law, surely his is much more above the Law, though he acknowledges the contrary
even now. For it is a sure Axiom, that Dignitas materiati desumitur ex
dignitate materiae. Besides, did ever any man see in this (or indeed in any
other) Kingdom, a Parliament called without the Kings Writ and peculiar
command, by the people or Kingdom they so much talk of? And being summoned by
his Writ, they come to consult and give him counsel, not to control or
command him. Nay, their power is so far from being above Law, that they have
not power to make a law without the Kings consent. Nay further yet, without the
Kings additional power they are like so many ciphers without a figure, which
have no value, are of no force.

In the tenth year of Rich. the 2. a Parliament was called to sit at
Westminster, which gave the King some discontent, insomuch that he went away
from them, but he had not been long absent, when the Lords and Commons sent
Commissioners to him, to desire him to return. For (said they) if your Majesty
should absent your self 40. days, we should be forced absque domigere regis,
to return to our own homes. Heu! quantum mutatus ab illo?

It is an excellent Maxim, and worth observation in these lawless times,
melius sub iniquissima lege, quam sub aequissimo arbitrio vivere. It is better
to live under a rigorous and unjust law, then an arbitrary government, though
just; the reason is, because by the first he is at a certainty, and knows what
to trust to; the later leaves him uncertain in or to all things, but only
danger.

The English Nation is sensible of nothing more then the breach of their
liberties, the violence offered to the freedom of their persons, and unjust
and illegal impositions upon their estates, witness Magna Charta 30, times
confirmed by the Princes of this Island. Let no man dream then that the Prince
may trench boldly thereon without check: for such conceit does but aggravate
the offense. For whatsoever devoureth his own kind, we justly account
unnatural; and heart-burning is easily kindled, when our own fellows begin to
dominiere over us. Firmissimum Imperium, quo obedientes gaudent; that
government under which the people rejoice, and live cheerfully, is most safe
and durable.

It is a sad case that a member of the body represented, a freeborn subject, of
life and conversation without just exception, should contrary to the tenor of
Magna Charta, contrary to the Petition of Right, yea and Scripture it self,
should be imprisoned without showing cause (as many have been) by a Parliament
professing reformation professing defense of laws and liberties, and without
any urgent or apparent necessity of State enforcing it, it is a riddle to me
beyond any thing this monstrous and degenerate age has brought forth. Those
Rulers and Rules of justice at first ordained for our comfort, preservation and
liberty, are now perversely wrested to enslave, ruin and destroy. Surely, when
after Ages shall ponder and discuss this proceeding in cold and sober blood,
in a deliberate and rational consideration, they will be ashamed to own the
actors for their Parents or predecessors; nay, it is to be feared, that the
stones out of the now modest walls, will rise in judgment one day against the
abusers of the trust committed to them, much dishonor will arise to the
Parliament in the breach of the known law Magna Charta, which they say is but
suspended not abrogated, that they provide for generations, and have not time
to attend particular grievances. This may satisfy men of a shallow capacity,
and small understanding, or such as suck profit under their commands. None but
the mad would yield obedience to them that are regardlesse of their laws and
liberties, or negligent of the means of their subsistence, lively hood and
safety, the main ends for which they were convened, and not to provide Offices
for themselves. Omne imperium in co^sensu and assensis parentium fundatur, all
lawful Empire, or Sovereign command has its basis or foundation in the
consent, approbation and good liking of the people. Is any so absurd to expect
good liking from those who daily see themselves abused in their persons,
liberties or estates, nay almost ruined in all, hopel^sse of ^edresse or
remedy, when no petition from few hands or many wi^^ b^e accepted, without
great friends in the House, so that there wa^^s but a good occasion to be
tendered for the delivery of them from that condition under which they mourn and
sigh. For men touched to the quick in their liberties and means of living, do
naturally incline to shake off all ^onds of obedience, and to cast the blame of
their sufferings upon the authors, as false to their trust, judging them
incapable of the great weight of authority committed to them; and being stung
with a lively sense of their lost freedoms and means of subsisting, will by
some sudden attempt, endeavor the repairing thereof, the most ill that can
happen cannot reduce them to a worse condition then they are in.

I cannot but be very sensible that I have incurred the misfortune to fall
under the misapprehensions of diverse, who cut of the premi^es will conclude I
go about to alienate all men from the Parliament but knowing my own integrity
that I am altogether clean from the guilt of such a thought, I pass by them
as not worth the taking notice of, much less the answering and only make the
Apollogy for my self, as one lately did, I will as near as I can remember,
do it in his own words.

I must confess it is no way pleasing to me to dispute the power either of a
King or of a Parliament, but had I fortunes of mine own; so far as those
would reach, I would not urge propriety against my Sovereigns commands, and no
man ought to complain of my grievance but my self: and if I were content to
loss that which the Subjects liberty calls meum, I hope it is no prejudice to
that it calls trum. But when I look on the general cause (as at this time) it
is otherwise: therefore I hold every man bound to lay particular cases aside,
and sacrifice his best indevours, for a timely composure of these general and
unseasonable distractions, and the best way I could think on, is this, viz.
Neither for private ends on the one side, to flatter the King, by giving him
more power then the Law has settled in him, nor for by-respects on the other
side, to abate the Kings due, and give it to the Parliament; but with
Allegiance to the one, and submission to the other (as near as I can) give unto
both their rights.

Having therefore spoken thus much, I cannot but say something of the Kings
power, although, as I said before, it is no pleasing Subject. See what King
James says: Kings are not only Gods Lieutenants upon earth, and sit upon Gods
Throne, but by God himself they are called Gods. If Kings be Gods Lieutenants,
they have their power of God, and they that resist the power or Ordinance of
God, receive to themselves damnation Romans 13. But you may see this better
explained by King James. Kings are justly called Gods; for that they exercise a
manner or resemblance of Divine power upon earth, if you will confider the
attributes of God, you shall see how they agree in the person of a King. God
has power to destroy or create, make or unmake at his pleasure, to give life
or send death, to judge all, and to be judged or accountable to none, to raise
low things, and to make high things low at pleasure, and to God are both soul
and body due: The like power have Kings, they make and unmake their Subjects,
they have power of raising and casting down, of life and death, Judges over all
the Subjects, and in all causes, yet accountable to none but God only. They
have power to exalt low things, and abase the high, and make of their Subjects
like men at the Chesse, a Pawn to take a Bishop or a Knight, and to cry up or
down any of their Subjects as they do their money, and to the King is due both
the affections of the Soul, and the service of the body of their Subjects.

But now in these our times, we must distinguish between the state of Kings in
their first original, and between the state of settled Kings and Monarchs that
govern in civil Kingdoms. In the first original of Kings some had their
beginning by Conquest, and some by election of the people: yet so soon as
Kingdom^s began to be settled in civility and policy, then did they ^et down
their minds by Laws (which are properly made by the King only) but at the
request of the people, the Kings Gr^nt being obtained thereunto (for of old Le
Roy^s' avisera was sufficient to dash all the indevours of the Commons.)

To conclude this point with King James his own words, touching the power of
Kings; It is an axiom in Divinity, that to dispute what God may do is
blasphemy, but q^id vult Deus the divines may lawfully and do frequently
dispute and discuse, for to dispute a posse ad esse is both Logic and
divinity, so it is sedition in Subjects to dispute what a King may do in the
height of his power. But just Kings will ever be willing to declare what they
will do, and to make and execute good Laws.

Give me leave to proceed a little farther to plough with his Heifer (pardon
the expression.) We have more good Laws than are well executed (y^^ (...)
gif^s of Parliaments, who are ordained for making of Laws, and therefore their
in^^itution ought not to be abused, in holding them for any men's particulars,
for is a parliament is the honourablest and highest judgment in the land (as
being the Kings head Court) if it be well used, which is by making of good
Laws i^ it: So it (...) the unjustest judgement-Seate that may be, being
abused to m^ns particulars, irr^vo^^ble decrees against particular parties
being given therein under color of general laws and oftentimes the States
not knowing themselves whom they hurt: And therefore no Parliaments ought to be
holden ^u^^ or necessity of new Laws, which would be but seld^m^: for few Laws
and well put in execution are best to a well ruled Commonwealth.

Thus have I endeavored to the utmost extent of my poor power to give you
satisfaction in your demands, which I have done in as moderate a manner as I
could possibly devise, insomuch that I hope I shall displease none (if it have
the illuck to be seen in public.) I would now certify you of some news
(but not reiterated or frivolous) only the intricate closeness in the
management of affairs hinders me, for I am altogether amazed and astonished, as
not knowing how to understand any thing for it must be another Oedipus that
will unfold this Sphynx; but I pray God to divert his judgments that hang over
our heads, that these clouds may not rain down on us another shoure of blood.
God in mercy look upon this poor distracted Land and send a happy and speedy
union, that all differences may cease, and war may no more be heard in our
Gates, that all good men will seek grace and ensue it: Let Achitophels plot
and council mischeifs, let Sanballats mock, let Rabshekas rail and blaspheme
and seducers every day wax worse and worse, yet magna est veritas and
praevalebit: the ways of the wicked though for a time they may prosper, yet
they shall never be blessed.

Sir, being infinitely obliged to you, and honoring you much for your worth and
excellent parts, cursorily and heartily, I have written this in answer to your
demands, not intending thereby to reprove or revile, or derogate from any
power, but only to lay open that all the World may know how far the entrusted
power will extend; and if this give you any satisfaction, I have what I desire,
If you doubt of the truth of any thing, I hope I am able to make all here good
by faithful and authenticke Records, or Testimony of such as are worthy of
trust.

I pray you keep it for your own use only, for I should be loath any but a
friend see it, it is so rudly done, but I dare say truly and faithfully. Thus
praying earnestly to God for a happy and sweet c^m^osure of these miserable
distractions and differences, desiring you that at your leisure you would be
pleased to let me hear from you, and that you would send me the news of your
parts. I remain.

July 20. 1647. Your poor friend and obliged Servant.

FINIS.

