A New SURVEY OF THE Justice of Peace HIS OFFICE.

Wherein is briefly, yet clearly opened the several Parts thereof: And what
one, or more Justices of Peace may do therein, in, or out of the Sessions of
the Peace, by all the Laws made to this Day; and now in force.

With the Names, or Times, of the Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances themselves,
relating to this Office.

Alphabetically set down under apt Titles.

By W. S. Sergeant at Law.

LONDON: Printed by J. S. and are to be sold in Fleet Street, the Temple, and
Holburn. 1659.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere is a little Piece on this Subject made by one (as I am informed) That is
dead, of which there has been several Editions: And being earnestly Entreated
to make some Additions to it, especially of the New Laws that has come forth
since that time; The which while I considered thereon, I concluded within my
self, That the Labor would not be much more to make a New Book, by way of an
Abridgement, to all the Larger Volumes: For the Office of a Justice of Peace
being Large, and the Books that have been writ on that Subject so numerous,
that those who have much other business Incumbent on them, will not have
leisure to read those Larger Treatises. There are some things very obscure,
Therefore I have digested this small Piece for a more Compendious and plain
help therein, Observing this Method in it, That in things which happen but
seldom, I am very short, and do only refer to the Laws themselves that give
directions about them; But in those things that are Common, and of daily use to
the Justices of Peace, I am more Exact, and Full. At the latter end of this
Work, you shall meet with Certain Questions and their Answers; which will be of
very great Concernment and use. And so I shall send this amongst you, after the
rest of my former Pieces, and desire to continue

Your true Friend, W. S.

CHAP. I. Of some things necessary to be known for the better understanding of
this Work.
FOr the better understanding of this whole WORK, we must know,

1. That which we shall do in this whole Work, is, 1. To say a little to the
general power of the Justices of the Peace. 2. To show what the Justices of
Peace may do out of the Sessions of the Peace. 3. What they may do in their
Sessions of the Peace. 4. What they may do, in or out of the Sessions of the
Peace. 5. What they may not do, in or out of the Sessions of the Peace.

2. By that which we say may be done by one Justice of the Peace, we inteud
that it may also be done by two or more Justices of the Peace. And so by that
which may be done by two, that it may also be done by three or more Justices of
the Peace.

3. Where we say, A thing may be done by two or more Justices; there it cannot
be done by fewer then that number.

4. When we say, That it is requisite to the doing of a thing by the Justices,
that one or two of them that do it, be of the Quorum, then it cannot be done by
others.

5. Where we say, That one or more Justices of the Peace may do a thing, we do
hereby intend also, that he or they ought, and it is his or their duty, to do
it. And it may be expected from him or them if it be required; and he or they
may in one way or other be blamed for his or their not doing of it. And wherein
we say, He is commanded, or ought to to do, or must do, or is to do, such a
thing; by this we intend also, That he may and has power to do the same thing.

6. Where we say, One, or two Justices may do a thing, and do not add, (and
one of them of the Quorum), there we intend, that any Justices, whether of the
Quorum, or not of the Quorum may do it.

7. Where we say, Justices of Peace have power to do a thing; there we intend,
That not only the Justices of the Peace of Counties, have power to do the
Mayors, Bailiffs, etc.
same thing within their Counties; but that Mayors, and other Head-Officers
also that are Justices of the Peace within Cities, etc. may do the same thing
within their Cities, etc.

8. Where we say, The Conviction is Conviction. Confession.
to be by the Confession of the party, or by Confession only; by this we mean,
the Confession of the party offending. Where we say, It is to be by view; by
View.
this we mean the view, or sight of the Justice of the Peace himself. Where we
say, the Conviction must be by proof of Witness, we do not intend by this,
Witness.
that it must be by proof of Witness upon Oath; unless we so express it.

9. Where we speak of a Warrant, Warrant.
that the Justice or Justices of the Peace may make; and say not, what kind of
Warrant, or to whom it shall be directed, we do generally intend a Warrant in
Writing under the hand and seal of the Justice or Justices of the Peace. And
that it be directed to the Constable, Tything-man, or other Officer of the
place. And where we say, That the warrant is to be sent to the Constable, and
no more, we do by this generally intend the Constable of the place where the
offender dwells.

10. Where we speak of sale of goods, Rendering, etc.
rendering, etc. and say no more, we do by this intend, That the Officer is to
prze and sell the goods Distrained, and to keep up so much of the money as the
Forfeiture is, and return the overplus to him that did owe the goods.

11. Where we say, Levied by his or His or Their.
their Warrant, we do intend hereby the Warrant of the Justice or Justices of
the Peace.

12. Where we say, The Justices Where etc.
where, etc. or the poor where, etc. and no more, we do hereby intend, the
Justices of the County, or the poor of the place where the offense is
committed. But where we say, the Justices or the Poor, where or where, etc. by
this we Where or where, etc.
do generally intend, that the case is such, That the Warrant must be penned
and directed according to the Act which sometimes is meant of the Justices of
the County, and poor of the place where the offender does live, or is first
apprehended. And sometimes where the offender does live, or the offense is
done. In this case the Statute must be looked into.

13. Where we say, That the Forfeiture shall go to the use of the poor, Poor.
etc. and say not what poor; we do generally intend the poor of the place where
the offense is committed.

14. Where we say an offender is to be punished, to be convicted, or the
penalty Before, or In the last.
levied, or the offender disabled, etc. [as before, or as in the last]; we do
by this intend, that the proceeding against the offender is in that offense, as
it is directed to be done for that offense which went last before it.

15. Where we set down times of the Kings and Queens; as 1 Iac. 27. 43 Eliz. 2.
and times of the year of the Lord; as 6 April, 1654. and the like; By this we
mean the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament set forth in those days and times,
which by search may by this light be found out.

16. Where the Justice does intend to act any thing upon any one Head, our
advice is, that he read it through before he do it.

CHAP. II. Of the Power of Justices of the Peace in the general.
AS to this Point, Of the Power of the Justices of the Peace in general, these
things are to be known:

1. That the Power that the Justices How derived to them.
of the Peace have, is given to them partly by, and from the Commission of the
Peace, and therein by the Common Law. And partly, by certain Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament. And some of it is conversant about Criminal matters
for the restraint, and punishment of diverse offenses. Some of it is about other
things necessary to be done in the Commonwealth, and for the better ordering
of the County; as for the making of Officers, settling of Rates, and the like.
By their Commission of the Peace, they are authorized to look to the Peace of
the County, to punish according to the Law those that break it, require and
take Surety of the Peace of all such as threaten hurt to others in their
bodies, or to burn their houses, and send to Gaol such as refuse to give
Surety. And to punish many offenses tending to the breach of the Peace. Some
offenses that are offenses by the Common Law, and some by the Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament. Some of which Acts and Ordinances have made new
offenses, and have given the Justices power to punish them. And some of these
also give them power to punish offenses that were offenses by the Common Law in
a higher degree, or in a greater measure than they were punished before by the
Common Law.

2. This power is over all persons Over whom it is.
within the County, Except their Fellow-Justices, and the persons that live in
such places within the County, that are exempt, having Justices within
themselves.

3. This power the Justice of Peace may exercise and execute, part of it, as
What they may do out of their county.
to take Informations against offenders, to prove offenses done in the County
where they are committed, or to take the Oath of a man robbed, whether he know
the parties that robbed him or not; or to take a Recogn^sance by Supplicavit,
or the like, in any place out of his County; where also he may take a
Recognizance to prosecute, if any man will voluntarily give it. But he cannot
exercise any coercive power; as to commit a Felo^, make an order, about a
Bastard, comm^t to prison for any offense, or the like in any place out of his
own County, whe^ein he is Justice of Peace. Hellier's Case. 7. Car. B. R. Sir
George Croke Report. 153.

4. Some of these things wherein they Where it is to be Acted.
have Conus^nce, may be done out of, and some of them must be done in, the
Sessions of the Peace for the County, and cannot be done elsewhere.

5. That which is to be done in the What they may do together, and asunder.
Sessions of the Peace, may generally be done by two Justices of the Peace, one
of them being of the Quorum. But there are some few things by certain Acts of
Parliament that cannot be done there but by more then two Justices.

6. The things to be done out of the Sessions, may some of them be done by one,
some by two, and some by more Justices of the Peace, and cannot be done by
sewer.

7. Where sewer Justices of Peace in or out of the Sessions have power to do a
thing, there regularly more Justices of the Peace may do the same thing in the
same way, and in the same place. Yet see Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 30.

8. That which one, two, or three Justices of the Peace may do out of the
Sessions of the Peace, regularly, the same thing in the same (but not in
another) way, may by the same number of Justices of the Peace, be done within
the Sessions of the Peace.

9. Where a thing is ^^ be done by the Justices, with the assent of others,
neither of them alone without the other may do this thing.

10. What a private man, or Inferior Officer of the Peace may do, in order to
the keeping of the peace; that doubtless a Justice of Peace may do.

11. Any one Justice of Peace in the execution of his Office; as to apprehend
Posse Comitatus.
Felons, keep the peace, or the like, may require the Assistance of what able
men he pleases. And those required, must assist him; or they may be punished
for Refusal.

12. For any thing the Justices do out of the Sessions, they are liable to a
suit for the same, as another man is. But for such Acts as are done in a
Sessions way, as Acts of the Court, they are not liable to a Suit. But any man
that is grieved thereby, may upon his Appeal to the Upper-Bench, have Relief
there, and avoid such Acts.

But we shall open this Power now by the particulars thereof. And first in what
they may do out of, and then in what they may do in their Sessions of the
Peace. And first of the first.

CHAP. III. Of the Power of one or more Justices of the Peace out of the
Sessions.
SECT. 1. About Armor; and Armed Men.
AS to Armor and Armed-men, these things are to be known:

1. That any one Justice of Peace, if he see men go, or ride armed in an
unusual way, (with secret Coats of Maile, Daggs, Pistols, or the like) by day,
or by night, to the terror of the people; he may, if he think fit, and ought
(if he judge it necessary to be done) to cause them to be disarmed, imprisoned,
and bound to the Peace. But Sheriff's Soldiers.
Soldiers, and Officers, in the doing of Justice, may go armed, and are not to
be interrupted. Upon Stat. of Northhampton. 2. Ed. 3.

2. Any Justice may (if he see cause) cause to be disarmed any man that is
brought before him upon any Suspicion of Crime.

3. If any man keep in his house, carry in his Journey, or do shoot in any Guns.
Gun, Crosse-bow, Stone-^ow, or Pistol, contrary to 33 H. 8. 6. And another man
shall according to that Act bring him before a Justice of Peace; The Justice of
Peace may by that Law, upon examination of the offender himself, and proof of
Witness, commit the offender to Goal, till he pay the penalty of 10 l. Escheat:
And this fine the Justice is to extreat and send into the Exchequer. But if
any Caution to Justices.
Justice shall resolve upon the doing of any thing, upon this Branch, our
Counsel is, that he do it by very good advice; especially in case where the
offender does deny the matter of Fact.

4. For the disarming of Recusants, ^ee Recusants. Sect. 45. of this Chapter.

SECT. 2. About Bail or Bailment.
AS to this, these things are to be known:

1. Any one Justice of Peace may ^ad or deliver out of prison, any p^^soner
that is a prisoner for any offense within the Connus^nce of the Justices of the
Peace, and that is baylable by the Law; as, where a man is arrested on a
Sessions process for Trespass, or such like thing. But no one Justice may bayl
a man in Felony.
prison on a suspicion of Fclony, or greater Crime. 3 Ed. 1. 15.

2. But there must be two or three Justices of the Peace, and one of them of
the Quorum, to Bayl such as are in prison upon a suspicion of Felony. And they
two must be together when they do it. And before they do it, they must take the
Examination of the prisoner in writing. And this Examination, with the Bayl and
Recognizances for the appearance of the Witnesses, they must certify to the
next Jail-deliver; or they Certificate.
may be fined by the Judges. And so they may be, for bayling a man not caution
to Justices.
bailable. 2 Mar. 13. 3 H. 7. 3.

3. No Justices may bayl one in prison for Treason, or for the death of a man,
or for any great offense, in case where he does confess the offense, and the
Mittimus of the Justice or Justices of Peace by which he is sent to Gaol, does
so express it.

4. No Justice may bayl a prisoner in any case, where any Law does expressly
forbid the taking of Bayl in that case. 1 and 2 Ph. and M. 13.

5. Where any Statute does appoint the Bail to be taken by more Justices then
one; there no one Justice may bayl the prisoner. 3 H. 7. 3. 2 Mar. 13.

6. Where two Justices may bayl one that has recanted his blasphemous
opinions. See Blasph^my.

7. How Bayl is to be given, and the Recognizance to be given in such cases,
See my Justice of Peace Clerk's Cabinet. Chap. 24.

SECT. 3. About Bargain and Sale.
ANy one Justice may join with the Clerk of the Peace, to take, and inroll a
Deed of Bargain and Sale of Land acknowledged before them within six months.
Upon 27 H. 8. 16.

SECT. 4. About binding to the good Behavior.
AS to persons of ill Name and Fame, Suspect-Theeves.
such as are generally suspected to be Thieves or Robbers, or that keep company
with such men. Common Cheaters or Couzeners, that get money Cheaters.
by false Tokens, false Dice, counterfeit Letters, or the like.
Common-Quarrellers, Fighters, or Breakers of the Common-Quarrellers.
Peace. Such as are like to commit Murder, or outrage. Such as are common
Libellers and Slanderers. Such as Libellers and Slanderers. Poysoners.
are common hedge-breakers, and woodstealers. Such as endeavor to poison men,
or do poison Cattle, or the like. Such as lie in wait to rob, maime, or kill
men: Rioters, Common-Drunkards, Rioters. Drunkards
(as some say) yet see for this, 4 Iac. 5. which as to the Drunkard makes it a
little doubtful. Lewd and incontinent persons, that either keep or Incontinent
persons. Eves-droppers. Barretors. Night-walkers.
haunt Bawdy-houses. One that has or is suspected to have a Bastard. Common
Evesdroppers, common Night-walkers. Common-Barrettors. Persons that live idly
and into dinately, having no Esture nor Calling to live by, and yet spend much.
Such as manifest contempt of Magistrates, and such like persons. And any one
Justice of Peace may (as it is generally held, and practiced) upon his own
knowledge, and of his own head, or at the request of others, and upon
Information of Witnesses upon Oath, as in his discretion he shall judge it
meet, send his Warrant to apprehend them, and bring them before him, or some
other Justice of the Peace, to put in Sureties for their good Behavior, and
Surety of the good Behavior.
to appear at the next Sessions. And if the offender be in his presence,
require him to put in such Surety as the Justice shall think meet. The which if
he will not, or cannot do; the same Justice may by his Mittimus send him to the
Common Gaol till he so do. But in all these cases it is most safe for the
Justices to go upon generals, and not upon a particular. And it is good for
Justices of the Peace to have this work (as much as may be) Caution to the
Justices.
done upon Articles exhibited, and well proved. And before two Justices of the
Peace; and indeed most safe to do it in the public Sessions. But for this,
see the Books at large, and my Books of this Office, Chap 18.

For a Warrant for the good Behavior, and Mittimus to send the party refusing
to be bound, to the Goal, see Clark's Cabinet for Justices, Chap. 9. Numb. 3.
Chap. 25. Numb 3. Chap. 24. Numb. 17.

SECT. 5. About Binding over.
1. IT is said, that in cases where a Justice of Peace has power given him by
an Act of Parliament, to enforce a man to do a thing, and he is in his
presence, and does refuse to do it, That in this case he may send him to the
Goal, or bind him over to the Sessions, etc. And that a Justice of Peace may
bind over a man that is an offender against a penal Law, and that before he is
Indicted. But it is good to be well advised Caution to Justices.
herein, before a man does it; and to consider what he may do to the party, in
case he refuse to be bound.

2. One Justice may bind over to the Challenge.
Sessions him that fights, or is about to fight a Duel. See Challenge.

3. There must be three or more Justices Depravers of the Sacrament.
of the Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, after examination taken against
him that depraveth the Sacrament, to bind over the Accuser and Witnesses. Upon
1 Ed. 6. 1. See more of this in other Titles.

SECT. 6. About Blasphemy and Heresy.
AS to him that maintains any of the blasphemous opinions first named in the
Ordinance of May 2. 1648. That there is no God, or he is not present in all
places, does not know all things, is not Almighty, etc. There must be two
Justices of the Peace, who upon proof thereof before them by the Oath of two
Witnesses, (which the Justices may administer) or the Confession of the party
himself, may commit the offender to prison without Bayl, and bind over the
Witnesses to appear at the next Jail-deliver. And so likewise they may take
bond, with two Sureties, Subsidiemen, of the offender herein, being convicted
upon his Trial, and having renounced his opinion, that he will never hold it
again.

2. And as to the opinions lastly named in this Ordinance, (viz.) That all men
shall be saved, or that man by nature has Free Will to turn to God, or that
God may be worshipped in or by pictures, etc. there must be two Justices of the
Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, who upon the like Conviction as in the
last, may order him to renounce his opinions in the Congregation whence the
complaint came, or where the opinion was held; or if he refuse so to do, to
send him to Gaol till he give bond never to do so again. But here the Justice
must see to it, what it is that he Caution to Justices.
is about to punish. For it is provided by a late Act, That such as profess
faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his eternal Son the true God,
and in the holy Spirit God coequal with the Father and the Son, one God
blessed for ever, and do acknowledge the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament to be the revealed Will and Word of God; and shall in other things
differ in doctrine, discipline, or worship of God; they are not (except in case
of Popery and Prelacy) to be punished for this, but to be protected therein
from wrong or trouble in the exercise of their Religion, while they are
peaceable, and do not hold sorth any horrible blasphemy, or teach or practice
licenciousnesse or prophanoness under the profession of Christ. So 17 Sept.
1656. the Humble Petition. This Clause (it is probable) may reach to many of
the things of this Rank; as that about the Directory, and Directory.
perhaps that of the Baptizing of Infants, and some others. It is good for the
Justice to be well advised therefore what he does upon this.

3. And as to him that maintains any of the blasphemous opinions named in the
Ordinance of Parliament of the 9th of August, 1650. That he is a God, or is
Almighty, Infinite, etc. Any one Justice of Peace may upon the proof thereof by
the Oath of two Witnesses before him, (which Oath he may give) or upon the
confession of it by the party accused, send him to prison, or to the Bridewell.
house of Correction for six months without Bayl, and until he put in Surety
to be of good Behavior for a year. Good Behavior.


See the cabinet for clarks. Two Warrants prepared for this Case. Chap. 3.

SECT. 7. About challenges and Duells.
AS to any that be fighting, or about to fight a Duel, and be for this brought
before a Justice of Peace: this Justice of Peace may for this bind them Surety
of the Peace.
to the Peace, and to appear at the next Sessions. And he may send for the
witnesses, and bind them to appear there Bind over.
also. Upon Ord. June 29. 2654. Confirmed by Act of 17 of September. 1656. See
Chap. 3. Sect. 5.

SECT. 8. About Cheaters, or confiners.
AS to him that is a common Cheater, by false Letters, Tokens, Dyce, or
otherwise, especially if he be idle, and go about and make a Trade of Cozening;
these things are to be known:

1. That any one Justice of Peace upon his own knowledge, or proof thereof
before him, by the Oaths of credible witnesss, may (as some say) put him to
give Surety for the good Behavior, and Good Behavior.
to appear at the next Sessions; or if he refuse, send him to Goal for it.

2. But there must be two Justices (and one of them of the Quorum) to call in,
examine, and bind over to the Bind over.
Sessions; or if they refuse, send to Goal such as by color of false Tokens,
or Counterfeit Tokens.
false Letters in other men's names, shall compass and get into their hands,
the money or goods of other men. Upon 33 H. 8. 1.

3. If a man live at a high Rate, and great expense, having no visible Estate
or Calling to answer it, and make it his Trade and Livelihood to cheat,
deboist, cozen and deceive the young Gentry and others; Any one Justice of
Peace may by Warrant under his hand and seal send for him, and warn him to come
before him; and being before him, may require of him sufficient Sureties for
his Appearance at the next Quarter Sessions, and for his good Behavior; and if
he refuse, send him to Goal till he do so. Upon the New Act. 17 Sept. 1656. But
how the Justice shall take Conusance of this offense, except he come before
him, by this Law, I know not. Therefore it is best, in this case, for him to
proceed upon his general power at the Common Law, and by the Commission of the
Peace, so to take Informations against him upon Oath. And if he find him to be
such a man, to bind him to the good Behavior, and to appear at Sessions. And
this is the same remedy in effect, as that which the Statute does prescribe.

SECT. 9. Of a Church, Churchwardens, Isle, etc.
AS to the Repair of Churches, Churchyards, or Chapels, when they are
decayed, these things are to be known: Reparations of the Church.


1. Any one or more of the Justices of the Peace near to the place where any
Church, or Chapel is in decay, upon any Information thereof, may if he please,
view it himself, or appoint the Minister and some of the Parish to certify to
him how it is, and what Reparations must be done. And then may he or they, by a
Warrant under his or their hands and seals, sent to the Churchwardens of the
place, order and direct what reparations shall be made there, and in, and by
what time. And in case it be not be done by that time, may for their neglect
bind over the Churchwardens Bind over.
to the next Sessions, where they may be fined 40 s. apiece, and committed to
prison till they pay the Fine.

2. But there must be two or more of the Justices near to the place where all
or any part of a Chancel, or Isle, or Church, or other place belonging to it,
that is to be repaired by the Parson, or other, by Custom or Prescription, is
in decay, to order them that are liable to the same Reparations what to do, and
to do the same by a certain day. Which not done, they may be indicted, and
fined for their neglect, at the Sessions.

3. There must be two or more of the next Justices to the place, yearly to join
Churchwardens choice.
with the Parish in their choice of their Churchwardens. And these Justices
must, within a month after their choice made by the Parish, under their hands
and seals, allow and approve of the same Choice.

4. There must be two such Justices Rates confirmed.
to confirm such Rates duly made by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
poor, for the Repair of the Church, Churchyard, and for other matters
concerning the Church. And to give Warrants under their hands and seals to be
directed to the present, or subsequent Churchwardens, to do all or any of
these following things, viz. 1. To levy by distress and sale of goods upon
every man all the Church-Rates, and the Arrears thereof. 2. To levy by distress
and sale of goods, all the Forfeitures committed for any offense within the
Act. 3. To levy all the money that shall be remaining in the hands of any
Churchwarden upon his Account. 4. To levy the 2 s. 6 d. Forfeiture, given to
the Churchwardens that are put to distrain for their Rate on him that will not
pay it without a di^stess. 5. To send to the Goal the party that does not pay
his Rate. 6. To send to the Goal the Churchwarden that does refuse to
account, till he do account and pay over Account.
to the succeeding Churchwardens the money remaining in his hands. 7. And to
join with the subsequent Churchwardens in the taking of the Account Caution to
the Justices.
of the precedent Churchwardens. But it seems not safe here for a Justice of
Peace to send his Warrant to levy any Forfeiture upon this Law, or to follow
the Presidents we have for this purpose given in our clarks cabinet, because
there is no way for the Conviction of the offender set down, and therefore that
then it must be in the Sessions, or no where. And there the offender may be
punished by way of Indictment or presentment, upon the general power of Oyer
and Terminer given by the Act to the Justices of the Peace.

5. There must be two Justices, and Lands given to the Church.
any two Justices may examine by proof of Witnesses the case of Lands or Rents
to be had, or paid toward the repair of any Churches within any Parish; And to
send their Warrant to the Churchwardens of the place, to cause the parties who
ought to pay the same to be bound over to the next Sessions, where Bind over.
the parties are to be ordered. And in this case it seems to me, that the
clearest way for the Justice of Peace, is to send his Warrant first of all to
the Churchwardens, to warn the party to be bound (if he live within the
County) to come before him to be bound over. And if he refuse upon proof by
Oath thereof by way of Information, to send for him by his Warrant, and bind
him to the Good Behavior.
good Behavior, and to appear at Sessions. See for all this, Act. 9. February,
1647. And sor Presidents of Warrants in the case. The clarks cabinet. Chap. 8.

6. There must be three Justices of the Peace, who out of Sessions may call
Ministers and Schoolmasters before them, that have Houses, Chancels, and
Churchyards belonging to them that are in decay, and to order them to repair
them. And if they do neglect it, to cause to be levied of their goods by way of
distress, and sale thereof so much as to do it. Upon Ord. 29 August, 1654.

7. Any two Justices of the Peace may Sexton.
order the payment of the due Fees to the Sexton, or Parish-Clerk, that is duly
chosen to the place. And where his Fees are denied, they may order the payment
thereof; and in case it be not paid, they may send their Warrant to the
Constable, to levy it as they do for the levying of a Church-Rate, what he
shall have for his service. Upon the same Act. 9. February, 1647. See a
President for this in the cabinet. Ch^p. 8. Numb. 9. And that seems to be all
that a Justice of Peace may safely do herein, (that is) call the party refusing
before him, and examine the matter; and if he find it ve: y clear, order the
party to pay him. And if he show himself obstinate herein, the party grieved he
must apply himself to the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions,
where they may by the general power of Oyer and Te^miner given to them by the
Act, find a way to bring him to it. Or if the case be so clear, that the party
shall consesse before the Justice what is due; there perhaps the Justice might
cause a distress to be made of his goods, as in case of a distress for a
Church-Rate: But it Caution to the Justices.
is good to be well advised: for the Law is very obscure herein. And it is
dangerous for a Justice of Peace so to do, where he has not a clear authority
for it.

SECT. 10. About Cloth and Clothiers.
AS to Cloth and Clothiers, and to the things that relate to their Trade, this
is to be known:

1. Any one Justice of Peace may enter Tenters, Winches.
into any house to search for Tenters, Winches, and such kind of Engines used
to make deceitful Cloth; and finding them, he may deface them: And in case of
second offense, he may sell them. And he with another Justice of Peace may join
together, and distribute the money, made thereby to the poor. 39 Eliz. 20. 43
Eliz. 18.

2. There must be two Justices to Special Sessions.
hear and determine the offenses about faulty Cloth. And this (for much of it)
must be done in and by a Special Sessions kept for the purpose. 39 Eliz 20. 21
Iac. 18.

3. There must be two Justices to sell, divide, and distribute the money made
of faulty Broad-Cloth. 39 Eliz. 20. 21 Iac. 18. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. 2. 4 Iac. 2.
And so to sell and divide the money made of Kersies, Frizes, or Cottons, 5 and
6 Ed. 6.

4. There must be two Justices to Searches and Overseers of Cloth.
make and appoint Searchers, and Overseers of Cloth in Towns, not Incorporate,
and to bind them by Oath, and Bond, to look to, and punish the defaults in
Cloath-making. Upon 4 ^d. 4. 1. 39 Eliz 20. 43 Eliz. 10. 2 Ed. 6. 2. 4 Iac. 2.
21 Iac. 28. 5 Ed. 6. 6. 7. Iac. 16. and 3. 1.

5. So there must be two Justices to punish Carders, Weavers, Sorters,
Spinners, that imbesil or detain any Wool or Imbesiling of Wool or Yarn.
Yarn, and to punish them that receive it; and upon proof made thereof before
them, by the oath of one witness to order them to give satisfaction, or to be
whipped. 7 Iac. 7.

6. There must be two Justices, that upon an Officer's Complaint of bad Cloth
made, by the mixing of Flocks, Nails, Thrums, Hairs, etc. may call before them
the parties accused, and their Witnesses; and if they find it true, punish it,
according to 21 Iac. 18.

7. There must be two Justices, and Clothier.
one of them of the Quorum, that upon proof of two Witnesses, or confession of
the Clothier himself, that does refuse to pay his Workman the wages set down,
Wages.
may send their Warrant to levy of him the 10 s. forfeiture, by distress and
sale of his goods. 1 Iac. 6.

8. There must be two such Justices also, that may take Information of
deceitful Linen Cloth.
Linen Cloth made, and that may bind the offender over to the Sessions, to
give Evidence that seized it. 1 Eliz. 12.

9. Any one Justice of Peace upon Dyers. Blockwood.
Complaint, That a Dyer does use Blockwood, or is suspected of it, may call for
the Dyer and his Servants before him, and examine them on oath. And if he see
cause, bind him and the Witnesses over to the next Sessions. And if he refuse
to be bound, send him to Goal till he do it. But there must be two Justices
when it is found, to give power to burn the stuff. 39 Eliz. 11. See more, Ord.
12. November. 1653, and 17 September. 1656.

SECT. 11. About Constables.
AS to these Officers, these things are to be known in this place:

1. It is said, That any one Justice Election of Him.
of Peace, in case of necessity, in a Hundred or Parish, where there is no
Constable for the Hundred or Parish for the present, (the Officer being dead,
or otherwise gone) and the Sessions is far off, no Leet in the place, or it is
far off in the time of keeping of it, much to do for an Officer, and the like;
in such Cases, that one Justice alone may make and swear a Constable for the
Hundred, or Parish. And we would have this to be Law, if we knew how to make it
good, for the necessity thereof in many places where otherwise this Officer
will fail, except it may be supplied by the Country Leet, there being no Leet
in the place. But truly we look upon this as a thing somewhat dangerous to be
done by a Justice of Peace out of Sessions, especially where the Election of
the Officer is for a place that has a Leet, for happily the Election may he
void, and the Lord of the Franchise may have his Action of the Case against
Caution to Justices,
the Justice. So also if an unfit Constable be chosen, that he may after this
way (as has been held and used) be removed by the Justices in, or out of
Remove of him.
Sessions, and another more fit put in his place. So if there be need of more
Constables in any Hundred or Parish, that the Justices out of the Sessions may
make, and swear them. This we agree to be generally practiced, and so seems now
to have the Countenance of Custom to warrant it. And yet we much doubt of
this. And therefore would advise rather to have what is done herein, to be done
in the Sessions only. See Steel's Rep. 362. and Chap. 7. Sect. 6.

2. These Officers are the most proper Officers under the Justices of the
Peace, (as to the matters of the Peace) and to them are their Warrants to be
directed, except it be in special Cases, where by Acts of Parliament they are
to be directed to some others.

3. If any of these Constables show Neglect and Contempt by them.
themselves any way to neglect or contemn the Authority or Commands of these
Justices, or any of them, in the execution of their Warrants or otherwise, such
Justice may cause him to be Indicted and sined for it in the Sessions.

4. If a Justice be to swear this Officer, he may do it to this effect:

You shall swear, you shall well and truly execute the office of High-Constable
His Oath.
of and within the Hundred of H. [or if it be a Parish] of petit constable for
and within the Parish of S.] and liberties thereof, to the best of your power
and skill, until another be chosen in your room, or you be otherwise
discharged by order of Law.

The Warrants for this, see in Clark's Cabinet. Chap. 20.

5. How Constables may offend by not doing their duties in the Execution of
Warrants sent to them, upon penal Laws, and otherwise against the Statutes,
and what the Justices of Peace may do hereupon, See in other Titles; as
Inne-Keepers, Rogues, Lord's Day, Trespasses, etc.

6. See more of this in Officers, Numb 4. Oath, Numb. 10. and in Oath, Sect.
37. Numb. 11.

SECT. 12. Of the correction-House or B^ide-well.
THis House is appointed for the punishment of Rogues, Vagahonds, wandering,
idle, and disorderly persons, that by the express words of 7 Iac. 4. are to be
sent thither by the Justices. But they cannot by this send thither who they
please, nor such persons for every cause.

How the Blasphemous Heretic is by them to be sent thither, see Blasphemy,
Sect. 6. of this Chapter.

And what Rogues and Idle persons may be sent thither by the Justices, of the
Peace out of their Sessions, See Rogues, Vagabonds, and Idle persons. Sect. 48.
of this Chapter.

And what Lewd persons may be sent thither for Incontinency, see Incontinency,
Sect. 27 of this Chapter.

And what Servants or Apprentices may be sent thither, see in Masters and
Servants. Sect. 33. of this Chapter.

And what other persons may be sent thither, see in other Titles.

SECT. 13. About crows.
AS to him that refuses to pay to another that does take old Crows, Choughs,
or Rooks upon his Land, having Land in his occupation worth 5 l. a year, after
the Rate of 2. d. a dozen; It is said, Any one Justice of Peace may cause it to
be levied by distress upon the Goods and Chattels of the Refusers. But how
this may be Caution to Justices.
warranted out of Sessions, I understand not, because there is no way of
Conviction of him for his Refusal, set down. Upon 24 H. 8. 10. The words
whereof are doubtful in this point. See Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Quest. 19.

SECT. 14. About the Excise.
AS to the Vintner, Inne-kepper, Victualler, Ale-house-keeper, or one that
Retailes Ale or Beer, and that shall brew his own Beer or Ale, before he give
security to the Sub-Commssioners of Excise, for the due payment of the Excise.
That upon due proof thereof made by Oath of two or more Witnesses, or other
sufficient Evidence, before any Justice of Peace within any County where the
offender does reside and dwell, the offender shall forfeit for every such
offense, 40 s. for the first, and 3 l. for the second time, to be levied by
distress and sale of goods, rendering, etc. And if he offend after a second
Conviction, the Justices are to declare him disabled to keep any such
Common-house any longer, and to commit him to Goal, till he give security never
so to offend again. And after this, he is to be punished as an unlicensed
Ale-house-keeper. And after the Act is penned in these words, All Justices of
Peace are required and authorized to put this Clause and Article in execution;
and the said penalty is to cause to be paid to the laid Comnissioners of
Excise. Act. 14 August, 1649.

We here conceivem that by these general words thus penned, [they may do
execution] that by this, any one Justice may take the Conviction; and happily one
may send the Warrant to do the Execution: But it will be more warily Caution to
Justices.
done by two Justices. And we suppose he or they may give the Oath for
Conviction, albeit there be no clause to enable it; And that they may make
their Warrant to whom they will, that will undertake to do the Execution. But
we conceive it most proper to be done by the Constable of the place, and
therefore more convenient to make the Warrant to him then to others. See Chap.
7. Sect. 6.

^^ If any Fine be imposed, Imprisonment, ponality, or Forfeiture inflicted, or
seicure of goods be made for, or about the Non-payment of the Excise; by the
Sub-Commissioners, or Farmers thereof, (out of London and the district therens)
or by their Agents, Deputies, or Officers, In this case there must be two such
Justices as are not interessed or concerned in the thing in Question, or
Landlord, or Tenant, or of him or relation to the parties, that must upon
complaint made to them, send their Warrant under their hands and Seal, for the
execution thereof. And these two Justices, if Complaint be made of either side,
may examine the matter upon Oath, and end it. And if they find any error, and
that it is by Mistake only, they may mitigate the Fine, so it be not less
then the one half of what is to be paid; and they may also give reasonable
Costs to the Officer employed in the business, for his trouble therein. Act.
17. September. 1657.

SECT. 15. About Fasting, and Feast-dayes.
AS to this matter of Fast-dayes, and Feast, Festival, or Holy Days, these
things are to be known in this place:

1. That for out Religious days of Days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving.
Humiliation and Thanksgiving, the serving of piocess, the going with Coaches,
Horses, Boats, and Sedans, Tippling and Idling, and the Entertainment of such as
Tipple, or are idle in houses, and grinding at a Mill on such a day, is penal,
Upon the 10th of April, 165^. But there being no way of Conviction for this
upon that Act out of Sessions, there is nothing that the Justice of Peace can
do out of Sessions against any man for the same, or for his doing of his
ordinary ^u^inesse now on a^day of Humiliation or Thanksgiving. And as to the
Ordinances of August 24. 1642, and of December. 2d. 1646, we take them to be of
no use at this day.

2. For the Ancient Festival or Holy Days, Holy-da^es.
called Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, Midsummer, and the like; we ^ake these
to be all abolished, and done away at this day, by the Ordinance for the
Direct^ry and by the Direct^ry it self; and by the Ordinance of 3d. of June,
1647.

3. That the second Tuesday of every Second Tuesday a Play-day.
month is to be a play-day, for recreation of Scholars, Appsentices, and
Servants, by Ord^ 3. June, 1647. And that if any difference be between the
Mastery Apprentice, or Scholar about this, any one Justice of Peace may end it.

4. That the Law for the Observation Lent.
of Lent and Fish-dayes, remains as it was, 5. Eliz. 5. 1^. Eliz. 7. And
therefore if any Justice of Peace shall Fish-dayes
(as he may, if he will) in the Lenttime search any Victualling-house for
Flesh; and if he find any dressed or killed, ^ill three days before Easter, he
may, upon his own sight of it, seize it, and give it to the poor, or to the
prisoners. Upon 1 Iac. 29. 3 Car. 4. 5 Eliz. 5. and 35 7. But there is some
doubt made upon the Continuance of some of these Statutes.

SECT. 16. About Felons and Felonies.
1. Where any Tr^a^^^, (...) any Felony greaten, or lester is committed, by
killing stealing, burning of ^^elling houses, or otherwise, upon the
Common Law, or upon any Statute Law; in all such cases those things are to be
done by the Justices of the Peace out of their Sessions. 1. Any one Justice of
Peace upon Notice, or Report (...) max (...) forth his Warrant under (...) of
(...) Cry, and Search (...) Cry. Search.
(...) the (...) Felon; and if they) (...) him, or one they have good cause to
suspect that he may be the; man, That they do him apprehend, and bring before
(...) Justice of Peace, to be examined theseof. And this he may direct to the
Sheriffs, and to all Constables of (...) Town and place within the Coun^ (...)
For which, see the President in the Clarks Cabinet, Chap. 5. Numb. 6.

2. If the Felony be by the taking away of goods, he may send his Warrant to
send to search in suspicious places Warrant to search.
for the goods stolen; and if he find the goods to secure them, to the end
that the owner may have them; and if the Officer suspect the party in whose
hands the goods are, to bring him to a Justice to be examined. But this Warrant
must be warily and tenderly made Caution to the Justices.
and used. And for this, see in the Clarks Cabinet, Chap. 5. Numb. 1. What
Warrant may safely be made in this case, and Chap. 7. Sect. 6. 3. When any man
is suspected of Felony by another that is willing to inform against the Felon,
the Justice may take his Information upon oath (if he will so give it). Or he
may (if he please) take it (as we conceive) without Oath. And if the party will
not give it upon oath, yet the Justice shall do well to take it so. Nor will we
advise a Justice to force any thing in this case; but to take such Information
as the Informer will give, and bind him over. 4. If a Felony has been done,
and there are some that can discover the Felon, and will not voluntarily come
in and inform; the Justice of Peace may send his Warrant to require them to
come in to him, and give such Evidence as they can against the person suspect;
and if they be obstinate, and refuse, he may perhaps bind them to the good
Behavior, and to appear at the Sessions to answer their contempt therein. 5.
The Justice of Peace when the Suspect-person is brought before him, is to
examine him, which he is not to do upon Oath. But he may examine others against
him; and this he may do upon Oath, if they will be so examined. 6. He must put
the Examination.
Examination, or the Effect thereof in writing, and let the person examined (if
he will) put his hand to it. 7. If the Justice see any cause of suspicion in
the Case, he is to send the person Suspect, by a Mittimus to the Goal, and bind
Mittimus.
over the Informer, if there be any in the Case, or if not, some other person
interested Bind over.
in it, or one that does appear to prosecute it, or one of the Witnesses to
prosecute the suspected person at the next General Jail-delivery or Sessions
(as the case is). And also bind over such of the Witnesses as can give the best
evidence, to be then there to give Evidence. 8. All these Examinations and
Informations, or the Copies thereof, together with the Recognizances for the
appearance of the Prosecutors and the Witnesses he is to certify, and send
Certificate.
in to the next Jail-delivery or Quarter Sessions, where the oftender is to be
tried. 9. One Justice alone may not safely in any case bail such a person
Bail.
accused of Felony. But if he see cause, or desire to Bail him, because the
offense is small, as perhaps but a Petit Larceny; or if it be greater, and the
evidence against him is very little, or none at all; he must call to his
assistance, another Justice of Peace: For there must be two Justices of the
Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, and they must be together to do this
work. See Bail, and 1 and 2 Ph. and M. 13. 10 Any one Justice may send his
Warrant to arrest any one that stands indicted of a Felony. See the Presidents
in the Cabinet for all these things, Chap. 5. throughout. Chap. 25. 1, etc.

2. Any two Justices, before whom Reward for the taking of Felons.
any one shall be convict of a Robbery, or Bu^glary, may give order to the
Sheriff to pay to the party that did apprehend and prosecute him, 10 l. for his
reward therein. Act. 17th of September. 1656.

3. How Felonies done beyond Sea, may be prosecuted here by the Prosecutor
thereof, and what the Justice of Peace is to do in it, see Act. 20th of
September, 1649.

4. How and at whose charge Felons shall he carried to Goal, see Sect. 20th of
this Chapter.

SECT. 17. About Fish, and Fishers.
AS to this we are to know, 1. That no Fisherman is to be forced to be a
Mariner, under the Lord Pro^ector's Commission, unless he be chosen by the
two next Justices to the place where he dwells. 5 Eliz. 5.

2. Justices of the Peace are to be Conservators of the Rivers, and shall have
power to ^arch We^res, lest by their straitness the Fly of Fish be destroyed.
Upon we^^. 2. ^^. and 13 ^. ^ ^9. And they may appoint Underofficers to look
to the Rivers, and to inform against offenders therein. West. 2. 47. and 13 R.
2. 19.

SECT. 18. About a Forcible Entry.
AS to such as make Forcible Entries into Lands, in this case any one Justice
of Peace, upon Complaint hereof made to him, and that the Force does continue,
may go to the place to view it: And if he find it upon his own view to be so,
he may remove it, Record the Force, and (as some would have it) Fine the
offenders according to his discretion, bind them to the good Behavior, send
them to Goal till they have paid or secured the Fine; And then make a Record of
all this, and certify it into the Upper-Bench, or Quarter Sessions, which he
will. And when the Fine is paid or secured, he may deliver the offender. But if
the Force be done and past, Then has he nothing to do, but to summon a Jury to
enquire of it; which he must do by his Warrant to the Sheriff, and do it within
a month of the Complaint, or it will be very panal to him. And by this Jury,
upon a Traverse, he must enquire; And if the Jury find any Forcible Entry, or
detainer in the Case; then is the Justice to send his Warrant to the Sheriff to
restore the party put out of, into possession again; and may Fine, etc. 15 R.
2. 2. 8 H. 6. 9. 31 Eliz. 11. 21 Iac. 15. See for this, the Books at large; and
in my Justice of Peace Book, Chap. 15. and in the Clarks Cabinet. See all the
Presidents of Warrants for it in Chap. 7. of that Book. And because there is
some difficulty in Caution to Justices.
this work, it will be the Justices wisdom to call in for the help of some,
or (at least) of one of his Fellow-Justices of Peace herein.

SECT. 19. About Free Quarter.
AS to Soldiers that take Free Quarter in men's houses against the owners
consent; In this case any two Justices of the Peace may examine the offense
upon Oath. And when they have done this, they are to send this Examination
under their hands and seals up to the Committee of Examination. Certificate.
the Army. And so satisfaction will be made to him that is wronged, Upon Act.
19. December, 1651. 24 April, 1648. and 24 December, 1647.

SECT. 20. About Goals or Prisons, and Prisoners.
AS to this, take these things, 1. Justices of the Peace regularly, are to send
such prisoners as they do commit to prison, to none other but the Common-Goal
of the County. Upon 5. H. 4. 10. And yet where any Statute directs them to send
to another prison, as to the Bride-well, Stocks, or the like, there they must
pursue the same direction.

2. The Jailer is to receive such a prisoner so sent to him by a Justice of
Peace, and that without Fee. And if ^he Jailer do not so, he may be punished by
the Justices of the Peace, by Fine, for his Contempt, etc. But not upon the
Statute of 4 Ed. 3. 10. For the Justices of the Peace have not the power of
Execution of that Statute.

3. An offender to be conveyed to Charges of Convey of a Prisoner to Goal.
Goal, is to bear all the charge of himself, and of those that guard him
thither, if he be able. And in case he refuse so to do, Any one Justice of
Peace may send his Warrant to the Constable of any Township in the County,
where he has goods, and take them, and prize them by four of the Neighbors,
and sell so much thereof as the Justice shall think fit to satisfy the charge.
And if the offender have no goods, a Rate for Rate.
the raising of the money, may be made by the Constables and Churchwardens,
and two or three others; or for lack of such Officers, by four of the more
sufficient men of the place where he was taken. And any one Justice of Peace
may by putting his hand to it, confirm it. And after give his Warrant under his
hand, to levy it by distress of the goods of them that refuse; and after
apprisal by four of the Inhabitants by sale thereof, to give back the
overplus; And so to pay over the money to them that did bear the charge of his
Convey to prison. Upon 3. Iac. 10. See the President for this in the Clark's
Cabinet, Chap. 17.

SECT. 21. About Habeas-Corpus, Certiorario Supersedeas, Writ of Error.
AS to these four things, which are Writs that serve to prevent, stop, or undo
the power of the Justices of the Peace, these things are to be known,

1. The Habeas-Corpus is to remove Remove of Records and Prisoners.
the prisoner, and his cause from the Justices, into a higher Court, upon
supposall that they are doing, or have done illegally. The Certiorani, to
remove the Cause and Record from before the Justices, before a higher power,
upon this pretense. The Supersedeas, is from a Higher Court, to forbid any
further or other proceeding before the Justices, The Writ of Error, to undo
what has been; done before the Justices, where, upon on Indictment or
Information, a Judgment is given against Law.

2. Every Habeas-Corpus, and Certiorari to remove a Record, or Prisoner, ought
to be signed by one of the Judges of the Court whence it comes. Upon 1 and 2
Ph. and M. 13. And yet if this be omitted, the Justice of Peace must
notwithstanding obey it.

3. Writs of Supersedeas out of the Higher Courts are to be void, that are not
granted upon Motion in the open Court, and upon good cause also showed by Oath,
and the same set down on the back of the Writ. And if this be not done, it
seems the Justices of the Peace may refuse to obey it. Upon 21 Iuc. 8.

4. No Remove shall be of an Indictment grounded upon the Ordinance of June,
1654, about Challenges. Nor Challenges
upon the Act of the 6th of October, 1650. where the proceeding is upon any
penal Law, for the buying, selling, searching, viewing, ordering, or disposing
of any Corn, Wint, Beer, Ale, Fish, Flesh, Sale-Butter, Cheese, or any other
dead Victuals whatsoever. Nor upon any Indictment grounded upon the last Act
made the 17th of September, 1656, about the Sabbath. Nor to remove any
Presentment, or Conviction for a Popish Recusancy. Nor shall any Writ Recusants.
of Error be granted to reverse any such Conviction. Upon the Act of 17th of
September, 1656.

5. The Justices of the Peace may refuse to send away an Indictment upon any
such W^it, if it be for a Ri^t, Forcible Entry, Assault and Battery, except the
Writ he delivered in ^^ the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions,
sitting the Court; and except the party indicted, will be bound with good
Sureties to pay the Prosecutor his Costs. But in case of Indictments for a
Foreible Detainer, and for any other offense then that before named, it is
otherwise. Upon 21 Iac. 8.

6. The Justices of the Peace when any such Writ is duly ^ssued ^orth and sent
to them, must obey it: for it is penal to them if they do not so. And if the
Writ for bid the Justice to do, that which he has sent out his Warrant to
command to be done, he must recall and countermand his Warrant.

7. If the Writ do not require the sending away of the Recognizance that the
Justice has taken, he ^^ to send the Writ and Recognizance to the next
Sessions, to be siled there.

8. The Judges of the Higher Courts that do send for any such Record, or
prisoner, may, if they please, send it down again, to be determined by the
Justices of the Peace. Upon 6 H. 8. 6. See Steel's Rep. 475. 322. 399.

SECT. 22. About Highways and Bridges.
AS to Highways and Bridges, these things are to be known:

1. Any one Justice of Peace may upon his own View, make a Presentment to the
Sessions (in the nature of an indictment) against any place or Parish, for that
their ways are not sufficiently amended. And also against any man, for any
offense by him done, against the Statutes of 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 8. and 5. Eliz.
13. (That is to say) The Constables and Churchwardens of the place for not
choosing the Surveyors, or not setting down the time for the six days work, or
for not giving public notice thereof in the Church. Or the Surveyors for
refusing the Office, or for their neglect in their office, and in particular,
for not making Presentment to a Justice of Peace, of such defaults as they find
upon these Statutes. Or the Parishioners that do not observe and attend to do
the dayes-works appointed them. Or such as suffer any Nusances in their
Grounds, hedges or ditches near to the Highways. Or the Baylifts or High.
Constables for their neglect in the levy of the Amercements sent to them by the
Clerk of the Peace against oftenders about the Highways, or for the not
making of their Account, and the like. And this presentment of the Justice, if
he have cause to have it drawn up, he may put the Clerk of the Peace to do it:
And being put in, it is of the same sorce as if it were found by Grand Jury.

2. Any one Justice may and must receive from the Surveyors of the Highways,
any Presentment that they shall make and tender to him, of any default upon
these two before named Statutes about the Highways. And this Presentment he
is to certify and send in to Certificate.
the next Sessions, under pain of 5 l. upon 5 Eliz. 13.

3. There must be two Justices (one of them of the Quorum) to enforce and take
the Account of any Officer, that has in his hands any of the Forfeitures upon
the Statute of 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 8. about Highways. And to imprison them who
do account and are sound to have money in their hands, till they pay it. But if
in this case the Officer be Caution to the Justices.
obstinate, they cannot tell what to do to order him. But it must be in the
Sessions, or no where, See Steel's Rep. 399. Chap. 7. Sect. 6.

4. Any one Justice might have caused Highways to be enlarged and cleared of
Trees and Bushes, upon the Statute of Winchester, 1 Ed. 3. But now they do
nothing out of Sessions, but according to the two aforementioned Statutes.

5. There must be four Justices of the Peace, (one of them of the Quorum,
Bridges.
And where so many Justices are not met together, it cannot be done) who with
the Constables, and two of the Inhabitants of every Parish, (and without their
consent also it cannot be done) to tax the Inhabitants of any place or places,
for the repairing of a Bridge, or Highway within 300 foot of the Bridge, when
it is unknown who ought to repair it. And they may appoint two Collectors to
gather the money, and two Surveyors to look to the work, and to give an Account
thereof, and of the Account.
money. And they may call these Officers their Executors or Administrators, to
an Account. Upon 5 Eliz. 13. and 18 Eliz. 9.

6. For the Repair of Chepslow Bridge, see 3. Iac. 23.

7. For the Repair of the High-way^s in the Wild of Kent, see 14. 15. H. 8. 6.
Of Huntington. Lane near to Chester, see 37 H. 8. 3. In Sussex, see 39 Eliz 19.
26 H. 8. 7. 15 H. 8. 6. Of the Cauceway between Dorchester and Sherborn, see 1
Mar. Parl. 2. Chap. 5. Of the King's Ferry in Kent, see 18 Eliz. 10.

SECT. 23. About Horses
AS to this; there is this only as belonging to the Office of the Justice of
Peace, out of Sessions, to be known; That if any horse be stolen and sold in an
open Market, the true owner thereof, or his Executors, may within six months
after the stealing thereof, make his claym for him before any one Justice of
Peace near to the place where the horse is found. And this Claym the Justice of
Peace to whom it is made, must take and hear. And if within forty days after
the claym, he can make proof his property by two Witnesses upon oath before the
Justice, and will pay down to the buyer so much as he before the Justice will
depose that he bond side gave for the horse, he shall have his horse again.
This Claym of the property by the true owner, and Oath of buyer for the price,
the Justice of Peace when called upon herein, he must take. Upon 31 Eliz. 12. 2
and 3 P^. and M. 3.

SECT. 24. About Hue-and Cry.
AS to this, any Justice of Peace may may do these things:

1. He may b^nd, or at the Sessions Good Behavior.
cause to be bound to the good Behavior, such as shall raise false Hue-and Cry
without any cause.

2. If any Felony be done, any Justice of Peace may command Hue-and-Cry to be
made after the Felon; and if he perceive Neglect in any Officer of his duty
herein, he may bind him, or cause him to be bound at the Sessions, to the good
Behavior. And so upon any Hue-and-Cry raised by others, if the Justice have
Information upon Oath of any Neglect in the following of it by any Officer,
this is cause enough for a Justice to have the Officer bound to his good
Behavior, and to appear at the next Sessions to answer his Neglect. See 27
Eliz. 13.

SECT. 25. Of Hunters, Hawkers, Fowlers, and Hunting, Hawking, Fowling.
AS to these things, the Justice of Peace his power out of Sessions is thus;

1. If any man Hunt or Hawk with Hawking in Corn.
Spanniels in the Corn of another man's, before it be shocked, without his
consent; In this case any one Justice of Peace may examine the matter, if it
has not been before heard and determined in the Sessions; and if he ^^^ cause,
bind over the party offending Bind over.
with good Sureties, to appear at the next Sessions, to answer the offense, and
to pay the penalty, or receive the punishment appointed by the Act of 23 Eliz.
10.

2. If any man Hawk at, or kill, any Pheasant, or Partridge, with any Hawk, or
Dog, between the first day of July, and the last day of August; In this case
any two Justices of the Peace of the County wherein the offender dwells, or is
apprehended, may within six months of the offense done, upon proof thereof by
the Oath of two witnesses before him, be committed to the Common-Goal of the
place where he is so Convicted for a month without bayl, unless he forthwith
pay to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the place 40 s. for every time he so
hawketh, and 20 s. for every Pheasant and Partridg so killed; But he may not
punish it after the six months. 7 Iac. 11.

3. As to him that humeth Deer, or Conies in any Parks, Forests or Warrens, in
the night disguised; In this case any one Justice of Peace upon complaint to
him made thereof, may send his Warrant to the Sherift, or any Bailiff or other
Officer within the County, to arrest and bring the offender before him to be
examined, and may examine him. If he deny it, it is Felony, and then the
Justice is to prosecute it as a Felony. But if he consesse it, he is only to
bind him over to appear at the Sessions, where he is to be sined for it. 3 H.
7. 7. And if any man purposely destroy or take Partridges or Pheasants in the
night; Any one Justice of Peace upon the bare Examination of the party
offending, may, if he see cause to suspect him, bind him with good Sureties in
a Recognizance, to appear at the next Sessions, to answer the offense, and to
pay the penalty of the Statute. Upon 23 Eliz. 20. But there being no way given
to the Justice to convict the oftender, he cannot levy the penality.

4. If any one not qualified, by having 10 l. a year of his own Inheritance, or
30 l. of his own Freehold, or 200 l. in goods, or is eldest son to a Knight,
or to a greater man, etc. shall keep any Gray-hound, Dog, or Nett, to take
Partridges, or Pheasants, Any two Justices in this case, upon suspicion hereof,
may send their Warrant to search in places they suspect, for them, and give the
Searchers power if they find any, to kill the dogs, and tear the Netts. And
may also upon the confession of the party, or proof of the thing by two
Witnesses, send him to Goal for three months, unless he will forthwith pay to
the Churchwardens of the place where, etc. the forfeiture of 40 s. Upon 1 Iac.
27. And if any such unqualified person kill or destroy any Pheasants or
Partridges by night or day. by Nets or otherwise, any two Justices upon his
confession thereof, or oath of one witness, may send him to the Goal for a
month, unless he forthwith pay to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the
Poor, where, etc. 20 s. for every Pheasant and Partridge. upon 7. Iac. 11.

5. If any kill, hunt, or take away any red, or fallow Deer in any Porrest,
Chase, Park, or other enclosed ground, without consent of the owner, or shall
be ayding or assisting therein; any, one or more Justices of the Peace, upon
the confession of the party, or oath of one witness, (which the Justice may
give) shall forfeit 15 l. half to the Informer, and half to the Poor of the
place; which the Justice may by Warrant under his hand levy by way of
distress, and sale of goods. And for want of distress, the offender to be
committed for 12 months without Bayl. The offender must be punished within
three months of the offense done. And he that is punished on this Law, may not
be punished upon any other Law. Act. 24. July, 1651.

6. If any man buy or sell any wild Partridge, Pheasant, Deer, or Hare, Any
two Justices of the place where, etc. or where, etc. upon the Confession of the
party, or Oath of two Witnesses, may Commit him to Goal for three months
without bayl, unless he forthwith pay to the the Churchwardens of the place
where, etc. 40 s. for every Deer, 10 s. a Hare or Paritridge, and 20 s. a
Pheasant; or until he enter into a Recognizance of 20 l. with two Sureties,
never to do so again.

7. If any shoot at, with Gun or Bow, or does kill by Nets, or other engines,
Guns.
a Hare, Paritridge, Pheasant, Pigeon, Hearn, Mallard, Duck, Teal, or any such
Fo^l; or taken the Eggs of a Eggs of Pheasants, Paritridges, ^c.
Pheasant, Partridge, or Swan, or does trace a Hare in the Snow; Any two
Justices of the Peace where, etc. or where, etc. may commit him to Goal, (as in
the last case) till he pay 20 s. for every Pheasant, Partridge, Pigeon, or
other Fowl; 20 s. for every egg so taken; and 20 s. for every Hare so traced.
Upon 1 Iac. 27. 3 Iac. 13.

SECT. 26. About Imprisonment, Arrest, and Commitment
AS to this, these things are to be known;

1. That the Justice of Peace must Caveat to Justices.
take very great care, that he do not give Warrant to arrest or imprison, or to
send to the Goal or Bride-well, any man in any cause, but where he has a clear
authority so to do, either by the Common Law, as in the Cases of Felony, the
Peace, and Good Behavior, or the like; o^ by the express words of some
Statute Law, and therein also with good advice. He must be sure there is a
power of Commitment to prison in the Case well given to him.

2. He must be sure also, that this power to commit to Prison, etc. is given to
the Justices: For if there be a power of Commitment, as there is by some
Statutes. that do say an offender shall be committed, but it does not say by
whom; we conceive it dangerous in this case, for any Justice or Justices, but
in a Sessions-way, and by an Act of the Court, to give Warrant to commit him.

3. He must be sure (if it be one Justice that does it) that the power is given
to one Justice alone to do it. For if power be given to two or more Justices to
commit a man to prison, and one Justice alone does it; this is an unlawful
Imprisonment: or which an Action may lie against the Justice.

4. He must take care in his Commitment, that he do pursue the order and
direction that the Law gives therein: (Viz) Where he is to commit to prison, he
may not commit to the the Stocks, or to Bride-well. And so on the other side;
for if he so do, the Commitment to that place is unlawful. And so for the time,
where the Law gives him power to commit for three days, and he commit of three
weeks, this is an unlaw^^ll Imprisonment; ye^ perhap unla^full for the three
days also. But where a Statute gives power to a Justice or Justices to commit
indefinitely, and does not say for what time, Sessions.
there they may commit accordingly. And in such cases, the Justices use at the
Sessions to discharge such prisoner according to their discretion.

5. Any Justice of Peace may commit a man that stands indicted for a Felony, or
a man he does suspect of Felony. But for this, see Felony. Sect. 16. of this
Chapter.

6. For Commitments to Prison by the Justice for particular offenses, see in
the Title it self.

SECT. 27. About Incontinency.
AS to this, these things are to be known of the Justices power out of the
Sessions;

1. As to such as keep, or haunt Bawdy-houses, Good Behavior.
or are suspected to be lewd and Incontinent; that in this case a Justice of
Peace may upon good Information hereof, upon the oaths. of credible Bawdry.
persons by his Warrant send for such persons, and bind them to the good
Behavior; or if they refuse to give Sureties, he may send them to Go^l till
they do.

2. Any one Justice of Peace may also bind to the good Behavior the Putative
Putative Father of a Bastard-Child.
father of such a Bastard-Child as is like to be chargeable to any Parish. And
this before or after the Birth of the Child. But this is best to be done upon
Information upon Oath of some other besides the woman with child, that the man
is suspect for Incontinency: for there is no Statute to enable the Justice so
to do; nor may he (as we concerve) do it, and justify it upon any other
account. See Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 39.

3. It is also conceived as clear, That any one Justice of Peace may before or
Good Behavior.
after the Birth of a Bastard-child, bind to the good Behavior any one that
shall have any hand in the shifting away of the putative Father or Mother of a
Bastard-child, whereby it may be left to the change of a Parish. But the
binding in both these cases, must be d^scretional Acts in the Justices by the
Common Law, and not grounded upon the Statutes.

4. There must be two Justices of the Bastard-Child.
Peace, (and one of them of the Quo^um) to take course, and make orders for the
relief of the Bastard, ease and safety of the Parish, corporal punishment of
the Mother and reputed father, and to commit them to prison, ^ill they obey the
same Order, or appeal to the Sessions. Or if they do appeal to the Sessions,
(as they may) then there must be two such Justices to bind them to appear
there, and to stand to the Order of the Sessions, (if it make any) otherwise to
the Order that the two Justices of Peace has made. For one Justice alone may
not do either of these things. But that the Justices be not mistaken in the
making of this Order, and the exercise of their power upon this Statute, they
are to know these things: 1. This Order must be made by two Justices, and one
of them must be of the Quorum; and it cannot be done by one, or by two, and
neither of them of the Quorum. Also some make question, if it may be done by
more then two Justices. See Steel's Report. 114. 2. It is necessary they be the
nearest or next Justices to the place where the Parish to be relieved is, but
it may be made by any two such Justices of the County. See Steel's Rep. 154.
245. 246. 3. This Order must be made at a private meeting. And therefore such
an Order made at the Quarte-Sessions, is not good, but illegally made; and all
the p^oceeding thereupon will be also illegal. Stile's Rep. 475. 4. It must be
made about a Bastard-Child. And therefore an Order made against a man in these
words, [That he shall keep his reputed child,] not expressing, [Whether it be a
bastard-child, or not] is held to be naught. Styles Rep. 154. 5. It must be
made against the person that is suspect to have the bastard-child, and not
another person. And for this, An Order made by the two Justices of Peace, that
another man should contribute to the half charge of the keeping of the child,
because he had suffered a Soldier to get it upon his Maid, was held to be
void. Steeles Rep. 267. 6. The Order must be pursuing the Act of Parliament to
this effect, to save the Parish harmless, or to secure it from the charge of
the child. Or to keep the child. And therefore it has been ruled, That an
Order to pay money weekly, toward the keeping of the bastard-child, is not
good, Steel's Rep. 14. 386. 7. This Security must be given to the Parish where
the bastard-child is born, and it must a Parish within the County, where the
two Justices of Peace have power Steel's Rep. 14. 368. 8. The Order must
express how long, and a certain time; that the reputed Father is to keep the
child, or to secure the Parish. Steel's Rep 154. And the Order is plainly to
express all these things; Or else it will no: be good: but being removed into
the Upper-Bench, will be quasht for insufficiency. 9. This Order being made, we
do not conceive what the Justices of Peace can do more upon this Act, out of
their Quarter Sessions; but what is expressed in the Act of 18. Eliz. 3. 10. It
is made a question, Whether the Justices upon this Law, may examine upon oath?
And as to this, we do conceive, that they may (if they please) examine without
Oath, and thereupon ground their Order; and this will be good enough: Or
perhaps they may examine upon Oath; for the matter about which it is, being
Incontinency, it is within their Connusance; and that about which they take
Informations upon Oath, and for which they bind to the good Behavior. See
Chap. 7. Sect. 6. For the power of sending the woman to the house of
Correction, is Bridewell.
only in the Sessions, and was appointed by 7 Iac. 4. And therefore could not
be intended by that of 18 Eliz. 3. And we take it, that no punishment can be
intended therein, but the binding of them both to the good Behavior, and to
appear at the Sessions: which for Good Behavior.
Incontinency they might do by the Common Law.

5. But now by 7 Iac. 4. it is said, That for a lewd woman that has had a
Bastard-Child that may be chargeable to the Paris^^^ That two Justices of Peace
may out of Sessions send her to the House of Correction. But there Caution to
Justices.
being no way of Conviction before the Justice, or how they may be assured of
the matter of fact, we think it not safe for any Justices of the Peace to do
this out of the Sessions, see Chap. 7. Sect. 6.

6. We know nothing that the Justices of the Peace can do out of Sessions upon
the Act of 10th of May, 1650. against Incest, etc. save only in the case of
Fornication, any one of the Fornication.
Justices of the Peace before whom the Conviction shall be had, may take the
Recognisance of the offender for the good Behavior for a year; the which he
must give, before he can be delivered after his three months Imprisonment.

SECT. 28. About Innes, Alehouses, Taverns, Victualling-houses; And
Inne-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, etc.
AS to all these things, this first of Inne-keeper.
all is to be known;

1. That any one that will may erect and keep up an Inn, for the Entertainment
Lycense.
of strangers only, without any License of the Justices of the Peace. But if
an Inne-keeper will sell Ale, Beer, or Cider by retail, in his house, or will
entertain others besides strangersin any case there to be drinking or eating
for money; in this case he must have a License from the Justices. Resolution of
the Judges, 22 Iac. Hutton's Report. 99.

2. The Justices of the Peace cannot in, or out of their Sessions, put down an
Inn, or discharge an Inne-keeper from selling of Ale, Beer, etc. although the
man be unfit, the place inconvenient, or he keep disorder. But he and his house
must be suppressed by Indictment. Common Nuisance.
way of Indictment against it, as a Common Nuisance at the Assizes or Sessions.
And if an Indictment be against a man for keeping of all order only, the
Judgment must he to disable him only as to that Inn. But another man may keep
and continue it an Inn still. Hutton's Rep. 100.

3. The Justices may at their pleasure stint the number of their Alehouses.
But they may not stint the number of Innes. Nor is there any way to suppress
or restrain the Innes so likely, as to hold them to the strict observance of
the Laws for the Assize, and against Tippling, made 1 Iac. 9. 4 Iac. 4. 1 Car.
4.

4. A disability of an Inne-keeper cannot be for three years, upon the
Disability.
Statutes of 21 Iac. 1.

5. Vintners that keep Innes and Victualling-houses, are to be bound by the
Statutes of 1 Car. 4. 1 Iac. 9. and 4. Iac. 1. as to Tippling, and the other
offenses named in those Statutes. But the other Statutes made against
Ale-house-keepers, do not bind Vintners or Inne-keepers, unless they be named
in the Statute. And therefore they are Victuallers
not taken to be included within 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.

6. The Quarter Sessions, or any two Justices, one of them of the Quorum, (out
of Sessions) may put down Alehouses at their pleasure. Upon 5. and 6 Ed. 6. 25.

7. Victuallers and Ale-house-keepers, and such like Tradesmen, may buy and
sell again in their houses by way of Retail, and not be under the penalty of
the Laws made against Forestalling, Forestalling, etc.
etc. 5 Ed. 6. 14. 13 Eliz. 25.

2. As to him that does use to sell Selling without Lycense.
Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry, by Retail, without License, except in Fairs at
Fair-time; In this case any one Justice of Peace may upon his own view, the
offenders confession thereof, or upon the proof thereof by the oath of two
Witnesses; for the first offense, send his Warrant to the Constables and
Churchwardens of the place where the offense is done, to levy of the
offender's goods 20 s. to the use of the Poor of the place where the offense is
done by distress, and after three days past, by sale thereof rendering the
overplus. And for lack of distress and payment thereof in six days, he may
send his Warrant to the Constable; to command him to see the offender to be
openly whipped. And for the second offense, the Justice of Peace may by his
Warrant send him to Bridewell for a month. And for the third offense, he may
send him to the Bridewell till the Sessions discharge him. And if the Officer
Officer.
neglect his duty in this; The Statute does give the Justice of Peace power to
send him to the Goal till he pay the 40 s. Forfeiture to the poor, or to cause
him to be whipped. 3 Car. 3. But the Statute does not say how the Officer is to
be convicted of this offense; and Caveat to Justices.
therefore it is not safe for the Justice of Peace out of the Sessions, to act
against the Officer upon this branch of the Statute. But to have him punished
in the Sessions upon the Common Law. See the Warrant for this in the Cabinet,
Chap. 12. Sect. 10. and Chapter 7. Sect. 6. But upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. There must
be two Justices to send to prison him that so sells Ale, Beer, etc. (but in a
Town in the Fair-time) against the Justices of Peace order, or without Licenses
of the Justices first had either in their Sessions, or (at least) of two of
them, and one of them of the Quorum, out of Sessions, there to remain in prison
for three days without bayl; and after, till he enter into Recognisance with
two Sureties, never so to do again. And to certify the offenses and
Recognisance to the Sessions, to make the offender liable to the Fine of 20 s.
But Caveat to the Justices.
we conceive this sending to prison, not warrantable out of Sessions, upon this
Statute, and that it is not safe for two Justices out of the Sessions, to send
out such a Warrant. For there is no way to convict the offender. Of his offense
set down by the Act. See Chap. 7. Sect. 6.

3. As to the Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper, Tippling suffered by the
Inne-keeper.
Taverner, or Victualler, that does suffer any one of the same, or of another
Parish to sit Tippling in his house. In this case any one Justice of Peace may
upon his own fight hereof, or the confession of the offender, or the proof
thereof by the oath of one witness, (which he may administer) convict him of
it. And after this Conviction, he is to give notice of it to the Constables or
Churchwardens of the place where the offense is done, and call upon them to do
their office therein, which is to levy of the offender's goods 10 s. forfeiture
for the offense, to the use of the poor of the place where, etc. by way of
distress of goods, and after six days by sale thereof rendering, etc. And if
it be not paid, or there be no distress to be had, the Constables or
Churchwardens that had the notice, they are to certify the same to any one of
the Justices of the Peace, And thereupon the same Justice of Peace may send his
Warrant to commit the offender to Goal, till he pay the same forfeiture. And
also to give him notice, That he is disabled for three years to keep any
Alehouse again. And if these Officers do not levy the money, Officers.
nor certify the lack of distress, or non-payment, within 20 days to the
Justice of Peace; The Statute says, That the Justice of Peace by Warrant under
his hand and seal shall levy 40 s. penalty upon them by way of dist^ess^ of
goods. And this distress to be detained six days, then prized and sold,
rendering, etc. And for lack of such distress, the same Officers to be sent by
the same Justice to the Goal, till they pay their forfeiture. But does not say
how the Constable or Churchwardens shall be convicted of this offense. And
therefore the Justice may Caveat to Justices.
not send such a Warrant to levy it; but this punishment may be inflicted by
the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions against the Officers for
their neglect, by the general power of Oyer and Terminer given to them by the
Act. Also the Justices in this case must take heed of sending their Warrant
against the Inne-keeper etc. for the 10 s. For the Constable and Churchwardens
are by their Office to do it without Warrant. 1 Iac. 9. 21 Iac. 7. 1 Car. 4. 3
Car. 3. See Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Quest. 19.

4. As to the Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper, Assife.
Vintner, etc. that shall sell less then one quart of the best, and two quarts
of the small Ale or Beer for a penny; In this case any one Justice of the Peace
may upon his own sight of it, the confession of it by the party, or proof
thereof by the oath of one Witness, (which he may administer) convict him of
it, and after his conviction, proceed against him, as he is to do in the last
case before against the Ale-house-keeper, for suffering tippling in his house.
And so also against the Officers throughout. 1 Iac. 9. 21 Iac. Caveat to
Justices.
7. 1 Car. 4. with the same Caveat as in the last. See for the Warrant in the
Cabinet, Chap. 12. Sect. 6.

5. As to him that is drunk; In this Drunkenness.
case any one Justice of Peace may upon his own view, or the offenders
confession thereof, or proof by the oath of one witness, convict him. And for
the first offense, he may within a week after the conviction, send his Warrant
to the Constable of the place where, etc. to levy of the offenders goods to the
use of the poor, etc. 5 s. if it he not paid in within a week after the
Conviction, by way of distress, and sale of goods, etc. And for lack of
distress, the offender is to be put in the Stocks six hours. And Caveat to
Justices.
albeit there is no express power by the Act given to the Justice, nor to any
others to do this. Yet it is conceived, that the Justice may safely do it. And
therefore that he may safely follow my Presidents in the clark's Cabinet
herein, to make his Warrant forth in this case to do it. For the words of 4.
Iac. 5. are, That if the offender lack a distress, he shall be committed to the
Stocks six hours. But it does not say the Justice shall commit him to the
Stocks. Or that he shall send his Warrant to do it. But this must (as it is
conceived) be necessarily understood. For the Act of 21 Iac. 7. has these
words; That one Justice may convict him, and the offender shall be punished as
in the Statute is appointed. And if it be the. Ale-house-keeper that is drunk,
the Justice is to give him notice, that he is disabled for three years to keep
an Alehouse again. And for the second offense in any Drunkard, the Justice of
Peace is to put him to give two Sureties for his good Behavior in a
Recognizance of 10 l. And in this Statute there is the like Clause to punish
the Officers neglect, as is in the two last before the third and fourth Number.
But no way of Conviction, except it may be by the parties own confession, upon
the general words of 21 Iac. 7. in the beginning thereof. But Caveat to
Justices.
this being doubtful, it is not safe for the Justice of Peace to grant his
Warrant against the Officers for this. But to leave it to the Sessions. 4 Iac.
5. See the Warrant on this part in the Cabinet, Chap. 12. Sect. 3. But no
Justice of Peace can punish any man for this offense of Drunkenness after six
months is past, after the offense is committed. See Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 24.

6. As to the Townesman or Stranger that shall be tippling in an Inn, Tippling.
Alehouse, or Victualling-house, and not invited by a Traveller, and during
the Traveller's stay there only, and laborers, that are there for the
convenience of their work, or one that is there for cause, to be allowed by two
Justices of the Peace; In this case any one Justice of Peace may upon his own
view thereof, the confession of the party, or proof thereof by the oath of one
witness, send his Warrant to the Constables of the place where, etc. to levy
of the offenders goods to the use of the poor, etc. 3 s. 4 d. by way of
distress and sale, rendering, etc. And for want of distress, to set him in the
Stocks for four hours. And to give the Inne-keeper notice, that he is disabled,
etc. 4 Iac. 5. 21 Iac. 7. See the Warrants for these things in the Cabinet,
Chap. 12. Sect. 4.

7. No man is to be punished twice for the same offense in any case upon these
Statutes. 3 Car. 3.

8. There must be two Justices, and License.
one of them of the Quorum, to give license to any man out of Sessions, to sell
Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry, and to take his Recognisance for the keeping of
good order; and this they must certify it into the Sessions, or forfeit five
marks. Upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.

9. There must be two Justices to License.
License Laborers and others to be in an Alehouse tippling. Upon 1 Iac. 9.

10. There must be two Justices, and one of them of the Quorum, to discharge or
put down an Ale-house-keeper at their own discretion. Upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.

11. The oath of the party confessing he has been tippling or drunk in an
Alehouse, shall be sufficient to convince the Ale-house-keeper of his offense
by suffering tippling, etc. 21 Iac. 7.

For Inne-keepers and Victuallers dressing of meat in the Lent, see Lent.

SECT. 29. About a Libeller or Slanderer; and Libell, etc.
AS to this kind of offender, and his offense, which we take now to be clearly
within the words of the Act against Challenges, forbidding all provoking Words
and Gestures, and so punishable thereupon by way of Indictment in the Sessions.
But there is this more in it; As to one that has his hand in the Contrivance,
procuring, or publishing of a Libell, especially if it be against a Magistrate.
Or one that does use commonly libelling against others, or is a common
Slanderer or Talebearer, and his Tales and Slanders are of dangerous
consequence, and do much mischief; In such a case as this, any Justice may
doubtless (out of the Sessions) take Informations hereof by good witnesses
against him; and if he find it so, bind him to the good Behavior, and to
appear Good Behavior.
at the Sessions; and if he refuse to be bound, send him to Goal till he so do.
See Chap. 3. Sect. 4,

SECT. 30. About Licenses.
1. ANy one Justice of Peace dwelling near the place where any poor Mariner or
other person Mariner.
having suffered Shipwreck shall land, may give a Testimonial under his hand
Testimonial.
of his case, and thereby license him to pass the next way to his place of
birth, or last dwelling, and to ask relief as he goes, and limit him a
convenient time for it. upon 39 Eliz. 4. 17. 1 Iac 25.

2. One Justice may under his hand and Seal license Laborers to go out of
Laborers.
one into another Country, to work at Harvest-work in the Harvest-time. Upon 5
Eliz 4.

3. One Justice may license a man upon good cause, to travail, or to do
Lord's Day.
a work of mercy or necessity on the Lord's Day. Or to come in later on the
Saturday night; or go out earlier on the Monday morning, than the Laws do
prescribe for this; or to grind at a Mill; or be in, go, or send to, a common
Alehouse, Wine-Tavern, Tobacco-house; or to have, or use a Coach, Sedan,
Horse-Litter, Boat, or Horse on this day. Upon the Act of 6th of April, 1654.

4. There must be two Tustices of the Churchwardens and Overseers to set up a
Trade for the Poor.
Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, to give allowance and license to
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of a Parish, to set up a Trade there,
for the better Relief of the Poor there. Upon 43 Eliz.

5. So to set up an Alehouse. See To sell Ale.
Alehouses.

6. Any two Justices of Peace may license poor people to travail to Bath or To
travail to Bath.
Buxton for cure of their diseases, at their own charge. Upon 5 Eiz. 4. But no
Justices can license poor people to beg, but in the Case before of a Mariner.
To beg.


7. There must be two Justices of the Servants.
Peace to license Servants to depart out of their Masters Service. Upon 5 Eliz.
4.

8. There must be sour Justices to Recusant.
join with the Lieutenant, to license a confined Recusant to go about any
special business. upon 3. Iac. 5. and 35 Eliz. 2.

See for Presidents of Licenses in most of these Cases, in the Cabinet, Chip.
2. 8.

SECT. 31. About the Lords Day.
AS to this thing, and the Justices power herein out of the Sessions, these
things are to be known.

1. That as to such as use, or meet Sports.
for Bear-bayting, Bull-bayting, Enterludes, Common-Playes, or other unlawful
pastimes whatsoever in, or out of their own Parishes on the Lords Day. In this
Case, any one Justice of the Peace, may upon his own sight hereof, the
Confession of the party, or the Oath of one witness (which he may administer)
send his warrant under his hand and Seal, to the Constable or Churchwardens of
the place where, etc. to levy of the goods of the Offender, by way of distress
and Sale thereof, rendering, etc. the 3 s. 4 d. Forfeiture. The Act goes
further and says. That in default of Distress, the Party Offending be set
publicly in the Stocks three hours. And these words, albeit they are so
penned that they are ambiguous, whether they shall be understood to be a part
of the warrant to be made under the hand and Seal of the Justice, or of a new
power in case of lack of distress. And it is given to no body in certain, yet
that the Justice of Peace has power to do it, and we conceive the Justice may
safely make out his Warrant so to do. And therefore in this (as to this branch)
that he may safely follow our President in the Clarks Cabinet. chap. 4. Warrant
1. But no man may be punished upon this Law of 1 Car. 1. unless he be
questioned for his offense within a Month after it is done. And the Justice in
this case may (if he please) reward the Informer with a third part of the
Forfeiture. See chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 24.

2. As to such as use, or be at Wrestlings, Ringing of Bells for pleasure,
Masks, Wakes, Church-Ales Dancing in their own, or in other Parishes on this
day; In this Case any one Justice of peace may upon his own view thereof, the
confession of the party, or proof thereof by the oath of one Witness send his
Warrant under his hand and Seal to the Constables and Churchwardens of the
place where, etc. If he be above 14 years old (which the Justice in the taking
of his information must inform himself of) to levy of his goods by distress,
etc. to the use of the poor of the place, etc. 5 s. And if he be under 14 years
of age, then so to levy of the Governor of the Offender 12 d. And then the Act
is penned further, in such like words, that the Offender shall be put in the
stocks three hours, as the last Act was penned, and is likewise doubtful. And
therefore we here leave the same advise with the Justice as we did in the
former Case, that he may give warrant to put in the Stocks for three hours.
Act. 6th. of April, 1644. And to follow our President in the Cabinet herein.
See chap. 7. Sect. 6. Here the Justice may also if he please, reward the
Informer with a third part of the Forseiture. See in the Cabinet, a Warrant for
it, chap. 4. Sect. 3.

3. As to Carriers with Houses, Carriers. Drovers of Cattle.
Wains, or Carts, and Drovers of Cattle that Travel on this day; In this Case
any one Justice of Peace may upon his own fight of it, the Consession of the
party, or proof of it by the Oath of two Witnesses, send his Warrant to the
Constables or Churchwardens, of the place where, etc. to levy of the goods of
the Offender 20 s. to the use of the poor of the place where, etc. by way of
distress and sale thereof, rendering, etc. upon 3. Car. 1. But no man is to be
punished upon this Law, unless he be questioned for his offense within six
Months after it is done. And here the Justice may also, if he please reward
the Informer with a third part of the Forseiture. See the President for it, in
the Clarks Cabbinet, Chap. 4. Sect. 4.

4. As to Butchers that by themselves Butchers.
or others kill, or sell their meat on this Day. In this case any one Justice
of Peace, may upon his own sight thereof, the Consession of the patry, or Oath
of two Witnesses send his Warrant to the Constables and Churchwardens of the
place where, etc. to levy to the use of the poor of the place, of the Offenders
goods 6 s. 8 d. by way of distress and sale thereof, etc. upon 3. Car. 1. But
no man is to be punished upon this Law for his offense after the six months.
And here also the Justice may if he please reward the Informer with a third
part of the Penalty. See the Warrant in the Cabinet, Chap. 4. Sect. 5.

5. As to such as Cry, show sorth, Crying and showing of Wares.
offer, or put to sale any Goods, Wares, or Commodities, (except it he
provision in an Inn, or Alehouse, or milk in London) upon this day; the
things are to forfeited; and any Churchwardens, Constables, or Overseers of
the poor, may without warrant from a Justice of Peace seize and secure them.
Also any one Justice of Peace may give a Warrant to any such Officers so to do.
Upon the Act of 6th of April, 1644; and 19th of April, 1650. And now it is
added, That any one Justice of Peace upon proof of the offense by his own view,
the confession of the party, or oath of witness, may give order to sell the
goods, and give the money to the poor of the place where the goods were first
seized. Or the Justice, if he please, may give the thirds thereof to the
Informer, the rest to the poor. But this new thing must be done within a month
after the offense is done, or it cannot now be done. Upon the new Act. 17th
September, 1646. See in the Cabinet, a President for it in the same place.

6. As to such as Travail abroad on horseback, or on foot, without License
Travailers.
of a Justice of Peace on this day. Any one Justice of Peace may upon his own
sight of it, the confession of the offender, or proof thereof by oath of one
witness, send his Warrant under his hand and seal to the Constables or
Churchwardens of the place where, etc. to levy of the goods of the offender 10
s. to the use of the poor of the place where etc. by way of distress and sale
thereof, rendering, etc. And then the Ordinance is further, That for lack of
distress, the offender shall be put in the Stocks three hours. But the words
being doubtfully penned, (as we showed before) and that it may be safe to put
this clause, and to follow my President for this in my Cabinet. Upon Ordinance
of 6th of April, 1644. And here also the Justice may (if he please) give a
third part of the forfeiture to the Informer.

7. As to such as carry any Burdens, Carrying of Burdens.
or do any worldly work on this day; In this case, any one Justice of Peace.
upon sight hereof, the Consession of the offender, or proof thereof by the Oath
of one witness, may send his Warrant under his hand and Seal to the Constables
or Churchwardens of the place where, etc. to levy of the oftenders goods ^ s.
to the use of the poor of the place where, etc. by way of distress and sale
thereof, rendering, etc. And this is by the same Ordinance of 6th of April,
1644. where the case is the same, as in the last offense. And therefore the
Justice (we conceive) may here also use the Clause, of putting in the Stocks
three hours. And here also the Justice may (if he please) give a third part of
the Forfeiture to the Informer.

8. As to the Travelers, Wagoners, Time of coming in, and going out of the
Inn Saturday nights.
Butchers, Higlers, Drovers, and their Servants, that shall come into their
Inn Saturday night after 12 of the Clock, and go out Monday morning before one
of the clock, without leave of a Justice of Peace. And as for such as Dance,
prosanely sing, drink, or tipple in an Inn, Tavern, Alehouse, or
Tobaccohouse, or is there, or does grind at a Corn-Mill on this day, without
leave of a Justice of Peace; the travailer and Inne-keeper, and all the rest
forfeit 10 s. a piece. And as to them that execute any Writs, Orders, or
Warrants (but in case of Treason, Felony, Breach of the Peace, or profanation
of Serving process.
the Lord's Day) upon this day; they forfeit 5 l. And as to them that use
Coaches, Boats, Lighters, Horses, or Going wi^^ Coaches, etc.
Sedans, but in case of Gods Service, and for cause allowed by one Justice of
Peace on this day, they forfeit 10 s. for every offense. And all these
Forfeitures in these four cases lastly named, are by Warrant of one Justice of
Peace under his hand and seal, to be levied of the goods of the offenders by
distress and sale of their goods, etc. And for lack of distress, the offender
is to be put six hours in the Stocks. But there is no Caution to the Justices.
way of Conviction of either of these offenders set down by the Act. of 19th of
April, 1650. And therefore we conceive, that no Justice may grant his Warrant
in either of these cases to levy the Forfeitures. But that it must be done by
the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions, if they have any Sessions.
power given to them therein by the Law; If not, it cannot be done at all.

9. As to the common Brewers of Beer or Ale, the Soape-boyler, or distiller
Brewers.
of Aqua-vita, or hot-Waters, that shall brew, or Tun any Beer, or Ale; boil
or make any Soape, or distill or make any Aqua-vita, or hot-waters on this day;
In this case any one Justice of Peace may within three months after the
offense committed, upon the confession of the party, or oath of one witness,
send his Warrant to the Constable of the place where, etc. to levy of the
offenders goods the double value of what is brewed, etc. to the use of the poor
of the place where, etc. and of the Informer, by way of distress and sale
thereof, rendering, etc. And for lack of distress and non-payment thereof, to
send him to Bride-well for three months, and until he pay it. See Chap. 7.
Sect. 6. Ord. Excise, 17th September. 1656.

10. As to Books written against the Books against the Day.
Morality of this day, and to countenance the profanation thereof; In this case
any one Justice of Peace may burn them himself, or cause them to be burnt by
others. Upon Ord. 6th of April, 1644.

11. All persons must on this day apply How the Day is to be kept.
themselves to the Sanctification of it, by exercising themselves thereon in
the duties of Piety and Religion, publicly and privately. Upon Ord. 6th of
April, 1644. And this is added thereunto by the new Act, That if he be not
allowed by some one Justice of Peace to absent himself, he is every Lord's Day
to resort to some Church, Chapel, or other convenient meeting place of
Christians, not distering in matters of Faith from the public profession of
the Nation, being the true Protestant Christian Religion, contained in the Holy
Scriptures of the New and Old Testament; under pain of 2 s. 6 d. The which any
one Justice of Peace, upon his own Sight, the confession of the party, or the
Oath of one witness, may by his Warrant cause to be levied of the offenders
goods by way of distress and sale thereof, rendering, etc. But nothing can be
done upon this new Act of 17. September. 1656, but what is done within a month
after the offense is done.

12. Any one Justice may license a License.
man to be absent from Church, to travail, or do worldly business, to be in an
Inn, or such like house; to go earlier out of his Inn Manday morning, or come
later into his Inn Saturday night; or to have a Coach, Horse-Litter, Boat, to
travail and pasle in it on this day. Upon the Laws before-named.

13. By the new Act of 17th of September, 1656, most of all the offenses before
named, are called a profanation of this day; and some others, as playing on
Instruments, vain Singing, Dancing, the going of Fulling-Mills, the working in
the washing, whiting, or drying of Clothes, thread, or yarn; the setting up, or
burning of Turf or Beer, the gathering of Rates, except it be for the poor;
the melting of Tallow and Wax by Chandlers, the baking by Bakers, the fitting
and carrying home of Clothes by Tailors, the Trimming of men by Barbers; the
keeping of Fairs and Markets, and vain and idle walking about in any place. And
by this new Law, my one Justice of Peace, in case of any of these offenses
done, may upon his own sight thereof, the Confession of the party, or oath of
one witness, send his Warrant to the Constable of the place where, etc. to
levy of the offenders goods 10 s. by way of distress, sale, etc. to the use of
the poor of the place where, etc. But no Conviction can be of any man for any
offense within this Law, but what is made within a month after the offense
done. And by this new Law, any one Justice of Peace may within this months
time after the offense, send his Warrant to search for, discover, apprehend and
bring before him such persons as he is informed, have profaned, or do profane
the day in any of the particulars before named. But here we Caution.
cannot but tell you, That the offenses formerly named, of Traveling, carrying
burdens, and doing worldly labors or work of their ordinary Calling, the
keeping, using, or being present at Wakes, Revells, wrestlings, shootings,
leapings, ringing of Bells for pleasure, Bowlings, Feasts, Church-ales,
May-poles, Gaming, Bear-bayting, Bullbaiting, Butchers, and others, using of
their Trades, which were offenses against other laws, before the making of
this Law, seem all tobe comprehended within this time now by the words of this
Law, as to this purpose are provided, That no person shall be impeached or
molested for any offense within this Act, unless he be thereof convicted
within one month after the offense committed. And then it will follow, That as
to all these offenses newly named by this Act, they cannot be punished by any
of the former Laws, but it must be done within the month. And the Justice of
Peace must therefore be wary what he does herein, and take heed how he uses
the Warrants we have advised and drawn in the Clarks Cabinet, as touching the
Lord's Day, that do not agree with the Advice now herein laid down, without very
good Advice.

SECT. 32. About Malt.
1. ANy one Justice of Peace may direct the Constable to sell such deceitful
Malt, as he upon Search shall find, at the price the Justice shall set down.
Upon 2 Ed. 6. 10 27 Eliz. 14. 1 Iac. 25. 3 Car. 4. 21 Iac. 28.

2. There must be two Justices of the Recognisance.
Peace to convict an offender by his own Confession, or the Testimony of two
witnesses of his breach of a Sessions-Order made for the Restraint of
Maulsters, and to commit him to Goal three days, and after, till he become
bound in a Recognisance of 40 l. to obey the Order. Upon 39 Eliz. 16.

3. Any one Justice of Peace alone may take the Recognisance of 40 l. mentioned
in the last head. Upon 39 Eliz. 16.

SECT. 33. About Masters, Servants, and Apprentices.
1. ANy two Justices of the Peace, Special Sessions.
(one of them being of the Quorum) may twice a year, between Micha^mas and
Christmas, and Lady Day, and John the Baptist, for three days at a time, keep
a special Sessions only to enquire of the matters, and severely to punish the
offenses against the Stat. of 5. Eliz. 4. about the Hiring, Keeping, Departing,
working, wages, and order of Servants, Workmen, Artificers, Apprentices, and
Laborers,. And the Justices are to have each of them 5 s. a day out of the
Forfeitures, for the time the Sessions does last, for their pains herein.

2. It is said that any one Justice of Peace may out of Sessions upon this Law,
do any one of these things following. 1. By the Agreement of the Master and his
Apprentice, and by writing under the Masters hand, discharge the Apprentice of
his Apprentiship. 2. Allow of the cause of putting away of a Servant, but not
of an Apprentice within his time 3. Hear and end any difference that shall
arise between the Master and his Servant, or Apprentice, about his not Serving
being hired, his parting before his tinie be ended, or his misbehaviour in the
time of his service, and make an order herein between them. And if the Master
will not obey it, bind him to appear at the Sessions; and if the Servant or
Apprentice refuse to obey it, bind him to the good behavior, and to appear
there also. 4. Put in the Stocks for two days and one night such a one, as he
in his discretion shall think fit, and shall command to wo^k in the Harvest
time for the saving of Corn or Hay. 5. Send to the Goal or house of Correction,
common Laborers that will not work for the wages set down by the Justices, and
others that have nothing but their work to live by, and will not work for
reasonable wages. 6. Hear and end any difference between the Clothiers and
their Workmen, Upon 4. Ed. 4. 1. 7. Send for and commit to ward him that
refuses to serve as an Apprentice according to 5 Eliz. 4.

3. There must be two Justices to do any of these following things. 1. To bind
to the good behavior, and to appear at the Sessions, or to send to the
Bridewell such as having no ability to live by, but their work, and live out of
Service, and have been by the Justices limited to a time to put themselves into
Service and have not done it within the time. 2. To punish the Servant by
Imprisonment that is retained according to, and in, the Trades named by the
Statute, and does refuse to serve, till he give bond to serve or to punish him
so for any miscarriage in his Service, or to punish him for his going away
before his time be expired; or to punish him for. his going away without giving
warning when his time is ended. 3. To imprison such Women above 12 years old,
and under 40 years old, unmarried, as are compellable to serve by the Statute,
and refuse to go to service till they give bond to do it. 4. To lay the 40 s.
Fine upon the Master^ for putting away his Servant within his time, or at the
end of his time, without giving of him a quarters warning. 5. To punish the
Master by the 5 l. Fine, and Imprisonment ten days, for giving of more wages
then is set down by the Justice upon the Statute. And to imprison the Servant
21 days for the taking of that wages. 6. To put in Prison for one year, or for
less time, the Servant that upon his own Consession or the oath of two
witnesses before them is proved to have made an Assray, or assault on his
Master, Mistress, or Governor. 7. To inflict the Fine of Five pound upon the
Master that retains the Servant without a Testimonial according to the
Statute. 8. To commit him to Prison that does hire a Servant for less time
then a year. 9. To imprison a Labourer, and Fine him 5 l. for departing from
the Work he has undertaken against the will of the Master, before he has
ended it.

4. But our Advise to the Justices of Peace herein is. That they be very Caveat
to the Justices.
cautious what they do out of Sessions, these things upon this Statute, and
that they use not some of my Warrants, as to this, I have given in the Clarks
Cabinet. See chap. 7. Sect. 6. For there is a Clause in it. That every
Retainer, and giving of wages, contrary to the true meaning of the Statute
shall be void. And there are few Retainers according to the Statute. Besides
there is some doubt either in the power and way of Conviction of the Offender,
or levying of the Forseiture for the Offense, upon most of the branches of the
Statute. And yet this perhaps, a Justice may adventure to do. If a Labourer be
in his presence, and idle, and disengaged, and he refuse to work in a time of
need in the Harvest, to commit him according to the Statute. And such as have
had time set them by the Justices, wherein to set themselves into a Service,
and they do it not, and the parties be before them and consesse it, and are
wilful; there the Justices may Proceed against them according to the Stitute.
And in case of purloyning by Servants from their Masters, and where the
Contumacy, and miscarriage of Servants toward their Masters is very fowl,
there they may adventure, and so may one Justice (perhaps by the very
Common Law, and of his own discretion) to bind him to the good behavior, and
to appear at the Sessions. And for differences that arise between Masters and
Servants, and Apprentices, any Justice may of his discretion labor to set them
agreed, and by consent of both parties, order any thing between them. And in
some Cases where he sees a stubbornness, bind over the party to appear at
Sessions. But other wise the safe way is to refer these matters to, and to have
all these offenders punished at the Quarter Sessions. For we do not perceive
that it can well be done any where else.

5. Every Justice not hindered by Sickness, or other good cause, is to be
present at the Taxing of wages, under pain of 10 l. by 5 Eliz. 4. 1. Iac. 6.

6. As to a Clothier, or other, that Clothiers for wages.
refuses to pay to his Workmen the wages set down by the Justices at the
Sessions. In this case, two Justices of the Peace (one of them of the Quorum)
may upon the Consession of the offender himself, or the proof thereof, [but
does not say, upon oath] of two lawful and sufficient witnesses, before them,
send their Warrant to the Constables of the place where, etc. to levy the 10 s.
Forfeiture upon the offender by distress and sale of his goods. Upon 1 Iac. 6.

7. If any Servant or Apprentice shall imbesill or steal away the goods of his
Master, any one Justice of Peace, if by circumstances the case comes to a plain
Felony, may deal with him, as he does with other men in cases of Felony,
according to the nature of the case. But for this, see 21 H. 8 7. and 33 H. 6.
1. and Dalton's Justice of Peace, page 95. and 320. See the Cabinet for the
Presidents to some of these things, in Chap. 13.

8. Poor people that have many children, Binding poor children Apprentices.
The Overseers of the poor, with the consent of two Justices, may bind them
Apprentices. And if their Parents hinder their binding, or being bound, entice
them away, the Parents may be sent to Bride-well by the Resolution of the
Judges, 1633. But this we conceive must be by the Justices in, and not out of,
their Sessions.

9. If any such person as by the Servants to service. Bridewell.
5 Eliz. 4. are appointed to be in service, as one brought up in husbandry
under 30 years old, or a Maidservant brought up in any of the Trades named in
the Statute, live out of Service, not having visible means to maintain
themselves without their labor, and refuse to serve as an hired servant by the
year, and he or she has been warned by two Justices, to put her self into
service by such a time, and does not, such person may be sent to the house of
Correction; Resol. of Judges, 1633. But this we conceive also must be done by
the Justices within, and may not be done by any of the Justices out of their
Sessions: And that if the Justices will do any thing against such persons out
of the Sessions, it is more safe to do it by binding of them to the Good
Behavior.
good Behavior.

SECT. 34. About Ministers or Preachers.
1. AS to him that shall wilfully disturb a Minister in his open Sermon,
Disturb him in his Sermon.
or rescue him that has so done; In this case any one Justice of Peace upon
Complaint hereof only, may commit him to safe keeping for six days. But then
there must be two Justices; (one of them being the same Justice that did commit
him) who within the six days must examine the matter. And if they find either
by his own Consession, or the proof of two Witnesses, that he is guilty of the
offense, then may they commit him to prison for three months. Upon 1 Mar. 3.
But this Statute does Caveat to Justices.
not say, Whether the proof shall be by oath, nor give power to the Justices to
administer the Oath. And therefore it is best to let such an offender be
punished by the Sessions.

2. But now by the New Act of 17th of September, 1656, If any do of purpose
molest a Minister in his Preaching, or other public duty, upon any day, or in
his going to, or coming from it. Or do make any public disturbance upon any
part of the Lord's Day, And he be thereupon brought (as he may be) Lord's Day.
to a Justice of Peace, The Justice of Peace may either upon sight of it, the
parties own consession, or the proof thereof by the oath of one Witness,
commit the offender to Prison without Bayl, till the next Quarter Sessions. But
this may not be done, neither by this Act, except it be done within the month
after the offense is committed.

3. As to a Scandalous Minister duly Eeected Ministers disturbed by them that
were cast out.
put out of any Living by authority of Parliament, that does enter upon and out
the Minister put in his Room, and by himself or others binder him to receive
the profits thereof; In this case any two Justices of Peace may upon proof
hereof by two witnesses, (but does not say, upon Oath) give such damages to the
party wronged, as they think fit, and settle him that is so put out, in his
quiet possession; and in this raise the Trained-Bands to assist him. And if he
shall by himself, or other, make any disturbance upon the Minister so put in,
in the execution of his Office; the same Justices upon proof thereof, by the
Oath of two witnesses, may commit the offender to prison for one month. Upon
Ord. 23 of August, 1647. and 8th of November, 1644. and 4th of April, 1648. and
August, 1654. and 17th of September. 1656.

SECT. 35. About a Mittimus.
AS to this Mittimus, which is the Justice of Peace his Warrant by which he
sends a Prisoner to the Goal, or to Bride-well, take these things:

1. It must be in Writing, under the Name, Hand and Seal of the Justice.

2. It must express his Office, Place, and Authority: as, W. S. Esquire, one
of the Justices, etc.

3. It must be directed to the Jailer, or keeper of the Prison.

4. It must express both the Names, the Christian and Surname of the party
committed.

5. It must express the cause somewhat certainly of his Commitment, as that it
is for Treason, Burglary, or Robbery, or for Felony, or the Suspicion thereof;
and where it is for Felony, to say, for Felony, by stealing a horse, and the
like.

6. It must have an apt Conclusion, The prisoner safely to keep, until he be
delivered by due order of Law, and the like.

7. And lastly, it must express the time of the making of it. Coo. 2. Part of
Instit. 591. And a Mittimus, with this cause, To answer to such matters as
shall be objected against him. Or, To keep the prisoner, till he that made it,
shall give order for his deliverances, is not good. And so if it be a
Commitment to Bride-well, it is good to set down the cause, as to say, because
he is an idle, or inordinate person, etc. See Presidents for it, in the Clark's
Cabinet, Chap. 25. and in Chap. 6.

SECT. 36. About Night-walkers.
AS to Night-walkers, that are idle Fellows, who use to sleep by day, and walk
abroad by night, and are suspected to live by some dishonest courses; In this
Case any one Justice of Peace, either of his own head, if he know them to
besuch, or by the Information of others upon Oath thereof by his Warrant may
cause them to be arrested, and to be brought before some Justice of Peace, to
put in Surety for their good Behavior, or else to be sent to Gaol till they so
do. And if any Watchmen of their own heads do arrest such (as they may) and
bring them to the Justice of Peace to be so dealt with, the Justice may so
proceed against them. See Good Behavior.

SECT. 37. About Oaths.
AS to this, these things are to be known,

2. The Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy, named in 1. Eliz. Oath
of Allegiance, etc.
3. 4 Iac. and other Statutes, they are all of them taken away by the Act. 9.
January, 1648.

2. Any one Justice of the four that do License a confined Recusant to Travel,
To a Recusant.
may give him the Oath appointed, by the Statute of 3 Iac. 5.

3. Any one Justice of the County where a Robbery is done, and dwelling To him
that is robbed.
in or near to the Hundred wherein it is done, may within 40 days of the doing
thereof, take his Oath that is robbed, whether he knew any of the Thieves, upon
27 Eliz. 13.

4. Any one Justice of Peace may To him that desires surety of the Peace.
give the Oath to him that desires surety of the Peace against another. See
Peace.

5. Any one Justice of Peace may give the Oath to these Offices following when
they come into their Officers. By common usage they give the Oath to the
High-Constable, and the Petty-Constable; To Constables and some other Officers.
And they may give the Oath to the under Conservators of Rivers: But to swear
Overseers of Cloth, there must be two Justices.

6. There must be two Justices of the Peace, (one of them of the Quorum)
without Commission to give the Oaths of the under Sheriffs, their Bailiffs,
Deputies, and Clarks at their first entrance To the Undersheriff and his
Officers.
into their Offices. Upon 27. Eliz. 12.

7. There must be two such Justices to give the Oath to the Collectors of the
Sheriffs Amercements for the County Court, that they shall Collect no more then
is due. Upon 11. H. 7. 15.

8. Any two Justices of the Peace may give to the Overseers of Cloth their To
Overseers of Cloth.
Oath. upon 3. Ed. 6. 2. 39. Eliz. 20. 43. Eliz. 12.

9. Any two Justices may give them To Overseers of them that are sick of the
Plague.
their Oath that are to be Overseers of them that are infected with the Plague,
upon 1 Iac. 31.

10. There must be three Justices To them that deprave the Sacrament
(one of them of the Quorum) to take the Information of witnesses against such
as speak irreverently of the Lords Supper. Upon 1 Ed. 6. 1.

11. And what Justices may take the Informations upon Oath against other
Offenders upon penal Laws, see in the Several Titles.

12. The Justices must take heed of New oaths.
imposing new Oaths (especially out of Sessions) For it is a Rule. That the
giving of every Oath must be warranted by Act of Parliament, or by the Common
law, time out of Mind. Coo. 2. part. Inst. 479. They must also take heed of
imposing the old Ceremony of How an Oath must be taken.
laying the right hand on the Bible in the taking of an Oath. For any man may
now (if he will) in stead thereof during the time of his taking of it, hold up
his right hand (only.) See the Act of 5 September. 1649. For the Oaths of
Mayors, etc.

SECT. 38. About Officers, and Offices.
AS to this, And what the Justices of peace may do about this out of their
Sessions, these things are to be known.

1. That the Justices of the Peace of the County have somewhat to do in the
making and Government of diverse of the Officers of the County, Hundreds,
Parishes, and Places within the County.

2. The Treasurers of the Countystock, albeit they be chosen and made at
Treasurers of the Countystock. Masters of Bride-well
and are under the Government, and order of the Quarter Sessions; yet may any
two Justices, by order of the Sessions levy by sale of goods, the Fine set by
the Sessions, on the Treasures for the neglect of their office, Upon 43 Eliz. 2.

3. Any one Justice may punish the defaults of Sheriffs, by not returning
Sher^ff^^,
good Jurors to enquire in a case of Forcible entry, before him, upon 8 H. 6.
9. But see more of this in Sheriffs, Sect. 50.

4. What one Justice may do in the making or remove of Constables; See
constables
Constables, Sect. 11. of this chap.

5. The Justices themselves being all of them Conservators of the Rivers,
Conservators of Rivers.
each of them may choose others under them to over-see the Rivers, upon 27 R.
2. 9.

6. Any two Justices may appoint searchers of Tiles, upon 17 Ed. 4. 4.
Searchers of tiles.


7. Two Justices may make and call to account once a year Overseers of
Overseers of Cloth.
Cloth, and bind them by Oath and bond to do their duty. Upon 3. and 4. Ed. 6.
2.

8. Two Justices of the nearest to the Overseers of the poor.
Parish, are within a Month of Easter every year, to appoint two or more of
every Parish, to be Overseers of the Poor of the Parish. For which See 43.
Eliz. 2. and poor. Sect. 43. of this chap.

9. Two Justices of the nearest to the Parish must under their hands and feals
Churchwardens.
approve the yearly choice of the Churchwardens of Parishes. For this, see
Church, Sect. 9. of this chap.

10. Two Justices may call Treasurers of the County stock, High-Constables,
Calling them to Account.
Petty-Constables, or others their Executors or Administrators, who have been
formerly trusted with the Receipt of any Money charged on a Parish by the
Statute of 43 Eliz and order the payment thereof to the County Treasurers. So
they may call them to an account for any money belonging to maimed Soldiers.
And so Officers that have received any money to the use of the poor, Upon the
Ord. of May 1647, and 24. of December 1647. But for the Accounts of
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the High way, See in the
Titles themselves.

11. Any one Justice may call Watchmen Watchmen.,
to an account of the Execution of their Office. And if he find them negligent
therein, cause them to be bound to the good behavior, or to be indicted at the
Sessions for it.

12. For other things about. Rogues, Drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, Poor, Church,
and the like, what Warrants Justices may send to Officers, and what they are to
do upon them, See in the proper Titles.

SECT. 39. About the Peace, and Surety of the Peace.
ANy one Justice of Peace may of his own head, without Motion of another, and
by his own power, put him to give Sureties for the Peace that he knows to be a
common Ryotor, or common Barretor, or that makes an Affray upon him, or upon
another in his presence, or that is about to make an Affray, or that does
threaten another to beat or kill him, or burn his house; or that does go or
ride armed in a terrible way, or the like, without any information, complaint,
or Oath of anyother man; Also he may upon the request of another, and the offer
of his Oath, that he stands in fear of his life, or some bodily hurt, or the
firing of his house by another man, whether it be true or false, take his Oath,
or perhaps he may do it without Oath, for we conceive it to be in his
discretion. And then he may send his Warrant to bring the party before him, or
some other Justice of the Peace (if he be not in his presence) to give surety
for the Peace, or if he refuse, to carry him to Goal, till he so do. And if he
be in his presence, he may require him to put in Sureties to keep the Peace.
And the Sureties, and the Sum in which they are to be bound, must be according
to his discretion, which is to be guided by reason, and to be greater or less,
as the case is more or less dangerous. And if he refuse so to do, he may send
him by a Mittimus to the Goal, till he shall so do. But for, and after an
Affray past, and without any such Oath taken, or cause of Suspicion of a new
Affray, Caution to Justices.
to send this Warrant, and take this. Surety, or to send to Goal any man
refusing, is not safe for a Justice of Peace. And yet if he have proof, that
the Affrayors are newly parted, and like enough to fight again, there perhaps
he may put them both to give surety for the Peace.

SECT. 40. About Plays, and Games.
AS to such as keep houses of Dicing Cards, Dice, Tables, etc.
Carding, Tables, and of the like unlawful Games, and such as haunt such
houses, and play there, not Licensed by the Lord Protector. Any one Justice of
Peace may in this case go into the house he does suspect, where such Play is,
And if he catch them in the manner, and they be not such as are excepted in the
Law, he may commit the keeper of the house, and those that play in his house,
to prison, until they enter into Recognizance never to offend so again. But he
(as we conceive) Caution to Justices.
may not without good advice send his Warrant to levy the 40 s. on him that
keeps the house, and the 6 s. 8 d. on him that plays, because no such power
is given him by the Statute of 33 H. 8. 9. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 9. 12 R. 2. 6. 11
H. 4. 4. 17 Ed. 3. 4.

2. As to the Artificer, or his Journeyman, a Hushandman, an Apprentice,
Labourer, Servant at Husbandry, or other Servant, without his Masters leave;
Mary-man, Fisherman, or Serving-man, that plays at Tables, Tennis, Dice,
Cards, Bowls, clash-coyting, Logating, or other unlawful game out of Christmas,
or then out of their Masters house and presence. And as to any man whatsoever
that shall play at Bowls in any open place out of his Garden or Orchard; In
this case any one Justice of Peace that does find him at it, and that he is not
excepted out of the Statute, may commit him to prison, till he enter into
Recognizance never to do so again. Upon 33 H. 8. 9. But he may not give Warrant
to levy the Forfeitures of 20 s. and 6 s. 8 d. in these cases.

3. Any one Justice may enquire into Archery.
the execution of the Statute of 33 H. 8. 9. about Bows and Arrows, and
acquaint the Sessions with what he finds. And may estreat the 10 l. into the
Exchequer, against such as are Convict before him for shooting in a Crosse-bow,
or Hand-Gun. Upon Guns.
33 H. 8. 6. See Armor.

4. As to Stage Players, these things Stage Players, etc.
are to be known: 1. That they are after one Conviction, albeit they do not
wander up and down, yet to be accounted incorrigible Rogues: and so any one
Justice may deal with them, as he may deal with a Rogue. By Ord. Rogue.
11 Febr. 1647. 2. So much as the money there received for to see a Play, shall
be forfeit to the poor of the place. 3. Any two Justices of the Peace of the
County wherein such a Collection has been made, upon complaint and proof
thereof before him upon Oath, may by Warrant under their hands and seals
command the Constables and Churchwardens to levy the same by way of distress
and sale of Goods, rendering, etc. 4. As to such as have been at such a Play; In
this case any one Justice of Peace, upon the confession of the party, or proof
thereof by one witness, may send his Warrant to theChurch-wardens or
Constables of the place where, etc. to levy 5 s. of him' to the use of the poor
of the place where, etc. by way of distress and sale of goods, rendering, etc.
Ord. 11th of Febr. 1647. 5. The Lord Mayor of London, and Justices of Peace of
London, Westminster, Middlesex, and Surrey, or any two of them within their
limits, may destroy Stage-Play-boxes, Galleries, etc. 6. As to the Actors in
such Plays within the last named places, any two Justices of the Peace of the
same Counties within their own limits, upon their own view thereof, or Oath of
two witnesses, within two months after the offense done, may by their Warrants
under their hands and seals, cause the offender to be apprehended, and openly
whipped in some Market Town, and cause him also to enter into a Recognisance with
two sufficient Sureties, that he will never so offend again; and commit to
prison till he shall so do. And if after he offend again, they are to deal with
him as an incorrigible Rogue. But this power in Iucorrigible-Rogue.
this thing is not given to the Justices of the Peace of any other County. Upon
this Ordinance of 11th of February, 1647.

5. If any May Pole be set up in any May-Poles.
place, Any one Justice of Peace may upon sight thereof, or Confession of the
party, or proof of one witness upon Oath, give Warrant under his hand and seal
to the present Constables or Churchwardens of the place where, etc. to levy by
way of distress and sale of the goods of them that were the Constables and
Churchwardens of the Parish at the time of the setting, and continuance of it
up, 5 s. a week, for every week it stood aster it was erected, before it was
taken down. And for lack of distress, or where there is an inability to pay
the Forfeiture, to put them in the Stocks three hours. Ord. 6th of April, 1644.
where the words of the Law, as to this last branch of putting in the Stocks
three hours, are a little doubtful. And yet we think the Justice may safely
insert that clause in his Warrant in this case also, and follow our President
in that, in the Cabinet, Chap. 23. Sect. 4.

6. The Justices are authorized to Cock-Matches.
hinder, disturb. and disperse Meetings for Cock-Matches. Upon Ordinance of 31
March, 1654. and 17 of September. 1656. And by this we conceive, the Justices may
entreat or command them to depart. And if they show themselves disobedient,
etc. perhaps bind them to the Peace or Good Behavior, upon good advice.

SECT. 41. About the Plague.
ANy one Justice of Peace may compel him that has the Plague to keep in. And
if after command, he refuse, albeit he have not the Sore upon him; yet the
Justice may punish him as a Vagabond, and also bind to Vagabond. Good Behavior.
the good Behavior for one year. And one Justice also may according to his
discretion appoint Searchers, Watchmen, and Keepers to look to and govern them
that are sick of the disease. But there must be two Justices to set, and issue
out Warrants to levy the Rate Rate.
for the Relief of the persons insected. 1 Iac. 31. 21 Iac. 28.

SECT. 42. About the poor.
AS to this, and what the Justices of Peace may do herein out of the
Quarter Sessions, take these things.

1. It is said that two Justices may send to the Bride-well, or common Goal,
such idle poor as will not work, being thereunto appointed by the Overseers,
Upon 43 Eliz. 2. But there is no way of Conviction of them by that Statute,
Caution to Justices.
and therefore we do not conceive it warrantable for Justices so to do out of
the Quarter Sessions. See Correction-house. See chap. 7. Sect. 6.

2. There must be two Justices of them that are nearest to the place, that must
yearly within a Month of Easter, under Making Overseers of the poor.
their hands and Seals, appoint two, or more Overseers of the Poor, to be
joined with the Churchwardens of the Parish, to look to the Poor of the
Parish. And if the Justices do not do it, they forfeit 5 l. a piece. So there
must be two such Justices to allow of, and subscribe the Rates there made for
the Rates.
poor; to force them that refuse to pay it, and to force the Overseers at the
end of their year to Accounts, and to pay over the Money remaining in their
Account.
hands to their Successors. And these two Justices may if they perceive a
Parish overcharged with their Poor, and not able to bear the poor thereof, lay
a Rate upon any other Parish within the Hundred to help them. But if they go
Sessions.
further then the Hundred with the Rate, then it must be done at the Sessions.
And there a Rate may be imposed upon any part of the County for Contribution to
that Parish. And there also a Rate may be imposed upon the Parents,
Grand-Parents, or Children of Parents to relieve Children.
such as are poor toward their relief. The which they are to pay, or forfeit 20
s. a Month. And these two Justices may give their Warrant to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, to levy the Rate by distress and
sale of goods, upon such as rated, and for lack of distress, to send them to
prison till it be paid. Also these two Justices may send their Warrant to the
present, or subsequent Churchwardens, and Overseers, to levy by distress and
sale of goods, all Arrears of Rates remaining in any man's hands. And for lack
of distress to send them to Goal, till it be paid, Upon 49 Eliz. 2. 39 Eliz. 3.

3. Any two Justices may compel the Overseers and Churchwardens at the end of
their year to account, and pay over to their Successors the Money remaining in
their hands at the end of their year, or the 20 s. forfeiture for neglect of
it, or of one part of the Duty of their Office, and cause it to be levied by
way of distress and sale of goods, and for lack of distress to imprison the
parties, upon 43 Eliz. 2. And so may two Justices take account of these
Officers yearly of their Employment of all such Money as they have in their
hands of any man's gift, for the binding of poor Children Apprentices, Upon 7.
Iac. 3.

4. Any two Justices may join with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor, in the placing of the children of Poor people at the Parish-charge, or
otherwise, with Husbandmen, or other Tradesmen, and punish them that will not
take them, by putting them to give surety of the good Behavior, and to appear
at Sessions. And Good Behavior.
punish also the Parents that refuse to let their Children to go, and the
Children that refuse to go, Upon 43 Eliz. 2. 5. Any two Justices may agree to
and License the setting up of a Trade in the Parish to set the Poor on work
there, Upon 43 Eliz. 2.

5. Any two Justices may under their hands appoint present Relief to any poor
Soldier hurt in the late Wars, and the Wives and Children of such Poor
Soldiers and Mariners, their Wives and Children.
as were slain or dyed in the same Wars, till the Quarter Sessions. But for
this, take these things, 1. There must be two Justices living near to the place
where the maimed Soldier or Mariner in the last Wars, before the 22d of May,
1647, settled when he took up Arms, that upon a Certificate of his Service and
or his hurt, under the hand of his Captain, or his Comissary Officer, or (in
case where they be dead) under the hands of other persons of credit, who may
examine the Truth of the thing by his own Oath, and by Witnesses, and appoint
the Treasurer of the public money to this use, to give him Relief till the
next Quarter Sessions, And then a Pension Pension.
may be given to him. 2. And as to the Widows and Orphans of the Soldiers
Widows and Orphans of Soldiers slain or dead.
or Mariners that were slain, or dyed in those Wars; In this case, the two next
Justices may by warrant under their hands, appoint the Treasurers what to give
them for their Relief, and to acquaint the next Sessions therewith, to the end
it may be continued, or determined. Ord. May 22. 1647. August, 1647. December,
1647. September, 1651. 3. Every Justice is to take order for the Relief of all
the maimed Soldiers belonging to the Ar^its in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Widows and Orphans of such Soldiers as have been slain there, as soon
as they bring into them such a Certificate as is mentioned in the Ord. of 30th
September. 1651. or be sent unto them by the Treasurer for maimed Soldiers by a
Pass, under their hands and the public seal of their Office, for that
purpose, the same allowance not exceeding 4 s. a week to one such Soldier, or
Widow, Or if they be able to work, the same Justice is to provide that they may
have such work, as to get 4 s. a week. And the Justices are to help to place
their Children Apprentices. The same Ordinance of 30th September, 1651.

6. Any two Justices next to the place where a poor Mariner or Soldier that is
become from beyond Sea to his place of Settlement, and can get no work, to take
order to set him on work, and to Rate.
tax the Hundred for his Relief, till he can have work. 39 Eliz. 17.

7. How the idle poor that will not work, shall be ordered; and disorderly poor
punished, see Rogues, Sect. 48. of this Chapter.

For the binding of poor Children Apprentices, see Sect. 33. Numb. 8.

SECT. 43. About Rates and Assessements.
AS to this, what may be done herein out of Sessions, take these things:

1. Four Justices may with the Consent of the Constables of a place set a Rate
for the repair of a Bridge. Upon For Bridges.
12 H. 8. 5.

2. In case where the Parishioners, For King's Bench, etc. Maimed Soldiers, etc.
Constables, and Churchwardens of a Parish shall all of them neglect to set
and distribute upon the Parishioners the Rate set by the Justices of the Peace
in the Quarter Sessions, for the King's Bench and Marshalsies; In this case, any
one or more Justices of the Peace, may by him or themselves alone set the Rate,
and give Warrant to levy it by distress and sale of goods, etc. and for lack
of distress, to send the party to Goal till payment. Upon 43 Eliz. 2. And so
likewise he may do (save only as to Commitment upon the Rate for Relief of
maimed Soldiers and Mariners. Upon 43 Eliz. 3.

3. There must be two Justices of the Peace (and one of them of the Quorum) to
Rate, and give Warrant to levy the Poor.
Rate set upon other Parishes of the Hundred, for the help of another Parish
not able to keep the poor thereof. Upon 43 Eliz. 2. So for a Rate set upon a
Hundred for the Relief of a poor Soldier or Mariner that is come from the Sea,
and wants work or relief. Upon 39 Eliz. 17. See Sect. 38. of this Chapter.

4. The Justices may (and, as it seems, out of Sessions) set down the For
Barrels and Firkins of Ale.
Rates that the Brewers of Ale and Beer within the County shall sell by, their
Barrels, Kilderkins or Firkins of Ale or Beer, which they may not exceed. Upon
23 H. 34. But the fittest place to do this, is in the public Sessions.

5. For the Rate of a Hundred charged with the money lost by a Robbery, see
Robbery, Sect. 47. of this Chapter.

6. For the Rates of Poor, see Poor. Of Churches, see Churches.

7. For the Rate to carry a Prisoner to Goal, and what the Justices may do
therein out of Sessions, see it in Goal, Sect. 20. of this Chapter.

8. For the Plague, see Plague, Sect. 41. of this Chapter.

SECT. 40. About the Posse-Comitatus.
ANy one Justice of Peace, if he have cause; as to keep the Peace, suppress a
Riot, take a Felon, or the like, may raise, command, and use all the power of
the County; and every man required by him, is to obey him herein; or may be
punished by the Sessions for his neglect or contempt of his authority herein.

SECT. 44. About Recognisances.
1. ANy one Justice of Peace may take a Recognisance for the Peace, or good
Behavior, or for a man's appearing at the Assizes, or at the Sessions, to
prosecute or give evidence, to bayl a prisoner where he is baylable, or the
like: And this by the Common Law.

2. Any one Justice may take a Recognisance upon diverse Statutes; as of such as
keep, or use houses of unlawful games, that they shall do so no more. Of such
as are suspect to use Logwood, and of their witnesses: of such as take
Partridges, and Hawkers in corn, to appear at Sessions: of such as are convict
for taking or killing of Pheasants and Partridges, to do so no more: of the
Master that shall abuse his Apprentice, that he appear at Sessions: of him that
is robbed, that intends to be relieved against the Hundred, Upon 27 Eliz. and
some others.

3. There must be 2 Justices of the Peace (one of them of the Quorum) to take
Recognisances of Ale housekeepers, to bail a Prisoner baylable for Felony.
And so in other cases where the Statute does say, there must be 2. Justices.

4. Every Justice is to see to it, that the Recognisances taken by himself, or
by himself, another, or other Justices; that they be (especially if they be for
the bayling of Felons) returned into the next Assizes, or Sessions, (as the
case is) before the Judges or Justices there, to be proceeded upon there.

SECT. 45. About Recusants.
AS to this sort of people, these things are to be known:

1. If any Jesuit or Priest be made Jesuit. Priest.
known to him, he must acquaint one of the Privy Council with it within 28
days, under pain of 200 Marks. Upon 27 Eliz. 2.

2. If any Agnus Dei be discovered to Agnus Dei.
him, he must acquaint one of the Privy Council with it, within 14 days. Upon
13 Eliz. 2.

3. One Justice may require a Popish Recusant within three months after his
Conviction, to submit and declare his conformity to the Laws of Recusants. And
in case he do not so, he may, if it he not a Feme Cevert, require him to abjure
the Realm: But the Abjuration must be in the Quarter Sessions, Abjuration.
35 Eliz. 1. 21 Iac. 28. So one Justice may within 3. days after Mass said,
take Information of it. Upon Mass.
3 Iac. 5. So he may require a Popish Recusant above 16 years old, who shall
trava^l above five miles from his dwelling Travail.
without License, if he have less then 20 Marks a year, or 40 l. in goods, to
conform. Upon 35 Eliz. 2. So to send to Goal without Bail a suspected Jesuit or
Priest, that being brought before him upon a suspicion, refuses to answer
directly, whether he be a Popish Priest or Jesuit. Upon 35 Eliz. 2.

4. There must be two Justices of Peace to give an Oath to a Recusant, Oath.
licensed by them two, and two other Justices, to travail^ Upon 3 Iac. 5. and
35 Eliz. 2. So to search the houses of such men who, or whose Wives, are
suspect Papists for Popish Books and Books Popish.
Relics, and to burn them; or if they be of value, to deface and restore
them. Upon 3 Iac. 4. So to take the submission of one that has been Reconciled
to the Church, who within six days after his Return, shall tender it to them.
Upon 3 Iac. 4. So to take the Abjuration of a Popish Recusant. By 35 Eliz. 2.
So to require a Popish Recusant above 16 years old, which shall travail above
five Miles from his dwelling, without license, if he have less then twenty
Marks Freehold by the year, or forty pound in goods, to conform in three
months, or else abjure, and to certify it to the Assizes. Upon 35 Eliz. 2. So
if being 16 years, and have not 20 marks a year, etc. and to travail, and
required by one Justice of Peace to conform within three months, then to
require him to abjure, and to certify the Abjuration Abjure.
to the next Assizes. Upon 35 Eliz 2. And there must be two (and one of them of
the Quorum) to send to prison a woman Covert Recusant, not conforming in three
months, unless her husband will pay ten pound a month, or the thirds of his
Lands. On 7 Iac. 6.

5. Any two Justices of the Peace may send for any person above 16 years old,
that they suspect to be a Papist, and cause him to be bound by Recognizance, to
appear at the next Sessions, to take the Oath of Abjuration. And upon his
refusal, commit him to safe custody without bayl, till the next
Quarter Sessions: And if he come not upon this to the Sessions, they are to
present him to the Sessions as suspicious, or they sorfeit 20 l. Act. 17
September. 1656.

6. Two or more of them of every Division, must send their Warrant four times
in the year, once a Quarter, and 28 days at least before the Quarter Sessions,
to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parishes within their limits, to
require them at some time and place, 14 days before the Quarter Sessions, to
present upon their Oaths to them the Names, Sirnames, Additions and places of
abode, of all such of 16 years old or upwards, as are suspect to be Papists, or
Popishly affected. And then taking their Oath to the Presentment, shall by
their Warrant to the Constable, require him to summon such persons presented,
either by delivering a Note in writing, or leaving it at his house or usual
place of abode, to appear in person at the next Quarter Sessions, when and
where they. shall deliver in the same Presentment openly in the Court to be
Recorded. Act. 17. September. 1656.

SECT. 46. About a Riot, Rout, and unlawful Assembly.
AS to Ryots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies; In these Cases any one Justice
of Peace, upon complaint to him made, or notice to him given thereof, if it
continue, he must if he be able, go to the place and view it; And there he must
first of all quiet it, and remove the Force. For the doing whereof, he may (if
he see cause) raise the power of the County to assist him. And if he find the
Ryotors at the place, he is to disarm them, send them to Prison, and Good
Behavior.
bind them to the good behavior. And if the Justice cannot go himself to the
place, he may command his servants or others to go to the place to suppress
it, and bring the Riotors before him, to find the Sureties for the good
behavior, or if they refuse so to do, send them to Goal. But if the Riot be
past. Then the Justice is to call in to his help, another Justice, and let one
of them be of the Quorum, and by a special Sessions called and commanded by
the Warrant to the Sherists, to bring a Jewry before them, and to charge this
Jewry to enquire of the Oftence. And if the Jewry find the Offenders guilty,
the Justices are to record it, fine them, and send them to Goal till they pay
their Fine, upon 1 H. 5. 4. 13 H. 4. 7. 19 H. 7. 13. See in chap. 3. sect. 4.

SECT. 47. About a Robbery.
AS to Robberies, where the Hundred is chargeable for the Money taken away. And
where default is found in the prosecution of the Felon by another hundred, and
the one half of the Money is recoverable upon that hundred, by the party
robbed, in the name of the Clark of the Peace of the County; by 13 Ed. 1. 2.
and 28 Ed. 3. 11. And for an equal distribution in both these Cases; any two
Justices of Peace (one of them of the Quorum) living in or near to the place,
may set the Rate upon the Towns of the Hundreds. And after the Constables of
the Towns and Parishes have distributed and set it, and Rate.
levied it by distress and sale of goods, which they are to do by their
Offices without Warrant from any other, And therefore we would not advise you
to use for this, the Warrant in the Clark's Cabbinet, chap. 16. Numb. 1. And
then they are to deliver the same money to one of the same Justices of Peace.
And this money the Justice that receives it, is to see paid to them for whose
use it was raised, Upon 27 Eliz. 13.

SECT. 48. About Rogues, Vagabonds, and Idle persons.
AS to all these kind of persons these things are to be known.

1. That as for idle, loose, and dissolute persons, which wander from their
Idle persons.
usual place of living and abode, and can give no good reason for their
travel to satisfy a Justice of Peace, albeit they do not beg. Fiddlers, and
Minstrells that shall be playing, or oftering, or desiring Fiddlers.
to play in any Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling house, albeit they do not beg.
Soldiers and Mariners that have Pensions, and yet beg, or shall counterfeit a
Certificate, Counterfeit Egyptians,, Beggars, or others described to be Rogues
Egyptians.
within 43 Eliz. 3. 39 Eliz. 4. 17. 1 Iac. 7. 7. September. 1656. that shall be
taken and found begging, wandering and misordring themselves. In this case any
one Justice of Peace, upon his ^wn sight hereof, may cause such persons to be
whipped and send to their place of birth, etc. with a Testimonial of their
Correction, ^imitting the place to which, and the time wherein they are to go
thither, upon 39 Eliz. 4. 1 Jac. 7. But if this Offender be brought to a
Justice, we do not conceive it needful, the Justice should order this
Correction. For the Officers may, and ought to do it of their accord, without
the Justice of Peace's Warrant.

2. Any one Justice of Peace may secure an incorrigible Rogue (that is)
Incorrigible Rogues
one that is dangerous to the inferior sort of people, and will not be
reformed of his Roguish life, one that is able to work, and does run away from
his Family, and leave it upon the charge of the Parish, Upon 7 Iac. 4. till two
Justices can send him to the Goal or Bride-well, upon 39 Eliz. 4.

3. There must be two Justices of the Peace, and one of them of the Quorum,
that by the words of 39 of Eliz. 4. are by warrant under their hands and seals
upon the Confession of the offense by the party, or proof thereof by two
witnesses, to give power to levy by distress, and sale of goods, the
forfeirures within the Statute, (viz.) the 5 s. upon the Minister for not
keeping a Registerbook, the 10 s. upon the Constable for his neglect in the
Apprehension, and punishment of Rogues, the 20 s. upon him for his not
punishment, and not safe convey of a Rogue brought to him by another, the 10 s.
of him that does not apprehend a Rogue begging at his house, or that does bring
a Rouge out of Ireland hither. So also upon the like Conviction, to levy by
distress and sale of goods, and bind to the good Behavior, such as disturb
the execution of the Statute, of 39 Eliz. As Officers that shall send a Rogue
by a general Pasport or that shall refuse to receive a Rogue when he is
brought to them, or that shall shift him away, or that shall not bring him to
the next Parish; Or other persons that are not Officers, that shall shift away,
or Rescue a Rogue, or as hinder the settlement of a Rogue, or that when he is
duly settled in any place shall remove him without Authority. But herein we must
give notice to the Justice of Peace that this Statute is doubtfully penned. (as
to the manner of Caution to the Justices.
Conviction) For the words are, That if the Offense shall be confessed by the
Offender, or that the same shall be proved by two sufficient and lawful
Witnesses. And does not say what proof it shall be, nor give power to the two
Justices to take the Conviction by such proof. And therefore it is not, as we
conceive, safe for the two Justices out of Sessions to do it. And yet it is
more clear that the Justices may do it upon the Confession of the Offender. But
truly it is best to do it in the Sessions, and not safe to do it otherwise; Nor
safe to follow our Presidents in the 18. chap. of the Clarks Cabinet, See chap.
7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19.

4. There must be two Justices of the Peace, (and one of them of the Quorum) to
send to the house of Correction. or Goal of the County, till the next
Quarter Sessions, an incorrigible Rogue, Incorrigible Rogues Caution.
upon 39 Eliz. 4. And yet here we conceive the Justice must see him to be such
a one, and he must be before him, for he has no means to convict him hereof,
or otherwise we know not how he shall justify it.

5. There must be two Justices of the Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, to
appoint a privy Sessions, and to send their Warrant to the Constables, and to
command a privy search, three or four days before the meeting, and to
apprehend, and bring before them all such suspicious persons, as in their
search, they shall find out, and to command all the Constables of Hundreds to
be then there, and the Constables of Parishes upon Oath, to present under the
Ministers hand what Rogues they have taken, punished, and sent away. And to set
a Fine of 40 s, or under, upon any of the same Constables, for not appearing
before them, or for not making a Return, or for not making an Execution of
their Warrant, or for not Executing the Justices warrant at any time in the
Convey of Rogues, to the Bridewell, upon 7 Iac. 4. 21 I^c. 28. But herein is no
way of Conviction of Offenders, or of Levy of the penalty set down, and Caution
to the Justices.
therefore we cannot see any way to punish these Officers herein with safety,
out of the Sessions.

6. As to the poor man or Woman, A poor man that does threaten to run away from
his Family.
that is able to work, and that shall threaten to run away, and leave his
Family upon the charge of the Parish; in this case any two Justices of the
Peace, upon proof hereof by the Oath of two witnesses, may send the Offender to
the House of Correction, unless he or she can put in sufficient Security
House of Correction.
for the discharge of the Parish, upon 7 Iac. 4.

7. As for such poor as have able bodies, Poor that will not work.
and nothing but their work to live by, and do not work in any ordinary and
daily Trade to get their livings by their work; And the Overseers of the poor
do provide them work, and appoint them to do it, and they will not work; It is
said in this case, that the Justices, or any of them, may commit such persons
to the Goal, or to the Bride-well: And so are the words of the Statute of 43
Eliz. 20. But we cannot see how this can be done out of the Sessions; For there
is no way of Conviction of the offense. And this therefore must be necessarily
employed by the Act, that if they shall punish, they must first Convict the
offender.

8. It has been said, that such poor persons as beg beyond their license.
Idle poor to be sent to Bride-well.
Such poor as are able to work, and are idle, or will not work, by the
appointment of the Overseers of the poor; such common-Labourers, poor men, as
refuse to work for the wages appointed, and some others, may be sent to
Bride-well by the Justices of the Peace: But we cannot see by what Authority;
only this in the 7 Iac. 4. That if Constables shall neglect to convey safely
all such Rogues, with all other idle and disorderly persons, etc. as by the
Justices of Peace his Warrant shall be sent to the houses of Correction, etc.
That then they shall forfeit, etc. By which is employed, that the Justices might
and do send such persons thither. But this must refer to the cases in which
they are by other Laws empowred to send them thither. And howsoever it be, it
is sure it cannot be safely done by any Justices of the Peace out of the
public Sessions. See 39 Eliz. 4. 7 Iac. 4.

9. As to the Warrants then in the Clerks Cabines, in Chap. 18. and some
Caution.
of the Mittimus, in Chap. 25. which are contrary to the Cautions we have
herein given, we do now (upon better Consideration) utterly dislike them, and
advise the Justices of the Peace not to use them.

SECT. 49. About Sewers.
SIx Justices of the Peace (two of them of the Quorum) have some power with the
Commissioners of Sewers for a year. For which, see 13 Eliz. 9.

SECT. 50. About Sheriffs.
AS to this head, these things are to be known:

1. Any one Justice may punish the defaults of Sheriffs in not returning good
Jurors to enquire of a Forcible Entry. Upon 8 H. 6. 9.

2. He may punish his defaults in the County Court, by entering a plaint in the
name of a man not present, himself, or his Attorney; or by not taking care that
the Plaintiff in every Suit do put in his pledges; Or by entering more Plaints
then one; or more then the Plaintiff does desire for one and the same cause. Or
where a proceeding is against a Defendant in a Suit, and he has no warning to
appear; In these cases, any one Justice may examine the Sheriff, or any of his
Officers. And if he find the thing by their confession, or otherwise, he is to
certify it into the Exchequer, the Sheriff does forfeit 40 s. Upon 11 H. 7.
15. So one Justice may examine the Collectors of the Sheriff's Amercements of
the County Court, if they have collected more then is due upon their Estreats.
And if he find it so, he may certify the offense against them into the
Exchequer. 11 H. 7. 15.

3. There must be two Justices, and one of them of the Quorum, to overlook the
Sheriff's Books and Amercements, and to seal the Indentures of his Estreats,
and to swear the Bailiff, that he shall levy no more then is contained in those
Estreats. Upon 12 H. 7. 15.

4. Any two Justices (one of them being of the Quorum) may give the
Under-Sherift, his Bailiffs of Franchiles, Deputies, and Clerks their Oaths,
which they are to take, before they meddle with their Office. Upon 27 Eliz. 12.

SECT. 51. About a Supplicavit.
1. THis Writ, the Justice to whom it is sent and given, must see that he do
execute it.

2. He is thereupon to send his Warrant to the Constable, to bring the party to
be bound, before him, to put in Sureties according to the Writ; or if he
refuse, to carry him to Goal. And if the sum be left to his discretion, it is
fit for him to set down a good Sum.

3. After Sureties given, he is to grant a Supersedeas, to stop all other
proceedings upon Warrants granted by himself or other Justices, to the sanie
end.

4. He need not certify the Recognisance till a Cerciorari come to require it.

SECT. 52. About Superstitious Relics.
ANy one Justice of Peace where any Altars, Tables of Stone, Crucifixes,
Crosses, Images, Pictures of any Person of the Trinity, or Saint, or like
superstitious Relics, are yet remaining, may upon Information to him given
thereof, cause the same to be taken down. Upon Ord. May, 1644.

SECT. 53. About Swearing and Cursing.
AS to him that does prosanely Swear or Curse, Any one Justice of Peace, upon
his own hearing thereof, the Confession of the patry, or Oath of one Witness,
may send his Warrant to the Constable, to levy distress and sale of goods, to
the use of the poor, etc. the Forfeitures appointed by the Act. Which is, if
the offender be above 14 years old, and in degree, a Lord, or higher, 30 s. If
a Baronet, or Knight, 20 s. If an Esquire, 10 s. If a Gentleman, 6 s. 8 d. If a
common person, 3 s 4 d. And this for the first offense. And after one
Conviction, for every offense afterward twice as much. And in case no
distress can be had, nor Surety given to pay the money; Then to put the
offender (for the first offense) in the Stocks three hours. And for every
offense after the first Conviction, six hours. And if the offender be under 12
years old, then the Justice may send his Warrant to the Constable to see him
whipped by the Father, or Master of the offender, in presence of the Constable:
Or that the Constable do it himself. And of this Conviction, the Justice of
Peace is to keep a Record, and to make Certificates quarterly to the Clerk of
the Peace. Upon 22 June, 1650. But he that is by Jury in a Sessions (being
Indicted) found guilty of swearing the Tenth Oath (or ten times) once, is to be
adjudged a common-Swearer, and to be bound to the good Behavior, Good
Behavior.
with good Sureties, for three years, over and besides the Forfeitures
aforesaid. Or the Justice of Peace may, if he will, after he has taken the
Conviction, send his Warrant to the Constable to apprehend the body of the
offender, and bring him before him, to be proceeded against as before. And
there the Justice may perhaps persuade him to pay to the Constable the
Forfeiture imposed. But if he will not do it, the Caution to Justices.
Justice must let him go, and can do no more, but send his Warrant as before.

SECT. 54. About a Testimonial, or Certificat.
AS to this, these things are to be known:

1. Any one Justice may give a Laborers.
Testimonial under his hand and Seal, to Laborers, to go into another County
to work in the Harvest-time. Upon 5 Eliz. 4.

2. There must be two Justices to give a Testimonial to a Servant of his
departing Servant.
out of his Masters Service with his good will. Upon 5 Eliz. 4.

3. There must be three Justices to certify under their hands and seals, the
worth of the Parents or Children, to be taken in as Apprentices or Servants
Apprentices
to Clothiers, or Merchants. Upon 5 Eliz. 4.

4. There must be two Justices of the Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, to
certify to the Sessions against an Ale-house-keeper, that he does sell Ale
without License. Upon Ale-house-keeper.
5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.

5. One Justice may certify deceive. able Deceiveable Cloth.
Cloth. Upon 21 Iac. 18.

6. One Justice may join with a Customer, to certify the unlading, and selling
of Corn, and Cattle carried from one part of the Land to another. Upon 5 and 6
Ed. 6. 14.

7. One Justice may take and certify Jesuit.
into the Chancery, the submission, and Oath of a Jesuit, or Priest, given
within three days of his landing in England. Upon 27 Eliz. 2.

8. One Justice near to the place where a Soldier or Mariner shall land,
Mariner or Soldier.
may give a Testimonial to him, showing where he landed, whither he is to go,
and in what time he is to go it. Upon 39 Eliz. 17.

9. One Justice may take and certify the Examinations of a Dyer and his
Servants about Logwood. Upon Logwood.
39 Eliz. 11.

10. One Justice may under his hand and seal, with the Constable or Minister,
give a Testimonial of the whipping of a Rogue, and limit the place whither
Rogue.
he is to go, and in what time he is to go it. Upon 39 Eliz. 4.

11. Recognisances and Examinations Recognisances. Examinations.
taken before one Justice of Peace, may be certified by him alone unto the
Sessions, Judges of the Jail-delivery, or Justices of the Sessions. But when
they are taken before two or more Justices; there, a Certificate thereof by one
of them is not sufficient.

See more, Cerciorari Sect. 21. of this chap. Forcible Entry, Sect. 18. of this
chap. Felony. chap. 3. Sect. 16. Numb. 8.

SECT. 55. About Tithes.
AS to the power of the Justices of the Peace, to hear and determine matters of
Tithe, these things are to be known.

Any two Justices of the Peace, not being Patron of the place wherein the
Substraction is, nor parties, nor any way interested in the thing in question,
may therein out of any Sessions, do these following things.

1. They may send their Warrant of Summons to the Constable of the place where,
etc. to call in the person complained of before them.

2. They may upon his default send a second Summons.

3. They may upon the parties second default (the same summons being proved
upon Oath) in the absence of the defendant, or in his presence, upon his
Appearance, proceed by the Oaths of Witnesses, and other proofs on either side
to hear and determine the matter in difference between the parties, And by
writing under their hands and Seals, adjudge the Case, and give reasonable
costs and damages to either party, as they shall think fit.

4. They may also if they please give treble damages where the Statute does
allow it.

5. If the party do not within 30 days after he has notice given to him of
this Judgment given by the Justices of Peace, pay to the complaynant, the
Tithes, or Money so adjudged according to the Judgment, then the same two
Justices upon complaint made to them, may give and send their warrant to the
Plaintiff, the Constable, or such other persons as the Plaintiff shall name, to
distrain and sell the goods, and Chattels of the Defendant to satisfy it,
rendering the Overplus.

6. If no distress can be had to satisfy the Judgment, the same or any two
Justices may by their warrant, send the Defendant to Goal without Bayl, till he
do satisfy the debt upon the Judgment.

7. If the Officer or other person employed about the Execution of this Warrant
of the two Justices, they may fine them for it, any sum not exceeding 40 s. to
the use of the poor of the place where, etc. And send their warrant to whom
they please to levy the Fine, to levy it of his goods and Chattels, upon Ord.
8. November 1644, 9th August, 1647. 20th October 1648. But in this work the
Justices must take care of these four things. 1. That the Plaintiff Caution to
Justices.
have a good Title to the thing in demand. 2. That the Defendant be a
Parishioner. 3. That the thing demanded be a modus Decimandi, or a Tithe paid
two years before the wars, 4. That the proceedings be in every particular,
according to the directions given by the Ordinance.

SECT. 56. About Titles of Honor Assumed.
IF any by writing or otherwise, do voluntarily, and knowingly give to any
person any Title of Honor, or Dignity given to him by the late King, since
January 4th, 1641; In this case any one Justice of Peace, upon the Confession
hereof by the party, or Oath of one witness, may send his Warrant to the
Constable of the place where, etc. to levy by way of distress and sale of
goods, rendering, etc. the 10 s. Forfeiture named in the Act. And if there be no
distress, to put him in the Stocks for three hours. Febr. 4th, 1641.

SECT. 57. About Transportation.
IF any load a ship, or carry away in any Ship or Vessel, with intent to
transport any Wool, Yarn, Woollen Flox, Wooll-Fell, Fullers-Earth, Clay,
Fullers Earth.
Tobacco-pipe-Clay, or any other Earth or Clay, which may be used in the Art of
Fulling beyond Sea, and the owner of the ground where it is dug, do by a
note under his hand, ofter to discover it to any one Justice of Peace; This
Justice must receive it, and within three months after the discovery
Certificate.
thereof, make it known by his Certificate under his hand and seal to the
Batons of the Exchequer. 9. Jan. 1647.

SECT. 58. About a Trespass in Orchards, Woods, etc.
AS to him that shall cut, or carry away standing corn, rob Orchards or Gardens
of Fruit, etc. break hedges, or do any such like thing, that is not Felony; In
this case any one Justice of Peace, upon the confession of the offense by the
party, or proof thereof by the Oath of one witness, may order the offender to
give the party wronged such satisfaction as the Justice shall think fit. Or if
he judge him unable to make any satisfaction by money; or however, in case of a
second offense, the Justice may send his Warrant to the Constable to whip him.
And if the Constable neglect to do his duty upon this Warrant, the Justice may
send him to Goal till he procure the party to be whipped. according to the
Justice of Peace his Warrant, 43 Eliz. 7. But there is no way nor power given
to the Justice to convict the Constable of this neglect. And therefore this
punishment may not be inflicted but in a Sessions-way. If the Justices have
power of it there. Wherefore otherwise they may fine him, or bind him to the
good Behavior for his contempt, as an offense at the Common Law. Some say
also, that for a common-hedg-breaker, woodstealer, or robber of Orchards, That
he may be sent to the House of Correction, Bridewell.
which is more then we dare affirm. But this is certain, That if it be done, it
must be done by order of the Justices of the Peace in and not out of the
Sessions.

SECT. 59. About warrants made by the Justices.
AS to the Warrants the Justices of Peace are to make, these things are to he
heeded:

1. It is safe for the Justice to make all his Warrants in writing.

2. To see they be perfectly done when the Justice does Subscribe them. And not
to leave them with blanks, to be filled up afterward by others.

3. In all cases his hand must be subscribed; and in some cases his Seal is
necessary. And therefore it is best in all cases to put his hand, and affix his
seal to it.

4. For the manner of penning it; He may (if he will) put the style of it in
the Lord Protector's Name, thus; Glouc. ff. Oliver, Lord, etc. Or he may send
it in his own Name, A. B. Esquire, one of the Justices, etc. Or without any
style at all (thus); Complaint being made to me, etc. These are to require you,
etc. And it may be with, or without, a Tesle. But it is Test,
not amiss to say, Witness my hand and seal, etc. And a certain Date of the
Date,
day, month, and year, may not be omitted. See in the Clerks Cabinet, and in
the 30th Chapter of my first Book of the Justice of Peace his Office, more of
this.

5. The Justice is to take care hi Warrant be penned plainly and clear ly, that
the Officer that is to execute it, may understand, and to declare ambiguous
words in it. Such as this, That you cause to come before me: for by this he may
not understand, whether he may fummon him to come, or bring him prisoner. And
therefore to say rather, That you warn or summon bin to come, or be, before me,
etc.

6. If the Warrant be to be grounded on a Statute Law, the more care must be
had in it, exactly to pu^sue the directions of the Statute therein. And where
the Statute says, It shall be under the hand and seal of the Justice; or to
the Constables and Churchwardens, accordingly to pen it.

7. If a Warrant be made by a Justice, to apprehend a man, and bring him before
this, or some other Justice of the Peace, it is safe to set down in the Warrant
the cause of it, as that it is to put in Sureties of the Peace, or for the good
Behavior, or because he is charged with a Felony, or the like, And to be sure,
the cause will bear such a Warrant. And therefore we cannot approve (at any
hand) the usual Warrant to attach or apprehend men, and bring them before a
Justice of Peace; and say no more, but for misdemeanor only; or to answer to
such matters as shall be objected against him. See for this, Coo. 2. Part of
Inst. 59^.

8. Where by a Statute Law, power is given to a Justice or Justices of the
Caution.
Peace, to commit to prison, Bride-weil, or the like, in case of lack of
distress, or insufficiency, or the like, whereby to levy the forfeiture, There
the best way for the Justices, is to do it by one Warrant thus, and therein
pursue the words of the Warrant thus; That you levy of the goods, etc. And in
case you can find no distress, [or for lack of distresse] or that the party be
insufficient, etc. That then you carry him to Goal for three days; Or that you
whip him, etc. [as the case is] according to the Statute in that case provided.
Rather then to take upon him to know his insufficiency, or lack of distress.
And thereupon to send a second Warrant absolutely to do it.

9. Where any of the Presidents in the Clarks Cabinet do differ from the things
we have laid down in this Work, our advice is, that you do not follow them.

SECT. 60. About Watch and Ward.
ANy one Justice of Peace may cause Watches to be set from Sun to Sun, between
Aseension and Michaelmas-day. But it is handsome to do this by two or more
Justices of the Peace, at a Meeting of Justices. And if neglect be found in
them that Watch, or look to the Watch, one Justice alone may punish it, perhaps
by binding to the good Behavior; or Good Behavior.
(which is more safe) he may cause him to be Indicted at the Sessions for it.

SECT. 61. About Weights and Measures.
AS to him that shall buy, or sell by, or keep, any other Weight or Measure,
whereby any thing is bought or sold then according to the Standard of the
Exchequer; In this case any one Justice of Peace may upon the proof hereof by
the oath of one witness, convict him, and then may send his Warrant to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the place where, etc. or one of them, to give
them notice hereof, who by their Offices are to levy of him 5 s. to the use of
the Poor of the place where, etc. by distress and sale of goods, rendering,
etc. And if there be no distress, the Act is, to send the offender to Goal,
till he pay the Forseiture. But it does not give power to the Justice to do it;
and yet it is conceived to be good. But see Chap. 7. Sect. 6. 16. and 17. Car.
19.

Two Justices of the Peace (one of them of the Quorum) may by examination and
enquiry, hear and determine the desaults of Head-Officers, and Buyers and
Sellers in Market Towns, Cities, and Buroughs, that have not common Balances
and Measures according to the Exchequer, and those sealed; Or that buy and sell
with any other. And that have not their Weights and Measures viewed every car.
11 H. 7. 4. But this (we Caveat to Justices.
conceive) cannot be done, but by the holding of a Special Sessions by two
Justices for this purpose.

SECT. 62. About a Wood.
TWo Justices of the Peace, appointed by the Sessions of Justices, may divide a
Wood between the Lord and his Commoners, where they cannot agree, 35 H. 8. 17.

We have done with what we have to say of the Justices of Peace their power out
of the Sessions. And now one word to what they may do within their Sessions.

CHAP. IV. Of the Power of the Justices of the Peace, in the Sessions of the
Peace.
AS to this, these things are first to be known,

1. That the general or Quarter Sessions, for all the business of the The
time.
County, may be kept but once a Quarter. And that must be at the time
appointed, and now used. But the special or privy Sessions, (which is a
Session^ appointed for some special business) may be kept os^ner. as the
Justices of the Peace have occasion to keep it.

2. That there being present (as there must be) two Justices of the Peace at
What Justices must be there.
least, And one of these 2 of the Quorum.

3. They may exercise all the power given to them, by the Common Law, Their
power there.
upon the Commission of the Peace; and all the power given them by the
Statutes: which give them either a general power, as Justices of Peace to hear
and end, and do not say where or how. Or that give power to hear and end in
their general or quarter Sessions; or^ in their ordinary Sessions, or in their
principal Sessions, or in their Sessions. And there they have power to hear and
determine diverse Criminal matters, or to punish diverse offenses. Some by the
Common Law. And so they can there punish diverse offenses that are against the
public peace, as some Felonies, Nusances, Frauds, Riots, Routs, Forcible
Entries, Maims, Batteries, Assaults, Extortions, Conspiracies, Libellings, and
slandring Trespasses, and Miscarriage of Officers, and other things. And some
of these are oftences so made by diverse Acts of Parliament, and the power of
Hearing and Judging upon them (amongst others) is given to the Justices of the
Peace. And so they can punish in this Court, 1. The Badgers, Laders, Badgers,
Drovers. etc.
or Drovers, that do buy and sell Corn without, or beyond their License, upon
5, and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 5 Eliz. 12. 13 Eliz. 25. Bakers, and Brewers, that Bakers,
Browers.
break the Assize, upon 51 H. 3. 13 R. 2. 8. And that sell at unreasonable
Rates, or at higher prices then the Justices set down, upon 23 H. 8. 4. The
Brewer for selling Ale or Beer to an unlicensed Ale-house-keeper, more then to
serve his house, upon 4 Iac. 4. The Brewer that is a Cooper, and makes
Barrells, upon 23 H 8. 4. The Baker, or Brewer, that conspire together to sell
C^nspiracy.
their Victuals and drink but at certain prizes, upon 2, and 3. Ed. 6. 15. 3.
The Baliffs of Sheriffs, and others, that gather the Sheriffs Amercements of
Bailiffs. In levy of Amearcements.
his Courts, before the Estreats be examined by two Justices of the Peace, or
before the Bailiff is sworn, o^ that shall gather more then is upon his
Estreat, upon 11 H. 7. 15. 4. Such as do not Bark Oaken Trees when they are
felled, Bark.
upon 1 Iac. 22. 5. Blasphemers and Heretics, upon Ord. ^. August 1650,
Blasphemers and Heretics. Butchers. Conspiracy. Cattle.
and 2 May 1648. 6. Butchers, for a Conspiracy not to sell their meat but at
such Rates, upon 2, and 3 Ed. 6. 15. For buying and selling again of live
Cattle, upon 3, and 4 Ed. 6. 19. 1 Iac. 25. For killing of weanlings under two
years old for sale; upon 24 H. 8. 9. 1 Iac. 25. For selling measl'd, or murrain
flesh, upon 51. H. 3. For gashing or hurting of Hides out of season, upon 1
Iac. 22. For selling of Calves under five weeks old, upon 1 Iac. 22. For using
Calves.
the Trade of a Tanner and Butcher together; upon 1 Iac. 22. Or for killing or
selling on the Lords day. For which, see Lords day. 7. Here they may punish the
Abuses by the making, weighing, and packing up of Butter, upon Butter.
the Act of 12 March, 1649. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 21. 21 Iac. 22. And forbid such as
buy butter and cheese for a time upon 12 March, 1649. 8. Captains Captains and
Soaldiers.
and Soldiers that offend about their Musters, departure from their Service
purloyning their Arms, and the like offenses, upon 21 H. 6. 19. 18 H. 6. 19. 7
H. 7. 1. 3 H. 8. 5. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. 5 Eliz. 5. 39 Eliz. 17. 9 Such as do not
keep so many Sheep, upon 25 H. 8. 13. or do not breed so many Cattle, upon 2
and 3 Pb. and M. Cattle
3. 7 Iac. 8. 25 H. 8. 13. or buy and sell Cattle again, against 3 and 4 Ed. 6.
19. 10. S^^th as make any challenges, or Fight any Duells, or conceal
Challenges and Duels. Quarrellers. Provoking words or Gestures. Cordwainers,
Tanners, etc.
them, and know thereof. And such as use any disgraceful, or provoking words
or gestures against another, upon 29 June 1654, and 17 September 1656. 11. Here
they may punish Cordwainers, Carriers, Tanners, Shoomakers, and the like, for
their miscarriage in their Trades, about Hides, Leather, Boots, and Shoes,
Calves skinned, and the like. Upon 27 H. 8. 14. 5 Ed. 6. 15. 1 Mar. 2. 8. 5
Eliz. 22. 1 Iac. 22. 4 Iac. 6. 12. Such as keep Markets and Fairs in Churches,
and Churchyards, Church, and Churchyard.
upon the Statute of Winchester, 1 Ed. 1. and the new Law of 17 September. 1656.
And such as strike or draw weapon in a Church or Churchyard, upon 5 and 6. Ed.
6. 4. And the not repairing of Churches and Isles, upon Ord. 9. February, 1646,
13. Here they may punish the Offenses, and Offenders, about the making and
ordering of Cloth, upon 21 Iac. 18. Cloth, and Clothiers.
3 and 4 Ed. 6. 2. 23 Eliz. 9. 39 Eliz. 20. 4 Jac. 2. 43 Eliz. 10. 21 Jac. 6.
7. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 5. 22. 36 Eliz. 11. 39 Eliz. 11. 14. Punish Artificers,
Laborers, that agree to do but such work, or to work at such a Conspiracy of
Artificers, etc.
rate; or Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Poulterers, Cooks, Coster-mongers, or
Fruiterers that agree to sell their Vistualls but at certain prizes, upon 2 and
4 Ed. 6. 15. and 5 Eliz. 4. if that Law continue, whereof some doubt. 15. Here
they may order the setting up of houses of Correction, and Rate the
Correction-House.
County to do it, make, and change the Governor, or Master of it, and order
and punish him at their discretion, upon 7 Jac. 4. 16. Here they may punish
such as turn Corn into meal, and Flower, Corn.
and sell it otherwise thenis appointed, by 23 October 1650. 17. Such Cottages,
and In-mates. Counterfeiters of false Tokens. Crows, Directory Service of God.
as build or keep up Cottages against 31 Eliz. 7. 18. Such as cheat other men
of their money, or goods, by false tokens, upon 33 H. 8. 1. 19. Such as neglect
their duty in taking Crows, upon 24 H. 8. 10. 20. Such as observe it not in
the service of God, upon 21 August, 1645. (as some say.) But it seems to me,
the Justices of Peace have not to do with it by that Ordinance. And that that
law is Suspended by a Clause in 17 September. 1656. 21. Such as oftend about
Fasting, or Fasting and Fish-dayes, Fish.
Fish-dayes, upon 5 Eliz. 5. 22. Such as offend by taking, and destroying of
Fish, by cutting of the heads of Ponds, or otherwise, upon 13 Ed. 1. 46. 13 R.
2. 2. 17 R. 2 9. 1 Eliz. 17. 27. 5. Eliz. 21. 3 Jac. 12. 21 H. 8. 2. 5 Eliz. 5.
or in the packing or sale thereof, upon 22 Ed. 4. 2. 11 H. 7. 23. 5 and 6 Ed.
6. 14. 5 Eliz. 5. 3^ Ed. 3. Stat. 1. 2. 3. 23. Here they may punish a Servant,
or Mariners, Forgery.
for forging a Testimonial, and others, for forging of false Letters, and
Tokens to get money, upon 5 Eliz. 5. 33 H. 8. 1. 24. So Fore-stallers,
Forestallers, Regrators, etc.
Regrators, and Ingrossers of Corn, Cattle, or other provision, upon 5 and 6
Ed. 6. 14. 13 Eliz. 25. 5 Eliz. 12. Act 29th October 1650. Of Bark, upon 1 Jac.
22. Of Hides, upon 1 Jac. 22. Of Wool, upon 1 and 2 Ph. and M. 13. of Tanned
Leather, upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 15. 25. So also the Goldsmiths, for their offenses
in their Trades, upon 2 H. 6. 14. Articuli super Chart. 20. Goldsmiths, and
Gilding.
28 Ed. 1. 4 H. 7. 2. 8 H. 5. 3. 2 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 4. 18 Eliz. 15. 17 Ed.
3. 14. 26. So also Offenders about Guns, upon 33 H. 8. 6. 2 Guns.
and 3 Ed. 6. 14. 27. So also offenders about Highways, upon two and Highways
3 Ph. and M. 8. 29 Eliz. 5. 5. Eliz. 13. 18 Eliz. 10. 22 H. 8. 5. by officers;
or others that do not help to amend them. And by any that do hurt them by
Nusances done to them. 28. Offenders about the breed and keeping of Horses,
upon 32 H. 8. 13. 1 Ed. Horses.
6. 5. 8 Eliz. 8. 21 Jac. 28. The not Tolling of Horses in a Fair, upon 2 Toll.
and 3 Ph. and M. 2. 31 Eliz. 12. 29. The neglect of pursuit of Hue-and-Cry,
upon 27 Eliz. ^3. 3 Ed. 1, 9. Hue-and-Cry.
13 Ed. 1, 3. 30. The Offenders in Hunting, Hawking, etc. upon 1 Hunting,
Hawking, etc.
Jac. 27. 3 Jac. 13. 19 H. 7. 11. 1 H. 7, 7. 7 Jac. 11, 13. 5 Eliz. 21. 11 H.
7, 17. 23 Eliz. 10. 13 R. 2, 13. 31. Such idle persons as live at high Rates,
and spend much, and have no visible Idle persons.
way to maintain it, upon Act, 17, September. 1656. 32. Here they may Incontinent
persons.
punish Incestuous persons, Adulterers, Fornicators, such as keep or use lewd
houses, upon 10th of May, 1650. Such as have Bastards. And here they provide to
secure Parishes against the charge of Bastard Children, upon 18 Eliz. 3. 7 Jac.
4. 33. Informers for their miscarriages about Informations, Informers.
upon 4 H. 7, 20. 18 Eliz. 5. 31 Eliz. 5. 21 Jac. 4. 34. Inn-holders, Hostlers,
Victuallers, and Ale-house-keepers, Inn-holders. Ale-house-keepers. Drunkards
for their miscarriages in their entertainments, upon 21 Jac. 21. 23 Ed. 3, 6.
13 R. 2, 8. Also Drunkards and Tiplers, upon 4 Jac. 5. 7 Jac. 10. 1 Jac. 9. 1
Car. 4. 35. Jurors of a Jewry, for concealment and perjury, Jewry. Libellers.
upon 3 H. 7, 1. 36. Libellers and slanderers, upon Ord. 25. June 1654. and 17
September. 1656. 37. Here they may License Badgers, Drovers of Licenses.
Cattle, Laders, Ridders, Carryers, Buyers, and transporters of Corn, Grain,
butter and cheese, upon 2 and 3 Ed. 6, 24. 5 Eliz. 12. 13 Eliz. 13. So here
they may give a License to shoot in a Gun, for Hawks meat, upon 1 Jac. 27. So
here they may give License to a man to sell Wine in a Town not Corporate, upon
7 Ed. 6, 5. So here they may give License to buy wheat, and turn it into
Flower, Meal, etc. and to this there must be the hands and Seals of five
Justices of the Peace, upon the 23 of October 1650. So they may here also, if
they please, give Licenses to sell Ale to Ale housekeepers, upon 5 and 6 Ed.
6. 25. 38, Here also they may restrain the number of Malsters, and buyers of
Barley to convert into Malt, and punish Malsters,
the making of bad Malt, upon 2 and 3 Ed. 6, 10, 20. 39 Eliz. 16. 5, and 6 Ed.
6, 14. 39. Here they do punish Mariners for wandering, and Idleness, Mariners.
and making and using of false Testimonials, upon 39 Eliz. 17. 40. Here they
may set down the rates for the wages of Servants and Laborers, Masters, and
Servants. Laborers. Apprentices.
discharge Apprentices, and punish all the miscarriages of Masters,
Apprentices, Servants and Laborers, upon 5 Eliz. 4, 2. 3 Ed. 6, 16. 1 Jac. 6.
21 H. ^, 7. 1 Jac. 17. 3 Jac. 9. 41. Here they may punish Millers for their
Millers.
taking of excessive Toll, upon 31 Ed, 1, de pistoribus. 42. Such as openly
Ministers.
revile Godly Ministers, and their Assemblies, or disturb them in the Service
of God, upon the two new Acts of Service of God.
17 September. 1656. 43. Here they give Oaths to diverse Officers, the
Commissioners Oaths.
of Sewers, upon 23 H. 8, 3. Constables, and others. 44. Here they make,
remove, change, and order Officers.
their Treasurers for the County stock, for the Kings Bench, and Marshalsie
Money, and for the poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, upon 43 Eliz. 2, 3. And
for maimed Soldiers, and the Widows and Orphans of Soldiers slain in the late
Wars, upon the Ordinances of August, and May 1647. The Collectors of the
Goal-money, upon 14 Eliz, 5, The Masters of Bridewell, upon 30 Eliz. 4. 7 Jac.
4. Here they use to make and remove High-Constables, and Petit-Constables,
Searchers for Pewter and Brass, upon 1 H. 8. 7. And punish their miscarriages;
And so also they may here punish the defaults of Overseers of the Poor,
Churchwardens and Surveyors of the Highways, upon 43 Eliz. 2, 3. 2 and 3 Ph.
and M. 8. 7 Jac. 4. For which, see the several Titles of Poor, Church,
Highwayes: Here also they may punish the offense of Sherifts, upon 27 Eliz. 12.
11 H. 7. 15. 4 Ed. 3, 9. 23 H. 6, 10. 27 Eliz. 12. 42 Ed. 3, 9. of Coroners
that resuse to enquire after the death of one slain, or take more for his Fee
then is due, upon 1 H. 8. 7. 3 Ed. 1. 10. 3 H. 7. 1. 1 Jac. 25. 14 Eliz. 5.
Clark of the Market for not doing his duty about weights, upon 16, 17 Car. 19.
13 R. 2. 16 R. 3. So the Clark of the Peace for his Offenses, upon 12 R. 2. 10.
38 H. 8, 14. 3 Jac. 4. 34 H. 8. 14. 2 Ed. 6. 14. 5 Eliz. 4. 12. 18 Eliz. 5, So
Stewards of Courts, upon 13 R. 2, 8. The common informer, upon 18 Eliz. 5. The
owners of Markets and Fairs, upon 31 Eliz. 11. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 7.
Conservators of Rivers, upon 27 R. 2, 9. Overseers of Cloth, upon 3 and 4 Ed,
6, 2. Searchers of Leather, upon 1 Jac. 22. Gawgers of Vessels, upon twenty
three H. 8. 14. Watchmen that do not their duty. See Watchmen. Ministers of
Parishes. Upon 39 Eliz. 4. 17. And here they may order the Parishioners to pay
the Clerk his wages, that two Clerks wages.
Justices have set down out of Sessions. And here all these Officers may be
called to account, and ordered to pay Account.
what they have of the public stock in their hands. 43 Eliz. 3. Ord. December.
1647. See Account 45. Here they give and take away the Pensions of Pensions.
Soldiers, at their pleasures. Upon 43 Eliz. 3. 1 Jac. 25. Ord. of May, 1647.
and December, 1647. 46. Here they may punish Perjury, upon 5 Eliz. Perjury.
9. 13 Ed. 1. 1. 47. Here they may punish the keeping, or haunting of houses
Plays and Sports.
of unlawful Games. And want of Bows and Arrows, upon 33 H. 8. 9.
Cock-matches, upon 31 March, 1644. and 17 September. 1650. Stage Players, upon
Ord. 9th Febr. And such as set and keep up May-Poles, upon 6th of April, 1644.
48. Here they Poor.
may punish all the miscarriages about the Poor, in the poor, and such as are
to order, or to relieve them: Here they may give order with the Lords consent,
Rates.
to set up a house on the Common for the poor where need is; give Relief to
them that appeal to them from the Justices out of the Sessions, upon an
over-Rate. Upon 43 Eliz. 2. 3. 39 Eliz. 4. So to see that poor Soldiers and
Mariners, and the Wives and Children of them that were slain in the Wars, be
relieved. Upon 30th September. 1651. 24 December. 1647. 28 May, 1647. Here they are
to order where the poor shall be settled; and punish them that hinder the
execution of the Statutes for the settling of the poor. upon 39 Eliz. 4. And
here they set the Rate of the County for the King's Bench and Marshalsies, and
dispose of the overplus thereof to charitable uses. Upon 43 Eliz. 3. 49. Here
they may punish false Prophecies. upon 5 Eliz. P^ophecies. Rates.
15. 50. Here the Rates are first to be made for the King's Bench and
Marshalsie, upon 43 Eliz. 2. For the Prisoners in the Goal, upon 14 Eliz. 5.
For the relief of maimed Soldiers, and the Widows and Orphans of Soldiers
slain in the late Wars. Upon the Ordinances named before, August, 1647. May,
1647. December. 1647. September. 1651. And for relief of the old maimed Soldiers
and Mariners, upon 43 Eliz. 3. And here the Rate is to be confirmed for them
that are sick of the Plague, upon 1 Jac. 31. Here the Rate is to be made for
the building of Bride-wells, upon 7 Jac. 4. Here they are to set down the Rates
by which vessels of Ale and Beer shall be sold, upon 23 H. 8. 4. And by which
Victuallers shall sell their Victuals, and Hostlers their Horse-bread. Upon 13
R. 2. 8. 23 H. 6. 13. And here they that complain are to be relieved against
all over-rates made by the authority of the Justices of the Peace out of the
Sessions, upon 43 Eliz. 2. 14 Eliz 5. 18 Eliz. 3. Ord. 8. February, 1647. 51.
Here they do discharge Recognisances, such Recognisances.
as are to be discharged. And hence they must be certified into the Exchequer
when they are forfeited. And here they may put in execution a Recognisance
forfeited by an Ale-seller, Upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 52. Here they may punish
Recusants, Priests and Jesuits, Recusants.
upon 13 Eliz. 2. 23 Eliz. 1. 27 Eliz. 2. 35 Eliz. 2. 21 Jac. 28. 3 Jac. 4. 5.
6. 7 Jac. 6. 5 Eliz. 1. 17 September. 1656. 53. Here they are to give Restitution
of the owners Restitution.
goods to him that has been robbed of them, and that has by his Industry and
evidence procured the Felon to be indicted and is found guilty, upon 21 H. 8.
11. 54. Here they are to punish Riots, Routs, Insurrections, Riots. Routs, etc.
and unlawful Assemblies, upon 13 H. 4. 7. 2 H. 5. 8. 8 H. 6. 14. 19 H. 7. 13.
1 Mar. 12. 1 Eliz, 16. 55. Here they are to dispose of the Rogues that are sent
to Bride-well, Rogues.
to brand Incorrigible Rogues, and punish the Officers for neglect of their
duty about Rogues; or others that hinder the execution of the Statutes against
them. Upon 39 Eliz. 4. 17. 1 Jac. 7. 7 Jac. 4. 56. Here they are to punish such
as come not to public Service of God.
meetings of Gods Service on the Lords day; and them that disturb such
meetings; upon the New Law of 17. September. 1656. But nothing can be done now
in, or out of Sessions against any man, for not coming to Church, upon the old
Laws, of 1 Eliz. 23 Eliz. For they are all made void by the Act of 27 September.
1650. 57. Here they may punish them that offend about Tile and Tile-making.
Assuming Titles.
Tile-making, and Tile-selling; upon 17 Ed. 4. 4. 58. Here they must punish the
Assuming of Titles given by the late King; upon Febr, 4. 1651. 59. The
miscarriage of Tradesmen and Artificers in their Trades; upon 1 Jac. Tradesmen
and Artificers.
22. 2 Ed. 6. 15. and other Statutes. 60. Here they are to punish the
Transportation of things prohibited out of the Land; upon 1 and 2 Ph. and M. 5.
Transportation.
21 Jac. 28. 1 Jac. 22. 25. 1 Jac. 4. 8 Eliz. 3. 13 Eliz. 13. 1 and 2 Ed 6. 5.
3 Jac. 11. But see the New Act now, 17 September. 1656, that gives power to
transport many things. 61. Here Vintners.
they are to punish Vintners that sell their Wine without License, or above the
Rates set down by the Justices here; upon 7 Ed. 6. 5. 28 H. 8. 14. 37 H. 8. 23.
62. So Victuallers, that conspire to Victuallers.
sell their Victuals at a set price, or above the prizes set by the Justices.
63. So to punish Usury; upon 13 Eliz. Usury.
8. 1 Ed. 4. 2. 64. The Abuses in the sale of Wines; upon 1 Ed. 6. 5. Wines.
28 H. 8. 14. 7 Ed. 6. 5. 65. Those that have not, or use not just Weights,
Weights and Measures.
according to the Standard; upon 12th of March, 1649. 11 H. 7. 4. 8 H. 6. 5. 11
H. 6. 8. 1 H. 5. 10. 7 H. 7. 4. 66. Order the dividing of a Wood between Lord
and Tenants; Wood.
upon 25 H. 8. 17. And so generally all the offenses that the Justices of the
Peace, or any of them, may punish out of Sessions; all these the Justices may
punish in the Sessions. And some others there may perhaps be, that we have not
named in the one, nor in the other, that the Justices of the Peace may have
Conusance of.

And their ordinary way of proceeding herein for the trial of these offenses,
and Conviction of these offenders, is, The offender is to be Presented or
Indicted; And thereupon Process go^h out against him, to come in to answer it.
And he comes in, and does either Consesse, or Traverse it. And upon his
Traverse, a Jury is charged to try the matter of Fact. And if the Jury find him
guilty, Then Judgment is given. If it be an offense at Common Law, the same is
commonly by Fine and Imprisonment at the discretion of the Court. If upon a
Statute Law, he is judged to bear the penalty appointed by the Statute for the
offense; which they may not mitigate, but in case of a special Submission
before ple^ding. And execution follows. And sometimes they use for a part of
the punishment, to bind to the Peace, or to the good Behavior.

CHAP. V. Of the things they may do out of a Sessions indifferently.
THere are many things that the Justices may do within or without their
Sessions indifferently as they please. So to set down the Prices of Ale and
Beer; Upon 23 H. 8. 4. Hear Prices of Ale and Beer.
and end offenses about Pheasants, etc. upon 1 Iac. 27. Force the Clothier to
pay his Workmen his wages; upon 1 Iac. 6. So in diverse other Cases, as 1 Iac.
6. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10. 17 R. 2. 9. Ord. 21 May, 1647. where it is said, The
Justices shall do a thing which may be done out of Sessions. But all things
will be most safely done in the Sessions.

We have showed what the Justices of the Peace may do out of, and in, their
Sessions, we shall now show what they may not do at all within or without their
Sessions. See more in Chap. 7.

CHAP. VI. Of the Things the Justices of Peace have no Conn^sance.
FOr answer to this, take these things:

1. The Justices may in their general Treason.
Sessions, enquire of, and take Presentment of any High Treason, Petit Treason,
or Misprision of Treason, by the Common Law; but they may not there further
proceed therein. Not have they to do with the Statutes of Treason and Praemunire
about Jesuits, Priests, and Popery; Upon 1 Eliz. 1. 5 Eliz 4. 1 Iac. 4. 5. 3
Iac. 5. 13 Eliz. 1.

2. They may hear and determine all Folonies.
Felonies, that are Felonies, by the Common Law. And such Felonies that are
made so by the Statutes that give them power to hear and determine them. But
they seldom or never m^ddle further with any such Felonies, then to commit,
the Felons, and bind over the prosecutors and witnesses to be before the Judges
of the Jail-delivery, to whom they always leave it, except in case only of
Petit Larcenies. But for Felonies, by Imbezilling a Record; Felonies by
Statute Law.
upon 8 H. 6. 12. by forg^ng of deeds; upon 5 Eliz. 14. By confederacy of
Masons; upon 3 H. 6. 1. By carrying away a woman against her will; Upon 3 H. 7.
2. By double marriage; upon 1 Jac. 11. By Witchcrast; upon 1 Jac. 12. By a
Jailer, in making his Prisoner an Approver; upon 14 Ed. 3. 9. By acknowledging
a Fine in another Name; upon 21 Jac. 29. By Servants that imbesil their
Masters goods; upon 21 H. 8. 7. 5 Eliz. 10. By burning of a house, or Frame of
a house; upon 37 H. 8. 6. And some others, the Justices of Peace have nothing
more to do with these within, or without their Sessions, but to examine the
offender. send him to Goal, etc. as they do with other Felons.

3. The Justices of the Peace have nothing to do about Maintenance and
Champertie; upon 32 H. 8. 9. Nor Maintenance. Sheriffs. Clerk of the Market,
Coopers. Wool and Cloth. Servants. Bows.
about Sheriffs; upon 1 Ed. 4 2. 4 Ed. 3. 10. Nor about the Clerk of the
Market; upon 13 R. 2. 4. Nor about Coopers; upon 23 H. 8. 4. 31 Eliz. 8. Nor
about woollen Yarn; upon 7 Ed. 4. 3. Nor about Cloth; upon 43 Eliz. 10. 27 H.
8. 12. Nor about a Servants wasting of the dead Masters goods; upon 21 H. 8. 7.
Nor about Bows; upon 12 Ed. 4. 2. 1 R. 3. 13. Nor about selling of Cattle;
upon the 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 19. Nor about Cattle. Importation.
bringing in of Foreign Wares; upon 5 Eliz. 7. Nor about the prices of Bows;
upon 8 Eliz. 10. Nor about Usury; upon 8th of August, 1651. Nor about the
Directory; upon Act. Directory.
23 August, 1645. 26 April, 1645. And some other Statutes and offenses thereby
made, there are, about other things wherewith the Justices of the Peace have
not to do at all.

4. They cannot here give a Remedy for a debt, a Legacy, or for Alimony:
Legacy. Alimony.
But if a Wife be a charge to a Parish, they may rate the Husband to help the
Parish. See more in Chap. 7.

CHAP. VII. Of the Order of the proceeding by the Justices of the Peace, in the
punishment of offenders within and without the Sessions of the Peace.
SECT. 1.
THe Order and manner of proceeding against offenders for the punishment of the
offenses we have spoken of, is either within, or without the Sessions. The
Course of the Justices of the Peace in the Sessions, is to enquire by Jury, and
to take their Presentment, or to receive Indictments, and (in some cases)
Informations preferred by others. And thereupon to grant out process against
the offenders, to come in and answer the matter whereof they are accused. And
upon theie appearance, if they do not consesse the offense, to take and enter
their Traverse, charge a Jury with the matter of Fact. And if the Jury find
them guilty thereof, the Justices do give Judgment (as the case deserves) of
Fine, Imprisonment, or Amercement, or otherwise; And Execution is done
thereupon accordingly. And so an offender there becomes attaint or convict of
his offense, either by his confession of it, when he is to plead to it upon the
Indictment, Presentment, or Information; or when upon his Traverse to it, the
same is referred to a Jury, to try whether he Be guilty or not, And the Jury
does find him Guilty. And this is the common way of Trial. But there are in
some special cases, other ways of Trial there, by Certificate, Examination of
the offenders and witnesses; but this is very rarely used. The Statute-Lawes,
Acts and Ordinances of Parliament wherewith the Justices of the Peace have to
do, are many; And those (especially as to the point of Conviction of offenders,
and the execution thereupon) they are variously penned; Not three of threescore
of them do agree therein, but are of several forms of drawing in that part.

For, 1. As to the persons that are to do the work, Some of them say, That the
Justices of the Peace of the County may do it. Some, That all the Justices may
do it. Some, That any of the Justices may do it. Some, That any one of the
Justices may do it. Some direct, That the thing must be done by one, some by
two, some by more Justices. And some, That one of them that do it must be of
the Quorum.

2. As to the place where they are to do it. Some of the Laws say, That it
shall be done by the Justices, and do not say where is shall be done. Others
say, It shall be done in the Quarter-Session. Others, in the General Sessions.
Others, in the open Sessions, or in the public Sessions. Others, in the
General or Quarter Sessions, Others, in the ordinary Sessions. Others, at the
usual and General Sessions. And others say, in the Sessions. Others, in any
Sessions of the Peace, etc.

3. As to the words by which the Justices are empowered; Some Statutes, etc.
give to the Justices power and authority by these express words, That they
shall have power. Others are, That they shall do it. Others, That they may do
it. Others, That it may be done before or by them. Others thus, Such a thing to
be done by the Justices of the Peace, and the like.

4. So for the manner of the doing of it: 1. For the Conviction of the offender
of his offense; Some Statutes, etc. set down a penalty, and say, That the
Justices shall hear and end it; and do not say, how. Others say, That the
Conviction shall be by the Oath of witnesses; some, by one; some by more
witnesses. Some, by the hearing, view or sight of Justice of Peace. Some, by
the Consession of the offender. Some, by the proof (not saying, upon Oath) of
Witness, or Witnesses. Some, by Information. Some, by Examination: And some,
by Certificate. Some, by any one; some, by two or three of these ways. And
some give power to administer the Oath; and some give no power to administer
the Oath. 2. And so for Execution; Some direct somewhat to be done, and say not
who shall do it. Some of them direct the Justice of Peace to make a Warrant,
and say not what Warrant; whether in writing, or under hand or seal; or to whom
it shall be directed. Some are appointed to be sent to the Constables; some, to
the Churchwardens: some, to Overseers of the Poor; and some, to two sorts of
them. Some appoint the Warrant to be in writing, and under the hand and seal of
the Justice of the Peace.

5. And so for the matter or thing to be done; Some to hear and determine in
the offense; some, to punish the offender: some are to put the Statute in
execution. Others, to punish offenders against that Law. Some give a power to
commit the offender to the Goal; some, to the Bride-well; some, to distrain his
goods, etc. Some are to convict the offender, and then to proceed to execution.
Others are, That the Justices shall convict the offender, and then certify
this Conviction to some other Court, etc.

We shall lay down diverse examples of these things. And then give our opinion
upon them, by way of Question and Answer.

SECT. 2.
1. Some of the Statutes, etc. we speak of seem to give to the Justices of the
Peace a power to do something only, or chiefly in the Sessions of the Peace.
And some again seem to give them a power to do somewhat with out the Sessions
of the Peace. And some again seem to give them a power to do something within
and without the Sessions, as they please to do it. And some seem to give a
Power to do the work, part of it without, and part of it within the Sessions.

2. Some Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances of Parliament are penned, as to the
Conviction of Offenders, to this To hear and Determine. Horses. Sheriffs. High
ways and Bridges. Fish. Victuallers Guns. Perjury. Navy. Lord's Day. Forcible
Entry. Captains. Prophecies Hunting. Gold and Silver. Blasphemy. Wandering
Soldiers and Mariners.
purpose. That the Justices of the Peace shall have power to hear and determine
the offenses, So is 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 7. 31 Eliz. 12. 32 H. 8. 13. of Horses,
27 Eliz. 7. 12. Of Sheriffs, 12 March, 1649. of Butter, 18 Eliz. 12. of
Highways, 22 H. 8. 5. Of Bridges, 1 Eliz. 17. of Fish, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15. of
Victuallers, 33 H. 8, 6. of Guns, 5 Eliz. 9. of Perjury, 8 Eliz. 5. of the
Navy, 17 September. 1656, of the Lords Day, 8 H. 6. 7. of Forcible Entry, 2 and 3
Ed 6. 2. of Captains, 5 Eliz. 15. of Prophecies, 5 Eliz. 21. 3 Jac. 13. of
Hunting, 23 of Eliz. 10. of Hawking, 8 H. 5. 3. of Gold, 2 H. 6. 14. of Silver,
9 August, 1650. of Blasphemy, 39 Eliz. 17. of wandering Soldiers, and Mariners.
All these and some others do run to this purpose. And yet the greatest part, if
not all of these do differ amongst themselves the one from the other, some of
them give power to the Justices of the Peace, to enquire, hear, and determine.
Others to examine, enquire, hear, and determine; others to examine, and
determine: And some of them are (only) to hear and determine. Some of these
also are to hear and determine in the Quarter Sessions, others in the general
Sessions. Others in the Sessions. Others to hear and determine the offenses.
But does not say where. And in some of them there are Additions of other
things. Some give them power to hear and determine by Bill Plaint. etc. and
some by one way and some by another way, and some by no way at all. Some of
them do add that the Justices shall grant out process. Others that they shall
fine. Others that they shall do execution thereupon, according to the Law, and
the like.

3. Others there are that are penned in other words, but much to the same
purpose. As for example.

One is penned to this purpose. That the Justices of the Peace in their
Sessions, Adultery.
shall have power to give in charge to a Jewry to enquire, and shall enquire by
the verdict of twelve men of all the said offenses, etc. And upon Enditement,
or presentment, to hear, and determine, as in other cases of Felony, or
Trespass, So 10th May, 1650, of Adultery.

4. Others to this purpose. That a Presentment taken before a Steward of a
Leet, shall be sent to the Justices in Horses.
their Sessions. And then that they shall proceed to hear and determine it, as
if it were taken by themselves. So 32 H. 8. 13. of Horses. 1 Ed. 4. 21. of
Sheriffs. Sherifts.


5. Another is to this purpose. That the Justices of the Peace shall examine,
hear, and determine the defaults of etc. and punish the offenders by
imprisonment, according to their discretion. So 28 H. 8. 14. of Wines. Wines.


6. Others are with reference to other Statutes, etc. That they shall have like
power to punish these offenses, as they have to ^unish the offenses against
another Statute, or another clause of the same Statute, So 3 H. 7 7. 17 Ed. 4.
4. May 10. 1650.

7. Others are with reference to other offenses, to this purpose: That the
offender shall suffer [or be punished] in this case, the Justices of the peace
as other Felons [or other Felonies] are punished by the Law. So 39 Eliz. 17. 8
Eliz. 3. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 4. 21 H. 8. 7. 1 Iac. 31.

8. Another is to this purpose. That these Offenses shall be diligently
enquired of, and presented before them in their Ordinary Quarter Sessions. And
that Drunkenness.
thereupon there shall be such due proceeding, as in such like cases, upon an
Indictment, or Presentment, is used by the Laws, etc. So 4 Iac. 5. of
Drunkenness.

9. Another to this purpose. That the Justices of the Peace shall enquire
thereof, and determine the same as well by examination, as by presentment. So
Coroners.
1. H. 8. 7. of Coroners.

10. Others thus. That the Justices of the peace shall enquire thereof at their
Quarter Sessions, and assesse such Fines upon the Offenders, as they shall
Highways.
think meet. So 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 8. and 5 E^^z. 13. of Highways.

11. Another thus; That the Justices of the Peace in their Sessions, shall
enquire as well by their office, as by the Information of others of all
Trespasses, Misprisions, and defaults made against Fi^^.
any of the points of this Statute, and cause them that be thereof Indicted to
come before them, and if they be thereof convict, they shall have Imprisonment,
and make Fine according to the discretion of the same Justices. So 17 R. 2. of
Fish.

12. Another thus. That the Justices of the Peace shall have power to enquire,
hear, and determine of all the defaults, etc. by presentment had before
Coroners.
them at their Sessions, without any more words. So 12 Ed. 4, 9. of Coroners.

13. Another to this purpose. That the Justices of the Peace shall enquire by
the Oath of 12 men, as also by information of any of the Kings Subjects, and
make such like process upon every Sheep.
presentment, and Information, as they use to do upon every Presentment of
Trespass before them. So 25 H. 8. 13. Of Sheep.

14 Others to this purpose. That the ^ustices of the Peace shall enquire [or
shall enquire by Jewry] of all the offenses within the Statute. [without
Forcible-Entry. Horses.
more words.] So 8 H. 6. 9. of Forcible Entry. 1 Ed. 6. 5. Of Horses.

15. Another to this purpose, that the Justices of the Peace in their Sessions
shall charge them that appear before them, duly to enqui^e, and put in
execution the effect of the premises in due time, so that this Act may be fully
executed. Crows.
So 24 H. 8. 10. of Crows.

16. Another thus. That the Justices of the Peace shall have power to enquire
of the said defaults, as well at the suit of the King, as of the parties. So 8
H. Yarn.
6. 5. of Yarn.

17. Another thus, That the Justices of the Peace in their Sessions, shall
enqui^e by the oath of twelve men, of these offenses. And that their
presentment shall be of the same force, as Wines.
theirs in the Kings Bench are; And the Forfeitures found by the Verdict
aforesaid, shall be divided, etc. so 7 Ed. 6. 5. of Wines.

18. Another to this purpose. That the Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter Sessions shall have power to indict and try the Offenders by the usual
course of Indictments, and Trials in like cases. And after such Conviction,
Log-wood.
to adj^dge the O^^ender to be set openly on the Pillory, So 39 Eliz. 11. about
Log-wood.

19. Another to this purpose. That the Justices of the peace in their Sessions,
shall call before them any suspected persons, and to their discretion examine
them in the Premises, and if they find any default in them, then that they be
committed to prison till they find Sureties to pay the Forfeitures set down,
etc. So 19. H. 7. 11. of Deer.
Deer.

20. Another thus: That he that shall so offend, shall be grievously punished,
according to the Justices of the Peace's discretion. And that they shall judge
the offender to the same bodily punishment as the Offense requires, Laborers.
and shall do execution thereof, So in 13 R. 2. 8. Of Laborers.

21. Another thus: That the Justices of the Peace shall set down such Fines and
Penalties upon the Offenders against that Law, as the most part of them in
their Quarter Sessions, shall think fit, etc. So in 7 Iac. 4.

22. Another thus; That for the offense, the offender shall suffer such further
penalty, as by the more part of the Justices shall be thought fit, not
exceeding 40 s. for every offense. So in 7 Iac. 4.

23. Another to this purpose: Upon Hawks Eggs.
pain of 10 l. the one half thereof to the party that will sue for the same by
Action of debt, by Examination before the Justices of the Peace, Information or
otherwise, and the other half to the King. So in 11 H. 7. 17. of Hawks eggs.

SECT. 3.
THere are another sort of them that seem to give power to the Justices to do
something within, or without; or within and without the Sessions incertainly.
As for Examples:

1. One of them is penned to this purpose; That the Justices shall enquire,
Pheasants.
hear, and determine all offenses against that Law. And in case it be not so
punished, That any one Justice may at his discretion examine all persons
suspect to offend, and bind them over. So 23 Eliz. 10. of Pheasants.

2. Another thus; That the Justices of the Peace shall enquire of all the
Tanners.
premises in their Sessions, and hear, o^ (in the disjunctive) determine the
same. And also by their discretion examine all persons suspected to offend
against that Law. So 1 Iac. 22. Of Tanners.

3. Another thus; That the Justices Til^^
of the Peace shall enquire, hear, and determine by their discretion, as well
by Examination or otherwise, of the offenses, etc. And if it appear to them by
Examination or otherwise, by their discretion, that any person has offended
against that Law, that then they shall assesse no less Fine, etc. for every
offense. So 17 Ed. 4. 4. of Tile. 32 H. 8. 13. of Horses. Horses.


4. Another thus; That the Justices Malt.
of the Peace shall enquire, hear, and determine as well by the Presentment of
12 men, as by Accusation or Information of two honest witnesses of, for, and
upon the same offenses. So 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10. of Malt.

5. Another thus; That the Justices Transportation.
of the Peace shall enquire as well by the Oath of 12 men; as also to hear and
examine the Masters and Mariners of the Ship, and to hear and determine the
same offenses, as they may and ought to hear and determine other offenses. So 1
and 2 Ph. and M. 5. of Transportation.

6. Another is to this purpose; That ^orestalling.
the Justices of the Peace shall enquire, hear, and determine at their
Quarter Sessions all offenses, etc. by Inquisition, Bill, Presentment, or
Information before them, and by examination of two lawful witnesses, or by any
of these ways or means, according to their discretion. So 5 and 6 Ed. 6. of
Forestalling, etc.

7. Another thus; That the Justices Weights.
of the Peace shall by examination or enquiry, hear and determine the desaults,
etc. and set Fine according to their discretion. So 11 H. 7. 4. of Weights.

8. Another thus; That all the Justices Pheasants.
of the Peace in their general Quarter Sessions, and any two of them together
out of any Sessions, shall examin^^, hear, punish, and determine the offenses,
etc. and to administer Oaths, and to perform every thing requisite for the due
execution of that Law. So in 1 Iac. 27. of Pheasants.

9. Another to this purpose; That all the Fors^itures that shall grow by the
Conviction of any person within the Statute, shall be levied by Warran^ under
the hands and seals of two Justices by distress and sale of the offenders
goods. And that if any of the said offenses shall be confessed by the offender;
or that the same shall be proved. Rogues.
by two sufficient witnesses (not saying, upon Oath) before two Justices of the
Peace, that then such person shall forthwith stand convicted in Law thereof And
that any two Justices of the Peace, etc. shall have power to hear and determine
all causes that shall come and grow in question upon this Act. So 39 Eliz. 4.
of Such as ^ve at high Rates.
Vagabonds.

10. Another to this purpose; That the Justices shall send for the offender,
and require Sureties of him for the good Behavior, and to appear at the
Sessions; or if he refuse to give it, send him to Goal. And that at the
Sessions be shall be indicted; upon which Indictment, if he be legally convict
of the offense, that he shall be sent to the House of Correction. So 17
September. 1656. Of them that live at High Rates. Clothes.


11. Another is to this purpose; That every Justice of Peace of the County
shall have power to hear and determine the Complaints of them that are wronged,
etc. by due examination of the parties, etc. And to commit the said offenders
to the next Goal, there to remain till damages be paid, etc. And that every of
the said Justices, upon complaint of any other, may cause the party complained
of, to come before him, and to examine him upon it. And if thereby, or by other
due proof he be found defective, that then he shall forfeit, etc. So 4 Ed. 4.
1. Of clothes.

12. Another to this purpose; That Yarn.
the Justices of the Peace shall have power to enquire of the said defaults as
well at the Suit of the King, as of the party. And that they shall examine the
Trespasso^s, and enquire and do execution upon them that be sound faulty by
Inquest or Examination to be made by the Judges, etc. So 8 H. 6. 5. Of Yarn.

13. Another to this purpose; That if the said offense shall be confessed by
Clothiers,
the offender, or proved by two lawful witnesses before the Justices of the
Peace in their Sessions; Or before any two Justices of the Peace: That then
such person of such offense shall be convict, and the Forfeiture shall be
levied by distress and sale of goods, by Warrant from the two Justices of the
Peace before whom the Conviction shall be. So 1 Iac. 6. Of clothiers.

14. Another to this purpose; That Tokens.
the offender being convict by examination of witnesses, or confession, taken
before the Justices of the Peace in their general Sessions, shall suffer any
corporal punishment (but death) they shall appoint. And that two Justices of
the Peace (one of them being of the Quorum) may to the Sessions call by
process, or otherwise, the persons susspect, or commit him to Ward, or let him
to bayl till the next Assizes or General Sessions, there to be examined, and
further ordered as aforesaid. So 33 H. 8. 1. Of Tokens.

15. Another is to this purpose; That the Justices of the Peace, upon complaint
Sheriffs.
to them, shall examine the suspect offender, and his Servants: And if upon
examination they shall find him faulty, That then he shall be convict and
attaint of the same offense, without further Inquisition or examination. And he
shall forfeit, etc. And that the Justices shall certify this Forfeiture into
the Exchequer. So in 11. H. 7. 15. Of sheriffs.

16. Another to this purpose; That the Justices of the Peace dividing
themselves Servants.
into several limits, shall by all such ways and means ^^ to their wisdoms
shall be thought must meet, make a special and diligent enquiry of the
Articles of that Statute, and the execution thereof, and where they shall find
defaults, severely punish it. So in ^ Eliz. 4. of Servants. Wherein there is
also a general ^ower of Oyer and Terminer to the Justices of the Peace.

17. That the Justices and every of them may examine, hear, and determine all
Complaints and offenses that shall be done against that Law; and according to
their discretion punish such as shall offend, etc. So 2. and 3 Ph. and M. 16.

18. Another to this purpose; That Captains and Soldiers.
the offender upon due proof of the offense by the Justices of the Peace, shall
suffer, etc. So in 2 and 3 Ed. 6. Of Captains and Soldiers.

SECT. 4.
THere are another sort of them, and they seem to give to the Justices of Peace
a power to do something only, or especially, out of the Sessions of the Peace.
As for Examples; 1. One of them is p^nned to this purpose:

1. If any Justice of Peace of etc. upon Lord's Day.
his or their view, or confession of the party, or proof of any one or more
witnesses by Oath, (which the said Justice may administer) shall find any
person offending in the premises, the said Justice shall give Warrant under
^^^ hand and seal to the Constables or Churchwardens of the place where etc.
to levy the said Forfeiture by way of distress, etc. rendering the overplus.
And for lack of distress, That the party offending shall be set in the stocks
three hours. See 6th of April, 1644. and 1 Car. 1. Of the Lords Day. 19th
April, 1650. Of the Lords Day.

2. Another to this purpose; That if Swearing.
any shall offend, etc. in the presence or hearing of any Justice of Peace
where the same offense shall be committed, or shall be thereof convicted by the
Confession of the party, or by the Oath of one Witness, before any Justice of
Peace, (which Oath he shall administer) that he shall forfeit, etc. And that
all and every the said Forfeitures shall be levied of the Goods and Cattle of
every person so offending, by Warrant from such Justice of Peace by distress
and sale thereof, restoring, etc. and in default of payment thereof, or
security given for it, if no distress be found, the offender if above 12
years, shall by Warrant from such Justices of Peace be set in the stocks for
three hours. If above 12 years old, then that the Justice of Peace shall give
his Warrant to the Constable to whip him. So Act. 1650. Of Swearing.

3. Another to this purpose, That the offender shall forfeit, etc. being
Stage Players.
convicted thereof by his own Confession, or proof of any one witness upon
oath before any one Justice of Peace, (which he shall administer) to be levied
by the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish where, etc. by Warrant of the
Justice of the Peace, by distress and sale, etc. See Old. 11th Febr. 1647. Of
Stage Players.

4. Another branch of the same Law Stage Plays.
is to this purpose; That all such offenders as upon view of two Justices of
the Peace, or any of them. Or by the Oath of two witnesses, (which they may
administer) shall be proved before any two of them to have offended, etc. that
they by their Warrant under their hands and seals, shall cause them to be
apprehended, and openly whipped in a Market Town, 11th Febr. 1647. Of
Stage Plays.

5. Another branch of the same Law is to this purpose; That he that offends
Lord's Day.
shall forfeit, etc. The said offense being done in view of any Justice of
Peace, etc. or being proved upon Oath by two or more witnesses, or by the
Confession of the party offending before any such Justice of Peace, (which they
may administer). All which penalties shall be levied by any Constable or Church
warden, by Warrant from any such Justice of Peace by distress and sale, etc.
So 3 Car. 1. Of the Lords Day.

6. Another to this purpose; That Excise,
the offender upon due proof thereof made by the Oath of two or more witnesses
before any Justice of the Peace of, etc. shall forfeit, etc. To be levied by
distress, etc. And that all Justices of the Peace of the, etc. are hereby
required and authorized to put this Clause in Execution, and the said penalties
and forfeitures to cause to be paid to the Sub-Commissioners of Excise. Act.
14. August, 1649. Of the Excise. Another after the same manner, the offense
being proved by the confession of the party, and proof by the oath Titles of
Honor.
of one or more witnesses, before one or more Justices of the Peace. Which said
Justice and Justices are hereby authorized and required to cause the same to be
paid accordingly; and in case of Refusal, to levy by distress, etc. And for
want of distress, to cause the said offender to be set in the public stocks
for three hours. So 4th of April, 1651. Of Titles of Honor.

7. Another to this purpose; That the offender shall forfeit 10 5. the same
Alehouses.
offense being seen and viewed by a Justice of Peace, etc. or proved by the
Oath of two witnesses before any such Justice of Peace (which he may
administer). And that all the said penalties be levied by the Constables or
Churchwardens of the place by Warrant from one Justice of the Peace of the
County, etc. by way of distress to be taken and detained for the Forfeiture;
And for default of satisfaction within six days after the distress taken, the
same to be presently apprised and sold, and the surplusage to be delivered,
etc. And for want of such sufficient distress, the party offending, to be by
the said Justice committed to the Common Goal, there to abide till the penalty
be paid. So 1 Iac. 9. 21 Iac. 7. Of Alehouses.

8. Another to this purpose; That Drunkenness.
the offender shall forfeit, etc. to be levied by way of distress, by any
person or persons, having Warrant from any Justice of Peace, or Court, where
any such Conviction shall be. So 4 Iac. 4. Of Drunkenness. And after by 21
Iac. it is added, thus; That proof of one witness shall be enough-And that any
one Justice of Peace shall have power upon his own view, Confession of the
party, or proof of one witness upon Oath, (which he shall have power to
administer) to convict any offender.

9. Another to this purpose; That any two Justices of the Peace may Cloth.
grant their Warrant to call before them Witnesses, and to examine them upon
Oath. And if it be found by the oath of two witnesses, or Confession of the
party offending, that he has done it, that he shall remain convict of it. And
the Justices may certify it under their hands and seals unto the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the place where, etc. And that then
immediately after the said Certificate shall be so delivered to such
Churchwardens; etc. and Warrant by them made to the said Overseers and
Churchwardens for the levying of the said Forfeiture, it shall be lawful for
them to levy the same by distress, etc. And for lack of such distress, it
shall be lawful for the said two Justices of Peace to commit the offender to
the Common Goal without bayl, till payment be made of the Forfeiture to the
Churchwardens, etc. 21 Iac. 18. Of cloth.

10. Another is to this purpose; After Alehouses.
a good power given to convict of one offense, and to levy the Forfeiture for
the same; That for another offense it being duly proved in manner as is before
limited; To be levied in such manner as is before appointed by this Statute. So
1 Jac. 9. 4. Jac. 4 and 5. Of Alehouses.

11. Another thus; That any Justice Logwood.
or Justices of the Peace, etc. may cause the Servants or Workmen of the
offender to come before him o^ them; and them to examine by oath, or otherwise.
And if upon Examination, they find the thing to be so, That then they may bind
them and the Witnesses over, and certify the Examinations to the next
Sessions; or if they refuse to be bound, send them to Goal. So 39 Eliz. 11. Of
Log-wood.

12. Another to this purpose; That they that shall offend, and the offense be
proved by the Consession of the Pheasants.
party, or oath of one witness before two Justices of the Peace, That he shall
be by the said Justices sent to Goal without bayl, for three months, unless
he forthwith pay the Forfeiture to the Churchwardens, etc. So 7 Jac. 10. Of
Pheasants, etc.

SECT. 5.
THere are other Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, that as to this point of the
giving power to the Justices of the Peace about the Conviction of offenders,
and doing of execution upon them, are more doubtfully penned, some appointing a
thing to be done, and not giving power to any body to do it, or not saying by
whom it shall be done.

1. One of them is to this purpose. That upon complaint, and proof made, etc.
before any one or more of the Justices Blasph^my
of the Peace, by the Oath of two or more Witnesses, (which he or they may
administer) or Confession of the Offender, the same confessing, or convicted
party, shall be committed to prison, or house of Correction for a Month. [And
it does not say by whom he shall be committed.] So in 9 August. 1650. Of
Blasphemy. To the same purpose is another: That the offender shall forfeit;
etc. And that it shall be levied, etc. and if he be not able to pay it,
^le-houses
then (says the Act) he is to be committed to the Stocks; [and says not by
whom] So in 4 Iac. 5. Of Alehouses. To the same purpose is another. That the
Offender shall forfeit, etc. To be levied, etc. and for lack of Lords day.
distress, or not payment thereof made, the offender to be committed to the
house of Correction, for three Months or until he make payment thereof, So is
it in 17 September. 1657. of the Lords Day. To this purpose is also 19 H. 7.
Buckstalls.
11. of Buckstalls, and 39 Eliz. 11. about Cloth. And the Acts of 1 Iac. 1.
and 6th of April, 1644. of the Cloth. Lords day.
Lords Day, are in this part, and as to this point very incertainly penned.

2. Others set forth how the offender shall be punished, and how execution of
the penalty shall be made and done. But does not say how the offender shall
Highways.
be convicted of his offense before the Justices of the Peace. And of this sort
we have one to this purpose. That the Surveyors of the Highways shall levy
the Forfeitures, and if they levy it not by such a time that then the
Constables shall levy it. So 18. Eliz. 10. of Highwayes. So to the like purpose
is it by another. That appoints Forfeitures upon Overseers of the Poor, for
neglect of their office: And that their Successors by Warrant of two Justices
of the Peace, by distress and sale of their goods shall levy: But there is no
way set down by the Act, how they may be convicted of their offense. So in 43
Eliz 2. And so is the Act of 9th of F^^r. 1647. For the neglect of the
Churchwardens in their Office, and Churchwardens.
of the Parish by not choice of Churchwardens, and of the Parishioners by not
payment of their Rates, there are several Rates not paid.
Forteitures appointed for these several offenses. And it is said in them.
That it shall be lawful for the present, and subsequent Churchwardens by
Warrant under the hands and Seals of two Justices of the Peace, to levy the
same by distress and sale of the Offenders goods, etc. and for lack of
distress, to send him to Goal, till payment. And to the same purpose is a part
of 19th April, 1650, About the Lords Day. So Lords day.
is 3 car. 3. about the Ale-house-keepers, as to the Officers penalty. And so
was 4 Iac. 5. about drunkenness, until it was supplied by 21 Iac. 7.

3. Others they set down how the offender shall be convicted of his offense.
But they say not how execution shall be done. For this, one of them is to this
purpose, That any one Justice of Peace upon complaint, etc. may cause the party
acensed to come before him, and examine him therein. And if by the same, and
other due proof, he find him guilty, that he shall forfeit so much, etc. Cloth.
So in 4 El. 4. 1. of Cloth. Another thus, That upon due proof of such an
offense before any Justice of Peace, the offender shall forfeit, etc. [and no
words how it shall be levied]. So in two or Captains and Soldiers.
three Ed. 6. Of Captains.

4. Others are so penned, that they do not give a clear power to the Justices
either to convict the offender of the offense, or to do execution of the
penalty, or pain to be inflicted for the offense. So is 14 Eliz. 5. about the
Rates for Treasurers Poor.
the Goal, there is a Forfeiture of 5 l. set upon an Offender. But no way set
down to convict the Offender, or to levy the Forfeiture. So in 43 Eliz. 2. and
Soldiers.
3. There are in those Statutes, some Forfeitures set upon offenders for their
offenses, and there is neither power of Conviction, nor of giving warrants for
execution given to the Justices of Peace therein. 4. But in some cases, as in 1
Iac. 9. as to the Forfeiture for Tippling, Tippling.
and selling less then measures; the Act it self, upon the Conviction of the
Offender, before the Justice of Peace gives power to the Constables, and
Churchwardens, who of their own heads without warrant from any Justice of
Peace, may levy the Forfeiture. So in 43 Eliz. 2. and 3.

SECT. VI. Certain Questions, and Answers for the opening of some of the
Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances touching the Office of the Justice of the Peace.
Quest. 1. Where a Statute, Act, or Ordinance of Parliament, made for the
punishment of any offense, shall not in any part thereof give any express
power to the Justices of the Peace, to do any Justices power.
thing upon it. As 1 Iac. 12. 8 H. 6. 12. 21 Iac. 29. and others. Whether in
this case, the Justices of the Peace may do any thing upon it at their Sessions
of the Peace?

Answ. We Conceive, Nothing at all more then what they might have done therein,
before the making of the Statute, etc. See C^^^. 2. Rep. ^43.

Quest. 2. If the offense mentioned in such a Statute, etc. were an offense at
the Common Law, before the making of that Statute, etc. and within the
Conusance of the Justices of the Peace, as in the Case of a Riot, Perjury, or
the like. Whether in this Case the same offense may not still be punished as an
offense at the Common Law, before the Justices of the Peace?

Answ. We conceive, yea: and yet that the offender shall not be twice punished
for the same offense.

Quest. 3. Where the Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances do give power to do things
in a way of Conviction of offenders to the Justices of Peace diversely. It being
in some of them, That all the Justices of the Peace of the County shall do it.
In others: That all Justices of the Peace 17 Of September. 1656. of Recusants. 24
H. 8. 10. 21 Iac. 27. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. 1 Iac 27 11 H. 7. 15. 4 Ed. 4. 1. of
cloth. Act. 14 August 1649. of Excise. 1 and 2 Ph^and M. 5. 5. 17 Sept. 16^6.
Of the Lords Day, and of such as live at high Rates. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 16.
of the County may do it. In others, that the Justices of the Peace of the
County shall do it. In others, that any Justice of the Peace of the County
shall do it. In others; th^^ all and every Justice of the Peace in any County,
may do it. In Others; that all and every Justice of the Peace shall do it. In
others, that any of the Justices of the County shall do it. In othe^s, That a
Justice of Peace may do it. In others, That upon proof of the offense before
one or two Justices of the Peace, he or they may punish so and so. In others;
That every person so offending, and being thereof convict, etc. How all these
shall be taken, as to the persons to do the thing?

Answ. As to this, we Answer; That ordinarily where in this case a power is
given to the Justices of the Peace to do any thing, and it is not expressed
where, or how the thing shall be done; In this case we conceive, That thing to
be done (especially if it be to convict an Offender of an offense) it must be
always done in the Sessions of the Peace, and in and by the ordinary way of
Indictment, or Presentment, and Traverse, and Trial of a Jewry, or Consession.
And then to hold a Sessions of the Peace, there must be two Justices Sessions.
of the Peace at the least, and one of them must be of the Quorum. But where
the Act does declare that the thing to be done, may be done without the
Sessions, and that any Justices may do it, there it seems there must be two
Justices to do it. If it say, all the Justices of the Peace, or every Justice
of What one two, or three Justices may do.
Peace, or any Justic^ (...) the Peace, or any one Justice of the Peace of the
County may do it; in these cases it may be done by any one Justice of Peace.
And where it does express the thing to be done before one, two, or three
Justices of the Peace, there it must be done accordingly. But in some cases the
Laws may perhaps be otherwise taken.

Quest. 4. Where an Act, etc. does give power to one or two Justices to do a
thing, Whether it may not be done by more Justices?

Answ. Where the Act, etc. is penned, That one or two Justices may do a thing,
There we conceive it clear, It may be done by more Justices. But where it is
penned, One Justice [or two Justices] shall do it; There it may be a little
more doubtful. But in both Cases, we conceive it may be done by more. And yet
in this last Case I should rather choose to do it by the very same number.

Quest. 5. Where some of the Statutes, 4 Jac. 5. and the rest named before, and
next after.
etc. are penned thus, That the Justices shall have authority to do. Others,
That they shall do. Others, That they may do. Some, That they may put the
Statute in execution. Others, That they may take the Conviction, and do
execution Others, That they shall punish the offenses upon the Statute. Others,
That upon Oath taken before the Justices, the Forfeiture to be levied by the
Justices, etc. Others, That the thing shall be done before them. How these
shall be taken?

Answ. We conceive, they, or the most part of them, are much to one purpose in
the Law, and do give a sufficient power to the Justices of the Peace in the
thing spoken of: but how, and in what manner, we cannot set forth.

Quest. 6. Where some of the Statutes, etc. do give power to the Justices of
the Peace, of doing, and say not where they Act. 17. September. 1656. of the
Lord's Day, and of Recusants. 5 Eliz. 4, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15. 25 H. 8. 13. 5 Eliz.
9. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 3. 4 Iac. 5. 4 H. 7. 12. 21 Iac. 21. 39 Eliz. 17. 24 H.
8. 10. 1 Jac. 27. 3 Jac. 13. 5 and 6 Ed. ^ 4. 14 H. 8. 10. 19 H. 7. 11.
shall do it. Others say, They may do it at the Quarter Sessions. Others, At
the open Sessions. Others, at the principal Sessions. Others, At the general
Sessions. Others, At the public Sessions. Others, At the usual Sessions.
Some, At the ordinary Sessions. Others, At the Sessions only. How all these
shall be taken?

Answ. This is partly answered in the Answer to the third Questions. But by all
these we conceive thus much; That the thing to be done by the Justices of the
Peace, is to be done in, and not out of some Sessions of the Peace. And in all
those Cases (but in the last) We conceive, is intended, That the thing must be
done at the Quarter Sessions. And in the last Case, where it is said, It may be
done at a Sessions of the Peace, or at any Sessions, etc. there it is most safe
also to do it at the Quarter Sessions, though perhaps it may be done at a
special Sessions held for that purpose.

Quest. 7. Where a Statute, etc. does say, That the Justices of the Peace of
the County shall or may hear and determine the offense; but does not say where,
as 39 Eliz. 4. of Bride-well; Bride-well. Mariners.
and Chap. 17. of Mariners. Whether the Justices may by this do any thing out
of the Sessions of the Peace?

Answ. We conceive not. And yet perhaps if it be to make a Rate, or to do some
such like thing, and not to punish an offense done, there happily it may be
done by the major part of the Justices of the Peace out of, as well as within,
the Sessions.

Quest. 8. If a Statute, etc. do give power to Justices of the Peace, to hear
and determine an offense, and it does not say by what way it shall be done;
Whether it may be done by any other, but by the ordinary way of Indictment,
Traverse; etc?

Answ. We conceive, No^.

Quest. 9. Where some of the Statutes, etc. touching Crimes, do give power to
the Justices to hear and determine them. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. and 14. 27 Eliz. 7.
12. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. 3. 7. 5 Eliz. 4. 5. 9. 21. 10 May, 1650. 4 Jac. 5. 1
Jac. 22. 27. 3 Jac. 13. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. 10. 23 Eliz. 10. 17 Ed. 4. 1. 1 Ed.
4. 21. 12 March. 1648. 18 Eliz. 10. 22 H. 8. 5. 31 Eliz. 12. 1 Eliz. 17. 32 H.
8. 13. 4 Ed. 4. 1. 33 H. 8. 1. 1 Ed. 6.
Others, To enquire, hear, and determine them. Others, to examine, enquire,
hear, and determine them. Others, to examine, hear and determine them. Others,
To examine and determine them. Others, To hear, or [in the disjunctive]
determine them. Others, To determine them. And some of these also have diverse
Additions of other things to them: As that they may do it by Verdict; or, That
they shall do it by Examination, or otherwise. Or, That it shall be by
Witnesses, or by two lawful witnesses, or Confession; or that it shall be upon
Presentment, Indictment, or Information. Or that the Justices shall call the
parties before them, send out process, give Judgment, punish, do Execution, or
the like. How all these shall be understood?

Answ. We conceive, That generally all these words shall have one and the same
Construction and operation in the Law. And that the Justices of the Peace by
either sort of these words in a Statute, etc. have a complete power of Oyer and
Terminer given to them of the offenses named by the Statute. And that the same,
or such other like Additions as are named in the Question, will not alter the
Case. But how, and in what way, we cannot set forth.

Quest. 10. Where some of the Statutes, etc. do give power to the Justices 7
Ed. 6. 5. 8 H 6. 5. 9. 1 Ed. 6. 5. 12 Ed 4. 9. 4 Jac. 5. 1 H. 8. 7. 2 and 3 Ph.
and M. 8. 5 Eliz. 13. 7 Ed. 6. 5. 24 H. 8. 10. 25 H. 8. 13. 14. 15 H. 8. 10.
of the Peace only, To enquire of the offense. Others, To enquire as well at
the Suit of the King, as of the Party. Others, To charge the Juries before them
to enquire. Others, That the offenses shall be enquireable before them. Others,
That they shall enquire by Presentment. Others, That they shall enquire and set
Fines. How all these shall be taken, And what the Justices of Peace may do upon
them?

Answ. We conceive also, That these words, in the most of these Statutes, are
of the same nature, and shall have the same Construction as those in the last
Question had. And that they do not limit the power of the Justices of the
Peace. But that they will have by either sort of these words, a complete power
of Oyer and Terminer given to them of the offenses named in the Statute. But
how, and in what way, we cannot set forth.

Quest. 11. Where some of the Statutes do give a power to the Justices of the
Peace, to punish an offense according to their discretion. Others, for such an
offense, to Fine or to imprison according to their discretion. Others, to Fine
and Imprison according to their discretion, as is 7 Jac. 4. 17 R. 2. of Fish.
How all these shall be taken, and what the Justices of the Peace may do upon
them?

Answ. We do conceive, That by this sort of words also, That there is a good
power of Oyer and Terminer of the offenses named in the Statute, etc. wherein
they are used, given to the Justices of the Peace.

Quest. 12. Where the Statute, etc. is thus penned, That the Justices of the
Peace at their Quarter Sessions shall have power to Indict, and try the
offenders by the usual course of Indictments and Trials in the like cases. And
after such Conviction, to adjudge the offender to the Pillory; as it 39 Eliz.
11. of Logwood. How this shall be Logwood.
taken, and what the Justices may do upon it?

Answ. We conceive, That hereby there is given to the Justices of the Peace, a
good power of Oyer and Terminer of the offense within that Law. But in what
way, we cannot set forth.

Quest. 13. Where the Statute, etc. is, That he that shall offend, shall be
grievously punished according to the discretion of the Justices, and that they
shall judge him to the same bodily punishment as his offense requires, and
shall do execution thereupon; as is 13 R. 2. 8. of Laborers. How this
Laborers.
shall be taken, And what the Justices of the Peace may do upon it?

Answ. We conceive, That by this he may be Indicted or presented for the
offense; and if he be found guilty, he may be imprisoned what time the Justices
of the Peace think fie. But for the way by which it is to be done, we do not
set forth.

Quest. 14. Where a Statute, etc. gives power to the Justices of the Peace, to
hear and end an offense by Examination according to their discretion. Or, as
others, By examination of parties and witnesses; As it is 32 H. 8. 13. of
Horses. 11 H. 7. 15. Horses. Sheriffs. Deer.
of Sheriffs. and 19 H. 7. 11. of Deer. How these shall be taken, and what the
Justices of the Peace may do upon them. And whether they may examine upon Oath?

Answ. We conceive, (as to this case) The words seem to hold forth a power of
Oyer and Terminer, in the ordinary way. If otherwise, then we doubt whether
they may examine by Oath, except it be in such a thing as whereabouts they do
examine by Oath, before the making of the Statute. But it should seem to me,
They may by these words examine without Oath, Examination.
and, upon that examination, order the punishment, as in the case of Provision
for a Bastard child, and punishment of the Parents, upon 18 Eliz. The words of
which Statute are the same in effect with the words of this Statute. And if the
Justices of the Peace shall in this and such like cases, take upon them to hear
and end, convict and punish in the ordinary way of Indictment, we can scarce
tell how the offender will be relieved. But how the law will fall out herein,
we cannot certainly set forth.

Quest. 15. Where a Statute is penned thus; under pain of 10 l. the one half to
the King, and the other half to him that will sue for it by Action of debt, by
examination before the Justices of the Peace, information, or otherwise. As it
is in 11 H. 7. 17. Of Phesants. Pheasants.
How this shall be taken, and what the Justices may do upon it?

Answ. This Act is very doubtful. And yet we conceive some use or other may be
made of it, in order to the punishment of the Offender.

Quest. 16. Where a Statute, etc. is penned thus. That the person offending
being thereof convict by examination of Witnesses, or confession before the
Justices of the Peace at their general Sessions, shall suffer, etc. And that
two Justices, one of the Quorum, may convent him to the Sessions by process,
or otherwise, or to commit him to ward, or let him to bayl, till the next
Assizes, or general Sessions, there to be examined, and further ordered, as
aforesaid. As it is in 33 H. 8. 1. How this shall be taken. And what the
Justices of the Peace may do upon it?

Answ. This is partly answered before in the Answer to the 14th Question. But
in this case we conceive that the offender may in the ordinary way be indicted,
and if he confess the offense, he may be therein convicted. Or otherwise that
the Justices may without oath, examine Witnesses, and order his punishment: as
upon the Act of 18 Eliz. about a Bastard. But the words seem to me to contain
in them probably a power of Oyer and Terminer, in the ordinary way of Trial.
But we do not presume to give forth anything for certain herein.

Quest. 17. Where a Statute, etc. in one part thereof gives power to the
Justices of the Peace, to hear and determine an offense, and in another part
thereof, is this clause. That any two Justices out of the Sessions may examine,
hear, enquire, and determine, and to administer Oaths, etc. As it is in 1 Iac.
27. of Phesants. How this Phesants.
shall be taken: and what the two Justices of the Peace may do herein out of
Sessions?

Answ. We do not understand what the two Justices of the Peace may by these
words do out of the Sessions, nor what the words do intend, except it be to
give power to convict the offender at the general Sessions, and also at a
special Sessions, kept for that purpose only.

Quest. 18. Where a Statute, etc. gives a power to one, two, or more Justices
of the Peace in a special way, and out of the Sessions, to convict an offender
of his offense. And the same Statute does nor give to the Justices of the
Peace, a general power also, to hear and determine the offense. As it is in
the Act of 1650 about Swearing, and Swearing.
diverse others. Whether in this case the Justices of the Peace may by their
Ordinary way of Trial in the Sessions, hear, and punish this offense?

Answ. As to this case, we do conceive, that there can be no conviction of this
offender for his offense elsewhere, or otherwise then before the one, two, or
three Justices of the Peace, out of a Sessions of the Peace, And that the
Justices of the Peace in their Sessions, are not to intermeddle therewith. But
that Sessio^^
in cases where there is a general clause also inserted in the Statute, to
give to the Justices a power to hear, and determine the offense, as there is in
23 Eliz. 10. 39 Eliz. 4. 1 Iac. 27. 9 August, 1650. 9 Febr. 1647. There the
offender may be proceeded against by the one, or by the other way.

Quest. 19. Where a Statute, etc. does give power to the Justices of the Peace
to distrain the goods of an offender, or to send him to prison for a
Forfeiture. But there is no way for the Poor. Mariners and maimed Soldiers.
Conviction of the offender set down by the Statute. As it is 43 Eliz. 2. of
the Poor. and Chap. 3. of Mariners and maimed Soldiers. 13 Eliz. 10. of
Highways. 5 and 6 of Ed. 6. 25. of Alehouses. 1 Jac 9. 21 Jac. 7. 4 Jac.
Highways. Alehouses Drunkenness. Lord's Day.
5. 1 Car. 4. of Alehouses, and Drunkenness, and 19 April, 1650. of the
Lord's Day. 7 Jac. 4. What shall be done in this case, And whether it may not be
supplied by the Sessions?

Answ. We do conceive it will be in this as in the last Case, That where there
are no general words in the Statute, etc. to give power to the Justices of the
Peace, to hear, and determine Sessions.
the offense. That in this case there is no way to punish the offender. And so
also it will be in case where the Statute does give a power of Conviction, but
no power of Execution. As it is in two and three of Ed 6. about Soldiers. 21
Iac. 18. of Cloth. 17 September. Soldiers. Cloth. Lord's Day.
1656. of the Lord's Day. And so also it will be, where the Statute, etc. does
not appoint a way of Conviction, or of Execution, but both are omitted. As it
is in 7 Iac. 4. of Bridgewell. and 21 Iac. 28. And that it is Bride-well.
Caution to the Justices.
not safe for the Justices of the Peace to give Warrants in these Cases.

Quest. 20. Where a Statute, etc. does say, a Conviction shall be before the
Justices, by the proof [or by the Testimony] of witnesses. And it does not say,
upon Oath. As in 21 Jac. 18. of Cloth. 39 Eliz. 4. of Bride-well. Cloth.
Bride-well. Crows.
24 H. 8. 10. of Crows. What proof this must be, Whether proof upon oath?

Answ. We conceive it to be doubtful. But that the most sure way for the
Justices, is to adventure to do it by the ordinary way of Indictment, and the
Trial of a Jury.

Quest. 21. Where a Statute, etc. does direct, the Conviction of an offender to
be by oath before one, or niore Justices of the Peace. But it does not give
power to the Justice to administer the oath: As in Act. 4th Febr. 1641. of
Titles of Honor. 14 August, Titles of Hounour-Excise. Hue-and-Cry.
1649. of the Excise. 27 Eliz. 13. of Hue-and-Cry. Whether in this case the
Justice of Peace may administer the oath?

Answ. We conceive, Yea. And yet there are very few of the Statutes and Acts
that do omit the inserting of a Clause to give power to the Justice to
administer the oath. See for this, the manner of penning of the Act of 27 Eliz.
13. for the oath of him that is robbed, to be taken before a Justice of Peace.
Which is admitted to be good, and taken daily.

Quest. 22. Where a Statute, etc. does give power to a Justice or Justices of
the Peace to convict an offender, and levy the Forfeiture by distress; with
this; That in case of lack of distress, they may proceed further. How this
lack of distress^ shall be understood?

Answ. By this we conceive shall be understood, Lack of distress in the place
into which the Officer by his Warrant is to enter, and execute it.

Quest. 23. Where a Statute, etc. gives a power to a Justice to distrain; and
for lack of distress, to proceed further, to imprison, etc. How the Justice
shall in this case take notice of the lack of distress, so as to grant his
second Warrant upon it.

Answ. In this case, we conceive i^ safest for the Justice, (if the Statute
will bear it out) to put it in his first Warrant, to the officer thus. That he
shall distrain, and in case of lack of distress, that he shall carry the party
to prison, [or put him in the stocks] etc. as the Case is.] And so put the work
upon the Officer, to take care of it.

Quest. 24. Where a Statute, etc. gives power to a Justice to convict an
offender, and levy the Forfeiture for his offense. And then these words are
added. That in case of lack of distress, the offender shall be committed [or
the offender to be committed] but it does not say by whom he shall be
committed. As is 39 Eliz. 11 of Log-wood. Log-wood. Blasphemy. Deer.
Drunkenness. Excise. Alehouses Lords day. Such as live at high Rates, etc.
9 August 1650, of Blasphemy, 19 H. 7. 11. of Deer. 4 Jac. 5. 21 Iac. 7 of
Drunkenness, 14 August 1649. of the Exercise, 6 April 1644, and 17 Sept. 1656.
of the Exercise, 1 Car. 1. 6 April 1644, of the Lords Day, and 17 September. 1656
of them that live at high Rates. Whether in these cases the Justice of Peace
may safely send his Warrant to commit the offender. Or what may be done by him
upon such a Law?

Answ. This Case may be a little doubtful. But we conceive that it will be
intended, as that which is necessarily understood, that the Justice of Peace
may make such a warrant, and Justify it. And this is the opinion of some
Learned men. But otherwise we conceive that the Justices of the Peace in their
Quarter Sessions, cannot supply it, but in cases where they have a general
power of Over and Terminer, of the offense by the same Law. And there it must
be also in the ordinary way way of proceeding by Indictment, etc.

Quest. 25. Where a Statute, etc. is that for lack of distress, the offender
by warrant from a Justice of Peace, shall be whipped, etc. [without more words]
as it is in 28 June, 1650. about Swearing. Whether the Justice may in this
case, make his Warrant to do this?

Answ. It seems, Yea. And so Iso, where the Act is penned thus, Upon pain of
etc. To be levied by warrant from a Justice of Peace, etc. as it is in the Act
of Excise. September. 1656.

Quest. 26. Where a Statute, etc. is penned thus. That upon proof, or Oath, or
confession of the offense before a Justice of Peace [without more words] such a
punishment shall be inflicted, or such a thing shall be done. As it is in Act
14 August 1649. of the Excise. Titles of Honor. Stage Plays. Swearing. Lords
day.
Excise. 4 Febr. 1651. of Titles of Honor. Act 1656. of Excise. 12 Febr. 1647.
of Stage-playe^. Act 1650. of Swearing. 3 Car. 1. of the Lord's Day. Whether
these words do give power to the Justice to take the Conviction?

Answ. We conceive, Yea. And so also, where the Statute, etc. is penned to this
purpose, that unless such a thing be done before a Justice of Peace, that such
a punishment shall not be inflicted. That by this the Justice has power in the
thing, as it is in 27 Eliz. 13. about the Oath to be taken by him that is
robbed. And it seems, in all cases regalarly where a thing is directed to be
done before a Justice of Peace in case of Conviction of an offender. That by
this there is implicitly given to the Justice a power to do that thing. See
Ca. 2. Just. 689.

Quest. 27. Where a Statute, etc. is thus penned. That after an offender is
convicted before a Justice of Peace, the power is given to some others to levy
the penalty, and the Justice of Peace has no power given to him therein. As it
is in 43 Eliz. 2. of Poor, and 3 of Soldiers and Ma^iners, Poor. Soldiers and
Mariners.
and 1 Iac. 9 of Ale-house-keepers. Whether in this case the Justice of Peace
may safely send any Warrant to do it?

Answ. In this case, we conceive it not safe for the Justice of Peace to give
any Warrant in it. And that he has no more to do, but to give notice of the
Conviction only to the person that is to do the E^^cution, and mind him of his
duty therein. And yet some also are of another opinion in this point.

Quest. 28. Where the words of a Statute, etc. are; That the Justice of the
Peace shall cause an ossender to be imprisoned, or the like thing to be done.
As it is in 14 August 1649. of Excise. 24 H. 8. 10. of Ctows. What the Justice
of Peace may do herein.

Answ. We conceive that by this word [Cause] is given a command and Authority
also to do the thing. And that the Justice may thereupon send his Warrant to
the officer, o^ some other that will undertake it, to authorize him to do it.

Quest. 29. Where a Statute, etc. besides a general power of Oyer and
Terminer, of an offense, does give to the Justices a special power, to give
such Correction to the offender as they shall think meet. As it is in 5 Eliz.
4. about Masters, and Servants. What the Masters and Servants.
the Justices may do upon this?

Answ. We cannot conceive what power is given hereby, except it be that two
Justices of the Peace may out of Sessions, where they see cause, bind the
Master to the good behavior, and send the Servant to Bridewell; which is not
but with good advice to be done.

Quest. 30. Where a Statute, etc. besides a general power of Oyer, and
Terminer, of an offense given to the Justices, does add this Clanse. That they
may d^v^de themselves, and by all means according to their discretion, make
enquiry upon the Statute, and the execution thereon, and punish the defaults.
As it is in 5 Eliz. 4 of Masters and Servants. What the Justices Masters and
Servants.
may do by these Additional words?

Answ. We conceive nothing at all, except it be to keep a special Sessions,
which (upon the matter) is all one with the general Sessions, for the
Conviction and punishment of the offender.

Quest. 31. Where the Statute, etc. as to the Conviction of an offender, is
penned thus; That every person offending therein, and confessing the same, or
being thereof Convicted by Verdict, upon Indictment or Presentment. As it is in
Act 10 May. 1650, of Fornication. Fornication.
How this Confession shall be taken?

Answ. By this Confession in this Act, we do conceive is clearly intended a
Confession upon an Indictment, or Presentment only. And not a Confession also
before any Justice, o^ Justices of the Peace in, or out of a Sessions, without
an Indictment, or Presentment.

Quest. 32. Where a Statute, etc. is thus penned; That they that shall so
offend, shall sorselt such further pains and penalties, as by the Justices of
the Peace, or the more part of them, shall be thought sit, not exceeding 40 s.
a piece for every offense. As it is in 7 Iac. 4. of Bridewell, without any
further addition of Words, of power to convict, or punish. How this shall be
taken? And what the Justices may do upon it?

Answ. This Statute is herein very doubtful; and yet happily, some use thereof
in order to the punishment of the offender, may be made by the Justices of the
Peace.

Quest. 33. Where a Statute, etc. gives to a Justice of Peace, power in case
of an oftence, to examine the matter. And it he suspect the party, to bind him
and the Witnesses over to the Sessions, or if he refuse to be bound, to send
him to the Goal, as in 39 Eliz. 11. of Log-wood, and 23 Eliz. 10. of
Highways. Logwood. High^ayes.
How this shall be taken; and what the Justice of Peace may do upon it?

Answ. We conceive in this case, he may safely pursue the words of the Statute.
See for this 33 H. 8. 6. and Coo. 5. 72.

Quest. 34 Whether the Clause in the now Law, touching the Lords Day, Lord's Day.
17 September. 1656. that forbids any man to be questioned for any offense within
that Law, do not (as to this) reach to all the former Laws for so many of the
offenses therein mentioned, that are again named by this Act?

Answ. We conceive that it does so; For the words are these, That no person
shall be impeached or molested for any oftence within this Act, unless he be
thereof convicted, within one Month after the offense committed.

Quest. 35. That where in part of Wines.
the Statute of 7 Ed. 6 5. of Wines. It is said, That men may sell Wine by
Retail in a Market Town, by License of the Justices of the Peace. And in
another part thereof it is said. That no person shall by retail sell any Wine
in his house, to be drunk or spent in his own house, or other place in his
occupation, etc. How these words shall be understood?

Answ. We take the meaning hereof to be, That none may sell Wine by Retail in
his own house, by the License of the Justices of the Peace. Nor at all may he
sell, or utter to others of other houses, in such a Town, but he must be first
Licensed by the Justices of the Peace.

Quest. 36. Where the Act of 17 September. 1656. of the Lords Day, does give
power to the Justices of the Peace, to make a Warrant under their hands and
Seals, to Constables, Church Wardens, and Overseers of the Poor, to search for,
discover, secure, apprehend, and bring before some Justice of the Peace, all
such as they shall find profaning the Day, or shall know, or be informed
Lord's Day.
to have profaned the day in any of the particulars in the Act mentioned. Or
shall have just cause to suspect for the same. How this Warrant may be Warrant.
made?

Answ. We do conceive in this Case. That the Justice of Peace may make such a
Warrant, and strictly pursue the words of the Statute, and justify the same.
And yet we conceive an unhappy use may he made thereof by the Officer. And the
rather for that the Officer may forth with carry the supposed offender to the
Justice, unless he will pay the penalty of the Statute. And if so, then must
he be punished before he is convicted. Therefore it is good to be well advised
in it.

Quest. 37. Where a power is by an Act, etc. given to the Justices of Peace
(and it is not said in any Sessions) to examine a matter, and so to make an
order in it. As it is in 18 Eliz. 3. about provision for a Bastard child. And
Bastard. Oath.
it is not said it shall be by Oath. Whether this Examination may be by Oath?

Answ. The common practice is so to do, And we conceive in this case, it may be
done with, or without an Oath, and the order will be well grounded by the one,
or by the other way. But it is good to be well advised herein.

Quest. 38. Where the Justice of Peace has power to convict an offender out of
the Sessions, upon View, Confession, or Oath of Witness, and he does so, and
the offender be to go to Goal, upon this Conviction. Whether in this Case it be
needful for the Justice to make a Record of this in Writing?

Answ. We conceive it is the safest way for the Justice of Peace so to do. And
yet perhaps it may not be necessary, but in cases where the Laws do especially
enjoin it. As in the Acts of Swearing, a Riot, and some Others.

Quest. 39. Whether it be of necessity, in case where an oftender is to be
convicted by Oath of Witnesses, that he be present, and to hear his Defense?

Answ. We conceive it the safest and best way so to do.

Quest. 40. Whether a Justice of Peace may bind to the Good-Behaviour Bastard.
Good-Behaviour.
the Putative Father of a Bastard-Child, to th end he may be forthcomming, when
he shall be brought in question by the Parish to secure it?

Answ. We conceive, Yea. But it must be by the ordinary way of binding to the
Good Behavior for Incontinency, and cannot be otherwise. And yet somewhat may
be said against this.

Quest. 41. What power the Justices of the Peace have in or out of the
Constables
Sessions of the Peace to make, or to remove High Constables of Hundreds, or
Constables of Parishes?

Answ. Custom seems now to Warrant this course. And there is a necessity of
it, where Lects are gone, or not duly kept, or where insufficient men are
chosen therein. And how this may be otherwise supplied, except it may be in the
Sheriffs Turn, we understand not. And yet we conceive, that where the Leets do
continue, and they do continue to elect, the Justices of the Peace are not to
meddle with it at all, But what they do in the making, or removal of these
Offices, it is safe for them to do it in the Quarter Sessions?

Quest. 42. Whether the Swearer be not to pay for many Oaths sworn Swearing.
at one time, so many times the penalty of the Statute as he swears Oaths?

Answ. We conceive not. And yet perhaps if the Oaths be sworn in the hearing of
a Justice of Peace, Hunting.
^here he must pay for every Oath the penalty of the Statute. Otherwise he is
first to be convicted of his Oath once sworn before he pay the increase of the
penalty.

Quest. 43. Whether hunting in 2 Coniger that is not a Free Warren, be within
the Statute of 3 H. 7. 7.

Answ. We conceive, Not. For the Statute speaks only of Hunting in a Park,
Forest, or Warren.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
ABjuration. See Recusants. Account. See Officers, Highwayes, Churchwardens.
Poor. Agnus D^i. See Recusants. Alehouse and Ale-house-keepers. See
Inne-keepers. Amercements. See Bailiffs. Apprentice. See Master and Servant.
Archery. See Sports. Armed men and Armed, Chap. 3. Sect 1. Arrest. See
Imprisonment. Artisicers and Arts. See Trades. Assessment. See Rates. Assise of
Bread and Beer. See Brewer, Baker.
B.
BAdger, Drover, Lader, Kidder, Carrier, or Transportr, of Corn or Cattle.
Chap. 4. Numb. 1. Bailiff. See Sheriff. and in Chap. 4. Numb. 3. Bail or
Bailement. Chap. 3. Sect. 2. 16. Numb. 9. Hakers. Chap. 4. Numb. 2. Bargain and
Sale. Chap. 3. Sect. 3. Bark. Chap. 4. Numb. 4. Barretors. See Behavior.
Bastardy, see Incontinency. Bawd. See Incontinency. Beer. See Alehouse.
Beggar. See Rogue. Behavior, and Surety of the Good Behavior, Chap. 3. Sect.
4. 6. 8. 9. 27. 41. 42. Numb. 4. Sect. 53. 46. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 40. Bind
over. Chap. 3. Sect. 5. 7. 8. 9. 10. 16. Numb. 1. 7. 25. Blasphemy. Chap. 3.
Numb. 6. Chap. 4. Numb. 5. Chap. 7. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. Sect. 6. Numb. 24. Books
Popish. See Recusant. Bows. See Sports. Brewer. Chap. 4. Numb. 2. Bride-well.
See Correction-house. Bridewell-Master. See Officers. Bridges. See Highways.
Butchers. Chap. 4. Numb. 6. Butter and Cheese. Chap. 4. Numb. 7, 62. Butts. See
Plays.
C.
CAlves. Chap. 4. Numb. 6. Captains and Soldiers. Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Chapter 4.
Numb. 8. Cards. See Plays. Carders. See Cloth. Carrier. See Lord's Day, Drover.
Cattle. Chap. 4. Sect. 9. Cerciorari. See Habeas Corpus. Certificate. See
Testimonial; and in Chap. 3. Sect. 2, 16. Numb. 8. Sect. 19, 22. Challenges and
Duels. Chap. 3. Sect. 7. Chap. 4. Numb. 10. Chancell. See Church. Cheators and
Cheating. Chap. 3. Sect. 8. See Behavior. Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Cheese. See
Butter. Chepstow-Bridge. See Highways. Church. Chap. 3. Sect. 9. Chap. 4.
Numn. 12. Churchwardens. Numb. 3. in Chap. 3. Sect. 9. Churchyard, Numb. 2.
in Chap. 3. Sect. 9. Chancel. Chap. 3. Sect. 9. Numb. 2. Isle, the same. Clerk
of the Parish in Chap. 3. Sect. 9. Numb. 7. Chap. 4. Numb. 45. Churchwardens.
See Church. Clerk of the Parish or Sexton. See Church. Clerk of the Peace. See
Officers. Clerk of the Market. See Weights and Measures, and Officers. Cloth
and Clothiers. Chap. 3. Sect. 10, 33. chapter 4. Numb. 13. chap. 5. Chap. 7. Sect.
4. Numb. 8. Sect. 5. Numb. 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 12, 19, 20, 24, 33.
Cockmatches. See Plays. Collectors of the Gaol-money. See Officers.
Commitment. See Imprisonment. Confession. See Conviction. Conservators of
Rivers. See Officers. Conspiracy, Chap. 3. Numb. 6. Chap. 4. Numb. 6. 14.
Constable. Chap. 3. Sect. 11. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 41. Conviction or
Hearing. Chap. 7. Confession. Chap. 7. Examination. Chap. 3. Sect. 16, 19.
Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 14, 15, 16. Trial. Chap. 7. View. Chap. 7. Witnesses,
Chap. 7. Traverse, Chap. 7.
Cordwainers, Carriers, Tanners, Leather, etc. Chap. 4. Numb. 11. Chap. 7.
Sect. 3. Corn. See Transportation; and Chap. 4. Numb. 16. Coroners. See
Officers. Corpus cum Cause. See Habeas Corpus. Correction-House, or Bride-well.
Chap. 3. Sect. 6. 12. 27. 28. 30. Numb. 8. 9. Sect. 33. Numb. 8 9. Sect. 48.
Numb. 6. Sect. 58. Chap. 4. Numb. 16. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19. 20. 32.
Cottages, and In-mates. Chap. 4. Numb. 17. Counterfeiters of false Tokens and
Letters, Chap. 3. Sect. 8. Chap. 4. Numb. 18. County Court, See Sheriff.
Crosse-Bowes. See Guns. Crosses. See Superstitious Relics and Recusants.
Crows. Chap. 3. Sect. 16. chap. 4. Numb. 19. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 20. 28.
Currier. See Cordwainer. Cursing. See Swearing.
D.
DEer. See Hunting. Directory. Chap. 4. Numb. 20. Sect. 6. Numb. 2. Dogs. See
Hunting. Drapery. See Cloth. Drovers. See Badgers. Drunkards. See Innes, etc.
Duels. See Challenge. Dyers. See Cloth.
E.
EGyptian. See Rogue. Error, and Writ of Error. See Habeat Corpus. Estreates.
See Sheriffs. Examination. See Conviction. Excise. Chap. 3. Sect. 14. Chap. 7.
Sect. 6. Numb. 21, 24, 25, 28. Exportation. See Transportation. Eves-droppers.
See Behavior.
F.
FAirs and Markets. See Lord's Day. Owners and Rulers of Fairs. See Officers.
Fasting-dayes, and Feasting-dayes, and Fish-dayes, Chap. 3. Sect. 15. Chap. 4.
Numb. 21. False Tokens. See Cheators. Felony and Felon. Chap. 3. Sect. 2. 4.
16. Chap. 6. Feasts or Feastival-dayes. See Fasting-dayes. Fiddlers. See Rogues.
Fishers and Fish. Chap. 3. Sect. 17. Chap. 4. Numb. 22. Chap. 7. Cutting off
the head of Ponds. Chap. 4. Numb. 22.
Fish-dayes. See Fasting-dayes. Flocks, See Cloth and Clothiers. Forcible
Entry. Chap. 3. Sect. 18. Chap. 7. Forgery. Chap. 4. Numb. 23. Fore-stallers,
Regrators, Ingrossers. Chap. 3. Sect. 3. 28. Chap. 4. Numb. 24. Fowl. See
Hunting. Fraud and Deceit. See Cheating. Free Quarter. Chap. 3. Sect. 19.
Fullers Earth. See Transportation.
G.
Jailer and Goal, or Prison, Chap. 3. Sect. 20. See Officers. Games. See
Plays. Goldsmith, Gold, Silver, and Gilding, Chap. 4. Numb. 25. Chap. 7. Good
Behavior. See Behavior. Guns and Crosse-bowes. Chap. 3. Sect. 1, 25. Chap. 4.
Numb. 26. Chap. 7.
H.
HAbeas Corpus. Chap. 3. Sect. 21. Remove a Record. Cerciorari. Supersedeas.
Writ of Error.
Hay and Oats. See Inne-holder. Hawking and Hawks. See Hunting. Hearing. See
Conviction. Hedge-breakers. See Trespasses. Heresie^ See Blasphemy. Hide^ See
Butchers and Cordwainers. Highways and Bridges, Chap. 3. Sect. 22. Chapter 4.
Numb. 27. Chap. 7. Sect. 1. Numb. 2. 10. Sect. 5. Numbi^ Chap. 7. Sect. 6.
Numb. 10, 33. Holidayes. See Fast-dayes. Honor ^ See. Title of Honor. Horses.
Chap. 3. Sect. 23. Chap. 4. Numb. 28. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 14. Hospital. See
Poor. Hostlers. See Inne-holders. Horse-bread. See Inne-holder. Hue-and Cry.
Chap. 3. Sect. 16, 24. Chap. 4. Numb. 29. Hunters, Hawkers, Fowlers, etc. Chap.
3. Sect. 25. Chap. 4. Numb. 30. Chap. 5. Chip. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 14, 15, 17,
24, 43. Humiliation-dayes. See Fast-dayes.
I.
JEsuits. See Recusants. Idle-livers. See Rogues. Imprisonments, Arrest or
Commitment, Chap, 3. Sect. 26. Incontinency. Chap. 3. Sect. 27. Chapter 4. Numb.
32. Chap. 7. Adultery, Chap. 4. Numb. 32. Incest. Chap. 4. Numb. 32.
Fornication, Chap. 3. Sect. 27. Numb. 6. Chap. 4. Numb. 32. Bastardy, Chap. 3.
Sect. 27. Numb. 1. 4. Chapter 4. Numb. 32. Chapter 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 37, 40. Bawd and
Bawdry, Chap. 3. Sect. 27. Numb. 1. Chap. 4. Numb. 32.
Informers, Chap. 4. Numb. 33. Inne-keepers or Inn-holders, and Innes, Chap. 3.
Sect. 28. Chap. 4. Numb. 34. Vintners or Taverns, Chap. 4. Numb. 63.
Ale-house-keepers and Alehouses. Chapter 3. Sect. 28. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19.
Victuallers and Victuals, Chap, 3. Sect. 28. Hay and Oats, and horse-bread,
Brewers Beer, etc. Chap. 3. Sect. 28. Hostlers and horse-bread. For all this,
see chap. 3. Sect. 28. Chap. 4. Numb. 34, Chap. 7. Sect. 1. Numb. 7. Sect. 4.
Numb. 7, 8, 10. Sect. 5. Numb. 1, 2, 4. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19, 24, 25.
Inmate. See Cottage. Inordinate person. See Rogue. Journeyman. See Servant.
Isle of a Church. See Church. Jury. Chap. 4. Numb. 35. Justices of the Peace.
Of their power in general, Chap. 2. and Chap. 6. Of their power out of
Sessions. Chap. 3. Of their power in the Sessions. Chap. 4. Chap. 7. Sect. 6.
Of their power in or out of the Sessions. Chap. 5. and Chap. 6. Chap. 7. Sect.
6. Cautions to them. Chap. 3. Sect. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 14, 16, 18, 22, 26,
28, 31, 33, 34, 39, 40, 42, 48, 53, 55, 59, 61. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19.

K.
Kine. See Cattle.
L.
Laborers. See. Masters and Trades. And Chap. 3. Sect. 30. Numb. 1. Chap. 7.
Sect. 2. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 13. Lader. See Badger. Leather. See
Cordwainer. Lent. See Fast-d^yes. Libellers and Slanderers. Chap. 3. Sect. 29.
Chap. 4. Numb. 36. Linen Cloth. See Cloth. License. Chap. 3. Sect. 28. Numb.
1. 2. Sect. 30. Chap. 4. Numb. 37. Logwood. See Cloth. Loyterer. See Rogue.
Lord's Day. Chap. 3. Sect. 30. Numb. 3. Sect. 31, 34. Chap. 7. Sect. 1. Numb. 2,
3. Sect 4. Numb. 1, 5. Sect. 5. Numb. 1, 2. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19, 24, 26,
34, 36.
M.
MAulsters and Malt. Chap. 3. Sect. 32. Chap. 4. Numb. 38. Chap. 7. Sect. 3.
Mariners. Chap. 3. Sect. 30. Numb. 1. Sect. 42. Numb. 5. Chap. 4. Numb. 39.
Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19, 27. Markets. See Fairs. Mass. See Recusant.
Masters and Servants. Chap. 3. Sect. 33. Chap. 4. Numb. 40. Chap. 7. Sect. 6.
Numb. 29, 30. Laborers. Chap. 3. Sect. 33. Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Apprentices.
Chap. 3. Sect. 33. May-Poles. See Plays. Measures See Assise. Millars. Chap.
4. Numb. 41. Ministers. Chap. 3. Sect. 34. Chap. 4. Numb. 42. See Officers.
Mittimus. Chap. 3. Sect. 16. Numb. 7. Sect. 35.
N.
NAme. See Behavior and Titles Assumed. Night-Walkers. Chap. 3. Sect. 36. See
Behavior. Nusances. Chap. 23. Sect. 28. Numb. 2.
O.
OAths. Chap. 3. Sect. 37. Chap. 4. Numb. 43. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 37.
Officers. Chap. 3. Sect. 38. Chap. 4. Numb. 44. Account, Chap. 4. Numb. 46.
Chap. 3. Sect. 38. Numb. 10. Opinion. See Blasphemy. Orchards. See Trespasses.
Overseers of the Poor. See Poor, and Officers. Overseers of Cloth. See
Officers.
P.
PApist. See Recusant. Parks. See Hunting. Peace. Chap. 3. Sect. 39. Surety of
the Peace. Pensions. See Soldiers. Perjury, Chap. 4. Numb. 48. Pictures. See
Superstitious Relics. Plays. Chap. 3. Sect. 40. Chap. 4. Numb. 49. Chap. 7.
Sect. 6. Numb. 26. Stage Plays. Numb. 40. May-Poles. Numb. 5. Cock-Matches,
Numb. 6. Cards, Tables, Dice. Numb. 12. Butts, Numb. 4. Archery and Bows,
Numb. 4.
Plague, Chap. 3. Sect. 41. Poor. Chap. 3. Sect. 30, 38, 42. Chap. 4. Numb. 50
Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19, 27. Mariners. Chap. 3. Sect. 38. Hospital. Chap. 3.
Posse Comitatus. Chap. 3. Sect. 40, 46. Preachers. See Ministers.
Priest-Popish. See Recusant. Prison. See Gaol. Prophecies, Chap. 4. Numb. 51.
Chap. 7.
Q.
Quarrellers. Chap. 4. Numb. 10.
R.
RAtes or Assessments, Chap. 3. Sect. 41, 43, 47. Chap. 4. Numb. 50, 52. Chap.
5. Receivers. See Collectors. Recognisances. Chap. 3. Sect. 44. Chap. 4. Numb.
53. Regrators. See Fore-stallers. Recusant. Chap. 3. Sect. 45. Chap. 4. Numb.
54. Religion. See Service of God. Relics. See Superstitious Relics. Remove
of Prisoners and Causes. See Habeas Corpus. Restit^tion. Chap. 4. Numb. 55.
Riot, Rout, etc. Chap. 3. Sect. 46. Chap. 4. Numb. 56. Robbery. Chap. 3. Sect.
47. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 21. Rogue. Chap. 3. Sect. 40. Numb. 40. Sect. 41.
Sect. 48. Chap. 4. Numb. 57. Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Numb. 9. Idle-fellow, or
Loyterer, Chap. 3. Sect. 48. Numb. 8. Chap. 4. Numb. 31. Beggar, Chap. 3. Sect.
48. Vageant, Wanderer, or Vagabond. Chapter 3. Sect. 43. Fiddler. Chap. 3. Sect. 48.
Egyptian. Chap. 3. Sect. 48.

S.
SAbbath. See Lord's Day. Searcher of Leather. See Officers. Search. See Felony.
Service of God. Chap. 4. Numb. 20, 42, 58. Servants. See Masters. Sessions. See
Justices of Peace. Sewers. Chap. 3. Sect. 49. Sexton. See Clerk of a Parish.
Sheriffs. Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Sect. 50. Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb.
14. Sheep. See Cattle. Shoemaker. See Cordwainer. Shooting. See Guns. Silver.
See Gold. Slanderer. See Libeller. Soldiers. Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Chap. 4. Numb.
8. Sect. 42. Numb. 5. Chap. 7. Sect. 5. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 19, 25.
Pensions. Chap. 4. Numb. 47.
Spinners and Carders. See Cloth. Sports. See Plays. Statutes expounded. Chap.
7. Sect. 6. Stock of the County. See Treasurers. Stolen Horses. See Horses.
Stolen goods. See Restitution. Supersedeas. See Habeas Corpus. Supplicavit.
Chap. 3. Sect. 51. Superstitious Relics. Chap. 5. Sect. 52. Surety of the
Peace and good Behavior. See Peace and Behavior. Surveyors of the Highways.
See Highways. Swearing and Cursing. Chap. 3. Sect. 53. Chap. 7. Sect. 6.
Numb. 18, 25, 26, 42.
T.
TAnners. See Cordwainers. Taverner and Taverns, See Inne-keepers. Taxation.
See Rates. Tenters for Cloth. See Cloth. Testimonial or Certificate. Chap. 3.
Sect. 30. Numb. 1. Sect. 54. Tile and Tile-makers. Chap. 4 Numb. 59. Chap. 7.
Sect. 3. Tippling. See Alehouses. Tithes. Chap. 3. Sect. 55. Titles of Honor
assumed. Chap. 3. Sect. 56. Chap. 4. Numb. 60. Chapter 7. Sect. 6. Numb. 21, 25.
Tokens counterfeit. See Cheators. Trades and Arts. Tradesmen, and Artificeas
andLabourers, Chap. 4. Numb. 61. Transportation of Cattle, Corn or Victuals.
Chapter 3. Sect. 57. Chap. 4. Numb. 62. Traverse. See Conviction. Treason. Chap. 6.
Treasurers. See Officers. Trespasses, by cutting Corn, robbing Orchards, etc.
Chap. 3. Sect. 58. Trial. See Conviction.
V.
VAgabond or Vagrant. See Rogue. Victuallers and Victuals. Chap. 4. Numb. 64.
Chap. 7. View. See Conviction. Vintners. See Inne-keepers. Undersheriff. See
Sheriff. Unlawful Games. See Plays. Usury. Chap. 4. Numb. 65.
W.
Ways. See High-wales. Warrens. See Hunting. Warrants. Chap. 3. Sect. 16.
Sect. 59. Chap. 7^ Sect. 6. Numb. 36. Watch and Ward. Chap. 3. Sect. 60.
Watchmen. See Officers. Weavers. See Cloth. Weights and Measures. Chap. 3.
Sect. 61. Chapter 4. Numb. 67. Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Widows and Orphans of Soldiers.
See Poor. Wine. Chap. 4. Numb. 66. Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Numb.
34. Wool. See Cloth. Wood. Chap. 3. Sect., 62.
Y.
Yarn. See Cloth.
FINIS.

