An exact Collection of choice DECLARATIONS, WITH Pleas, Replications,
Rejoynders, Demurrers, Assignement of Errors: AND THE ENTRIES OF JUDGments
thereupon affirmed.

Collected by VV. S. one of the Clerks of the Upper Bench Office:

In the Reigns of Queen ELIZABETH, King JAMES, and the late King CHARLES.

DILIGENTLY PERUSED, AND TRANslated into English, for the benefit and help of
young Clerks.

With an exact TABLE, wherein may be found the Principal matters contained in
the whole Book.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. and T. R. for John Place, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Furnivalls Inn Gate in Holborne, 1653.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Know that this painful Work, by the Authors own hand was diligently
composed, not imagining that these ensuing Presidents, collected for his
private use, should ever have worn an English Garment, or be seen without a
Court-Character; but (being very aged) and knowing that the Ports and safe
Harbors of good Declarations, Pleadings, Replications, Rejoynders,
Sur-rejoynders, Demurrers, Assigning of Errors, with diverse other matters
incident, and appertinent to an Upper Bench Clerk, an Index whereof in this
little of great you may find, and more particularly knowing with what ardency
and fervor of affection the Author by these his practical observations, for
well nigh 60 years past, have by his cautious Marginal Notes in this Book
comprised, prevented the many irrevocable downefals of Causes, that young
Clerks to their own dishonor, and the ruin, sometimes of their Clyents, for
want of good and learned Presidents, have suffered a miserable shipwreck: and
for that the Author during all the time aforesaid, have had, and as yet has,
the favorable aspect of the Judges in the upper Bench, and the approbation of
the lest Clerks in the said Court now living, and is reputed for a good, Just,
learned, and painful Attorney, and that in his old age he might live in his
Works, and be some help and furtherance to young Clerks, who intend to be
Attorneys, and declare themselves in English, as they are, and shall be obliged
by the late Act of Parliament, and the Supreme Authority of this Nation, he
does lovingly admonish them to make use of these, if they cannot frame better,
(which I think impossible.) I am confident the Author (if God permit) will
recollect some other scattered Papers which have layn a long time in darkness,
but will without doubt when they come forth illuminate their Judgments, and
abolish some Errors which are daily committed for want of well declaring and
pleading. Some ancient Clerks may be offended, but I care not, Non nobis solum
nati sumus, etc. The few Vitia Scriptor' in the Author are amended, what
oversights or neglects, you may impose upon the Printers, you shall have
thanks to amend; which is all that I expect, and more then the Collector of
these Presidents has yet had: And so I conclude in the words of a grave
Lawyer, Nihil aliud in his reportare cupio, quam ut eruditior quispiam istis
provocatus, doctiora scriberet promulgetque

Farewell. J. W.

ACTIONS OF ABATEMENT.
ABATEMENT.
AND the aforesaid I. T. and I. D. by R. D. their Attorney come and defend the
force and injury, The Defendants plead in Abatement to the Writ, that the
Plaintiff, and another Stranger are Tenants in Common, and the other not named
in the Writ.
when, etc. and pray Judgment of the Writ aforesaid, because they say, that
the aforesaid T. G. the aforesaid fourteenth day of August, whereon, as is
supposed, the Entry aforesaid to be made, had nothing in the Manor aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, unless in common and undivided, with ^ne W. C.
Esquire, which said W. as yet is alive, and remains in perfect Health, and is
not named in the Writ aforesaid, And this they are ready to aver, whereupon
they pray Judgment of this Writ.

AND the aforesaid T. G. says, that his Writ aforesaid, The Defendant pleads
the sole seisin in himself, and traverses, etc.
for the reason, prealleged, ought not to be abated, because he says, that
long before the aforesaid fourteenth day of August, wherein the Entry
aforesaid was made, one I. G. Father of him the said T. whose Heir he is, was
seized of the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in his Demesne, as of
Fee, and so being thereof seized, of such his Estate died seized; After whose
death, the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, did descend to him the
said T. G. as to the Son and Heir of him the said I. G. by virtue whereof, the
same T. into that Manor, with the appurtenances, after the death of the
aforesaid I. G. as Son and Heir of the aforesaid I. did Enter, and was thereof
sole seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, at the time of the Entry aforesaid made,
and afterward, Without that, that the same T. G. the same fourteenth day of
August, Traverse the Tenute in Common.
held the Manor aforesaid in common, and undivided, with W. C. aforesaid, in
the form wherein the aforesaid I. and I. above have alleged, And this, etc.
whereupon he prays Judgment, whether his Writ aforesaid, for the reason
before alleged, ought to be abated, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
And the aforesaid I. and I. say, that the aforesaid T. G. the aforesaid
fourteenth day of August, held the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in
common and undivided, with the aforesaid W. C. in the form wherein the same I.
and I. have above alleged; And of this they put themselves upon the Country,
And the aforesaid T. G. in like manner, etc.

Misnomer of the Town wherein the Entry and Trespass is supposed to be
Committed, pleaded in Abatement.
AND the aforesaid I.F.I.W. and I.P. by W.F. their Attorney, come and defend the
force and injury, when, etc. And all contempt, and whatsoever, etc. And pray
Judgment of the Original Writ, of the Plaint aforesaid, Because, whereas the
aforesaid T. L. by the same Writ, supposes that the aforesaid I.F. I.W. and
I.P. into the Manors aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in F. O. and other
Villages (as in the Writ, etc.) were entered; The same I. F. I.VV. and I. P.
say, that within the County of N. aforesaid, there is not had, nor at the time
of the obtaining the aforesaid Writ was there had, any Town, any Hamlet, or
place known, out of any Town, and any Hamlet known, or called by the name of
Odnoggo. And this, etc. Whereupon they pray Judgment of that Writ, etc.

The Plaintiff replies, that there is no Misnomer, and thereupon takes issue.
And the aforesaid I.VV. says, that his Writ aforesaid, for the Reason
prealleged, ought not to abate, because he says, that at the aforesaid time of
the obteining of the Original Writ of the Plaint aforesaid, to wit, the
twelfth day of -- in the twenty fourth year of the Reign of our Lord the King
that now is, within the City aforesaid, was had, and as yet is had, a certain
Town, known, and called by the name of Ognoggo, as by the Writ aforesaid is
supposed, And this he prays may be Enquired of by the Country, And the
aforesaid Defendants in like manner, etc. Therefore Command is given unto the
Sheriff of N. that he cause to come before our Lord the King (such a day)
wheresoever, etc. twenty four, as well Knights, etc. of the body of the County
of N. by whom, etc. And who neither, etc.

Misnomer of the Addition pleaded in Abatement.
ANd the foresaid VV. P. in his proper person, comes and defends the force and
injury, when, etc. And all contenpt, and whatsoever, etc. And says that be at
the time of the obtaining of the Original Writ of the Plaint aforesaid, was
of the Society of Clements Inn, in the Parish of St. Clements Danes without
the Bars, a Member of the middle Temple London, which said Society is, and
at the time of the obtaining of the same Writ, and long before was a certain
Society of Men, Expert in the Temporal Laws, Traverse.
and practicing the same, as also of Counselors of the same Law, Without
that, that the same VV. at the time of the obtaining the same Writ was VV.P. of
London, Mercer, or by that name known or called, as by the same Writ is
supposed, and this, etc. VVhereupon he prays Judgment of that Writ, etc.

And the aforesaid I. says, that his Writ aforesaid, Issue upon the Traverse.
for the reason aforesaid, ought not to abate, because he says that the
aforesaid VV. at the time of the obtaining the same Writ, to wit, the
sixteenth day of June, in the eighteenth year of our Lord the King, was W. P.
of London Mercer, and by that name known, and called, as by the same Writ is
supposed; And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country, And the
aforesaid W. in like manner, etc.

ss. WIlliam Pole of London, Smith, Misnomer in the Surname pleaded in
Abatement.
was Attached to answer I. W. of a Plea of Trespass, And the same person, which
by the name of W. P. of London, Smith, by the Sheriffs of London is taken, and
by the same Sheriffs brought to the Bar, in his proper person comes, and says
that he at the time of the obtaining of the Original Writ of the Plaint
aforesaid, and always afterward, was known, and called by the name of William
Cuason of London, Smith, Without that, that he at the obtaining of the same
Writ, Traverse.
or ever afterward, was known, or called by the name of W. P. of London,
Smith, as by the same Writ is supposed; And this, etc. whereupon he prays
Judgment of that Writ, etc.

AND the aforesaid I. C. says, The Plaintiff replies that he is known, and
called as well by the one, as by the other.
that his Writ aforesaid for the reason, etc. ought not to abate, because he
says, that at the time of the obtaining of the same Writ, that is to say (such
a day and year) the same W. was indifferently known, and called, as well by the
name of VV. P. of L. S. as by the name of VV. C. of L. S. And this, etc.
VVhereupon he prays Judgment, whether his Writ aforesaid ought to abate, etc.

AND the aforesaid VV. says, Issue upon the Misnomer.
that he as the time of the obtaining of the aforesaid Writ, and ever
afterward, was known, and called by the name of VV. Cursen, of London, Smith,
as he above has alleged, without that the same VV. at the same time, or ever
afterward, was indifferently known and called, as well by the name of VV. P. of
L. Smith, as by the name of VV. C. of London, Smith, And of this he puts
himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner, etc.
Therefore the Jury is to come out of the body of the County, etc.

Note.
It is to be known, if the party come freely out of Prison, then the Entry
ought to be thus (And thereupon he bring, his Suit, etc.)

And VV. C. of London, Smith, in his proper person comes, and says that he is
the same person against whom by the name of W. P. of L. Smith, the aforesaid I.
brought his Original Writ aforesaid, And defends the force and injury, when,
etc. and says that he, etc. (as before, etc.) And the aforesaid I.C. says,
that it is well and true, that the same person which now appears by the name of
VV.C. of London, Smith, is the same person against whom the same I.C. by the
name of W. P. of London, Smith, brought his Writ aforesaid, And says further,
that his same Writ, for the reason prealleged, ought not to abate, because he
says (as before, etc.)

Note.
Note, where the party comes in by Cepi Corpus, there the Entry must be made
as before in the other Plea aforesaid, etc.

ACTIONS OF APPEAL.
APPEAL.
ss. Joan Govor of, etc. John Govor of, Appeal of Robbery against the
Principals and Abettors, Trin. 24. Hen. 6. Roll. the 25.
etc. Richard Hopkins of, etc. Thomas Ireland of, etc. and William Quick of,
etc. were attached by their bodies, etc. to answer Thomas Berd, together with
William Podie, of, etc. and others, of a Robbery and breach of the Peace of our
Lord the King that now is, whereof they are Appealed, And there are Pledges,
etc. to will, etc. And whereupon the same Thomas Berd in his proper person
instantly Appeals the aforesaid Joan, and others, for that where as the
aforesaid Thomas Berd was in the peace of God and of our Lord the King that now
is, at Huish near Highbrig on Wednesday next after the Feast of the Invention
of the holy Cross in the 24. year of the Reign of our Lord the King that now
is, about the hour of ten before noon of the same day, where came as well the
aforesaid Joan and others, who now appear, as the aforesaid William Podie, Some
of the Defendants appear and others do not appear.
etc. who now appear not, whom the aforesaid Thomas Berd of the Robbery
aforesaid might appeal if they were present, to be Felon and Felons of our Lord
the King that now is, lying in wait, and premeditating the assault against the
peace of our Lord the King that now is, his Crown and dignities, the day, year,
hour, place, and County of Somerset aforesaid, And the aforesaid Thomas
Ireland, and others, the aforesaid Thomas Berd of forty Sheep, eight pair of
Sheets, and other Goods, etc. of the Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid Thomas
Berd then and there found feloniously did rob, take, and carry away, And the
aforesaid Joan and others then and there were present, comforting and helping
the aforesaid Thomas Ireland and others to make the aforesaid felony in form
aforesaid, And so soon as they the said Felons, the Felony and Robbery
aforesaid in form aforesaid had done, they fled, And the same Thomas Berd them
speedily followed from Town to Town unto the four next adjoining Villages, And
with or until, etc. And if the same Felons, who now appear, the Felony
aforesaid of the Robbery aforesaid upon them above put, will deny, the same
Thomas Berd is here ready to prove this against them as the Court, etc. And the
aforesaid Joan (and some of the Defendants) in their proper persons, came and
defended the force and injury, when, and all Felony, and whatsoever, etc. Not
guilty for some of the Defendants.
And say that they are not guilty, And of this they put themselves, etc. And
the aforesaid Thomas Berd in like manner, etc. Therefore the Jury thereupon is
to come before our Lord the King in eight days of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary, And who neither, etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well,
etc. The same day is given to the parties now appearing, And upon this the same
Joan, Bayl for some of the Defendants.
and Thomas Ireland, and others, are delivered over in Bayl unto John Methole
of etc. and three other Manucaptors, etc. before our Lord the King at the
aforesaid Town, etc. At which day before, Default after Issue by one.
etc. the aforesaid Thomas Berd solemnly called to appear came not, And the
aforesaid John Govor and others in their proper persons came, And the aforesaid
Joan Govor, and Thomas Ireland, although solemnly called the fourth day of the
Plea came not, upon which the aforesaid John Methole one of the Pledges of the
aforesaid Thomas Ireland in his proper person came, And said that the same
Thomas Ireland is dead, One of the Defendants dead.
and dyed at Huish near Highbrigs in the said County of Somerset long before
the said eight days of the Purification, etc. to wit (such a day) and this he
is ready to avow, whereupon he presumes our Lord the King, him upon the
aforesaid occasion would acquit, etc. And upon this for that that it is
sufficiently here in Court by credible men of the aforesaid Country testified,
that the aforesaid Thomas Ireland is dead, and dyed in the form which is by the
aforesaid John Methole above alleged, Cease of Process as to one and his Bayl
by death. Exigent against one who makes default after Issue.
which Thomas Croswell who prosecutes for our Lord the King on that behalf
denies not, It is considered that the process against the aforesaid Thomas
Ireland and his pledges aforesaid on that behalf should cease, etc. And that
the Manucaptors of the aforesaid Joan Govor be taken, etc. And command is given
to the Sheriff, that he cause to be required the aforesaid Joan from County to
County until, etc. she be wayved if not, etc. And if, etc. then he take her,
and her safely, etc. So that he have her body before our Lord the King from the
day of Easter in one month wheresoever, etc. And upon this for that the
aforesaid Thomas Berd, the appeal aforesaid against the aforesaid John Govor
and others in form aforesaid prosecuteth not, Judgment against the Plaintiff
by default.
It is considered that the same Thomas Berd be taken, etc. And his pledges
aforesaid of prosecuting be in money etc. And that the aforesaid John Glovor of,
etc. and others who above appeared, as to the Suit of the aforesaid Thomas
Berd, go without day, etc. But as to the satisfying of our Lord the King being
instantly spoken to, in what manner of the premises upon them above put they
would acquit themselves, they say severally they are not guilty, etc. Not
guilty as to the King.
And thereof of good or ill severally put themselves upon the Country,
Therefore the Jury thereupon is to come before our Lord the King in eight days
of St. Hillary, wheresoever, etc. And who neither, etc. to Recognize. etc.
because as well, etc. The same day is given to the parties aforesaid, etc. Bayl
for those that are acquit by default.
And upon this the aforesaid John Govor and others are delivered unto Bayl unto
William Trigo and three other Manucaptors until the aforesaid Term, etc. And
so from day to day until, etc. At which day before our Lord the King at
Westminster came the aforesaid John Govor, Venirefacias.
and others in their proper persons, and the Sheriff returns the names of 24.
Jurors whereof none, etc. Distringas Jur'.
Therefore command is given to the Sheriff that he should not omit, etc. but
destroy, etc. by all the Lands, And that of the issues, etc. And that he have
the bodies of them before our Lord the King from the day of Easter in fifteen
days wheresoever, Ni. pri.
etc. or before the beloved, and faithful of our Lord the King R. N. Knight,
chief Justice of our Lord the King of his Bench, if before on Thursday next
after, etc. at etc. by form of the Statute, etc. come to make the Jury
aforesaid, etc. The same day is given to the aforesaid John Govor and others,
etc. Continuance of the Jurat'.
And the Process thereupon continued by the Jury thereupon put, It is put in
respite before our Lord the King until from the day, etc. Unless the Justices
of our Lord the King at the Assizes, etc. first (such a day etc.) at, etc. by
the form of the Statute, etc. comes for default of Jurors, etc. At which said
fifteen days from the day of Easter before our Lord the King at Westminster
came the aforesaid John Govor and others, etc. in their proper persons, And the
aforesaid Justices at the Assizes, etc. before whom etc. sent the Record, etc.
in those words, afterward the day and place within contained before, etc. came
the aforesaid John Govor, etc. in their proper persons, and the Jurors. etc.
being called in like manner came. And upon this Proclamation being made as the
manner, as if any for the Lord the King could enform the Jurors of the Jury,
whereof within is made mention of the within-contained, he should come and he
should be heard, But none appeared to do this, Whereupon it was proceeded into
the taking of the Jury aforesaid by the oath of the twelve, who to speak to the
truth of the within-contained, being chosen, Verdict for the Defendants.
tried and sworn, say upon their oaths that the aforesaid John Govor and
others, etc. are in nothing guilty of the Robbery of the within written Thomas
Berd, as the aforesaid John Govor, etc. within by pleading have alleged, nor
upon that occasion ever withdrew themselves, nor any of them ever withdrew
himself, and they Assess the Damages of each the aforesaid John Govor, etc.
having respect as well to the Imprisonment and Arrest, which severally by
occasion of the Appeal aforesaid they have sustained, and the infamy which by
the Imprisonment, Damages for the Defendants.
and by other means they have severally incurred, as also for their expenses
and costs in that behalf laid out, to a hundred pound, and upon this the
aforesaid John Govor, Avowment that the Plaintiff had not wherewith to satisfy
the Damages.
etc. say that the aforesaid Thomas Berd has not, whereof the aforesaid
Damages may be rendered unto them, and pray that the Justices here may enquire,
at which, or whose abetting the Appeal aforesaid by malice was formed, and upon
this it was sought of the Jurors aforesaid, if the aforesaid Thomas Berd have
whereof to the aforesaid John Glovor and others, he may be able to render the
Damages aforesaid or no, who say that the aforesaid Thomas has sufficient, The
Jury find he has Assets.
whereof to the said John Govor and others, etc. he may be able to render the
Damages aforesaid, and further say upon their oaths that there are no Abettors
to the forming of the Appeal aforesaid by malice; for that, that the principals
aforesaid of the premises are quit. The Jury find no Abettors because the
Principals are quit:
It is considered that Process on that behalf against the Accessaries aforesaid
shall altogether cease, etc.

ACTIONS OF ASSIZE.
ASSIZE.
ss. THe Assize comes to be Revised, whether R. N. and N. H. and A. his wife
have unjustly, Mid. Assize upon Disseisin made of Tenements, as of the
Freehold. Easter 9. Hen. 7. Roll 37.
disseied I. Y. of F. I. G. the Elder, and W. B. of his Freehold in H. after
the first, etc. And whereupon the same I. I. and W. by W.F. their Attorney
complain, that they have disseized them of one Message, and one acre and a
half of Lands, with the appurtenances, etc.

And the aforesaid R. N. and A. being called, came not, And of them the Sheriff
Retorns, that they have nothing, etc. The Defendants come not, and the Sheriff
retorns a Nihil, etc. The assize is taken by Default, etc. and the review found
for the plaintiff.
And that they are not found, etc. And that they have neither Bayl nor Bayls;
Therefore the Assize aforesaid is taken against them by default, etc. And the
Reviewers of the assiize aforesaid being called, came, who to speak to the
truth of the premises being chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, that
the aforesaid I. I. and W. were seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, in their view put in the Plaint aforesaid specified in their
Demesne, as of Free hold, until the aforesaid R. N. and A. them thereof
unjustly and without judgment, and by force and arms they did disseize, and
they assess the Damages of them the said I. I. and W. by occasion of the
Disseizin aforesaid above their Expenses and costs by them about the
prosecution of this Assize laid out, to six shillings and eight pence, And for
those Expenses and costs to thirteen shillings and four pence. And of the same
Reviwers by the Court it is Demanded, if the same Disseisin were made after the
Eighth year of the Lord Henry the sixth, late King of England, or no, who say
it is so, Therefore it is considered that the aforesaid I. I. and W. shall
recover their seisin of the Message, and Land aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, in the Plaint aforesaid, specified by the view of the Reviewers
of the same Assize, and their Damages aforesaid, to the trouble, according to
the form of the Statute in that case provided, and by the Reviewers aforesaid
in form aforesaid assessed, which said Damages in the trouble amount unto three
shillings. And the aforesaid R. N. and A. are to be taken, etc.

A Writ of Scire fecias seisinam upon the assize before.
THe King, to the Sheriff of Middlesex Greeting; Whereas I. Y. of F. I. G. the
Elder, and VV. B. lately in our Court before, etc. at Westminster, by the
review of a certain Assize of novell dissesin, and the judgment of the same
Court, have recovered their seisin of one Message, and one acre and a half of
Land, with the appurtenances, in H. against R. N. N.H. and A. his wife, And
therefore We Command you, that you cause to be had to the aforesaid I. I. and
VV. full seisin of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, without
delay, Witness, etc.

An Original in assize of noble disseisin before the King.
ss. THe King to the Sheriff of Middlesex Greeting, I. Knill, and H. Lord
Chard, have complained unto us, that G.H, VV. K. and R. A. have unjustly, and
without judgment, disseized them of their Freehold in H. after the first, etc.
And therefore we Command you, that if the aforesaid I. R. and H. shall make you
secure of prosecuting their claim, Then you cause that Tenement to be reseized
of the Cattle which in it were taken, and that Tenement with the Cattle to be
in peace until Friday next after three weeks of Saint Michael, And in the mean
time to cause twelve free and lawful men of that VVisonage to view that
Tenement, and the names of them in the Writ, And that you Summon them by good
Summons, that they be then before us at Westminster, ready thereupon to make
their review. And that you put by sure and safe Pledges the before- G. W. and R.
or their Bailiffs, if they be not found, that they be then there, to hear that
Revisement, And that you have then there the Summoners the names of the
Pledges, and this Writ, VVitness our self at Westminster, the twentieth day of
October, in the nineteenth year of our Reign.

The Retorn thereof.
Pledges of prosecuting John Do, and Richard Row G. H. C. H. and R. A, within
named are attached, Horse of the price of 11. shillings, The residue of the
Execution of this Writ appeared in a certain Panell to this Writ annexed the
answer of L. K. and R.W. Sheriffs, The names of the Reviewers, etc. I. R.
Esquire, etc. (and so the twenty fourth) singularly Impanelled (and then thus)
the Summoners of the Reviwers aforesaid, and of every of them I.T. and R. S.
the Manucaptors of the summons of the Reviewers aforesaid and of every of them
A. D. R. R. N. D. and H. H.

THe King to the Sheriff of Middlesex Greeting, Habeas Corpus Jur' upon the
same.
We command you that you have before, etc. on Thursday next after the Morrow of
St. Martin the bodies of I. R. Esquire (and so the names of the 24 in the
panell named) the Reviewers of a certain Assize of novell disseisin which I. R.
and H. L. have brought before us against G. H. W. H. and R. A. of Tenements in
H. to make revisement of the same Assize, and that in the mean time you cause
the Reviewers aforesaid, to see the Tenements aforesaid and their names in the
Writ, and that you have then there the names of those Reviewers, and this Writ.
Witness, etc.

The return of the same Writ remains in a certain panell to this Writ annexed
the answer of L. H. and R. W. Sheriffs, The Return of the Writ of Habeas Corpus
Jur'.
The names of the Reviewers, etc. (and then the names of the Reviewers in the
Panell,) etc. (and then thus) each of the Reviewers aforesaid severally by
himself is attached by I. D. and R. R.

Note for a Rule General that the Inrolment of the Writ of Habeas Corpus,
ought always to be in the Roll of Pleas and not elsewhere and ought to be
enrolled as in the Plea following.

ss. THe Assize came to be Revised, whether G. Houghton, Middlesex. A
Declaration in Assize of novell disseisin upon the original Writ aforesaid.
March 19. Hen. 7. Roll. 69. One of the Defendants says that the Father of his
Wife was seized of the Tenements in view, put in Fee and dyed, and the
Defendant entered in right of his Wife and had issue, and the Wife dyed, and as
Tenant by the Law of England hold himself in, etc.
W. H. and R. A. unjustly, etc. have disseised I. R. and H. L. of their
Freehold in H. after the first, etc. And whereupon the same I. and H. by G. C.
their Attorney complain that they have disseised them of one Message and 18.
Acres of Land with the appurtenances, etc. and the aforesaid G. H. by T. L. his
Attorney comes and answers as Tenant of the Tenants aforesaid, and says that
the Assize thereupon between him and the aforesaid. I. H. ought not to be had,
Because he says that one W. B. was seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, put in view of the revisement of the Assize aforesaid, and in
the Plaint aforesaid specified in his Demesne as of Fee, and he being thereof
seized dyed of such his estate thereof seized, after whose death the Tenements
aforesaid did discover to one I. the Wife of the aforesaid G. as to the
Daughter and Heir of the aforesaid W. B. by which the same G. and I. in right
of her the said I. as Daughter and Heir of the aforesaid W. into the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances did enter and were thereof seized in their
Demesne as of Fee in right of her the said I. And they being so thereof seized
the aforesaid G. and I. had issue between them one W. H. and afterward the
aforesaid I. L. in the Parish of St. B. in the Ward of A. London dyed, and the
aforesaid G. over-lived her, and held himself in the aforesaid Tenements with
the appurtenances, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Freehold, as
holding thereof by the Law of the Land of this Kingdom of England, And that the
aforesaid I.R and H. clayming the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
by color of a certain deed of Demise to them thereupon made for term of their
life by the aforesaid W. B. in his life time, Whereas nothing of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, into the possession of them the said I. and
H. by that Deed ever passed into the Tenements aforesaid entered upon, whose
said I. and H. their possession thereupon one D. D. in the same Tenements with
the appurtenances entered, upon whose said D. D. his possession thereupon the
aforesaid G. in the same Tenements with the appurtenances did reenter as it was
lawful for him to do, and this, etc. Whereupon he demands judgment, whether
the aforesaid I. and H. the Assize aforesaid thereupon, against him ought to
maintain, etc.

The other Defendants say they made no disse^sin.
And the aforesaid W. H. and R. A. in their proper persons say, that they have
done no injury, nor dissesin to the aforesaid I. R. and H. of the Tenements
aforesaid, And of this they put themselves upon the Assize, And the aforesaid
I. R. and H. in like manner, Therefore the Assize is to be taken thereupon
between them, etc.

The Plantiff says that one was seized of the Tenements, and Enfeoffed the
Plaintiffs to hold for ever, and traverses the dying feised of the Father of
the Defendants Wife.

The Traverse


And the aforesaid I. R. and H. say that they by any thing, by the aforesaid G.
prealleged ought not to be debarred from having the Assize aforesaid against
him, because they say, that one R. A. was seized of the Tenements aforesaid in
view, etc. and in the Plaint, etc. specified in his Demesne as of Fee, And being
so thereof seized did Enfee of them the said I. R. and H. To have and to hold
to them and their Heirs for ever, By virtue of which said Feoffment they the
said I. and H. were thereof seized in their Demesne as of Fee, until they the
said I. W. and R. A. in the Writ named them the said I.R. and H. of those
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances unjustly, etc. they disseised,
Without that, that the aforesaid W. B. dyed seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of
the aforesaid Tenements put in view of the revisement of the Assize aforesaid
in the Plaint above specified, as the aforesaid G. has above by pleading
alleged And this etc. Whereupon he prays judgment, and that the Assize
aforesaid may be proceeded in to the taking thereof between them. etc.

Issue taken upon the traverse.
And the aforesaid G. as formerly says, that the aforesaid W. B. dyed seized in
his Demesne as of Fee of the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances, as he
above by pleading has alleged, and of this he puts himself upon the Assize,
The Assize remains to be taken for want of Reviewers.
and the aforesaid I. R. and H. in like manner. etc. Therefore the Assize is to
be taken between them, etc. And the Reviews of the Assize aforesaid, being
called some of them came, and the Assize aforesaid remains to be taken before
the Lord the King at Westminster until Thursday next after the morrow of St.
Martyn for want of Reviews, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is to have them there,
the bodies of the Reviewers, etc. And in the mean time, etc. So that, etc. The
same day is given to the parties aforesaid here, etc. At which day before our
Lord the King at Westminster, came as well the aforesaid I.R. and H. as the
aforesaid G. by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the aforesaid VV. H. and R. A.
in their proper persons in like manner came, and the Reviewers of the Assize
aforesaid being called in like manner came, who to speak to the truth of the
premises, being chosen, Verdict in Assize for the Plaintiff.
tried, and sworn, say upon their oaths that the aforesaid R. B. dyed not
seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, as the aforesaid I.
R. and H. above by pleading have alleged, and that the aforesaid I. R. and H.
were of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances seized in their Demesne
as of Fee until the aforesaid G. W. and R. them the said I. and H. thereof
unjustly and without judgment, but not by force nor Arms they did disseize,
and they Assess the damages of them the said I. and H. by occasion of the
premises, aforesaid above their expenses and costs by them, about the
prosecution of this Assize laid out to thirteen shillings and four pence,
Judgment upon the verdict.
and for those expenses and costs to twenty shillings, Therefore it is
considered that the aforesaid I. R. and H. shall recover the seisin of the
Tenements aforesaid, in the Plaint aforesaid specified, by the view of the
Reviewers of the Assize aforesaid, and their damages and costs aforesaid above
assessed, which said damages in the whole amount unto thirty three shillings
and four pence, and the aforesaid G.VV. and R. in money, etc. Money, etc.


SIr John Knill and Hugh Lochard have arraigned an Assize of novell disseisin
against G. H. and others, The charge given to the Jury upon the foregoing
assize.
and supposes them to be disseised of their Freehold in H. and have made
their claim for a Message and eighteen Acres of Land with the appurtenances,
thereunto has come the same G. by his Attorney, and says that the Assize
thereof between him and the said I. R. and H. L. ought not to be for that he
says (as in his Plea) and the aforesaid W. and others Defendants, say that
they have done no wrong nor no disseisin unto the said Plaintiff of the
aforesaid Tenements, and of that they have put them upon the Assize, and the
Plaintiff also (and then rehearse further the title of the Plaintiff in his
reputation, and the issue that is joined thereupon, and then thus) so your
charge is whether that W. B. dyed seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the
Message and eighteen acres of Land put in view, and specified in the Plaint as
the said G. H. has alleged in his Bar or not, and also whether the said W. H.
and other Defendants disseised, the Plaintiffs of the Tenements aforesaid or
not, if you find that the same W. B. dyed not seized as the Plaintiff has
alleged, you shall enquire whether the Plaintiffs were seized of the Tenements
put in view, and specified in the Plaint in their Demesne as of Freehold, and
disseised by all the Defendants or any of them, and whether the disseisin was
done with force or not, and if you find the said A.B. dyed not seized, and that
the Plaintffs were seized of the Tenements and disseised by the Defendants or
some or any of them, you shall enquire what damage the Plaintiff has sustained
by reason of the disseisin, and also for the costs about the suit of this
Assize, and if you find that W. B. dyed seized in his Demesne as of Fee, and
that the Defendant disseised not the Plaintiff, you shall enquire no further,
and this is your charge, etc.

ACTIONS OF AUDITA QUERELA.
AUDITA QUERELA.
ss. THE Lady the Queen has sent to her Justices of the Pleas assigned to be
held before her, Audita Querela upon an Escape by a Bailiff of a Liberty.
her Writ in these words; ss. Ellzabeth, etc. To our Justices of Pleas in our
Court before us assigned to be held Greeting, We have received by the grievous
complaint of Thomas Boyton of, etc. in the County of Suffolk, Clerk, otherwise
called, etc. That whereas one William Andrews Citizen, etc. and Lewis Simpson
Citizen, etc. London, lately in our Court before us at Westminster by Bill
without our Writ, and by the judgment of the same Court, had recovered against
him the said Thomas, as well a certain debt of 100. pounds, as 10. pounds for
their Damages which they sustained, as well by occasion of the detention of that
debt, as for their Expenses and costs, etc. laid out, whereof he is Convict;
And although after the rendering of that Judgment, to wit, the second day of
July, in the the 31. year of our Reign at Saint Edmonds Bury, in the County of
Suffolk, that is to say, within the Liberty and Franchise then of Roger
Townsend Knight, and Willam Drue Esquire, of St. Edmonds Bury, in the aforesaid
County of Suffolk, the same Thomas by John Pridie, and Henry Doy, by virtue of
a certain Warrant lately before, to the aforesaid John Pridie and Henry, by the
aforesaid Roger Townsend, and William Drue, made and directed by virtue of a
certain Warrant to them the said Roger and William Dixie, by one Philip Tilvey
Esquire, then Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Suffolk, under the Seal of his
Office made of, and upon a certain Writ of Capias ad fatisfaciendum of the
aforesaid William Andrews and Lewis Sympson, of the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
lately before at the prosecution of them the said W. A. and L. from our said
Court before us issued, and to the Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Suffolk
lately before directed and delivered, Which said Roger Townsend and William
Dixie then, that is to say, the aforesaid second day of July, in the aforesaid
31. year of our Reign, and before and after had full Retorn of all, and all
manner of Writs and Warrants within the Liberty aforesaid to be Executed, and
the Execution of them, In Execution of, and for the Debt and Damages aforesaid
was then taken and arrested, And in Execution detained until afterward, to
wit, the third day of November, in the 31 year aforesaid, the aforesaid K. T.
and W D. the same T. B. at Lamby has in this County of Surrey (the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, to the aforesaid William Andrews and Lewis Sympson, being in
no wise satisfied) permitted him to go whether he would at large. As the same
Thomas by diverse ways and means which are convenient, is ready to make appear,
yet the same W. and L. by reason of the judgment aforesaid, for the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, against him the said Thomas in our said Court before us now
lately prosecuteth, And him upon that occasion to take; and in our Prison,
under the Custody of our Marshall of our Marshalsees before us to be detained
most unjustly, have procured to his the said T. B. no little loss and
grievance, and against the Law of our Realm of England, Whereupon he has
humbly implored us to provide for him in that behalf a fit remedy, And because
we would not that the aforesaid T. B. should in that behalf be in any manner
injured, and being willing to do what is just, We Command you, that having
heard the Complaint of the aforesaid T. B. in this behalf, and calling before
you the parties aforesaid, and hearing hereto, thereupon their several reasons
to him the said T. B. you should cause to be had full and speedy Justice, as of
right, and according to the Law and Custom of our Realm of England ought to be
done, VVitness our self at Westminster, the twenty sixth day of October, in the
thirty second year of our Reign. The Declaration of the Plaintifs.
After, to wit, on Monday next after the morrow of All Souls, in the self-same
Term before the Lady the Queen at Westminster came the aforesaid T. B. under
the Custody of the Sheriff of the County aforesaid in Execution for the debt
and Damages aforesaid to the Bar here brought in his proper person, who is
committed to the Marshal, etc. and presently says, that he in person in
Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid, ought not to be deteyned, because
that he says that the aforesaid I. Pridie. and Henry Day, the aforesaid T.B.
the second day of July, in the thirty first year of the Reign of our said Lady
the Queen that now is at St. Edmonds Bury, in the County of Suffolk, that is to
say, within the Liberty and Franchise then of Roger Townsend Knight, and Dix
Esquire of St. Edmonds Bury, in the County of Suffolk; aforesaid (which said
Roger and William Dix, then and before, and after, had full retorn of all, and
all manner of Writs and Warrants within the Liberty aforesaid to be executed,
by virtue of a certain Warrant lately before to the aforesaid I. P. and H. by
the aforesaid R. T. and W. D. made and directed, by virtue of a certain Warrant
to them the said R. T. and W. D. by one Philip Tilney Esquire, then Sheriff of
the aforesaid County of Suffolk, under the Seal of his Office made, of, and
upon a certain Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum of the aforesaid W. A. and L.
S. of the debt and damages aforesaid, lately before at the prosecution of the
said W. A. and L. in the aforesaid Court of the said Lady the Queen, before her
the said Queen issued, and to the Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Suffolk
lately before directed and delivered) they took and arrested, And him the said
T. B. then and there in Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid, under
their custody had, Until the aforesaid R. T. and W. D. the same T. B. so
taken and arrested in Prison in Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
being afterward, to wit, the third day of November, in the thirty first year
of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth, now Queen of England aforesaid, at Lamby
Heath, in the County of Surrey, out of the Prison there, they did permit to
escape and go at large, by reason whereof the same T. B. of the Debt and
Damages aforesaid was clearly discharged, And prays that he from the Prison
aforesaid, in which, by the aforesaid occasion he is now detained for the Debt
and Damages aforesaid, he may be delivered, And because the Court of our Lady
the Queen here are unknowing, whether the allegation of him the said T. B. be
true or no, It is Commanded the Sheriff, that by honest men, Scire facias
awarded.
etc. he make known to the aforesaid W. A. and L. S. that they be before our
Lady the Queen in eight days of St. Hillary, wheresoever, etc. to show if they
have any thing for themselves, or know what to say, wherefore the aforesaid T.
B. of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, ought not to be discharged, and from the
Prison aforesaid, in which by the aforesaid occasion he is detained, to be set
free, etc. if, etc. And further etc. The same day is given to the aforesaid T.
B. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. And upon this comes (such Manuceptors,
Recognizance entered into.
etc.) in their proper persons (and so recite the Recognizance) At which day,
here before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came the aforesaid T. R. in his
proper person, The Sheriff Retorns a Scire fac'.
And the Sheriff Retorns, that by virtue of the aforesaid Writ to him
thereupon directed, he has made known to the aforesaid W. A. and L.S. of being
before our Lady the Queen at the aforesaid Town, in the aforesaid Writ
contained, by I. Done and R. Fenne, honest men, etc. as by the same Writ it
was Commanded him, And the aforesaid H. A. and L. so warned, etc. On the fourth
day of the Plea, being solemnly called, The Defendants approve by Attorney, and
imparl.
by Edward Wemmo their Attorney came and prayed thereupon day of imparting, and
it is granted unto them, etc. And upon this day thereupon is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the said Queen, from the day of Easter in Fifteen
days, wheresoever, etc. That is to say, to the aforesaid W. A. and L. to
impart, and then to answer, etc. At which day before our Lady the Queen at
Westminster, came as well the aforesaid T. R. in his proper person, as the
aforesaid W. A. and L. by their Attorney aforesaid, And the aforesaid W. A. and
L. further pray day thereupon of imparting, And it is granted unto them, etc.
And upon this day is further given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady
the Queen, to the Morrow of the Holy Trinity from thence next following,
wheresoever, etc. that is to say, etc. (as before) At which day, etc. (as
before,) And so to imparl unto Eight days of St. Michael then next following;
At which said eight days of St. Michael, before our same Lady the Queen at
Westminster, came as well the aforesaid T. B. in his proper person, as the
aforesaid W. A. and L. by their Attorney aforesaid; The Defendants plead Escape.
And the aforesaid VV. A. and L. S. say, that by any thing before alleged, the
aforesaid T. B. ought not to be discharged from the Execution aforesaid,
Because they say, that the aforesaid R. T. and VV. D. did not permit the same
T. B. to Escape, and go at large in manner and form as the same T. B. has
above alleged, Issue joins thereupon.
And upon this they put themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid T. B.
in like manner, etc. Therefore the Jurie thereupon is to come before our Lady
the Queen in eight days of St. Hillary, wheresoever, etc. And who neither,
etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to the
parties aforesaid, Jury put in respite.
etc. From which day the Jurie aforesaid, between the parties aforesaid, was
put in respite thereupon between them, before our Lady the Queen at
Westminster, until from the day of Easter, in fifteen days from thence next
following, for want of Jurors, etc. At which day, before our Lady the Queen at
Westminster, came as well the aforesaid T. B. in his proper person, as the
aforesaid VV. A. and L. S. by their Attorney aforesaid, And the Jurors called
in like manner came, who to speak to the truth of the Premises, being chosen,
tried and sworn, say upon their Oaths, that the aforesaid T. B. was taken and
arrested in Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid, as in the Record
aforesaid above is specified, And that the aforesaid R.T. and VV.D. Bailiffs of
the Liberty and Franchise aforesaid, in the County of Suff^lk aforesaid, did
bring the aforesaid T. B. to Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, on
Monday before the retorn of the Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum, in the Record
aforesaid above mentioned, (The day of the Retorn of the aforesaid Capias ad
satisfaciend' being on Monday next after the morrow of All Souls, in the thirty
first year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England. And that
before the retorn thereof, the aforesaid Bailiffs of the Liberty and Franchise
aforesaid, the aforesaid T. B. at the request of him the said T. B. to the
Village of Lambeth, in the County of Surrey did carry; which said Village of
Lombeth, is a Village near adjoining to Westminster aforesaid, but out of the
way, and not in the way from the County of Suffolk aforesaid, unto Westminster
aforesaid, nor is between the County of Suffolk aforesaid, and Westminster
aforesaid; And that the aforesaid Bailiffs of the Liberties and Franchises
aforesaid, afterward at the aforesaid day of the aforesaid Retorn of the
aforesaid Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum did bring the aforesaid T. B. to
Westminster aforesaid, And him the said, T. B. in the Court of our Lady the
Queen, before her the said Queen at Westminster aforesaid, into the Prison of
the said Court of our Lady the Queen, called the Kings Bench, by virtue or
color of the aforesaid Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum they did deliver, And
further the Jury say, that the aforesaid T. B. from the time of the arrest of
him the said T. B. aforesaid, unto the retorn of the aforesaid Writ of Capias
ad satisfaciendum, and the delivery of the aforesaid T. B. into the Court of
her the said Lady the Queen, before her the said Queen, as is aforesaid,
remained, and continued with the aforesaid Bailiffs, by virtue or color of the
aforesaid Writ or Warrant; But whether upon the whole matter aforesaid,
Special Verdicts.
in form aforesaid found, the bringing of the aforesaid T. B. to Lambeth
aforesaid, etc. in manner and form aforesaid be an Escape out of Prison, and a
permission to go at large in Law nor no, the Jury aforesaid are altogether
ignorant; Whereupon they pray the advisement and discretion of the Court of our
Lady the Queen, now here before her the said Lady the Queen being, And if it
shall seem to the said Court of our said Lady the Queen, that the aforesaid
bringing of the aforesaid T. B. to Lambeth aforesaid, in manner and form
aforesaid, be an Escape out of Prison, and a permission to go at large in the
Law, then the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the aforesaid R. T.
and T. D. the aforesaid, T. B. at Lambeth in the County of Surrey aforesaid,
out of the Prison aforesaid to Escape, and to goat large, they did permit, in
manner and form as the aforesaid T.B. he has above alleged, and if upon the
whole matter aforesaid, it shall seem to the Court of the Lady the Queen, that
the before bringing of him to the said T.B. to Lambeth aforesaid, in manner and
form aforesaid, be not an Escape out of Prison, and a permission to go at large
in the Law, Then the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the
aforesaid R.T. and W.D. did not permit the same T.B. out of Prison aforesaid to
Escape, and to go at large in manner and form as the aforesaid T. B. has
above alleged.

ACTIONS OF CONSPIRACY.
CONSPIRACY.
Norfolk. Declaration in Conspiracy, for procuring one to be Endicted for
Witchcraft.
ss. NIcholas Stockdale complains of William Skippon of Hi^cham, etc. John
Green of etc. William Waters of, etc. and John Hitch of, etc. in the custody
of the Marshall, etc. for that, that is to say, that whereas they the aforesaid
William Skippon John Green, William Waters, and John Hitch the 12. day of July
in the 44. year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England, at
Fakensam in the County aforesaid by Conspiracy fore thought between them, the
aforesaid Nicholas for that he the first day of December in the year of the
Reign of the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England the 44. and diver other days
after the said first day of December, should practice and exercise Witchcraft
and Sorcery, wickedly and Feloniously at Hitcham aforesaid, in, upon and
against one Mary Skippon then the Wife of the aforesaid William Skippon, by
which said practices and exercises of the said Witchcraft, the aforesaid Mary
from the aforesaid first day of December in the 44. year aforesaid until the
20. day of the month of February in the 44. year aforesaid most dangerously and
mortally was sick and languished, and the same 20. day of February in the 44.
year aforesaid, the same Mary by the said practice and exercise of the
aforesaid Witchcraft at Hitcham aforesaid, in the County aforesaid dyed, and
that the aforesaid Nicholas Stockdale to the same Mary at Hitcham aforesaid, in
manner and form aforesaid of his malice fore thought, willingly, devillishly,
wickedly and feloniously, by the practice and exercise of the Witchcraft
aforesaid did kill and murder, against the peace of our said Lady the Queen,
and against the form of the Statute of our said late Lady the Queen held at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, in the 5. year of her Reign in that
case published and provided, Before our then very beloved and faithful
Counselor of our said Lady the Queen John Popham Knight chief Justice of the
said late Queen of the Pleas in the Court of her the said late Queen before her
the said Queen assigned to be held, and Robert Clark, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, of the same late Queen, Justices of the Assizes of the said late
Queen, in the aforesaid County of Norfolk, then assigned to be taken, held at
the Castle of Norwich, the twelfth day of July in the 44. year aforesaid, as
also the Justices of the same late Queen, for the keeping of the Peace in the
County aforesaid, and assigned to hear and determine of diverse Felonies,
Trespasses and other misdemeanors in the same County then committed, at the
Castle of Norwich in the County aforesaid, to be endited, and him the said
Nicholas, upon that occasion then and there to be taken, and in the Gaol of the
said Castle, of our late said Lady the Queen, be ore the aforesaid John Popham
Knight, and Robe^t Clark Justices of our said late Queen, at the Gaol aforesaid
to be delivered, to be held, falsely and maliciously they conspired, and
procured against the form of the Statute in that case lately published and
provided, after which said Conspiracy, Inditing, taking, and imprisoning, and
detension of him the said Nicholas, he in form by them the said William
Skippon, John Green, William Waters, and John Hitch had, and procured the same
Nicholas for making his purgation in that behalf, according to the Law and
cu^^om of this R^alm of England, being asked then to wit at the Gaol delivery
aforesaid, whether he were guilty of the Felony aforesaid, whereof in form
aforesaid, he was endicted or no, and thereupon he had said, that he was not
thereof guilty and of this had then put himself upon the Country, as by the
Record thereupon before the Justices remaining it is fully manifest and appears
the aforesaid William Skippon, John Green, William Waters and John Hitch by
Conspiracy between them at Fakenham aforesaid in form aforesaid, came before
the aforesaid Justices at the Assizes aforesaid, and to prove him the said
Nicholas guilty of the Felony aforesaid before the same justices gave in
evidence upon their oath to the Jury at the Assizes aforesaid impanelled
charged and sworn to enquire of the good and ill, That the same Nicholas, the
aforesaid Mary in form aforesaid, had killed and murdered, according to the
form and effect of the Endictment aforesaid, by them in form aforesaid
procured, which said Jury more fully understanding the truth and the
Conspiracy aforesaid, as is aforesaid, before had, then to wit at the Assizes
aforesaid, said upon their oath, that he the said Nicholas was not guilty of
the Felony aforesaid in manner and form as the same Nicholas was endicted, and
he the same Nicholas then before the Justices aforesaid at the Gaol delivery
aforesaid, according to the Law and custom of this Rea^m of England was
acquitted, By virtue of which said Conspiracy Endictment taking, giving in
evidence, and detension in the Prison aforesaid, of him the said Nicholas, by
them the said William Skippon, John Green, William Waters and John Hitch in
form aforesaid had and procured, the same Nicholas, not only in great scandal
and infamy, as also in danger of his life, and also of the loss of all his
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, he was fallen and elapsed unto, But
also diverse great sums of money for the making of himself clear in that behalf,
was constrained, and compelled to the Damage of him the said Nicholas two
hundred pound, etc.

Lincoln. Declaration in Conspiracy brought by one who was Endicted together
with others, etc. before the Justices of the Peace, and afterward acquit by
the Justices of Assizes. March 14. Hen. 6. Ro^. 6.
ss. T. G. lately of R. in the County aforesaid Gentleman, I. P. of S. in the
County aforesaid Husbandman, and A.B. of the same in the County aforesaid
Husbandman, were attached to answer A. P. lately of S. in the County aforesaid
Gentleman, Wherefore by Conspiracy forehad between them the aforesaid A. P.
together with E. P. lately of S. in the County aforesaid Gentleman, I. G. of
the same, in the County aforesaid Yeoman, T.C. of the same, in the same County
Yeoman, T.S. of S. in the same County Husbandman, A. H. of S. in the County
aforesaid Husbandman, and G.P. of B. in the County aforesaid Husbandman, for
that he (such a day and year) by force and Arms that is to say with Swords,
Staves and Knives, and other ^urtfu^l weapons, at S. aforesaid in the County
aforesaid the Close and House of R. B. did break, and enter and one Cart load
of Hay of the price of six shillings and eight pence, of the Goods and Chattels
of him the said R. B. then and there found, riotously took and carried away,
against the Peace of our Lord the King aforesaid, at C. aforesaid, to be
Indicted and him the said A. upon that occasion to be taken, and in the Pri^on
of the Marshalsee of our Lord the King in the Court of him the said Lord the
King, before him the said King held, until the same A. before Humphry
Coningsbie Knight, and John Carrill Justices of our Lord the King at the
Assizes in the County aforesaid assigned to be taken on Friday the Feast of St.
Anne last past at the Castle of Lincoln in the County aforesaid according to
the Law and custom of the Realm of our Lord the King of England, he was thereof
acquitted, to be detained falsely and maliciously at C. aforesaid they did
procure, to the great damage of him the said A. and against the form of the
provision in that case provided, And whereupon the same A. by VV. V. his
Attorney complains, that the aforesaid T.G. I.P. and R.B. by Conspiracy
forehad between them at C. aforesaid, in the County of Lincoln aforesaid, on
Tuesday next, before (such a Feast) (such a year) aforesaid, the aforesaid A.
together with E. P. lately of S. in the County aforesaid Gent. (and the rest as
before) for that he the seventh day of October, in the tenth year of the Reign
of our Lord the King aforesaid, with force and arms, that is to say, Swords,
Staves, and Knives, and other most hurtful weapons, at S. aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, the Close and House of R. B. did break and Enter, And one
Cart-load of Hay, to the value of six shillings and eight pence of the (...)
and chattells of him the said R. B. then and there found, rio^^^^ he took and
carried away, against the Peace of our said Lord the ^^ng, at C. aforesaid, on
Tuesday next before (such a feast, such a year aforesaid) before W. Tirwhit, R.
Terwhit and W. H. Knights, and their Companions, Justices of our Lord the King
for the Peace, as also assigned to hear and determine of diverse Felonies,
Trespasses, and other misdemeanors in the parts of Lindsey, in the County
aforesaid committed, to be Indicted, and him the said A. upon that occasion on
Wednesday next after Fifteen days of Easter, in (such a year) at Westminster,
in the County of Middlesex, to be taken, and in the Prison of the Marshall of
our Lord the King, in the Court of him the said Lord the King, before him the
said King had, until the same A. before H.C. and I.C. Justices of our Lord the
King, at the Assizes in the said County of Lincoln assigned to be taken on
Friday the Feast of St. Anne last past at the Castle of Lincoln, in the County
aforesaid, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm of our Lord the King of
England, he was thereof acquitted, to be detained falsely and maliciously, at C.
aforesaid, they procured against the form of the provision aforesaid; Whereupon
he says, that he is damnified, One of the Defendants Iustifies as a
Counselor at Law, and the other as Witnesses to testify a Riot before the
justices of the Peace, which is the same Conspiracy, whereof, etc.
and has damage to the value of forty pounds, And thereupon he brings his
Suit, etc.

And the aforesaid T.G. I.P. and R. B. by I. L. their Attorney come and defend
the force and injury, when, etc. And all Conspiracy, etc. And say that the
aforesaid A. ought not to have his action against them, etc. because by
protestation, they say that the aforesaid A. was never taken and detained in
Prison of the Marshalsee of our Lord the King before him the said King, by
reason of the Indictment aforesaid, in manner and form as he above has
declared, yet for Plea they say, that long before the Conspiracy aforesaid
supposed to be made, the aforesaid E.P. I.G. T.C. T.S. and A.H. the aforesaid
seventh day of October, in the tenth year of our Lord the King that now is
aforesaid, by force and arms, that is to say, with Swords, Staves and Knives,
at S. aforesaid, in the aforesaid County of Lincoln, the Close and House of the
aforesaid R. B. they did break and enter, and one Cart-load of Hay, to the
value of six shillings eight pence of the goods and chattels of him the said R.
B. then and there found, they riotously took and carried away, And for that
that the aforesaid A. P. was there present at S. aforesaid, at the said time of
the Riot and Trespass aforesaid committed, And in like manner that the common
voice and fame was, that the Riot and Trespass aforesaid was done and committed
by the Command of the aforesaid A. and the aforesaid R. B. after the Riot and
Trespass aforesaid committed, and before the Conspiracy aforesaid supposed to
be made, came to the aforesaid T. G. unto B. in the County aforesaid, for that
the same T. G. was learned in the Law of (...) Land, And to him the said T. G.
reported the whole matter (...) Riot and Trespass aforesaid, And prayed
Counsel of him the (...) T. what in that matter was fit to be done, And the
foresaid T. G. then and there demanded of the aforesaid R. B. whether he had
any testimony of the Riot and Trespass aforesaid, And the same R. R. said, that
the aforesaid I. P. was present at the same time of the Riot and Trespass
aforesaid committed, and knows to testify all the premises said by the said
R. B. to be true, By reason whereof they the same T. G. I. P. and R. B. had
suspicion that the aforesaid A. was guilty of the Riot and Trespass aforesaid,
Upon which the same T.G. I.P. and R. B. after and before the time of the
Conspiracy aforesaid supposed to be made, at C. aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid had conference together of the Riot and Trespass aforesaid, in form
aforesaid committed, and what was further more fit to be done, for the
punishment and reformation of the aforesaid Riot and Trespass, Upon which the
aforesaid T. G. then and there Counseled the aforesaid R. B. and I. P. that
they should be at C. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, at the next General
Sessions of the Peace, there to be held, to show the Justices of the Peace of
our Lord the King, of the Riot and Trespass aforesaid, to that intention, that
the same Justices at the same Sessions of the Peace may be able to make
Inquiry of the same Riot and Trespass amongst other things, By which they the
same R. B. and I. P. on the said Tuesday next before etc. at C. aforesaid,
before W. Tirwhit, R. Tirwhit, and W. H. Knights, and other Justices of our
said Lord the King of the Peace, as also assigned to hear and determine of
diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other misdemeanors in the parts of Lindsey in
the County aforesaid committed, they came, and to the same Justices, then and
there in full Court sitting, they gave information of the Riot and Trespass
aforesaid, And to them a certain Bill con^eining the Riot and Trespass
aforesaid, by the aforesaid A.E. I.G. T.E. T.S. etc. committed then and there,
did exhibit and deliver, which said Bill, the aforesaid Justices of the Peace
there to certain persons of the same County, then and there to enquire of the
Riot and Trespass aforesaid, amongst other things there sworn, they did
deliver, thereupon to declare the truth of the premises; And further, the same
R. B. and I. P. say, that they before the aforesaid Justices, at their Command
were sworn to declare true information and evidence to the aforesaid Jurie, to
the matter contained in that Bill, By virtue whereof they the said R. B. and J.
P. to the same Jurie of the Riot and Trespass aforesaid gave Evidence, Which
said Conference of the aforesaid T.G. R.B. and I.P. of the premises, in form
aforesaid, and the exhibition of the aforesaid. Bill to the aforesaid Justices
of the Peace, as also the information and declaration of the Evidence
aforesaid, to the aforesaid Jury, in form aforesaid, are the same Conspiracy
whereof the aforesaid A. P. now complains of, And this, etc. whereupon he
prays Judgment, whether the aforesaid A. should have his action, etc.

And the aforesaid A. says, that he by any thing, The Plaintiff replies, that
they Conspired of their proper injury without any such cause.
etc. ought not to be debarred, etc. because he says, that they the said T.G.
R.B. and I. P. the aforesaid time of the Conspiracy aforesaid made, of their
proper injury and malice, and without such cause by them the said T. G. R. B.
and I. P. above by pleading alleged, him the said A. together with the
aforesaid E. P. I. ^. T.C. T.S. A.H. and E. P. of the Riot and Trespass
aforesaid to be indicted, and him the said A. upon the occasion to be taken,
and in Prison aforesaid to be detained, falsely and maliciously they procured,
in manner and form as the aforesaid A. above against them complains; And this
he prays may be Enquired of by the Country, And the aforesaid T.G. R.B. and
I. P. in like manner, etc. Therefore, etc.

N. L. lately of Trucleston, in the County aforesaid Knight, Declaration in a
Writ of Conspiracy upon the Statute of 8. Her. 6. where one of the Defendants
approves upon the Distringas, and the other upon the attachment. Mich. 15. Hen.
7. Roll. 35.
in money for many defaults, etc. the same N. and R. A. lately of I. in the
Parish of H. Yeoman, and I.S. lately of A. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, and
I.H. lately of M. in the County aforesaid Tailor, were attached to answer
as well our Lord the King, as Y. M. lately called T. M. of Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex Spinster, of a Plea, wherefore whereas in the Statute in
the Parliament of our Lord Henry the sixth; late King of England, at
Westminster, in the eighth year of his Reign hold, It is Ordained and
established, that every of the Liege people of our Lord the King, of treason,
felony, or Trespass, by any Indictment, or appeal, before Justices of the
Peace, or any other having power to take the same Indictments or Appeals, or
any Commissioners or Justices in any County, Liberty, or Franchise of England,
to be taken, Indicted or appelled, dwelling in any County, other than where the
same Indictment, or appeal was taken, and afterward thereupon by Verdict
should be duly acquitted, should have his Writ and Action upon the Case against
every procurer of such Indictment or appeal, And that there be such Process in
and upon the same Writ, as of Trespass by force and arms made, And if such
Procurer shall be convict in that behalf, the Plaintiff shall recover his
Damages to the treble, Provided always that the said Ordinance extends not it
self to an Indictment or Appeal taken, or to be taken in the County of Chester,
as in the aforesaid Statute more fully is contained; The Indictment for
breaking a House and Chest, and taking away of goods.
Yet the aforesaid N. R. I. and R. at Winchester, falsely and maliciously have
procured the aforesaid T. (for that he and T. L. lately of I. in the County
aforesaid Labourer, and (others) such a day and year by force and arms, that is
to say, with Swords, Staves, Bows and Arrows, the House and Chest of R. A. at
I. aforesaid, they did break and enter, and three Girdles Embroidered with Silk
and Gold, to the value of 40. shillings, of the goods and chattels of the
aforesaid R. A. then and there found, feloniously they took and carried away,
against the peace of our said Lord the King) before W. F. and I. H. and their
Companions Justices of our said Lord the King of the peace, as also assigned to
hear and determine of diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors in
the aforesaid County of Southampton, to be indicted, although the same T. at
the time of the taking of the Indictment aforesaid at Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex, dwelled, and as yet dwells, by which procurement the same
T. so indicted, by diverse labors and Expenses (until before the beloved and
faithful of our Lord the King, T. Wood, and I. Reed, Justices of our Lord the
King, at the Assizes in the aforesaid County of Southampton assigned to be
taken, by the form of the Statute thereupon lately published, and provided, by
Virtue of the Writ of our Lord the King of Nisi prius, at Winton taken
thereupon, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm of our Lord the King of
England, was duly acquitted) was grievously troubled and vexed in the Contempt
of our said Lord the King that now is, and his the said T. great damage, and
against the form of Statute aforesaid, etc. And whereupon the same T. who
as well, etc. by W. F. her Attorney complains, that the aforesaid N. R. I. and
I. the twelfth day of September, (such a year) at Winton, falsely and
maliciously procured the aforesaid T. for that she and T. L. lately of H. in
the County aforesaid Labourer, and others the twenty sixth day of August, in
the second year of the Reign of our Lord the King that now is, with force and
arms, that is to say, with Swords, etc. the House and Chest of R. A. at I.
aforesaid, they did break and Enter, and three Girdles embroydered with Silk
and Gold, to the value of forty shillings of the goods and chattells of the
aforesaid R. A. then and there found, feloniously they took and carried away,
against the Peace of our said Lord the King (before W. F. and I. H. and their
Companions then Justices of our said Lord the King of the Peace, as also
assigned to hear, and determine of diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other
misdemeanors in the aforesaid County of Southampton, (such a day and year) at
W. in the County of S. aforesaid) to be Endicted, although the same T. at the
time of the taking of the Indictment aforesaid, at Westminster, in the County
of M. dwelt, and as yet dwells; By which procurement the same T. so indicted by
diverse labors and Expenses (until before the faithful and beloved, etc. T.W.
and R. R. Justices of, etc. in the aforesaid County of S. assigned to be taken,
by the form of the Statute, etc. by virtue of the Writ of our Lord the King of
Nisi prius on Monday next after the Teast. etc. (such a year at Winton, taken
according to the Law, etc. then there was duly acquitted, etc. was grievously
troubled and vexed in the Contempt of our Lord the King that now is, and his
the said T. great damages, And against the form of the, etc. Whereupon he says
that he is worsted, and has damage to the value of 100. pounds, And thereupon
as well, etc. he brings his Suit, etc.

Southampton ss. N. L. lately of, etc. Knight, I. H. lately of, The same by the
man, and the wife for Felony supposed to be done by the wife, where she was
indicted before the Justices of the Peace, and acquitted by the Justices of
Assize by a Writ of Nisi prius.
etc. Tailor, and I. W. lately of, etc. Yeoman, were attached to answer T. M.
and T. his Wife, lately called T. M. at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex
Spinster, together with I. Waterman, lately of T. in the County aforesaid
Teoman, of a Plea, wherefore by Conspiracy at Winchester between them forehad,
the foresaid T. (for that she and T. L. lately of T. in the County aforesaid
Labourer, and others (such a day and year with force and arms, that is to say,
with Swords, Staves, and Knives, the House and Chest of H. at T. they broke and
Entered, and three Girdles Embroydered with Silk and Gold, to the value of forty
Shillings, and two Table clothes, to the value of twenty shillings, of the
goods and chattells of the said H. then and there found, feloniously they took
and carried away, against the Peace of our Lord the King) to be indicted, and
her the said T. upon that occasion to be taken, and in the Prison of the Gaol
of our Lord the King of Winchester, until the same T. in the Court of our Lord
the King, before the beloved and faithful of him the said Lord the King, T. W.
and R. R. Justices of the Assizes of him the said Lord the King, in the County
aforesaid assigned to be taken, by the form of the Statute thereupon published,
and provided, by virtue of the Writ of our Lord the King, of Nisi prius at
Winchester, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm of our Lord the King
of England, she was thereof acquitted) to be detained falsely and maliciously
they procured, to the great damage of them the said T. M. and T. And against
the form of the Ordinance in that case provided, etc. And whereupon the same T.
M. and T. by VV. F. their Attorney complain, that the aforesaid N.I.H. and
I.VV. of I. etc. together with, etc. by Conspiracy between them forehad (such
a day year and place) the aforesaid T. for that she and T. L. lately of, etc.
and others (such a day and year) by force and arms, etc. (as before) against
the peace, etc. before VV.F. and I. H. and their Companions Justices of our
said Lord the King of the peace, as also assigned to hear and determine of
diverse Felonies, Trespasses and other Misdemeanors in the same County of S. on
Monday next after (such a Feast such a year) at Winchester in the aforesaid
County of S. to be Indicted, and her upon that occasion (such a day year and
place) to be taken, and in the Prison of our Lord the King, of his Gaol of
Winchester, Until the same T. in the Court of our Lord the King, before the
beloved and faithful of our said Lord the King, T.VV. and R. R. Justices of
the Assizes of our said Lord the King assigned to be taken in the County of S.
by the form of the Statute thereupon published, and provided, by virtue of the
Writ of our Lord the King of Nisi prius on Monday next after (such a Feast such
a year) at Winchester, taken according to the Law and custom of the Realm of
our Lord the King of England, thereupon he was there acquitted) to be detained,
falsely and maliciously they procured to the great damage of them the said T. M.
and T. and against the form of the Ordinance in that case provided, etc.
Whereupon they say, that they are worsted, and have damage to the value of 100.
l. And thereupon they bring their suit, etc.

One of the Defendants pleads not guilty, and the other that at the time of the
original issuings, etc. he was inhabiting at Thrukleston, and not at
Truckleston, and so not the same person.
And the aforesaid N. L. I. H. and I.VV. lately of I. etc. by A.G. their
Attorney come and defend the force and injury, when, etc. And the aforesaid I.
VV. and I. H. lately of I. say, that they are in nothing guilty, etc. And upon
this they puts themselves upon the Country, etc. And the aforesaid T. M. and D.
in like manner, etc. And the aforesaid N. L. says, that he the day of the
issuing forth of the original Writ of the aforesaid T. M. and T. was dwelling
and conversant at Thruckleston in the County of S. without that, that the same
N. ever was dwelling o^ conversant at Traxston as by the aforesaid Writ it is
supposed and this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays judgment of the
Writ, etc.

And the aforesaid T. M. and T. say, that they by any thing by the aforesaid N.
L. prealleged, their Writ aforesaid ought not to be quashed, because as to the
Plea of the aforesaid N. L. in quashing of the Writ aforesaid above pleaded,
The same T.M. and T. say, that the aforesaid Village of T. the said day of the
obteining the original Writ of them the said T. M. and T. to Wit the 6. day of
January, in the 9. year of the Reign of the King that now i^, was known and
called, as well by the name of the Vi^lage of Truxston, as by the Writ aforesaid
is supposed, as by the name of the Village of Truckleston, and this they pray
may be enquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid N. in like manner,
Therefore the Jury thereupon is to come before our Lord the King, from the day
of St. Michael in fifteen days wheresoever, of the Visonage of T. by whom,
etc. And who neither, etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day
is given to the parties aforesaid now appearing, etc.

ANd the aforesaid I. P. and W. by R. R. their Attorney come and defend the
force and injury, when, Justification in Conspiracy, for that the Defendant was
one of the Jury with other Jurors, before the Justices of the Peace at the
Sessions.
etc. And all Conspiracy and whatsoever, etc. And the aforesaid I. says, that
he is not guilty, etc. And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the
aforesaid W. by Protestation acknowledging not any such Conspiracy as is above
supposed, But that the aforesaid R. ought not to have his action aforesaid
against him, because he says, that at the time wherein the aforesaid R.
supposes himself in form aforesaid to be Indicted, he then together with other
Jurors, by the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, was impanelled and summoned to
appear before the aforesaid, late Justices of the Peace at Norwich, to do
there before the same Justices of the Peace, that which by the same Justices,
on the behalf of our Lord the King should be enjoined them, by reason whereof,
he with other Jurors then and there, before the same Justices of the peace
appeared, and by the same Justices of the Peace upon the book were sworn, and
changed by their oath to enquire, for the King, of all Felonies, Trespasses and
other articles in the Commission of our said late Lord the King. Father of our
Lord the King that now is, to the aforesaid Justices of the Peace directed,
contained within the County aforesaid, done or committed, and he together with
other Jurors before the aforesaid late Justices of the Peace, upon the book
then sworn, and charged, him the said R. according to their conscience by form,
of Law, of the Felony in the Writ and Declaration above specified did Indict,
Which all and singular he is ready to aver. Whereupon he expects not that the
aforesaid R. ought not his action aforesaid, for any Conspiracy in that Case
to maintain against him, etc. And prayed judgment, etc.

And the aforesaid R. says, that he from his action of Conspiracy aforesaid,
against the aforesaid W. by any thing by him the said W. prealleged ought not
to be debarred, Because he says, that he the day and year, etc. in the
Declaration above specified together with the aforesaid I. Conspired to Indict
him the said R. of the Felony aforesaid, Traverse:
in the form wherein he above by his Writ and Declaration supposes, Without
that, that there is had any such Record in which it is contained, that he
before the aforesaid Justices of the Peace, together with other Jurors was
sworn, on him the said R. of the Felony aforesaid, in form aforesaid, as he
above by pleading has alleged, and this he is ready to aver, and for that he
gain says it not, etc. he prays judgment, etc.

And the aforesaid W. by Rejoinder says, that there is had such a Record in
which is contained, that he before (such and such) late Justices of the Peace,
together with other Jurors was sworn, and that they the aforesaid R. of the
Felonies aforesaid in form aforesaid Indicted, as he above by pleading has
alleged, and this he avows in the Records in the Rolls of them the said late
Justices of the Peace, under the custody of the Justices of the Peace of our
Lord the King that now is in the County aforesaid reserved, etc. And the
aforesaid R. in like manner, etc. Therefore as to that above of the issue
pleaded, above to be tried, Command is given to the Sheriff, that he cause to
come before our Lord the King in eight days, of St. Michael wheresoever, etc.
24. etc. of the visonage of H. by whom, etc. And who neither, etc. To
Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to the parties
aforesaid, etc. And as to this that the aforesaid W. allegeth, that there is
had such a Record, in which is contained, that he together with other, etc.
were sworn, etc. And calls that to be upon Record in the Rols of the aforesaid
late Justices of the Peace, under the custody of the Justices of the Peace of
our Lord the King that now is in the County aforesaid residing, It is said by
the Court here, that the same W. have that Record at his Peril before our Lord
the King at the aforesaid days of St. Michael, if it shall seem expedient unto
him, and upon this the same W. prays a Writ of certiorare, etc. And it is
granted unto him. By which command is to the same Justices of our Lord the King
that now is that having searched the Rols and other their Remembrances in their
custody being of Record, and what thereupon of the premises they shall find in
them, to our Lord the King at the aforesaid eight days of St. Michael, they
send, the same day is given to the parties aforesaid, etc. At which day before
our Lord the King at Westminster, came the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and the aforesaid Thomas Dorham lately Justice of the Peace of the
aforesaid late King and Justice of the peace of our said Lord the King that now
is to whom the Writ of our Lord the King that now is was directed, to certify,
etc. To him the said Lord the King has certified as follows, In the
Inquisition, etc. And as to that, that it was commanded the Sheriff, that he
should cause to come between the said R. and I. 24. etc. to make the Jury
aforesaid, And the Sheriff returns the names of the 24. whereof none, etc.
Therefore command is given to the Sheriff that he destrein them, etc. that they
be before our Lord the King in eight days of St. Hilary, wheresoever, etc. to
make the Jury aforesaid, the same day, etc. that is to say as well to the
aforesaid I. thereupon as to the said W. in the state they are now in of
hearing, the aforesaid certifying, because the Court is not advised, etc. A
Declaration in the nature of Conspiracy, for cousening one to be falsely
Indicted, for a common Barenton. Trin. 1. Jacobi Regis Rot. 869.


LOndon ss. William Berkwith complains of R. P. L. G. and E. M. in the custody
of the Marshall, etc. for that whereas the same W. was a good, true and
lawful, etc. And of a good name, same and reputation, etc. and without any
crime of Baretory, seditiousness, or causer of any Murder, Manslaughter, or
disturber of the peace of our Lord the King, untouched, unaccusused and
unspotted has hitherto remained, By reason whereof, etc. yet the aforesaid
Defendants not ignorant of the premises, plotting, etc. (such a day and year)
at London in the Parish of St. Laurence in the old Jury London, in the Ward of
Cheap London, before R. Salstonstall then Mayor of the City aforesaid, W. Web
and I. Spencer Knights, Justices of our Lady the Queen for the keeping of the
peace in the City aforesaid, and the Suburbs of the same, as also assigned to
hear and determine of diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors
within the same City and the Suburbs thereof made and committed, falsely and
maliciously they caused and procured to be Indicted, for that he the aforesaid
Plaintiff (such a day and year aforesaid) having not God before his eyes, but
moved, and seduced by a diabolical instigation at London, that is to say in
the Parish of St. Sepulchers without Newgate, in the Ward of Farington without,
in the Suburbs of the City of London aforesaid, and diverse other days and
seasons, as well before as after that time within D. aforesaid, was and yet is a
very evil person of dishonest name, fame and conversation, a common Baretor,
and a great disturber of the Peace of our Lady the Queen, so that he is very
like to make and cause murder, manslaughter, strifes, discords, and other great
grievances, between the true and faithful subjects of our Lady the Queen that
now is, to the great damage and hurt of the good and faithful subjects of our
said Lady the Queen, and to the most pernicious example and evil encouragement
of all other Malefactors in the like kind and against the peace of our said
Lady the Queen, her Crown and dignities, as also against the form of the
Statute in the like case published and provided, Upon which afterward command
was to the Sheriffs of London, by the Writ of our Lady the Queen, that they
should cause the aforesaid W. to come before the Justices of our Lady the Queen
at the Gaol delivery of Newgate, held for the City of London, at the Justice
Hall in the Old Baly in the Parish of St. Sepulchers in the Suburbs of the City
aforesaid, on Wednesday the 15. day of February in the 40. l. year aforesaid,
before R. Salstonstall Mayor of the City aforesaid, John Popham Knight, chief
Justice of the Pleas, etc. E. Anderson Knight, chief Justice of the Common
Bench, Francis Darcy Knight, R. Martyn Knight, I. Heart Knight, W. Web Knight,
John Croke Recorder of the City aforesaid, S. Somes and N. Moseley Aldermen of
the City aforesaid, M. Dale and I. Dalton Esquires, Justices of the Lady the
Queen, assigned for her Gaol delivery of Newgate aforesaid, of the Prisoners
therein being, the aforesaid Plaintiff under the Custody of H. Row and I.
Moore Aldermen, and Sheriffs of the City aforesaid at the Bar then and there
brought in proper person before the aforesaid Justices, and then and there had
to hear the Indictement aforesaid, said, that he of the Trespass and contempt
in the Indictement aforesaid above specified, was in nothing thereof guilty, as
in the Indictement aforesaid was supposed, and of that he then put himself upon
the Country, and the aforesaid Queen in like manner, etc. Therefore it was
commanded the aforesaid Sheriff of the City aforesaid, that they cause to come
before the Justices aforesaid thereupon a Jury there immediately, and who
neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. And the Jurors of that
Jury by the aforesaid Sheriffs of the City aforesaid to that impanelled and
called in like manner, then and there came, to wit I. L. T. R. etc. (and so
recite the Jury) who to speak to the truth of the premises in the Indictment
aforesaid specified, being chosen, tried and sworn, said upon their oaths, that
the aforesaid Plaintiff was not guilty of the Trespass and contempt aforesaid,
in the Indictement aforesaid specified as by the same testimony was supposed.
Therefore it was then considered by the Justices aforesaid that the aforesaid
Plaintiff should go quit without day, etc. By reason of which said premises,
the aforesaid Plaintiff has been enforced, and compelled to expend and lay out
great sums of money, and been at very great trouble and loss about the clearing
of himself, and the restitution of his good name fame and reputation, and the
evacuating and making void of the aforesaid Indictment, To the damage of him
the said Plaintiff of 100. l. And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc. Not guilty
pleaded to this;

T. Farrer Attorney for the Plaintiff I. Wem Attorney for the Defendant.

ACTIONS OF CONTINUANCE.
CONTINUANCES.
Afterward the Process being thereupon continued between the parties
aforesaid, Continuance of a December tales upon the Roll.
of the aforesaid Plea put here between them in respite before the Lord the
King at Westminster, until Tuesday next after fifteen days, from the day of
Easter from thence next following, for default of Jurors, etc. At which day
before our Lord the King, at Westminster, came the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And the Jurors of that Jury being called, some of them
came, and some of them came not; And because the residue of the Jurors of the
aforesaid Jury appeared not, Therefore the Jury aforesaid is further put in
respite before our Lord the King, at Westminster, until Friday next after the
morrow of the holy Trinity, for want of Jurors, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is
to have their bodies, etc. And he is to put ten others, etc. The same day is
given to the parties aforesaid there, etc. At which day before our Lord the
King, at Westminster, came the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid,
And the Sheriff retorns the names of the ten others of which now, etc. And as
to the further Execution if the Writ aforesaid, the Sheriff retorns, that the
Writ aforesaid was so lately delivered unto him, that for the shortness of
time he could not make any further Execution: Therefore the Jury is further put
in respite before our Lord the King, at Westminster, until Friday next after
fifteen days of St. Michael, for want of Jurors, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is
to have the bodies, etc. The same day is given to the parties aforesaid here,
etc. At which day before our Lord the King at Westminster, came the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the Jurors of that Jury some of
them came, and some of them came not, Therefore the Jury aforesaid is further
put in respite before our Lord the King at Westminster, until Thursday next
after, from the day of St. Michael in three weeks for want of Jurors, etc.
Therefore the Sheriff is to have their bodies, etc. The same day is given to
the parties aforesaid, etc. At which day before, Continuance upon a Summons ad
Auxiliand.
etc. came the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the Sheriff
sent not thereupon the Writ, Therefore it is commanded him as otherwise, that
he Summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid, W. that he be before, etc. (such a
day) wheresoever, etc. to join himself in aid to the foresaid L. to expect and
maintain that issue with the aforesaid L. if, etc. And further, etc. And as to
the trying of those issues above joined, The Jury is thereupon to come before
our Lord the King at the same Term, wheresoever, etc. And who neither, etc. to
Recognize, etc.

Continuance of a Demurrer in Law, and an Issue.
AT which day here came the parties aforesaid, etc. And because the Justices
will advise themselves of, and in the aforesaid Plea, whereupon the parties
aforesaid have above demurred in Law, before they thereupon render Judgment,
Therefore day is given to the parties aforesaid here until eight days of St.
Hillary of hearing thereupon this judgment, Because the Justices here have not
as yet, etc. And as to the trying of the issue aforesaid between the same
parties by the Country to be tried above joined, The Sheriff has not sent the
Writ, Therefore as formerly, Command is to the Sheriff, that he cause to come
at the same Term, twelve, etc. To Recognize in form aforesaid, etc.

Continuance of Scire facias in a Writ of Error.
AT which day before our Lord he King at Westminster, came the aforesaid
Plaintiff in a Writ of Error, in his proper person, And the Sheriff sent not
the Writ, thereupon, etc. Therefore as otherwise it is Commanded the Sheriff,
that by honest men, etc. he make known to the aforesaid Defendant, that he be
before our Lord the King (such a day) wheresoever, etc. To hear the Record and
Process aforesaid, And further, etc. The same day is given to the aforesaid
Plaintiff, by the aforesaid Manuceptors, etc.

Continuance of a Judgment after Verdict.
AT which day before our Lord the King at Westminster, came the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of our Lord the
King here of their judgment to be rendered, of and upon the Premises, are not
as yet advised, Therefore day is given to him the said Plaintiff in the same
state, etc. is now in before our Lord the King until (such a day) wheresoever,
etc. of hearing thereupon their judgment, etc.

AT which day before our Lord the King at Westminster, Continuance of an
Exigent.
came the aforesaid Plaintiff by his Attorney aforesaid, And the aforesaid
Defendant came not, nor the Sheriff thereupon sent the Writ, Therefore Command
is to the Sheriff, that if now he cause him to be called from County to County,
until he shall be Outlawed, if not, etc. And if, etc. then he shall take him,
and safely keep him, so that he may have his body before our Lord the King
(such a day) wheresoever, etc.

AT which day before our Lord the King at Westminster, Continuance of a
Distringas in Attaint.
came as well the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, as the
aforesaid three Jurors of the first inquisition formerly appearing in their
proper persons, And the Sheriff has not sent the Writ, Therefore the Jury of
the tweny four Knights aforesaid, remains to be taken before our Lord the King,
on the Morrow, etc. wheresoever, etc. for default of Jurors of the same Jury of
24. Knights, etc. And Command is to the Sheriff, that he distrein the Jurors of
the same Jury of 24. Knights, by all their lands, etc. And that of the issues,
etc. So that he may have their bodies before our Lord the King at the same
Term; The same day is given as well to the parties aforesaid, as to the
aforesaid three Jurors of the first inquisition aforesaid, now appearing, etc.

THe Jury between C. S. by his Attorney Plaintiff, Continuance^ of a Jurata for
want of Juror, and a December Tales awarded.
and E. R. of a Plea of Debt put in respite before our Lord the King at
Westminster, until (such day) etc. unless, etc. first, etc. at (such a place)
etc. by the form of the Statute, etc. Come for default of Jurors; At which day
before our Lord the King at Westminster came the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorney aforesaid, And the aforesaid Justices, before whom, etc. have sent
here the Record of the Jury aforesaid, before them had, in these words;
Afterward at the day and place aforesaid, (reciting the Record until) came as
well the within named, etc. as the within written; etc. And the Jury likewise
called, some of them came, and some of them came not, as appears in the Panell,
etc. Therefore as formerly the Jury aforesaid is put in respite before our Lord
the King, etc. until, etc. Therefore the Sheriff, etc. is to put ten such,
etc. The same day is given to the parties aforesaid, here, etc:

AT which day before our Lord the King at Westminster, Continuance upon a
matter in Law and Verdict.
came the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the
Court of our Lord the King here as well of their judgment upon the Verdict
aforesaid, as of their judgment of the matter in Law above pleaded to be
rendered, are not as yet advised; Day is thereupon further given to the said
parties in the state wherein they are now, before the Lord the King, at
Westminster, until eight days of St. Hillary, wheresoever, etc. of hearing
thereupon their judgment, etc. for that the Court of our Lord the King here is
not as yet, etc.

Continuance in Attain where the Sheriff Reto^^s not the Writ, and out of the
assent of the parties the Jury is not taken.
AT which day before our Lord the King, at Westminster, came as well the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, as the aforesaid seven Jurors of the
first Inquisition aforesaid, formerly appearing in proper person, And the
Sheriff Retorns the Writ to our Lord the King thereupon, in all things prepared
and executed. But the Jurors of those twenty four Knights, as well of the assent
of the parties aforesaid, and the aforesaid seven Jurors of the former
Inquisition aforesaid, as of the Jurors aforesaid of the twenty four Knights
remains to be taken before our Lord the King, until the Morrow, etc.
wheresoever, etc. And Command is to the Sheriff, that he distrein the Jurors of
the same Jury of twenty four Knights by all their lands, etc. And that of the
Issues, etc. And that he have their bodies, etc. before our Lord the King at
the same Term, etc. the same day is given as well to the parties aforesaid, as
to the aforesaid seven Jurors of the first Inquisition aforesaid, now
appearing, etc.

Continuance by a Writ of adjournment.
BEfore which day the Plaint aforesaid was adjourned by the Writ of our Lord the
King of Common adjournment, until eight days of St. Hillary then next
following, wheresoever, etc. At which said eight days of St. Hillary, the
Plaint aforesaid was further adjourned by the Writ of our Lord the King, of
Common adjournment, until from the day of Easter in fifteen days unto the
Castle of Hertford, At which day, etc.

Continuance of the Jurata, where the Plaintiff acknowledges one of the
Defendants to be dead.
AT which day came as well the aforesaid P. as the aforesaid R. by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And the aforesaid P. says, that the aforesaid A. is dead,
etc. Therefore against him nothing is further thereupon to be done, etc. And
thereupon the parties aforesaid now appearing, The Sheriff thereupon sent not
the Writ, etc. Therefore as formerly the Jury aforesaid is put in respite
before our Lord the King, until in eight days, etc. wheresoever, etc. for
default of Jurors, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is to have their bodies, etc. The
same day is given to the parties aforesaid now appearing, etc.

Continuance of a Jurata by the assent of the parties.
THe Jury between I. S. Esquire Plaintiff, and T. W. of, etc. of a Plea of
Trespass put in respite here until (such a day, etc.) as well of the assent of
the parties aforesaid, as of the Jurors of the same Jury now here at this day,
to wit, from the day of Easter, etc. appearing, Therefore the Sheriff is to
have their bodies, etc.

THe Jury between T. W. Gent. by his Attorney, Plaintiff, Jurata which serves
either for debt, trespass, or Ejectione firm.
And G.D. of etc. (of such a Plea) put in respite before our Lord the King at
Westminster, until Tuesday next after Eight days of Saint Michael, unless
the Justices of the Assizes of our Lord the King, in the County aforesaid,
assigned to be taken first on Monday the eighth day of August, at Newark upon
Trent, in the County aforesaid, by the form of the Statute, etc. Come for
default of Jurors, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is to have the bodies, etc. The
same day is given to the parties aforesaid, here, etc. And it is to be known,
that the Writ of our Lord the King, thereupon the fourth day of July, in this
self-same Term, before our Lord the King at Westminster is delivered of Record,
to the Deputy of the Sheriff of the County aforesaid in form of Law to be
Executed under a penalty, etc.

UNless the beloved and faithful, etc. John Popham Knight, This difference in
Guild Hall London, before the Chief Justice.
Chief Justice of our Lord the King, of the Pleas in the Court of him the said
Lord the King, before him the said King assigned to be held first on Saturday
next after, etc. at Gild-hall London, by form of the Statute, etc. as in the
next before.

ACTIONS of COMMITTITVR.
COMMITTITUR.
Committitur of a Prisoner to the Marshall, being under the Custody of the
Sheriff by a Case.
Afterward, to wit, the twenty fifth day of May then next following before our
Lord the King at Westminster came W. R. in his proper person under the Custody
of the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, in Execution for the damages aforesaid,
by virtue of the Writ of our Lord the King, of Capias ad satisfaciendum to him
the said Sheriff, of, and upon the Premises directed, which said R. is
committed to the Marshall, etc. there to remain, until, etc. according to the
form of the judgment aforesaid, etc.

Committitur of a Prisoner upon a Case.
COmmand was to the Sheriff, that he should take, etc. Whereof he is Convict,
And now here know as well the aforesaid A. by his Attorney aforesaid, as the
aforesaid Defendant in his proper person, by the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, brought to the Bar, And the Sheriff now retorns, that he took the
bodies of him the said Defendant, And that he had him now here ready, upon
which the same Defendant is Committed to the Prison, etc. by occasion of the
Premises to stay until, etc.

Commitment after Judgment.
Afterward, to wit (such a day) then next following, before, etc. Came the
aforesaid I. in his proper person, and rendered himself to the person of the
Marshall of the Marshallsee of our Lord the King, for the debt and damages
aforesaid, Upon which the same I. is committed to the Marshall of the
Marshalsee, etc. in Execution for the debt and damages aforesaid, There to
remain until, etc.

ACTIONS OF ERROR.
ERROR.
Afterward, to wit, (such a day, etc. Error alleged in assault and battery in
the judgment, that the Entry was that the party be taken, when the cause of
action was before a general Pardon.
) in this self-same Term before our Lady the Queen at Westminster, came the
aforesaid Nicholas Stoddard by William Man his Attorney, And says, that in the
Record and Process aforesaid, as also in the rendering of the judgment
aforesaid, it is manifestly Erroneous in this, That whereas in every judgment
Entered, or to be Entered in Trespass and Assault, after the general pardon of
our Lady the Queen that now is, by Act of Parliament, of Trespass and assault
made before the same act of Parliament, the judgments so Entered, and to be
Entered, ought to be Entered, And nothing of fine of the aforesaid Defendant,
because he is pardoned, and not that he should be taken, yet after the general
Pardon of our Lady the Queen that now is, had, and Enacted in the Parliament of
our Lady the Queen that now is at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the
twenty fifth day of October, in the thirty ninth year of the Reign of our Lady
the Queen that now is, the Judgment aforesaid was Entered against the aforesaid
Nicholas, in the Plea aforesaid, that he the said Nicholas should be taken for
the Trespass and Assault aforesaid, made the aforesaid tenth day of September,
in the thirty seventh year aforesaid, in the Record aforesaid specified, which
was long before the aforesaid act of Parliament, of the general Pardon
aforesaid, And so that Judgment is void in Law.

Also it is Erroneous in this, for that whereas the aforesaid John S. the
aforesaid Term of Easter, Error also for want of admission by Proc^^in amy, the
party being within age.
in the aforesaid forty first year of the Reign of the Queen, had prosecuted by
John Mallows and William Evoring, as the next kinsmen of him the said John, yet
there is not had any Record of the admission of the aforesaid I. S. being an
Infant, in form aforesaid, to prosecute the Plea aforesaid, by his next kinsmen
aforesaid, under the names of any of the Prothonotaries of the Common Bench
Entered, as by the Law and Custom of the Court of our Lady the Queen, of Common
Bench aforesaid, it ought to be Entered, And prays a Writ of our Lady the
Queen, to the aforesaid Edmond Anderson Knight, Chief Justice of our Lady the
Queen of the Common, to whom it belongs to make Certificates in that behalf, to
certify our Lady the Queen thereupon more fully the truth, And it is granted
unto him, etc. By which it is Commanded the aforesaid E. Anderson, Chief
Justice of the Bench aforesaid, That having searched the Rolls, Certiorare to
the Chief Justice awarded to certify, etc.
under the names in the Offices of the Prothonotaries aforesaid of the
admission of Infants to prosecute by their next kinsmen of the Term and year
aforesaid; And what of the admission aforesaid in the same, he shall find, he
should certify forthwith to our Lady the Queen, wheresoever, etc. together
with the Writ to him directed, The Certificate of the Chief Justice.
etc. Which said Chief Justice of our Lady the Queen, of the Bench aforesaid,
by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him thereupon directed, certified to her the
said Lady the Queen, that having searched the Rolls of the Entries of every of
the Prothonotaries aforesaid, in the aforesaid County of Suffolk, of the Term
and year aforesaid in his Custody of Record remaining, he found not in the same
any Entry of the admission of the aforesaid I. S. to prosecute by I. M. and W.
E. the next kinsmen of him the said I. being within age, against the aforesaid
N. S. of the aforesaid Plea, as by the aforesaid Writ it was Commanded unto
him, which said Writ is Filed amongst the Records without day of this Term,
Upon which the aforesaid N. S. prays a Writ of our Lady the Queen, to warn the
aforesaid I. S. of being before our Lady the Queen, to hear the Record and
Process aforesaid, And it is granted unto him, etc. By which it is Commanded
to the Sheriff, that by honest men, etc. he make known to the aforesaid I. S.
that he be before our Lady the Queen, from the day of Easter in fifteen days,
wheresoever, etc. to hear the Record and Process aforesaid, if, etc. And
further, etc. The same day is given to the aforesaid N. S. etc.

Den^rrer in Law to the first matter of the Errors.
And the aforesaid I. S. by T. Bland his Attorney comes, and as to the aforesaid
first matter, by the aforesaid Nicholas above for Error in form aforesaid
assigned, For that, that after the General Pardon of our said Lady the Queen
that now is, had, and enacted in the aforesaid Parliament of our Lady the
Queen, that now is, at Westminster aforesaid, the aforesaid twenty fifth day of
October in the thirty ninth year of her Reign aforesaid, the judgment
aforesaid was entered against the aforesaid N. in the Plea aforesaid, that he
the same N. should be taken for the Trespass and Assault aforesaid, made the
aforesaid tenth day of September, in the thirty seventh year aforesaid, which
was long before the aforesaid Act of Parliament of General pardon aforesaid;
The same I. by Protestation, that that matter, for that Error in form aforesaid
assigned, is insufficient in the Law to maintain the aforesaid Writ of Error of
him the said N. in that behalf, To the which he the said I. has no
necessity, nor by the Law of the Land is bound in any manner to rejoyn for
Plea, yet he says, that in the aforesaid Court of Bench aforesaid, there is
had, The Custom of the Common Bench alleged for the manner of Entering judgment
in the Case.
and time out of mind there has been had such a Custom used and approved; That
is to say, that the Clerks of the same Court, who for the time being are
assigned and allowed to enter and Record any Judgments in the same Court from
time to time rendered, and to be rendered, were used and accustomed in the
Entries of the Rolls and Records of the same Court, of the Judgments rendered
in the same Court, upon any action of Trespass, against the Defendant in the
same action named, for any Trespass committed before any General Pardon, to
Enter as well in the end of such Judgment, And nothing of Fine of the aforesaid
Defendant, because he is pardoned, As in the End of such Judgment, And the
aforesaid Defendant is to be taken, and to note in the Margent of the same
Rolls directly opposite to the word Capiatur in the (...) Judgment this word
(Pardoned) by that means giving direction (...) the Clerk of the Estreats of
the same Court, where he may find them amongst the Rolls of the same Court,
against whom he the said Clerk does send out, and direct Writs of our Lord the
King of Capias pro fine, to compel them to render themselves, and come under
their Fines in the same Court for their Trespasses, and other causes fineable,
according to the Custom and Law of the Land, of this Kingdom of England, And
against whom he should omit and forbear to send forth the like Writs, And that
the same Entry of Pardon in the Margent of the Record aforesaid is, and for
the whole time aforesaid, was as sufficient a discharge of the aforesaid party
against whom the Judgment in the same Record is rendered, that he should be
taken, as if within the same Record it had been Entered nothing of the Fine of
that party, because he is pardoned. And the aforesaid I. S. in fact says,
that in the Record aforesaid, sent before our Lady the Queen, the aforesaid
word (Pardoned) in the Margent of the same Record is entered, and noted
according to the Custom aforesaid, as by that Record above appears. And as
for the other matter by the aforesaid N. for his last Error in form aforesaid
assigned, the same I. S. says, that in the aforesaid Court of the Bench
aforesaid there is had, and time out of mind there has been had such a Custom
used and approved, The Plaintiff sets form the Custom to Enter the adm^ssion
upon the Roll wherein the Declaration is Entered.
that is to say, that every admission of any Infant to prosecute in the same
Court of Bench aforesaid, by his next kindred, in any Plea to be entered and
enrolled, were used to be Entered and enrolled in the Roll wherein the
Declaration in that Plea was Entered and enrolled, And the same I. further
faith, that the Declaration aforesaid, of him the said I. in the Plea
aforesaid, against him the said N. was Entered amongst the Rolls of Robert
Bernors Gent. Phillizer of the County of Suffolk, to wit, in the Roll 386. as
in the Record aforesaid sent here to the Court of our Lady the Queen more fully
appears; And the same I. S. further says, that although the aforesaid Chief
Justice of the Common Bench has certified to the Lady the Queen, that having
searched the Rolls of the Entries of every the Prothonotaries of the aforesaid
County of S. of the Term and year aforesaid, in his Custody remaining of
Record, he had not found in the same any Entry of the admission of the
aforesaid I. S. to prosecute by the aforesaid I. M. and W. E. next of kindred
to him the said I. S. being within age, against the aforesaid N. S. of the
aforesaid Plea, yet there is had such a Record of the admission of the
aforesaid I. S. so being within age, to prosecute in the aforesaid Court of
Bench, by the aforesaid I. M. and W. E. his next kindred, against the aforesaid
N.S. of the aforesaid Plea Entered in the same Bench, in the aforesaid Roll 386.
on which the Declaration aforesaid, as is aforesaid, remains Entered ^^^ording
to the Law and Custom of the said Court of Bench a^^^^said; Which said Record
as yet remains before the aforesaid Justices of the Common Bench, under the
Custody of the aforesaid Chief Justice omitted as yet to be certified to our
Lady the Queen, Certi^rare awarded to Certify the full truth.
And the same I. S. prays a Writ of Certiorare of our Lady the Queen, to the
aforesaid Chief Justice of the Common Bench to be directed, to whom the
certifying as well of the omission aforesaid, as of the Customs aforesaid, rests
to be made, to Certify our Lady the Queen more fully of the truth thereof, and
it is granted unto him, etc. By which it is Commanded to the aforesaid Chief
Justice of the Common Bench, that searching the Rolls of the Entries of the
aforesaid Phill^zor of the aforesaid County of Suffolk, of the aforesaid Term
of Easter, in the sixteenth year aforesaid, And what in the same Rolls of the
omission aforesaid he shall find, as also the whole and full certainty and
truth of the aforesaid several Customs of the said Court of our Lady the
Queen, of the Bench, from the day of the holy Trinity in fifteen days,
wheresoever, etc. he do certify, together with the Writ of our Lady the Queen
to him thereupon directed; The same day is given to the parties aforesaid, etc.
At which day before our Lady the Queen, at Westminster aforesaid, came the
parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the aforesaid chief Justice
of our Lady the Queen, of her Bench aforesaid, by virtue of the Writ aforesaid,
to him thereupon in form aforesaid directed, certified to her the said Lady the
Queen, at Westminster, at the same day, That in the Court of the Lady the Queen
of Common Bench, There is had such a custom used and approved, that the Clarks
of the same Court, who for the time being are assigned and allowed to enter and
Record in the Rols and Records of the same Court any judgments in the same
Court from time to time rendered, and to be rendered, were used and accustomed in
the entry in the Rolls and Records of the same Court, the judgments rendered in
the same Court, in and upon any action of Trespass against the Defendant in the
same action named for any Trespass committed before any general pardon, to
enter as well in the end of such judgment, And nothing of Fine of the aforesaid
Defendant, because he is pardoned, as in the end of such judgment, And the
aforesaid Defendant is to be taken, And to note in the Margent of the same Roll
direct opposite to those words in the judgment this word (pardon) for that
reason to give direction to the Clark of the Extreats of the same Court, where
he shall find amongst the same Rolls of the same Court, against whom he the
said Clark does send or direct Writs of our Lord the King, of Capias pro fine
to compel them to render themselves, and to undergo their fines in the same
Court, for their Trespasses, and other causes, fineable according to the custom
and Laws of this Kingdom of England, And against whom he is to omit and forbear
to send forth and direct such Writs, And that such entry (of pardon) in the
Margent of the Record aforesaid is, and by the whole time aforesaid was as
sufficient a discharge of the party aforesaid against whom the judgment in the
same Record was rendered, that he should be taken as if it were entered in the
same Record within, And nothing of Fine of that party, because he is pardoned,
as the aforesaid I.S. by his Plea aforesaid above has alleged, And further the
aforesaid chief Justice of our Lady the Queen of her Bench aforesaid, by virtue
of the aforesaid Writ of our Lady the Queen further certifies that having
serched the Rolls of Robert Berners Phillizer of the County of S. of the Term
of Easter in the 41. year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen, that now is, he
finds as within in these words appears, That is say, Pleas at Westminster
before Edmund Anderson Knight, and his fellows Justices of our Lady the Queen
of her Bench, here of the Term of Easter, in the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth by
the grace of God, etc. the 41. Roll 386.

The Entry of the Warrant of admission with the Phillizer.
ss. John Mallows and W. E. are admitted by the Court of our Lady the Queen,
here to prosecute for I. S. who is within age, as the next of Kindred of him
the said I. S. against N. S. lately of, etc. Gentleman, of a Plea of Trespass
and assault, Which said Writ so as aforesaid returned amongst the Records of
this Court is filed Upon which the aforesaid I. S. says, that in the Record
and Process aforesaid, nor in the rendering of the judgment aforesaid, there is
nothing erroniou^, and prays that the Court of our Lady the Queen, here may
proceed unto examination, as well of the Record and Process aforesaid, as of the
matters aforesaid above for errors assigned, and that the judgment aforesaid
may be affirmed, And because the Court of our the Lady the Queen, here of their
judgment, of and in the premises to be rendered, are not as yet advised, day
thereupon is given to the parties aforesaid, before our Lady the Queen, until
eight days of St. Michael wheresoever, etc. of hearing thereupon their
judgment, for that the Court of our Lady the Queen, here thereupon are not as
yet, At which day before our Lady the Queen, at Westminster, came the parties
aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid, and upon this all and singular the
premises, being by the Court of our Lady the Queen, here seen and fully
understood, and mature deliberation thereupon had, for that, that it seems to
the Court of the Lady the Queen here, that as well the aforesaid Writ of
Certiorare, to the aforesaid chief Justice of the Common Bench in form
aforesaid issued and directed, as the aforesaid answer of the same chief
Justice of the Bench unto that Writ as now it remains filed upon Record, before
our Lady the Queen, does not sufficiently and fully agree, and answer the
aforesaid allegation of the aforesaid I. S. as to the aforesaid custom o^ the
said Court of Bench for the entering of an admission of an In^ant, to prosecute
by his next of Kindred in any his Pleas in the Rolls of the same Court where
the Declaration of such infant is entered and enrolled by the aforesaid I. S.
above a leged so that the same Court of our Lady the Queen, before her the said
Queen, here for the incertaintie of the truth of such custom of the said Court
of Bench, in that behalf in form aforesaid alleged, to their judgment of and
upon the premises, as well, on the part of the aforesaid N. S. in denial, as on
the part of the aforesaid I. S. in affirmation to the judgment aforesaid above
alleged cannot proceed, Without more full information of the consciences of the
Justices, And that the Court of our Lady the Queen, here before her the said
Queen, of the truth of the custom of the said Court of Bench in that behalf
above alleged, An Alias Cer^orare warded.
Therefore it is commanded the aforesaid chief Justice of the Bench aforesaid,
that he the full and whole certainty, and truth of the aforesaid custom of the
said Court or Bench, of the entry of the admission of Infants to prosecute by
their next of Kindred in personal Pleas in the same Court by the aforesaid I.
S. above alleged, to our Lady the Queen aforesaid, from the day of St. Hilary
in fifteen days wheresoever, etc. do certify together with the Writ
thereupon to him directed, etc. The same day is given to the parties aforesaid,
etc. At which day before our Lady the Queen, at Westminster aforesaid, came the
parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the aforesaid Chief Justice
of our Lady the Queen, of the Bench aforesaid, by virtue of the Writ aforesaid,
to him thereupon in form aforesaid directed, to her the said Lady the Queen, at
Westminster aforesaid, at the same day certified, The Return of the Cer^^rare.
that in the said Court of our Lady the Queen of the Bench is had, and from the
time out of mind, there has been had such a custom used and approved in the
same Court of Bench, that every admission of any Infant to prosecute in the
same Court of Bench aforesaid, by his next of Kindred, in any Plea entered and
enrolled, and to be entered and enrolled, have been used and accustomed in the
Roll, where the Declaration in that Plea is entered and enrolled, Which said
Writ so as aforesaid returned, together with the return thereupon, amongst the
Records of this Court is filed, And upon this the aforesaid I. S. further
prays that the Court of our said Lady the Queen, here may proceed to the
Examination as well or the Record and Process aforesaid, as of the aforesaid
matters above for errors assigned, and that the judgment aforesaid may be
affirmed, and because the Court of our said Lady the Queen, here are not as yet
advised of and upon the rendering their judgment, of, and upon the premises,
day is thereupon further given to the parties aforesaid, before our Lady the
Queen, Mich. Term 41. and 42. Judgment was affirmed in this cause. Roll. 417.
until from the day of Easter in fiftteen days wheresoever, etc. of hearing
thereupon their judgment, For that the Court of our said Lady the Queen here,
thereupon as yet have not, etc.

ss. Afterward, to wit on Saturday the 9. The affirmation of a judgment upon a
W^t of Error out of the Kings B^^ch into the Exchequer Chamber.
day of February in the 2. year of the Reign of our Lord the King that now is,
The transcript of the Record and Process aforesaid, between the parties
aforesaid, with all things touching them, by reason of a certain Writ of our
Lord the King of correcting error, by them the said Thomas Scot, Elizabeth and
Thomas Forn of and upon the premises prosecuted before the Justices of our said
Lord the King of his Common Bench, and the Barons of the Exchequer of our said
Lord the King in the Exchequer Chamber aforesaid, according to the form of the
Statute in the Parliament of the Lady Elizabeth are Queen of England, at
Westminster, the 23. day of November in the 27. year of her Reign, held and
published from the aforesaid Court of our Lord the King that now is here before
him the said King were transmitted, And the aforesaid T. S. E. and T. Fen in
the same Court of the Exchequer Chamber aforesaid, have assigned diverse matters
for Errors, in the Record and Process aforesaid, for revoking and annihilating
of the judgment aforesaid, to which the same E. and R. in the same Court
appearing pleaded, that neither in the Record nor Process aforesaid, nor in the
rendering the judgment aforesaid, there was in any thing Error, Afterward to
wit on Saturday the 9. day of Pebruary in the aforesaid second year of our said
Lord the King, in the same Court of Exchequer Chamber aforesaid, the premises
being seen, and by the Court of our Lord the King here diligently examined and
fully understood, As Well the Record and Process aforesaid, and the judgment
aforesaid upon the same rendered, as the aforesaid causes of Errors aforesaid by
the aforesaid T. S. E. and T. F. above alleged and assigned, For that, that it
seems to the Court here, that the Record aforesaid is in nothing vicious and
defective, And that the Record aforesaid was in nothing Erroneous, Therefore it
was considered if that the judgment aforesaid in all things be affirmed, and
continue in all his force strength and effect, notwithstanding in any thing the
said causes of Error above assigned and alleged, And further it was considered
of in the Exchequer Chamber aforesaid, that the aforesaid E. R. should recover
against the aforesaid T. S. E. and T. F. 100. s. to them the said E. and R. of
their assent by the Exchequer Chamber aforesaid adjudged according to the form
of the Statute thereupon published and provided, for the damages, costs and
charges, which they had by delay of the Execution of the judgment aforesaid,
by reason of the prosecution of the aforesaid Writ of Error, And thereupon the
Record and Process before the aforesaid Justices of the common Bench, and
Barons of the Exchequer aforesaid in the premises had They the same Justices of
the Common Bench and Barons of the Exchequer aforesaid, before our said Lord
the King wheresoever, etc. they remit according to the form of the Statute
aforesaid, which to the said Court of our Lord the King now reciding, etc.

ACTIONS OF ESCAPE.
ESCAPE.
R. L. Executrix of the testament, Escape against a Sheriff upon an Arrest,
upon a Bill of Middlesex.
etc. complains of S. S. and H. C. lately Sheriffs of the County of Middlesex,
in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. For that, that is to say, whereas one G.
S. of, etc. (such a day and year at London in the Parish etc.) by his certain
writing obligatory with the Seal of him the said G. sealed, and in due manner
made, bearing date the same day and year, acknowledged himself to be bound and
firmly obliged to the aforesaid I. in his life time in 20. s. of lawful money
of England, to be paid to him the said I. when he should be thereunto required,
with a condition thereupon indorsed for true payment of 12. s. of like money,
etc. upon the day of the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord then next
following, which said 12. s. the aforesaid G. to the aforesaid I. in his life
time, or to the aforesaid R. after his the said I. his death, he has not pay,
but the aforesaid G. forfeited the aforesaid 20. s. to the aforesaid I. in the
writing obligatory contained, For the more speedy recovery of which said sum of
20.^. the aforesaid R. after the death of the aforesaid I. her Husband, to wit
in the Term of Easter, in the 27. year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen that
now is, before her the said Lady the Queen, at Westminster, had come and
obtained out of the same Court of the Lady the Queen before her the said Queen
a certain precept of her the said Lady the Queen, directed to the then Sheriffs
of the aforesaid County of Middlesex, By which it was commanded to them the
said then Sheriffs, that they should take the aforesaid G. if, etc. And safely,
etc. So that they might have his body before our Lady the Queen, at
Westminster, on Friday next after the morrow of the holy Trinity then next
following, to answer the aforesaid R. of a Plea of Trespass, And that they
should have there then that Precept, to that intent, that the same R. as
executrix of the testament of the aforesaid l. in the same Court of our Lady
the Queen, here might declare and prosecute her Bill against the aforesaid G.
for the debt aforesaid, by the aforesaid writing obligatory done, which said
Precept the aforesaid R. afterward (to wit such a day and year and place)
delivered the aforesaid Sheriffs in form of Law to be executed, by force of
which said precept, the aforesaid S. S. and H. B. then Sheriffs of the
aforesaid County of Middlesex, afterward, and before the return of the same to
wit such a day and year at I. in the aforesaid County of Middlesex, took and
arrested the aforesaid G. And him the said G. under their safe custody then
and there had and deteyned, And he the said G. being so in custody of them the
said late Sheriffs, They the said late Sheriffs afterward, to wit the
aforesaid (such a day and year) led the aforesaid G. unto the City of London.
And him there so negligently kept, that the same G. afterward (to wit the same
such a day and year) at London in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, from the
custody of them the said late Sheriffs, did go away and Escape, And they the
said late Sheriffs, him the said G. to go at large whithersoever he would, they
did permit, the aforesaid R. of the aforesaid 20. s. then and as yet being in
no wise satisfied, And the said G. being so gone away, Escaped, and permitted
to go at large, from the custody of them the aforesaid late Sheriffs as
aforesaid the same G. kept himself so secretly and privately, that she the said
R. could not procure any Writs or precepts to be served upon the aforesaid G.
for the recovery of her debt aforesaid, By which the same R. says, that she
has not only Expended, lost and let go diverse great Expenses and Charges, in
and about the aforesaid Arrest of the aforesaid G. but also remains totally
frustrate of all other remedy, for the recovery of the debt aforesaid,
whereupon she says that she is worsted, and has damage to the value of 40. s.
And thereupon she brings her suit, etc. And she brings here into Court the
Letters testamentary, etc.

The Defendants plead they did make the Arrest.
And the aforesaid S. H. by T.B. their Attorney come and defend the force and
injury, when, etc. And say that the aforesaid R. ought not to have her action
aforesaid against them because they say, that they did not take nor Arrest the
aforesaid G. in the manner and form, as the aforesaid R. above against them
complains, And of this they put themselves upon the Country, And the
aforesaid R. in like manner, etc. Therefore the Jury is to come, etc.

R. S. complains of John Chaunroy Bailiff of the Liberty of the Bishop of
London in the County of Middlesex, Escape upon a Bill of Middlesex, where the
Plaint and attachment is mentioned.
for that whereas the aforesaid R. S. on Tuesday next after a month of Easter
(such a year) before our Lady the Queen at Westminster, had prosecuted a
certain Bill against I. T. For that, that he the same I. T. (such a day and
year) by force and arms, the Close of him the said R. S. at Westminster in the
County of Middlesex, he had broke, And other harms to him he had done against
the Peace of our Lady the Queen that now is, to the damage of him the said R.
S. of 20. l. And he found pledges of prosecuting his Plaint aforesaid, to wit
John Dee and Richard Row, by force of which said Bill it was commanded to the
Sheriffs of Middlesex, that they should attach the aforesaid I. T. so that he
might be before our Lady the Queen at Westminster on Thursday next after a
month of Easter then next following, to answer the aforesaid R.S. of the Plea
aforesaid, the same day was given to the aforesaid R. here, etc. At which day
before our Lady the Queen at Westminster, came the aforesaid R.S. in his proper
person, And Christopher Hawks, and T.G. Sheriffs of the said County of
Middlesex, by virtue of the precept aforesaid, before our Lady the Queen, at
Westminster, returned that the aforesaid I. had nothing within their Balywick,
by which he could be attached, Upon which it was commanded to the same
Sheriffs, that they should take him if, etc. And him safely, etc. So that they
might have his body before our Lady the Queen at Westminster, on Monday next
after eight days, etc. from thence next following, to answer the aforesaid
R.S. of the aforesaid Plea. The same day was given to the aforesaid R. here,
etc. And the aforesaid Sheriffs of Middlesex, by virtue of the precept
aforesaid, commanded a certain Warrant to the aforesaid I. E. Bailiff of the
Liberty of the Bishop of London in the County of Middlesex, who had full return
of all Writs, Precepts and Warrants, etc. (And so recite the return) until for
that Execution thereupon, elsewhere in the County aforesaid, out of the Liberty
aforesaid, could not be made. Which said I.C. by virtue of the Warrant
aforesaid, such a day and year at S. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, took
and arrested the aforesaid I. T. And the aforesaid I. C. plotting to defraud
the aforesaid R. S. and to defer him from the recovery, for his Trespass
aforesaid, he the said I.T. so taken and Arrested the aforesaid I.C. (such a
day year and place) aforesaid suffered to go at large, by which he the same R.
S. is deprived altogether of the recoverie for his Trespass aforesaid, To the
damage of him the said R. twenty pounds, And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

Escape against a Sheriff for not having the body of one by him arrested at the
retorn of the Writ.
ss. HEnry Appleton, latly Sheriff of Essex, was attached by a Writ of
Privilege of our Lord the King, from the Count here issuing, to answer H.C. one
of the Attorneys of the Court of our Lord the King, of his Bench here,
according to the Liberties and Privileges of the same Court for the like
Attorneys, and other Ministers of the same Bench from time out of mind used,
and approved in the same, of a Plea of Trespass upon the Case, And whereupon
the same H.C. in his proper person Complains, wherefore whereas one T.D. a
foreign Merchant, was indebted to him the said H. C. in a hundred pounds of
lawful money, etc. To be paid to him the said H. C. when he should be
thereunto required, And for that, that the aforesaid T. D. had not paid the
same hundred pounds to him the said H.C. he the said H. C. for the more speedy
recovery of that debt (such a day and year) then being one of the Attorneys of
the Court of the Bench of our Lady the Queen, here according to the Liberties
and Privileges of the same Court, from the whole time aforesaid, used and
approved in the same, out of the same Court of Bench here prosecuted a certain
Writ of Privileges of our Lady the Queen, against the aforesaid T. D. to the
then Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Essex, being directed. By which said
Writ our aforesaid Lady the Queen Commanded him the then Sheriff, that the same
Sheriff should attach the aforesaid T.D. so that he might have him before the
Justices of our Lady the Queen here on Tuesday next after the Morrow of all
Souls then next following, to answer unto him the said H. C. of a Plea of Debt;
Which said Writ he the said H.C. (afterward, to wit, such a day and year) to
the aforesaid H. A. then being Sheriff of the aforesaid County of E. at London,
that is to say, in the Parish, etc. delivered in form of Law to be executed, by
Virtue of which said Writ, the aforesaid H. A. (the same day and year, etc.)
then being Sheriff of the aforesaid County of E. Commanded the Bailiff of the
Liberty of our Lady the Queen, of her hundred of B. in the aforesaid County of
E. (which said Bailiff had Execution of all Writs within the same Liberty, for
that no Execution of that Writ could be made within his Bailiwick elsewhere)
That he should attach the aforesaid T. So that he might have his body before
the aforesaid Sheriff, before the retorn of that Writ, So that the same sheriff
might have him before the Justices of our Lady the Queen, here at the aforesaid
day of Wednesday next after, etc. to answer the aforesaid H. C. of the
aforesaid Plea, By virtue of which said Warrent, the aforesaid Bailiff
afterward (to wit, such a day, year, and place) in the aforesaid County of E.
within the Liberty aforesaid, he took and arrested the aforesaid T. And the
same Bailiff after that taking, and arresting, and before the said day of
Wednesday, etc. to wit, the second day of N. in the twenty seventh year
aforesaid, the aforesaid T. to one H. C. then Deputy of the aforesaid H. A.
authorized by the same H. A. in that behalf he delivered to be safely kept, as
the aforesaid H. A. returned to the aforesaid Justices of our Lady the Queen
here at the aforesaid day of Wednesday, etc. The aforesaid H. A. his Office of
a Sheriff in the just and true Execution of the Writ aforesaid little caring,
but knowing the aforesaid T. to be a fugitive and deceiptfull person, and
plotting and intending him the said H.C. to hinder from the recoverie of his
debt aforesaid, and to cause him the said H.C. (what in him lay) wholly to lose
his debt aforesaid, the aforesaid T. before the aforesaid Justices of our Lady
the Queen here, at, or ever after the aforesaid day of Wednesday, etc.
according to the purport of the aforesaid Writ he had not, but the same T. he
the said H. C. of his said debt aforesaid, being in no wise satisfied, or in
any manner contented, before the retorn of the same Writ, to wit, such a day
and year at London, etc. in the Parish, etc. he suffered to go at large
whithersoever he would, in the danger of the loss of the debt of the aforesaid
H. C. For that if the aforesaid H. A. had had the aforesaid T. before the
Justices of our Lady the Queen, here at the aforesaid day of Wednesday, etc.
according to the purport of the Writ aforesaid, and the aforesaid Arrest, then
the same T. ought to have found in the Court here to him the said H. C.
sufficient Manucaptors, who must have undertaken for the aforesaid T. that if
the same T. should be Convict in the Debt aforesaid, that then he the said T.
should pay the debt aforesaid, to him the said H.C. or should render himself to
the Prison of our Lady the Queen, of the Fleet, by occasion of the Judgment
of, and upon the Premises to be rendered, or that they the said Manucaptors,
the debt aforesaid, for the aforesaid T, should pay to him the said H. C. And
if the same T. did not find such Manucaptors, that then he should be committed
to the Prison of our Lady the Queen, of the Fleet, there to stay until he
should do it, To the damage of him the said H. C. a hundred pounds, And
thereupon he brings his Sure, etc.

And the aforesaid H. A. by Thomas Foster his Attorney comes and defends the
force and injury, when, etc. Not guilty pleaded.
And says that he is in nothing guilty of the Premises above imposed upon
him; And of this he puts himself upon the Country, And the aforesaid I. C. in
like manner. Therefore Command is given to the Sheriff, that he cause to come
here in eight days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, and, etc.
By whom, etc. And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The
same day is given to the parties aforesaid, here, etc.

This was tried in London, and a Verdict and Judgment for the Plaintiff. And a
Writ of Error was brought, and assigned for Error, For that it appears not in
what place the Bailiff of the Liberty delivered the Prisoner to the aforesaid
F. the Undersheriff, nor whether he was delivered in the County of Essex or no.

Error also, for that he said not in his Declaration, that the Defendant took
no security for the appearance aforesaid, for it might be that the Sheriff
delivered him up upon Bayl, according to the form of of the Statute.

Error also, for that the Plaintiff said not, that the aforesaid T. appeared not
in the Bench.

Afterward the Defendant, after he had pleaded in nullo est Erratum, died, And
then was made this Entry following (as yet, etc.) Afterward, to wit, the
fifth day of May, in the Four and thirtieth year of the reign of our Lady the
Queen that now is, before our Lady the Queen at Westminster came the aforesaid
H. A. by his Attorney aforesaid, And says that the aforesaid H. C. is dead,
and prays license to purchase a new Writ of Error, etc. And it is granted unto
him, etc. And afterward, to wit the sixth day of May then next following,
before our Lady the Queen at Wistminster, came the aforesaid H. A. by his
Attorney aforesaid, And brought before our Lady the Queen, a certain new Writ
of Error of our Lady the Queens, directed to the Justices of our Lady the Queen
of the Pleas, before her the said Queen assigned to be held, which said Writ
follows in these words, Elizabeth, etc. (And so recite the Writ of Error) And
upon this the same H.A. says, that in the Record and Process aforesaid, as
also in the rendering of the Judgment aforesaid, it is manifestly Erroneous,
alleging for Errors the several matters above assigned, And the same H.A.
says further, that the aforesaid H.C. before his death, to wit, at London
aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, made his last Will and Testament
in writing, And thereby Constituted and ordained Elizabeth, his then wife,
Executrix of his Testament aforesaid, and there afterward died; And the same
H. A. prays a Writ of our Lady the Queen, to warn the aforesaid Executrix of
being here, etc. retornable on the morrow of the holy Trinity, etc.
wheresoever, etc. At which day came the aforesaid H. A. by his Attorney, And
the aforesaid Defendant by John Williams her Attorney came, And upon this the
aforesaid H. A. as formerly says, That in the Record and Premises aforesaid,
etc. it is manifestly Erroneous, And the Executrix pleads, that it is in
nothing Erroneous, and so they continue it for argument, And afterward upon
full debate judgment was affirmed.

ACTIONS OF DEBT, AND DIVERSE OTHER Actions and Pleas.
DEBT.
ss. W. C. Complains of I.H. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. of a plea,
A Declaration in Debt upon a Bill, to be paid at the day of Marriage of the
Defendant.
that he render unto him 20 l. of good and lawful, etc. which, etc. for that,
to wit, that whereas the aforesaid I. (in such a day and year) at, etc. by his
certain Bill Obligatory, sealed with the Seal of him the said I, and unto the
Court, etc. whose date, etc. acknowledged himself to owe unto the said W. the
aforesaid 20. l. to be paid unto the said W. at the day of the Marriage of him
the said I, and the said W. in fact says, that the said I. afterward, that is
to say, (in such a day and year, etc.) married to wife one M.A. by which an
Action did accrue unto the said W, to require, etc.

ss. W. B. next of Kin of R.B. deceased, Declaration in Debt for an
Administrator against an Administrator.
Administrator of all and singular the Goods, Chattels, rights and Credits,
which where of R.B. late of H. in the County of Middlesex, Yeoman, otherwise
called, etc. deceased, which dyed intestate, complains of A.N. Widow,
Administrator of all and singular the goods and chattels, rights and credits,
which were of R.N. late of F. in the County of Middlesex Yeoman, deceased, in
the custody of the Marshall, etc. of a Plea that he render unto him 60. l. of
lawful, etc. which, etc. for that, to wit, that whereas the aforesaid R.N. in
his life, that is to say (in such a day and year) at, etc. by his certain
Writing obligatory, sealed with the Seal of him the said R.N. in his life, and
unto the Court, etc. whose Date, etc. acknowledged himself to be holden, and
firmly bound unto the said R.B. in his life, in the aforesaid 60. l. to be paid
unto the said R.B. his Executors or Administrators, on the Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel from thence next ensuing, notwithstanding the aforesaid R.N. in
his life, and the aforesaid A.N. after the death of him the said R.N. although
often requested, etc. the aforesaid 60. l. unto the said R.B. in his life, and
the said W.B. unto whose Administration of all, and singular, the Goods and
Chattels, Rights and Credits, which were of the said R.B. at the time of his
death, by T. Watts, Archbishop of Middlesex lawfully deputed 25. day of May,
in the year of our Lord 1577. at London, was committed, have not hitherto paid,
nor either of them has paid; but the same unto the said R.B. in his life, and
the said W.B. after the death of him the said R.B. have altogether denied to
pay; and the aforesaid A.N. does deny to pay, and the same unto said W. (as
yet) does unjustly detain, to the damage of him the said W. 40. pounds, and in
delay of the Execution of the Administration aforesaid, and thereupon he
brings his Suit, and profereth here in Court, the aforesaid Letters of
Administration of the said W. by which it plainly makes appear unto the Court
of the said Lady the Queen here, him the said W. to be Administrator of the
Goods and Chattels aforesaid, etc.

An Action upon the Statute of Maintenance.
ss. I. F. Who as well for the Lady the Queen, as for himself, prosecuteth, and
complains of H.B. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. of a Plea, that he
render unto the said Queen, and unto the said I. 10. l. of lawful, etc. which
unto the said Lady the Queen, and to the said I. who as well, etc. does owe and
unjustly detein for that; that is to say, That whereas in the Statute in the
Parliament of the Lord H. the 8. late King of England, at Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex 28 day of April, in the one and thirtieth year of his Reign
began to be held, and there through diverse prorogations, until to the 25. day
of May, in the two and thirtieth year of his Reign prorogued and continued, The
words in pleading, that the Parliament is pror^gued.
and then and there held by the said Lord the King, with the assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons there, it was enacted, that
no person or persons, of whatsoever State, degree or condition he or they
should be, or were from thenceforth hereafter, he or they should unlawfully
maintain, or cause, or procure any unlawful Maintenance in any Action, Demand,
Suit or Complaint in any Court of the said Lord the King, of the Chancery,
Star Chamber, Whitehall, or elsewhere within any the Dominions of the Kingdom
of England, or of Wales, or in the Marches of the same, where any person or
persons, has, or then hereafterwards should have authority by virtue of a
Commission of the Lord the Kings Letters Patents, or Writ, to hold a Plea of
Land, or to examine, hear or determine any Title of Land, or any matter, or
Witnesses concerning the Title, Right or Interest of any Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments; and also that no person or persons of whatsoever state, degree,
or condition, he or they be, or were, from thenceforth in time to come, should
unlawfully retein for maintenance of any Suit or Plea, any person or persons,
to embrace any Freeholders or Jurors, or should suborn Witnesses by Letters,
reward, promise, or any other sinister labor, or means, to maintain any matter
or cause, to the disturbance or hindrance of Justice, or to the procuration, or
occasioning of any Perjurie by false Verdict, or otherwise, in any Court
aforesaid, under the pain of forfeiting for every such offense 10. l. of which
one moity thereof should be unto the said late King, his Heirs or Successors,
but the other unto him, who therefore will prosecute by action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or information in any Court of the said late King, where no Essoin,
Protection, wager of Law, injunction shall be allowed, as in the same Statute
amongst other things is more fully contained, notwithstanding the said H. the
aforesaid Statute no wise regarding, nor the penalty in the same contained any
manner of way fearing, a certain Bill of plaint before her, the said Lady the
Queen at W. as yet hanging undetermined between one R.K. Plaintiff, and the
aforesaid I.F. of a Plea of Trespass on the behalf of the said R.K. against the
aforesaid I.F. (in such a day and year at, etc.) has maintained and upheld, to
the manifest disturbance, and hindrance of Justice, and in Contempt of the Lady
the now Queen, and against the form of the aforesaid Statute, by which an
Action did accrue unto the said I.F. as well for the Lady the Queen, as for
himself, to require, and have of the said H.B. the aforesaid ten pounds,
notwithstanding the aforesaid H. although he has been often requested, etc.
the aforesaid 10. l. unto the said I.F. who as well, etc. has not as yet paid,
but the same to him hitherto has altogether denied to pay, and as yet does
deny, to the damage of him the said F. five pounds, and thereupon he brings
his Suit, etc.

ss. P. S. Who as well for the Lady the Queen, as for himself, A Declaration
upon the Statute of Perjury.
prosecuteth, and complains of W. O. in the custody of the the Marshall, of a
Plea, that he render unto the said Lady the now Queen, and unto the said P. 20.
l. of lawful, etc. which unto the said Queen, and unto the said P. who as well,
etc. does owe, and unjustly detein for that; that is to say, that whereas in a
Statute in Parliament, of the Lady the now Queen, at W. in the County of
Middlesex, on the 12. day of January, in the fifth year of her reign holden,
published amongst other things, it was firmly Ordained and Enacted, by the
Authority of that Parliament, that if any person or persons, after the 10th day
of April then next following, either by subordination, unlawful procuration,
sinister persuasion, or means of any other, by their proper Act, consent, or
agreement, voluntarily and corruptly, should commit any voluntary perjury, by
his or their deposition in any the Kings Chancery Courts of the Star Chamber,
Whitehall, or elsewhere within the Kings Dominions of England or Wales, or in
the Marches of the same, where any person or persons, has or have authority by
virtue of the Kings Commission of Pa^ent or Writ, to hold Plea of Land, or to
examine or determine any Title of land, or any matter, or Witnesses concerning
the Title, Right and Interest of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or in
any Courts of Record, or in any Leet or View of Frank-pledge in a Court day,
called Law-day, or in any Court in ancient Demesne, Hundred Court, Court Barron,
or in the Court or Courts of the Stannery, in the County of Devon, and
Cornwall, or being examined to the perpetual memory of a thing, that then
whatsoever person and persons so offending, and being duly convicted, or
attainted by the Laws of this Kingdom of England, for his or their said
offenses, shall lose and forfeit unto the said Lady the Queen 20. pounds, and
should have Imprisonment by the space of six months without Bail or Mainprise,
and that the Oath of such person or persons so offending, from thenceforth
afterward in any Court of Record, should not be taken within this Kingdom of
England or Wales, or Marches of the same, till what time the Judgment given
against the said person or persons, should be made void, or revoked by
Attainder or otherwise; that upon every such kind of Revocation, the parties
grieved shall recover his or their Damage against all and singular such person
and persons as should procure the said Judgment so revoked, to be rendered
against him or them, or any of them, by Action or Actions, to be prosecuted
upon his or their Case or cases, according to the course of the Common Laws of
this Kingdom of England, and if it should happen the said offender or
offenders, not to have any goods or chattells, to the value of 20. pounds, that
then he or they should be put upon the Pillory in any Market place within the
County, City or Borough, where the said offense should be committed, by the
Sheriff or his Officers, if they should happen to be without any City or Town
Corporate, then by the chief Officer or Officers of such City or Town
Corporate, or by his or their Officers, And there should have both his ears
nailed, and from thenceforth should be discredited and disabled for ever, to be
sworn in any the Kings Courts of Record aforesaid, until the Judgment should
be reversed, and thereupon to recover his Damages in manner and form before
mentioned, one Moity of which said sum of Money to be forfeited, in manner and
form aforesaid, should be to the said Lady the now Queen, her Heirs and
Successors, and the other Moity thereof, unto such person or persons, as should
be grieved, hindered, or molested, by reason of the offense or offenses before
mentioned, who therefore would prosecute by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint,
Information, or otherwise, in any the Kings Courts of Record, in which no Wager
of Law, Essoin, Protection or Injunction, should be allowed, as in the said
Statute, amongst other things more fully it is manifested, and it appears.
And where also, etc.

ss. A. B. Late of London, Tailor, Declaration in Debt after Verdict and
Judgment in Trespass in the Kings Bench upon Recognizance there against one of
the Bayl. Easter 6. H. 8. Roll. 432.
was Summoned to answer R.H. of a Plea, that he render unto him 100. pounds of
lawful money of England, which, etc. And thereupon the said R. by R. I. his
Attorney says, that whereas he the Monday next after fifteen days of the holy
Trinity, in the fourth year of the Reign of the now King, before him the said
Lord the King at Westminster, in his proper Person came and appeared, and then
and there in the Court of the said King, brought his Bill against one W.G.
Mercer, in the Custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsea of the Lord the King,
before him the King, then, and there, being of a Plea of Trespass, and the
Pledges to prosecute, are Philip Mason, and John Wicham, by which said Bill the
said R. Complained of the said W. of that that he the second day of July, in
the third year of the said now King, with force and arms, that is to say, with
Swords, etc. the house of him the said R. at London, in the Parish, etc. had
broke, and other wrongs to him had done, against the Peace, etc. to the damage,
etc. and the aforesaid W. by T.C. his Attorney appearing, comes and defends
the force and Injury, when, etc. and says that he in no wise was thereof
guilty concerning the Trespass aforesaid, as the said R. above against him
Complained, And of this he put himself upon the Country, And the aforesaid R.
likewise, etc. therefore thereupon comes the Jury before the Lord the King,
at Westminster, the Monday next after eight, etc. of St. Michael; And who
neither, etc. to Recognize, Entry of Recognizance after Issue joined.
etc. because as well, etc. the same day was given to the parties aforesaid,
there, etc. And upon this before the said Lord the King, at Westminster, in the
said County of Middlesex, personally then and there comes I.G. of London,
Gent. and L.G. of London, Gent. and the aforesaid A. the Manucaptors for the
said W.G. that is to say, under the pain of 100. pounds, which they
acknowledged, and every of them for himself acknowledged of his Lands and
Chattels, and of every of them to be done, And to the use of the said R. to be
levied, and likewise the said W.G. assumed for himself under the pain of 100.
pounds, which he acknowledged of his Lands and Chattels to be executed, and to
the use of the said R. to be levied, if the said W. all such Damages, Costs and
charges, in which it should happen him, the said W. in the Plea aforesaid, in
any manner, lawfully to be overthrown, does neither pay, or himself to the
Prison of the Marshall of the Lord the King, before him the King in that
occasion not to render, etc. At which said day of Monday next, after eight,
etc. of St. Michael, before him the Lord the King at Westminster comes,
as well the aforesaid R. in his own person, as the said W.G. by his foresaid
Attorney; And the Sheriff then sends a Writ of Venir' fac' 24. etc. in all
Services and Executions, together with the Pannell of the names of the Jurors
thereupon impannelled, upon which the Jurors of that Jury being called,
likewise come, who being chosen, tried, and sworn to speak to the truth of the
Premises, Say upon their Oath, that the said W. was guilty of the Trespass
aforesaid, even as the said R. had above Complained; And they Assessed the
Damage of him the said R. by reason of the Trespass (as in the Verdict) for
which it was considered at that time in the same Court before him the Lord the
King, that the said R. should recover against the said W, etc. (as in the
Record) even as in that Record it more fully appears. And the said R. says,
that afterward the said W.G. in Damage, Costs, and charges aforesaid, was
convicted, and after Judgment was thereupon given; hitherto the said W.G. the
Damage Cost and Charges unto the said R. has not paid, neither himself to the
Prison of the Marshall of the Lord the King, before him the said King, by that
occasion has rendered, according to the form and effect of the Recognizance
aforesaid, by which an Action did accrue to the said R. to require and have of
the said A. the aforesaid 100. pounds, notwithstanding the said A. the
aforesaid 100. pounds unto the said R. has not yet rendered, but the same to
him hitherto to render, has denied, and as yet does deny; Whereupon, etc.

Declaration for Costs, for the Defendant, for the Plaintifs not prosecution.
In the sixth year of Queen Elizabeth.
ss. G. F. Complains of I. W. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that
namely, that whereas in the Statute in Parliament of the now Queen, at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, in the eighth year of her Reign, by
Prorogations continued, and then and there held, amongst the rest of the
matters, it was contained, that when, and as often as any person or persons,
after the first day of January then next following, should sue forth, or by any
means should cause to be sued forth, out of the Court of the said Queen,
commonly called the Kings Bench, any Writ or Process of Latitat ali as, and
Pluries Capias in the same Statute mentioned, against any person or persons,
who upon the same Writ or Writs, should happen to be arrested, or which should
appear upon the return of any the said Writs or Processes, and should put in
Bayl to answer such suit, which against him should be brought according to the
Common Course of the said Court, that then in every Case, if the party or
parties, at whose suit, means, or procurement the said Writ or Process is
obtained, or were sued forth, within three days next after such Bayl had and
taken, should not put in the same Court, his or their Declaration against the
same party or parties, against whom such Writs or Process were sued forth, or
should be; or if after Declaration had or put in the same Court, the Plaintiff
in such case should not prosecute the same with effect, but voluntarily and
apparently to the said Court should suffer his or their Suit to be delayed, or
after Declaration so had, should suffer the Suit to be discontinued, or
otherwise Non-sute in the same, that then in every such case the Judges of the
said Court for the time being, by their discretion from time to time, even as
they shall see or perceive any such default to be in the party or parties, at
whose Suit, means or procurement, such Writs or Process were sued forth, should
grant and award unto every such person and persons so arrested, vexed, molested
or troubled by such Writs or Suits, his or their Costs, Damages and Charges
whatsoever so sustained, by reason of such Writ, Process, arrest, or Suit taken
and sued, or had against him, to be paid by such person or persons, which so
procured any such Writs or Process to be sued forth, as before it is said. And
further, by the said Statute, It was enacted, that every person and persons
unto whom any Costs, Charges, Damages, Forfeiture or payment of any sum or sums
of money, by authority of the said Act, should be granted, adjudged, or
forfeited, at all times from thence hereafter should, or might have his, or the
Remedy for the Recovery thereof, by his or their Action of Debt, Bill or Plaint
in any Court of Record against such person or persons, their Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, which should or ought to have paid the same by virtue or
force of the said Act, in which Action, Bill or Plaint, No Essoyn, Protection,
or Wager of Law should be admitted or allowed unto any Defendant or Defendants
in the same, as by that Act, amongst other things plainly it does, and may
appear. Notwithstanding which, the said I.W. the said Statute nothing at all
regarding, nor the penalty in the same contained fearing, after the said first
day of January, in the said Statute mentioned, that is to say, in the Term of
St. Michael, in the 12th year of the Reign of the now Queen, out of the said
now Queen, here commonly called the Kings Bench at Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex, then being sued forth, a certain Precept of the said Queen, to
the then Sheriff of Middlesex directed, to take the aforesaid G. if, etc. and
safely, etc. so that he should have his body before the said Queen at
Westminster, the day, etc. to answer unto the foresaid J. of a Plea of Trespass.
Upon which said Precept, the then Sheriff of the said County of Middlesex
returned, that the said I. was not to be found in his Bailiwick. Upon which on
the behalf of the said I. in the Court of the said Queen, before her the said
Queen, it was sufficiently testified, that the said G. did lie hid, and run
into the County of S. at the request of the said I. the said Queen then
Commanded the then sheriff of the said County of S. that he should take the
said G. if he should be found in his Bailiwick, and him safely to keep, so that
he should have his body before us at Westminster, the day, etc. to answer unto
the foresaid J. of the said Plea of Trespass, according to the express of that
Writ, the said I.G. afterward, that is to say, (in such a day and year, etc.)
at P. in the said County of S. by M.F. the then Sheriff of the said County of
S. by virtue of the said Writ of Latitat was arrested, to answer unto the said
I. of the said Plea, according to the Compulsion of that Writ, by pretense of
which said Writ, the said G. afterward, that is to say, the day, etc. in the
year abovesaid, at Westminster, in the said Court of the said Queen, in his
proper person appeared, and put in Bail to answer the said I. of the said Plea
of Trespass, according to the common Course of that Court. And the said G. in
fact says, that the said I. within three days next following the said day of
January, in the aforesaid year did not put his Declaration in the said Court
against him the said G. by pretense of which the said G. in his proper person,
as it is beforesaid, appearing here in the Court of the said Queen, before the
same Queen, according to the form of the said Statute, there was adjudged unto
the said G. 20. shillings for his Costs, Charges and Damages, by occasion of
the Arrest, and vexation of him the said G. sustained, by which an Action did
accrue unto the said G. to have and require of the aforesaid I. the said 20.
shillings, according to the form of the said Statute, etc. Notwithstanding
which, the said I. although often required, etc. the said 20. shillings, unto
the said G. has not yet paid, but the same unto him hitherto has altogether
denied to pay, and as yet denies, to the Damage, etc. And thereupon, etc.

Declaration upon an Escape made by the Sheriff.
Surrey, ss. A. B. Complains of C.D. Esquire, late Sheriff of the County of
E. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. of a Plea, that he render unto him 101.
pounds of lawful money of England, In the like manner the Plaintiff declares
in debt upon Judgment.
which unto him he owes, and unjustly detaineth, for that, that is to say,
that whereas the said A. formerly, that is to say, in the Term of St. Michael,
in the 28. and 29. years of the Reign of E. now Queen of England, at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, before her the said Queen at VV. by
F.G. his Attorney came and brought then, there in the said Court his certain
Bill against H.I. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. of a Plea of Debt,
Declaration in Debt upon Obligation.
And there were Pledges to that Bill, that is to say, I. Do, and R. Roo, which
said Bill so by him brought, follows in these words, ss. London, ss. A.B.
otherwise A.B. of, etc. complains of H.I. of, etc. otherwise called, etc. in
the Custody of the Marshall of the Marshalsey, etc. of a Plea, that he render
unto him one hundred pounds of lawful, etc. which to him he owes, and
unjustly deteyneth, for that namely, that whereas the said H. the 20th. day of
M. in the said 28. eight year of the reign of the said E. now Queen of England,
at L. that is to say, in the Parish of the blessed Mary of the Arches, etc. by
his certain Writing Obligatory with his Seal, etc. and unto the Court, etc.
whose Date, etc. to be paid, etc. and so repeat the whole Declaration until,
And thereupon then he brought his Suit, etc. Afterward, that is to say,
Tuesday next after eight days of St. Hillary, The Importance.
from thence forth next following, until which day the said H. had License to
impart to the said Bill, and then to answer, etc. before the said Queen at
Westminster, came the said A. by his said Attorney, Says nothing in Debt.
And the said H. although solemnly called, came not, nor any for the said H.
said any thing in bar or preclusion of the Action of the said A. by which the
said A. then remained thereupon against him undefended, Judgment upon says
nothing in Debt.
And that then in the same Court it was considered, that the said A. should
recover against the said H. his said Debt, and also 20. shillings for his
Damages which he had sustained, as well by occasion of the deteining of that
Debt, as for his Charges and Costs by him about his Suit in that behalf put to,
And that the said H. should be in mercy, etc. as by Record thereof in Court of
the said Queen, here remaining more fully appears. And afterward, that is to
say, the fifth day of July, in the 29th. year of the Reign of the said Queen,
for that the said H. the said Debt and Damages unto him the said A. had not
paid, the said A. sued forth out of the Court of the said Queen, here at
Westminster aforesaid, a certain Writ of the said Queen, to take the said H. to
satisfy him the said A. of and for the said Debt and Damages, directed to the
said Sheriff of the County of E. and retornable before the said Queen at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Monday next after three weeks of St.
Michael from thenceforth next following, which said Writ, the said A.
afterward, and before the retorn of the same, that is to say, the tenth day of
S. then next following at Westminster aforesaid, delivered to the said C.D. the
Sheriff of the said County of E. then being in form of Law to be executed, by
pretense of which said Writ, the said C. afterward, that is to say, the 13th
day of October, in the 29th year abovesaid, at K. in the County of E.
aforesaid, took and arrested the said H. and him so arrested, did lead to the
prison of her the said Queens Gaol of E. called E. Gaol, within the Town of E.
in the said County of E. in his Custody, and the same H. in the Prison of her
the said Queens Gaol of E. aforesaid, in the said County of E. in his Custody
had, in Execution of, and for the said Debt and Damages, until the Tenth day
of November, in the 29th year abovesaid, and him the said H. so in Execution
for the said Debt and Damages under the Custody of the said C. then Sheriff of
the said County of E. being, the same C. afterward, that is to say, the same
Tenth day of November, in the 29th year abovesaid at Southwark, in the County
of Surrey aforesaid, the same H. without leave, and against the will of him the
said A. out of the Custody of him the said A. suffered to escape, and to go at
large whither he would, the said A. for the said Debt and Damages, or any penny
thereof then being altogether unsatisfied, by which an Action did accrue unto
the said A. to require, and have of the said C. the said 101. pounds,
Notwithstanding the said C. although often required, etc. the said 101. pounds
unto the said A. has not as yet paid, but the same to him hitherto has
altogether denied to pay, and as yet does deny, to the Damage of him, etc.

Protestation he did not suffer to go at large.
And the said C. by N.O. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
Injury, when, etc. because protesting that the said C. did not take and arrest
him the said H. by virtue of the said Writ, as the said A. above against him
Complains for Plea, the said C. says, that he the said C. did not suffer the
said H. to escape, and to go at large whither he would, in manner and form, as
the said A. before against him declared. And of this, etc. And the said, etc.
therefore, etc.

Declaration upon Account after Auditors assigned, when the Defendant is found
in arrears.
ss. T. S. Complains of A.B. in the Custody of the said Marshall, etc. of a
Plea, that he render unto him 6. pounds of good and lawful money, etc. which,
etc. for that, to wit, whereas the said A. B. such a day and year, at, etc.
with the aforesaid T. before I. and F. Auditors, assigned by the said T. to
hear the Account of him the said A.B. had accounted concerning diverse sums of
money of his the said T. by the aforesaid A. to the Account of the said T. when
he was thereunto required, before that time received, and upon that Account the
said A. was found in arrerages toward him the said T. in the aforesaid 6.
pounds, by which an Action did accrue unto the said T. to require and have of
the said A. the aforesaid six pounds, the said A. notwithstanding, although
often, etc.

ACTIONS OF PROHIBITION.
PROHIBITION.
ss. MEmorandum, England. Suggestion where the Suggestor affirms the Tenement
whereof the Tithes are required to be held parcel of a Priory.
that the Tuesday next after the Month of Easter, in that same Term, before the
Queen at Westminster, comes W. C. in his proper person, and gives unto the
said Queen here to be understood, that whereas M.W. late Prioresse of the late
Priorship of P. in the County of W. was of late seized of, and in the same late
Priorship, of and in one Orchard, one Close, called the Barn-yard, containing
by estimation half an acre of Meadow, and Pasture of one Close and Meadow,
called Mott Meadow, containing by estimation sixteen acres of Pasture in P. in
the said County, unto the same late Priory lately belonging and apperteining,
and parcel of the possessions thereof, and from the time of which, the Memory
of men is not to the contrary, until the time of the Dissolution or
suppression of the said late Priory, and also at the time of the dissolution or
suppression of the same, for himself, his Farmers or Tenants thereof for the
time being, amongst other things they had held and occupied, discharged of, and
from the payment of any Tithe of Hay, of, in, or upon those Tenements with
th'appurtenances, or any parcel thereof yearly in whatsoever manner by the
whole time aforesaid, growing, renewing, coming forth or happening, and the
said late Prioresse, of the said late Priory, and of the said Tenements with
th'appurtenances, so as it is beforesaid, from the payment of the Tithe of Hay
thereupon growing, renewing or taken, being seized, discharged, the said late
Priory, and all the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments unto the same late
Priory lately belonging, whereupon, etc. by force of a Statute in Parliament at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, in the 27th year of the Reign of H. 8.
Statute of ^7 year of H. 8. for suppression of land belonging unto religious
houses.
late King of England, held, published, were suppressed or dissolved, and to
the hands of the same late King by virtue of that suppression, came, by virtue
of which the said late King was seized, of and in the said late Priory, and the
said Tenements, called M. Meadow, and R. Close in his Demesne, as of Fee in
right of his Crown of England. And whereas in the Statute in Parliament of the
said late King H. 8. Statute of 31. year of H. 8. for the discharge of their
land for the payment (...) Tithes, etc.
held at Westminster aforesaid, the 28. day of April, in the year of his Reign
the 31th, amongst other things, It was firmly Ordained, that as well the said
late King, his Heirs and Successors, as all and singular other Persons, their
Heirs and Assigns, who then had, or from thenceforth afterward should have any
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friar houses,
or other Ecclesiastical houses, or places, Sites, Circuits, and Precincts of
them, or any of them, or any Manors, Rectories, Appropriations, Tithes,
Pensions, Portions, or any Hereditaments whatsoever, which before then did
belong or appertein, or which then did belong or appertein unto the said
Abbeys, Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friar houses,
or other Religious and Ecclesiastical houses or places, or unto any of them,
they should have, hold, reteyn, keep and enjoy as well the said Rectories,
Appropriations, Tithes, Pentions, Porsions, as the said Monasteries, Abbeys,
Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Friar houses, and other Religious and
Ecclesiastical houses, Sites, Circuits, and Precincts, Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, and all of them according
to their estates, and every of their Titles, discharged and acquitted from the
payment of Tithes, so freely, and in as ample manner and form, as the said late
Abbots, Priors, Nuns, Prioresse, and Ecclesiastical Governors, or
Governesses, or of any of them, they should have, hold, occupy possess, use or
enjoy the same, or any parcel thereof, at the days of their dissolution,
suppression, dissertion, forfeiture, Surrender, or coming to the hands of the
said late King, of such Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories; Nunneries, Colleges,
Hospitalls, Friar houses, or other Religious houses, or places, or at the day
of Dissolution, Surrender, or be coming to the hands of the said Late King of
any of them by the said Act, or any thing in the same contained to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding, by force of which said Statute, or by pretense of the
rest of the Premises, the said late King H. 8. held the said Premises, with
the appurtenance called M. Meadow, and R. Close by himself, his Farmees and
Tenants thereof, had, and held discharged from the payment of the Tyth of Hay,
of, in, and upon the same tenements, with th'appurtenance, or any parcel
thereof yearly in whatsoever manner growing, renewing, coming or happening,
and so thereof being seized the said late King afterward, that is to say (...)
day (...) in the year of his Reign (...) at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, by his Letters Patents, sealed with his great Seal of England, and
in due manner executed, bearing date the same day and year, gave and granted
the said Tenements with th'appurtenances called M. Meadow, and R. Close with
th'appurtenance unto the aforesaid W.C. To have to him, and his Heirs for ever,
To hold of the same late King, as of (...) by pretense of which said Letters
Patents, the said W.C. into the said tenements called M. Meadow, and R. Close,
with th'appurtnance, entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and so thereof being seized, the same tenements, with th'appurtenances, by
himself, his Farmers or Tenants, had and held, discharged from the payment of
any Tyth of Hay, of, in, or upon the said Tenements called M. Mead, and R.
Close, or any parcel thereof, yearly in whatsoever manner, growing, renewing,
coming or happening, by pretense of the said Act, and of the rest of the
Premises. And whereas also in the Statute in Parliament of the said late King
H. 8. Statute 31. H. 8. that no person should be sued or constrained to pay
Tithes, where, etc. The like Statute of the second year of Edw. the 6th:
held at Westminster aforesaid, in the 31. year abovesaid, It was enacted, that
no person nor persons should be sued, or constrained to render, give or pay any
Tithes for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which by the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, or by any Privilege or prescription
were not chargeable with the payment of Tithes, And further, whereas in the
Statute of the late King Edw. the 6th in the second year of his Reign, amongst
other things firmly it remains, that no person should sue, or otherwise
Compel to render, give or pay Tyths for any Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, or
by any Privilege or Prescription were not chargeable with the payment of any
such Tithes of Hay thereupon growing, taken or had, but by that whole time
were, and every part and parcel thereof, was altogether discharged from the
payment of such Tithes, as before it is said; And whereas also such causes or
businesses, and the Cognizance of the same Pleas of Tithes against the form of
the aforesaid Acts and Statutes demanded, should not appertain to the
Ecclesiastical Court, in any manner, notwithstanding the said W.S. Farmer of
the Rectory of R. in the said Counties of Warwick, Worcester Diocese, not
being ignorant of the Premises, thinking him the said W.C. against the due
form of the Law of this Kingdom of England, and against the form and effect of
the said Statute unduly, to grieve, oppress and weary, and also the said now
Queen, and her Regal Crown, and the Cognizance of Pleas to deprive, which to
the said Queen, and her Regal Crown, and not to the Court Christian does
belong, to another Trial in the Christian Court, to bring him the said W.C.
into the said Court before the Worshipful, etc. as ensuing of, and for the
taking away, and non-payment of the Tyth of Hay by the said W. C. of, in, and
upon the Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in the year of our Lord 1570. from
thence coming, had and taken the supposed Tyth of that Hay, to have been
thereout coming of the said Closes called R. and M. and of diverse parcells of
Meadow unto the same adjoining, and unto the Manor of P. belonging and
appertaining, within the bounds and Limits of the said Parish Church of R. and
the tythable places of the same brought into the Plea, and the said W. S. him
the said W. C. in the Court Christian aforesaid, before the said spiritual
Judge, by the said occasion to appear, and unto the said W. S. of and in the
Premises unjustly enforced to answer; And although the said W. C. the said
matter in this suggestion contained in the said Court Christian, before the
said spiritual Judge in his discharge, in the Premises had pleaded, and
brought inevitable testimony to prove the same, Notwithstanding the said Judge
altogether refused to admit the said Plea, and allegation, And the said W. C.
in the said cause if Substraction of the said Tyth to condemn, and to compel
him to pay the said Tyth of Hay, by the definitive sentence of the said Court
Christian, and with all his forces endeavored, and from day to day was
d^vising, to the Contempt of the now said Queen, and the Damage, prejudice,
impoverishing, and manifest grievance of him the said W. C. and against the
force, form, and effect of the said Statute. And this the said W. C. is ready
to prove; Whereupon the said W. C. most humbly imploring the aid and
munificence of the Court of the said Queen, unto him desires Remedy, and a
Writ of the said Queen of Prohibition unto the said spiritual Judge, or unto
any Competent Judge in this behalf whatsoever to be directed, that neither
they, nor any of them, the said Plea touching the premises in what manner
soever, before them, or any of them may any further hold, etc. And it is
granted to him, etc.

A Declaration for that the Defendant (...) p^osecuted in the Court Christian
after the Queens Pr^h^b^tion.
U. K. Esquire, who as well for the said Queen prosecuteth, as for himself,
Complains of W.S. Farmer, of all and singular the Tithes to the Rectory of
the parish Church of Badby, with Ne^^ham, in the County of Northampton
aforesaid, in the Diocese of Peterborrough, and of the Province of Canterbury,
in the Custody of the Marshall. etc. of a Plea, wherefore he is prosecuted in
the Court Christian, against the Queens Prohibition unto him formerly thereof
to the contrary directed and delivered, for that, Suggestion for Prohibition
for that the said Rectory unto an Abbot was app^opriate, and h^ld discharged of
the payment of any Tithes.
that is to say, that whereas within the said Parish of B. with N. in the said
County of N. there has been and remained, and from the time of which contrary
the Memory of men remains not, there had been accounted, and there were
as well a Rector and a Vicar, as a Rectorie and Vicarage of the parish Church of
B. with N. aforesaid, which said Rectory is, and from time out of the memory of
man was a Rectorie appropriate; And whereas Philip late Abbot of the late
Monastery of the blessed Mary of St. Ogwin of Eversham in the County of
Worcester, at the time of the dissolution, and suppression of the same late
Monastery, and all his Predecessors, Abbots of the same late Monastery for the
time being, from the time out of the memory of man, were seized, as well of the
said Rectory with th'appurtenances, as of D. acres of Land, 40. acres of
Meadow, Together, at once, and all at once seized.
and 100. acres of Pasture with th'appurtenance in B. with N. aforesaid, called
the Demesns, together and at once, and all at one time in his Demesne, as of Fee
in the right of his said late Monastery, and that by reason thereof, the said
late Abbot, and all his Predecessors Abbots of the said late Monastery for the
time being, the said Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, and
every parcel thereof, from time out of mind, until at the time of the
dissolution or suppression of the said late Monastery; And also the said late
Abbot at the time of the dissolution or suppression of that Monastery, held and
enjoyed, discharged and acquitted, of, and from the payment of the Tithes
following, that is to say, of the Tithes of Grain and Hay, of, in, or upon the
said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, yearly in whatsoever
manner growing, happening, renewing, or coming, and the Tithes of Lambs and of
Wool sheer'd by Sheerers, falling and happening of Sheep, in or upon the said
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, depasturing, feeding, and lying, and also of
the Tithes of Heifers and of Milk, falling, happening, and milkt of Cowes in
and upon the same Tenements with th'appurtenance, depasturing, feeding and
lying; and also the Tithes of Herbage, and of whatsoever dry or barren Cattle,
in and upon the said Tenements, with th'appurtenance, depasturing, feeding and
lying; and also of the Tithes of Pigs falling, and happening of Sows, in and
upon the same Tenements, with th'appurtenances, depasturing, feeding, and
lying; and also of the Tithes of Wood, and Underwood, growing and happening in
and upon the said Tenements, with th'appurtenance. And whereas the said late
Abbots, as well of the said Rectory with th'appurtenance, as of the said
Tenements with th'appurtenance, called the Demesns, for the payment of the said
Tithes for the said occasion before alleged, is discharged, as before, it is
said, Statute of 31. H. 4. for holding religious Lands in such form as Abbots,
etc. and others held.
being seized by a Statute in Parliament of H. 8. late King of England held at
Westminster the 23. day of April, in the 31. year of his Reign, amongst other
things it was ordained, and firmly remains, that as well the said late King,
his Heirs and Successors, as all and singular such person and persons, their
Heirs and Assigns, who then had, or from thence afterward should have any
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friar houses,
or other Ecclesiastical houses or places, Sites, Circuits, and Precincts, of
them or any of them, or any Manors, Messuages, Rectories, appropriate Tithes,
Pensions, Portions, or other Hereditaments, whatsoever they should be, which
belonged or appertained, or which then, that is to say, at the time of the
publishing of that Statute, did belong or appertain unto the said Monasteries,
Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friars houses, or other
Religious and Ecclesiastical houses or places, or unto any of them, they
should have, hold, retein, keep, and enjoy, as well the said Rectories,
appropriate Tithes, Pensions, and Portions, as the said Monasteries, Abbeys,
Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friar houses, and other Religious
and Ecclesiastical houses and places, Sites, Circuits, Precincts, Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever they should be,
and every of them, according to their Estates and Titles, discharged, and
acquitted from the payment of Tithes, as freely, and in as large and ample
manner as the said late Abbots, Priors, Abbesses, Prioresses, and other
Ecclesiastical Governors and Governesses, or any of them had held, occupied,
possessed, used, retained, or enjoyed the same, or any parcel thereof at the
days of their dissolution, suppression, renouncing, dissertion, forfeiture,
giving up, or coming to the Highness of the late King, of such Monasteries,
Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Hospitalls, Friars houses, or other Religious or
Ecclesiastical houses or places, or at the day of dissolution, suppression,
renuntiation, desertion, giving up, or coming to the hands of the said late
King, of any of them, by the said Act, or any thing in the same contained to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding, as by the said Statute, among other
things more fully it does, and may appear. Giving up of the Abbey land, by the
Abbot unto the King.
The foresaid late Abbot, as well of the said Rectory, as of the said Tenements
with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns from the payment of the said tithes
was discharged, as before is said in form aforesaid, being seized, the said late
Abbot the 28. day of January, in the said 31. year of the Reign of the said
late King H. 8. at Westminster aforesaid, by the assent of the said late
Monastery then called together by his certain Writing, then sealed with the
Conventuall Seal of the said late Monastery, and in the Chancery Court, of the
said late King at Westminster aforesaid, then held and being, and in due manner
enrolled, of Record, bearing date the same day and year, gave, granted, and
gave up unto the said late King H. 8. the said late Monastery, and also the
said Rectory, and the said Tenements called the Demesns, with th'appurtenances
amongst ather things, To have and to hold unto the said late King, his Heirs
and Successors, amongst other things for ever, by virtue of which, and by force
of the said Statute, the said late King H. 8. was of that Manor, Rectory, and
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, amongst other things seized in his Demesne, as
of Fee in the right of his Crown of England, and so thereof being seized, the
said Tenements, with th'appurtenances called the Demesns, and every parcel
thereof, held and enjoyed, and ought to hold and enjoy, discharged and
acquitted from the payment of any Tithes aforesaid above in this behalf
recited, of, in or upon the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, called the
Demesns, and every, or any parcel thereof, yearly, in manner and form
aforesaid, above in this behalf alleged, in any manner, growing, happening,
sheering, milking, or renewing (by pretense of the said Act) of the rest of the
premises, and the foresaid late King, of the same Tenements with
th'appurtenance, called the Demesns, from the payment of the said Tithes, in
that manner aforesaid, discharged in form aforesaid, being seized, the said
late King, Intailment made by Letters Patents of the King.
the 20th day of April, in the 34th year of his Reign, at Westminster
aforesaid, by his Letters Patents, sealed with his great Seal of England, and
in due manner made, and to the Court of the said now Queen here proffered,
bearing date the same day and year, gave and granted the said Tenements with
th'appurtnances, called the Demesns, unto one E.R. Knight, and unto the Lady V.
then his Wife, To have and to hold to them the said E. and V, Form of pleading
of a Deed in the tail.
and the Heirs males of the body of him the said E. lawfully begotten, and for
default of such issue, the Remainder thereof unto one F. R. Esquire, brother of
the said E. and to the Heirs males of the body of him the said E. lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue, the Remainder thereof unto the right
Heirs of one R. R. Knight then deceased, late Father of the said E. for ever,
To hold of the said late King, his Heirs and Successors in Chief, by the Tenth
part of one Knights fee, As by those Letters Patents amongst other things more
plainly it does, and may appear; By pretense of which said Letters Patents,
they the said E. and V. into the same Tenements with th'appurtenances, called
the Demesns, entered, and were thereof seized, that is to say, the said E. in
his Demesne, as of Fee tail, in form aforesaid, and the said V. in her Demesne,
as of Freehold for term of her life, the Remainder thereof, as aforesaid is
remaining, and the said E. and V. of the same Tenements with th'appurtenances,
called the Demesns, in that manner afore-spoken of, being seized, they the said
E. and V. the same Tenements with th'appurtnances likewise held and enjoyed,
of, and from the payment of the said Tithes before in this behalf alleged, in
whatsoever manner growing, happening, sheering, milking, or renewing, By right
of increase.
altogether discharged, by pretense of the said Act, and of the rest of the
Premises, and so thereof being seized the said E. afterward at B. with N.
aforesaid, dyed without Issue male of his body lawfully begotten, and the said
V. him survived, and held her self in, into the said Tenemenes with
th'appurtences, called the Demesns, and was thereof solely seized in her
Demesne, as of Freehold for term of her life, the remainder thereof in form
aforesaid being, And the said V. of the same Tenements with th'appurtenances in
that manner before spoken, Note whenever any does allege land to be discharged
from the paying of Tithes, and the same land was conveyed from the King to
diverse persons, the Plaintiff in Prohibition ought to allege the same lands to
be held and discharged by whatsoever persons using the same lands.
being seized, She the said V. likewise held and enjoyed the said Tenements
with th'appurtenances altogether discharged of, and from the payment of any the
said Tithes above in this behalf specified, in, or upon the same Tenements with
th'appurtenance, called the Demesns, yearly, in manner and form aforesaid,
before in this behalf alleged, in whatsoever manner growing, happening,
coming, sheering, milking, or renewing, by pretense of the said Act, and of
the rest of the Premises, and so thereof being seized, she the said V.
afterward at B. with N. aforesaid, dyed, of her said estate thereof seized;
after whose death the said F. R. in the said Letters Patents named, in the said
tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, entered, and was thereof
seized in his Demesne as of Fee-tayl; that is to say, to him and the Heirs males
of his body lawfully begotten, according to the form of the said Gift, and so
thereof being seized the same Tenements likewise held and enjoyed from the
payment of any Tithes aforesaid, above in this behalf specified, in, or upon
the same Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, yearly in manner
and form aforesaid, above in this behalf alleged, in whatsoever manner growing,
happening, coming, sheering, milking, or renewing, altogether discharged by
pretense of the said Act, and of the rest of the Premises, and so thereof
being seized, the said F. afterward at B. with N. dyed, of the said estate
thereof seized; after whose death the same Tenements with th'appurtenances,
called the Demesns, according to the form of the said Gift, descended unto one
V. R. Esqiure, as Son and Heir male of the said F. R. in the Letters Patents,
as it is aforespoken mentioned, by virtue of which the said V. R. into the said
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne,
as of Fee-tayl, according to the form of the said Gift; And so thereof being
seized, the same Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, likewise
held and enjoyed from the payment of any of the said Tithes above specified, in
and upon the same Tenements with th'appurtenance, called the Demesns, yearly in
manner and form aforesaid, above in this behalf alleged, in whatsoever manner
growing, happening, coming, sheering, milking, or renewing, altogether
discharged by pretense of the said Act, and the rest of the Premises, and so
thereof being seized, the said V. R. the first day of May, in the 21. year of
the Reign of the said now Queen at B. with N. at B. with N. aforesaid, Lease
for years.
demised the said Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, unto the
said V. R. the now Plaintiff, to have, and occupy to him and his Assigns, from
the Feast, etc. then last past, until the end and term of 21. years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, by virtue of which
said Demise, the said V. R. the now Plaintiff, into the said Tenements with
th'appurtenances entered, and was, and as yet is thereof possessed, and so
thereof being possessed the same Tenements with th'appurtenances unto him, as
aforesaid, Demised, had, and occupied, and as yet has and does occupy, and
should, and ought to have and occupy from the payment of any the said Tithes
above in this behalf specified, in or upon the said Tenements with
th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, yearly in manner and form aforesaid above
in this behalf alleged, in whatsoever manner growing, happening, coming,
sheering, milking, or renewing, discharged by pretense of the said Act, and of
the rest of the Premises; And whereas farther by the Statute in Parliament
held at Westminster aforesaid, the fourth day of November, Statute of 2. Ed. 6.
that no person should sue for the payment of Tiths where, etc.
in the second year of the Reign of the Lord Edward the sixth, King of England,
among other things it remains enacted by Authority of that Parliament, that
no person should be sued, or otherwise compelled to render, give or pay any
Tithes, for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which by the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, or by any Privilege or Prescription,
were not chargeable with the payment of any such Tithes, or which were
discharged by any open Composition, as by that Act amongst other things more
fully it does and may appear; And whereas also the said Tenements with
th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, and every part and parcel thereof, from
the whole time abovesaid, of which the memory, etc. hitherto has been, and
every part and parcel thereof, was by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom
of England altogether discharged, and acquitted of, and from the payment of any
the said Tithes, above in this behalf recited, of, in, or upon the same
Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, and of, in, or upon every,
or any parcel thereof, in whatsoever manner, by the whole time aforesaid, in
manner and form aforesaid, before in this behalf alleged, growing, happening,
coming, sheering, milking, or renewing; And whereas also the Cognizance of such
like Causes or Businesses, and the Pleas of the same of Tithes against the form
of the said Act and Statute desired in such Case, Cognizance of a Plea in
Prohibition.
in no manner do pertain to the Ecclesiastical Court; Notwithstanding which
the said Defendant not being ignorant of the premises, Imagining unjustly to
grieve, oppress, and weary the said V. the now Plaintiff, against the due form
of the Laws of this Kingdom of England, and against the form and effect of the
said Acts and Statutes, and also against the said now Queen and her Regal
Crown, and it does not belong to the Court Christian, to another Trial in the
Court Christian, to draw the said V. the now late Plaintiff in the Court
Christian, before the Worshipful and learned Master Bartholmew Clark, Addition
of the Judge of the Arches of London.
Doctor of Law, lawful Deputy, Official of the Court of Canterbury, of the
Arches of London, of and for the substraction, and not payment of the Tithes
following; That is to say, of the Tithes of Wheat, of Marsklyn of Barley, of
Oats, Beans, Tares, of Hay and Wood, in the year of our Lord 1589. now coming,
and also four other years the next preceding of the said years and months in
the same concurring whatsoever more one than another, of, in or upon the said
Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, growing, happening, and
coming, by the said V. the now Plaintiff, in those years of the Lord, had and
received; And of and for the Substraction, and not payment of Tithe of Calves,
Milk, and Piggs, in those years of the Lord, falling, milked, brought forth,
and happening, of Cowes and Sows, of him the said V. now the Plaintiff, in and
upon the same Tenements with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, in those
years of our Lord, pasturing, feeding, and lying; And of and for the
Substraction, and not payment of the Tithe of Wool in those years of our Lord
shorn of the sheep of him the said V. the now Plaintiff, in, and upon the
Tenements, called the same Demesns, with th'appurtenances, in those years of
the Lord, depasturing, feeding, and lying, etc. and so repeat all the Tithes
the Defendant sued for in the 8th day of October, in the 31. year of the Reign
of the said now Queen, at London, that is to say, in the Parish of the blessed
Mary in the Arches, etc. drew into Plea, and the said Defendant, him the said
V. the now Plaintiff, into the said Court Christian, before the said spiritual
Judge, by the said occasion, altogether unjustly enforced to appear, and to
answer unto the Defendant, of and in the premises, And although the said V.
the now Plaintiff, the said Statute, and the rest of the premises in discharge
of the payment of the said Tithes by the said Defendant in the said Court
Christian, as before it is said, being required often had pleaded and alleged,
and had brought to prove that truth, inevitable testimony; Notwithstanding
which, the said spiritual Judge altogether refused to admit that Plea and
Allegation; And the said Defendant, him the said V. the now Plaintiff, in the
said Court Christian, in the said Cause of Substraction of the Tithes
aforesaid, with all his force indevoured, and from day to day devised to
condemn, and to compel to pay the said Tithes unto him by the definitive
Sentence of the said Christian Court. Delivery of the Writ of Prohibition
alleged.
And although the Writ of Prohibition of the said now Queen, unto the said
Defendant the third day of November, in the 31. year of the Reign of the said
now Queen aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish of, etc. in this
behalf, in the premises directed, and was delivered; Notwithstanding the said
Defendant, the said Plea after that Prohibition unto him to the Contrary
thereof directed and delivered, as before is said, that is to say, the seventh
day of November, in the 31. year of the Reign of the said now Queen abovesaid,
in the said Court Christian, before the spiritual Judge at London aforesaid,
in the Parish, etc. was further sued, and in that Plea proceeded,
notwithstanding the said Writ of the said Queen of Prohibition unto him in form
aforesaid directed and delivered, to the contempt of the said now Queen, and to
the manifest damage, prejudice, Impoverishment and grief of him the said V. the
now Plaintiff, and against the form and effect of the said Acts and Statutes,
whereupon the said V. the now Plaintiff, who as well, etc. says that he is the
worse, and has damage to the value of 26. pounds, And thereupon as well for the
said Queen, as for himself, produces the Suit, etc. with this, that the said
V. the now Plaintiff will prove, that the said V.R. who demised the said
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, called the Demesns, unto the said V. the now
Plaintiff, in form aforesaid, is yet alive, and in full life at B. with N.
aforesaid remains.

And the said Defendant by Stephen Worley his Attorney comes, Defendant
says, that the Abbot did not hold the Tenements discharged from the payment of
Tithes.
and defends the force and Injury, when, etc. all Contempt, and whatsoever,
etc. And says that he did not sue the said Plea in the Court Christian
aforesaid, after the Queens Prohibition unto him to the contrary thereof first
directed, and delivered in manner and form as the said Plaintiff above and
against him Complains. And of this, etc. And the said, etc. But for
Consultation of the said now Queen thereupon had, the said Defendant protesting
that the said Rectory is not, nor from the time, etc. was a Rectory
appropriate, Protestation.
and protesting also, that the said late Abbot of the said late Monastery of
the blessed Mary, and St. Egwyn of Evesham aforesaid, at the said time of the
dissolution and suppression of the said late Monastery, by all his
Predecessors, Abbots of the same late Monastery for the time being, from the
time of which to the contrary, etc. were not seized as well of the Rectory
aforesaid with th'appurtenances, as of the said 500. acres of land, 40. acres
of Meadow, and 100. acres of Pasture with th'appurtenances, in B. with N.
aforesaid, called the Demesns, Together at once, and all at once.
together at once, and all at once in his Demesne, as of Fee in the right of his
said late Monastery, And also protesting, that by reason thereof, the said late
Abbot, and all his Predecessors Abbots of the said late Monastery, for the time
being, did not hold the said Tenements with th'appurtenance, called the
Demesns, and every parcel thereof, from the time of which to the contrary,
etc, until the said time of the dissolution, or suppression of the said late
Monastery, in manner and form as the said Plaintiff before against him
complains, for Plea the said Defendant says, that the said late Abbot at the
said time of the dissolution or suppression of that Monastery, did not hold and
enjoy the said Tenements called the Demesns, and every parcel thereof,
discharged, and acquitted, of, and from the payment of the said Tithes, in
manner and form, as the said Plaintiff before against him complains. And of
this, etc. And the said, etc. therefore, etc.

England ss. Mich. 11. 22. of Eliz. Statute of 13. R. 2.
MEmorandum, that such a day in that same Term before the said Queen at
Westminster, came Jo. Osborn in his proper person, and gives the Court of the
said now Queen, here to be understood, that whereas in the Statute in
Parliament, of the late Lord Richard, late King of England, the second after
the Conquest, at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, in the 13th year of
his Reign held, published amongst other things, that the said Admiralls or
their Deputies of any business within the Kingdom of England, unless only of a
matter upon the Sea done, Suggestion for a Prohibition to the Admiralty for
that it holds Plea for words.

Statute of 15. year of R. 2.


as in the time of the said now Queen Elizabeth, the third year of the Reign of
(...) late King of England, was duly used, and in no ways whatsoever they
themselves should hinder; And whereas also in the Statute in Parliament of the
late King Richard the second at Westminster, aforesaid, in the 15th year of his
Reign held, amongst other things Ordained, and firmly it remains, that all
manner of Contracts; Pleas and Plaints, and all other matters arising within
the body of the County, as well by Land as by Water, and also of Wreck of Sea,
the Court of Admiralty should in no ways have the Cognizance, power nor
Jurisdiction; Cognizance of Plea.
And that all such Contracts, Pleas and Plaints, and all other Emergencies
within the body of the County, as well by Land as by Water, as before is said,
and also Wreek of Sea, should be tried, ended, discussed, and remedied by the
Laws of the Land, and not before the Admiral, nor by the Admiral, nor by his
Deputy in any manner whatsoever; And whereas also all and singular Pleas, of
whatsoever trespasses, speeches, and publishing of scandalous English words
whatsoever, touching and concerning the Banckruptery or insufficiency, or
poverty of any person being a Merchant at the time of the speaking or
publishing of the same scandalous English words, and all other such Pleas and
matters only, are not of the Test or Jurisdiction, but do specially appertein
and belong to their now Queen, and her Regal Crown, and by the Laws of the
Land of this Kingdom of the said Queen of England, they ought not in any
manner whatsoever, to be tried, ended, and discussed before the Admiral, or by
the Admiral, or by his Deputy, and from the time of man's memory they ought,
and were accustomed to be tried, etc. by the Laws of the Land: Notwithstanding
which, one John Raynes Merchant of the City of London, not being ignorant of
the Premises, cunningly devising, and intending the same J. Osborn against the
due form of the Law of this Kingdom of England, unduly to grieve, oppress, and
weary out; and the said now Queen and her Regal Crown to dis-inherit, and also
the Cognizance of a Plea, which to the same Queen, and her Regal Crown in this
behalf, and not to the Court of Admiralty does belong, to another Trial in the
Court of Admiralty, to draw him the said J. O. in the Court of Admiralty,
before the Worshipful and excellent man, The style of the Judge in the Court
Admiral.
Mr. David Lewis Doctor of Laws, chief President of the Court of Admiralty, or
his lawful Deputy, or other competent Judge in this behalf whatsoever, of, and
for the protestation of the insufficiency, and disabling of the said John
Raynes Merchant, being as before is spoken of, and of, and for the speaking,
publishing and affirming of the English words following, that is to say, etc.
as by the Libell of him the said J.R. against him the said Jo. Osborn,
exhibited, and here proffered to the Court, more plainly it may and does appear,
where in truth the speaking, publishing, and affirming of the said scandalous
words, and the aforesaid protestation by the said J. O. before supposed to be
done in the said Libell specified, if any, or which like speech divulging,
affirming, or Protestation, were had and done at Guilford, in the County of
Surrey, and not upon the main Sea, nor within the Maritine Jurisdiction, And
the said J.R. the same J. O. in the said Court of the said Admiralty to
condemn, and the said J. R. of, and in the Premises, to answer, with all his
Forces, as yet endeavors, and from day to day cunningly devises. And
although the said John Osborn, all and singular the Premises in the Court of
the said Admiralty, before the aforesaid Judge of the Court of that Admiralty
for his discharge in the Premises, had often pleaded, alleged, and brought
inevitable testimony to prove; Notwithstanding which, the Judge of the Court of
that Admiralty altogether refused to admit that Plea and allegation, in
contempt of the said now Queen, and to the manifest damage, prejudice,
impoverishment, and grief of him the said John O. And this the said J.O. is
ready to prove; whereupon the said John here most humbly imploring the gracious
Aid of the Court of the said Queen, prays remedy, and the Writ of Prohibition
of the said Queen, to be directed to the Judge of the Court of that Admiralty,
to prohibit him, that he in no wise should any further hold the aforesaid Plea
of the Premises in any manner whatsoever depending before him, etc. And it is
granted unto him, etc.

ACTIONS OF REPLEVIN.
REPLEVIN.
ss. AND the said R. R. by T.S. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
Injury when, Defendant justifies the taking of the Cattle for Rent behinds.
etc. And does well, avouch the taking of the said Cattle in the said place,
in which, etc. And justly, etc. because he says that the said place in which,
etc. is, and from the time of the said taking, and before, was one acre of Land
in R. aforesaid, and says that long before the time of the said taking, before
supposed to be done, and at the same time the said R. was seized in his Demesne,
as of Fee, of one Message, one Garden, ten acres, and half an acre of land,
and two acres of Wood, with th'appurtenances, in R. aforesaid, whereof the said
place in which, etc. is, And at the said time in which, etc. was parcel, And
so being thereof seized, that same Message, Garden land, and Wood, with
th'appurtennaces, long before the time of the taking aforesaid, that is to say,
at the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, in the year of the Reign of the Lord
Edward, late King of England, the fourth after the Conquest, brother of the
Lord, the now King, 22. at R. aforesaid, Demised unto the foresaid I.A. To have
to him from the same Feast, as long as it should please him the said R.
yielding therefore yearly unto the said R. as long as the said J. should have
and occupy the said Message, Garden Land, and Wood, 21. shillings at the Feast
of Pentecost, and Andrew the Apostle, by equal portions yearly to be paid, by
virtue of which Demise, the said I.A. the said Message, Garden land, and wood,
with th'appurtenances, from the said Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle until the
Feast of. Saint Andrew the Apostle next before the time of the taking
aforesaid, had, and occupied, And for that, that 21. shillings of the said
Lease, by the said time unto him the said R. at the time of the said
computation, remained in arrear, and as yet remains unpaid, does well avouch
the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. and justly,
etc. And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays Judgment, and the
return of the said Cattle to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Plaintiff says, that before the Defendant had any thing, one N. was seized of
the Premises, and afterward the said Land descended to the Wife of the
Plaintiff, as Heir of N. by which the Plaintiff claimed the Tenements in
hereditarie right, and that the Defendant had nothing in the Tenements unless
by Intrusion. Claim.
ss. ANd the said J. A. says, that the said R. the taking of the said Cattle,
in the foresaid place, in which, etc. by any matter before alleged, that he
ought not to avouch the same to be just, because he says, that long before the
time of the said Caption, and long before the said R. had any thing in the said
Message, Garden land, and Wood, with th'appurtenances, one N. A. was thereof
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and dyed of such his estate thereof seized,
after whose death, the right of the aforesaid Tenements, with th'appurtenaces,
descended unto one T. A, his Son and Heir of him the said N. and the said R.
after the death of the said N. into the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
intruded himself, and by that intrusion was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of
Fee, and so thereof being seized, made the foresaid Demise unto the said J. A.
in form aforesaid, And the said T. A. afterward dyed without Heir of his body
begotten, after whose death, the right of the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, descended unto one E. then the Wife of him the said I. A. as
Sister and Heir of him the said T. him the said I. A. being then possessed of
the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, by virtue of the said Demise, And
the said I. and E. immediately after the death of the said T. claimed the said
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in the right of her the said E. And the said
I. A. further says, that at the said time, the said T. was nothing in arrear
of the said Lease, unto the said R. And this he is ready to prove, whereof,
from which the said R. before acknowledging the taking of the said Cattle,
prays Judgment, and his Damages by that occasion to be adjudged unto him,
etc.

Defendant says, that true it is that N. was seized, etc. and thereof
infeoffed him the Defendant, and one R. C. who afterward dyed, by pretense of
which the Defendant was alone scized by right of Incroachment, and after that
made a Demise, etc. Right of Encroachment without this.
ss. AND the said R. R. says, that well and true it is, that the said N. was
seized of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and so thereof seized, thereof infeoffed him the said R. and one R. C. to have
to them and their Heirs for ever, by virtue of which said Feoffment, they the
said R. and R. were thereof seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, and the said R.
C. afterward dyed of such estate thereof seized, And the said R. above joined
himself, and of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, was alone seized in
his Demesne as of Fee, by right of Incroachment, and so thereof seized the said
Demise unto the foresaid I. A. in form aforesaid made, in which form the said
R. the said R. by his said Avouchment before supposes, without this, that the
said R. into the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, after the death of the
said N. intruded himself, in which form the said A. before in pleading, has
alleged; And this he is ready to prove, whereupon, as formerly, he prays
Judgment, and the retorn of the said Cattle, to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ss. AND the said I. A. says, Issue upon Intrusion, etc.
that the said R. into the said Tenements with th'appurtenances, after the
death of the said N. intruded himself, in what form the said above in pleading
has alleged, And this he prays may be inquired of, etc.

ss. AND the said R.R. and T. G. by W. H. their Attorney comes and defends
the force and injury, when, Defendant as Servant acknowledges the taking of
the Cattle, and parcel of the Rent so in arrear, by the name of Distress.
Par. 18. H. 7. ro'. lxxv.
etc. all Caption, and whatsoever, And says that the said A. T. his said
Action against them ought not to maintain, because he says, that one G. B.
long before the said time, in which, etc. was seized of a certain Tenement,
with th'appurtenances, heretofore of I. H. in the said Parish, whereof the said
place, in which, etc. is, and at the said time, in which, etc. was parcel in
his Demesne, as of Fee, And says that one E. Prior of the Church of St. George
of Cambridge, and all his Predecessors, Priors of that Monastery, from time out
of mind, were seized of a certain annual Rent, of two shillings four pence,
issuing out of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, whereof the said
place, in which, etc. is, and then was parcel in his Demesne, as of Fee, as in
right of that Monastery, at the Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, and of
the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, to be paid by equal portions, and
that the said Prior, and all his Successors, from the said time out of mind,
Prescription pleaded to distrein for Rent.
used to distrein for the said Rent of 2. shillings four pence, as often, as at
any Feast of the said Feasts, it was in arrear in part, or in the whole, not
paid upon the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, whereof the said place in
which, etc. is, and then was parcel, and the Distresses so there taken, to
lead, drive, and in possession to keep them until full satisfaction should be
unto him of the said annual Rent, and the Arrerages of the same, if any were.
And further, that they the said R. and T. say, that for 23. shillings 4. pence
being behind for ten years parcel of 6. pounds, 6. shillings 8. pence being
behind, at the Feast of St Michnel in the 18th year of the Reign of the now
King for 40. years next before the said Feast, the said R. and T. as Servants
of him the said now Prior, and by his Command at the said time, in which,
Inquire if it should not be, whereupon he prays Judgment, and the return of
the said Cattle, etc.
etc. does well acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle in the said place,
in which, etc. by the name of Distress, and the said 23. shillings 4. pence so
being behind, as it was lawful for them. And this he is ready to prove, as,
etc. whereupon he prays Judgment, if the said Agnes her foresaid action
thereupon against him ought to have or maintain, etc.

Plaintiff allegeth a demise made to him by one S. and prays Aid of the said S.
ss. AND the aforesaid A.T. says, that she, by any matter before alleged from
her said action had, ought not to be precluded, because she says that one S.
W. before the said time in which, etc. was seized of the said tenements, with
th'appurtenances, whereof the said place in which, etc. is, and at the said
time in which, etc. was parcel, in his demesne as of fee, and he so thereof
seized long before the said time, that is to say in the feast of St. Michael
the Archangell in the 12 year of the reign of the said Lord the now King, at W.
in the said County, demised the said tenements, with th'appurtenances, Prayer
of Aid. Note that in the Voucher the defendant may pray Aid before Issue
joined, but in other action does not pray Aid unless after Issue joined.
whereof the said place in which, etc. is, and at the said time in which, etc.
was parcel, unto the foresaid A. to have and occupy to him and his Assigns
from the said feast of St. Michael until the end of the Term of five year,
from thence next following fully to be complete, by virtue of which said demise
she the said A. long before the said time, in which, etc. was thereof
possessed, which said Term does as yet endure, And so the said A. says that
she has nothing in the said tenements, with th'appurtenances, unles to the end
of five years in form aforesaid the reversion, whereupon being expectant after
that term unto the aforesaid S. W. and his heirs, without which said S. she
the said A. says, that she to the knowledge of the said R. and T. cannot
answer, and prays Aid of him the said S. and has, etc. Therefore the Sheriff
is commanded that he summon by good summons the said S. that he be before the
said King, in Eight days of the Holy Trinity, wheresoever, etc. to answer to
the said knowledge of the said R. and T. together with the said A. if, etc. The
same day is given to the said parties, etc.

Cornub. Declaration in a writ of recaption of Cattle and that they were taken
hanging another Plea for the same Cattle undetermined and for which Cause they
were before taken. M. 20. h. 7. to. 75.
ss. I. C Esquire, T.C.J.H.J.D.J.W. and W.A, were attached to answer as well unto
the Lord the King, as unto J.G. Esquire, of a Plea, wherefore whereas the said,
J.C. and the others were formerly summoned to be in the Court of the said King,
before him the said Lord the King, on the Morrow of all Souls last past,
wheresoever, etc. to answer unto the aforesaid J.G. of a Plea, wherefore they
took the Cattle of him the said J.G. and them unjustly detained, against the
Sureties and pledges, which the Sherif of the said Lord the King, of the said
County, had made to replevy to him the said J.G. as the King had accepted,
which said Plea between him the said J.G. and J.C. in the Court of the Lord the
King here as yet does hang undetermined; Notwithstanding the said J.C. and
others, hanging the said Plea, the Cattle of him the said J.G. again took for
the same occasion which before they had taken the same, etc. Which thing is
manifest against the Law, and Custom of the Kingdom of the Lord the King of
England; And whereupon the said J.G. who as well for the Lord the King, as for
himself prosecuteth by J. H. his Attorney Plaintiff, that whereas the said J.C.
and the others, formerly, that is to say in the Term of St. Hillary in the year
of the reign of the now King, ninteenth, were summoned to be in the Court of
the Lord, the King, here before his Justices assigned, to hold Pleas before him
the Lord the King, to answer unto the said J.G. and them unjustly detained
against the sureties and pledges, which the Shreif of the said Lord the King,
of the said County, had made unto the said J.G. to replevy, and the King had
accepted, which said Plea between him the said J.G. and the said J. C. and the
others, in the Court of the said King, here as yet does hang undetermined;
Notwithstanding they the said J. C. and the others, hanging the said Plea, the
Cattle of him the said J. G. that is to say, ten Oxen, Eight heyfers, two
horses, and a hundred sheep, again that is to say the twentieth day of May, in
the nintteenth year of the Reign of the Lord the now King, at E. near Moreball,
in which the Cattle in a place called the Widl-Park, they took for the same
occasion, which before they had taken them, etc. Which is manifestly in
Contempt of the said King, and against the Law and Custom of the Kingdom of
him the said King of England, whereupon he says, he is the worse, and has
damage to the value of forty pounds, And thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

ss. AND the said I. Copleston, T. Colpeston I. Horn, I. Davy, Some of the
defendants plead that they did not take the Cattle, As, etc.
I. Welsh, and W. Atwood, by W. Fisher his Attorney, comes and defends the
force and injury, when, etc. And the said I. Davy, I.W. and W. A. say that they
did not take the said Cattle as the said I.G. before against them Complains,
And of this they put themselves upon the Country. And the said, I.G. likewise,
etc. And they the said I.C.T.C. and I.H. as to the taking and detention of the
said Cattle supposed to be done, they say that the said I. G. ought not to
maintain his action, because they say that the place in which, that trespass is
supposed to be done, is, and at the said time in which, etc. was one message,
a hunded, The rest of the defendants plead that they took the Cattle in the
name of a distress for dry Rent in arrear, as servants of the other, and
justify perscridtion.
acres of land six acres of meadow, six acres of wood, and twenty acres of
Heath and furzes, with th'appurtenances, in G. aforesaid, called Wilpark, of
which said message, land, and tenements, the said J. E. is, and at the said
time in which, etc. was seized in his demesne as of fee, And that the said I.
Colshill and all his Predecessors, whose heir he is, long before the said time
in which, etc. were seized in their demesne as of fee of a certain Annual rent
of forty shillings coming forth of the said tenements to be perceived yearly to
him and his heirs at the feasts of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, of St.
Michael Arch-angell, the Nativity of our Lord, and of Easter, with equal
portions to be paid, from the time of which the memory of man is not extant.
And the said I.C. and all his Predecessors whose heir he is, from all the said
time of which the Memory of man is not extant, used to distrein in the said
tenements with th'appurtenances for the said Rent, as often as that Rent at any
feast of the said Feasts should be in arrear, and the Distresses thereupon to
take, lead, drive away, and wholly to themselves to retein, until the said
yearly Rent, and the Arrearages thereof, if any there were, should be
satisfied; And the said I. C. so thereof seized, dyed of such estate thereof
seized, after whose death the said Annual Rent long before the said Retorn, in
which, etc. descended unto one Agnes, Wife of the said I. Broker, Descent.
Esquire, as Cousin and Heir of the I. Colshill, that is to say, Daughter of
Ranfrid, son of Iohane, sister of I. Colshill, by which the said I. Broker, and
Agnes long before the said time, in which, etc. were of the said Annual Rent
of 40. shillings seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, in Right of the said Agnes,
And because 30. shillings of that Rent, after the death of the said I.
Colshill, at the Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, of St. Michael
the Arch-Angell, and the Nativity of our Lord, next before the said taking
supposed to be done, that is to say, next before the 20. day of May, in the 30.
year of the Reign of the said now King, were in arrear unto the said I. Broker,
and Agnes, not paid, they the said J. Cop. T. Cop. and J. Horn, as servants of
them the said J. Broker, and Agnes, and by their Command at the said time, in
which, etc. the aforesaid Cattle, in the said place called Wilpark, by the
name of Distress, for the said 30. shillings, so as it is aforesaid of the
said annual Rent remaining behind, Without this that they took the Cattle
again, for which cause they formerly had taken them.
they took and detained, as it was lawful for them to do, without this, that
the said J. Cop. T. Cop. and J. H. at the said time, in which, etc. they took
the said Cattle for the same occasion which before they had taken them, as the
said J. G. before against them Complains, And this, etc. Whereupon he prays
Judgment, if an Action, etc. he ought to maintain, etc.

Plaintiff says, that the said Rent was not behind, but that the said Cattle
were taken for the cause before. Venit' f^c' awards upon 2. Issues.
ss. ANd the said I. G. says, that he by any matter before alleged, from his
said Action sued, had of the taking, and deteyning of the said Cattle, against
the foresaid I. Cop. T. Cop. and I. Horn ought not to be precluded, because he
says, that the said Rent was not in arrear unto them the said I. Broker, and
Agnes, at the said Feasts, as, etc. and so as before, says that the said I.
Cop. T. Cop. and I. H. took the said Cattle for the same occasion which they
formerly took them, as the said I. G. before against them complains, And this
he prays, that it may be inquired of the Country, etc. And the said I. Cop.
T.C. and I. H. likewise, etc. therefore, as to the trying of that issue, as the
other issue between the said parties before likewise joined, thereupon comes
the Jury before the said King, from the day of S. Hillary in fifteen days,
wheresoever, etc.

ss. AND the said I. B. by T. A. his Attorney comes, Defendant avoweth the
taking of the Cattle, for that the Plaintiff being his Tenant by homage Fealty
and Escuage, and suit of Court, and because he did not Homage and Suit of
Court, at the said Court of him the Defendant he avows, etc.
and defends the force and Injury, when, etc. and does well avow the taking
of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. Because
he says, that the said I.G. does hold of him the said I.B. as of his Manor of
S. in the same County one Message, and two acres of land, with
th'appurtenances, in the said Town of S. whereof the said place, in which, etc.
is parcel by Homage, and at Escuage, of the Lord the King 40. shillings, when
it should happen 40. d. and at more, more, and at less, less; And by service
to do Suit to the Court of him the said I. B. of his Maannor of S. aforesaid,
at G. from three weeks to three weeks, and by the Rent of ten pence, unto him
the said I. B. and his Heirs, at the Feast of Easter, and St. Michael the
Archangel, by equal portions yearly to be paid, of which said Services one T.
P. grandfather of him the said I. B. whose Heir he is, was seized by the hand
of one R. F. then Tenant of the said Message, and Land, with th'appurtenances,
As by the hand of his true Tenant, of which said R.F. the Estate of the said
I.G. now has in the same Message and Lands, with th'appurtenances, and from
the said T. P. Grandfather, etc. descended the said Manor, and Services, with
th'appurtenances, unto one Iohane P. as his Daughter and Heir of the said T.P,
etc. And from her the said Iohane descended the same, and Services, with
th'appurtenances, unto the foresaid I. B. who now avoweth as Son and Heir of
the said Iohane, And because the homage of the said I. E. and also suit at the
said Court of him the said I. B. holden at G. aforesaid sixth day of October,
next before the day of the said taking, they justly belonged unto the said I.
B. the said I. B. avoweth the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in
which, etc. as in parcel of the said Tenements of him the said I. B. in form
aforesaid, holden above the said I. G. and above his true Tenant, and within
his Fee, etc.

ss. AND the said I. G. says that the said I. B. the taking of the said
Cattle, in the foresaid place, in which, Plaintiff says, that the place in
which, etc. is without his Fee.
etc. ought not to avow just, because he says, that that place is, and at the
time of the said taking was without the Fee and Lordship of him the said I. B.
And this he is ready to prove; whereupon from that the said B. before has
acknowledged the taking and detension of the said Cattle, he prays
Judgment, and his Damages by that occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ss. AND the said I. B. says, that the said place in which, etc. is, and at
the time of the said taking, was within the Fee and Lordship of him the said I.
B. in the form which the said I. B. by his Avowment aforesaid, has supposed,
and not without his Fee, and Lordship, And of this he puts himself upon the
Country, etc.

Defendant avoweth the taking of the Cattle for that one N.L. held the other
parcel of land, whereof the place in which etc. is parcel, of one R.B. whose
Heir the Defendant is by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage, and Rent of 20. s. by the
year, and one I. L. h^d the estate of the said N. L. suffered the Homage to be
unperformed, and the Rent unpaid. Descent.
ss. AND the said I. T. by W.B. his Attorney, comes and Defends the force
and injury, when, etc. and does well avow the taking of the said Cattle in the
said place, in which, etc. And justly, etc. because he says, that one N. L.
was lately seized of six Messuages with th'appurtenances, in little L.
aforesaid, in his Demesne, as of Fee, whereof the place in which, etc. is
parcel, and the said Message with th'appurtenances held of R. B. by Homage,
Fealty and Escuage of the Lord the King 40. shillings, when it should happen
10. shillings, and at more, more, etc. and at less, less, etc. and by the
Rent of 20. shillings unto the said R. and his Heirs, at the Feasts of Easter
and St. Michael th'Arch-Angell, by equal portions yearly to be paid, of which
Services, the said R. was seized by the hand of the said N. as by the hand of
his true Tenant of the said Fealty, as of Fee and right, and of the said Rent
in his Demesne, as of Fee, And that the said R. afterward dyed, after whose
death the said Services descended unto the said I. T. as Cozen, and Heir of him
the said R. that is to say, Son of the fifth son of M. the Daughter of G. Son
of the said R. of whom the said N. the Estate in the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, one I. L. now has; And because as well the Homage of him the
said I. L. unto the said I. T. after the death of the said R. remained due, and
as yet remains; as the said Rent by 6. years next before the day of the said
taking, unto the said I. T. was behind, and as yet being unpaid, the said I. T.
well avoweth the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc.
as parcel of the said Tenement of him the said I. T. in form aforesaid held,
and above the said I. L. as above his true Tenant, and within his Fee, etc. And
this he is ready to prove, Whereupon he prays, etc. and the retorn of the
said Cattle to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Plaintiff says, that he has nothing in the Tenements, unless a certain Demise
by one I. L. made at the term of three years the Reversion thereof unto the
said I. L. and his Heirs expectant, and therefore prays aid of the said I.L.
which said I. L. after sumons thereupon made unto him likewise comes and
joyneth himself with the Plaintiff, and says that the said R. never was seized
unless of the service of Fealty only, and the Rent of 10. shillings; Without
this, that the said R. was seized of homage, Fealty and Escuage, and the rent
of twenty shillings in manner and form, etc, by the hand of N.L. etc.
ss. AND the said T. Wild not acknowledging any matter in the Avowment of the
said I. T. before alleged to be true, says, that the said I. L. before the day
of the said taking was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, of the said Message,
with th'appurtenances, whereof the said place, in which, etc. is, and at the
said time, in which, etc. was parcel, and the said I. L. so thereof seized
long before the said time, that is to say, in the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, in the nineteenth year of the Reign of the now King, at W. in the
said County, Demised unto the aforesaid T. W. the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, To have to him and his Assigns from the said Feast of St.
Michael, until the end and Term of three years from thence next following, and
fully to be Complete, by virtue of which, the said T. long before the said
time, in which, etc. was thereof possessed; Which said Term as yet indureth,
And so the said T. says, that he has nothing in the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, unless at the Term of three years in form aforesaid, the
Reversion thereof after that Term ended being expectant to the foresaid I. L.
and his Heirs, Without which said I. L. the said T. says, that he cannot
answer unto the said Avowment of the said J. T. and prays Aid of him the said
I. L, and has, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is commanded, that he Summons in
Aid, prayer of aid.
Summon, by good Summons, the aforesaid I. L. that so before the said King,
from Easter day in three weeks wheresoever, etc. to answer to the said Avowment
of the said I. T. together with the said T. W. if, etc. the same is given unto
the said parties, etc. At which day before the said King at Westminster, came
as well the said T. W. as the said I. T. by their said Attorney, And the said
I. L. being summoned, etc. by T. H. his Attorney likewise comes, and joyneth
himself with the aforesaid T. to answer unto the said I. T. together with the
said T. W. to the said Avowment, etc. Join in aid, and traverse the tenure.
And as well as the said T.W. the said J. L. who joyneth himself, etc. says
that the said J. T. the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in
which, etc. for the reason before alleged, ought not to avow just, because
Protestation.
protesting that the said N. did not hold the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, of the said R. by the said Services in the said Avowment
specified; Neither that the said R. ever was seized of the said Services, or of
any parcel thereof, besides Fealty, and the Rent of ten shillings of the said
20. shillings by the hands of the said N. or of any other Tenant of that
Tenement for Plea says, that the said N. L. held the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, of the said R. B. by Fealty, and the Rent of 10. shillings of
the said 20. shillings unto the said R. and his Heirs, at the said Feasts of
Easter, and St. Michael the Archangel, by equal Portions yearly to be paid,
of which Services the said R. was seized by the hands of the said N. as by the
hands of his true Tenant, that is to say, of the said Fealty, as of Fee and
right, and of that Rent in his Demesne, as of Fee; And the said T.W. and L.
says, that the said Rent of ten shillings, or any parcel thereof, was not
behind unto the said J. T. at the time of the said taking unpaid; And they the
said T. W. and J. L. say, that the said R. or any of his Predecessors never was
seized of the said ten shillings residue of the said 20. shillings, nor any
parcel thereof, by the hands of the (...) N. nor of any other Tenant of the
said tenements, with th'appurtenances, after the Limitation of Assize of new
disseisin, that is to say, after the first of the Lord King H. son of King
John, in Vaston, without this that the said N. held the said tenements, Without
this.
with th'appurtenances, of the said R. by homage, fealty, and at the Escuage of
the Lord the King and by the rent of twenty shillings by the year, as by the
said Avowment is supposed, and this he is ready to prove, whereupon from which
the said I.T. the taking of the said Cattle before acknowledging, prays
judgment, and his damages by that occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue in prayer of Aid.
ss. AND the said I.T. says, that the said N. tenant of the said tenements,
with th'appurtenances, of the said R. by homage, fealty, and Escuage, of the
said Lord the King, and the said rent of twenty shillings by the year, in the
form which the said I. T. before has alleged. And of this puts himself upon
the Country, and they the said T.W. and I.L. who joined themselves, etc.
likewise, etc. therefore, etc.

Declaration in replevin parcel in the detinuit and parcel in the detinet,
and the plantif prays that the defendant may be bound to deliver.
ss. W: Burton of L. Chaplain, and B.W. were summoned to answer unto I.I. of a
Plea wherefore they took the Cattle of him the said I.I. and them unjustly
detained against the sureties and pledges, etc. And whereupon the said I. I. by
I. C. his Attorney complains that the said W. and B. the day, etc. in the
year. etc. In the Town of H. in a certain place called -- they took four score
sheep of him the said John, and seaventy sheep thereof they unjustly detained
until, etc. And ten sheep residue thereof of the price of twenty shilling as
yet unjustly detain against the sureties and pledges, etc. Whereupon he says
that he is the worse, And has damage to the Value of twenty pound. And
thereupon he brings his Suit, etc. And prays that the said W. and B. may
secure the delivery of the said Ten sheep unto him, etc.

Defendant acknowledges the taking of the sheep as bailiffes of the Dean and
Chapter, etc. of Lincoln with which the Dean and Chapter, etc. one annual Rent
of the burden of a certain Manor whereof the place is parcel thereout going
was granted, and liberty for not payment thereof to distrain, etc. And as to
the rest of the sheep, etc. the defendant says that the Plaintiff has
deliverance there upon in the Country.
ss. AND they the said W.B. and B.W. by T.S. his Attorney comes and defends
the force and injury, when, etc. And as Bayliffes of I. M. Dean etc. Does well
acknowledge the taking of the said sheep in the said place, in which, etc. And
justly, etc. Because he says that one R. S. knight, son and heir of the Lord
R. of S. in the County of L. was lately seized of the Manors of H. and B. with
th'appurtenances, whereof the said place in which, etc. is parcel in his
demesne as of fee, and so thereof seized by his certain writing indented, whose
other part is signed with the Seal of him the said R. they the said W. and B.
profer here in Court, the date of which is at L the second day of June in the
fourth year of the reign of the Lord the now King, gave and granted, and by his
said Writing indented, confirmed unto J. S. then Dean of the Church, etc. By
the names of Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of the blessed Mary of
Lincoln and his Successors forever to the use and augmentation of the Support
of five Chaplains of one Church, and six singing boys, for the Justification
for the burden of Rent.
Souls of the most illustrious Prince Lord Edward the third, late King of
England, deseased, and B. and the Souls of his Predecessors, and of all the
faithful in the Chapel of St. Katherine founded in the Church aforesaid, and
also to the Aid of Sustentation of one Chaplain, divine services for the said
Souls, and for the Soul of B. is to be celebrated by them the said five
Chaplains and their Successors of a new Maintenance by License of the said Lord
King Richard, late had and obtained by the Chapter of him the said king, dated
at Westminster the 23. day of February in the aforesaid twentyth year of his
Reign one yearly perpetual Rent of twenty marks to be perceived yearly of all
and singular his Manors, or Cattle, Lands and tenements, with
th'appurtenances, in H. to be paid unto them the said late Dean, and Chapter,
and their Successors, every year forever, at two terms of the year, that is to
say at the feasts of Easter and St Michael th'arch-Angell by equal portions in
the Court Chamber of the said Cathedral Church. At which said payment of the
said perpetual Rent of twenty mark, unto the said late Dean and Chapter, and
at the said feasts faithfully as it was preadvised to be done, obliged all and
singular the said Manors, by the name of all and singular the said Manors or
Lordships, lands and tenements of H. and B. with th'appurtenances, in
whosoevers hands they should be or come from thenceforth to come that if the
said perpetual annual Rent of twenty marks, should be behind in part or in
all, after any Term before assigned for the payment whereof, then it should be
lawful for the said late Dean and Chapter, Claim of distress for the Rent
Charge.
and their Successors, in all and singular the Manors, Lordships, lands and
tenements of him the said R. aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, in whatsoever
hands they should come from thence in future, for the said yearly Rent and the
Arrearages thereof if any should be, and the distresses taken, to drive, or
carry, lead away, impound and retain, as well within the County as without,
wheresoever it should please the said Dean and Chapter, and their Successors,
until themselves of the said perpetual yearly Rent, together with all and
singular the Arrearages of the same, and the damages which they should sustain
and expend, which they should lay out, by reason of the not payment of the said
continual annual Rent at the said Terms, should be fully satisfied, By virtue
of which gift and Grant, of the said I. S. late Dean of the said Cathedral
Church, chief of the same were late seized of the said Rent of twenty marks by
the hands of the said R. S. then tenant of the said Manor and tenements, and
because the said Rent, unto them the said Dean and Chapter of the said Church,
Command to the Sheriff to deliver the Cattle, whereupon the Plaintiff desires
Security, and the Defendant says, that he has the deliverance in the Country.
A special Writ shall issue unto the Sheriff to deliver them, etc. Plaintiff
says, that he has nothing in the Tenements unless a certain Demise unto him
by one W. J. made, and the Freehold, and Fee thereof in the person of the said
W. J. being, and prays of the same W. aid, and has, etc. Prayer of Aid.
Summons in Aid.
by one year next before the day of the said taking was in arrear unpaid, they
the said W. and B. as Bailiffs of the said Dean and Chapter, for 20. Marks of
the said annual Rent so being behind, they do lawfully acknowledge the taking
of the said Sheep in the said place, in which, etc. as in parcel of the said
Manors of the said now Dean and Chapter, of the yearly Rent, in form
aforesaid, charged with Distress, etc. And as to the Sureties of the said
Sheep, He says that he had deliverance thereof in the Country, etc. therefore
the Sheriff is commanded, that if the said I. I. had not the Deliverance of the
said Sheep, then the said Sheep he should cause to be delivered unto the said
J. J. and whatsoever, etc. he should make known unto the Lord the King, from
the day of Easter, in fifteen days wheresoever, etc.

ss. AND the said I. I. not acknowledging any matter by the said W. B. and B.
W. before alleged, says, that one W. I. was seized of the said Manor of H.
whereof the whole place, in which, etc. is parcel, in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and as yet remains, and so thereof seized in the Feast of St. Michael
th'Arch-Angell, in the 20th year of the Reign of the said now King, at H.
Demised unto the said I.I. that Manor, with th'appurtenances, To have to him
and his Assigns at the Term of ten years then next following, and fully to be
completed, by virtue of which said Demise, the said I. I. of that Manor, with
th'appurtenances, of such estate was possessed, and as yet remains, And so
says, that he does hold the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, at the term of
years in form aforesaid, the said Freehold, and Fee thereof being in the person
of the said W. I. without which said W.I. the said I.I. says, that he cannot
answer unto the foresaid W. and W. to the said Acknowledgement, and prays Aid
of him the said W. I. and has, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is Commanded, that
he summon by good Summons, the said W. I. that he be before the Lord the King
(such a day) wheresoever, etc. to answer unto the said W. and B. together with
the said I. and I. to the said acknowledgement, if, etc. the same day is given
unto the parties, etc. At which day, before the said King, at Westminster,
comes as well the said I. I. as the said W. and B. by their said Attorney,
Essoyn of a bad retorn.
and the said W. I. then caused himself to be Essoined of a bad retorn coming;
After which Summons, etc. of the said Plea, and has thereupon day, by his
Essoin here, until to this day, that is to say (such a day then next
following, etc.) And now here at this day comes as well the said I. as the
said W. and I. by their said Attorney, And the said W. I. the Summons unto him
in the said County being made, by W. S. his Attorney likewise comes, and
joyneth himself with the said I. I. to answer unto the said W. and B. together
with the said I. I. to the acknowledgement aforesaid, Enquire if the retorn of
the Sheriff, that he had not summoned should not be expressed here. Join in
aid. Impartance.
And upon this as well the said I. as the said W. I. prays License thereupon
to impart here, until in, etc. of St. Michael, and they have, etc. the same
day is given to the said W. and B, etc. At which day here comes as well the
said I. I. and W. I. who joyneth, etc. as the said W. and B. by their said
Attorney, And the said I. I. and W. I. say that the said W. B. and B. the
taking of the said Sheep in the said place, in which, etc. for the reason by
them before alleged, they ought not to acknowledge just, because they say that
one T. D. and W. D. were seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, of the said Manor
of H. with th'appurtenances, whereof the said place, in which, etc. is parcel,
long before the said R. had any thing in the said Manor, Plaintiff says that
the Grantor had nothing in the Manor unless by Disseisin, and that the Grant
made of the Rent, was in the mean between the said Disseisin, and the re-entry
of the Plaintiff.
until the said R. them the said T. and W. B. of the said Manor unjustly
disseized, and without Judgment of Disseizin; And afterward the said T. and
W. into the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, upon the possession of him the
said R. re-entred; And they say, that the said Grant of the said Rent was made
in the meanwhile between the said Disseizin, and the said Re-entrie of the said
T. and W. And this they are ready to prove; whereupon they do not intend that
the said W. and B. the taking of the said Sheep in the said p^ace, in which,
etc. for the reason by them before alleged, cannot acknowledge. And from which
they, the said W. and B. the taking of the said Sheep before acknowledged pray
Judgment, etc. and their Judgment by that occasion to be adjudged unto them,
etc.

ss. AND they the said W. B. and B. say that they by any matter before alleged,
from the said taking, acknowledged just, Defendant maintains the Plaintiff
without this that the said R. disseised the said Plaintiff, etc.
ought not to be precluded, because they say that one B. once was seized of the
said Manor of H. with th'appurtenances, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so
thereof seized, gave, and granted unto the said R. that Manor with
th'appurtenances, To have to him and his Heirs for ever, by virtue of which,
the said R. was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, at the Grant made of
the said Rent. Without this, etc.
Without this, that the said R. Disseized the said T. and W. D. of the said
Manor of H. with th'appurtenances, as the said I. I. and VV. I. who joyneth
himself, etc. before have alleged. And this they are ready to prove; Whereupon
he prays Judgment, and the retorn of the said Sheep to be adjudged unto him,
etc.

ss. AND they the said J. J. and VV. J. who joyneth himself, Plaintiff says,
that he disseised, etc.
etc. say that the said R. disseised the said T. and VV. of the said Manor of
H. as they the said J. J. and VV. I. before have alleged, and this they pray,
that it may be inquired of by the Country, And the said VV. and B. likewise,
Defendant avows the taking of the Cattle for rent behind, and Service undone.
etc. therefore, etc.

ss. AND the said T. S. in his own person comes, and defends the force and
injury, when, etc. and does well avow the taking of the said Cattle in the
said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. because he says that the said J.
is, and at the day of the said taking was seized of one Message, and fifteen
acres of Land in the said Town of H. whereof the place in which, etc. is
parcel, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and those Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
does hold, and at the day of the said taking, held of him the said T. as of his
Manor of I. by Fealty, and the Rent of 3. shillings and 4. pence, unto the
said T. at the Feast of Easter, and of St. Michael the Arch-Angell by equal
portions yearly to be paid, and by the Service to reap two acres of Rye, and
two acres of Oats in the Harvest, and to fill the Lords Cart, to dung a piece
of Land called Beroland, in the Demesns of the Land of the said Manor growing,
and being, every year by one days work, and doing Suit to the Court of him the
said T. of J. at H. from three weeks, of which said Services, he was seized by
the hands of the said I. as by the hands of his True Tenant; And because as well
the said Rent unto the said T. was not paid, as the said other Services were
undone by two years next before the day of the said taking, the said T. does
well avow the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in which, etc. as
in parcel of the said Tenements of him the said T. in form aforesaid held,
Acknowledges the Avowment by the Plaintiff.

Judgment that the Defendant shall have the retorn of the Cattle
irreplegiable.

Defendant without day. Plaintiff in mercy.

Defendant avoweth the taking of the Cattle, doing damage, and the Plaintiff
prays, that the Defendant may secure the deliverance unto him, for that the
same Defendant claymed no property in them, And the Defendant find Pledges, etc.


and within his Fee, etc.

And the said I. says, that he cannot deny, but that he holds of the said T.
as of the said Manor, the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, by the
Services aforesaid; Neither, but that as well the said Rent, as those Services
unto the said T. by the time aforesaid, remained behind in the form which the
said T. P. by his said Avowment has supposed. Therefore it is considered, that
the said T. shall got thereupon without day, and that the said I shall take
nothing by his said Writ, but that he be in mercy for his false Clamor; And
that the said T. shall have the retorn of the said Cattle irreplegiable for
ever,

ss. AND the said M. by R.T. his Attorney comes, and defends the force and
Injury, when, etc. And does well avow the taking of the said Cows, in the said
place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. because he says, that he is seized, and
at the time of the said taking, was seized in one Message, and twelve acres of
Meadow, with th'appurtenances, in the said Town of G. whereof the place, in
which, etc. the said Cows were taken, is parcel in his Demesne, as of Fee, And
for that he at the time of the said taking, found the said Cows, doing Damage
in the said place, in which, etc. the said M. those Cows in his ground and
freehold, so doing damage took as to him it was lawful; And this he is ready
to prove, whereupon he prays judgment, and the return of the said Cattle,
etc. And upon this the said R. says that the said M. as yet remains
possessed of the said Cowes, whereupon from which the aid M. has claimed no
property in the same Cowes, desires that the same M. may secure the delivery
of the said Cowes unto the said R. and he finds pledges of that delivery to
be made, that is to say R.T. of, etc. and W.S. of, etc. Therefore the said R.
may have the delivery thereof, etc.

And the said R. says that he by any matter before alleged from his said
action had, ought not to be precluded, Plaintiff says that he was seized of one
Message, etc. and that the same Plaintiff and all those whose estate had used
to have common, etc. in a certain Moor, etc. in which, etc. And so justifies
using the common. etc.
because he says, that he, the day before the time in which it is supposed the
said Cowes were taken, and at the same time, was seized of one Message, and
twelve acres of Meadow, with th'appurtenances, in G. and that the said R. and
all his Ancestors, and all those whose estate the said R. now has, had common
of pasture, in a certain Moor of the said M. called H. by the whole year, and
in six acres of Meadow, with th'appurtenances, in G. whereof the said place in
which it is supposed the said Cowes were taken, that is to say, in the said
Moor, by all the year in the said Meadow, after the grass was cut, and the Hay
thereof coming, made and carried away, with all his Cattle depasturing, and so
faith, that he for using his said common, in the said place called H. put the
said Cowes in the said Moor, As it was lawful for him to do. And this, etc.
whereupon, etc.

And the said M. says, that the said Moor and Meadow, Defendant says that the
said Moor is his freehold without this that the Plaintiff and all his ancestors,
etc. used to have common etc. Without this.
of him the said M. are the ground and freehold of the same M. and at the time
of the said taking were, without this that the said R. and all his Ancestors,
and all those whose estate the said R. now has in the same twelve acres of
Meadow, had common of pasture in the said Moor, and Meadow, as the said R.G.
before has alleged; And this, etc. whereupon, etc. as before prays judgment
etc.

And the said R. says, that he, and all his Ancestors, whose estate the said
R. now has in the said Message and twelve acres of Meadow, had common of
pasture in the said Moor and Meadow, as the said R. before has alleged, and
this he prays that it may be enquired of, etc.

ss. AND the said R.A. by R.C. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury, when, Defendant allegeth that the Plaintiff held of him by Homage,
fealty, and three shillings rent and suit of Court, and to render a Herriot at
death or alienation of every tenant and that the Plaintiff did not do suit of
court, and so avoweth the taking, etc.
etc. and does well avow the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in
which, etc. and justly, etc. because he says that the said T. Harrington at
the time of the said taking supposed to be done, and long before he was seized
of one Mesuage, and one Virge of Land, with th'appurtenances, in B. aforesaid,
whereof the said place, in which, etc. is, and at the said time of the said
taking supposed to be done, was parcel in his Demesne as of Fee, and so seized
the same held of the aforesaid R. A. as of his Manor of B. in C. aforesaid, by
Homage, fealty, and three shillings Rent, unto the said R.A. at the feasts of
St. Michael the Archangell, and the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by
equal portions yearly to be paid, by the Service to do suit to the Court of
him the said R. of his said Manor, from three weeks to three weeks, there to
be held, And also by the service to render as well after the death of every
Tenant of the said Message, and of one Virge of land, Seized of services.
with th'appurtenances, dying seized, As after every alienation thereof made or
to be made, the best living thing which was of him the said Tenant, by the name
of Herriot, Of which services the said R.A. was seized by the hands of the said
T. H. as by the hands of his true Tenant, that is to say of the said Homage,
fealty, and suit of Court, as of fee and right, and of the said Rent, and
residue of the said Services, in his Demesne, as of Fee. And because the suit of
him the said T. H. at the Court of the said R. A. held at his said Manor on
friday next after the Epiphany of our Lord, in the fourteenth year of the reign
of the now King unto the said R. A. remaining undone, the said R. A. does well
avow the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which etc. as in
parcel of the said tenement of him the said R. A. in form aforesaid held, and
upon the said T. H. as upon his true Tenant thereof, etc. And within his fee,
etc. And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays judgment, and the
return of the said Cattle to be adjudged unto him etc. Defendant protesting
that he did not hold the premises by the services in the avowment of the
Plantif specifyed, and that the Defendant was not of the same seized, etc. for
Plea says, that he holds by fealty 3. shillings tent only, without this
that he holds as above.


And the said T. H. says, that the said R. A. by any thing before alleged, the
taking of the said Cattle ought not to avow just, because protesting that the
said T. does not the said Message and Virge of land, with th'appurtenances, of
the foresaid R. A. by the said services in the avowment of him the said R.
before specified, etc. And protesting also that the said R. A. was not seized
of the said services by the hands of him the said T. in manner and form as the
said R. A. before has alleged for Plea says, that the said T. does hold the
said Message, and Virge of land of the aforesaid R. A. as of his Manor of B.
by fealty, and the Rent of three shillings only, for all services and ancient
demands, without this that the said R. A. was seized of the said services to
do suit at the Court of him the said R. A. of his said Manor from three weeks
to three weeks, there to be held, and of the residue of the said services in
manner and form as the said R. A. in his said avowment before has alleged, and
this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays Judgment, and his Damages by
that occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said R. A. says, Issue upon the Tenure.
that the said R. was seized of the said Services to do Suit to the Court of
him the said R. of his said Manor, from three weeks to three weeks, there to
be held, and of the residue of the said Services, in manner and form as the
said R. before has alleged, And of this he puts himself upon the Country,
and the said T. likewise, etc.

ss. AND the said I.T. and H. by R. M. his Attorney comes, and defends the
force and injury, when, The form of a Plea where the Defendant took more Beasts
and Chattels than the Plaintiff by his Declaration supposes himself to have
taken, the Defendants say, as to one Horse they did not take, as to the
residue, say, that he the said J.D. one of the Defendants, in right of his
Wife, was seized of the Manor of D. of which Manor the Plaintiff holds ten
acres of land, whereof, etc. of the Defendant by Fealty, and four shillings
Rent, and to do Suit of Court, and a Fine was leavyed of the same Manor
between W.F. Plaintiff, and the said I. E. and his Wife, and that afterward the
said W. F. granted the said Manor unto the said I.E. and his Wife, and to the
Heirs of their bodies, etc. in Fee-tayl, and that after the Plaintiff attorned
unto them the said I. P. and his Wife, and because the said Rent was behind,
the Defendants took the Beasts, etc.
etc. and as to the taking of one Horse of the said Horses, they the said J.
and H. say, that they did not take that Horse in manner and form, as the said
Prioress before against them complains; And of this they put themselves upon
the Country, And the said Prioress likewise, etc. And the said I. and H.
further say, that they at the time in which the taking of the said Cattle is
supposed to be done, they took four Horses of the said five Horses, in the said
Declaration specified, and also one Cart with six Stacks of Barley in the same
Cart being, with the whole Tacklyn to the said Cart belonging, that is to say,
Cartharness for the said four Horses in the same Cart, to be drawn of the said
Oxen, and Cattle of the said Piroress, in the said place, in which, etc. which
said four Horses, and the said Cart, with the said six Stacks of Barley in the
same Cart being, and the said Cattle, that is to say, the tackling of the said
Cart, called Horse Harness, for the said four Horses drawing that Cart of I.N.
Knight, Sheriff of the said County, at the Complaint of the said Prioress, unto
the said Prioress caused to be replevyed, and of the said four Horses and
Chattells, the said I. in his own right, and of Anne his Wife, does well avow;
And the said Hen. as Bailiff of the same I. does well acknowledge the taking of
the said Cattle, in the said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. because he
says, that the said place in which, etc. does contein in it self ten acres of
land, with th'appurtenances, in C. aforesaid, whereof the said Prioress at the
said time, in which, etc. long before, etc. was seized in her Demesne, as of
Fee, in the right of her said Monastery, and so thereof being seized, held the
same of the said I. and A. his Wife, in the right of her the said A. as of her
Manor of D. in the said C. of K. by Fealty, and the Rent of 4. shillings every
year, at the Feast of St. Michael th'Arch-Angell, to be paid, and by Service to
do Suit at the Court of them the said I. and A. of their said Manor, from
three weeks to three weeks, there to be held, of which Services the said I. and
A. in the right of her the said A. were seized by the hands of the said
Prioress, as by the hands of their then true Tenant, that is to say of Fealty,
and Suit of the said Court, as of Fee, and in right, and of the said Rent in
their Demesne, as of Fee; And them the said I. and A. in the right of her the
said A. so of the said Manor, Rent, and Services being seized long before the
said time, A Fine levied where the wise is Cognisee seized of the lands
acknowledged.
in which, etc. that is to say, in Eight days of St. Michael, in the 21. year
of Henry, late King of England, and France, the seventh from the Conquest, in
the Court of him the said late King, at Westminster, before T. Fr^wick, and his
fellows then Justices of him the Lord the King, and other faithful people of
the said late King then there present, a certain Fine was levied of the said
Manor, with th'appurtenances, amongst other Tenements and Rents, by the name
of the Manor of D. with th'appurtenances, and of one Message, CCC. acres of
land, twelve acres of Meadow, twenty acres of Pasture, and five pounds Rent,
and the rent of 20. Cocks, 100. Capons, 160. Sheep, with th'appurtenances in D.
in the County of K. between William Frost then Plaintiff, and the said I. and A.
by the names of I. Batiller, and A. his Wife then agreeing, whereupon the Plea
of Concord was summoned between them in the same Court, that is to say, that
the said I. and A. do recognize the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, to be
the right of him the said W. as that, that the said W. then had, of the Gift of
the said I. and A. And the same Remized, and quit claymer of them the said I.
and A. and the Heirs of her the said A. unto the said W. and his Heirs for
ever; And afterward they the said I. and A. granted for themselves, State in
the tail made by Fine.
and the Heirs, of her the said A. that they should Warrant unto the said W.
and his Heirs the said Manor with th'appurtenances, against all men for ever.
And for that Recognizance, Remise, quit claymed, Warrant, Fine and Concord, the
said VV. granted unto the said I. and A. the said Manor, with
th'appurtenances, and that unto them rendered in the same Court, to have and to
hold unto the said I. and A. and the Heirs of the body of them the said I. and
A. begotten, of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the Services which to the said
Manor appertains, for ever; And if it should happen, that they the said I.
and A. should dye without Heir of their bodies begotten, then after the
Deceases of them the said I. and A. the said Manor, with th'appurtenances,
should wholly remain to the Heirs of her the said A. of her body begotten, to
be held of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the Services which to the said
Manor do appertein, for ever; And if no Heir of the body of her the said A.
should be begotten, then the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, should wholly
remain to the right Heirs of the said I. B. to be held of the chief Lords of
that Fee, by the Services which to the said Manor apperteineth, for ever, as
in the said Fine is more fully contained; And afterward the said Prioress of
the said ten acres of land being seized at C. in the County aforesaid,
Attornment of the Tenant unto the Lord.
to the said I. and A. returned her self, by pretense of which Fine, they the
said I. and A. afterward, and before the said time, in which, etc. into the
Manor, with th'appurtenances, entered, and thereof at the said time, in which,
etc. were, and as yet do remain seized in their Demesne, as of Fee-tayl; And
because the Rent aforesaid for eight years after the levying of the said Fine,
and before the said taking, supposed to be done, that is to say, for eight
years next before the Feast of St. Michael th'Arch-Angell, in the fifth year of
the Reign of the now King, at the said time, in which, etc. ended, was in
arrear, unto the said I. and A. and as yet remains unpaid, the said I. in his
own right, and in the right of the said A. does well avow, and the said H. as
Bailiff of him the said I. does well acknowledge the taking of the said Beasts,
and Chattels, in the said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc. that is to
say, for 14. shillings Rent, aforesaid, and of and for the six first years of
the said eight years being behind, and unpaid, and upon the said Prioress, as
upon the true Tenant of them the said I. and A. in form aforesaid, in the said
place, in which, etc. and within their Fee, etc. And this they are ready to
prove; whereupon they pray Judgment, and the retorn of the said Beasts and
Chattels to be adjudged unto them, etc.

And the said Prioress says, The Plaintiff says, that the Defendant never was
seized of the Rent and Services in bar specified, etc. after the first going
over of the Lord H. King, Son of the King in Valton.
that she by any matter by the said J. and H. before alleged, the said J. the
taking of the said Beasts, and Chattells in the said place, in which, etc. to
avow just, nor the said H. the same taking, in the same place, in which, etc.
to acknowledge just they ought not, because portesting that there has not
been, nor from the time of the said taking, had there been any such Manor
called D. within the said County of K. protesting also, that she has not
Attorned unto the said I. and A. as the said I. and H. have alleged, protesting
also, that the said place, in which, etc. is, and at the said time, in which,
etc. was without the Fee of the Lordship of them the said I. and A. for Plea,
says, that the said I. and A. never were seized of the Rents and Services
aforesaid, or of any parcel thereof, in manner and form which the said I. and
H. before alleged, after the first going over of the Lord King Henry into
Vaston, as by the said Avowment, and Acknowledgement before supposed; And this
they are ready to prove, whereupon, from which the said I. and H. the taking of
the Beasts and Chattells above acknowledging prays Judgment, and her Damages
by occasion of the taking, and unjust detension of the said Beasts and
Chattells to be adjudged unto her, etc.

And they the said I. and H. say, that they the said I. and A. were seized of
the said Rent and Services by the hands of their true Tenant thereof, in what
manner and form they the said I. and H. before have alleged. Issue of Scizin of
Rent.
And of this they put themselves upon the Country, And the said Prioress
likewise, etc. Therefore, etc.

Defendant prays Judgment of the Plaint returned by the Sheriff upon a
Recordare, and says, that it is insufficient, for that the Surname of the
Defendant was not put in the Plaint, and therefore that he may have the retorn
of the Cattle, etc.
ss. AND the said I. C. in his person comes and defends the force and
Injury, when, etc. and prays, hearing of the Plaint, of the taking and
deteyning of the said Cattle before the Sheriff of the said County, made, and
here in Court, at this day, that is to say, on the morrow of All Souls, by
virtue of a Writ of the said Lord the King, of Recordare, returned, and it is
read to him in these words ss. I. B. complains of the Lord John, Chaplain of
the Chauntery of the holy Virgin Petronill of Harvow, of a Plea of taking, and
unjust deteyning of Cattle, Pledges to prosecute, and of those Cattle to be
returned, if the retorn thereof should be adjudged unto I. T. and I. H. And
upon this the said I. C. prays Judgment of the said Plaint, for that that
the Chaplain of a Chauntry, is not a name of Dignity; and the said I. C. in
that Plaint is not nominated by any Surname, whereupon he prays Judgment,
and that that Plaint may be made void, and the retorn of the said Cattle
adjudged unto him, etc. And because it appears unto the Justices here, Retorn
to be had Adjudged for insufficient Plaint before the Sheriff. Plaintiff in
mercy. Defendant without day.
that the said Plaint is not sufficient in Law to the said I. G. before the
said Justices here to the same Plaint to be put to answer, for that, that the
Chaplain of a Chauntery is not a name of Dignity, And the said I.C. in that
Plaint is not named by any Surname, It is Considered, that the said I. shall
take nothing by the said Plaint, and be in Mercy for his false Clamor, etc.
And the said I. C. shall go thereupon without day, and shall have retorn of
the said Cattle, etc.

Defendant avoweth the taking of the Cattle for Rent behind, and for Homage
and Fealty not done.
ANd the said I. B. in his own person comes and defends the force and injury,
when, etc. and does well avow the taking of the said Cattle in the place, in
which, etc. and justly, etc. because he says, that one M. N. late the Wife of
I. C. late was seized of one Message, one Plow-land, twelve acres of Meadow,
and twelve acres of Pasture, with th'appurtenances, in C. in her Demesne, as of
Fee, whereof the place in which it is supposed the said Cattle were taken, is
parcel, and held the same of the said I. B. and of one I. P. and I. M. his
wife, as of his Manor of C. by Homage and Fealty, and at Escuage of the Lord
the King, forty shillings, when it should happen, And at more, more, and at
less, less, etc. And by Service to do Suit to the Court of them the said I. B.
I. P. and I. M. of their said Manor, from three weeks to three weeks, etc. and
by the Rent of 14. shillings one penny and half penny, in every year at the
Feasts of Easter and of St. Michael to Archangel, by equal Portions to be
paid, and also by the Rent of two shillings 6. pence yearly, at the end of
every fourteen weeks to be paid for the keeping of the Castle of Dover,
Defendant says, that he was seized of all the Services besides Homage and
Fealty, notwithstanding avoweth for all the Services.
they the said I. B. I. P. I. M. and M. the same Tenements, with
th'appurtenances of the said Castle by the same Rent of 2. s. 6. pence in like
manner to be paid, do further hold, of which said Services (except Homage and
Fealty) the said I. B. and the said I. P. I. M. and M. were seized by the hands
of the said M. as by the hands of their true Tenant, And as well for the said
Rent of fourteen shillings and a penny half penny, at the Feasts of Easter, and
of St. Michael th'Arch-Angel, by ten years next before the day of the said
taking, remaining behind unpaid, as for the 25. shillings of the said Rent of
2. shillings six pence unto them the said I. B. J. P. J. M. and M. by ten years
next before the day of the said taking, after the end of every fourteen weeks
yearly in form aforesaid to be paid, being likewise behind unpaid, and also for
Homage and Fealty of the said M. undone, the said J. C. as in his own right,
and of the said J.P. J.M. and M. does well avow the taking of the said Cattle
upon the said Margery, and upon their true Tenant in the said place, in which,
etc. as in parcel of the said Tenements of them, in form aforesaid held, and
within their Fee, etc.

And the said P. says, Plaintiff says, that the place, in which, etc. is out
of the fee.
that the said J.B. the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which,
etc. ought not to avow just, because he says, that the said place, in which,
etc. is, and at the said time of the said taking done, was without the Fee, and
Lordship of the said J.B. J.P.J.M, and M. and this he is ready to prove,
whereupon, from which, etc. he prays Judgment, etc.

And the said J. D. says, that the said place, in which, etc. is, and at the
said time of the taking done, was within the Fee, and Lordship of him the said
J. B. and of the said J.P. J.M. and M. in manner and form as the said I. B. by
his said Avowment before has supposed, and not without his Fee; And of this he
puts himself upon the Country, and the said P. likewise, etc. Therefore
comes, etc.

ss. AND the said T.W. by T. S. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and Wrong, when, Defendant as to all the Beasts and Chattels, besides, etc. he
did not take, and as to the residue says, that the property was in a Stranger,
and desires Judgment of the Writ.
etc. And as to all the said Cattle, besides one Horse, of the said Horses,
and all the said Chattels, besides one Patel aforesaid, at the said Town of P.
taken, says, that he did not take the said Beasts and Chattels (Except before
excepted) in the form which the said R. before against him Complains, And of
this puts himself upon the Country; And the said R. likewise, etc. And as to
the said Horse, and Patell, residue of the said Horses and Chattells, the said
T.VV. says, that at the time of the said taking, the property of that Horse
residue, was unto one A. P. And the property of that Patel residue then was
unto one P. T. and not to the said R. as he by his said Writ and Declaration
supposes, And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays Judgment of the
Writ, etc. And for to have the Retorn, etc.

And the said R. says, that his said Writ, for the reason before alleged,
ought not to be made void, because, as to the said Horse and Patell residing,
Plaintiff says, that the property was in himself.
says, that at the time of the said taking the property of the same Horse and
Patell, was unto the said R. in the form which he by his said Writ and
Declaration has supposed. And this he prays that it may be enquired of, etc.

Defendant says, as to the taking of the goods, that the property was in the
Stranger, and justify as his servants.
AND they the said R. S. I.N.Y I.G. and W. by I.B. their Attorney comes and
defends the force and injury, when, etc. and as to the taking, and deteyning
of the said five Cart-^oad of Wheat in Sheaves, ten Cart-load of Barley in
Sheaves, ten Cart-load of Oats in Sheaves, and eight Cart-load of Hay, they the
said R.S. I.N. Y. I. G. and VV. prays Judgment of the Writ, etc. because
they say, that the property of those Chattel's, at the time of the said taking
supposed to be done, was unto R. S. of I. etc. and T. H. by which they the said
R. the now Defendant I.N. Y. I.G. and W.V. Servants of him the said R. S. of L.
etc. and T. H. and by their Command, at the said time, in which took and
deteyned the Chattels, and the same as yet they detein, as unto them it is
lawful, And this they are ready to approve; whereupon, as to the taking and
detension of those Chattels, they pray Judgment of that Writ, etc. And as to
the taking of the said Cattle, they the said R. S. the now Defendant, I. N. Y.
I. G. and W. as Bailiffs of the said R. S. of L. and T. do well acknowledge
the taking of those Cattle in the said place, As to the taking of the Cattle
the Defendants justify as servants of another, doing damage.
in which, etc. and justly, etc. because they say, that the said -- in which,
etc. is supposed, the taking of those Cattle to be done, is, and at the said
time, in which, etc. was the ground and Freehold of the said R. S. of L. and
T.H. And that those Cattle at the same time were in the same place, eating the
grass there then growing, and Damage there doing, by which they the said R. S.
the now Defendant, I. N. Y. I. G. and VV. as Bailiffs of the said R. S. of L.
and T. at the said time, in which, etc. took and deteyned those Cattle, and
the said Ewe-sheep, as yet they detein, as to them it was lawful, and this
they are ready to prove, whereupon they pray Judgment, if the said I. his
Action thereupon against them ought to have, etc. And the said R. S. of L. and
T. pray retorn of the Oxen, Steers, Cows, Calf, Heifers, and the said Living
goods to (...) adjudged unto them. The Plaintiff prays that the Defendant may
secure unto him of some of the Cattle for that he has not claimed any
property. Defendant as to parcel says, that he put them in an open Pound, and
in default of the Plaintiff, with hunger they perished, to find pledges of
deliverance for the residue.
And upon this the said I. N. says that the said R. S. the now Defendant, I.
N. Y. I. G. and VV. of the said Ewe-Sheep, whereof, out of which, they the said
R. S. the now Defendant, I. N. Y. I. G. and VV. have claymed no property in the
same Ewe-sheep, prays, that they the said R. S. the now Defendant, I.N.Y.I.G.
and VV. may put in Security here in Court, unto the said I. N. for the Delivery
of the same Ewe-sheep. Upon which they the said J.S. the now Defendant, J. N.
Y. J. G. and VV. as to the Security and Delivery of two Ewe-sheep, of the said
three Ewes, say, that the Delivery thereof unto the said I.N. they ought not to
secure, because they say that immediately after that they the said Cattle in
form aforesaid took, those Cattle they put in a certain open Pound, at C. in
the County aforesaid, and afterward the said two Ewe-sheep with hunger, and
for want of Sustenance, in default of him the said I. M. there perished; And
this they are ready to prove; whereupon they pray Judgment, if they ought to
secure the Deliverance of those two Sheep unto the said I. N. etc. which said
matter, to the securing of the Deliverance of those two Sheep, the said I. N,
does not gainsay, and as to the Deliverance of that one Ewe-sheep, as is before
said deteyned, they the said R.S. the now Defendant, I. N. Y. I. G. and W. they
have found pledges of the Deliverance thereof to be made unto the said I. N.
namely I. Hercum, and J. Beuning, Plaintiff says, that the property of the
Chattels was his, and not another, as to the residue pleads a certain Demise
unto him made by virtue of which he entered, and was thereof possessed until
another disseised him, and after that, the Plaintiff put Cattle in the place,
in which, etc. And that the Defendant took the same. Def. pleads a Demise at
will, etc.
therefore the said I. N. may have the Deliverance thereof, etc.

ss. AND the said I. N. says, that his said Writ, as to the taking and
Detension of the said Chattels, for the reason before alleged, ought not to be
made void, because he says, that the property of those Chattels at the said
time, in which, etc. was unto the said I. N. and not unto the said R. S. of L.
and T. as the said R. S. the now Defendant, and the others above have alleged,
and this he prays may be inquired of by the Country, and the said R. S. the
now Defendant, and others likewise, etc. And as to the taking of the said
Cattle, the said I. N, says, that the said R.S. the now Defendant, and the
others, the taking of those Cattle ought not acknowledge just, because he
faith, that the said place called W. in which, etc. is, and at the time of the
said taking was, three closes, containing Ten acres of Land, and eight acres of
Pasture in L. aforesaid, whereof the said W. H. long before the said time was
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof seized before that time, in
which, etc. that is to say, the Tenth day of January, in the Tenth year of the
Reign of the said now King, at G. in the County aforesaid, those Closes, with
th'appurtenances, amongst other Lands and Tenements in G. aforesaid, demised
unto the said I.N. to have and occupy unto the said I. N. from the same Tenth
day of January from thence next following, and so from year to year, at the
will of him the said W. H. paying therefore yearly unto the said W. H. as long
as the said I. N. those Closes, and also the said Lands and Tenements, by
reason of that Demise should have, and occupy, 26. shillings 8. pence, to be
paid at the Feast of St. Michael th'Arch-Angell, by virtue of which Demise, the
said I. N. of the said Closes, together with those Lands and Tenements was
possessed, until they the said R. S. of L. and T. H. the aforesaid W. H. of
those Closes before the said time, in which, etc. Disseised, and from those
Closes of him the said I. N. expelled, and amoved, by which they the said R. S.
of L. and T. were seized in those Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in their
Demesne, as of Fee by Disseisin, And after that the said I. N. by pretense of
the said Demise unto him made, put the said Cattle there to feed, Upon which
the said R. S. of L. and T. then upon, and in those Closes, being the said R.
S. the now Defendant, and the others, those Cattle then, that is to say, at
the said time, in which, etc. they took and deteyned, and the Ewe-sheep, as yet
they unjustly detein, of which said taking and deteyning the said I. N. has
now brought his said Action thereupon against them; And this he is ready to
prove, whereupon he prays Judgment, and his Damages by that occasion to be
adjudged unto him, etc.

Defendant maintains his Plea without this they disseized the other Plaintiff.
And they the said R. S. the now Defendant, and the others, say, that the said
Closes at the said time, in which, etc. was the ground and Freehold of the said
R. S. of L. and T. and that the said Cattle at the same time were in those
Closes, etc. feeding, and there doing Damage, by which they the said R. S. the
now Defendant, and the others as Bailiffs of the said R. S. of L. and T. those
Cattle at the said time, in which, etc. they took and deteyned, as unto them
it was lawful, as they before have alleged; Without this, that the said R. S.
of L. and T. have disseised the said W. H. of the said Close, Without this.
with th'appurtenances, as the said I. N. before has alleged, And this they
are ready to prove; whereupon, as before, they pray Judgment, etc. and for the
said R. S. of L. and T. the retorn of the said Oxen, Steers, Calf, Heifer, and
living goods, to be adjudged unto him, to be adjudged unto her, etc.

And the said I. N. says, that the said R. S. of L. and T. have Disseised the
said W. T. of the said Closes, with th'appurtenances, in manner and form as he
before has alleged; And this he prays, that it may be inquired of by the
Country, etc.

ss. AND they the said R. A. and W. D. by A. B. their Attorney comes and
defends the force and wrong, when, One of the Defendants avoweth, and the
other Justifies as Servant for rentcharge behind.
etc. all taking, and whatsoever, etc. And the same R. does well arow, and the
said W. D. does well acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle in the said
place, in which, etc. And justly, etc. because he says, that the said R. G.
Gent. long before the said time, in which, etc. was seized of one Tenement, and
C. acres of land in C. whereof the place, in which, etc. is, and at the said
time, in which, etc. was parcel in his Demesne, as of Fee, and he so thereof
seized long before the said time, in which, etc. by his certain Deed, which the
said R. here in Court profereth, whose Date is the fourth day of the month of
July, in the nineteenth year of the Reign of the Lord Edward, late King of
England, the Fourth, To have, hold, and receive that annual Rent unto the said
R. and his Assigns, at the Term of his life, of, and in the said Lands and
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, every year, at the Feast of St. Michael
th'Arch-Angell, the Birth of our Lord, Easter, and the Nativity of St. John the
Baptist, equally to be paid. And the said R. A. further says, that the said R.
G. by his said writing further granted, that if it should happen the said
yearly Rent to be behind in part, or in all, by one month next after any
Feast, of the said Feasts, in which it ought to be paid unto the said R. A. or
his Assigns unpaid, that then it should be lawful unto the said R. A. and his
Assigns, into all the said Lands and Tenements, and the rest of the Premises,
with th'appurtenances, to enter and distrein, and the Distress so there taken,
to lead, carry away, impound, and in Pound to keep, until to him of that
annual Rent so being behind, together with the Costs and Charges, if any
should be, were fully satisfied, and paid. And for twenty six shillings eight
pence being behind at the end of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist next
before the said time, in which, etc. the said R. A. does well avow, and the
said W. D. as Servant of the said R. A. and by his Command at the said time, in
which, etc. does well acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle in the said
place, in which, etc. by the name of Distress for 26. shillings and 8. pence,
so being behind, as in the Lands and Tenements unto the Distress of him the
said R. A. with the said yearly Rent in form aforesaid charged, as to them were
lawful. And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

And the said I. not acknowledging any the matrers by the said R. A. and W. D.
before alleged to be true, says that the said R. G. long before the said time,
in which, etc. was seized of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances; in his
Demesne, as of Fee, and he so thereof seized long before the said time, that is
to say, the first day of October, in the fourteenth year of the Reign of the
said now king, at A. in C. aforesaid, demised those Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, unto the said I. H. to have and occupy to him, and his
Assigns, from the feast of St. Michael th'Arch-Angell then last past, until
the end and Term of seven years, then next following and fully to be
completed, by virtue of which Demise the said I. H. long before the said time
in which, etc. into the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, entered, and was
thereof possessed, and so the same I. says that she has nothing in the said
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, unles at the Term of the said seven years, in
form aforesaid, thereupon after that term completed belonging unto the said
R.G. his heirs and Assigns, without which said R. G. the same I. H. says that
she cannot answer to the said Plea of the said R. A. and W. D. And prays Aid
of him the said R. G. and she has, Aid prayed.
etc. Therefore the said R. H. is summoned that he before the Lord the King,
from the day of Easter, in Eight weeks, wheresoever, etc. to answer to the said
Plea of the said R. A. and W. D. together with the said R. H. if, etc. the same
day is given to the said parties, etc. At which day before the said King, at
Westminster, comes as well the said I. H. as the said R. A. and W. D. by their
said Attorney, being summoned, etc. by A. B. his Attorney likewise comes and
joyneth himself, with the aforesaid I. H. to avow and acknowledge the said,
etc. and as well the same I. as the said R. G. who joyneth himself etc. Say that
the said R. A. the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in which, etc.
For the reason before alleged, Plaintiff and Lessor say that the same Lessor, at
the time of the making of the writing by which the said annual Rent was
granted, was within age, etc.
to avow just, nor the said W. D. the taking of those Cattle, in the same
place, in which, etc. to acknowledge just ought not, because they say, that well
and true it is that the said R. G. long before the said time, in which, etc.
was seized in the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, whereof the said
place, in which, etc. is, and at the said time in which etc. was parcel in his
Demesne, as of Fee and that he so thereof seized long before the same time gave
and granted the said annual Rent unto the said R. A. to have and to hold the
said annual Rent unto the said R. and his Assigns to the Term of his life in
manner and form as the same R. A. and the said W. before in pleading have
alleged; And further the said I. H. and R. G. say, that the said R. G. long
before the said time in which, etc. that is to say the first day of October, in
the fourteenth year of the Reign of the said Lord the now King aforesaid, at A.
aforesaid, demised the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, whereof the said
place in which, etc. is, and then was parcel, unto the said I. H. to have and
occupy to him and his Assigns, from the said feast of St. Michael
th'Arch-Angell then last past, until the end and Term of seven years then next
following and fully to be completed, by virtue of which demise the said I.
long before the said time, in which, etc. was thereof possessed. And moreover
they the said R. G. and I. H. say that the said I. G. at the said time of the
making of the said writing, was within the age of twenty one years. And this
they are ready to prove, as, etc. Within age.
Whereupon from which the said R. A. and W. the taking of the said Cattle
before acknowledging pray judgment and his damages by that occasion to be
adjudged unto them, etc.

And they the said R. A. and W. D. as formerly says, Defendant maintains the
Plea, without this that the Lessor was within age. etc.
that the said R. G. was seized of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
in his Demesne as of Fee, and that he so thereof seized, by his said Deed, at C.
aforesaid, gave and granted unto the aforesaid R. A. the said annual Rent of
twenty six shillings and eight pence, to have and receive that yearly Rent unto
the said R. and his Assigns to the Term of his life, of and in the said Lands
and Tenements, with th'appurtenances, every year at the feasts of St. Michael
th'Arch-Angel, the birth of our Lord, Baster, and the Nativity of St. John the
Baptist, equally to be paid, and that the said R. G. by his said writing
further granted, that if it should happen the said yearly Rent to be behind in
part or in all, by one Month after any feast of the said feasts, in which it
ought to be paid unto the said R. A. or his Assigns unpaid, that then it
should be lawful unto the said R. A. and his Assigns, into all the said lands
and Tenements, and the rest of the premises, with th'appurtenances, to enter,
and the distresses so there taken to lead, carry away, impound, and in pound to
keep until unto him of that annual Rent so being behind, together with the
Costs and Charges, if any should be, should be fully satisfied and paid. And
for twenty six shillings and eight pence being behind at the feast of the
Nativity of St. John the Baptist next before the said time, in which, etc. the
said R. A. does well avow, and the said W. D. as Servant of him the said R. A.
and by his Command at the said time, in which, etc. does well acknowledge the
taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in which, etc. By the name of
distress for the same twenty six shillings eight pence, so being behind,
Without this that the Grantor was within age, etc.
as unto them it was lawful, in manner and form as they before have alleged,
without this, that the said R. G. at the said time of the making of the said
writting, he granted the said annual Rent, he was within the age of twenty one
years, in manner and form as they the said I. H. and R. G. before in pleading
have alleged. And this, etc. whereupon as formerly they pray judgment and the
return of the Cattle to be adjudged unto them; And that the said I. from her
said action against them had, may be precluded, etc.

And the said I. and R. G. as formerly say, at the said time of the making of
the said writing of the Grant of the Annual Rent, was within the Age of twenty
one years, in manner and form as they the said I. and R. G. before in Pleading
have alleged, and this they pray, that it may be enquired of by the Country,
etc.

Defendant justifies the taking of the Cattle for parcel of a yearly Rent
Charge behind by the name of distress.
ss. AND the said V. E. by R. M. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and wrong, when, etc. And as Bailiff of the said T. C. widow does well
acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle, in the said place, in which, etc. And
justly, etc. Because he says that long before the said taking supposed to be
done, one J. M. late of the parish of St. Lawrence in the I Will of Tenet in the
said County, was seized of one Tenement, called the H. in the said Parish of S.
and of twenty four acres of Meadow, thirty acres of pasture, and twenty acres
of Wood, with th'appurtenances unto the same Tenement appertaining in S.
aforesaid, called the H. whereof the said place in which, etc. is, and at the
said time of the said taking supposed to be done, was parcel, in his Demesne,
as of Fee, and so being seized the said I. M. the Eighth day of July, in the
seventeenth year of the Reign of the Lord Henry, late King of England, the
seventh, at S. aforesaid, by his certain Writing sealed with the Seal of him
the said I. which the said V. herein Court prosereth, whose date is the same
day and year, gave and granted, and by the said writing, confirmed unto one T.
W. Esquire, father of the said T. a certain yearly Rent of fifty three
shillings and four pence, going out of the said Tenements called the H. in the
Parish of S. in the said County, and of all Meadows, feedings, pastures, and
woods unto the said Tenement in what soever manner belonging, To have, levy and
receive the said annual Rent of fifty three shillings and four pence, of the
said Tenements unto the said T. W. his heirs and Assigns for ever, at the
feasts of the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary, etc. and of St. Michael
th'Arch-Angel to be paid by equal Portions; and the said I. M. by his said
writing willed and granted, that if the said annual Rent should happen to be
behind in part or in all unpaid, beyond any Term of the payment thereof before
limited, that then it should be lawful unto the said T. W. his heirs and
Assigns, in all the said Tenement, land, Meadow, feedings, pasture and Woods,
and every parcel of them, to enter and distrain, and the distresses so taken
thereupon, to lead, drive, carry away, and retain the same until of all the
said annual Rent, which then should be behind, together with the damages and
Expenses had and incurred by occasion of the Not-payment of the said Rent unto
the said T. W. his heirs or Assigns, should be fully paid and satisfied, by
virtue of which said Grant of the said I. M. twenty six shillings and eight
pence, unto the said T.W. in his life, that is to say, Payment of a Rent charge
alleged by which the Defendant was thereof seized.
at the feast of St. Michael, th'Arch-Angel in the year of the said Lord Henry,
late King of England the seventh, eighteenth, at H. aforesaid did pay, by which
the said T.W. was of that Rent seized, in his Demesne as of Fee, and so thereof
being seized the said T. long before the taking aforesaid supposed to be done,
that is to say the twelvth day of August, in the third year of the Reign of the
said now King, at Feversham in the County aforesaid, dyed thereof seized, after
whose death the said Rent, with th'appurtenances, descended unto the said T. as
Son and heir of the said T. and because Eightteen pound thirteen shillings and
four pence, of the said Rent, for seven years ended at the feast of St. Michael
the Archangel next after the death of the said T. W. and next after the said
taking supposed to be done, unto the said T. were behind, and as yet remains
unpaid, the said V. for five pound six shillings and eight pence of that Rent,
unto the said T. for the two first years of the said seven years next before
the death of the said T. due, as bailiff of the said T. does well acknowledge
the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. as parcel of
the said Tenements, unto the distress of the said T. in form aforesaid charged.
And justly, etc. And this he is ready to prove, etc. whereupon he prays
judgment, and the return of the said Cattle to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said S. M. says, Plaintiff says that the Grantor did not grant the
annual rent in bar specified.

Protestation.


that the said V. by any matter in his said acknowledgment before alleged the
taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. ought not to
acknowledge just, because protesting that the said I. M. has nothing in the
said Tenements at the time of the Grant of the said Rent supposed to be done,
for Plea says that the said I. M. by his said Writing gave and granted unto
the said T. W. the said annual Rent of the said fifty three shillings and four
pence, going forth of the said Tenements, in manner and form as the said V. in
her said acknowledgement before has alleged. And this he is ready to prove,
etc. Whereupon, from which the said V. the taking of the said Cattle before
acknowledging prays judgment, and his damages, by reason of the taking and
detension of the said Cattle, to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said V. says, that the said I. M. by his said writting gave and
granted unto the said T. V. the said annual Rent of fifty three shillings and
four pence, going forth of the said Tenements, in manner and form as the said
V. before has alleged, and this she prays that it may be inquired of, etc.

Cambridge Defendant justifies the taking of the hurdles, for that that he was
seized of the Manor of C. and had accustomed to have folding within the
Precinct of the same, and that if any other any fold there should levy, then it
should be lawful unto the Lord of the same Manor the same fold to cast down
flat, and those hurdels to distrain and to keep until, etc. And says that the
Plaintiff has levied a fold within the precinct of the said Manor, etc. Mich:
33. H. 8. roll. 100.
ss. AND the said T. Braken by I.W. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and injury, when, etc. All taking and whatsoever etc. And does well avow the
taking of the said thirty six Folding Hurdels, in the said two Ridges of Land,
and justly, etc. Because he says that one T.D. Master or Keeper of the Kings
Hall or College within the University of Cambridge vulgarly called the Kings
Hall, and the Fellows of the same Hall or College were seized of the said two
Ridges of Land, in their Demesne as of Fee, in the right of their said College,
and that the said T. likewise seized in his Demesne of and in the Manor of
Chesterton in the said County, and the said T.B. and all those whose estate he
has of and in that Manor with th'appurtenances, they had and were accustomed
to have free folding in and through the Precinct of the Town of Chesterton
aforesaid, and further the said T. B. says, that if any one any other folding
within the precinct of the said Town of Chesterton without leave of the Lord of
the Manor of C. aforesaid for the time being did levy, that then the Lord of
the Manor of C. aforesaid, who for the time should be, that folding by all the
said time at his will has accustomed to cast down flat, and also those Hurdels
of such folding so erected by the whole time aforesaid to distrain, and at his
will under safe custody likewise accustomed to put, as long as, and until such
those Hurdels in due manner out of his possession should be sued forth, and
because the said T. G. before the said time in which, etc. a certain fold in
and upon the said two Ridges of Land, in C. aforesaid, by the command of the
said Master, and Fellows of the said Hall or College, without the leave of him
the said T. H. with the said thirty six folding Hurdles did set up and levied,
the said T. B. those thirty six folding Hurdles took, and the same under safe
Custody put, as to him it was lawful, which is the same taking and detaining
of the said thirty six folding Hurdles whereof the said T.G. before himself now
Complains. Enquire.
And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays judgment, and the return
of those thirty six folding Hurdles, and also damage according to the form of
the Statute, in such case made and provided, to be adjudged unto him. etc.

Plaintiff says that the Master and Fellows of the Kings Hall in Cambridge of
the Manor of Rectory of Chesterton
And the said T.G. says, that the said T.B. by any matter before alleged, the
taking of the said thirty six folding Hurdles in the said place, in which, etc.
ought not to avow just, because he says that the Master or keeper of the said
Hall or College, and the Fellows, etc. at the said time in which, etc. were
seized of the Manor of the Rectory of Chesterton aforesaid, whereof the said
two Ridges of Land, are, and at the said time in which, etc. were parcel, and
the said Master or Keeper of the said Hall, or College, and the Fellows,
Whereof, etc. They the said Master and Fellows accustomed to have for
themselves and their farmors free folding in the whole precinct of the Town of
C. without this that the Defendant, etc. Without this
etc. and all those, whose estate they had in the Manor of the said Rectory,
had and were accustomed to have for themselves, their Tenants and Farmers, free
folding in and through the whole Precinct of the Town of C. aforesaid, by
reason of his said Manor, without any Contradiction, or leave of any to
hinder; By which the said T. G. as Farmer of the said Master, and Fellows of
the said College or Hall, set up the said fold as unto him it was lawful,
Without this that the said T. B. and all those whose estate he has of, and in
the Manor of C. had and were accustomed to have any free fold, in and through
all the precinct of the Town of C. aforesaid, as the said T. B. by his said
avowment before has acknowledged, prays judgment, and his damages by reason
of the taking of those thirty six folding Hurdles to be adjudged unto him.

And the said T. B. as formerly says, that they, and all those whose estate he
has in the said Manor of C. aforesaid, had and were accustomed to have free
folding in and through the whole Precinct of the Town of C. aforesaid, as he by
his said avowment before has alleged. And of this he puts himself upon the
Country, etc.

ss. PEter Marton was attached to answer N.C. of a Plea, wherefore he took the
goods and Chattels of him the said N. and the same unjustly detained against
the Sureties and pledges, etc.

And the said P. by W.W. his Attorney comes and defends the force and wrong,
when, Defendant as Major of a Borough Town justifies the taking of the skins
for Toll denied. Borough Town
etc. And does well avow the taking of the said Ox skins, in the said place,
in which, etc. and justly, etc. Because he says, that the said Town of
Helliston is and from the time of which the Memory, etc. was an ancient Town
corporate of Major Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of H. within which said
Town they the said Major Bailiffs and Burgesses, and all their Predecessors
Majors Bailiffs and Burgesses of that Town for the time being from the time of
which contrary the Memory of men does not, etc. had, and from all the said time
used to have a certain market in every Saturday in the year, in which said
Market they the said Majors Bailiffs and Burgesses they took and accustomed to
take a certain Toll, of all and all manner Oxen and Cowes skins, of whatsoever
person or persons of the same Toll not lawfully discharged or otherwise with
the same Majors, Bailiffs and Burgesses concerning the same Toll agreed and
accorded within the Precinct of the said Town, that is to say of every Buyer of
Beef Skins, in the said Market, so sold unto any person, or persons, foreiners,
One half-pennie, and if any refuse to pay that Toll, then the said Major
Bailiffs and Burgesses, and all their Predecessors Majors Bailiffs and
Burgesses, of the said Town, for the time being, from the time of which
contrary, etc. used and accustomed by themselves, their officers or Servants,
within that Town, or within the Precinct of the same Town, to take and keep
such Oxen and Cowes skins, so in the said Market being sold, until the said
Toll thereof be paid, and the said P. says that the said N. before the said
time in which, etc. at H. aforesaid within the Precinct of the said Town, that
is to say in the Market place there, he bought the said two Ox skins, in the
Market day of the same Town, upon which the said P. the then Major of the said
Town, at the said Town in which, etc. at H. aforesaid, demanded of the
aforesaid N. one penny, unto the said P. the then Major of the said Town, and
to the Bailiffs and Burgesses of the same Town, due for Toll, for the said two
Oxes skins, at the same time in the said place, in which, etc. being, which
said penny and every parcel thereof the said N. unto the said P. to the use
of the said P. at that time Major of the said Town, Bailiffs and Burgesses,
then and there refused to pay, by which the said P. then Major of the said
Town, the said two Beef skins, of the said goods and Chattels of the said N.
then and there being, for the same penny in form aforesaid denied at H.
aforesaid, in the said place, in which, etc. in the same time, does well avow
the taking of the said two skins, for the said Toll in form aforesaid denied
and refused. And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays judgment, and
return of those two skins to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Plaintiff says that he is Burgess of the Borough of Bodmin and that by
reason thereof he is discharged of all Tolls within the Town of H. in bar
specified.
And the said N. C. says, that the said P. by any matter before alleged the
said taking of the said two skins, in the said place, in which, etc. ought not
to avow just, because he says, that he the said N. at the time of the taking
of the said skins, and long before that was a free Burgess of the Borough of
the Lord the King, at Bodmyn in the said County, And that the said Borough of
Bodmyn, is, and from the time of which contrary the Memory of men does not
remain, was an ancient Borough, of a Major Bailiffes and Burgesses of that
Borough, within which said Borough all the Burgesses of that Borough, and
their Predecessors Burgesses of the same Borough, from the time of which
contrary, etc. were, and from all the time aforesaid, were used to be
discharged freely and quietly, from all Tallages and Tolls, as well within the
said Town of Helliston, as in and through all C. aforesaid, and that they may
freely buy and fell all and singular Merchandise, things and Wares, as well
within the said Town of H. or otherwhere, without Toll or Tallage thereof unto
any person or persons rendering without any Contradiction, by pretense of which
the said N. as a free Burgess of the said Borough of B. at H. aforesaid, in
the said place, in which, etc. the said ninth day of August, in the fourth year
of the Reign of the said now King aforesaid, did buy the said two One Skins,
and of those Skins was possessed, until the said P. of his own Wrong, and
without lawful Cause at H. aforesaid, in the said place, in which, etc. those
Skins out of the possession of him the said N. did take, And this he is ready
to prove; whereupon from the said P. his taking of the said two Ox skins in
the said place, in which, etc. before acknowledged, the said N. prays
Judgment and his Damages by occasion of the said Ox skins to be adjudged unto
him, etc.

And the said P. as before says, that the said Town of H. is, and from all the
time aforesaid, was an ancient Borough, of Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of
the said Town of H. within which said Town the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses,
and all their Predecessors, Mayors, Bailiffs and Burgesses of that Town for the
time being, from the time abovesaid, had and used to have a certain Market on
every Saturday in the year, in which said Market, they the said Majors,
Bailiffs and Burgesses did take, and have accustomed to take the said Toll of
all, and all manner Oxen and Cowes Hides, of whatsoever person or persons of
the same Toll not lawfully discharged, or otherwise with the same Mayor,
Bailiffs and Burgesses of the same Toll agreed and accorded, within the
Precinct of the same Town, that is to say, of every buyer of every Oxen and
Cowes Hide in the said Market so fold unto any person or persons Foreiners, one
halfpenny, and if any refused to pay that Toll, then the said Mayor, Bailiffs
and Burgesses, and all their Predecessors, Majors, Bailiffs and Burgesses of
the said Town of H. for the time being, for all the time aforesaid, used, and
were accustomed by themselves, their Officers or Servants, within the said
Town, or within the Precinct of the said Town, to take and keep such Oxen and
Cowes Hides, so in the said Market being sold, until the said Toll thereof be
paid, Without this.
Without this, that the said Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the said Town of
Bobmyn, used, and from the time of which, etc. accustomed to buy and sell all
and singular Merchandises, Affairs and Wares within the said Town of H. without
Toll or Tallage to be rendered unto any person or persons, as the said N. before
has alleged; And this he is ready to prove, whereupon he prays Judgment,
and the Retorn of the said two Skins to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said N. as before says, that the said Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses
of the said Town of B. had used, and from the time of which, etc. they
accustomed to buy and sell, all and singular Merchandises, Affairs and Wares
within the said Town of H. without Toll or Tallage thereof unto any person or
persons to be rendered as he before has alleged; And this he prays that it may
be inquired of, etc.

ss. T. K. was Summoned to answer unto I. N. and I. F. of a Plea, wherefore he
took the Cattle of him the said I. and the other, and the same unjustly
deteyned against the Sureties and Pledges, etc.

Defendant as to one One says, that he did not take, and as to the other, that
he took it by the name of a Heriot.
And the said T. L. by J. G. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
wrong, when, etc. and as to the taking of one Ox of the said Oxen, the said T.
says, that he did not take the said, as the said J. and J. before against him
do Complain, And of this he puts himself upon the Country. And the said I.
and I. likewise, etc And as to the taking of the other Ox of the said Oxen,
the said T. does well avow the taking of the said other Ox in the said place,
in which, etc. and justly, etc. because he says, that long before the taking
of the said other Ox, before supposed, one J. G. was seized of one Message,
with th'appurtenanees in W. aforesaid, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so seized
held the same of the same T. by Fealty, and the Rent of eight pence unto him
the said T. every year, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary,
etc. and of St. Michael th'Arch-angell, to be paid by equal Portions, and also
by Service, that every Tenant of the said Message, with th'appurtenances
thereof, seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, or in use from the time of which
Contrary, etc. he ought, and had accustomed to render unto the said T. and his
Heirs, the best living of the same Tenant of the said Message with
th'appurtenances so thereof dying seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, or in use,
by the name of Heriot, of which Services the said T. was seized, by the hands
of the said I. G. as by the hands of his true Tenant, that is to say, of the
said Fealty, as of Fee and right, and of the said Rent in his Demesne as of Fee.
And afterward the said I. G. dyed of the said Message, with th'appurtenances,
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee. And because the said other Ox was the proper
Ox of the said I. G. at the time of his death, the said T. that Ox as the
best Animal which was of the said I. G. at the time of his death, by the name
of a Heriot, he took and justly, etc.

Plaintiff says, that the Message, etc. is without the Fee, and Lordship of
the Defendant.
And they the said I. N. and I. F. say, that the said T. L. by any matter before
alleged, the taking of the said other Ox, residue of the said two Oxen, ought
not to avow just, because he says, that the said Message with
th'appurtenances, is, and at the said time, in which, etc. was without the Fee
and Lordship of the said T. and not within; And this he is ready to prove;
whereupon from what the said T. L. the taking of that Ox before has
acknowledged prays Judgment, and his Damages by occasion of the taking and
deteyning of the said Ox to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said T. L. says, that the said Message with th'appurtenances, is,
and at the said time in which, etc. was within the Fee, and Lordship of him the
said T. as he before has alleged, And of this he puts himself upon the
Country, and the said I. N. and I. F. likewise, etc. therefore as well to try,
etc. as, etc. comes, etc. before the said King in eight days of the holy
Trinity wheresoever, etc. And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. because
as well, etc. The same day is given unto the said parties, etc.

ss. AND they the said I. B. and W. B. by A. B. their Attorney comes and
defends the Force and Injury, when, One of the Defendants pleads, that he did
not take, the other Defenda^t justifies by virtue of a Demise to him made of
five acres at Will for Damage feasant.
etc. and the said W. says, that he did not take the said Cattle, as the said
E. before against him has declared; And of this he puts himself upon the
Country, And the said E. likewise, etc. And the said I. does well avow the
taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. and justly, etc.
because he says, that long before the time in which the said taking is
supposed to be done, one J. T. and W.M. were seized of five acres of Land with
th'appurtenances in the said Town of B. whereof the said place in which the
said taking is supposed to be done, is parcel in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so
thereof seized, Demised the same five acres of Land with th'appurtenances,
whereof the said place, in which, etc. is parcel, unto the said I. B. To have
and to hold unto the said I. B. from year to year, at the will of them the said
I. T. and W. M. by virtue of which Demise the said I. B. was possessed of the
said five acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, To hold in form aforesaid, and
so thereof possessed by the Will of the said I. T. and W. M. plowed the said
five acres of land, and with Corn sowed the said five acres of land, after the
same Sowing at the said time, in which the said taking is supposed to be done,
when the said Corn was bladed, And for that, that the said I. B. at the same
time in which, etc. found the said Cattle in the same place, in which, etc.
there doing Damage, and eating the said blades, the said I. B. does well avow
the taking of the said Cattle in the said place, in which, etc. doing Damage,
etc.

And the said E. says, Plaintiff faith, that the trespass was done for default
of Closure of the Defendant.
that the said I. for the reason before alleged the taking of the said Cattle
ought not to avow just, because he says that the five acres of land are one
Close by it self, and that the said I. T. and W. M. and all other Tenants
thereof from time out of mind, have accustomed to shut the said Close, so as
themselves undamnified from going into that Close, and the feeding, treading
down of their grass or blades there growing. by the Cattle of whomsoever
there to be done, they would preserve, And the said E. further says, that he
is, and at the same time was seized of another five acres of Land, with
th'appurtenances, in the same Town, near adjoining unto the said Close, And
that he before the said time, of the said taking, put the said Cattle in his
said five acres of Land to feed, and those Cattle for default of shutting of
the said Close, of the said I.T. and W. M. entered the same Close, and the said
Damage, at the same time of the said taking did; And this he is ready to prove,
etc. Whereupon, from which the said I. B. the taking of the said Cattle, in
the said place, in which, etc. as before, prays Judgment, and his Damages by
that occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Defendant says, that the place in which etc. was not used to be closed from
the time, etc.

Without this.


And the said I. B. says, that he by any matter before alleged, from the taking
the said Cattle to be avowed, ought not to be precluded, because he says,
that the said Close does lie open, Without this, that the said I. T. and W. M.
and all others, Tenants thereof, accustomed to shut that Close, from the time
which Memory is not extant, as the said I. B. before has alleged, And this,
etc. whereupon he prays Judgment and the retorn of the said Cattle to be
adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said E. says, that the said I. T. and I. M. and all others, Tenants
of the said Close, accustomed to shut the said Close, from the time in which
Memory is not extant, As the said E. before has alleged, And this he prays
may be Inquired of by the Country, etc.

^ent. Declaration upon a Replev^n, yet they are deteyned in several places.
ss. W. D. H. T. and J. W. were summoned to answer unto T. K. of a Plea,
wherefore they took the Cattle of him the said T. and the same unjustly
detained against the Sureties and Pledges, etc. Whereupon the said T. by W. his
Attorney Complains, that the said H. and I. 12. day of February, in the Tenth
year of the Reign of the said now King, at H. in the County aforesaid, in
certain places called M. and D. they took the said Cattle, that is to say, in
the said place, called M. 31. Weather-sheep, parcel, etc. in the said place
called D. they took three Lambs, residue, etc. and the same as yet they
unjustly detein against Sureties and Pledges, etc. whereupon he says, that he
is the worse, and has damage to the value of ten pounds, And thereupon he
brings his Suit, etc.

Two of the Defendants do avow the taking in the right of their Wives, as
Daughters, and Heirs of a Woman who was seized of Land, for Damages done, and
the third as Servant of them, and by their Command does well acknowledge the
taking, etc.

Plaintiff says in replying that another in the right of his Wife was seized of
the Tenements, etc. and the same Plaintiff Demised at Term of years, Without
this, that the Mother of the Wife avowing, dyed seized of the Tenements, etc.
as, etc. and prayed further, that the Avowant secure unto him Deliverance, etc.

Defendant maintains that the Mother of their Wives dyed seized as, etc. and
for security of Delivery, they should say, in form following, etc.

And further, The Advocants say, that they took the Cattle by the name of a
Distress, and they put them in an open Pound where they perished.
they the said W. H. and I. say that they the Delivery of the said Cattle unto
the said T. ought not to secure, because they say, that the said Cattle, in
the said ten acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, by the name of a Distress,
from the Cause by them before in their said Avowment alleged they took, and the
same Cattle unto the Town of B. in the said County they chased, and were
wronged, And the same Cattle there in a certain open Pound, where the said T.
might have given them the sustentation of food of Cattle, if he would have
given it unto them, to be kept in Safety as a Distress, And this they are
ready to prove; Whereupon they pray Judgment, if they the Delivery of the said
Cattle unto the said T. in this behalf ought to secure, etc. The Advocants
say, that after the said taking, converted the same to his own use.

Without this, that in default of the Plaintiff, they perished with hunger.




And the said T. L. says, that the said W. H. and I. ought not to secure the
Delivery of the said Cattle unto him, because he says, that they the said W.
H. and I. after the taking of those Cattle, converted them to their own use;
Without this that those Cattle in default of him the said T. with hunger
perished, in that manner and form, which the said W. H. and J. before in
pleading have alleged, And this he is ready to prove, as the Court, etc.
Whereupon he prays Judgment, and that they may secure unto him the Delivery
thereof, etc.

And they the said W. H. and I. as formerly say, that the said Cattle in the
Default of the said T. perished with hunger; as they the said W. H. and I.
before in pleading have alleged; And of this they put themselves upon the
County, And the said T. likewise, etc. And therefore as well to try, etc. as,
etc.

ss. AND upon this the said R. G. prays that the said J. and J. may secure
unto him the Delivery of the two Cows, Inrolment, that the Defendant secure
Delivery.
of the Cows aforesaid; And they the said J. J. unto him the said R. the
Delivery of those Cows are undertaken by T. S. and R. therefore the Command is
to the Sheriff, that those two Cows he cause to be delivered unto the said R.
C. without delay, and in whatsoever manner, etc. he shall make known in eight
days of Saint Hillary, etc.

THe Lord the King, Declaration in a Writ of Replevin of Cattle, where the
Defendants do appear upon the Writ plur. Repleg. of Process upon a Writ of
Replevin by the Plaintiff not found. Parl. 37. H 6. Return of a Writ of Plur'
Replevin.
sent his Close writ to the Sheriff of Cornwall in these words; Henry by the
Grace of God, of England, etc. reciting word by word the Writ of the pluries
Replegiar. etc. The Indorsement of the same Writ follows, in these words, the
Cattle within written are removed to a place to me unknown, by the within
written I. B. and I. further I Certify unto the Lord the King, that no other
writ besides this writ, was deliver- unto me. And now at this day, that is to
say, at the said fifteen days of Easter, in the same Term, before the Lord,
the King, at W. comes as well the said W. by I. G. his Attorney, as they the
said I. B. and I. K. by P. G. his Attorney, upon which they the said I. B. and
I. K. prays that the said W. may declare against them in the said Plea, and
upon this the said W. finds his Pledges here in Court, Note if the sheriff
makes Replevin by writ the Plaintiff does not put in security to the sheriff but
to the Court,

Declaration in a Replevin where the Cattle were taken in one Town, and were
impounded and detained in another.


to prosecute, that is to say I. G. and R. I. And complains that the said I.
B. and I. K. the Monday next after the feast of the Epiphany of our Lord, in
the thirtieth year of the Reign of the said now King at P. in a certain place
called M. they took twenty Oxen of the price of every Ox twenty shillings, ten
Steeres of the price of every Steer ten shillings, ten Cowes of the price of
every Cow ten shillings, and four Horses of the price of every Horse twenty
six shillings and Eight pence, and brought them to T. and there have impounded
and unjustly detained against Sureties and Pledges. And that they the said I.
B. and I. K. the same day and year took Cattle, that is to say ten Oxen of the
price of every Ox twenty shillings, six Cowes of the price of every Cow ten
shillings, and ten Steeres of the price of every Steer ten shillings, at H. in
a certain place called B. and there impounded and unjustly detained, and as yet
unjustly they do detain against Sureties and Pledges, etc. Whereupon he says
that he is the worse, and bath damage to the value of C marks, and thereupon he
brings his suit, etc.

Imparlance in a Replevin.
And they the said I. B. and I. K. do defend the force and wrong when, etc. all
taking and unjust detaining, etc. whatsoever, etc. And they pray a day to
imparse, and it is granted unto them, etc. And upon this day thereupon is given
to the said parties until in Eight days of the holy Trinity wheresoever, etc.
That is to say the said I. and I. to Imparl and then to answer, Kent.
Declaration upon a Replevin for taking and detaining of beasts and Chattels.
etc.

K. B. of P. was summoned to answer unto W. M. of a Plea wherefore he took the
Cattle and Chattels of him the said W. and the same detained against Sureties
and Pledges, etc. And whereupon the said W. by I. G. his Attorney complains
that the said R. in such a day and year, etc. at I. in a certain place called
S. took Cattle, that is to say, three Horses, and Chattels, that is to say one
Cart, and four Copps, and six Sheaves of the wheat of him the said W. and the
same detained against Sureties, and Pledges until, etc. Whereupon he says
that he is the worse, And has damage, etc. And thereupon brings his suit,
etc.

Defendant as Bailiff of the Prior acknowledges the taking of the Cattle for
a Rent charge and a^ears behind where he was thereof by prescription.
And the said R. B. by W. F. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury, when etc. and as Bailiff of W. Prior of Christ's Church in Cambridge
does well acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle, etc. in the said place,
in which, etc. And justly, etc. because he says, that the said T. late Prior
of the said Church, Predecessor of the said now Prior, and all his
Predecessors, heretofore Priors of the said Church, from the time of which,
etc. were seized of a certain Rent of six shillings eight pence, Coming forth
of twenty acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, in I. aforesaid, whereof the
said place, in which, etc. is, and at the time of the said taking done, was
parcel in his Demesne, as of Fee, in the Right of his said Church, by the hands
of the Tenant of those twenty acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, for the
time being, As of a Rentcharge.
yearly at the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord, and of St. Andrew the
Apostle, to be paid by equal Portions, And the said T. late Prior, and all his
Predecessors heretofore Priors of the said Church, from the time of which, etc.
in the Right of that Church distreined, and used to distrein for the said Rent,
and the Arrerages of the same, in the said twenty acres of Land, with
th'appurtenances, and in every parcel thereof, when that Rent, or any parcel
thereof unto the Prior of the said Church for the time being, by any Feast, in
which, as is premised, ought to be paid, should happen to be behind unpaid, and
the Distresses so taken, to lead, chase, carry away, and wholly to retein them,
until that Rent, and the Arrerages of the same, unto the Prior of the said
Church for the time being, should be fully satisfied and paid, which said T.
the late Prior afterward dyed, The death of one of the Priors, the Choosing of
another.
after whose death the said now Prior was elected, and made Prior of the said
Church; And because the said Rent at the time of the said taking supposed to be
done, was behind for two years next before the day of the said taking done unto
the said now Prior, unpaid, the said R.B. as Bailiff of the said now Prior, for
thirteen shillings four pence of that Rent of those two years so being behind,
does well acknowledge the taking of the said Cattle, and Chattels, in the said
place, in which, etc. And justly, etc. as in parcel of the said twenty acres,
with th'appurtenances, unto the Distress of him the said Prior of that Rent,
in form aforesaid charged, And justly, etc. And this he is ready to prove, etc.
whereupon he prays Judgment, and the Retorn of the said Cattle and
Chattells to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ACTIONS OF TRESPASS upon the CASE.
TRESPASS UPON THE CASE.
Declaration for scandal of a Title.
ss. R. Stevens, otherwise Walker, complains of Thomas Gittens, in the
Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that namely, that whereas the eighth day of
October, in the eleventh year of the Reign of the said Lady, the now Queen, one
I. E. was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, of, and in one Message, a hundred
acres of Land, forty acres of Meadow, two hundred acres of Pasture, and twenty
acres of Wood, with th'appurtenances, in H. in the said County, and so being
thereof seized, the same I. afterward, that is to say, the 22. day of October,
in the said eleventh year, infeoffed the said R. of the said Message, and the
rest of the Premises, with th'appurtenances, to have to the said R. to him and
his Assigns for ever, by virtue of which the said R. into the said Message,
and the rest of the Premises, with th'appurtenances entered, and was, and yet
is thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, which said Message, and the rest
of the Premises, with th'appurtenances, being desirous to sell, to pay diverse
sums of money unto diverse persons unto whom he was indebted, the said Message,
and the rest of the Premises, with th'appurtenances unto one G. P. and diverse
other subjects of the Lady, the now Queen, after the said 22. day of October,
in the eleventh sent aforesaid, and before the 20. day of March, in the twenty
third year of the Reign of the said Lady the now Queen, for one hundred pounds
of lawful money of England could have bargained, and aliened, the said Thomas,
well knowing of the Premises, craftily and deceiptfully imagining, and
intending the said R. of the Sale of the said Message, and the rest of the
Premises, with th'appurtenances, for a good value of the same, maliciously to
hinder, and the right and Title of the said R. of, in the said R. and the rest
of the Premises unjustly and untruly to extenuate, scandalize, and to bring
into obloquy; Afterward, that is to say, the 22. day of March, in the twenty
third year abovesaid, at H. aforesaid, in the said County, by color of a
certain Deed indented by one W.E. unto the said T. of, and in the Premises,
made in the presence and hearing of diverse Venerable, and of other worthy
people of Credit, subjects of the now Lady the Queen, then, and there being,
and hearing, did speak these false, feigned, and scandalous English words, and
plainly with a loud voice, pronounced and published, that is to say I (himself
the said T. B. meaning) have better right to half the Lands (meaning the half
of the said Messuages and Tenements above specified) than he the (meaning the
same) R. now Plaintiff has, Which said W. E. had no right to sell the said
Message, and the rest of the Premises, where in truth the said R. S.
purchased the said Message, and the rest of the Premises, with
th'appurtenances, of the said I. E. who at the time of that purchase had right
to sell the said Message, and the rest of the Premises, with
th'appurtenances, and where in truth the said T. E. nothing of right or lawful
claim, of, to, or in the said Message, and the rest of the Premises, with
th'appurtenances, then had, or as yet has, or in any manner whatsoever was
able, or is able lawfully to sell or demand, by pretense of which said speech,
publication and claim aforesaid, the said R. at any time after the 20. day of
March, in the twenty third year above said, the said Message, and the rest of
the Premises, Enquire whether these words are sufficient to maintain the said
Action, because the Defendant spoke the words in his proper right and title.
with th'appurtenances, unto any person in no wise could bargain or sell, by
reason of which, the said R. was not only constreined to his great charges and
costs to borrow of diverse persons, diverse sums of money to be paid at the debt
of him the said R. and also true it is, the same R. for clearing of the said
Title and Claym by the said T.G. in form aforesaid made, and for the
manifestation and proof of the right and title of him the said R. aforesaid, of
and in the said Message, and the rest of the Premises, with th'appurtenances,
he took upon him, and underwent diverse grievous Labors of his body, and has
diverse ways spent vast sums of money, and also certain other great dutiful
Affairs of him the said R. do remain undone, and neglected; Whereupon the said
I. says, that he is the worse, and has Damage to the value, etc.

Justification of the speaking of the scandalous words, by reason of a
Feoffment.
ss. AND the said T. E. by E. B. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and Injury, when, etc. And says that he ought not to maintain an Action,
because he says, that the said W. E. tenth day of August, in the eleventh year
of the Reign of the now Lady, the Queen, was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee,
of, and in the Moitie of the said Message, and the rest of the Premises, with
th'appurtenances in H. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid; And so thereof being
seized, the said W. E. afterward, that is to say the tenth day of October, in
the seventeenth year of the Reign of the Lady, the now Queen, for the sum of
13. l. 6. s. and eight pence, of lawful money of England, to him paid,
infeoffed the said T. E. of the Moity of the said Message, and of the rest of
the Premises, with th'appurtenances in H. aforesaid, To have unto the said T.
E. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the use and behoof of him the said T. E.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, by reason of which said Feoffment in form
aforesaid, unto the said T. E. by the said W. E. made afterward, that is to
say, the said twentieth day of March, in the twenty third year abovesaid at H.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the said T. E. did speak the said English
words, in the said Declaration before specified, namely, etc. As to him it was
lawful, And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

Defendant in his own Injury.
ss. AND the said R. S. says, that he by any matter by the said T. E. above in
pleading alleged, ought not to be precluded, because he says, that the said T.
the twentieth day of March, in the twenty third year abovesaid, at H.
aforesaid, of his own Injury, without such Cause by him the said T. above in
pleading alleged, did speak the said English words in the said Declaration
above specified, namely, etc. in manner and form as the said R. above against
him Complains, And of this he puts, etc.

Declaration for words the Plaintiff to be a felon.
ss. E. H. Complains of W. T. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that
namely, that whereas the said E. remained a good, true, faithful, and Liege
Subject of the now Queen, and as a good, true, faithful, and Liege Subject of
the said now Queen, and of diverse of her Progenitors, late Kings of England,
from the time of his Nativity hitherto, behaved, had and governed himself, and
of a good name, fame, condition, conversation, and gesture among all his
Neighbors, and other faithful Subjects of the Lady, the now Queen, with whom
the said E. hitherto had fellowship, was noted, and reputed, and as a faithful
subject of the said Lady, the Queen, without any Crime of Theft, Felony,
Falsity and Deceit, from the whole time aforesaid has remained, and continued
unhurtfull, untoucht, and unspotted; Notwithstanding which, the said W. not
being ignorant of the Premises, thinking to deprive the said G. of his good
name, fame, and credit aforesaid, And so to bring him the said E. into a bad
name, fame, and opinion of the Liege people of the said Lady, the Queen, as
they the said Liege people of the said Queen, from the Company of him the said
E. should withdraw themselves, and with him in any manner they distrusted to
deal, or to have Comerce, And in forfeiture of all and singular his Goods and
Chattells, Lands and Tonements, and also to cause to be brought, and put into
the danger of the loss of his life (in such a day and year, at, etc.) in the
presence and hearing of diverse Worshipful, and other faithful Subjects of the
said Lady, the now Queen, then and there being, and hearing these scandalous
and opprobrious English words following, which the said E. did speak, utter,
affirm, pronounce and publish, that is to say, etc. by pretense of which said
false and scandalous words, speech, and utterance, the said E. not only in his
good name, fame, and credit aforesaid, which before toward his Neighbors, and
diverse Worshipful, and other faithful Subjects of the said Lady, the now
Queen, he had used, is hurt; And also it is true, they his said Neighbors, and
many more faithful Subjects of the said Lady, the Queen, with the said E. in
any manner refused to intermeddle by the said occasion, and from the company of
the said E. they withdrew themselves, by which the said E. diverse great gains,
proffits, and advantages, which he in buying, selling, and lawful bargaining
with such his Neighbors, and other faithful subjects of the said Lady, the
now Queen, to the Relief of him the said E. and his Family, might have gained,
has altogether lost, and to let pass to the Damage, etc.

ss. K. B. complains of R. W. in the Custody of the Marshall, Declaration
upon the Statute for impounding of Cattle without the County. 1. 2. Ph. and M.
etc. for that namely, that whereas in the Statute in Parliament of Philip and
Mary, late King and Queen of England, began at Westminster the twelfth day of
November, in the first year of their Reign, then continued, and held until the
sixteenth day of April then next following, No distress of Cattle should be
driven out of the Hundred, Tythenham, Wapentage, or Township, where the said
Distress should be taken, unless it be openly within the same County, not above
three mile distant from the place where the said distress should be taken; And
that no Cattle, or other goods distreyned, or taken by the way of Distress,
for whatsoever cause, at one time should be Impounded in several places, by
which the Proprietor, or Proprietors of such Distress, for whatsoever Cause
should be constreyned to prosecute several Replevins for Deliverance of the
said Distress at one time so taken, Under pain of every such person offending,
contrary to that Act, to forfeit to the party grieved, and for every such
offense five pounds, and his treble Damages, As in the said Statute more fully
is contained; The said I. the said Statute not regarding, nor fearing the
penalty in the same contained, five Sheep, and six Lambs of him the said R. at
G. in the Hundred of F. in the County aforesaid, being in a certain place
called B. took into Distress, and those Sheep and Lambs thence out of the said
County of S. and Hundred, into R. in the County of C. did drive, and those
Sheep and Lambs there impounded, and so impounded, deteyned against the
Sureties and P^edges, in Contempt to the Act of now the said Queen, and to the
great Damage of him the said R. and contrary to the form of the said Statute,
whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has Damage to the value of ten
pounds, And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

Declaration for stopping of a way.
ss. T. W. Complains of W. T. the elder, and W. T. the younger, in the
Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that, that is to say, that whereas the Town
of M. in the County aforesaid, has been an ancient Town, within which, from
time out of mind it had been accustomed and used, that every Inhabitant of the
said Town for the time being, well, freely, and quietly might, and was able to
pass through a certain way, called the Church Way, leading from M. aforesaid,
until to a certain place in the Parish of M. aforesaid, called Ledborn Green,
from time, for the carriage of his Hay, as well through a certain passage,
called a Mead, in the said Parish, as through certain Closes and Pastures in L.
aforesaid, to his several Messuages in M. aforesaid, being they the said W. T.
the elder, and W. well knowing of the Premises, craftily devising to hinder
and disturb the said T. and all the Inhabitants of the Town of M. aforesaid
being, from the whole benefit and profit of the said way, the Ninth day of J.
in the eighteenth year of the Reign of the now Queen, at M. aforesaid, upon the
said way in a certain place there called B. H. in the Parish of M. aforesaid,
erected and made up a Hedge; And him the said T. then an Inhabitant of the Town
of M. aforesaid, being to use the said Way with a certain Carriage of Hay of
the said T. which he then had carried away from the said Closes, called Ledborn
Closes, and through the said Way to his Message in M. aforesaid, then being,
he was about to bring away, then, and there, he was hindered and disturbed, by
which the said many Enjoyments, gains and advantages, which he with the use of
the said way might have had, and benefitted, by reason of the stopping of the
said way, and hindering of his said Carriage wholly lost and let pass to the
damage of him the said T. a hundred pounds; And thereupon he brings his Suit,
etc.

ss. I. F. Merchant complains of E. P. in the Custody of the Marshall,
Declaration where the Defendant in Consideration of 30. shillings promised to
secure the Plaintiff of certain goods then being beyond the Seas, and to have
them safely unloaden at London.
etc. for that namely that whereas the said I. the first day of January, in the
fortieth year of the Reign of the now Queen of England, at London, that is to
say, in the Parish, etc. had appointed, that diverse Wines, Sacks, and other
Merchandise, should be provided and bought for the said I. at the Isle of
Teneriff in parts beyond the Seas by the Factor of the said I. there residing
as Factor of the said I. in that part should see best, to the value of five
hundred pounds, to be transported from the same Isle of Teneriff, or any of the
said Isles of the Canaries, up to London aforesaid, in a certain Ship called
the Francis of Leith, otherwise called the Richard Arundel of London, to the
use of the said I. And whereas also the said I. N. had very much desired to
have all such Wines, Sacks, and other Merchandises of him the said I. or any
part thereof, which at the said Isle of Teneriff, or any of the said Isles of
the Canaries, at that time were laden, or then afterward should be laden in
the said Ship, to be transported from the same Isle even up to London
aforesaid, and there to be unladen, secured, and assured unto the said I. N.
according to the Custom of Merchants. And the first day of M. in the fortieth
year of the Reign of the said now Queen abovesaid, at London aforesaid, in the
Parish, etc. had Communication with diverse persons, for, and concerning the
Assurance aforesaid, of the said E. P. afterward, that is to say, the said,
first day of M. in the fortieth year of the Reign of the said now Queen
aforesaid, at L. aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, for, and in
Consideration that the said J. N. then and there upon himself assumed, and unto
the said E. promised to pay unto the said E. thirty shillings of lawful, etc.
when he should be thereunto required by the said E. for the Assurance of so
much Wines, Sacks, and other Merchandises of him the said I. of whatsoever kind
or nature they were, which at the Isle of Teneriff aforesaid, or any Isle of
the said Isles of the Canaries at that time were laden, or then afterward
should be laden in the said Ship to London aforesaid by Sea to be transported
in the said Ship, as much as should come to the sum of twenty five pounds, upon
himself assumed and unto the said I. then, and there, that is to say, the day
and year last said at L. aforesaid in the Parish and Ward aforesaid faithfully
promised, that if the Wines, Sacks, or other Merchandises of him the said I. in
the said Ship then laden, or then afterward to be laden at the Isle of
Teneriff aforesaid, or any Isle of the said Isles of the Canaries, should
happen to be lost or taken away by men of War, Fire, Enemies, Pirates,
^etterones, Letters of Mart, or Countermart, Arrests, Restraints, or by the
detention of Kings or Princes, or other persons whatsoever, Barratry of the
Master of the said Ship, and Mariners of the same Ship, or by any other danger,
^osse, or misfortune whatsoever, or howsoever happening, or coming, from the
day and hour of the lading of the said Wines or Merchandises aboard the said
Ship at the Isle of Teneriff, aforesaid or any Isle of the said Isles of the
Canaries, before that the said Ship, with the said Wines, Sacks, or other
Merchandises in the same Ship so as aforesaid, being laden, or should be laden,
should arrive at L. aforesaid, and before that the same Wines of Sacks, or
other Merchandises should be at London aforesaid discharged, and upon land put
in good Security, that then he the said E. P. twenty five pounds of lawful
money of England, unto the aforesaid, when thereunto he should be required,
after such loss, or taking away, well, and truly to pay, and, etc. And that in
Case of any misfortune, it should be lawful unto the said I. his servants,
Factors and Assigns, to sue and labor for, in, and about the defense,
safeguard and Recovery of the said Wines of Sacks, or other Merchandises, or of
any parcel thereof, without any prejudice of the said Assurance. And that at
the charges thereof, the said E. should contribute according to the rate and
quantity of the said sum so assured, and the said I. N. in fact says, that
after the said promise and assumption, so as aforesaid made, and before the day
of the obteyning of this Bill that is to say the eighteenth day of A. in the
fortieth year of the Reign of the said now Queen abovesaid, at the said Isle of
Teneriff, in the Port of the said Isle thirty two Pipes of Canary Wines, in the
whole amounting to the value of fifty pounds of lawful, etc. of the proper
goods and Chattels of him the said I. were laden into the said Ship in another
Isle of Teneriff aforesaid, by Sea, in the said Ship to be transported to
London, to the use of the said I. And that the said Ship afterward, that is to
say, the twentieth day of A. in the fortieth year aforesaid, from the Isle of
Teneriff aforesaid, and Port of the same Isle, with the the said thirty two of
those Pipes of Canary Wines of the said I departed laden, and was coming
forward, for, and upon the Sea in his Voyage toward London aforesaid, with the
said Wine; And further the said I. N. in fact says, that after the said lading
of the said thirty two Pipes of Canary Wines of the said I. N. in the said Ship
in form aforesaid done, to be transported from the said Isle of Teneriff, up to
London aforesaid, and after the said departing of the said Ship from the said
Port of the Isle of Teneriff aforesaid, in his said Voyage toward London
aforesaid, the same Ship b^ing laden with the said thirty two Pipe of Canary
Wines of him the said I. N. in saying upon the main Sea, from the Isle of
Teneriff aforesaid toward London aforesaid that is to say, the twenty eighth
day of I in the fortieth year of the Reign of the said now Queen aforesaid, by
the boisterousness of Winds, and great Tempests in the main (...) was
overwhelmed, and there was cast away, and the said thirty two Pipes of the
Canary Wines of him the said I. there then, and in the main Sea were altogether
lost, that the said I. N. afterward, that is to say, the Tenth day of A. in
the fortieth year aforesaid at London aforesaid, in the Parish, and, etc. gave
Notice to the said 8. of the said loss; Notwithstanding which the said E. his
promise and Assumption aforesaid, nothing regarding, but imagining, and
fraudulently intending the said I. N. of the said twenty five pounds, or any
parcel thereof unto the said I. N. has not as yet paid, or in any manner for
the same has satisfied, although afterward, that is to say, such a day and
year at L. aforesaid, in the Parish, and etc. was required by the said I. to
do this, whereupon the said I. faith that he is the worse, and has Damage to
the value of ten pounds, And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

ss. EDward Ayscoughe Esquire complains of Thomas Pelhum Esquire, late
Sheriff of the said County, Surrey. Declaration against a Sheriff, for that he
did not arrest one in exccution upon a Cap. utl. after Judgment being in his
presence.

Enquire if the Plaintiff ought not declare, who as well for the Queen, as for
himself. A Cap' to satisfy to the Sheriff of London, and that he was not to be
found ret' thereupon for that that the Original Writ there had issued.


in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that, that whereas the said E.
formerly, that is to say, in the Term of St. Michael, in the 28. and 29th years
of the Reign of the now Queen, before Edmond Anderson, Knight, and his fellows
then Justices of the Queens Bench at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex,
by Consideration of the same Court had recovered against one W. Howard, late
of, etc. sixty five pounds three shillings four pence, which was adjudged unto
the said E. in the Court of the said Queens Bench for his Damages which he had
by occasion of a certain Trespass upon the Case unto him by the aforesaid W.
done, as it had been said, whereupon he was convicted upon which said Judgment
the said E. for the more speedy obtaining of the said Damages afterward, that
is to say, the nineteenth day of J. in the thirtieth year of the said now
Queen, shed forth out of the Court of the said Queens Bench a certain Writ of
the same Queen, to satisfy against the said W. directed to the then Sheriffs
of London, where his Original Writ in the said Plea had formerly issued, by
which said Writ, the said Queen had commanded them, the said then Sheriffs of
London, that they should take the said W. if he should be found in their
Bayliwick, and him safely to keep, so that they should have his body before the
Justices of the said Queen at Westminster from the day of the holy Trinity, in
fifteen days then next following, to satisfy unto the said E. of the said 65.
pound 3. shillings four pence, which unto the said E. in the same Queens Court
were adjudged for his said Damage whereof he was Convicted; At which day before
the said E. Anderson and his fellows then Justices of the said Queens Bench at
Westminster aforesaid, came the same Edward by his Attorney, and T. Skinner,
and I. Catcher, then Sheriffs of London, sent to the then Justices of the said
Queen at Westminster, that the said W. was not found in their Bayliwick, by
which then and there, a Command was to the same then Sheriffs of London,
Exigent to the Sheriffs of London.
that they should cause to be called the said W. from Husting to Husting, until
according to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom of the said Q. of England, he
should be Outlawed if he should not appear, and if he should appear, then they
should take him, and cause safely to be kept, so that they should have his Body
before the Justices of the said Queen at Westminst. aforesaid, on the Morrow of
all Souls then next following, to satisfy unto the said Edward of the said
Damages; At which day before the aforesaid Justices of the said Queen, at
Westminster, came the said E. by his said Attorney, Exigent returned by the new
Sheriffs, which was executed by the Sheriffs of London their Predecessors.
and H. Offeley, and R. Saltenstall, then Sheriffs of London, then and there
returned the said Writ unto them by the said T. Skinner, and I. C. late
Sheriffs of London, their Predecessors in going out from their Office delivered
unto them, and in form following returned, and executed, that is to say, at the
Husting of a Plea of the Land held in Guild Hall of the City of London, on
Monday next after the Feast of the Apostles of Peter and Paul, in the thirtieth
year abovesaid, the said W. the first time was called, and did not appear; At
the Husting of a Plea of the Land held in the Guild Hall of the said City, on
Monday next after the end of St. Mildred the Virgin, in the thirtieth year
abovesaid, the said W. was the second time called, and did not appear, At the
Husting of a Plea of the Land held in Guild Hall of the said City, on Monday
next after the end of St. James the Apostle, in the thirtieth year abovesaid,
the said W. was the third time called, and did not appear; At the Husting etc.
held. etc. on Monday next afor the end of St. Faiths the Virgin, in the year,
etc. the said W. was the fourth time called, and did not appear; At the Husting
etc. held, etc. on Monday next after the end of St. Luke the Evangelist, in the
thirtieth year abovesaid, the said W. was the fifth time called, and did not
appear, therefore he was Outlawed. Outlawed.
Upon which the said E. afterward, that is to say, in the Term of St. Hilary,
in the thirty second year of the Reign of the said now Queen, he Sued forth out
of the said Court of the Queens Bench aforesaid at Westminster aforesaid, a
certain Writ of the said Queen to take the said W. so as is premised Outlawed,
Cap' utl. to the Sheriff of Surrey directed. Special. Cap' Utl.
directed to the Sheriff of Surrey, by which said Writ of the said Queen, unto
the then said Sheriff of Surrey is commanded, that he should not omit for any
Liberty of hi^ County but that by the Oath of honest and lawful men of his
County, he should diligently enquire what Goods and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements the said W. had in his Bayliwick, on Monday next after the end of St.
Luke the Evangelist aforesaid, in the thirtieth year abovesaid, or ever after
that day he was Outlawed in London, at the Suit of the said E. of a Plea of
Trespass upon the Case, whereupon he was convicted, as the said Sheriffs of
London unto the Justices of the said Queen at Westminster, at a certain day
then past had sent; And he by their Oath should cause to be extended and
apprised according to the true va^ue of the same, and those things which by
that Inquisition should be found, he should take into the hands of the said
Queen, and should cause the same to be safely kept, so that out of the true
value and profits thereof, he should answer unto the said Queen, and the same
so extended and appraised what thereupon he should do, he should make known unto
the then Justices of the said Queen, at Westminster, from Easter day to one
Month next following, distinctly and plainly under his Seal, and under the
Seals of them by whose Oath he should make that Extent and Appraisement; And
for that the said W. lay Out awed, and did run into the said County of Surrey,
in Contempt of the said Queen, and prejudice of her the said Queens Crown; the
Queen thereupon commanded the said Sheriff of Surrey, that he should take the
said W. wheresoever in the Bayliwick, as well within a Liberty as without, he
should happen to find him, and cause him to be safely kept, so that he should
have his body before the Justices of the said Queen, at Westminster, at the
said Term, to do, and receive what the Court of the said Queen, of that shall
consider in this behalf, and that he should have then there that Writ, And
although the said E. after the issuing forth of the same Writ and before the
said Month of Easter, that is to say, the second day of March, in the year of
the Reign of the now said Queen thirty two abovesaid, at Southwark, in the said
County of Surrey, in the presence of the said W. then being at large, and whom
the said T. by virtue of any Writ of the said Queen, lawfully and safely might
take, delivered unto the said Thomas Pelham, then being Sheriff of the said
County of Surrey, that writ in form of Law to be executed and the same Edward
then, and there offered to pay unto the said Sheriff the Fee due unto him for
the Execution of the same Writ, and then, and there required the said Sheriff,
that he should execute the said Writ, as to him by that Writ it was commanded,
notwithstanding which the said T. P. then, and continually afterward until
the said Month of Eastet, and after the said Month of Easter, the said
Sheriff of the said County of Surrey, being, the Command of the said Queen
little weighing, and his office of Sheriva^ty in the true and just execution of
that Writ to him directed, as by the bond of his Oath he was bound, nothing
regarding, cunningly imagining not only the said Queen, of that which
belongs to the said Queen, by reason of the Outlary aforesaid, to defraud,
and him the said E. from the obtaining of the said Damages in form aforesaid
recovered, very much to hinder, And also the Court of the said Queens Bench in
this behalf to deceive, and mock, the said W. so as is Premised, Outlawed, as
contemning the said Queens Crown and Dignity, and the Law of her the said
Queen, continually from day to day after the Receipt of the same Writ, and
before the Retorn of the same, at large in his Bayliwick going, and there
remaining, altogether refused to take and arrest, and that Writ at the
aforesaid Month of Easter, before the Justices of the said Queens Bench had
not, neither did Retorn, nor any thing thereupon did, but that Writ altogether
concealed, to the Contempt of the said Queens Command, and manifest deceiving
and mocking of the said Court, and also not to the small damage and grief of
him the said E. and the manifest hindrance and delay of the recovery of his
said Damages, Not guilty pleaded.
to the Damage of him the said E. one hundred pounds, And thereupon he brings
his Suit, etc.

Declaration upon an Assumpsit to save one harmless upon an Obligation.
ss. E. B. complains of R. C. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for that,
to wit, that whereas the aforesaid E. (such a day and year) at H. in the County
aforesaid, at the special instance and request of the aforesaid R. by his
writing Obligatory bearing Date the same day and year, was bound, together with
the aforesaid R. and for the sole Debt of the said R. unto one P. B. upon
condition thereupon Indorsed, that if the aforesaid R.C. should pay unto the
aforesaid P. B. at a certain day in the same Condition contained, eight pounds
of lawful, etc. that then that Writing should be void and of none effect,
otherwise to remain in his strength and virtue, the aforesaid R. afterward,
that is to say, (in such a day and place) in Consideration aforesaid, assumed
upon himself, and the aforesaid E. B. then and there faithfully promised that
he the said R. at all times then afterward should discharge the aforesaid E.
against the aforesaid P. from the aforesaid Writing Obligatory, yet
nevertheless the aforesaid R. his promise and assumption aforesaid, not
regarding, has not hitherto discharged the aforesaid E. from the aforesaid
Writing Obligatory, although he has been often required by him the said E. to
do it; whereupon the said E. says, that he is very much the worse, etc.

ACTIONS OF TRESPASS
TRESPASS.
AND the said T. S. by F. S. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury, when, Defendant justifies, as his Serva^t which had the Freehold.
etc. And as to the coming with Force and arms, etc. not guilty, as, and as to
the rest of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be done, the said T.
says, that the Action he ought not, etc. because he says, that the house
aforesaid, in the said Declaration above specified, in which it is supposed the
Trespass aforesaid to be done, is, and at the foresaid time, in which, etc. was
the ground and Freehold of the said I. B. by which the said T. as Servant of
him the ^^id I. and by his command, at the same time, in which, etc. the
foresaid house, as the house and ground, and proper Freehold of him the said I.
he did break and enter, and the said R. from the possession of the said House
expelled and amoved, and him the said R. from the possession thereof by the
time aforesaid withheld, and kept, as to him it was lawful, And this, etc.
whereupon, etc.

ss. AND the said R. B. says, that he by any thing, Replication.
etc. ought not to be precluded, because he says, that the said House in which
the Trespass aforesaid was done, is, and at the time in which, etc. was the
ground and Freehold of him the said R. and not the ground and Freehold of him
the said I. in manner and form, as the said T. above in pleading has alleged,
and this he prays may be enquired, etc.

Defendant pleads to part property in himself, and to the residue that he did
not take.
ss. AND the said G. and E. by I. B. his Attorney comes, and defends the
force and Injury, when, etc. and prays Judgment of the said Writ, because,
as to the taking and detention of three of the Topsail of the Tapestry, and
other things, etc, of the aforesaid goods and chattells in the said Declaration
above specified parcel, they the said G. and E. say that the property of the
same goods and chattells, parcel, etc. at the said time of the taking
aforesaid above supposed to be done, was in them the said G. and E. and not in
the said I. in manner and form as the said T. himself does now Complain, and
this, etc. whereupon he prays, etc. and that the said Declaration, as to the
taking and deteining of the said goods and chattels, parcel, may be made void,
etc. and as to the residue of the goods and chatte^ls in the said Declaration
above specified, they the said G. and E. say, that they did not take those
goods and chattells, residue, etc. in manner and form as the said T. above in
his Declaring has all god; And of this he puts himself upon the Country,
and the said T. likewise, etc.

Replication for other parcel.
ss. AND the said T. says, that the Declaration aforesaid, as to the taking
and deteining of the said goods and chattells, parcel, etc. by any matters by
the said G. and E. above by pleading has alleged, ought not to be made void,
because he says that the property of the said goods and chattells, parcel,
etc. at the said time of the said Caption done, was in the said T. and not in
them the said G. and E. in manner and form as they the said G. and E. above in
pleading have alleged, And this he prays, etc. and the said, etc. likewise,
therefore as to the Trial of that Issu^ as the aforesaid other Issues between
the said parties above likewise joined, Comes thereupon the Jury, etc. and
upon this the Plaintiff finds Pledges to delive^ the goods and chattells of
the Defendant, etc.

Defendant just fi^th as Tenant of the Plaintiff by Copy of Court Roll of the
Manor of Foaley.
ss. AND the said Defendant by I. S. his Attorney comes and defends the
force and injury, when, etc. and as to the coming with force and arms, etc.
not guilty, and as to the rest of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be
done, the said Defendant ^aith, that the said Plaintiff ought not to have an
action, because he says, that the Close and house aforesaid, and also the
places in which the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be done, are, and at the
time of the said Trespass above supposed to be done, were one Message, and two
acres of Land, with th'appurtenances in Foxley aforesaid, which said Message,
and two acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, at the time of the said Trespass,
above supposed to be done, and also from the time of the Memory of man, were
parcel of the Manor of Foxley, of which said Manor, with th'appurtenances
aforesaid, which is, and at the said time, in which, etc. and also long before
the said time, in which, etc. was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and that the
same Message, and two acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, are, and by all
the said time were, and are Customary Land, and from the whole time aforesaid,
of which the Memory of men is not to the contrary, were Demised, and Demiseable
by Copy of Court-Roll of the Manor aforesaid, by the Lord of that Manor, or
his Steward of that Manor for the time being, unto whatsoever person or
persons, would be willing to take the same in Fee-simple, Fee-tayl, at Term of
life, or of years, at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the
said Manor, and the said Plaintiff, of the said Manor, with th'appurtenances
whereof, etc. as aforesaid being seized, the said Plaintiff before the time
aforesaid, in which, etc. that is to say, the twelfth day, in the thirty sixth
year of the Reign of H. 8. late King of England, at F. aforesaid, at the Court
of that Manor then there held at the said Manor by one I. W. then his Steward
there, by Copy of Court Rolls of that Manor, granted the Tenements aforesaid,
with th'appurtenances, in which, etc. the said Defendant to have to himself and
his Heirs for ever. To hold of the said Plaintiff by a Rod, at the Will of the
Lord of that Manor, by the Rent and Service thereupon due, and accustomed, by
virtue of which Grant, the said Defendant into those Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, in which, etc. before the foresaid time, in which, etc. he
entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, at the Will of the
Lord of the said Manor, according to the Custom of the said Manor, and he
the Defendant, being so thereof seized, the said Defendant, the foresaid time,
in which, etc. the Close and House aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, in which,
etc. as the proper Close and House of him the Defendant did break and enter,
and the aforesaid Oak, in, and upon the said two acres of Land then growing, as
the proper Oak of him the Defendant did cut down, and carry away, as to him it
was lawful, and this, etc. whereof, etc.

ss. AND the said Plaintiff says, Plaintiff confesses the Defendant to be his
tenant by Copy of, Court Roll, but says that the same Defendant forfeited his
estate to him by doing wa^^ in cutting down an Oak of the age of ten years.
that he ought not to be precluded, because he says, that well and true it is,
that he the said Plaintiff, is, and at the time of the said Trespass done, and
long before was seized of the Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc. in
his Demesne, as of Fee, and that the aforesaid Message, and two acres of Land,
with th'appurtenances, are, and at the foresaid time, in which, etc. and also
from the time of the memory, etc. were the customary Lands, and parcel of the
Manor aforesaid, and Demised and Demiseable by the Lord of that Manor, and by
the Steward of the Court of the same Manor for the time being, to whatsoever
person or persons, were willing to take the same in Fee-simple, Feetayl, for
term of life or years, or otherwise at the Will of the Lord, according to the
Custom of the said Manor aforesaid, and that he the said Plaintiff, of the
Manor aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc. so being seized before
the said time of the foresaid Trespass done, at his the said Court of the
Plaintiff, of his said Manor holden the said twelfth day of October, in the
thirty fifth year abovesaid, by the aforesaid I. W. at that time his Steward of
his Manor aforesaid, granted the aforesaid Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
unto the foresaid Defendant, to have, and to hold to the said Defendant and his
Heirs by a Rod, at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said
Manor, by virtue of which said Grant, the said Defendant into the aforesaid
Tenements, with th'appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne,
as of Fee, at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor,
in manner and form as the said Defendant above in pleading has alleged, And
that the said Defendant being so thereof seized before the time of the said
Trespass done, that is to say, the tenth day of November, in the first and
second year of the Reign of the now Lord the King, and the now Lady the Queen,
made waste in the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in felling and cutting
down one Oak of the age of Ten years and more, and by Destroying the branches
of the stem of the same Oak thereout growing, with his Cattle, under pretense
of which, the said Plaintiff before the said time, in which the said Trespass
was done, into the Tenements aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, in which, etc.
entered, as into the Tenements, unto him the Plaintiff, by the said Defendant
forfeited, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee, until the said
Defendant, the said first day of October, in the second and third year
abovesaid, with force and arms, etc. the Close and House aforesaid, at F.
aforesaid brake, and the aforesaid Oak, to the value, etc. there lately
growing, cut down and carried away, against the peace of the said now King and
Queen, as he above against him complains, and this he is ready to prove,
whereof from which the said Defendant the said Trespass aforesaid above
acknowledging, the said Plaintiff prays Judgment, and his Damages, by reason
of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Defendant pleads the Custom of the Manor, to give the customary Tenants
liberty to cut down Trees growing upon their Tenements.
ss. AND the said Defendant by Protestation not acknowledging any matters in
the said Replication above to be true, for Plea says, that within the Manor
aforesaid, it has from the time of which the memory of men is not to the
contrary, it had such a Custom, that is to say, that every Costomary Tenant of
the Manor aforesaid, who held any Customary Tenements within that Manor unto
him and his heirs, at the Will of the Lord of the Manor by Copy of Court-Roll
of that Manor, according to the Custom of the same Manor, could and might
cut down whatsoever Trees and Wood growing, in, or upon the Customary
Tenements, without forfeiture of such Customary Tenements unto the Lord of that
Manor for the time being, for such waste, by which the said Defendant being
seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, in which, etc. in his
Demesne, as of Fee, at the will of the Lord of the said Manor, that Oak, the
said first day of October, in the years of the Reign of the now King and Queen,
the second and third abovesaid, then and there growing, did cut down, as to him
it was lawful, and this he is ready to prove, whereof as before he prays
Judgment, and that the said Plaintiff from his action aforesaid against him the
Defendant had, may be precluded, etc.

ss. AND the said Plaintiff as formerly he says, Plaintiff maintains the
Replication without this, that there is such a Custom as the Defendant in his
Rejoinder allegeth, etc.
that he the said Plaintiff is, and at the time of the said Trespass done, and
long before was seized of the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc.
in his Demesne, as of Fee, and that the said Message and two acres of Land,
with th'appurtenances, are, and at the time in which, etc. and also from the
time, etc. were Customary Lands, and parcel of the said Manor, and Demiseable
and demised by the Lord of that Manor, and by the Steward of the Court of the
same Manor for the time being, unto whatsoever person or persons, is, or are
willing to take them in Fee-simple, Fee-tayl, for term of life or years, or
otherwise, at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor,
And that the Plaintiff, of the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc.
before the said time of the said Trespass done, that is to say, at the said
Court of him the Plaintiff of his said Manor holden the twelfth day of October,
in the thirty fifth year abovesaid, by the aforesaid I. W. then his Steward of
his said Manor, granted the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, unto the
foresaid Defendant, to have, and to hold unto the said Defendant and his Heirs,
by a rod, at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor,
by virtue of which said grant, the said Defendant, into the said Tenements with
the appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne, as of Fee, at
the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor, in manner and
form, as the said Defendant above in pleading has alleleged, and that the said
Defendant so being thereof seized before the said time of the said Trespass
done, that is to say, the tenth day of November, in the years 1. 2. abovesaid,
he made waste in the same Tenements, with th'appurtenances, that is to say, in
cutting and felling down one Oak of the age of ten years and more, by
destroying the branches of the stem of the same Oak thenceforth growing, with
his Cattle, under pretense of which before the said time in which the said
Trespass was done, into the Tenements aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, in
which, etc. he entered, as into the Tenements unto him the Plaintiff by the said
Defendant forfeited, and was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, until
the said Defendant the said first day of October, in the years second and third
abovesaid, with force and arms, etc. the said Close and House at Foxley
aforesaid, did break, and the Oak aforesaid, to the value, etc. there lately
growing, did cut down, and carry away, against the Peace of the said now King
and Queen, as he above against him complains, in manner and form as he the
said Plaintiff in replying has alleged, without this, that within the said
Manor it has, and from the time of which the Memory of men is not to the
contrary it had such Custom, that is to say, that every customary Tenant of
the said Manor, who held any customary Tenements within that Manor, to him
and his heirs, at the Will of the Lord of that Manor, by Copy of Court-Rolls
of that Manor, according to the Custom of the same Manor, was able to, and
might cut down whatsoever Trees and Woods growing in, or upon those Customary
Tenements, without any forfeiture of any such Customary Tenement unto the Lo^d
of that Manor for the time being, for such like waste, in manner and form as
the said Defendant above in rejoyning has pleaded, and this, etc. wherefore as
formerly he prays Judgment, and his Damages aforesaid, by reason of the said
Trespass, to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ss. AND the said Defendant as before says, that within the said Manor it
has, and from the time of which, etc. it had such Custom, that is to say,
that every Customary Tenant of the said Manor, which held any Customary
Tenements within that Manor, to him and his heirs, at the Will of the Lord of
that Manor, by Copy of Court-Roll of that Manor, according to the Custom of
the same Manor, is able to, and might cut down whatsoever Trees and Wood
growing in, or upon those Customary Tenements, without forfeiture of any such
like Customary Tenements unto the Lord of that Manor for the time being, for
such like waste, And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the said
Defendant likewise, etc.

ss. AND the said Johane by W.B. her Attorney comes and defends the force
and injury, when, Defendant justifies Trespass as Servant by virtue of a certain
Demise by the Rector of the Parish Church of St. Swithins in London, according
to the Custom of the City of London, by the assent of the Warden of the same
Parish, the Deed being openly known.

Custom of London, that the Rector of any Church might let the land of his
Church with the assent of the Wardens of that Church, and of honest persons of
the Vestrey.


etc. and as to the coming with force and arms, not guilty, and as to the
residue of the said Trespass above supposed to be done, the said I. says, that
the foresaid R. ought not to maintain his Action, because he says, that the
said House in which the said Trespass is supposed to be done, is, and at the
time of that Trespass above supposed to be done, was one Message, with
th'appurtenances, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, whereof long before the
said time, in which, etc. one R. Chatterton Clerk, late Rector of the Parish
Church of St. Swithin in Candle-wick-street, in the City of London, was seized
in his Demesne, as of Fee, in the right of his said Church, and that the said
City of London, is an ancient City, within which said Ciity it has, and from
the time, etc. it had such Custom, that if, and whenever any person being
Rector of any Parish Church within the said City, being seized in his demesne,
as of Fee, in the right of his Church aforesaid, of any Message or Tenement
within the same City, to the use of the Parishioners of the Parish of which any
such person should be Rector, or to the use, intention or Trust to any
charitable works to be done, or done or to the use of finding any Chaplain at
Divine Services in such Church, where such person so should be Rector, to do
and celebrate, and if such Rector so seized at such use should make any Demise
of any such Message or Tenement, unto any person or persons for term of years,
by his Deed indented, sealed with his Seal, by the Assent of the Wardens, of
good Works, Rents and Ornaments of such Church, or of one of the Wardens of
such Church for the time being, and of any other honest persons of that Church
in a certain place called the Vestrey of the Church of such Parish being come
together to the handling of the businesses of that Church, or the greater
Number of those persons so being there assembled, that from thenceforth such
Demise for Term of years so made should be, and from the whole time abovesaid,
it was used to be good, valid, and of force in Law against such Rector, and his
Successors, of others whosoever claiming under the title and titles of the
Rector, during such Term, in such Deed of Demise specified, although such
Demisor shall die, or his Rectory or Benefice thereupon resign or her, with any
other person, should grant within such Term in such Deed of Demise contained,
and that long before the said time, in which, etc. and long before which the
said R. H. had any thing in the aforesaid Message, with th'appurtenances, the
said R. C. Clerk, then being Rector of the Parish Church of St. Swithin
aforesaid, was seized of that Message, with th'appurtenances, in his Demesne,
as of Fee, and in right of the said Church, to the use, to find a Chaplain to
celebrate Divine Services in the aforesaid Church of St. Swithins for ever, and
so thereof to that use being seized, the said R. C. being Rector of that Church
long before the said time, in which, etc. that is to say (in such a day) in the
thirty second year of the Reign of H. 8. at London, in the Parish of St.
Swithins in the Ward of Walbrook aforesaid, by his certain Deed indented, one
part of which is sealed with the Seal of the said R. C. the same I. R. here in
Court does profer, whose Date is the same twenty first day of October, in the
said twenty second year of H. 8. abovesaid, with the Assent of William Sp^nk,
and Richard Bownington then Wardens of the good Works, Rents, and Ornaments of
the said Church of St. Swithins being, and of the greater number of honest
persons of that Parish, in a place called the Vestrey of the Church of the said
Parish being assembled, to treat of the businesses of that Parish, Namely, T.
P. A. R. R. C. I. P. R. D. W. D. W. S. W. G. T. W. H. B. A. B. W. H. R. C. I.
H. R. B. and I. S. Demised Granted, and to farm let unto one John Rogers, the
aforesaid Message, with th'appurtenances, To have and to hold, unto the said
R. his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, from thenceforth next ensuing, until the end and term of ten years,
from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding,
and paying therefore yearly during the said Term, unto the said Rector and
Wardens, or to their Successors Rectors and Wardens of the said Church for the
time being, or to their certain Attorney, four pounds Sterling, at the four
Terms in the year, in the City of London usual, by equal portions, as by that
Writing here in Court showed more fully it does, and may appear, by virtue of
which said Demise, the said I. R, into the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, before the said time, in which, etc. entered, and was thereof
possessed, and so thereof being possessed, the said John afterward, that is to
say the fifteenth day of May, in the sixth year of the Reign of the King that
now is, at the said City of London, that is to say, in the Parish of St.
Swithin, in the Ward of Walbrook London, made his Will, and by the same Will
constituted, and appointed one P. B. and N. S. Citizens and Cloth works of
London, Executors of his said Will, And afterward, and before the said time,
Lessee for years, makes his Will and dies, and his term comes to his
Executors.
in which, etc. there dyed, after whose death the said P. and N. as Executors
of the said Testament, into the said Message, with th'appurtenances, entered,
and was thereof possessed, and the said R. H. claiming the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, by color of a certain Charter of Demise unto him thereof
made for term of his life, by the foresaid R. C. Rector of the said Church,
before the said Demise, by the said B. C. thereof unto the said I. R. made in
form aforesaid, where none of that Message, with th'appurtenances, into the
possession of the said R.H. by that Charter ever passed over into that
Message, with th'appurtenances, before the said time, in which, etc. he
entered, upon the possession of which said R. H. thereupon the said I. R.
afterward, that is to say, the foresaid time, in which, etc. into the said
Message with th'appurtenances, as servant of the said P. and N. and by their
Command re-entred; as to him it was lawful to do, And this, etc. whereof, etc.

ss. AND the said R. Hartings says, Plaintiff says, that the lands were
appertaining to a Singing man, and by Act in the Parliament of King Edw. 6. it
came to the hands of the King, and that the King gave the same lands unto one
who sold them the Plaintiff, without that the said Rector Demised in manner and
form, etc.

Upon the Statute of the first of E. 6. for suppressing of Singing men of
Colleges and free Chapels.


that he by any matters by the said I. above, etc. ought not to be precluded,
because, he says, that well and true it is, that the said R. C. Clerk, late
Rector of the said Church of St. Swithin in Candlewick-street London, long
before the said time of the foresaid Trespass done, he was seized of, and in
the said Message, with th'appurtenances, in his Demesne, as of Fee, in the
right of his said Church, to the use, to find a Chaplain to celebrate Divine
Services in the said Church of St. Swithins for ever, and so thereof being
seized to the same use, afterward, and before the said time of the aforesaid
Trespass done, by an Act in Parliament, of the Lord the now King, held and
begun at Westminster, the fourth day of November, in the first year of his
Reign, and from thence until the twenty fourth day of December, then next
following, continued, and then and there begun, it was Ordained and enacted by
Authority of the same Parliament, that all manner of Colleges, free Chapels and
Chanteries, being, and to be had, within five years next before the first day
of the fame Parliament, which were not in actual and real possession of the
said Lord H. late King of England, the eighth, Father of the Lord the now King,
neither in real and actual possession of the same now Lord the King, Neither
excepted in a certain Act in Parliament of the same Lord, the Lord the King,
held at Westminster the said twenty third day of November, in the thirty
seventh year of his Reign, other than such, which by Commissions of the Lord
the King, in form afterward in the said Act, made in the first year of the
said Lord the now King, should be mentioned, altered, transposed, or changed;
And all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, and other
Hereditaments, and the matter mentioned in the aforesaid Act made in the first
year of the said Lord the now King, abovesaid, appertaining unto them, or unto
any of them, and also all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and other
Hereditaments, and the other things in the said Act mentioned, by any
Assurance, Will, Devise, or otherwise had, made, or acknowledged, or declared,
given, assigned, limited, or appointed, to the sustentation of any Presbytery,
to have continuance for ever, and with which, or by which any Presbyter should
be sustained, maintained, or found, within five years next before the first day
of the same Parliament, of him the said Lord the now King, which were not in
actual and real possession of him the said Lord the now King, And also all
annual Rents, Profits, and Emoluments at any time within five years next
before the beginning of the same Parliament of the first year abovesaid,
detained, paid, or gathered, toward, or for the Maintenance, Supportation, and
Exhibition of any Stipendary Presbytery, intended by any Act, without writing,
to have continuance for ever, by Authority of any Parliament, immediately after
the Feast of Easter then next, it should be adjudged, and also it should be in
true, actual, and real possession, and seizin of the Lord the now King, his
Heirs and Successors for ever, without any Office or Inquisition thereof to be
had, or found, and in as ample manner and form, as the Presbyters, Wardens,
Masters, Ministers, Governors, Rectors, and other Incumbents of them, or any
of them, at any time within six years next before the beginning of the said
Parliament of the said Lord the now King, were had, occupied, or enjoyed, or at
that time they had, occupied, and enjoyed the same, And as if all and singular
the said Colleges, Free Chapells, Chaunteries, Stipendaries, Salaries of
Presbyters, and the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and all the Premises
whatsoever, and every of them had been, or were in the same Act, specially,
particularly, and certainly recited, nominated, and expressed by express
words, names, Addition of names, Corporations, Titles, and Faculties, and in
their own natures, kinds, and qualities, as by the same Act more fully
appears; And the said R. H. says, that the said Message, at the said time
of the making, and finishing of the said Act of Parliament, of the said Lord
the now King, and continually before, was applied, and given to the
sustentation of a Chaplain in the said Church of St. Swithins, to celebrate
Divine Service in the same Church; And further the said R. H. says, that at
the said time of making the said Act, and before, the said Message was not in
actual and real possession of the said late King, Father of the Lord the now
King, neither in the actual or real possession of the Lord the now King,
neither excepted in the foresaid Act of the said late King, or by any
Commission of the Lord the now King altered, otherwise disposed, neither
changed, by pretense of which said Act of the said Lord the now King, the same
Lord the now King, from the said Feast of Easter, in the said Act specified,
was of the Message aforesaid, with th'appurtenances, seized in his Demesne, as
of Fee, and so being thereof seized, the said Lord the now King, afterward,
and before the said time of the aforesaid Trespass done, by his Letters
Patents, the Date whereof is at Westminster the twenty first day of May, in
the third year of his Reign, gave and granred, and by his the said Letters
Patents confirmed unto one I.H. B.B. the foresaid Message, with
th'arpurtenances, among other Lands and Tenements, to have, hold, and enjoy
unto them the said I. and B. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, by virtue of
which said Grant, they the said I. and B. were of the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof being
seized, they the said I. and B. afterward, and before the said time of the
foresaid Trespass done, that is to say, sixth day of May, in the year of the
Reign of the Lord, now King, third, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, they gave, and granted the said Message, with th'appurtenances,
unto the same R. H. To have, hold, and enjoy the aforesaid Message, with
th'appurtenances, unto the said R. H. his Heirs, Trespass granted by Letters
Patents of the King.
and Assigns for ever, by pretense of which said Gift, and Grant, the said R.
H. long before the said time, in which, etc. into the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee,
until the said I. the day and year abovesaid, in the said Declaration above
specified, with force and arms, etc. into the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, broke, in manner and form, as he above, etc. against him
complains, Without this, Without that.
that the said R. C. Demised, Granted, and to Farm let unto the foresaid I. R.
the said Message, with th'appurtenances, in manner and form as the said I.
above in pleading has alleged, and this, etc. VVhereupon from which the said
I. the said Trespass above done, acknowledged, prays Judgment, and his
Damage by that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said as I. before says, that the said Richard C. Demised, Granted,
and to farm let, unto the aforesaid I. R. the said Message, with
th'appurtenances, in manner and form as she has alleged, and of this puts
her self upon the Country, etc.

ss. AND the said G. B. by W. W. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and Injury, when, Defendant justifies, that the place is parcel of the M. of R.
and that he as Servant of the Lord of the Manor broke the Close, and so
justifies.
etc. and as to the coming with force and arms, etc. and also the whole
Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be done, besides the breaking of the said
Close, says that he is not guilty, and as to the breaking of that Close, the
said G. says, that no Action, etc. because he says, that the said Close, and
also the place in which the said Trespass is supposed to be done, are, and at
the said time of the said Trespass supposed to be done, were two hundred and
fifty acres of Heath and Furzes, with th'appurtenances, in W. aforesaid, called
Waldringfield Heath, which said two hundred and fifty acres of Heath and
Furzes, lie between a certain way called the Procession way of Mertlesham,
dividing the said Furzes of W. Heath, and certain Furzes called Marlad Heath in
part, and Land called Ringland, late J. Kingbils in part, of the Furzes called
Brightwill Heath, Ab^ttals.
and Dapdalewey in part upon the South, and Land called Colecroft, in part, and
Land lying in the Town of Martlesham, and the Heath in Martlesham, and the
D^tch called Fexall Ditch, of the North part, and one head of the said Heath
called Waldringfield Heath, abutting upon the terre Tenements, appertaining to
the Manor of Rivershall, and Waldringfield, against the east, and other two
hundred and fifty acres of Heath and Furzes, are, and at the said time, in
which, etc. were parcel of the Manor of Rivershall in W. aforesaid; Which
said Manor is, and at the aforesaid time, in which, etc. was the ground and
Freehold of one I. and M. by which the Defendant as the Servant of them said I.
and M. and by their Command, the Close aforesaid, as the proper Close and
ground, and freehold of them the said I. and M. did break, as to him it was
lawful, and this, etc. whereof, etc.

Plaintiff says, that the place, etc. is not parcel of the M. of R. but that
one I. P. was seized, and so seized Demised two hundred acres of o^ Land,
parcel of the hundred and fifty ac^es in bar specifies the Plaintiff to hold
unto the Plaintiff at the Will of the Lessor.
ss. NOT to he precluded, because he says, that the said Close, and also the
places in which the said Trespass, whereupon the said R. himself above in
manner Complains was done, are, and at the time of that Trespass were two
hundred acres parcel of the said two hundred and fifty acres of Heath and
Furzes in bar aforesaid before specified; whereupon long before the said time
of the foresaid time done, one I. P. was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and
the said I. so being thereof seized, the said I. before the said time of the
said Trespass done, that is to say (such a day and year) at N. in the County
aforesaid, Demised the said two hundred acres of Heath and Furzes, with
th'appurtenances, unto the said R.W. To have and to hold the said two hundred
acres of Heath and Furzes, with th'appurtenances, unto the said R. at the will
of her the said Jane, by virtue of the same Demise, the said R. into the said
two hundred acres of Heath and Furzes, with th'appurtenances, before the
foresaid time of the said Trespass done, entered, and was thereof possessed,
until the said G. B. at the time of the said Trespass done, the foresaid Close
did break, in manner and form, as the said R. himself above, Without this.
and in manner complains. Without this, that the said two hundred acres of
Heath and Furzes, are, and at the time of the said Trespass done, were parcel
of the Manor of Rivershall, in manner and form as the said G. B. before in
pleading has alleged, and this, etc. Whereupon from that the said G. the
Trespass aforesaid, before acknowledging, the said R. prays Judgment, and
his Damages by reason of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him.

ss. AND the said G. B. as before says, that the said CC. Acres of Heath and
Furzes are, and at the said time of the said Trepass done were parcel of the
said Manor of R. in manner and form as the said G. above in pleading has
alleged, And of this he puts himself, etc.

ss. AND the said Henry Crowch by J. Percivall his Attorney comes and
defends the force and injury, when, Defendant justifies as Lossee the Coheirs
in Gavelkind, with the Plantiff had one Father per diverse venters. Mi. 11. H.
8. Roll. 88.
etc. And says that the said T.B. ought not to have, etc. any Action, because
he says that long before that the said T. B. had any thing in the foresaid
Tenements, with the appurtenances, on T. B. Father of the said T. B. the now
Plaintiff, was seized of all the whole Tenements aforesaid, as in his Demesne,
as of Fee, and so thereof being seized took to Wise one A. S. and they the said
T. B. the Father and A. had issue between them the said T. B. and afterward the
aforesaid A. dyed, after whose death the said T. B. the Father took to Wife one
M. C. which said T. and M. had issue between them one G. B. and afterward the
said T. B. the Father dyed (by Protestation) seized of all the whole Lands
aforesaid, after whose death the said Tenements, for that, that the same
Tenements, are and were then of the tenure and nature of Gavelkind in the
County of Kent, and that the same Tenements, Custom of Land of the tenure of
Gavelkind.
and all other the Lands and Tenements of the same tenure and nature are, and
from what time memory does not remain, were parted and partable between the
Heirs Males, and that from the whole time of which memory does not remain, in
the County of Kent, by the Custom of the said County it was used, that
whenever two Heirs Males were Copartners of the half blood, of whatsoever
Parent begotten, were inheritable of any the Lands or Tenements of the said
tenure or nature of Gavelkind in the same County, and if either of the same
Heirs, without Heir of his body; should dye of his purpartie of such like
Hereditaments seized, That when the other Heir, Copartner of the same Heirs
surviving inherited and by the whole time aforesaid was Hereditable, and did
inherit, and ought to inherit according to the Custom of the said County, all
the purpart of the Lands and Tenements of the said tenure and nature of
Gavelkind aforesaid, of the other Heir, so without Heir of his body dying, or
any of the other blood of the same Heir of the whole blood, so without Heir of
his body dying, descended to the said Thomas B. Son, and to the said G. Bedell,
as Sons and Heirs of the said T. B. the Father, according to the aforesaid
Custom, By which the said T. B. the Son, and G. B. into the said Tenements with
the appurtenances before the said time in which, etc. entered, and thereof were
seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, And afterward and before the same time in
which, etc. the said G. B. at Southwark in the County of Surry dyed, and his
said Moity or purpart seized, without Heir of his body lawfully begotten, after
whose death the Moity or purpart of the said G. descended unto the said T. B.
the Son, and Brother, and Heir of the ha^f blood of the said T. B. according to
the said Custom, by which the said T. B. the Son, into the said other Moity or
purpart of the said G. his Tenements aforesaid, before the said time in which,
etc. entered, and was of the whole tenements seized, in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and so thereof seized before the time aforesaid, in which, etc. demised the
said whole Tenements unto the said H. C. to have to him for the rest of the
years, by which the said H. C. of the same Tenements was possessed. And because
the said H. at the said time in which, etc. found the aforesaid Horse eating
the Grass of him the said H. in the said Tenements then growing, and there then
doing damage, the said H. chased that Horse out of the said Tenements into the
common Straw House, as it was lawful to him to do, And this, etc. Whereupon,
etc.

Acknowledges part of the Plea of the Defendant by the Plantiff.
ss. NOT to be precluded, because he says, that true it is, that the said T.
B. the Father was seized of the said whole Tenements, in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and so thereof seized, took to Wise the aforesaid A. S. and they the said T.
and A. had issue between them the said T. B. the Son, and afterward the said A.
dyed, after whose death the said T. B. the Father took to Wife the said, M.C.
and they the said T. and M. had issue between the said G.B. and that afterward
the said T. B. the Father dyed, seized of the whole Tenements, after whose
death the said Tenements, for that, that the said Tenements are of the tenure
and nature of Gavelkind in the County of Kent, and that the same Tenements, and
all other the Lands and Tenements of the same tenure and nature, are and from
the whole time of memory does not remain, were parted and partable between the
Heirs Males, and that from all the said time of which memory does not remain,
in the said County of Kent, by Custom of the said County, it was used that
whenever two Heirs Males Copartners of the half blood, of whatsoever Parent
begotten, were of any Lands or Tenements of the said tenure and nature of
Gavelkind in the same County hereditable, and either of those Heirs without
Heir of his body should dye seized of his purparty of such Inheritance, that
then the other Heir Copartner of those surviving shall inherit, and by all the
time aforesaid was hereditable, and did inherit, and ought to inherit,
according to the use and Custom of the said County, the purparty of all the
Lands and Tenements of the said tenure and nature of Gavelkind aforesaid, of
the other Heir, so without Heir of his body dying, before any other blood of
the same Heir of the whole blood, and without Heir of his body dying, descended
unto the foresaid T. B. the Son, and G. B. Sons and Heir of the said T. B. the
Father, according to the aforesaid Custom, by which the said T. B. the Son, and
G. B. into the said Tenements, with the appurtenances, before the said time, in
which, etc. entered, and thereof were seized, in their Demesne, as of Fee, and
that, that the said G. B. at Southwark aforesaid dyed, and of his said Moity or
purpart seized, without Heir of his body lawfully begotten, in manner and form,
as the said H. C. in his said Bar before has alleged, And the said I. B. the
now Plantiff says, that after the death of the said G. B. the Brother, the
said Moity of the said Tenements, which was of his the said G. B. according to
the said Custom of Gavelkind, descended unto the said I. B. and unto one R. B.
as Kin and Heirs of the whole blood of the said G. B. etc. namely as Sons of H.
B. Brother of T. B. Father of the said T. Father of the said T. B. the Son, and
G. B. by which they the said I. B. and R. B. before the said time, in which,
etc. into the said Moity of the said Tenements entered, and thereof were seized,
in their Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, before the said time,
in which, etc. thereof Infeoffed the said I. M. To have to him and his Heirs
for ever, by virtue of which said Feoffement the said I. M, before the said
time in which, etc. demised the said Moity unto the said I. B. for the said
Term of two years yet in being, as the same I. B. before has alleged, by
virtue of which said demise, the said I. B. of that Moity was possessed, until
the said I.C. at the said time in which, etc. chased the said Horse out of the
20. Acres of Land, as the said I. B. before complains; Without this that it
has, or from the time of which memory is not, it had any such Custom in the
said County of Kent, that whenever two Heirs Males Coparceners of the half
blood, of whatsoever Parent begotten, should be inheritable of any Lands or
Tenements of the said tenure and nature of Gavelkind in the said County, and
either of those Heirs should dye without Heir of his body, seized of his
purpart of such like Inheritance, that then the other Heir Coparcener of the
same Heir surviving, might inherit, and by all the said time was inheritable,
and has inherited, and ought to inherit according to that Custom, that purpart
of all the Lands and Tenements of the said tenure and nature of Gavelkind
aforesaid, of the other Heir so without Heir of his body dying, before any
other Kin of the same Heir of the whole blood so dying without Heir of his
body, as the said H.C. before in pleading has alleged. And this, etc.
whereupon from which the said H. C. the said Trespass being acknowledged
prays judgment, and his damages by reason of the said Trespass before
acknowledged prays judgment, and his damages by occasion of that Trespass to
be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue upon Custom.
And the said H. C. as before says, that it has, and from the time which
memory does not remain, it had such Custom in the said County of Kent, that
whenever two Heirs Males Coparceners of the half blood, of whomsoever
begotten, were inheritable of any Lands or Tenements of the said tenure and
nature of Gavelkind in the same County, and either of those Heirs should dye
without Heir of his body, seized of his put part of such like inheritance, that
then the other Heir Coparcener of the same Heir superviving, might inherit, and
by all the time aforesaid was inheritable, and has inherited, and ought to
inherit, according to that Custom, the purpartie of all the Lands and Tenements
of the said tenure and nature of Gavelkind, of the said other Heir, so without
Heir of his body dying, before any other Kin of the same Heir of the whole
blood, so without Heir of his body dying, as the said H. before in pleading
has alleged, Enter the Court will advise before the Ven' fac' adjudged, and a
special rendting of his Judgment thereupon, in which they were before to
confer with the Justices of the Bench, and a Writ of Ven' fac' of the body of
the County of Kent should be awarded.
And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the said I. B. likewise.
And because the Court of the Lady the Queen hereof, etc. issues aforesaid
between the said parties before joined, will advise, before any Writ of Venir.
fac' to the Jury to try the issue should be adjudged, day is given to the said
parties before the Lady the Queen, in what State now until in 8. days of St.
Hillary whenever, etc. then to attend and hear the Order or Judgment of the
said Court, of and upon the premises, for that, that the Court of the Lady the
Queen, thereof, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen, at Westminster,
comes the said parties by their said Attorneys, And, etc. And so it was
continued by 10. Terms then next following, etc. And in this thing the
inspection and view diligently, as well the said issues, as in all and singular
the premises by the Court of the Lady the Queen, of the Bench, is to be had and
consulted with, for that the Trial of the said Issue does touch and concern
the Comunalty of the said County, and it is the Custom that a Writ to call a
Jury, to try that Issue, of the body of the said County of Kent should Issue
forth, and should be directed to the Sheriff of the same County, by which the
command is to the Sheriff of the same County, that he should cause to come
before the Lord the King in 8. days of St. Hillary wheresoever, Ven' fac' of
the body of the County of Kent awarded.
etc. 24. as well Knights, etc. of the body of the said County, by whom, etc.
And who neither etc. to recognize, etc. because as well, etc. the same day, is
given to the said parties there, etc.

AND the said W. says, Plaintiff says, that he held the said twenty acres of
Land of the said Prior by Fealty, Sure of Court, and the rent of four
shillings, and for that rent behind the said Priaccustomed to distrain, Without
this, that the Prior was seized of the Rentcharge, as, etc.
that the said R. B. the taking of the said Cattle, and Chattells, in the said
place, in which, etc. ought not to acknowledge just, etc. because he says,
that he himself was seized of the said Ten acres of Land, with
th'appurtenances, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof seized, the same
twenty acres of Land, with th'appurtenance, held of the aforesaid T. late Prior
of the said Church by Fealty, and Suit to the Court of him the said late Prior
of his Manor of I. in C. aforesaid, to be held from three weeks to three
weeks, and by the Rent of four shillings unto the said late Prior, at the Feast
of St. Michael th'Arch-Angell, yearly to be paid; And the said W. M. and all
those whose estate he has in those twenty acres of Land, held those twenty
acres of Land, with th'appurtenances, of the said late Prior, and his
Predecessors, heretofore Priors of the said Church, by that Service and Rent,
in the right of the said Church, from time out of mind held, and by all the
said time, the said late Prior, and all his Predecessors formerly Priors of the
said Church, accustomed to distrein in the said twenty acres of Land, for that
the same Rent of four shillings, and every parcel thereof, whenever that
Rent should happen to be behind in part, or in all; Without this, that the said
T. the late Prior, Issue upon Seifin of Rent.
and his Predecessors, heretofore Priors of the said Church, from the time
wherein the Memory of man is not extant, in the right of that Church, were
seized of the said Rent of six shillings eight pence, issuing out of the said
twenty acres of Land, as of Rentcharge, in the form which the said R. B. by
the said Acknowledgement before has supposed, And this, etc. whereupon he
prays Judgment, and his Damages by occasion of the taking and deteining of
the said Cattle and Chattells, to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said R. says, that the said W. the now Prior, and his Predecessors
heretofore Priors of the said Church, from the time whereof the Memory of man
is not extant, in the right of that Church, were seized of the said Rent of six
shillings eight pence of the said twenty acres of Land, as of a Rentcharge, in
what form the said R. by his said acknowledgement before supposes. And of this
he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

AT which eight days of St. Hillary, before the Lord the King, Entry of an
Essoin, and joining in Aid, and imparlance in Replevin. Mich. 15. H. 7. rot.
78. the like Mich. 23. H. 7. rot. 103.
at Westminster, comes the said parties by their said Attorneys, and the said
I. T. being summoned at the aforesaid Eight days of Saint Hillary, caused
himself to be Essoyned of the said Plea, and had thereupon day by his Essoyn,
until at this day, that is to say, from the day of Easter, in three weeks then
next following, before the said King, wheresoever, etc. And now at this day,
before the said King, at Westminster, comes, as well the said R.M. as the said
P.S. and I. and R. W. by his said Attorney, and the said I. T. in the fourth
day, being solemnly called by W. F. his Attorney, likewise comes and joyneth
himself in Aid of the said R. M. to answer unto the said P. S. I. and R.
together with the said R. M. to the said Avowment, and Acknowledgement, is
granted, etc. And upon this day thereof is given to the said parties, before
the said King, until in eight days of the holy Trinity, Imparlance by
default, Plaintiff joyneth himself in Aid.

The Writ of Ven' Fac' is not put into the Crown.


wheresoever, etc. that is to say, to the aforesaid R. M. and I. T. to imparl,
and then to answer, etc. And as to the trying of the said Issue before joined,
he has not put the Writ thereof in the Crown, Therefore as often comes the
Jury thereupon before the said King, at the same Term, by whom, etc. And who
neither, etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. the same day is given to
the said parties, etc.

Defendant pleads, that the Wife of the Plaintiff, whilst she was sole released
him. Hill. 13. H. 8. 10 32.
ss. AND the said I. F. by R. T. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and wrong, when, etc. and says that the said W. and A. ought not to have an
Action, etc. because he says that the said Anne before the said time of the
said Trespass supposed to be done, and before the Marriage between her the said
A. and the said W. solemnized (that is to say) the eighteenth day of October,
in the Ninth year of the Reign of the now King, the said A. delivered unto the
aforesaid I. F. the said goods and Chattells, as the said W. and A. before have
declared; And afterward, that is to say, the twenty fifth day of November, in
the Ninth year of the Reign of the Lord the now King aforesaid, the said A.
whilst she was sole, by the name of Anne Redhelke of L. Widow, at L. that is
to say, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, by her certain Writing, which the
said I. sealed with the Seal of her the said A. here in Court proffered, whose
Date is the said twenty fifth day of November, in the ninth year of the Reign
of the said now King aforesaid, remised, and released unto the said I. F. by
the name of I. F. Citizen and Merchant Tailor of London, all, and all manner of
personal Actions and Demands, which she might have against him the said I. by
whatsoever reason, from the beginning of the World, until the day of making of
the said Writing, as in that Writing more fully is contained, Without this,
that the said A. delivered the said goods and Chattels unto the said I. F. the
said twentieth day of December, in the said Ninth year of the Reign of the said
now King, or at any time after the making of the said VVriting of the Release,
And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

Protestation.
And they the said W. and A. say, that they by any matter, etc. ought to be
precluded, because protesting that the said A. delivered unto the said I. F.
the said goods and Chattells, as they the said W. and A. before against him
Complains, for Plea says, that the said Writing of Release, Not her De^d.
is not the Deed of the said A. in manner and form as the said I. F. before
have alleged, And this he prays that it may be inquired of, etc.

ss. AND the said I. O. in his own person comes and defends the force and
Wrong, when, etc. Kent. Defendant justifies the Trespass by virtue of a Demise.
Judgment for the Plaintiff, Trin. 13. H. 7. ^ot' 87.
And as to the coming with force and arms, or whatsoever, which is against the
Peace of the Lord the now King, and also all the said Trespass, besides the
breaking of the said Close, and eating up, treading and consuming of the said
Grass in N. aforesaid, says, that he in no manner is guilty thereof, And of
this he puts himself upon the Country, And the said Plaintiff likewise, etc.
And as to the breaking of the said Close, and eating up, treading and consuming
of the said grass in N. the said Defendant says, that he ought not to have his
Action, because he says, that the said Close, and also the place in which the
said Trespass is supposed to be done in N. aforesaid, was, and at the said
time, in which, etc. were thirty acres of Land, with th'appurtenances in N.
aforesaid, called H. whereof before the said time, in which, etc. one T. Chelyn
was seized in her Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof seized, before the said
time, in which, etc. that is to say, in the Feast of St. Michael th'Archangell,
in the twelfth year of the Reign of the now King, at Feversham, in the said
County, Demised the same Tenements, with th'appurtenances, unto the said
Defendant, to have unto the said Defendant, from the same Feast of Saint
Michael, to the end of the Term of four years from thence next following, and
fully to be Completed, By virtue of which said Demise, the said John was of
the said Tenements possessed, And the said Plaintiff claimed the said Tenements,
with th'appurtenances, by Color of a certain Deed of Demise unto him thereof
made for Term of his life by the said Thomasine, Color.
before the said Demise unto the said Defendant in form aforesaid made, where
nothing of those Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in the possession of them
the Plaintifs by that Deed ever passed, into the said Tenements, before the
said time, in which, etc. they entered, upon which said possession of the
Plaintifs, thereupon the said Defendant into the said Tenements, in which, etc.
at the same time, in which, etc. claiming his said Term re-entred, and the said
Close in the same Tenements in N. did break, and the grass upon the same
Tenements then growing with the said Cattle did eat up, and tread down, as to
him it was lawful, And this, etc. Whereupon, etc.

And they the said Plaintifs say, Plaintiff allegeth a certain Conveyance unto
him by the said T. Chelyn made for and in consideration of a certain Marriage.
that they by any matter before alleged from his said Action against him the
said Defendant had, ought not to be precluded, because they say, because that
long before the said Trespass done, the said T. Chelyn was seized of the said
thirty acres of Land in N. aforesaid, and of the hundred and thirty acres of
wood, with th'appurtenances, in D. and N. aforesaid, called the Manor of
Sholand, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof seized long before the said
Trespass done, that is to say, the sixth day of July, in the Third year of the
Reign of the said now King, at Lynsted, in the said County, between the said T.
C. and one William Morgan, the then Son and Heir apparent of the said
Thomasine, and A. Hett, it was agreed and covenanted, that the said W. Morgan
should take to Wife, and marry the said A. and the said A. should take to
Husband the said W. Morgan, and the same Thomasine for Matrimony between them
to be solemnized then and there covenanted, and granted unto the said W. M. and
Alice, that they from the day of Matrimony between them to be solemnized,
should have and hold unto them and their Assigns for Term of their, and either
of their life, as long as they live, the said Tenements in D. and N. aforesaid,
and that the same Thomasine, and all and singular other persons which then
were, or then afterward should be seized of, and in those Tenements, should
stand, and be thereof seized immediately after the Matrimony between the said W.
M. and Alice solemnized, to the use of them the said W. M. and Alice, to the
Term of their, or either of their life, so long as they live, and after the
death of them the said W. and A. to the use of the said T. C. and her heirs,
and that the same Thomasine should make, or procure to be made, all and
singular the said Tenements to be secured unto the said W. M. and Alice,
according to the form of the said Concord and Agreement, when she should be
thereunto requested, And the said Plaintifs say, that after the said Concord
and Agreement in form aforesaid made, that is to say, the twenty sixth day of
the said Month of July, in the third year aforesaid, the said Alice, at Hern
in the said County of Kent, took to Husband the said W.M. and he took to wife
the said Alice, and that the Matrimony solemnized, and celebrated between them,
was according to the form and effect of the said Concord and agreement, by, and
after which said Matrimony solemnized, and consummated, the said Thomasine, was
of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in her Demesne, as of Fee, seized
to the use of the said W.M. and Alice for the Term of their, and either of
their life, so long as they live, and she so thereof being seized, the said VV.
M. and A. according to the form of the said Concord and Agreement, the issues
and profits of the said Tenements, by the Sufferance of the said Thomasine,
from the said 26. day of July, in the third year abovesaid, until the 15. day
of July, the said W. M. at Feversham in the said County of Kent, dyed; and the
said Alice him survived, by which the said Thomasine was of the said Tenements,
with th'appurtenances, seized in her Demesne, as of Fee, to the use of the said
Alice for the term of her life, and she the said Thomasine so thereof, to that
use being seized, the said Alice after the death of the said VV. M. and long
before the said Trespass done, into the said Tenements entered, and those
Tenements, with th'appurtenances; afterward, that is to say, in the day of the
Nativity of St. John the Baptist, in the twelfth year aforesaid, an Hern
aforesaid, the said Plaintifs demised, To have to them and their Assigns, from
the same day, until the end and Term of three years from thence next
following, and fully to be complete, by virtue of which Demise, the said
Plaintifs were of the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, possessed, until
the said Defendant at the time of the said Trespass done, the said Close did
break, and the said grass in that Close then growing, with the said Cattle did
eat up, tread down, and consume, in manner and form as they the said Plaintifs
by their said Bill before against him do Complain, All and singular which
matters they the said Plaintifs are ready to prove, whereupon, from what the
said Defendant, the said Trespass in N. aforesaid, before has acknowledged,
pray Judgment, and their said Damages, by occasion of the said Trespass to be
adjudged unto them, etc.

And the said Defendant protesting that it was not consented, Protestation.
agreed^ and covenanted between the said Thomsine, and the said W.M. and Alice,
that the said VV. M. should take to Wise the said A. H. protesting also, that
the said Thomasine for the Matrimony between the said W. M. and A. to be
solemnized, did not Covenant, nor grant, to, and with the said W. M. and Alice,
that they from the day of Marriage to be solemnized between them, they should
have, and hold to them and their Assigns, for the Term of their, and either of
their life, so long as they live, the said Tenements, nor that the same
Thomasine, and all and singular other persons, which were, or then afterward
should be seized of, and in those Tenements, should stand, and be thereof
seized, after the Matrimony between them the said W. M. and A. solemnized, to
the use of them the said W.M. and A. for the Term of their, and either of their
life, so long as they live, Protesting also that the said Alice did not Demise
unto the said Plaintifs, the said Tenements in manner and form as the said
Plaintifs in their said Replication before have alleged, for Plea, as before
says, that the said Thomasine was seized of the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, in N. in her Demesne, as of Fee, And so seized demised the
same Tenements, with th'appurtenances, unto the said Defendant, To have to him
from the Feast of St. Michael th'Archangell, until the end of the Term of four
years from thence next following, and fully to be Complete; By virtue of which
Demise the said Defendant was of those Tenements possessed, in manner and form
as the said Defendant in bar before has alleged, Without this, Without this.
that the said Thomasine at the time of the said Demise by the said Alice unto
the said Plaintiffs of the said Tenements supposed to be done, was seized of
the said Tenements with the appurtenances to the use of the said Alice, in
manner and form as the said Plaintiffs before in pleading have alleged, And
this, etc. whereupon he prays Judgment, and that the said Plaintiff from his
said Action, against him the said Defendant had, may be precluded, etc.

And the said Defendants say, that the said Thomasine at the time of the said
Demise, by the said Alice unto the said Plaintiffs in form aforesaid made, was
seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances to the use of the said
Alice, in manner and form as they the said Plaintiffs before in pleading have
alleged, And this they pray that it may be enquired of by the Country, etc.

^uff. Declaration in Trespass wherefore they broke the Close against two
Defendants who plead severally.

Parl. 32. H. 8. Rot. 111. One of the Defendants pleads that he is seized of
certain Lands, etc. in Fee, by reason of which he ought to have Common in the
place in which, etc. and that he put the Cattle, etc. for using the Common,
etc. which is the same Common, and so justifies.


ss. R. B. late of Levistost in the said County Yeoman, and W. H. late of L.
etc. were attached to answer unto Edward B. together with R. H. late of, etc.
of a Plea, wherefore with force and Arms, the Close of him the said E. at G.
they did break, and his Grass to the value of 10. l. there late growing with
certain Cattle they did eat up, tread, and consume, And other Wrongs, etc. To
the great Damage, etc. and against the Peace, etc.

And the said R. B. and W.C. by R. B. their Attorney comes and defends the
force and wrong, when, etc. And as to the coming with force and Arms, etc. Not
guilty, and as to the residue of the said Trespass before supposed to be done,
the said R. B. says, that the said E. no Action, because he says, that the
place in which the said Trespass is supposed to be done, is, and at the said
time of that Trespass supposed to be done, was a certain place called the Dens,
containing in it self D. Acres of Land in G. aforesaid, extending it self from
the South, from a certain place called G. in L. aforesaid, unto a certain place
called H. in G. aforesaid, against the North-West, and so extending from the
foot of the Rock of the Cliff until the Sea against the East, and that he at
the said time of the said Trespass supposed to be done, and long before, of 3.
Messu^ges, and 16. Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in L. aforesaid, was
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, And that he and all those whose estate he has
in the said 3. Messuages and 16. Acres of Land, with the appurtenances, from
the time of which, etc. had, were accustomed to have common of Pasture, of and
in the said places called the Dens, within the said Bounds and Limits, with
all, and all manner of his Cattle and living Creatures whatsoever, at all time
of the year, by which the said R. B. at the said time of the said Trespass
supposed to be done, his said Cattle into the said Close, in the said place
called the D. in G. aforesaid, within the said Bounds and Limits, to the said
Grass there then growing, to feed, in using his said Common by the time
aforesaid, did put, as to him it was lawful, which things are the same
breaking of the Close, treading, consuming and eating up of the said Grass,
whereof the said G. before himself does now complain, And this, etc. Whereupon
he prays Judgment if an Action, etc.

And the said W.C. says, that the said E. No Action, The other Defendant says
that he likewise is seized of certain other Lands, etc. in Fee, by reason of
which he has Common of pasture in the place in which, etc. and that he put in
Cattle, etc. in using the Common, etc. which is the same Trespass, etc. and so
justifies.
because he says, that the place in which the said Trespass supposed to be
done is, and at the said time of that Trespass before supposed to be done, was
the said place called the Dens, and that he at the time of that Trespass before
supposed to be done, and long before, was likewise seized in his Demesne, as of
Fee, of and in two Messuages and 2. Acres of Land, with the appurtenances, in
L. aforesaid, and that he and all those whose estate he has in the said two
Messuages, and two Acres of Land, with the appurtenances, from the time of
which, etc. had and were accustomed to have Common of Pasture in the said place
called the Dens, within the said bounds and limits, with all and all manner of
his Cattle and living Creatures whatsoever, at all time of the year, by which
the said W.G. at the said time of the said Trespass supposed to be done, his
said Cattle into the said Close in the said place called the Dens in G.
aforesaid, within the said bounds and limits, to the said Grass there then
growing to feed, in using his said Common by the said time, put, as to him it
was lawful, which matters are the same breaking of the Close, treading,
consuming, and eating up of the said Grass, whereof the said E. before himself
how complains, And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

And the said E. B. says, To the Plea of one of the Defendants, the Plantiff
says, that the Trespass done was as well in the said place called the Dens as
in another place called the East Heath, and because the Defendants to the
Trespass in the same place called East Heath of new assigned, do not answer,
prays Judgment, etc. New Assignment.
that he by any matter before alleged from his said Action against the said R.
B. and W.C. had, ought not to be precluded, because he says, that the said
Close, and also the place in which the said Trespass, whereof the said E.
before himself now complains, was done, are, and at the said time of that
Trespass done, were, as well the said place called the Dens in G. aforesaid, as
the said other place called the East Heath, with the descending of the Cliff in
G. aforesaid, whereupon from which they the said R. and W. to the said Trespass
in the said place, called the East Heath, with the descending of the Cliff,
before of new Assigned to be done, do not answer, prays Judgment and his
Damages by occasion of that Trespass to be adjudg^d unto him, etc. And as to
the said Plea of the said R. B. before pleaded, the same E. says, that he by
any matter in the said Plea before alleged, from his said Action against the
said R. had, ought not to be precluded, because he says, that he himself at
the time of the said Trespass done was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, of, and
in the Manor of G. in C. aforesaid, whereof the said place called the Dens, to
the said time in which, etc. was parcel, until the said R. together, etc. the
day and year aforesaid in the said Declaration before specified, the Close of
him the said E. aforesaid, at G. aforesaid, in the said place called the Dens,
within the said bounds and limits, did break, and his Grass to the value, etc.
there late growing, with his said Cattle by the time aforesaid was eaten up,
trodden down and consumed, in what manner and form the same E. before against
him complains; Without this.
Without this, that the said W. C. and all those whose Estate he has in the
said three Messuages and 16. Acres of Land, in the Bar of the said R. before
specified, from the time of the contrary of which the memory of Man does not
remain, had, and accustomed to have common of pasture, of and in the said place
called the Dens in G. aforesaid, within the bounds and limits aforesaid, with
all and all manner of his Cattle and living Creatures whatsoever, in all time
of the year, as the said R. before in the said Bar has alleged, And this he is
ready, etc. whereupon from what the said R. the said Trespass in the said place
called the Dens done in G. aforesaid, before has acknowledged, prays
Judgment, and his Damages by occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto
him, etc. And as to the said Plea of the said W. C. before pleaded, the said E.
says, that he by any matter in the same Plea before alleged, The Plaintiff to
the Plea of the other Defendant pleads as to the Plea of the first.
from his said Action against the said W. had, ought not to be precluded,
because he says that he himself at the said time of the said Trespass done was
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, of and in the said Manor of G. whereof the
said place called the D. is, and at the said time, in which, etc. was parcel,
until the said W. C. together with, etc. the day and year aforesaid in the
said Declaration before specified the Close of him the said E. aforesaid,
Without this.
at G. aforesaid, etc. as before; Without this, that the said W. C. and all
those whose Estate he has in the said two Messuages, and two Acres of Land,
with the appurtenances, from the time, etc. as before, And this he is ready to
prove, whereupon from what, etc. as before.

One of the Defendants to the trespass of the new Assignment pleads not
guilty, to the other Plea maintains as before, and Issue upon that.
And the said R. B. as to any Trespass in the said place called the East Heath
with the descending of the Cliffin G. aforesaid, of new Assignment made,
supposed to be done, says, that he in nothing is thereof guilty, And of this
he puts himself, etc. And the said E. likewise etc. And as to the said Plea of
the said E. before in replying pleaded, the said R. as before says, that he,
and all those whose estate he has in the said 3. Messuages, and 16. Acres of
Land, with the appurtenances, from the time of which, etc. had and accustomed
to have Common of Pasture, of and in the said place called the Dens in G.
aforesaid, within the said bounds and limits, with all, and all manner of his
Cattle and living Creatures whatsoever, in all time of the year, as the said R.
before in his said Bar has alleged, And of this he puts himself upon the
Country, And the said E. likewise, etc. And the said W.C. as to any Trespass in
the said place called the East Heath, with the descending of the Cliff in G.
aforesaid, of new Assignment, supposed to be done, says, that he in nothing is
thereof guilty, And of this puts himself upon the Country, and the said E.
likewise, etc. And as to the said Plea of the said W. C. before to the replying
pleaded as before says, that he, and all those whose Estate he has in the
said two Messuages, and two Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances, from the
time of which, etc. had and accustomed to have Common of Pasture, of and in the
said place called the Dens in G. aforesaid, within the bounds and limits
aforesaid, with all and all manner of his Cattle and living Creatures
whatsoever, in all time of the year, as the said W. before in his said Bar has
alleged, And of this puts himself upon the Country, and the said E.
likewise, therefore as well as to the trying of that Issue as the said, etc.
Middles. Declaration in trespass for taking and leading away of a horse. Hill.
22. H. 8. Roll 26.


ss. I. W. complains of R. W. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. of that,
that he in the Feast of St. Margaret the Virgin, in the 21. year of the Reign
of King Henry the 8. with force and Arms, that is to say with Staves, etc. one
Gelding of Color black Gray of him the said I. of the price of 5. marks, at W.
in the County aforesaid, found, took, and lead away, And other Wrongs,
Defendant pleads that before the time of the trespass, etc. he was possessed of
the horse etc as of his proper horse, and that certain Malefactors took the
said horse out of his possession, and it came to the hands of the Plaintiff out
of whose possession the Defendant took the horse as his own horse, and so
justifies.
etc. to the Damage, etc. 10. marks, And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

And the said R. by W.T. his Attorney comes and defends the force and wrong
when, etc. And as to the coming with force, etc. or whatsoever thing etc. Not
guilty, And as to the residue of the Trespass, no Action, etc. because he
says, that before the said time of the said Trespass supposed to be done, the
same R. was of the said Horse, as of his own Horse possessed, And afterward,
and before the said time in which, etc. that is to say the 24. day of July in
the 20. year of the Reign of the said now King, the said Horse, by certain
Malefactors unto the said R. unknown, out of the possession of him the said R.
feloniously was taken and led away, and afterward the said Horse came to the
possession of him the said I. And because the said R. at the same time in
which, etc. found the same Horse in the possession of him the said I. the same
R. the said Horse of him the said R's own, out of the possession of him the
said I. did take and lead away, as to him it was lawful, And this, etc.
Whereupon, etc.

The Plaintiff says, that one I. R. being of the said Horse possessed, at B. in
the Fair there sold that Horse, that he paid unto the Bailiff of the Fair toll,
etc. Protestation.
And the said I. says, that he by any matter before alleged, etc. ought not to
be precluded, etc. because protesting that the said Horse, was never the Horse
of the said R. as the said R. in his said bar before has alleged for a Plea,
notwithstanding the said I. says, that before the said time of the said
Trespass done, the said I. R. was possessed of the said Horse, and so possessed
in the Feast day of the Body of Christ in the 21. year of the Reign of the said
now King abovesaid, at Canbury in the County of Oxon' in a certain Fair or
Market there then held, did bargain, and sell unto the said I. W. the said
Horse, for the sum of 31. shillings six pence of lawful, etc. which the said
I. W. then and there, unto the said I. R. paid; And further the said I. W.
says, that he then and there paid unto one R. C. the then Bailiff of the said
Fair, one penny by the name of Toll for the said Horse, by which the said W.
was of the same Horse possessed, until the said R. W. the day and year in the
Declaration of him the said I. W. before specified, at W. aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, the same Horse with force and arms aforesaid, did take and
lead away, in manner and form as the said I. W. in his said Declaration before
against the said R. W. does Complain, And this, etc. Whereupon from what the
said R. the said Trespass before has acknowledged to have done, he prays
Judgment, and his Damages, by occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto
him, etc.

The Defendant says, that I. R. did not sell unto the Plaintiff in the Fair,
nor the Plaintiff paid the Tol. Without this.
And the said R. W. as before says, that before the said time of the said
Trespass supposed to be done, the same R. W. of the said Horse, as of his own
Horse was possessed, until the same Horse by the said Malefactors, unto the
said R. unknown, out of the possession of him the said R. feloniously was taken
and led away, as the said R. in his Bar before has alleged; Without this, that
the said I. R. did bargain, and sell unto the said I. W. the said Horse in the
Market or Fair aforesaid; Nor the same I. W. unto the aforesaid R. C. the then
Bailiff of the said Fair, one penny in the name of Toll for the said Horse did
pay, as the said I. in his Replication before has alleged, And this, etc.
whereupon he prays Judgment, and that the said I. W. from his said Action
against him the said R. had, may be precluded, etc.

And the said I. W. says, that the said I. R. did bargain, and sell unto the
said I. W. the said Horse in the said Market, and unto the said R. C. the then
Bailiff of the said Fair one penny by the name of Toll, for the said Horse did
pay, as the same I. in his Replication before has alleged, Ven' fac' to the
Sheriff of Oxo^.
And this he prays, that it may be enquired of the Country, And the said R.
likewise, etc. Therefore Command is to the Sheriff of Oxon. that he cause to
come before the Lord the King at Westminster, the day, etc. twelve, etc. of the
Visn of B. in the said County of Oxon. by whom, etc. and who neither, etc. To
Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to the said parties
there, etc.

ss. AND the said I. M. by R. M. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and wrong, when, Staff. Justific' in Trespass for that, that the Tenements in
which, etc. were Customar'.
etc. and as to the Coming with force and arms, etc. Not guilty; And as to the
residue of the said Trespass before supposed to be done, the same I. M. says,
that the said I. S. No action, because he says, that the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, in the said Declaration before specified, are, and from the
time whose contrary, etc. were Customary Tenements, and Lands, and parcel of
the Manor of Harnedesworth, with th'appurtenances, in the County aforesaid, of
which said Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc. long before the said
time in which the said Trespass is supposed to done, one T. late Earl of Ormond
was seized, in his Demesne, as of Fee, and that the same Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, are, and from all the time aforesaid were Demised, and
demiseable by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Manor, by the Steward of the said
Court of that Manor for the time being, unto any person or persons, willing to
take the same in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, to Term of life or years, or otherwise
at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor, and him
the said Earl, of the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof etc. so as
before is said being seized, the same Earl afterward, and before the said
time, in which, etc. that is to say, at the Court of him the said Earl, of his
said Manor, held at that Manor the tenth day of October, in the twentieth
year of the Reign of the said now King of England, the seventh after the
Conquest, by one W. H. the then Steward of him the said Earl, of the said
Manor, according to the Custom of the said Manor, Demised by Copy of
Court-Roll, the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, amongst other things, by
the names of one Message, By names.
and a certain parcel of Land unto the aforesaid Tenement, with
th'appurtenances belonging unto one R. M. To have, and to hold unto him and his
heirs for ever, according to the Custom of the said Manor, by virtue of which
said Demise, the same R. was of those Tenements, with th'appurtenances, seized
in his Demesne, as of Fee, according to the Custom of the said Manor, And he
the said R. of those Tenements, with th'appurtenances, so being seized, the
same R. of such his Estate before the said time, in which, etc. dyed thereof
seized, after the death of which said R. the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, descended unto one Matild, as Daughter and Heir of the said
R. by which the same Matild into the same Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
entered, and was thereof seized in her Demesne, as of Fee, according to the
Custom of the said Manor, and so thereof seized, the same Matild before the
said time, in which, etc. took to Husband the said I. M. by which they the said
I. and Matilda were of the same Tenements, with th'appurtenances, seized, in
their Demesne, as of Fee, according to the Custom of the said Manor, Color by
demise by Copy of Court-Roll.
in the right of the said M. And the said I. S. claiming the said Tenements,
with th'appurtenances, by Color of a certain Deed of Demise to him thereof
made by the said late Earl, in his life, long before the said Demise of the
said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, unto the aforesaid R. M. in form
aforesaid made, where nothing of the said Tenements, into the possession of him
the said I. S. by that Deed ever passed, into the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, entered; Upon the possession of which said I. S. the same I.
M. in the right of the said M. his Wife, afterward, that is to say, at the
same time, in which, etc. into the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances,
re-entred, and the said Close and House, as the proper Close and House of them
the said I. M. and M. did break, and the said Grass, as the proper Grass of the
said I.M. and M. with the said Cattle, did eat up, tread, and consume, as to
him it was lawful.

The form of Pleading, where Land is granted by Copy of Court-Roll to him and
his.
And further, the same I. M. says, in fact, that within the said Manor it
has, and from the time the Contrary of which the memory, etc. it had such
Custom, that is to say, that all Tenants of any Lands and Tenements within the
said Manor, having and holding the same Lands or Tenements, as of the said
Manor, by Copy of Court-Roll, by these words in the same Copies, that is to
say, To have to him and his, according to the Custom of the said Manor, they
shall have an estate in the same Lands and Tenements, with th'appurtenances, in
Fee-Simple, according to the Custom of the said Manor, And this, etc. And
whereupon, etc.

And the said I. S. says, that he by any matter, etc. not to be precluded,
because he says, that well and true it is, that the said late Earl of Ormond,
was seized of the said Manor, with th'appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his
Demesne, as of Fee, and so thereof dyed seized; after the death of which said
Earl, the said Tenements, with th'appurtenances, Descent.
descended unto the aforesaid I. S. as to the Cousin and Heir of the said late
Earl, that is to say, as Son and Heir of George, as Son and Heir of Anne,
Daughter and Heir of the said Earl, by which the said I. S. before the said
time of the said Trespass done, into the said Manor, with th'appurtenances,
whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, until
the said I. M. at the said time, in which, etc. into the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, entered, and the said Close and House, then and there did
break, and the said grass then and there growing, with the said Cattle, did
eat up, tread and consume, in manner and form as the said I. S. before, Without
this.
himself now Complains; Without this, that the said Tenement, with
th'appurtenances, are, and from the time the contrary of which the memory of
man does not remain, were Customary Lands and Tenements, and Demised, and
demiseable by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Manor, in manner and form as the
said I. M. before in pleading has alleged, And this, etc. Whereupon from what
the said I. M. of the said Trespass before acknowledges, prays Judgment,
and his Damages by occasion of the said Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the said I. M. as before says, that the said Tenements, with
th'appurtenances, are, and from the time the Contrary of which the memory of
men does not remain, were Customary Tenements and Lands, and Demised, and
demiseable by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Manor, in manner and form, as the
said I. M. before in Pleading has alleged, And of this he puts himself upon
the Country, And the said I. S. likewise, etc. Therefore, etc.

I. I. lately of, etc. and B. P. lately of, Declaration in Trespass and false
imprisonment.
etc. were attached to answer W. N. of a Plea, wherefore by force and arms, him
the said W. at London, they took, imprisoned, and evil handled, and him there
so in prison against the Law and Custom of the Realm of our Lady the Queen
that now is, they long deteyned, and other harms to him they did, to the great
Damage of him the said W. and against the Peace of our Lady the Queen, etc. And
whereupon the same W. by I. W. his Attorney complains, that the aforesaid I.
and B. (such a day and year) by force and arms, that is to say, with Clubs and
Knives, him the said W. at London, etc. they took, imprisoned, and evil
handled, And him there in Prison against the Law and Custom of the Realm of our
Lady the Queen that now is, they long, that is to say, for the space of thirty
days they detained, And other harms, etc. To the great Damage, etc. And
against the Peace, etc. Whereupon he says, he is worsted, and has Damage, to
the value of 300. pounds, And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

To this Declaration above, the Defendants plead specially the Charter of the
Universitie, and that they were Proctors, And that the Plaintiff was fined for
engrossing, and forestalling, etc. And this in the Chancellours Court in
Cambridge, and so justify the taking of him for the Fine, and to this the
Plaintiff Demurs, and the Defendants join in Demurrer.

At which day here came as well the aforesaid W. as the aforesaid I, and B. by
their Attorneys aforesaid; The Demurrer adjudged good, and a Writ of Inquiry
of Damage awarded.
And upon this the aforesaid Plea, of the aforesaid I. and B. above in Bar
pleaded being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, it seems to the
same Justices here, that that Plea in the manner and form aforesaid pleaded,
and the matter contained in the same is insufficient in the Law to debar him
the said W. from having his Action aforesaid against the aforesaid I. and B.
For which the aforesaid Plaintiff ought to recover his Damages, by occasion of
the Trespass aforesaid, against the aforesaid I. and B. But because it is not
known to the Justices here, what Damages the aforesaid W. has sustained,
as well by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid, as for his Costs and Charges by
him about his Suit in that behalf laid out, etc. Command is given to the
Sheriff, that by the Oath, etc. And the Inquisition which, etc. the Sheriff is
to make appear here in eight days of St. Hillary, under the Seal, etc. and the
Seals, etc. At which day here came the aforesaid W. by his Attorney aforesaid,
And the Sheriffs, to wit, Humphrey Weld, and Roger Clark, now here Returned a
certain Inquisition taken before them at Guild Hall in the City of London,
situate in the Parish of Saint Lawrence in the Old Jury, in the Ward of Cheap
London, the twenty sixth day of April last past, by the oath of twelve honest
men, etc. by which it remains found, that the aforesaid W. has sustained
Damage by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid over and above his Costs and
Charges by him about his Suit in that behalf laid out, to Forty pounds, and
for those Costs and Charges to twenty six shillings and 8. pence, Therefore it
is considered, that the aforesaid W. should recover against the aforesaid I.
and B. his Damages, etc.

Declaration in Trespass with a Continuance.
ss. R. A. Complains of I. H. in the Custody of the Marshall of the
Marshalsees, etc. for that that he the said I. the first day of October, in the
ninth year of the Reign of our Lord King James that now is, by force and arms,
etc. the Close of him the said R. called E. Containing by estimation three
acres, lying and being in B. in the County aforesaid, he did break and enter,
And his grass there, to the value of five pounds there then growing, with
walking up and down with his feet he did tread down and consume, And other of
his grass to the value of forty shillings there then likewise growing, to the
value of forty shillings, with his Cattle, that is to say, with Horses, Oxen,
Cows, Hogs, and Sheep, he did eat up, tread down, and consume; The Trespass
aforesaid, as to the treading down and consuming the grass aforesaid, walking
with his feet from the aforesaid first day of October, in the ninth year
aforesaid, unto the day of the obtaining of this Bill, to wit, the ninth day of
October, in the ninth year aforesaid, by diverse days and seasons continuing,
And other harms to him, he then and there did, against the Peace of our said
Lord the King that now is, and to the Damage of him the said R. of ten pounds,
And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

ANd they the said T: N: and J: by H: F: Justification in trespass, for that
the ten^ments in which etc. were customary lands and were granted by copy of
court roll unto K. Joane, and John and to either of them as long as they live,
and after that R. and John dies, and afterward the said Ioane took to ^usband
one T. now one of the Defendants, etc.
his Atttorney comes and defends the Force and Wrong when etc. And as the
coming with force and arms etc: not guilty etc: and at to the residue of the
said Trespass before supposed to be done, they the same T: and N: say that the
said C: no action, because he says, that the said Close and also the places in
which the said Trespass is supposed to be done, are, and at the said time of
that Trespass supposed to be done, were one Message and half a yard of Land
with the appurtenances in R. aforesaid, which said Message and half a yard of
Land with the appurtenances, are, and at the said time in which etc: and also
from the time of which, contrary etc: were parcel of the Manor of B: in the
said County, of which said Manor with the appurtenances, one T: W: late Prior
of the late Priory of the Blessed M. of B: in the said County late dissolved
before the said time in which etc. was seized in Demesne as of fee, in the
right of his said Priory, and that the said Tenements with the appurtenances
whereof etc: are, and at the said time in which etc. and also from all the said
time were demised and demisable by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manor by the
Lord of that Manor, or by his steward of the Court of the same Manor for the
time being, unto whatsoever person or persons willing to take the same in fee
simple, fee tail, for Term of life or years at the Will of the Lord according
to the custom of the said manor, and the said Prior of the said manor with
the appurtenances so seized, the said late Prior before the said time in which
etc: That is to say, at the court of him the said late Prior held at the said
manor on Wednesday, in the vigills of Saint George the martyr in the 24. year
of the Reign of the late Lord Henry King of England, after the conquest the
eighth, by one T, C: Knight then his steward of the Court of his said manor
granted the said Tenements with the appurtenances whereof etc. unto one R: J:
and the aforesaid Johanne to have and to hold to them the said Richard Johanne
and John, to the term of their, and either of their Life's as long as they live
successively, by copy of court Roll of the said manor at the will of the Lord
according to the Custom of that manor; by color of which said grant, the
said R, I. and I. were seized in the said Tenements with the appurtenances in
their demesne as of freehold at the Will of the Lord, according to the
custom of the said manor, and they the said R. and J. afterward, and before
the said time in which etc, died, and the said Iohanne them survived and held
her self in the said Tenements with the appurtenances in her demesne as of
freehold, at the Will of the Lord according to the custom of the said manor
by the Right of increase, Right of increase.
and she the said I. so thereof being seized, the same I. before the said time
in which etc. took to husband him the said T. N by which they the said T. and
I. were, and as yet are seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances in
their demesne as of freehold in the Right of him the said I. at the will of the
Lord, according to the custom of the said Manor, And the said C. claiming the
said Tenements by color of the same Grant of copy of court Roll unto him
thereof made for term of his life by the said late Prior long before the said
Grant by the same late Prior thereof unto the said R. I. and I. in form
aforesaid made, Color by copy of court Roll.
where nothing of the said Tenements with the appurtenances in the possession
of the said T. by that grant ever passed into those Tenements with the
appurtenances before the said time in which etc. entered upon the possession of
which said T. thereupon they the said T. and I. afterward, that is to say, in
the same time in which etc. into the said Tenements with the appurtenances
entered, and the said close, as the proper close of them the said T. and I. did
break, and the said Grass, as the proper grass of the said T. and J. then and
there growing, with the said Cattle did eat up, tread, and consume; and the
said Ground as the proper ground of them the said T. and J. then and there with
the Plough aforesaid, did rip up, and also the said underwood, as the proper
underwood of them T. and J. then and there growing, did cut down and carry away
as to them it was lawful, and this etc. and whereupon etc.

Plaintiff says, that well and true it is, that the Tenements are customary
lands, etc. but says that within the said manor it has been a custom, that
if any customary Tenant should inhabit by one year without the Manor, then the
Lord might enter and him thereof expel.
OUght not to be precluded, because he says, that well and true it is, that the
said Tenements with the Appurtenances whereof etc. are, and from all the time
aforesaid, were parcel of the Manor of Bromefeild aforesaid, of which said
Manor with the appurtenances, the said T. S. late Prior of the said late
Priory of the blessed Mary of B. aforesaid, before the said time of the said
Trespass done, was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, in the Right of his said
Prioty, and that the said Tenements with the appurtenances in which etc. are,
and from all the time aforesaid, were demised and demisable by the Lord of the
said Manor, or by his Steward of the court of that Manor, for the time being
by copy of Court Roll of the said Manor unto whatsoever Person or Persons,
willing to take the same in fee simple fee-tail for term of life or years at
the Will of the Lord, according to the custom of the said Manor, and him the
said Prior so thereof being seized, the said late Prior before the said time in
which etc. that is to say, at the court of him the said late Prior, at that
manor held the said Wednesday in the said Match of Saint George in the twenty
eighth year of the Reign of the said now King, by the said T.C. than his
Steward of his said manor, granted the said Tenements with the Appurtenances
whereof etc. unto the said R. Davyes and Jo: then his wife, and to the
aforesaid John Son of the same R. and I. To have and to hold to them and either
of them longer living successively, at the will of the Lord, according to the
custom of the said manor: By pretense of which said Grant, the said R. I. and
J. were seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances whereof etc. in
their demesne as of Freehold at the Will of the Lord according to the custom
of the said Manor, and them the said R. J. and I. so thereof being seized, the
said R. and John afterward, and before the said time in which etc. dyed, and
the said Joane them survived and held her self in, in the said Tenements with
the Appurtenances and was thereof seized in her demesne as of freehold at the
Will of the Lord, according to the custom of the said Manor by the right of
increase, and she the said I. so thereof being seized, the same J. before the
said time in which etc. took to husband the said T.N. by which they the said T.
and J. were seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances in their
demesne as of Freehold in the Right of him the said I. at the will of the Lord,
according to the custom of the said Manor in manner and form as the said T.
and I. before inpleading have alleged: Custom that any customary Tenant does
abide without the manor by a year and a day, then it shall be lawful to the
Lord of the manor to seize his customary Tenements.
And further the said C. says, that in the said manor it has, and from the
time the contrary of which etc. it had such custom, that is to say, that if
any customary Tenant or Tenant by copy of Court Roll of the same Court, does
abide or inhabit within any other Manor without this manor of B. by the space
of one year and a day, without the license of the Lord or that Manor, that
then it shall be lawful unto the Lord of the said manor for the time being
into all and singular his Lands and Tenements by copy of court Roll of the said
manor, in any manner whatsoever demised to re-enter, and such Tenant by
occasion of the Premises, thereof wholly to expel and amove, and the same
Lands and Tenements to him and his heirs to have again, re-enjoy, and
re-possesse (the said custom notwithstanding.) And the said C. further says,
that before the said time in which etc. the said manor with the appurtenances
by the Dissolution of the said late Priory came to the hands and possession of
the said now King, by which the said now King was seized of the said manor
with the appurtenances whereof etc. in his demesne as of Fee in the Right of
his Crown of England, and him the said King so thereof being seized, the same
late King before the said time in which etc. by his Letters Patents here in
court offered, whose date is at Westminster the twentieth day of January in the
one and thirtieth year of his Reign for diverse causes and considerations,
him the late King specially moving, and out of his certain Knowledge and mere
motive, did give grant and to Farme-let unto the same C. his Executors and
Assigns, the said Manor with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. to have and to
hold unto the same C. his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of Saint
Michaell the Arch-angell then next following, until the end and Term of eighty
nine years then next following, and fully to be complete: By virtue of which
said giving, granting, and to Farm-letting, the same Charles was of that Manor
with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things possessed. And
because the said T. and J. do inhabit without the said Manor of B. that is to
say, at C. in the said County, within the Manor of C. by the space of one
year, and one day; that is to say, from the two and twentieth day of April,
in the fourth year of the Reign of the said now King, until to the four and
twentieth day of April, in the fifth year of the same Reign of the said now
King, then next following, against the Custom of the said Manor; the said C.
afterward and before the said time of the said Trespass done, into the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. entered; And the said T. and J.
of those Tenements with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. wholly expelled and
amoved, by which the said C. was thereof possessed, until the said T. and J.
at the said time in which, etc. with Force and Arms aforesaid, the Close of
him the said C. in the said place, in which, etc. did break, and his said
Grass there then growing, with the said Cattle did eat up, tread, and
consume, and the said Ground there with a Plow did rip up; and also his said
Wood there then growing, they did cut down and carry away, against the Peace,
etc. in manner and form as the same C. before against them himself now
complains. And this, etc. whereupon from which the said T. and J. the said
Trespass before acknowledging, the same C. prays Judgment, and his said
Damages, by occasion of that Trespass unto him to be adjudged, etc.

AND they the said T. and J. say, that they the said T. and J. by the said
space of one year, that is to say, from the said two and twentieth day of
April, in the fourth year of the said Reign of the said now King above said,
until the said four and twentieth day of April, in the fifth year of the
Reign of the said now King aforesaid, did inhabit within the said Manor of B.
and not without in manner and form, as the said C. before in replying has
alleged; and this, etc. Whereupon as before he prays Judgment, and that the
said C. from his said Action thereupon against them had may be procluded, etc.

AND the said C. as before says, that the said T. and J. by the space of one
year and a day, that is to say, from the said two and twentieth day of April,
in the fourth year of the Reign of the said now King, until the four and
twentieth day of April, in the fifth year of the Reign of the said now King,
did inhabit without the said Manor of B. that is to say, at C. aforesaid, and
within the Manor of the said C. in manner and form as the same C. before in
replying has alleged. And this he prays that it may be inquired of by the
Country, etc.

WILLIAM Attersale, Kent. Declaration upon the Statute of the eighth year of H.
6. of forcible entryes by Deeds.
complains of John Fuller and M. his wife, and VV. Parker, in the custody of
the Marshall, etc. Of a Plea wherefore whereas in a Statute in Parliament, of
the Lord Henry late King of England the sixth, after the Conquest at
Westminster, in the eight year of his Reign, held, established amongst other
things, it should be continued, that if any person of any Lands or Tenements,
with main strength be expulsed and disseised, or peaceably is put out, and
afterward is held out with force, or any Feoflment or discontinuance thereof,
after such entry, for the Right of the Possessor, to defraud and take away in
any manner is made; the party in this behalf grieved, may have against such
disseisor, an Assise of new disseisin, or a writ of Trespass; and if the party
grieved by Assise, or by Action of Trespass, shall recover, and by Verdict or
in other manner, by due form of Law it shall be found, that the party Defendant
in the Lands and Tenements, was by force of entry, or after his entry, should
hold by force, the Plaintiff shall recover his treble Damages against the
Defendant: And further shall make Fine and Redemption, as in the same Statute
more fully is contained. Notwithstanding they the said J. M. and W. P. the said
Statute little weighing, and the Penalty in the same little fearing, the first
day of October, in the sixth year of the now King Edward the sixth, into two
parts of one Message and twelve Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances of him
the said VV. A. in J. in the County aforesaid, with main force, that is to say,
with Swords, Staves, Clubs, Bows, and Arrows they entered, and the said VV. A.
with main force expulsed and disseised, and him so expulsed and disseised, of
the same two parts of the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, with the said
main force withheld, and as yet does withhold from the same, to the contempt of
the said now King, and to the Damage of him the said W. A. 20 l. and against
the form of the said Statute, and against the Peace of the Lord the now King:
And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

Defendant iustifies, by virtue of a certain demise unto them at will by one
made his own Right, the rest as his Servants peaceably and quietly entry into
the Tenements etc.
AND they the said J. F. M. and W. P. by I.C. their Attorney, come and defend
the force and wrong, when, etc. all Contempts and whatsoever, etc. And say,
that long before the said Entry into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances,
before supposed to be done, one I. G. was seized of the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee; and him the said I. G. so being
thereof seized, the same I. G. afterward and before the said time, in which,
etc. that is to say, the eighth and twentieth day of October, in the year of
the Lord, 1541. at I. aforesaid, made his last Will, and by the same Will, that
I. then his Wife, should have the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, to the
Term of the life of her the said J. so that after the Discease of her the said
J. have those Tenements with the Appurtenances, should remain unto one J. K.
and his Heirs for ever; And afterward and before the said time, in which,
etc. the said J. at I. aforesaid died, after the death of which said J. G. by
virtue of the said last Will, the same J. into the Tenements with the
Appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Freehold,
and she the said J. so thereof being seized, the same J. long before the said
time, in which, etc. that is to say, the twentieth day of September, in the
sixth year of the Reign of the now Lord King Edward the sixth, at J.
aforesaid, demized the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, unto the said J.
F. one of the aforesaid Defendants, to have and to hold those Tenements with
the Appurtenances, unto the said J. F. his Executors and Assigns, from the
Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, Lease at will.
from thence next following, and fully to be complete, and so from year to
year, as long as both parties should please; By virtue of which said Demise,
the same J. F. into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances entered, Color by
demise.
and was thereof possessed; and the said W. A. claiming the said Tenements with
the Appurtenances, by color of which Deed of Demise unto him thereof made, by
the said J. G. in his life, for term of his life, where nothing of the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, into the Possession of him the said W. A. by
that Deed ever passed, into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances entered:
Upon the Possession of which said W. A. thereupon the said J. F. in his proper
Right, claiming his said Term, and the said M. and W. P. as Servants of him
the said J. F. and by his command at the said time, in which, etc. into the
said Tenements with the Appurtenances, peaceably and quietly now have entered,
Verification of a Lease for another life.
as unto them it was lawful; without this, that they the said J. F. M. and
W.P. will prove that the said J. have in her full life remains, that is to
say, at T. in the County aforesaid, without this, that they the said I. F.M.
and W. P: Traverse to the Delaration upon the Statute of forcible entry that it
was not with force against the form of the Statute, etc.

Plaintiff faith, that certain strangers were seized etc. and so seived by
fine acknowledged before the Justices of the said Lord the Kings Bench,
acknowledged the Tenements to be of his the plaintifs, by pretense of which,
the Plaintiff entered and was thereof seized etc. until, etc.

Fine acknowledged of the moiety of a message etc.

Conveyance of a Title by fine.


at the said time in which etc. into the said tenements with the appurtenances
with Force and arms aforesaid, entered against the form of the said statute in
manner and form as the said W. A. before against them complains, and this
etc, whereupon they pray Judgment if an Action, etc,

ANd the said W. A. says, that he by any matter by the said I. F. M. and W.P.
etc. not to he precluded, etc. because he says, that long before the said time
of the said entry made, one I.H. and I. his wife, and T. C. and B. his wife
were of the moiety of the said Tenements with the appurtenances seized in their
Demesne as of Fee, and them the said I.H. and I.T.B. and B. of that moiety of
the said tenements with the appurtenances so being seized, they the said I. H.
and the rest afterward, that is to say, from the day of Easter in fifteen
days in the sixth year of the Reign of the now King, Edward the sixth, before
E. Mountain C.I. H. and E.M. Justices of the said Lord the King, personally
came and acknowledged the moiety of the said Lands with the appurtenances by
the name of the moiety of one message, of one Garden and fourteen acres of
Land with the appurtenances in I. aforesaid, to be the right of him the said W.
A. as those which the said W. A. had of the gift of the said I.H. and I T B.
and B. and they remised and quite claimed from them the said J. J. T. and B.
and the heirs of them the said I. and B. unto the said W. A. and his heirs for
ever, by pretense whereof the said W. A. of the moiety of the said Tenements
with the appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as of
Fee, until the said I. E. into the said tenements with the appurtenances
entered, and him the said W. A. of the moiety of the same Tenements with the
appurtenances, unjustly and without judgment, unjustly disseised, by which the
same I. was of the moiety of those Tenement aforesaid with the appurtenances
seized by disseisin, and she the said I, by that disseisin so thereof being
seized, the same I. before the said time of the said entry made, that is to
say, the said twentieth day of September, in the sixth year of the Reign of the
said now King Edward the sixth, at J. aforesaid, demised the said Tenements
with the appurtenances unto the said I. F. now one of the Defendants, to have
and to hold unto the same I F. his Executors and assigns from the said Feast
of Saint Michaell the Arch-Angell, from thence next following until the end
and term of one year from thence forth next following, and so from year to
year, as long as the said both Parties should please: by virtue of which said
Demise, the said I. F. into the said Tenements with the appurtenances, entered,
and was thereof Possessed in manner and form as the said I. F.M. and W: P:
above in Pleading have alleged; upon the Possession of which said I. F.
thereupon the said W. A. before the said time of the said Entry, made into the
Moiety of the said Tenements with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, until by the said I. F.M. and W.P. of the
said moiety of the said Tenements, Avermenn, that 2 parties and one moiety of
those said lands are one, and not diverse.
with Force and Arms, and with the said main strength in form aforesaid was
disseized in manner and form, as the same W.A, by his said declaration before
against them have declared; and this he is ready to prove, together with this,
that the said moiety of the said Tenements in the said Fine contained, and the
said two Parts in the said Declaration specified, in which the said Entry is
supposed, are one and the same, and not others, nor diverse, whereupon from
which the said I. M. and W.P. the said Entry and disseisin before done,
acknowledging, the same W.A. as well for the King as for himself, prays
judgment and his damages by occasion of that Entry, and disseisin to be
adjudged unto him, etc.

ANd they the said I. F.M. and W.P. as formerly say, that long before the said
time of the said Trespass before supposed to be done, the said J. G. in the
said Bar before named, was seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances
in his Demesne as of Fee, and he the said I. G. so of those Tenements with the
appurtenances being seized; the same I G. before the same time in which etc:
that is to say, the said twenty eighth day of October in the year of our Lord,
one thousand five hundred forty and one, at I. aforesaid, made his last will,
and by the same willed, that the said I. his Wife should have the said
Tenements with the appurtenances to the term of the life of her the said
Iohanne, so that after the decease of her the said Johane, those Tenements with
the appurtenances, should remain unto the aforesaid I. R. and his heirs for
ever, and afterward and before the said time in which etc. the same I, G. at
I. aforesaid dyed, after the death of which said I. G. the said I. into the
said Tenements with the appurtenances, by virtue of the said last will entered,
and was thereof seized in his demesne as of freehold. And she the said I. so
thereof being seized the same I. before the said time in which etc. that is to
say, the said 20 day of September, in the sixth year of the Reign of the said
Lord, King Edward the sixth above said, at I. aforesaid, demised the said
Tenements with the appurtenances unto the aforesaid I. now one of the said
Defendants, to have and to hold the said Tenements with the appurtenances unto
the same I. F. and his Assigns from the Feast of Saint Michaell the
Arch-Angell from thence forth next following, and fully to be complete, and so
from year to year as long as the said both parties should please, by virtue of
which said Demise, the said J.F. into the said Tenements with the appurtenances
entered, and was thereof possessed in manner and form as the said J. F.M. and
W.P. before in pleading have alleged, Without this.
Without this, that the said J.G. disseized the said W.A. of the said moiety of
the said tenements with the appurtenances, in manner and form as the same W.A.
before in pleading has alleged, and this etc. Whereupon as before prays
judgment, and that the said W. A. from his said Action against them had, may
be precluded, etc.

ANd the said W.A. as before says, that the said J.G. disseised him the said
W.A. of the said moiety of the said Tenements with the appurtenances in manner
and form, as the same W. A. before in replying has alleged, and this he
prays may be inquired of by the country, etc.

ANd the said S.R. by Richard Heywood his Attorney, Kent. Justification in
Trespass for taking of Cattle in an open pound by virtue of a demise made by
one unto whom it was granted, by will until a hundred and eighty pound should
he levied thereupon for the preferment of his Daughters.
comes and defends the force and and injury when etc. And as to the coming
with force and arms etc. not guilty etc. And as to the residue of the said
Trespass before supposed to be done, the same S. says, that the said J. no
action, because he says, that the said close and also the place in which it is
supposed the said Trespass to be done, are, and at the said time of that
trespass supposed to be done, were eight and forty acres of marsh with the
appurtenances called Platters marsh at Alhallowes aforesaid, whereof long
before the said time of the said time before supposed to be done, one R.W.
Citizen and Merchant Tailor of London, was thereof seized in his demesne as of
fee, and he the said R. of the said Tenements with the appurtenances so being
seized, the same R. before the same time in which etc. That is to say, the
twenty fifth day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said H. 8. late King
of England, Father of the Lord the now King 36. at London, that is to say, in
the parish of Saint Augustines in the ward of B. London, made and declared his
last will in writing, and by his said will willed amongst other things, that
one J the then wife of him the said R.W. the Executors and Assigns of the same
J. should have and enjoy the said eight and forty acres of land with the
appurtenances amongst other things, by the name of all his lands, By the name,
Tenements and hereditaments, within the Hundred of How in the county of Kent,
until she the said I: should have levy and receive of the Rents Revenues, and
profits, thereof issuing and increasing the full and whole sum of a hundred
and eighty pound Sterling, for and to the preferment of the marriage of L.A.
and T: Daughters of the said R.W. that is to say, unto every one of them, the
sum of sixty pound Sterling and afterward and before the said time, in which
etc. the said R: W. at London in the Parish and ward aforesaid dyed, after the
death of which said R. and before the said time in which etc. the said I. into
the said Tenements with the appurtenances entered and was thereof possessed, by
virtue and pretense of the said last will, and she the said J. so thereof being
possessed, the same J. before the said time in which, etc. that is to say, the
fifth day of March in the second year of the Reign of the said now King at
London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, by a certain Indenture
between the said Jane of the one part and the aforesaid S. of the other part
made with the seal of the same J. sealed, did grant, and to farm let unto the
said S. the said Tenements with the appurtenances, to have, hold, and occupy
those Tenements with the appurtenances, unto the said S.R. for the term of
eleven years from thenceforth next following, and fully to be complete, by
pretense of which said Grant and Demise, the aforesaid S.R. at the said time in
which etc. into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances entered, and was
thereof possessed: And the said J.W. claiming the said Tenements with the
appurtenances by color of a certain deed of Demise unto him thereof made for
the Term of the rest of the years as yet during by the said J. long before the
said Demise by the same J. thereof as before is said unto the said S. made,
where nothing of the said Tenements in the possession of him the said John by
that deed ever passed into the said Tenements with the appurtenances, entered
upon the possession of which said John, thereupon the said S. at the said time
in which etc. into the said Tenements with the appurtenances claiming his Term
then to come, of and in the same re-entred; and because the same S. then and
there found the said cattle in the same place in which etc. the grass of him
the said S. then and there growing, For damage doing.
eating up, and there damage doing, the said S. those Cattle at the said time
in which etc. did take, and the same at Alhallowes aforesaid, in the county
aforesaid, in the common and public pound, Averment.
there put and impounded, as unto him it was lawful, with this that the said
S. will prove, that the said J. W. or his Assigns not as yet had levied or
received the said full and whole sum of a hundred and eighty pound Sterling,
according to the form and effect of the said last will of the said R.W. her
late Husband, and this etc. whereupon he prays Judgment if action, etc.

NOt to be precluded, because he says, The Plaintiff replies, that one A.B. was
seized of the moiety of the Tenements in Bar specified, who demised that unto
him, without this, that the Testator was seized of the whole Tenements.
that long before the said time of the said Trespass before supposed to be
done, one A. B.R. was seized of the moiety of those tenements with the
appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee, and he the said A. B. of the moiety of
those tenements with the appurtenances so being seized, the same A, B, before
the said time of the said Trespass done; that is to say, the first day of
August in the first year of the Reign of the said now King. Edward the sixth,
at Alhallowes aforesaid, demised the moiety of the said Tenements with the
appurtenances unto the said John Wood to have and to hold the same moiety of
the said Tenements with the appurtenances, unto the said J.W. and his Executors
from the said first day of August, until the end and term, and for the Term
of twelve years from thence forth next ensuing, and fully to be completed: by
virtue of which said demise the said J.W. into the moiety of the said Tenements
with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed, until the said S.
him the said J. W, of the moiety of those Tenements with the appurtenances,
thrust out, and the said A. B. of the same unjustly and without judgment,
disseised upon the possession of which said S. thereupon the said J. Wood
before the said time of the said Trespass done, claiming his said term, of,
and in the same, into those Tenements with the appurtenances entered, and was
thereof possessed, by virtue of the said Demise until the said S. afterward,
that is to say, at the said time of the said Trespass done, the said Close did
break, Without this.
and the said Cattle then and there did take, and the same in form aforesaid
impounded in manner and form as the same J. Wood, before against him, himself
complains, without this, that the said R, S. was seized of the said whole
tenements with the appurtenances in manner and form as the said S. above in his
said Bar has alleged, and this, etc. whereupon from which the same S. the
said trespass before acknowledging, prays judgment, and his damages by
occasion of that trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ANd the said S. as before says, that the said R.W. was seized of the said
whole tenements with the appurtenances in manner and form as the same S. before
in pleading has alleged, and of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Justification of Trespass for Lands in Gavel-kinde.
AND the said G. W. by R.H. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
wrong when, Kent. Justification in Trespass, for that, that the Tenements were
of nature of Gavel-kind in the County of Kent
etc. and as to the coming with force and arms etc. not guilty, and as to the
residue of the said Trespass before supposed to be done, the same G. says,
that the said E. and A. no action, because he says, that the said Close called
R. otherwise B. does contain, and at the said time of the said Trespass before
supposed to be done, did contain eighteen acres of land and wood with the
appurtenances, of which said Tenements with the appurtenances long before the
said time in which etc. one E.W. the Elder, Grandfather of the said G.W. the
now defendant, was seized in his demesne as of fee, and him the said G.W. the
grandfather, of those Tenements with the appurtenances so being seized, the
same G.W. the Grandfather before the said time in which etc. died thereof by
protestation seized: after th death of whichsaid G.W. the G-F, those Tenements
with the appurtenances (for that they are of the tenure and nature of gavelkind
in the said county, and that all Lands and tenements of the same Tenure and
nature in the same county from the time, the contrary of which memory etc. were
parted and partable between the heirs males) did descend to T W. as Son and
Coheir of the said G. the Grand Father, and unto the aforesaid G. the now
Defendant and R.W. his Brother, and Margery Bedell as Kin and Coheir
aforesaid of the said G. W. their Grandfather, that is to say, unto the
aforesaid G. the now Defendants and to the said R. his Brother, as Sons and
heirs of one R.W. one of the Sons and Coheirs of the said G. W. the elder, and
unto the aforesaid T.W. as another of the sons and Coheirs of the said G. the
said G.W. (the now Defendants (Grandfather, and unto the said Margery as the
Son of A. another of the Sons and Coheirs of the same G.VV. the Grandfather.
Descent.
By virtue of which, the said G.VV. the now Defendant, and the said R. VV. his
Brother into the said Tenements with the appurtenances, before the said time in
which etc. entered and were, and as yet do thereof remain, thereof seized in
their demesne as of Fee, and the same Tenements with the appurtenances do hold,
In common and undivided.
and at the time of the said Trespass supposed to be done, and at the day of
the filing of the said Bill, that is to say, the tenth day of October, in the
sixth year of the Reign of the said now King held in common and undivided, with
the said Edward and Alice, who the pur-party of the said Margery, of and in the
said Tenements, do hold from the said Day of filing of the said Bill, they have
holden for term of years then during from the demise of the said Margery, and
one John Bedell her husband, And this etc. Whereupon he prays Judgment if an
Action, etc.

NOt to be precluded, because he says, Plaintiff says, that the said G.W. the
Grandfather infeossed one A.W. his Son which said A. had issuee Margery W.
and dyed, unto which said Margery the Tenements descended in the right of an
heir and the same Margery took to husband one J.B. and the said J.B. and M.
demised the Tesements unto S.S. and A. his wife now one of the Defendants, and
afterward the same S.S. dyed and the same A took to husbanb the said E. now
one of the plaintiffs, by virtue of which said demise, they the said E. entered.
that well and true it is that the said G.VV. the Grandfather in the said Bar
before named, was seized of the said Tenements with the appurtenances in his
demesne as of Fee, in manner and form as the said G. the now Df. before in
pleading has alleged, and that the same G.VV. the Grandfather so thereof
being seized, before the said time of the said trespass done, of the said
tenements with the appurtenances, infeoffed the said A.VV. his Son to have the
same Tenements with the appurtenances, unto the same A. and his heirs for ever,
by virtue of which said Feoffment, the same A.VV. was seized of the said
Tenements with the appurtenances in his Demesne as of Fee and him the said A.
of the said Tenements with the appurtenances so being seized, the same A. of
those Tenements with the appurtenances died seized, after the death of which
said A. the said Tenements with the appurtenances descended unto Margery
Wallis, Daughter and heir of the same A. by virtue of which, the same M. into
the said Tenements with the appurtenances long before the said time of the said
trespass done, entered, and was thereof seized in her demesne as of fee, and she
the said M. of those Tenements with the appurtenances so being seized the same
M. before the said time of the said Trespass done at C. aforesaid, took to her
husband the said J.B. by virtue of which they the said J. and M. were seized of
those Tenements with the appurtenances in their demesne as of fee, in the right
of her the said M. and them the said J. and M. of those tenements with the
appurtenances so being seized, they the said J. and M. afterward, and before
the said time of the said trespass done, that is to say, at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Arch-Angell in the thirty seventh year of the Reign of the Lord
Henry the eighth late King of England, at C. aforesaid, demised the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances unto one S.S. and unto the aforesaid A. now
one of the Plaintiffs, the then wife of the same S. to have and to hold the
same Tenements with the appurtenances unto the same S. and A. their Executors,
and Assigns, from the same Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel until the End
and Term of seven years from thence next ensuing, and sully to be complete, by
virtue of which said demise, they the said S. and A. so thereof being
possessed, the same S. before the said time in which etc. at C. aforesaid dyed,
and the said Allice him survived, and held her self in, in the said Tenements
with the appurtenances, and was thereof possessed by the Right of increase, and
she the said A. so thereof being possessed, the same A. before the said time,
in which, etc. at C. aforesaid, took to her Husband the said E. H. by virtue of
which, they the said E. and A. were possessed of the said Tenemenrs with the
Appurtenances, By the Right of increase.
until the said G. W. the now Defendant, at the said time of the said
Trespass done, the said Close with Force and Arms aforesaid, did break and
enter, and the said Grass to the value, etc. with his feet walking did tread
down and consume, and the said Cattle in the said Declaration before
specified, then and there found, he did take and chase, in manner and form as
they the said E. and A. before against him themselves now complains: And
this, etc. whereupon from which the said G. W. the now Defendant, the said
Trespass before acknowledging, prays Judgment and his Damages, by occasion
of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Defendant maintains the plea, without this that G.W. Grandfather, infeoffed
the said A.W. his Son, etc.
AND the said G. W. the now Defendant, as before says, that the said G. VV. the
now Defendant, was of the said Tenements with the Appurtenances seized in his
Demesne as of Fee; and he the said G. W. the Elder, of those Tenements with the
Appurtenances so being seized, the same G. W. the Elder, of those Tenements
with the Appurtenances, died thereof by protestation seized, after the death of
which said G. W. the Elder, the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, for
that, that the same Tenements are of the Tenure and Nature of Gavel-kinde in
the said County, and that all Lands and Tenements of the same Tenure and Nature
in the same County, from the time the contrary of which, etc. were parted and
partable between the Heirs Males, did descend unto the said G. W. as Son and
Heir of the said G. W. the Grandfather of the said G. W. the now Defendant,
and unto the same G. the now Defendant, and to the said R. W. Brother of the
same G. the now Defendant, and unto the aforesaid Margery as Kin and Co-heire
of the said G. their Grandfather, that is to say, unto the aforesaid G. the
now Defendant, and Richard his Brother, as Sons and Heirs of the said R: W.
one of the Sons and Co-heires of the said G. W. the Elder, and unto the
aforesaid T. as another Son and Co-heire of the said G. W. the Grandfather of
the said G. the now Defendant, and unto the aforesaid Margery, as Daughter of
the said Alexander, another of the Sons and Co-heires of the said G. W. the
Grandfather, by virtue of which the said G. W. the now Defendant, and the said
R. W. his Brother, into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, before the
said time, in which, etc. entered, and were, and as yet are thereof seized in
their Demesne as of Fee, and the same Tenements with the Appurtenances do hold,
and at the time of the said Trespass before supposed to be done, and at the
day of fyling the said Bill, did hold, and as yet does hold in common and
undivided, with the said Edward and Alice, who the Pur-party of the said
Margery Bedell of and in the said Tenements with the Appurtenances do hold, and
at the said day of fyling of the said Bill, did hold for term of years,
Without this.
from the demise of the said I. B. and Margery, in manner and form as the said
G. the now Defendant before in pleading has alleged; without this, that the
said G. W. the Grandfather, infeoffed the said A. W. his Son, of the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, in Manner and Form as the said E. and Alice
before in replying have alleged: And this, etc. whereupon as before prays
Judgment, and that the said E. and A. from their said Action against him had,
may be precluded, etc.

And they the said E. and A. as before says, that the said G. W. the
Grandfather, infeoffed the aforesaid A. W. his Son, of the said Tenements with
the Appurtenances, in Manner and Form as they the said E. and A. before in
replying have alleged; and this they pray that it may be inquired of, etc.

AND the said W. W. by R. C. his Attorney, Devon. Defendant Justifies that the
Tenements in which etc. was the ground of another man, and iustifies the
Trespass as his Servant doing damage.
comes and defends the Force and Wrong, when, etc. And as to the coming with
Force and Arms, etc. not guilty: and as to the residue, etc. the same W. W.
says, that the said W. S. no Action, because he says, that the said Close and
also the place in which, etc. the said Trespass is supposed to be done, are,
and at the time of the said Trespass before supposed to be done, were thirty
six Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in V. aforesaid, in a certain place
there called W. which are, and at the said time of the said Trespass before
supposed to be done, were the Ground and Freehold of one R. M. by which the
same W. W. at the said time in which, etc. into the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances, as Servant of the said R. and by his Command entered, and the
said Close as the proper Close of him the said R. did break: And the same W.
W. found the said Colt there the Grass of him the said R. upon the Ground of
him the said R. that is to say, upon the said thirty six Acres of Land growing,
eating up, and Damage there unto the said R. doing the same W. W. that Colt,
for that Damage then and there, as before it is said done, took and lead away,
as unto them it was lawful; And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

Not to be precluded, because he says, that long before the said time, in
which, etc. the said R. M. in the said Bar before named, was seized of the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee, and so thereof
being seized, before the said time, in which, etc. that is to say, the twelfth
day of August, in the first year of the Reign of the said now King Edward the
sixth, at A. in the said County of D. demised the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances, unto the aforesaid W. S. to have to him and his Assigns from
the Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, from thence next ensuing, until
the end and term of three years, from thence forth next following, and fully
to be complete; by virtue of which said Demise, the same W. S. into the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, before the said time, in which, etc. entered,
and was thereof possessed; and he the said W. S. of the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances so being possessed, the same W. S. before the said time, in
which, etc. the said Colt into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, to
the Grass there growing, as the proper Grass of him the said W. S. put to
feed, which said Colt was there, the Grass there growing, feeding upon, until
the said W. W. at the said time, in which, etc. upon the Possession of him the
said W. S. into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances entered, and the said
Close in the said place, in which, etc. did break, and the said Colt then and
there did take and lead away, in manner and form as the same W. S. before
against him complains: And this, etc. whereupon from which the said W. W. the
said Trespass in form aforesaid done, before acknowledging, prays Judgment
and his Damages, by occasion of the said Trespass, to be adjudged unto him,
etc.

Defendant maintains Plea, without this, that the said stranger demised the
said Tenements.
AND the said W. W. as before says, that the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances are, and at the said time, in which, etc. were the Ground and
Freehold of the said R. M. by which the same W. W. at the said time in which,
etc. into the said Tenements with the appurtenances, as Servant of the said R.
and by their Command entered, and the said Close as the proper Close of him the
said R. did break, and for that he the same W. W. found the said Colt, the
said Grass of the said R. upon the Ground of him the said R. that is to say,
upon the said thirty six Acres of Land growing, eating up, Damage thereunto the
same R. doing the same W. that Colt for that Damage, Without this.
then and there as before is said done, did take and lead away, as to him it
was lawful; without this, that the said R. M. demised the said Tenements with
the Appurtenances, unto the aforesaid W. S. in manner and form as the said W.
S. before in replying has alleged: And this. etc. whereupon as before
prays Judgment, and that the said W. S. from his said Action, against him the
said W. W. had, may be precluded, etc.

And the said W. S. as before says, that the said R. M. demised the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, unto the said W. S. in manner and form as the
said W. S. before in replying has alleged; and this he prays that it may
be inquired of, etc.

AND the said S. S. by W. D. his Attorney, Suff. ss. Defendant iustifies
Trespass, by virtue of a Demise made by a Master of a College.
comes and defends the force and wrong, when, etc. And as to the coming with
force, etc. not guilty, and as to the residue of the said Trespass before
supposed to be done, the same S. says, that the said R. no Action, because he
says, that the said Close and also the place in which it is supposed the said
Trespass before to be done, are and at the said time of the said trespass before
supposed to be done, were a hundred Acres of Lands and Pasture with the
Appurtenances in E. aforesaid, parcel of the Manor of E. with the
appurtenances in the County aforesaid, of which said manor with the
appurtenances long before the said time in which, etc. one G. W. Clark, late
Master of the late College of R. in the County of Norffolke, and the Fellows
of the same late College were seized in their demesne as of fee, in the right
of their said College, and them the said late Master and fellows of the said
late College of that Manor with the appurtenances whereof etc so thereof
being seized, they the said late Master and fellows of the said late College
before the said time in which etc. that is to say, the twentieth day of
December in the year of the Reign of the Lord Henry the eighth, late King of
England, 30. at R. in the said County of Norffolke, by their certain writing
indented, with the common seal of them the late Master and fellows, sealed,
and unto the Court of the Lord the now King here showed, whose date is the same
day and year by their unanimous assent and consent did demise, and to farm let
unto the aforesaid S. his heirs, Executors, and Assigns, the said manor of E.
with the appurtenances in the laid county of Suffolk, with all arrable Lands
and pasture of Sheep with all their appurtenances and other commodities unto
the said Manor and preimses belonging, as well within the town E. aforesaid,
as within other towns unto the same adjacent, with the Lands and Pastures lying
at Dead-mans Grave, to have and to hold the same Manor with the appurtenances
whereof etc and other the premises unto the aforesaid S. his Executors and
Assigns from the Feast of the invention of the holy Cross last past, before
the date of the said writing indented until the end and term of fifty years
from thence forth next ensuing, and fully to be complete; by virtue of which
said demise, the said S. into the said manor with the appurtenances whereof
etc. before the said time in which etc. entered and was thereof possessed, and
the said R. claiming the said manor with the appurtenances, whereof etc. by
color of a certain deed of demise unto him thereof made for the term of his
life by the said late Master and fellows of the said late college long before
the said demise, unto the aforesaid S: of that manor with the appurtenances,
whereof etc. as before is said, made, where nothing of that Manor with the
appurtenances whereof etc. into the possession of him the said R. by that deed
ever passed into the said Manor with the appurtenances whereof etc. before the
said time in which etc. entered upon the possession of which said R. thereupon
the said S: afterward, that is to say, at the said time in which etc. into the
said Manor with the appurtenances, whereof etc. claiming the said Term then
to come, of, and in the same re-entred, and the said Close as the proper close
of him the said S. then and there did break, and the said grass as the proper
grass of him the said S. then and there growing, with his cattle did eat up,
tread, and consume, as unto him it was lawful, and this etc. whereupon etc.
Judgment, if action etc.

NOt to be precluded, because he says, that well and true it is, that before
the said time of the said Trespass done, the said late Master and fellows of
the said late College were seized of the said Manor with the appurtenances,
whereof the said hundred acres of pasture with the appurtenances, in which the
said Trespass was done, are, and at the said time of the said trespass done, and
also from the time, the contrary of which memory etc. were parcel in his
Demesne as of fee, and so thereof seized, they the said Master and fellows
before the said time of the said trespass done, and before the said demise of
the said Manor with the appurtenances whereof etc. unto the aforesaid S. in
form aforesaid made, that is to say, the last day of January in the twentieth
year of the Reign of the said late King, at E. in the said county of N. by
their certain Deed, with the common Seal of the same late Master and fellows
Sealed, whose date is the same day and year, did demise and to farm let unto
one E.B. and the said S. the said manor with the appurtenances whereof etc. to
have and to hold to the same E. and S. from the feast of the invention of the
holy Cross from thence forth next ensuing, until to the end and Term of ^fty
years from thence next following, and fully to be complete in manner and form
as the said S. in his bar before in pleading has alleged. And further the
same R. says, that by a certain Act in Parliament of the Lord Henry the
eighth, late King of England, Father of the said now King, at Westminster in
the county of Middlesex, the twenty eighth of April, in the thirty first year
of the Reign of him the late King began and there then held and continued
until the twenty eighth day of June, then next following (amongst other
things, it was enacted, ordained, and established by him the late King, and the
Lords spiritual, and temporal, and also the commonalty in the same Parliament
then assembled, and by the authority of the same, that not only all late
Monasteries, Abbyes, Priories, Monks Houses, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friars
Houses, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical Houses and Places, Scites,
Circuits, Precincts, Manors, Demesnes, Granges, Messuages, Lands, Tenemenss,
Meadows, Pastures, Reversions, Services, Woods, Tithes, Pensions, Portions,
Rectoryes, Appropriations, Vicaridges, Chappells, Advowsons, Patronages,
Annuities, Interests, Entries, Conditions, Commons, Courts Leets, Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, and all the rest of the Hereditaments whatsoever,
henceforth immediately and then presently, but also all other Monasteries,
Abbyes, Priories, Monks Houses, Colleges, Houses of Monks, Colleges,
Hospitalls, Friars houses, and other religious and Ecclesiastical houses and
Places, which from thenceforth afterward should happen to be dissolved,
suppressed, renounced, forsaken, forfeited, surrendered, or in any other manner
come to the Kings most excellent Majesty, and also all Scites, Circuits,
Precincts, Manors, Demesnes, Granges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Manors,
Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services, Woods, Tithes, Pensions, Portions,
Rectories, Appropriations, Vicaridges, Churches, Chappells, Advowsons,
Nominations, Patronages, Annuityes, Rights, Interests, Conditions, Commons,
Court Leets, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and other Hereditaments
whatsoever, belonging or appertaining unto them or any of them whenever, and
as often as they should be dissolved, suppressed, renounced forsaken,
forfeited, surrendered, or by any other means should come unto the Kings
Excellency, they should be vested, deemed, and adjudged, by the authoriry of
the same Parliament, in the true actual and real seizin and possession of the
said late King, his heirs and Successors for ever, in the State and condition,
as at the making of the same act, then were, and even as all the said late
Monasteries, Abbyes, Priories, Monks Houses, Colleges, Hospitalls, Friars
Houses, and all religious and Ecclesiastical houses and places so dissolved,
suppressed, renounced, forsaken, forfeited, surrendered, or come to the Kings
Excellency, as it is before said, as also the said Monasteries, Abbeys,
Priories, Friars Houses, and all Religious and Ecclesiastical Houses and
Places, which then afterward should happen to be dissolved, suppressed,
renounced, forfeited, surrendered, or become to the Kings Excellency, the
Scites, Circuites, Precincts, Manors, Demesnes, Granges, Lands Tenements, and
the rest of the Premises whatsoever should be in the same Act, specially and
particularly, recited, nominated, and expressed, by express Words, Names,
Titles, and Faculties, in their kinds, natures, and qualities: And further it
was enacted by the said Authority, that if any Abbot, Prior, Prioresse, or
other Ecclesiastical Governor, or Governesse of any Monastery, Abbey, Prior,
Monks House, College, Hospital, Friars House, or other Religious Houses, or
Places, which then afterward should happen to be dissolved, suppressed,
renounced, forsaken, forfeited, surrendered, or come to the Kings Highness,
within one year next before, the first day of the same Parliament, had made,
or from thence afterward should make any Demise, or Grant, under their
Conventuall or common Seal, or otherwise for term of years, or life, or
lives of the Site, Circuit, and Precinct of their aforesaid Monastery, Abbey,
Priory, House of Monks, College, Hospital, House of Friars, or other
Religious or Ecclesiastical House or Place, or of any part of them, or of any
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rectories, appropriate Tithes, Pentions,
Portions, or other Hereditaments, belonging or pertaining to their aforesaid
late Monastery, Abbey, Priory, House of Monks, College, Hospital, House of
Friars, or Religious or Ecclesiastical House, or Place: Which Manors,
Messuages, Granges, Lands, Tenements, Rectories, appropriate Tithes, Pentions,
Portions, and other Hereditaments whatsoever had not been before the same
Demise commonly used to be let nor set to Farm, but kept and reserved in the
manurate, Tillage, or Occupation of the aforesaid Governor, or Governesse, for
Maintenance of Hospitality, and good House keeping, or within one year next
before the first day of the same Parliament, had made, or afterward should
make any Demise or Grant, for term of life, or for term of years, of any
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Rectories,
appropriate Tithes, Pentions, Portions, Churches, Chapels, or other
Hereditaments whatsoever, whereof, and in which the State, or Interest, for
term of life, year, or years, at the time of the making any such Grant, or
Demise, then had, there being, or continuance, or after that time should have
their being, or continuance, and then were not determined, ended, or expired,
or within one year next before the first day of the aforesaid Parliament, had
made, or afterward should make any Demise or Grant, for term of life, or for
term of years, of any Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Rectories, appropriate Tithes, Pentions, Portions, Churches,
Chapels, or other Hereditaments whatsoever; upon which Demises and Grants, the
usual and old Rents and Forms, accustomed to be rendered and reserved, by the
space of twenty years, next before the aforesaid first day of the same
Parliament, were not, or should not be, or afterward had not been thereupon
reserved and rendered; or if any such Governor, or Governesse, of any such
Monastery, Abbey, Priory, House of Monks, College, Hospital, House of Friars,
or other Religious or Ecclesiastical House, or Place, which from that time
should happen to be dissolved, suppressed, renounced, lost, forfeited,
surrendered, or come to the Kings Highness, within one year, next before the
aforesaid first day of the aforesaid Parliament, had made, or afterward should
make any Bargain, or Sale of their Woods, which Woods were then growing, or
standing; that then all and every such Demise, Grant, Bargain, and Sale of
Wood, or Woods, should be altogether void and of none Effect, as in the same
Act amongst other things more fully appears. And further the same R. says,
that the aforesaid late Master, and the then Brotherhood of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized,
before the said time wherein, etc. to wit, the sixth day of the Month of
December, in the three and thirtieth year of the aforesaid late King Henry the
eighth, at the College aforesaid, by their certain Writing, with the common
Seal of them the said late Master and then Brotherhood sealed: And in the
Court of Chancery, of him the said late King at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, enrolled of Record, whose Date is in the Chapter House of them the
said late Master, and then Brotherhood there the same day and year, with
their unanimous Assent and Consent, and Deliverance of Mind, certain knowledge
and mere motion, for certain just and reasonable causes, them the said late
Master and then Brotherhood, conscientiously moving their Souls, voluntarily
and of their own accord, they gave and granted, and by that Writing did give,
grant, render, deliver, and confirm, to the aforesaid late King Henry the
eighth, their whole College with their Appurtenances, and the aforesaid Manor
of E. and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. and the
Reversion and Reversions of the same Manor amongst other things to have, hold,
and enjoy the aforesaid College with all their Appurtenances, and the
aforesaid Manner of E. and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, whereof,
etc. amongst other things to the aforesaid late King, his Heirs, Successors,
and Assigns, to the sole proper behoof, use, and profit of the same late
King, his Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, for ever, as by the same Writing
amongst other things more plainly appears. By virtue of which said Gift,
Grant, and Act aforesaid, the same late King was seized of the Manor
aforesaid, and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his
Demesne as of Fee and Right, in right of his Crown of England; and being so
thereof seized the same late King, afterward, and before the aforesaid time of
the Trespass aforesaid made, to wit, the tenth day of December, in the thirty
fourth year of his Reign, by his Letters Patents which he the said R. brings
here into Court, whose Date is at Westminster, the same day and year, did give
and grant unto Henry, then Earl of Surrey, the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things: And the Reversion of the
same Manor, to have and to hold, to him the said Earl, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever: By virtue of which said Letters Patents, the same late Earl
was seized of the aforesaid Manor with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his
Demesne as of Fee and Right, and so being thereof seized, after and before the
aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid made, the same late Earl, the
twentieth day of May, in the thirty sixth year of the aforesaid late King, by
his Indenture at E. between him the said Earl, by the name of the Honorable
Henry Earl of Surrey, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, on the one
part, and the aforesaid Richard, by the name of Richard Filmerston, Gentleman,
of the other part, which other part, with the Seal of the aforesaid Earl
signed, he the said R. brings here into Court, whose Date is the same day and
year did bargain and sell to him the said R. the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things, by the name of the whole
Manor of E. with the Appurtenances in Suffolk, and all Lands and Tenements,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Under-Woods, Possessions, and
Hereditaments, accepted, reputed, or taken, as part, parcel, or Member, of the
aforesaid Manor, or to that Manor in any manner pertaining, as also all other
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, being of the aforesaid Earls in E. or
elsewhere in the County of S. which the aforesaid Earl had of the Gift and
Grant of the aforesaid late King, or which pertained or belonged, or were part,
parcel, or member, or unto the aforesaid College, or of the Possession
thereof, within three years next before the dissolution of the same College,
to have and to hold the aforesaid Manor, and all other the Premises with
their Appurtenances, to the aforesaid R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as
by the same Indenture, amongst other things, it more fully appears: Which said
Indenture before Sampson Michell Clerk, one of the Masters of the Court of
Chancery of the aforesaid late King, afterward the same twentieth day of May
in the thirty sixth year aforesaid, as the Deed of him the said Earl, by him
the Earl was acknowledged, and in the Chancery aforesaid the same day and
year, according to the form of the Statute in that case published and
provided, was enrolled; by which the same R. was seized of the Manor aforesaid
with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his Demesne as of Fee, until the
aforesaid S. afterward, to wit, the aforesaid time wherein, etc. into the
Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. did enter, and the Close
aforesaid then and there broke, and the Grass aforesaid then and there
growing, with the Cattle aforesaid did eat up, trod down, etc. in manner and
form as the aforesaid R. above against him complains.

And further the same R. says, That the aforesaid Demise of the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. by the aforesaid late Master
and the Brotherhood to the aforesaid E. Bestroy and S. in form aforesaid made,
had his Continuance and being at the aforesaid time of the aforesaid Demise of
the same Manor with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. to the aforesaid S. by
the aforesaid late Master and Brotherhood, in form above in the Bar aforesaid
specified, was supposed to be done: By which the same Demise in the Bar
aforesaid pleaded, in the same manner and form made is void and of none
effect: And this, etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid S. the Trespass
aforesaid in the aforesaid hundred Acres of Land with the appurtenances, above
acknowledges, the same R. prays Judgment, and his damages by occasion of
that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid S. as formerly says, The Defendant maintains his Plea and
traverseth the demise of the Master, and Brotherhood to T. Bostnay and S.
That the aforesaid late Master and Brotherhood aforesaid, of the late
College, long before the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid above
supposed to be done, were seized of the Manor aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. in their Demesne as of Fee, in right of their
College aforesaid: And the said late Master and Brotherhood of the same late
College of that Manor with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. being seized, the
same late Master and Brotherhood of the aforesaid late College, before the
aforesaid time wherein, etc. to wit, the aforesaid twentieth day of December,
in the thirtieth year of the Reign of the aforesaid late King, at R.
aforesaid, by their aforesaid Writing indented with the Seal of them the said
Master and Brotherhood sealed, and to the Court of our aforesaid late Queen
shown, as aforesaid, whose date is the same day and year, by their unanimous
assent and consent, did demise and to Farm let unto the aforesaid S. his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, the aforesaid Manor of E. with the
appurtenances, to have and to hold the aforesaid manor with the apuptenances,
whereof, etc. to the aforesaid S. his Executors and Assigns, from the
aforesaid Feast of the Intention of the holy Cross last past, before the date
of the said indented Writing, unto the end and term of fifty years, from
thence next following, and fully to be complete and ended: By virtue of which
said Demise, the aforesaid S. into the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances
did enter, and was thereof possessed, in manner and form as the aforesaid S.
above by pleading has alleged.

Without that that the aforesaid late Master and Brotherhood aforesaid of the
late College, demised the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, whereof,
etc. to the aforesaid E. Bestnay and S. in manner and form as the aforesaid R.
above by Replication has alleged: And this, etc. Whereupon he prays
Judgment, and that the aforesaid R. may be debarred from having his Action
aforesaid against him, etc.

AND the aforesaid R. F. as formerly says, That the aforesaid late Master and
Brotherhood of the aforesaid late College, did demise the Manor aforesaid
with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. to the aforesaid E. B. and S. in manner
and form as the aforesaid R. above by Replication has alleged; and this he
prays may be inquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid S. in like manner,
etc. Therefore command is to the Sheriff of Norfolk, A Justification in
Trespass, by a Prescription for a Procession way in another place then in the
declaration, with a traverse that he is guilty in the place in the declaration.
that he cause to come here twelve, etc.

AND the aforesaid T. A. R. T. M. and others, by W.H. their Attorney, come and
defend the force and injury, when, etc. And the aforesaid T. M. says, That he
is in nothing thereof guilty: And of this, etc. and the aforesaid Prior in like
manner, etc. And the aforesaid T. A. R. and others, as to the coming by Force
and Arms, say, that they are in nothing thereof guilty: And of this, etc. and
the aforesaid Prior in like manor, etc. And as to the residue of the Trespass
aforesaid, supposed to be made, they the said T: A.R. and others say that the
aforesaid Prior ought not to have his action aforesaid against them: Because
they say that long before the aforesaid time, wherein the Trespass aforesaid
is supposed to be done, one E. M. was seized of one Marsh called forty acres,
containing forty acres of Marsh land with the appurtenances lying in the Parish
of H. in the County aforesaid in his demesne as of fee: and being so thereof
seized before the said time, wherein, etc. at H. aforesaid demised the
aforesaid forty acres of Marsh Land to the aforesaid Prior to hold to him at
the will of him the said E. By virtue of which demise, he the said Prior the
aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made was thereof
possessed: further say that the same T. A. is, and the aforesaid time of the
Trespass aforesaid supposed to be done was Vicar of the Parish Church of H.
aforesaid: and that they the said R. and others at the same time of that
Trespass supposed to be made were Parishioners of the same Parish of H. and
dwelling within the same Parish: and further say, that the aforesaid T.A. and
all his predecessors Vicars of the Parish Church of H. aforesaid, and
whomsoever Parishioners of the same Parish from the time being from time out of
mind were used and accustomed yearly at their pleasure, on the Eve of
Ascension day within the Rogation days to go and walk about through the Marsh
aforesaid with solemn procession of the aforesaid Parish of H. By which the
aforesaid T. A. the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be
made then being Vicar of the same Church: And the aforesaid R. and others then
Parishioners of the same Parish of H. and dwelling within the same Parish on
the Eve of Ascension day within the Rogation days in the aforesaid first year
of the Reign of our Lord the King that now is, with other Parishioners of the
same Parish, with the solemn procession of the same Parish, did go and walk
about the aforesaid forty acres of Marsh; The aforesaid Prior then of the Marsh
aforesaid being possessed by virtue of the demise aforesaid to him made; and in
that walking about the grass aforesaid in the same Marsh then growing, by
walking, with their feet they did tread down and consume, as it was lawful for
them to do; Without that that the aforesaid T. A. R. and others are guilty of
the Trespass aforesaid in S. aforesaid supposed to be done in the form which
the aforesaid Prior above against them complains, and this, etc. Whereupon
they pray judgment, whether the aforesaid Prior ought to have his action
aforesaid against them.

ANd the aforesaid Prior says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that he ought not be debarred from having his Action aforesaid against etc.
Because he says by Protestation that the aforesaid Marsh called forty acres is
in Seasalton aforesaid, and not in the parish of H. by protestation also that
the aforesaid E. was not seized of the aforesaid forty acres of Marsh, nor
demised them to him the said Prior in form aforesaid; and not acknowledging any
thing by the said T. A. R. and which is above alleged to be true, For plea
says, that the said T. A. R. and others are guilty of the Trespass aforesaid,
in Seasalton aforesaid; in the form wherein he the same Prior above against
them complains; and this he prays may be enquired of by the Country, and the
aforesaid T. A. R. and others in like manner, etc.

ANd the aforesaid W.T. and T.C. by W.R. their Attorney come, and defend the
force and injury when etc. Justification in Trespass for a ^erriot Custom
And as to the coming by force and arms, etc. or whatsoever, etc. not guilty:
And as to the taking of the Ox aforesaid, they the said W. and T. say that the
aforesaid Administrator ought not to have his Action aforesaid against them;
Because they say that long before the aforesaid time, wherein the aforesaid I.
the Testator, etc. was seized of twenty acres of Lands with the appurtenances
in B. aforesaid in his demesne as of Fee; And being so thereof seized, held the
same twenty acres of Land with the appurtenances of Thomas Bishop of London as
of his Manor of Boughton Aylusse in the County aforesaid by fealty and rent of
12 d. by the year, that is to say, at the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle 3 d.
thereof, and at the feasts etc. 3 d. thereof residue by equal portions yearly
to be paid; And by the service of doing Suit to the Court of the said Bishop of
his Manor aforesaid from three weeks to three weeks at Boughton A. aforesaid
to be held, and by the service of rendering after the death of each Tenant dying
thereof seized; and after each alienation of the same twenty acres of Land in
fee made by way of releife three pence one farthing, and the third part of one
farthing: And by the service of rendering to the aforesaid Bishop after the
death of each Tenant dying of the aforesaid twenty acres of Land seized the
best living beast of the same Tenants at the time of his death in the name of a
Herriot; of which said services the same Bishop was seized by the hands of the
aforesaid Testator, as by the hands of his true Tenant: (and otherwise thus)
That the aforesaid Bishop and all his Ancestors, and all they whose estate the
same Bishop has in the aforesaid Manor of B A. with the appurtenances have
had and time out of mind were accustomed to have of all and all manner of
Tenants of the Manor aforesaid, and of each Tenant of the same Manor whose
Lands or Tenements of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, as of the same Manor
holds, and these Lands or Tenements or any parcel thereof so held, he
alienateth to any person or persons in fee, notice thereupon in the life time
of him who alienateth those Lands or Tenements by them or by him, to which or
to whom such Lands or Tenements should be sold to the Lords of the said Manor
for the time being, being not given or made after the death of such Tenant so
alienating, the best living beast, which was his the said Tenants so alienating
at the time of his death, by the name of a customary Herriot: And the aforesaid
W. and I. say, that the aforesaid I.S. the Testator, etc. was seized of the
aforesaid twenty acres of land with the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee:
and being so thereof seized enfeoffed T.S. and I.S. of the same twenty acres of
Lands, with the appurtenances of the aforesaid Bishop in form aforesaid then
being held, to hold to them, their heirs and assigns for ever: By virtue of
which said Feoffment, they the said T.S. and I.S. were thereof seized in their
demesne as of Fee: and the aforesaid J.S. the Testator afterward dyed: No
notice by the same T.S. and I.S. or either of them of that Feoffement to the
aforesaid Bishop at the time of the said Feoffement then and as yet being Lord
of the Manor in the life of the aforesaid J.S. the Testator being given or
made: and the aforesaid W. and T. further say, that the aforesaid I. S. the
Testator at the time of his death was possessed of the Ox aforesaid as of his
proper Ox, which then was his best living beast at the time of his death. By
means whereof they the said W. and T. as the servants of the same Bishop, and
by his command, the aforesaid time, wherein the Trespass aforesaid was
supposed to be made: The Ox aforesaid, as the best living Beast which was the
aforesaid I.S. the Testator at the time of his death in the custody of the
aforesaid Administrators at B. A. aforesaid there found in the name of a
customary Herriot, they took and led away as it was lawful for them to do;
And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

AND the aforesaid I.T.S. and I. Administrators, etc. say, The Plaintiff says
by Protestation that the Lands were (...) held by such, or so many services
put, etc. for Plea that they did the Trespass de injuria propria, and traverse
the custom.
that they levy any thing, etc. ought not to be debarred from having their
action aforesaid against them, because by Protestation, that the aforesaid
twenty acres of Lands are not sold of the aforesaid Bishop by such, nor so many
services as the aforesaid W. and T. above have alleged for Plea; they say
that the aforesaid W. and T. the day and year aforesaid by force and arms of
their proper injury, the Ox aforesaid out of the possession of the
Administrators aforesaid, at B. aforesaid found, they took and led away, as
the same I. T. S. and I. above against them complain, without that, that the
aforesaid Bishop, and his Ancestors, and all they whose estates the same Bishop
has in the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances were, and from the whole
time aforesaid were used, and accustomed of all, and all manner of the Tenants,
and of every Tenant of the Manor aforesaid, who holds Lands or Tenements of
the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, as of the same Manor And those Lands or
Tenements, or any parcel thereof so held, shall have sold to any person, or
persons in Fee, notice thereof in the life of him who shall so have alienated
those Lands and Tenements by him or them, to which, or to whom these Tenements
shall be sold, unto the Lord of the same Manor for the time being, not being
given, or made after the death of the Tenant so alienating, the best living
beast which was of his the said Tenants so alienating at the time of his death,
in the name of a customary Herriot, as the aforesaid W. and T. above has
alleged: And this, etc. Whereupon for that the same VV. and T.C. the taking
of the Ox aforesaid above acknowledge, they pray judgment, and their damages
upon that occasion to be adjudged unto them, etc.

Issue upon the Herriot custom.
AND the aforesaid W. and T. say that the aforesaid Bishop, and all his
Ancestors, and all they whose estates he the said Bishop has in the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances has had, and from the whole time aforesaid,
were used and accustomed to have of all, and all manner of Tenants, of every
Tenant of the Manor aforesaid, who held Lands or Tenements from the Lord of
the Manor, etc. as of the same Manor, and do alien those lands and Tenement,
or any parcel thereof to any person or persons in Fee; Notice thereof in the
life time of him who shall so sell those Lands or Tenements by them, or by him,
to which, or to whom those Tenements shall be sold, to the Lord of the same
Manor for the time being, not being given, and made after the death of such
Tenant so alienating, the best living beast, which was his the said Tenant so
alienating at the time of his death in the name of a customary Herriot, as the
same W. and T. above have alleged: And of this they put themselves upon the
Country, etc.

AND the aforesaid R.J. A.E. J.C. and R.L. by R. G. their Attorney come and
defend the force and injury, Some of the Defendants plead not guilty, and
others justify, for that the place in which, etc. is the Kings highway. Trin.
16. Hen. 7. Roll. 35.
whom, etc. And the aforesaid R.I. A.E. and R. say, that they are in nothing
guilty, etc. And of this, etc. And the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner,
etc. And the aforesaid, J.C. as to the coming with force and Arms, etc. as
also the whole trespass aforesaid, besides the breaking of the Close
aforesaid, says that he is in nothing guilty, etc. And as to the Trespass
aforesaid, of breaking the Close aforesaid supposed to be done, the same I.C.
says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff ought not to have his action aforesaid
against him, because he says, that the place in which the Trespass aforesaid
is supposed to be made, is, and at the time wherein, etc. was seven Acres of
Land called Otefield-brook with the Appurtenances in W. aforesaid, whereof the
said I. C. at the time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, and long
before the said time was seized in his Demesne as of Fee: Over which said seven
Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances is, and from time out of mind, was the
Kings common highway, tending and leading from the Kings way there called the
Ashford highway, unto the Village of Adelsford in the County aforesaid,
containing in breadth eight foot, that is to say, as well for horsemen, as for
footmen there by the same way willing to ride, or journey: And further, he the
same I.C. says that he the aforesaid time wherein, etc. did ride, and travel
from the aforesaid Kings way, called Ashford highway, unto the village of A.
aforesaid over the aforesaid seven Acres of Land, using that highway of the
Kings there, as it was lawful for him to do: which said riding by that
highway of the Kings over the aforesaid seven Acres of land, is the same
breach of the Close, whereof the aforesaid I. C. above complains, etc. And
this, etc. whereupon he prays judgment whether the action etc.

And the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he ought not to be debarred from
having his action aforesaid against the aforesaid I. C. because he says, that
the foresaid I. C. together with etc. the day and year aforesaid by Force and
Arms aforesaid of his proper injury the Close aforesaid in the aforesaid seven
Acres of land did break, and also his grass upon the same seven Acres of Land
then growing, with the cattle aforesaid, did eat up, tread down, and consume
in manner and form as the same I. C. above now complains.

Without that, that there is, The Traverse.
or from the aforesaid time out of mind, etc. there was a common Kings high
way, tending and leading from the Kings highway there called Ashford highway,
unto the village of Adelsford, as well for horsemen, as for footmen, over the
aforesaid seven Acres of Land in manner and form as the aforesaid I. C. above
by pleading has alleged: And this, etc. VVhereupon for that the same I. C.
the Trespass aforesaid of breaking the Close aforesaid above acknowledges, he
prays judgment, and his damages by that occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid I.C. as formerly, says, that there is, Issue upon the
Traverse.
and from the said time out of mind, etc. there was a common Kings highway
tending and leading from the aforesaid highway called Adelsford highway unto
the village of Adelsford aforesaid, as well for horsemen as for footmen over
the aforesaid seven acres of Land with the appurtenances, in manner and form
as the aforesaid I. C. above by pleading has alleged: And of this he puts
himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner, etc.

The Defendants plead that a stranger was seized, etc. And Enfeoffed certain,
etc. And justify the Trespass as servants to the Feoffees. Paschae 19. Hen.
7. Roll. 60.
AND the aforesaid T. and VV.B. by T.S. their Attorney come and defend the force
and injury when etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, or whatsoever,
etc. not guilty: And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid, supposed to
be done, the same. T.A. and VV. say, that the aforesaid T.R. ought not to have
his action aforesaid against them, because they say that the place in which the
Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be done, is, and the aforesaid time wherein,
etc. was one Garden, three Crofts of Land containing twelve acres of Land and
one Pagholl in L. aforesaid, whereof one E.B. long before the said time,
wherein, etc. was seized in his demesne as of Fee: And so being thereof seized,
by his certain Deed indented long before the said time enfeoffed F.A. and I.R.
to have, and to hold to them, and their heirs for ever. By virtue of which
said Feoffement they the said R. and I. long before the aforesaid time, Color
by Feoffement.
wherein, etc. were thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee: And the
aforesaid T.R. claiming the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances by
color of of a certain demise to him thereupon made for term of his life by
the aforesaid Edmond long before the aforesaid Feoffement, to them the said F.
and I. made, where nothing of the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances
into the possession of him the said T.B. by that Deed ever passed into the same
Tenements with the appurtenances long before the said time of the Trespass
aforesaid, supposed to be done, entered upon: which said T.B. possession
thereupon; the aforesaid T. A. and W. as the servants of them the said F. and
I. and by their commandment, the aforesaid time wherein, etc. into the same
Tenements, with the appurtenances re-entred, and the close aforesaid then there
broke, and the corn and grass then there growing did tread down, and
consume, continuing that treading down, and consumption in form aforesaid, as
it was lawful for them to do: And this, etc. Whereupon, etc. Whether action,
etc.

The Plaintiff Assigns Trespass anew.
AND the aforesaid T.R. says, that he by any thing by the aforesaid T.A. and
VV. pre-alleadged, ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid,
against them of the Trespass aforesaid made, because he says, that the place
in which the Trespass aforesaid, whereof he above now complains, is, and the
said time wherein, etc. was two hundred acres of Lands in R, aforesaid, called,
Fatherfeild, Thistlecrosse, and Churchfield, other then the Tenements aforesaid
in the aforesaid bar of them the said T.A. and VV. specified. VVhereupon for
that the aforesaid T.A. and VV. to the Trespass aforesaid in the aforesaid two
hundred acres of Land answer not, he prays judgment, and his damages, by
occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ANd the aforesaid T.A. and W. as to the trespass aforesaid in the aforesaid
two hundred acres of land anew assigned supposed to be done, The Defendants
justify the Trespass in the lands anew assigned for certain way from their
houses to the Church.
say that the aforesaid T.R. ought not to have or maintain his action aforesaid
against them, etc. because they say that the aforesaid T.A. and W. are, and the
aforesaid time wherein etc. were seized of one Message with the appurtenances
in R. aforesaid in their demesne as of Fee; and that they, and all those whose
estate the same T.A. and W. have in the same Message with the appurtenances
were accustomed to have a certain way from the said Message unto the Parish
Church of R. over and upon the aforesaid two hundred acres of Land from the
time out of mind, etc. By which the same T.A. and W. the aforesaid time wherein
etc. into the aforesaid two hundred acres of Land entered, using their way
aforesaid in the same, as it was lawful for them to do, which is the same
trespass of breaking the Close aforesaid, and treading down and consuming the
grass aforesaid in the same two hundred acres of Land whereof the aforesaid A.
B. above against them complains; And this etc. whereupon they pray judgment
whether the aforesaid T.B. ought to have and maintain his action aforesaid
against them, etc.

ANd the aforesaid T.B. says that he by any thing before alleged ought not to
be deba^red from having his action aforesaid against them, The Plaintiff by
protestation says the Defendant had no way for plea, that they trod down the
grass out of the way.
because by protestation that the aforesaid T. A. and W. and all they whose
state the same A.T. and W. have in the Message aforesaid, have not had, nor
were accustomed to have the way aforesaid from the Message aforesaid, to the
Church aforesaid, over and upon the aforesaid two hundred acres of Land in the
aforesaid last bar specified from the time out of mind etc. as they above by
pleadings have alleged; for plea he says, that he the same T.B. was of the
aforesaid two hundred acres of Land with the appurtenances long before the said
time wherein etc. seized in his demesne as of Fee, until the aforesaid T. A.
and W. by force and arms aforesaid the Close aforesaid in the aforesaid two
hundred acres of Land did break, and the come and grass aforesaid out of that
way growing did tread down and consume in manner and form as the same T. B.
above by pleading has alleged; and this etc. whereupon he prays judgment,
and his damages by occasion of that trespass to be adjudged unto him etc.

ANd the aforesaid T.A. and W. as to the trespass aforesaid out of the way
aforesaid in the aforesaid two hundred acres of Lands supposed to be made, say,
that they are nothing thereof guilty; And of this they put themselves upon the
Country, and the aforesaid T.B. in like manner, etc.

The Defendants justify the taking of a Mortuary, by virtue of a Demise to
them of the Rectory, etc. Trin. 21. Hen. 7. Roll 62
ANd the aforesaid R. P. and W. P. by A. B. their Attorney come and defend the
force and injury when, etc. and as to the coming by force and arms or
whatsoever, etc. not guilty etc. and as to the residue etc. the same R. and W.
say that the aforesaid plaintiff ought not to have his action etc. because
they say, that one L. Prior of the house and Church of the blessed Mary, and
St. Thomas the Martyr of the now place near Guilford is and the said time
wherein etc. was Parson imparsonate of the Church of Ewel aforesaid: and that
he, and all his Predecessors, Priors of the house aforesaid, from the time out
of mind, etc. were Parsons of the same Church imparsonate in the same: And
that he, and all his Predecessors aforesaid Parsons of the Church aforesaid by
the whole time aforesaid, were used and accustomed to have of every person
within the Precinct of the Parish of Ewel aforesaid, dying, to whom the
Sacraments and holy things at the time of his death are administered, or
administrable, one living Beast of the same so dying person; if the same dying
man have beasts at the time of his death, or before, or the best thing of him
the said so dying man, if he have no living beasts at the same time, in the
name of a Mortuary, for the holy things to him so dying to be celebrated: And
that the aforesaid Prior, and all his Predecessors aforesaid, Parsons of the
Church aforesaid, from the whole time aforesaid, were used and accustomed, to
take and seize such Mortuary so happening, to whose hands soever they should
come: And the same R.P. and VV. say, that the aforesaid now Prior, long before
the said time, wherein etc. that is to say, (such a day and year) at Ripley in
the County aforesaid, demised to the aforesaid R.P. the Rectory of Ewel
aforesaid, with all fruits, oblations, offerings, glebes, lands, and other
their appurtenances whatsoever; To have, and to hold to him the said R.P. and
his Assigns until the end and term of one and twenty years from thence next
following, and fully to be complete: By virtue of which Demise the aforesaid
R.P. long before the said time wherein, etc. was of the Rectory aforesaid, and
other the premises, with their appurtenances possessed: And he being so
thereof possessed after, and before the said time, that is to say (such a day
and year aforesaid) one E G. to whom the Sacraments and holy things then were
to be administered, and administrable, was possessed of the aforesaid horse, as
of his proper horse: And he being so thereof possessed long before the said
time, wherein, etc. delivered that horse to the aforesaid R.G. safely to be
kept: And that horse to him the said E. to be redelivered when he should be
thereunto required: And that also long before the said time wherein, etc. that
is to lay the eleventh day of March (such a year) One R.R. to whom the
Sacraments and holy things then were to be administered, and administrable was
possessed of the aforesaid Ox, as of his proper Ox: And so being thereof
possessed long before the same time, wherein etc. delivered that Ox to the
aforesaid R.G. to be safely kept: And that Ox to him the said R.R. when he
should be thereunto required to be re-delivered: By means whereof, the
aforesaid R. E. long before the aforesaid time, wherein, etc. was of the said
Ox possessed: And he being so of the same Horse and Ox possessed, the
aforesaid E. G. and R. R. afterward, and long before the same time at Ewell
aforesaid, within the Parish aforesaid dyed: By means whereof, the Horse and
Ox aforesaid, came and belonged to the aforesaid R.P. in the name of a
Mortuary, of them the said E. G. and R.R. By which the same R.P. as in his own
Right: And the aforesaid A. and W. as servants of him the said R.P. and by his
command the aforesaid time wherein, etc. the Horse and Ox aforesaid at Ewell
aforesaid found, in the name of Mortuaries of them the said E.G. and R.R. they
took and led away, as it was lawful for them to do: And this, etc. whereupon
they pray judgment whether the action, etc.

AND the Plaintiff says, that he ought not to be debarred from his action
aforesaid, etc. because he says, That the Prior, Parson of the Church
aforesaid imparsonate in the same remains, and all his Predecessors aforesaid
Parsons of that Church from time out of mind were used, and accustomed to have
of each person within the Precinct of the Parish of Ewell dying, to whom the
Sacraments, and holy things at the time of his death are to be administered, and
administrable one living beast of the same so dying person, if the same dying
person have living beasts at the time of his death, or one other better thing
of his the said person so dying, if at the same time he had no living beasts,
in the name of a Mortuary for Sacramentals to him so dying to be administered:
And that also within the same Parish of Ewell, from the whole time aforesaid,
there is had such a custom, that wheresoever any of the Parish aforesaid, to
whom Sacraments and holy things are to be administered and administrable at the
time of his death within the Parish aforesaid do dye, having livings, beasts,
or other things at the time of his death, that then after his death his
Executor or Executors of his last will, or Administrator, or Administrators of
the goods and Chattels of him so dying, were used and accustomed to have the
first election of all and singular the beasts, or of any other better things
which were of him so dying at the time of his death: And the same living beasts
or other better things first chosen to be taken and seized to the fulfilling
of the Will of the Testator so deceasing: And after such election of the living
beasts, or of other better things of such person dying, by the Executor, or
Administrator of the goods of such so dying in form aforesaid made, That then
the aforesaid Prior Parson imparsonate of the Church aforesaid, or his Deputy
by the whole time aforesaid were used and accustomed to have to himself of the
beasts, or of other things residue which were of the aforesaid so dying person
at the time of his death, the best beast, or other better thing of his so dying
by his Executors or Administrators formerly in no wise taken, or seized for his
Mortuary: And the aforesaid R. and M. say that the aforesaid E.G. and I.R. long
before the said time wherein, etc. And at the time of the death of them, were
possessed of the aforesaid Horse and Ox, as of their proper Horse and Ox: And
so being thereof possessed at Ewell aforesaid, constituted the aforesaid R.G.
Executor of their last Wills: And long before the aforesaid time, wherein etc.
By means whereof the said R.G. after the death of the aforesaid E.G. and R.R.
as Executor of the Testament, and last Will of them the said E.G. and R.R. long
before the said time wherein, etc. the aforesaid Horse and Ox, as the best
living beasts of the aforesaid Testator took and seized to the fulfilling of
the execution of the Testament of the aforesaid Testators: By which he the said
E.G. long before the said time wherein etc. was of the same Horse and Ox
possessed until the said R.P.A. and W. in the said time wherein etc. the same
Horse and Ox out of the possession of him the said E. G. they took and led
away in manner and form as the same E.G. above against them complains: And
this, etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid R.P.A. and W. the Trespass
aforesaid above acknowledges, he prays judgment, and his damages upon that
occasion to be adjudged unto him, etc.

The Defendant maintains his plea in bar, and traverses the custom pleaded by
the Plaintiff. Traverse.
AND the aforesaid. R.P.A. and W. as to the aforesaid residue of the Trespass
aforesaid supposed to be done, says as formerly, that the aforesaid Prior is,
and at the said time wherein, etc. was Parson of the Church aforesaid
imparsonate in the same, and that he, and all his predecessors (and so recite
as in the first plea in bar of the Defendant.)

Without that that within the aforesaid Parish of Ewell from time out of mind,
etc. there was had such a custom, that whenever any of the Parish aforesaid,
to whom Sacraments and holy things at the time of his death are to be
administered or administrable do dye within that Parish, having livings, beasts,
or other things at the time of his death, that then after his death, his
Executor, or Executors of his will aforesaid, or the Administrator or
Administrators of the goods and Chattels of him so dying, were used and
accustomed to have the first election of all and singular the livings, beasts,
or of any other better things, which were of his so dying at the time of his
death: And the same living beasts, or other bette things first chosen, to take
and seize to the fulfilling of the Execution of the Testament of such Testator
so deceasing, as the aforesaid R.G. above by pleading has alleged: And this,
etc. Whereupon they pray judgment: And that he the said E.G. may be debarred
from having his action aforesaid against them.

AND the aforesaid E. G. as formerly says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that within the Parish, etc. (and so word for word as in the Traverse before)
until as he the same E.G. above by pleading has alleged. And this he prays
may be enquired of by the country, etc. Aid Prior after issue made.
And upon this the aforesaid R. P. says that he that Averment aforesaid, above
pretended, without the aforesaid Prior cannot make good, or maintain: And
prays aid of him the said Prior: And he that, etc. Therefore the same Prior is
to be summoned by good Summons, etc. that he be before our Lord the King from
the day of St. Michael in fifteen days, wheresoever, etc. to join himself in
aid unto the aforesaid R.P. and to make good and maintain the issue aforesaid,
with the aforesaid A. and W. if he will: And as to the trying of the issue
aforesaid above between the parties aforesaid joined, Issue and the Ve. fac.
The Jury are thereupon to come before our Lord the King at the aforesaid
Term: And who neither, etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same
day is given to the parties aforesaid here, etc.

Middlesex, AND the aforesaid J.L. by W.L. his Attorney comes and defends the
force and injury when, etc. The Defendant pleaded the goods taken as a pawn
for money lent etc.
And as to the coming by force and arms, he says, he is in nothing thereof
guilty: And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid, supposed to be done,
the same I. says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff ought not to have his action,
etc. because he says that the same S. long before the said time wherein, etc.
was indebted unto him the said I. in 46 s. and 8 d. for diverse sums of money by
him the said S. of the aforesaid I. formerly borrowed: And afterward, and long
before the said time, the same S. by one A. his wife delivered to the aforesaid
I. the aforesaid goods, and chattels, as a pawn for the aforesaid 46 s. and 8
d. to be held to him the said I. in pledge, until the said S. to the aforesaid
l. the same 46 s. and 8 d. had paid: And the same I. in fact says, that the
aforesaid S. has not as yet paid to him the said I. the aforesaid 46 s. and 8
d. Which is the same Trespass, and taking and carrying away the aforesaid
goods and chattels, whereof the aforesaid S. above now complains. And this,
etc. Whereupon he prays judgment whether the Action etc.

AND the aforesaid S. says, that he by any thing before alleged, The
Plaintiff replied that he took them injuria sua propria without such a cause.
ought not to be debarred from having his Action aforesaid, because he says,
that the aforesaid I. as of his proper injury, and without such a cause above
by him the said I. alleged the day and year aforesaid, the aforesaid goods
and chattels at St. John street aforesaid found, he took and carried away, as
the same S. by his Bill aforesaid above supposes: And this he prays may be
enquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid I. in like manner. Therefore the
Jury is to come before our Lord the King, etc.

Justification in Trespass for taking Cattle as a stray.
AND the aforesaid R. by T.B. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, and also the whole
Trespass aforesaid, besides the taking and leading away of two horses of the
aforesaid three horses, the same R. says, that he is in nothing guilty, etc.
And as to the taking and leading away of two of those horses, the same R. says
that the aforesaid T. Poultrey ought not to have his action aforesaid against
him, because he says that the place in which the Trespass aforesaid was
supposed to be done, is, and the said time wherein, etc. was eight acres of
Meadow in Shouley aforesaid called Salmons Meade parcel of the Manor of S.
otherwise C. within which said Manor the same R. and all his antecessours,
whose heir he is: And all others whose estate he the said R. now has in the
said Manor have had view of Frank Pledge, Wayfes, and Strayes within the same
Manor from time out of mind: And the same R. says, that the aforesaid two
horses before the said time, wherein, etc. came within the Manor of S.
aforesaid, and there remained before the said time, wherein, etc. by the space
of one year, and one day as Strayes: And the aforesaid R. made public
Proclamation in the Market of the Village of St. Albans, and in diverse
Churches, and Markets being near there, according to the laudable custom of
that Country used: And none came to claim the property of the said two horses
within the aforesaid one year, and one day: By which the same R. in the
aforesaid eight acres of Meadow seized and took the aforesaid two horses as his
proper goods and chattels.

Traverse the place of taking.
Without that, that the same R. took those two horses within the Precinct of the
aforesaid Manor of Shouley Berry in manner and form as the aforesaid T. above
against him complains: And this, etc. Whereupon he prays judgment whether
the aforesaid T. ought to have his action aforesaid against him, etc.

Issue upon the traverse.
AND the aforesaid T. says, that he by any thing before, etc. ought not to be
debarred, etc. Because he says, that the aforesaid R. took the aforesaid two
horses within the Precinct of the aforesaid Manor of S. M. in manner and form
as the same T. above against him complains: And this he prays may be
enquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid I. in like manner: Therefore the
Jury is to come before our Lord the King etc.

AND the aforesaid A: by G. T. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury, when, etc. And says, The Defendant pleads the property of the horse in
a stranger, who in public Market falls to the Defendant.
that the aforesaid C. ought not to have his action aforesaid against him,
because he says that before the property of the horse aforesaid was the
aforesaid C. the property of the same horse did belong unto one B. And says
that the Town of Dorton is and from the time out of mind was an ancient
Borough, within which said Borough there has been, and from the whole time
aforesaid, was had a certain Market on each Thursday weekly: And says that
the aforesaid B. of the aforesaid horse as of his proper horse being possessed
long before the time of the Trespass aforesaid, supposed to be done (that is
to say such a day and year) at D. aforesaid in full Market there for 6 l. to
the aforesaid B. in hand paid that horse to him the said A. he sold: And the
same horse to him the said A. then and there delivered. By virtue of which said
sale and delivery of that horse as of his proper horse was possessed, and as
yet is: And the aforesaid C. the horse aforesaid out of the possession of him
the said B. took, and was thereof possessed until the same A. the same horse
as his proper horse at S. aforesaid at the time of the Trespass aforesaid,
supposed to be made, out of the possession of the aforesaid B. by means of the
sale and delivery aforesaid, he again took, and led away, as it was lawful
for him to do: And this etc. Whereupon he demands judgment, etc.

AND the aforesaid C. says, that he by any thing before alleged, The
Plaintiff pleads the property in another stranger, who sold to him, and
traverses the sale made to the Defendant.
ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against him, etc.
because by protestation, that the aforesaid propriety of the horse aforesaid
was never the aforesaid B. for Plea he says, that long before the time of the
Trespass aforesaid made, the propriety of the horse aforesaid, was one T.H.
which said T. of that horse as of his proper horse then being possessed, that
horse to him the said C. long before the said time wherein the Trespass
aforesaid was made, to wit (such a day and year, and place, and County) for a
100 s. to him the said T. in hand paid, sold to him the said C. the horse
aforesaid: And that horse to him the said C. then and there delivered. By
virtue of which said sale and delivery the same C. of that horse as of his
proper horse was possessed until the aforesaid A. the horse aforesaid at S.
aforesaid at the time of the Trespass aforesaid made by force and arms out of
the possession of him the said C. he took and led away, as he by his aforesaid
Writ and declaration above against him complains.

Without that, A Traverse of the sale to the Defendant.
that the aforesaid B. the horse aforesaid to the aforesaid A. at D. aforesaid
(the aforesaid such a day, and year) sold, in manner and form as the
aforesaid A. above alleges: And this etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid
A. the Trespass aforesaid above acknowledges, he prays judgment, and his
damages by occasion of the Trespass, aforesaid to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the aforesaid A. says, that the aforesaid B. the horse aforesaid to the
aforesaid A. at D. aforesaid (the day and year aforesaid) sold in manner and
form as he above has alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country,
And the aforesaid C. in like manner, etc. Therefore the Jury is to come, etc.

Institutions in trespass for want of reparation of the hedges by the
Plaintiffs. Trin. 22. Hen. 6. Roll. 89.
AND the aforesaid T. and I. by I.H. their Attorney come and defend the force
and injury where, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms etc. not guilty:
And as to the breaking of the close aforesaid; and the eating up, treading
down, and consuming of the grass aforesaid, the same T. and I. say, that the
aforesaid N. ought not to have his action aforesaid against them, because they
say that they at the time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, were,
and are seized of a certain close of pasture near adjoining to the said close
of the aforesaid N. in which the grass aforesaid grew in K. aforesaid in their
demesne as of Fee. Between which said closes there is a certain hedge
separating each from other the aforesaid closes: Which said hedge the aforesaid
N. and all they whose estate the same N. has in the close aforesaid, from time
out of mind were accustomed to make, repair and sustain; and say that that
hedge for want of reparation, and sustaining of the same, was at the time of
the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, broken down, and laid prostrate
to the ground; and that the Cattle of them the said T. and I. in their close
aforesaid put to depasture into the said close of the aforesaid N. by the
breach and decay of the said hedge did enter against the will of them the said
T. and I. and the grass aforesaid did eat up, tread down, and consume, the
same T. and I. their Cattle aforesaid freshly pursuing into the said close of
the said N. by the breach and decay aforesaid, did enter to drive back their
cattle into the said close of them the said T. and I. and into that close
speedily drove them, as it was lawful for them to do, which is the same
Trespass, and breach of close and feeding, treading down, and consuming the
grass aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid N. above against them complains: And
this they are ready to aver, etc. whereupon, etc.

The Defendants plead that the Vicar was seized in right of his Vicaridge, and
justify as his servants.
Essex, AND the aforesaid H.T.R. and VV. by T. G. their Attorney come and
defend the force and injury when etc. And as to the coming by force and arms,
as also the whole Trespass aforesaid, besides the breaking of the close, and
how aforesaid, say that they are not guilty, etc. And as to the breaking of the
close and house aforesaid, they the same H.R. and VV. say, that the aforesaid
C. ought not to have thereof his action aforesaid against them, because they
say that the close and house aforesaid, and also the place in which it was
supposed the same Trespass to be made, The form of pleading where the quantity
of the close is not ascertained in the Declaration.
was one house and acre of Land with the appurtenances in Eastham aforesaid,
which are, and the aforesaid time wherein etc. were parcel of the Manor of
Eastham in the County aforesaid, whereof before the said time wherein, etc. one
I.R. Vicar of the Church of Eastham aforesaid, was seized in his demesne, as of
Fee, in right of his Vicaridge aforesaid, by which the same H. R. and W. as the
servants of him the said I. R. and by his command the aforesaid time wherein,
etc. the close and house aforesaid, did break, as it was lawful for them to
do: And this, etc. Whereupon they pray judgment whether the aforesaid C.
ought to have, or maintain his action aforesaid against them etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, The plaintiff replies that the Vicar
demised to him, etc.
that he by any thing before pre-alleadged, ought not to be debarred from
having his action aforesaid against them of the breach of the close and house
aforesaid, because he says that it is well and true that before the said time
of the Trespass aforesaid made, the aforesaid I.R. was seized of the aforesaid
house, and one acre of Land with the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee in
right of his Vicaridge aforesaid: And being so thereof seized before the same
time of the Trespass aforesaid made, to wit, the first day of June in the 33
year of the Reign of our Lord the King, that now is at E. aforesaid in the
County aforesaid, demised the same Tenements with the appurtenances to him the
said Plaintiff, To have, and to occupy to him the said Plaintiff, and his
assigns from the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist then next
following, until the feast of St. Michael the Archangel in the 35 year of
the Reign of our Lord the King that now is: By virtue of which demise, he the
said Plaintiff of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, was
possessed, until the aforesaid Defendants the day and year aforesaid in the
Declaration aforesaid above specified by force and arms, etc. the close and
house of him the said Plaintiff at E. aforesaid, they did break against the
peace of our Lord the King that now is, as he above against them complains:
And this etc. Wherefore for that the aforesaid Defendants, the breaking of the
close and house aforesaid above acknowledges, he prays judgment, and his
damages by occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc. The
Defendants maintain their plea, and traverse their D^mise.


AND the aforesaid Defendants, as formerly, say that the aforesaid I.R. was
seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demesne, as of
Fee in right of his Vicaridge aforesaid, as they above have alleged.

Without that, that the aforesaid I.R. demised the Tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances to the aforesaid Plaintiffes, as the same Plaintiff above
alleges: And this, etc. Whereupon as formerly, he prays judgment, and that
the aforesaid Plaintiff may be debarred from having his action aforesaid of
the breach of the close and house aforesaid against them, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the aforesaid Plaintiff as formerly says, that the aforesaid I. R.
demised to him the said Plaintiff the same Tenements with the appurtenances,
as he above has alleged: And this be prays may be enquired of by the
Country: And the aforesaid Defendants in like manner, etc.

Justification in Trespass by virtue of a demise made to the Testator, who
bequeathed the same to his wife.
AND the aforesaid R.F. by R. M. their Attorney come and defend the force and
injury when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever, etc.
not guilty etc. And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed
to be done, the aforesaid R.F. says, that the aforesaid R.R. and I. ought not
to have their action aforesaid against him, etc. because he says that the
close and house aforesaid, as also the place in which the trespass aforesaid
was supposed to be done, was, and the aforesaid time wherein the Trespass
aforesaid was supposed to be made, were one Message, and one close of Land
containing in it fifteen acres of Land, with the appurtenances in S. aforesaid,
whereof before the said time wherein, etc. one I. A. Esquire was seized in his
demesne as of Fee: And so being thereof seized before the said time, wherein,
etc. to wit (such a day, year, and place) did demise the Tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances to one R.W. of etc. To have, and to hold to him, and his
Assigns from the feast of St. Michael the Archangel then next following, unto
the end and term of forty years from thence next following, and fully to be
complete and ended: By virtue of which Demise the same R. W. was thereof
possessed: And so being thereof possessed before the said time wherein, etc. to
wit, (such a day, year, and place) made his last Will and Testament: And by the
same willed and declared that Elizabeth his wife immediately after the decease
of him the said R. W. should have and enjoy his state, term, and interest
which he then had to come in the Tenements aforesaid, The form of pleading,
where the Lease accrued to the husband under the wifes title.
with the appurtenances: And afterward, and before the said time wherein, etc.
the same R.VV. dyed: After whose death, the aforesaid E. was of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances possessed; and so being thereof possessed
before the said time, wherein, etc. (to wit, such a day, year, and place) took
to husband him the said R. F. By which he the said R. F. was of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances possessed; and the aforesaid Plaintiffes
claiming the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances by color of a
certain Deed of Demise to them thereupon made for term of their life by the
aforesaid I.A. long before the aforesaid Demise by the same I. A. to the
aforesaid R. W. thereupon in form aforesaid made, where nothing of these
Tenements, with the appurtenances into the possession of them the said
Plaintiffes by that Deed ever passed into the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances before the said time, wherein, etc. did enter: Upon whose the
said Plaintiffes possession, thereupon the same Defendant afterward, to wit,
the same time wherein, etc. into the same Tenements, with the appurtenances,
did re-enter; and the grass aforesaid then there growing, which the aforesaid
Cattle did eat up, tread down, and consume, and the ground aforesaid in the
aforesaid fifteen acres of Land with his ploughes aforesaid, he did break up,
as it was lawful for him to do: And this, etc. Wherefore he prays judgment
whether the action, etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, The Plaintiff pleads that before the
dom^se etc. the aforesaid Feoffee enfeoffed the Plaintiff and others to the
use of a stranger.
that he by any thing before alleged, ought not to be debarred from having
his action aforesaid against the aforesaid Defendants, because he says, that
before the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid made, the aforesaid I.A.
was seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in his demesne as
of Fee, and so being thereof seized before the said time wherein, etc. and
before the aforesaid four and twentieth day of September in the year, etc. of
the same Tenements with the appurtenances enfeoffed them the said Plaintiffes,
and one R. E. Knight, and W. L. to hold to them, and their heirs for ever, to
the use of one T. A. son and heir apparent of the aforesaid I. A. and Mary the
wife of him the said T.A. and the heirs of their bodies of them lawfully
begotten. By virtue of which said Feoffement they the said Plaintiffes, and R.
and W. were thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee to the same use: And the
said Plaintiffes and R. and W. to that use being so thereof seized, the
aforesaid J.A. the aforesaid four and twentieth of September, in the
eighteenth year aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the aforesaid R.W. To
have, and to hold to him, and his assigns from the aforesaid feast of St.
Michael the Archangel from thence next following unto the end and term
aforesaid: By virtue of which demise, he the said R. W. was thereof possessed;
and so being thereof possessed the aforesaid (such a day, and year, and place)
made his last Will and Testament in writing, and by the same willed and
declared that the aforesaid Elizabeth his wife immediately after his decease,
should have and enjoy his state, term and interest which he then had to come
in the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances; and after the same R.VV.
dyed, after whose death the aforesaid E. into the Tenements aforesaid entered,
and was thereof possessed; and so being thereof possessed afterward, to wit,
the aforesaid tenth day of M. in such a year aforesaid, the same E. took to
husband the aforesaid Defendant: By which the same Defendant was of the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances possessed, as he above has
alleged; and he being so thereof possessed, the aforesaid R.E. and VV.L.
before the time wherein, etc. at London in the Parish, etc. dyed, after whose
death the same Plaintiffes before the said time wherein, etc. into the
Tenements aforesaid with their appurtenances, did re-enter, and were thereof
seized in their demesne as of fee to the use aforesaid by right accruing, etc.
And further the same Plaintiffes say that the Trespass aforesaid, whereof they
now complain, was made in the Mid-time between the aforesaid Feoffement by the
aforesaid I. A. to them the said Plaintiffes, and the aforesaid R.E. and VV.L.
of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in form aforesaid made, and
the said Re-entry of them the said Defendants in the same; and this, etc.
VVhereupon for that the aforesaid Defendants the Trespass aforesaid in the
Tenements aforesaid above acknowledged, they the said Plaintiffes pray
judgment, and their damages by occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto
them, etc.

The Defendant maintains his Plea, and tracurses the Feoffeoment.
AND the aforesaid Defendant says, that before the said time wherein the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, the aforesaid I. A. was seized of
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee: And so
being thereof seized before the said time, wherein, etc. to wit, the aforesaid
three and twentieth day of S. in the aforesaid (such a year) at S. aforesaid
demised the same Tenements with the appurtenances to the aforesaid R.VV. to
have and to hold to him the said R.W. and his assigns from the aforesaid feast
of St. Michael the Archangel then next following, unto the end and term
aforesaid: By virtue of which demise he the said R.W. was thereof possessed;
and so being thereof possessed, the aforesaid (such a day, year, and place)
made his last Will and Testament; and by the same willed and declared, that the
aforesaid Elizabeth his wife immediately after the decease of him the said R.W.
should have his whole state, term and interest which he then had to come, of,
and in the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances; and afterward the same
R.W. at S. aforesaid dyed, after whose death, the aforesaid Elizabeth was of
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances possessed; and so being thereof
possessed before the said time, wherein, etc. at S. aforesaid took to husband
the same Defendant; By which the same Defendant before the said time wherein,
etc. into the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, did enter, and was
thereof possessed as he above has alleged.

Without that, that the aforesaid I. A. before the (aforesaid such a day and
year) enfeoffed the aforesaid (Plaintiffes and others) of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances; The traverse of the Feoffement.
To hold to them and their heirs for ever, to the use of the aforesaid T.A.
and M. and the heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, as the aforesaid
Plaintiffes above have alleged: And this, etc. VVhereupon he prays
judgment: And that the aforesaid Plaintiffes may be debarred from having their
action aforesaid against him, etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiffes, as formerly, Issue upon the Traverse.
say that the aforesaid I.A. before the aforesaid four and twentieth day of S.
in the aforesaid such a year enfeoffed them the said Plaintiffes, and the
aforesaid R.E. and W. of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to
hold to them, and their heirs to the use of the aforesaid T.A. and M. and the
heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, as they above have alleged: And
this they pray may be enquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid Defendants
in like manner, etc. Therefore it is commanded the Sheriff that he cause to
come, etc.

AND the aforesaid T.P. by R. F. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, Justification in Trespass for the taking of goods by pretext of
gift from the Plaintiff to the Defendants wife while she was sole.
etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, etc. not guilty: And as to the
residue, etc. the same T. (not acknowledging himself to have taken and carried
away so many goods or chattels, nor that the goods or chattels were of so much
value as by the Writ and Declaration aforesaid is supposed) says that the
aforesaid I. E. ought not to have his action aforesaid against him, because he
says that the aforesaid I. before the said time wherein the Trespass
aforesaid is supposed to be made, to wit (such a year, and place) gave to one
A. the wife of the aforesaid T. the goods and chattels aforesaid, to hold to
him, and his assigns for ever: By virtue of which said gift, the same A. was
thereof possessed, and afterward took to husband the same Defendant: And that
the aforesaid A. was possessed of the goods and chattels aforesaid at the time
wherein the aforesaid Defendant took her to wife: By which the same Defendant
the goods and chattels aforesaid as his own proper goods and chattels at the
time wherein the Trespass aforesaid, was supposed to be done at R. there
found, took, and carried away, as it was lawful for him to do: And this he
is ready to aver: Whereupon he intends not any injury in that behalf
should be assigned to his person etc. The Plaintiff said that the wife of the
Defendant while she was sole give back to him the goods


AND the aforesaid Plaintiff not acknowledging any thing by the aforesaid
Defendant before alleged to be true says, that he by any thing pre-alleadged
ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against him, etc.
because he says that before the aforesaid time wherein, etc. there was
certain communication had between him the said Plaintiff, and the aforesaid
A. of Matrimony between them to be contracted: And thereupon the aforesaid A.
him the said Plaintiff treated with such flattering and dissembling speeches,
that the same Plaintiff believing that she would give her consent to such
Matrimony; The goods and chattels aforesaid to her the said A. (the aforesaid
day year and place) did give: And afterward the aforesaid A. turning her heart
from the aforesaid Plaintiff on the aforesaid Defendant to have him for her
husband, after the gift aforesaid, the aforesaid A. coming to the Village of R.
aforesaid (such a day and year) the goods and chattels aforesaid to him the
said Plaintiff then and there gave back again what time the aforesaid A. was
sole: By pretext whereof the same Plaintiff was thereof possessed until the
aforesaid Defendant by force and arms, the goods and chattels aforesaid at R.
found, took, and carried away, against the peace of our Lord the King, that now
is, and the same Plaintiff above against him complains: And this etc.
Whereupon for that the aforesaid Defendant above acknowledges the Trespass
aforesaid, he prays judgment, and his damages by occasion of that Trespass
to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue upon the giving back of the goods.
AND the aforesaid Defendant not acknowledging any thing by the aforesaid
Plaintiff before alleged to be true, says, that the aforesaid A. after the
Gift aforesaid to her by the aforesaid Plaintiff of the goods and chattels
made, did not give back again the aforesaid goods and chattels to him the
aforesaid Plaintiff, as the same Plaintiff above has alleged: And of this
he puts himself upon the Country, etc. And the aforesaid Plaintiff in like
manner, etc.

The Defendant justifies for that the goods were pawned to the Plaintiff, and
be pawned them to another, who delivered them to the Defendant to be safely
kept, and to whom the Defendant afterward the same re-delivered.
AND the aforesaid W.B. by I.C. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, as also the whole
Trespass aforesaid, besides the taking, and carrying away of one bolle of
Gold, and one bolle of Silver and gilt, and one cup of Gold, says, that in
nothing thereof guilty etc. And as to the taking and carrying away of the
aforesaid one bolle of Gold, one bolle of Silver and gilt, and one cup of Gold
the same Defendant not acknowledging these goods and chattels to have been of
such value as by the Declaration aforesaid is supposed, says, that the
aforesaid W.C. ought not to have his action, etc. because he says, that one
R.C. was Proprietor of these goods, and in the possession of them long before
the aforesaid Plaintiffes had any thing in them; And so being Proprietor, and
possessed (such a day, year and place) pawned to the aforesaid Plaintiff,
those goods and chattels for forty Marks of him the said Plaintiff by him the
said R.C. of loan received, under such a condition, that if the aforesaid R. C.
should pay to the said plaintiff the aforesaid forty Marks before the feast of
the Birth of our Lord then next following; Then he the said Plaintiff should
re-deliver to the aforesaid W. those goods and chattels; otherwise he should
keep them safe, until he should be fully satisfied, and paid the aforesaid
forty Marks: By virtue of which said pawnings the said Plaintiff was possessed
of these goods and chattels under the condition aforesaid: And so being thereof
possessed, the same goods and chattels further pawned to one W. G. for other
forty Marks of him the said W. by him the said Plaintiff of loan received
under such condition that the aforesaid W.G. those goods and chattels to them
the aforesaid R.C.W.C. who should pay, and deliver those forty Marks to him the
said W.G. should re-deliver; and says that these forty Marks to the aforesaid
W.G. at the time when the Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, were not
paid; and fearing, and supposing the same goods and chattels could not be kept
secure in the house of him the said VV.G. the same goods and chattels before
the aforesaid feast of the Birth of our Lord at C. aforesaid delivered to him
the said Defendant to be safely kept: And to him the said VV.G. when he should
be thereunto required to be re-delivered; and says, that he contemned the
keeping of those goods, knowing them to be his by wicked profit; and being
unwilling for that cause to keep them any longer, the same goods and chattels
at the time when the Trespass aforesaid was above supposed to be made, from a
certain chest, where in his house at C. aforesaid they lay, he took; and to
the house of the aforesaid VV. G. in the same Village he carried; and the same
to him the said VV.G. then and there delivered; which said taking and carrying
of the goods and chattels aforesaid by the cause aforesaid, are the same taking
and carrying away of the aforesaid goods and chattels, of which the aforesaid
Plaintiff above now complains: And this, etc. VVhereupon he prays
judgment, whether the Plaintiff ought to have, or maintain his action
aforesaid against him, etc. The Plaintiff pleads that I.C. pawned the goods
unto him, and paid not the sum for which they were pawned, and traverses
that she pawned them in manor and form, etc.


AND the aforesaid Plaintiff not acknowledging any thing by the aforesaid
Defendant before alleged to be true, says, that he by any thing before
alleged, ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against
him, for the aforesaid taking and carrying away the aforesaid goods and
chattels, which the aforesaid Defendant above acknowledges, because he says
that the aforesaid R.G. the aforesaid (such a day and year) at C. aforesaid
pawned to him the said Plaintiff these goods and chattels for forty Marks of
him the said Plaintiff, by him the said R. of loan received, under such
condition that if the same R. should pay to him the said Plaintiff these forty
Marks before the feast of the birth of our Lord then next following, then the
same goods and chattels to him the said R. should be delivered, otherwise to
the same Plaintiff they should remain as his proper goods and chattels to him
by the aforesaid R. sold for the aforesaid forty Marks, and says that the
aforesaid R. paid not to him the said Plaintiff the aforesaid forty Marks
before the aforesaid feast of the birth of our Lord: By which the same goods
and chattels, the taking and carrying away whereof, the aforesaid Defendant
above acknowledges to him the said Plaintiff as his proper goods and chattels
did remain: And the aforesaid Defendant, the aforesaid time wherein the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be done, by force and arms of his proper
injury the same goods and chattels at C. found, took, and carried away, as the
same Plaintiff above against him complains.

Traverse.
Without that, that the same Plaintiff pawned to the aforesaid W.G. these goods
and chattels for forty Marks, as the aforesaid Defendant above alleges: And
this, etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid Defendant above acknowledges the
taking and carrying away of the goods and chattels aforesaid, he prays
judgment, and damages by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid to be adjudged
unto him, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the aforesaid Defendant says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff pawned to the
aforesaid W. G. the aforesaid goods and chattels, the taking and carrying away
whereof the same Defendant above acknowledges for forty Marks as the same
Defendant has above alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country:
And the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner, etc.

Justification in Trespass for killing Hogs and Sheep, as the servant of the
Plaintiff being a Butcher.
AND the aforesaid T. by W.T. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. and as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever is
against the peace, etc. besides the killing of the Hogs and Sheep aforesaid,
says, that he is not guilty: And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid
above supposed to be done, the same Defendant says, that the aforesaid
Plaintiff ought not to have his action aforesaid against him, because he
says, that he all the time of that Trespass supposed to be made, and long
before, was servant of the aforesaid Plaintiff to serve him in the service of
a Butcher: And that the same Plaintiff, before the time of the Trespass
aforesaid, supposed to be made at B. aforesaid commanded him the said Defendant
then his servant in form aforesaid the Hogs and Sheep aforesaid, the said time
wherein etc. as best conduced with his, and of a Butcher to kill, and the flesh
thereof to put to sale: By which the same Defendant the Hogs and Sheep
aforesaid, the aforesaid time wherein, etc. as best conduced to his art of a
Butcher, he did kill, as it was lawful for him to do: And this, etc.
Whereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid Plaintiff ought to have
his action aforesaid against him, etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing by the aforesaid
Defendant before alleged, ought not to be debarred from having his action
aforesaid against him, because he says the aforesaid Defendant maliciously of
his proper injury, the Hogs and Sheep aforesaid the said time wherein, etc. he
killed.

Without that, Traverse.
that the same Plaintiff commanded him the said Defendant to kill the Hogs and
Sheep aforesaid in the form wherein the same Defendant above by pleadings has
alleged: And this, etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid Defendant above
acknowledges the Trespass aforesaid, he prays judgment, and his damages by
occasion of that Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid Defendant says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid Plaintiff commanded him the said Defendant to kill the
Hogs and Sheep aforesaid in the form wherein he the said Defendant above by
pleading has alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country: And
the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner, etc. Therefore as well, etc.

AND the aforesaid W. by I. R. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. Justification in a Trespass for a horse or foot way leading
from one Village to another.
And as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever, etc. and the whole
Trespass aforesaid, besides the breaking of the Park aforesaid, ^ yes, that
he is in nothing thereof guilty. etc. And as to the breaking of the Park
aforesaid, the same Defendant says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff ought not to
have his action aforesaid against him, because he says that within the Park
aforesaid, there has been had, and time out of mind there was had a certain
common highway leading from the Village of A. unto the said Village of B. in
the same County by the middle of the Park aforesaid for all men from the same
Village of A. unto the same Village of B. by the same way for the same whole
time willing to ride or walk, by pretext whereof the same Defendant, the said
time wherein, etc. by the same common way within the Park aforesaid, did ride
from the same Village of A. unto the aforesaid Village of B. which said riding
within the Park aforesaid, is the same breaking of the Park aforesaid, whereof
the aforesaid Plaintiff above now complains: And this, etc. VVhereupon, etc.

The Plaintiff replies that he did it of his proper injury.
AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing before prealledged
ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid, against the
aforesaid Defendant for the breach of the Park aforesaid; because he says that
the aforesaid Defendant, the aforesaid time wherein, etc. by force and arms of
his own proper injury broke the Park aforesaid.

Traverse the prescription.
Without that, that there is had, or time out of mind there was had such a
common highway leading by the middle of the Park aforesaid, as the aforesaid
Defendant above by pleading has alleged: And this etc. VVhereupon for this,
etc. he prays judgment, and his damages, etc. to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the aforesaid Defendant says, that there is had, and from the time out of
mind there has been had such a common highway leading by the middle of the
Park aforesaid, as he the same Defendant above by pleading has alleged:
And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid Plaintiff in
like manner; Therefore the Jury thereupon is to come, etc.

Justification in Trespass by license.
AND the aforesaid I. by I.R. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, or any thing, etc.
as also the whole Trespass, besides the breaking of the house aforesaid,
says, that he is not guilty, etc. And as to the Trespass aforesaid of
breaking the house aforesaid above supposed to be done, the same Defendant
says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff ought not to have his action aforesaid
thereupon against him, because he says that the same Plaintiff long before
the same time wherein, etc. at Westminster in the County of Middlesex licensed
him the said I. to enter into the house aforesaid: By which the same Plaintiff
long before the said time, wherein, etc. at Westminster in the County
aforesaid, finding the doors of the house open, he peaceably entered that house
as it was lawful for him to do, which is the same breaking of the same house
whereof the aforesaid Plaintiff above against him complains: And this he is
ready to aver: VVhereupon he demands judgment whether the aforesaid
Plaintiff ought to have his action against him, etc.

The Plaintiff replies that he did it of his proper injury, ^^ll traverses
the License.
AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing pre-alledged, ought
not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid of the breach of the house
aforesaid, against the aforesaid Defendant; because he says that the same
Defendant of his own proper injury the said time wherein etc. by force and
arms aforesaid the house aforesaid, he did in manner and form as the same
Plaintiff above against him complains.

Without that that the same Plaintiff licensed the aforesaid Defendant to
enter the house aforesaid, Traverse.
as the same Defendant above by pleading has alleged; And this etc. Whereupon
for that the same Defendant the Trespass aforesaid above acknowledges, he
prays judgment, and his Damages by occasion of that Trespass, to be
adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid Defendant, as formerly says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid Plaintiff licensed him the said Defendant to enter into
the house aforesaid in the form wherein he the Defendant above by pleading
has alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country. And the
aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner etc. Therefore the Jury is to come between
them, etc.

AND the aforesaid R.P. and I.R. by L.S. their Attorney come and defend the
force and injury when, etc. Justification for that the Plaintiff was suspected
for a Fel^^
And as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever which is against the
peace of our Lord the King that now is, as also the Trespass aforesaid of
woundings supposed to be made, says, that he is in nothing thereof guilty: And
as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid, above supposed to be done, the
same R. and I. say, that the aforesaid W. ought not to have his action
aforesaid against them, because they say that long before the said time wherein
the trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, to wit, the tenth day of
January, in the eighth year of the reign of our Lord the King that now is,
one I.S. at Norwich aforesaid, in his house there was feloniously spoiled and
robbed of two silver Spoons to the value of 10 s. And that the aforesaid W.
diverse days and times before the felony aforesaid made, frequented the house
of him the said I.S. aforesaid suspiciously without any reasonable cause there
to be had; And that the aforesaid W. R. the said time of the felony aforesaid
done, was in the house of the aforesaid I.S. by which the same R. and I.R. had
suspicion the aforesaid W.R. to have committed the felony aforesaid. And that
the aforesaid R. and I.R. the same time wherein etc. being then Sheriffs of
the City aforesaid, softly laid their hands upon him the said W.R. the same
time wherein etc. And the same W. R. for suspicion of the Felony aforesaid the
same time wherein etc. they took, and him the said W. to the Goal of our Lord
the King within the City aforesaid, there to be safely kept for the same Felony
the said time wherein etc. they lead and imprisoned as it was lawful for them
to do, which said softly laying on of their hands of them the said R. and I.R.
upon the aforesaid W.R. and the taking of him the said W. R. and the leading
and imprisoning of him out of the cause aforesaid, are the same assault,
beating, and imprisonment whereof the aforesaid W.R. above complains. And
this they are ready to aver, whereupon they pray judgment, whether the
aforesaid W.R. ought to have his action aforesaid against them etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing before alleged ought
not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against them, because he
says that the aforesaid R. and I. R the day and year aforesaid of his own
proper injury by force and arms, without any such cause by them the said R.
and I.R. above by pleading alleged on him the said W.R. at Norwich aforesaid
they made an assault and him did beat, wound, imprison, and evil entreat in
the manner and form as the aforesaid W.R. above against them complains. And
this he prays may be enquired of by the Country etc.

Justification upon imprisonment and assault, by virtue of a Warrant of the
Peace. Mich. 8. Hen. 8. Roll 77.
Staff. ss. AND the aforesaid H.W. by W.F. his Attorney comes and defends the
force and injury when etc. and as to the coming by force and arms or
whatsoever is against the peace etc. not guilty, and as to the residue of the
Trespass aforesaid, above supposed to be done, the same H. says that the
aforesaid R. ought not to have his action aforesaid against him, because he
says that long before the said time, wherein the trespass aforesaid was
supposed to be done on I.W. at Stafford in the County aforesaid came before R
W. then one of the Justices of the Peace of our Lord the King, assigned in the
County aforesaid to be kept, and there took his corporal oath, that he
grievously and manifestly went in danger of his life, and maiming of his
members by the aforesaid R.C. By which he the same I.W. long before the said
time wherein etc. at Stafford aforesaid, at the Petition of the aforesaid I.W.
directed a certain precept of our Lord the King to the aforesaid H. W. then
being Bailiffe of R. and to the Constable of R. aforesaid: and to either of
them jointly and divided commanding them, by that precept, that they cause to
come the aforesaid R. C. before the aforesaid R. W. or one of his Companions,
Justices of the peace of our Lord the King in the County aforesaid, to find
sufficient security of the peace of our Lord the King, toward the Lord the
King and all his people, and chiefly against the aforesaid H.W. to be given:
And if the same R.C. should refuse to do this, then the same H. and the
aforesaid Constable the same R.C. unto the next Goal of our Lord the King in
the County aforesaid should cause to be led, or one of them should cause to be
led, there to stay until he would freely do this. By reason of which precept
the aforesaid H.W. before the said time, wherein etc. did repair to the
aforesaid R.C. at R. aforesaid, and showed to the aforesaid R.C. there the
precept aforesaid, then and there further requiring the same R. to find before
the said R. W. or one of his companions, Justices of the peace of our Lord the
King in the County aforesaid then being, to find security for bearing the peace
of our Lord the King in form aforesaid, and the same R. this to do then at R.
aforesaid, upon which the same A.W. him the said R. then and there the said
time wherein, etc. arrested, and him in bringing toward the prison of our Lord
the King at the Castle of Stafford in the County aforesaid, imprisoned by the
time aforesaid, and his hands upon him the said R. in that arresting and
leading did softly lay, as it was lawful for him to do; which said arrest and
leading to the prison aforesaid, and laying hands upon him the said H. are the
same taking imprisoning and ill handling, whereof the aforesaid R. above
complains. And this etc. whereupon he prays judgment whether the action etc.

AND the aforesaid R. says that he by any thing before alleged ought not to
be debarred from having his action aforesaid against the said H. W. Because by
protestation not acknowledging any thing by the aforesaid H. above alleged to
be true, for plea he says, The Plaintiff replies that he offered security.
that he before the time of the Trespass aforesaid made, and the time wherein
etc. offered the aforesaid H. to find sufficient security before T. Partridge,
then one of the Justices of the peace of our Lord the King, for the same County
assigned to be kept according to the form of the aforesaid precept by the said
I.W. to him directed, which to do the same H. refused.

Without that that the same R.C. refused to come before the Justices of the
Peace in manner and form as the aforesaid H. has above alleged: Traverse the
denying to come before the Justices.
And this etc. whereupon for that the aforesaid H. the Trespass aforesaid
above acknowledges, he prays judgment, and his damages by that occasion, to
be adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid H says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid R. refused to come before the Justices of our Lord the
King, to find sufficient security in manner and form as the same H. above has
alleged; and of this he puts himself upon the Country. And the aforesaid
R.C. in like manner etc.

Justification by virtue of a common Watch according to the form of the
Statute of Winchester.
AND the aforesaid G. by I.W. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever is
against the peace of our Lord the King, as also the whole Trespass aforesaid,
besides the assault and imprisonment above supposed to be made, says, that he
is not guilty, etc. And as to the assault and imprisonment supposed to be made,
the same G. says, that the aforesaid T. ought not thereupon to have his action
aforesaid against him, because he says that in the Statute in the Parliament
of Edward the first, late King of England, Progenitor of our Lord the King that
now is at Winchester in the thirtieth year of his Reign held, published
amongst other things; It was ordained and established that watches should be
made, as more anciently they were wont to be, that is to say, from the day of
the Ascension of our Lord unto the feast of St. Michael the Archangel, that is
to say, in each City by six men at each Gate of the same; and in every Town by
twelve men, and in every entire Village by six or four men, according to the
number of the people inhabiting in them. And that the Watches should be kept by
the whole night from the Sunset, to the rising of the Sun, so that if any
stranger should make his journey through them, he should be arrested until the
morning following: And if no suspicion should be then found of him, that then
he should from thence go quit, as in the same Statute more fully is
contained: And further, the same G. says, that he at the time of the Trespass
aforesaid above supposed to be made, was dwelling in the said Village of W.
together with other the inhabitants his neighbors about him in the same
Village, were assigned to keep the Watches there, and says, that the aforesaid
T. the time of the Trespass aforesaid, supposed to be made, to wit (such a
day, year, and place) came suspiciously to the Village aforesaid after Sunset,
and before the rising of the same, that is to say, about the hour of eleven in
the same night: By which the same G. then came to the aforesaid T. and him at
the same time wherein etc. he arrested and detained him with him until the
morning following, and compelled him to stay there, according to the form of
the Statute aforesaid, as it was lawful for him to do; which said coming
unto, and detention by the cause aforesaid, in form aforesaid, is the same
assault and imprisonment whereof the aforesaid T. above now complains: And
this he is ready to aver: VVhereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid
Plaintiff ought to have his action aforesaid against him, etc.

Middlesex AND the aforesaid C. Crips, Justification by a Constable for taking
a Where: Mich. 2. Hen. 8. Rot. 103.
and E. by T.R. their Attorney come and defend the force and injury when, etc.
And as to the coming by force and arms: And whatsoever which is against the
peace, etc. as also the whole Trespass aforesaid besides the assault, beating,
evil handling, and imprisonment by the space aforesaid supposed to be made,
the same C. and E. say that they are in nothing thereof guilty, etc. And as to
the assault, beating, evil handling, and imprisonment the same E. and C. say,
that the aforesaid M. ought not to have her action aforesaid against them,
because they say that the aforesaid M. long before the said time of the
Trespass, aforesaid supposed to be made, was a public notorious and common
Whore, and had carnal knowledge with many, and diverse common men unknown to
him the said C. at many and diverse times: And the same C. and E. say, that at
the time wherein the Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, and long
before the same C. was Constable of our Lord the King in the aforesaid Parish
of St. Andrews, and that before the said time of the Trespass aforesaid
supposed to be done, was given to understand by certain of his neighbors,
very careful of keeping the peace of our Lord the King, and willing to avoid
ill government, he being then Constable of our Lord the King, as aforesaid,
that the aforesaid M. at the aforesaid Parish of St. Andrews then lay and
lodged in bed with a certain man unknown to the same neighbors; and also
that diverse loose men and vagabonds, and very many unknown persons made many
brawlings, scoldings, cryings out and uproars there between themselves, and
strove together which of them should first have the carnal knowledge of her
the said M. and should then use her as their Whore By reason of which
information, he the said C. then there being Constable, as he was by oath
bound, for the preservation of the peace of our Lord the King, and the avoiding
of the premises, and the ill government aforesaid, repaired to a place in the
Parish aforesaid, where then the aforesaid M. and other the men, vagabonds
aforesaid, then were supposed to be, as to see if the same M. and the rest of
the aforesaid men vagabonds behaved themselves there as he was given to
understand the aforesaid time, wherein the Trespass aforesaid was supposed to
be done: And the aforesaid Vagabonds perceiving afar off the coming of him
the said C. then being Constable, before he could approach unto them they fled
away; so that the said C. could not arrest them, but the aforesaid M. with a
certain man, to whom unknown in bed there (the aforesaid time wherein the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be done) he found lying like a whore at the
Parish aforesaid: And because the same M. behaved her self then, and sometimes
before so evilly, and for that cause very many evil persons and disturbers of
the peace of our Lord the King there, had often disturbed the Constable, and
very many of the neighbors there: And she the said M. although oftentimes
thereupon then, and before to desist from the premises by him the said
Constable had been required, would not reform, or justify herself thereupon,
neither by the law of God, nor the King by which the same C. then being
Constable of our Lord the King, and the aforesaid E. with the same C. her
husband by his command coming to his help, their hands upon the aforesaid M.
there so lodging in bed with the aforesaid unknown man softly laid hand on,
and took her from that bed, and her the said M. as well for her punishment, as
to the terror of other the like whores; whereas by the consideration and
distinction of him the said C. then, and there in the Stocks according to the
Law of the Land, they put, and kept by the space aforesaid, as it was lawful
for them to do: which said laying on of their hands of them the said C. and E.
on the aforesaid M. and the taking out of the bed aforesaid, as also the
putting into the Stocks of the said M. are the aforesaid assault, beating,
evil handling, and imprisonment, whereof the aforesaid M. by her bill above
against them complains: And this they are ready to aver: whereupon they pray
judgment, whether the aforesaid M. ought to have or maintain her action
aforesaid in this behalf against them, etc.

The Plaintiff replies that it was done of their proper injury without any
such cause.
AND the aforesaid M. says, that she by any thing before pre-alledged, ought
not to be debarred from having her action aforesaid against them the said C.
and E. of the aforesaid assault, beating, evil handling, and imprisonment,
because she says, that the aforesaid C. and E. the day and year above written
by force and arms aforesaid, of their proper injury without such cause by them
the said C. and E. above alleged on her the said M. at the aforesaid Parish
of St. Andrews, they made an assault, and so did wound, evil entreat, and
imprison by the space aforesaid in manner and form as she the same M. above
against them complains: And this she prays may be enquired of by the
Country: And the aforesaid C. and E. in like manner, etc.

Justification of an imprisonment by virtue of the Statute of Vagrants and
Vagabonds of Rich. the second the 7. year of his reign Hill. 34. Hen. 8. Roll
60.
AND the aforesaid I.H. in his proper person comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. And as to the coming by force and arms as also the whole
Trespass aforesaid, besides the Imprisonment of the aforesaid R.S. the same I.
H. says that he is not guilty etc. And as to the Imprisonment of the aforesaid
R. the same I. H. says that the aforesaid R. ought not thereupon to have his
action aforesaid against him, because he says that by the Statute of the Lord
the King Richard the second, late King of England, at Westminster in the
seventh year of his reign, by authority of the same Parliament, amongst other
things it was Enacted, that all and singular Bailiffes of Liberties, Constables
and other Officers of Villages where Vagrants and Vagabonds frequent, should
have power diligently to examine them, and of compelling them to find
sufficient pledges by sufficient manucaptors for their good behaviors; And
that if default be made in those Vagrants and Vagabonds, and that they cannot
find pledges, that then it shall be very lawful for the aforesaid Bailiffes
of Liberties, Constables and other Officers of Villages the same Vagrants and
Vagabonds to commit to the next Goal of our Lord the King within the County
aforesaid, where such Vagrants and Vagabonds frequent, there to remain til the
coming of the Justices of our Lord the King for the Goal Delivery within that
County where such Vagrants and Vagabonds are imprisoned; and that the same
Justices shall do with these Vagrants and Vagabonds, as to them shall seem
expedient; And the same I. says that he, at the aforesaid time of the
Imprisonment aforesaid above supposed to be made, was Bayliffe of our Lord the
King of St. Edmonds Bury aforesaid. And for that that the same I. the aforesaid
time of the imprisonment aforesaid, above supposed to be made, found the same
R. a Vagrant and Vagabond at, and within the Village of St. Edmonds Bury
frequenting; The same I. being then Bayliffe of the Liberty aforesaid,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, the aforesaid R. then and
there did diligently examine; And as well for that upon the examination of the
aforesaid R. it did sufficiently appear to him the said I. the said R. to be a
Vagrant and Vagabond, as for that that the same R. the same time wherein etc.
could not find pledges, and sufficient Manucaptors for his good behavior
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid; The same I. as Bayliffe of our
Lord the King of the Liberty aforesaid according to the form of that Statute
the aforesaid R. the aforesaid time wherein etc. to the aforesaid Goal of our
Lord the King of St. Edmunds Bury aforesaid, he did commit there to remain
until etc. which said Goal is the next Goal of our Lord the King, near the
aforesaid Village of St. Edmunds Bury aforesaid, which is the same Imprisonment
of the aforesaid R. whereof the same R. above now complains; And this he is
ready to aver, whereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid R. ought to
have his action aforesaid in this behalf against him, etc.

The Plaintiff says that he dwells in the County of W. his Trade there
exercising.
AND the aforesaid R. says that he by any thing before alleged ought not to
be debarred from having his action aforesaid against the aforesaid I. because
he says, that he the aforesaid time of the imprisonment aforesaid above made,
was dwelling, conversant and Inhabiting at W. in the County aforesaid, daily
exercising the art called a Tailors craft.

Traverses the being a Vagrant.
Without that, that the same R. the aforesaid time of the Imprisonment aforesaid
above made was a Vagrant and Vagabond in manner and form wherein the same I.
in his bar by pleading above has alleged: And this he is ready to aver,
whereupon for that that the aforesaid I. the Imprisonment aforesaid above
acknowledges, he prays judgment and his damages by occasion of that
Imprisonment, to be adjudged unto him, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the aforesaid I. as formerly says, that the aforesaid R. the aforesaid
time of the imprisonment aforesaid above supposed to be made, was a Vagrant and
Vagabond, as the same I. in his Bar above by pleading has alleged; And of
this he puts himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid R. in like manner, etc.

Justify imprisonment as by seizing of the Ward within age, for that the
father held of him in Knights service, Mich. 50. Hen. 6. Roll 75.
AND the aforesaid R.L. by W. B. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, and the wounding
aforesaid says that he is in nothing thereof guilty, etc. And as to the
residue of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be made, says that no
action etc. because he says that one W.C. was seized of one Message, and one
hundred acres of Land with the appurtenances in H. in the County of L. in his
Demesne as of Fee, and so being thereof seized, the same Message and Land with
the appurtenances he held, of him the said R. as of his Manor of H. in H.
aforesaid in the County of L. by Knights service, that is to say by Homage,
Fealty, and Escuage of our Lord the King of 40 s. when it shall happen unto 10
s. and unto more, more, etc. and unto less, less, etc. And by doing service
of suite unto the Court of him the said R. of his Manor of H. aforesaid, two
times of the year by reasonable warning to him the said W. thereupon made, of
which said services the same R. was seized, by the hands of the aforesaid W. C.
as by the hands of his true Tenant, and after and before the Trespass
aforesaid, above supposed to be made, the same W. dyed of such his Estate of,
and in the Message and Lands aforesaid with the appurtenances seized, after
whose death the same Message and Lands, with the appurtenances, did descend to
the aforesaid H. as to the son and heir of the said W. which said H. as yet
remains within the age of one and twenty years: By which the same R. after the
death of him the said W. at the time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be
made, as the Keeper of him the said H. during his minority, by reason of his
Tenure aforesaid, his hands softly upon the said H. at H. aforesaid, he laid,
and the body of him the said H. by reason of the premise, he there seized and
took, and in his custody by the time aforesaid he kept, as it was lawful for
him to do: which said seizing and taking of him the said H. and laying hands of
him the said H. out of the cause aforesaid, and the keeping of him, are the
same assault, beating, imprisoning, and evil handling, whereof the aforesaid
H. above now complains: And this he is ready to aver: Whereupon he prays
jugdement whether the aforesaid H. ought to have his action aforesaid against
him, etc. And the aforesaid H. says, that he by any thing before by him the
said R. pre-alleadged, ought not to be debarred from having his action
aforesaid against him, of the assault, beating, evil handling and imprisonment
aforesaid, because by protestation that the aforesaid W. did not dye seized of
the aforesaid Message and Lands, for plea, he says, that the same W. held six
acres of Lands parcel of the aforesaid C. acres of Land at the time of the
Trespass aforesaid made of the said R. by fealty and rent of 20 d. by the
year at the feasts of the birth of our Lord, and S. Michael the Archangel, by
equal portions yearly to be paid for all services.

Without that, that the said W. held the aforesaid Message, Traverse the
holding by Knights service.
and a hundred acres of Land, with the appurtenances, or any parcel thereof of
the aforesaid R. by Knights service, in the form wherein the same R. above by
pleading has alleged: And this he is ready to aver: Whereupon for that, that
the aforesaid R. above has acknowledged, etc. he prays judgment, and his
damages, by occasion of that assault, etc. to be adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid R. says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid W. held the aforesaid Message, and a hundred acres of
Land, with the appurtenances of the aforesaid R. by Knights service in the
form wherein he the said R. above by pleading has alleged: And of this he
puts himself upon the Country: And the aforesaid H. in like manner, etc.
Therefore the Jury between them is to come, etc.

Trespass and assault against the man and wife, the man pleads not guilty and
assault demesne for his wife.
AND the aforesaid T. and A. by W. F. their Attorney come and defend the force
and injury when, etc. And the aforesaid T. says that he is in nothing thereof
guilty, etc. And of this he puts himself upon the Country: And the aforesaid
H. and I. in like manner, etc. And the aforesaid T. and A. for the aforesaid A.
say, that as to the coming by force and arms, or whatsoever, which is against
the peace, etc. say, that she is in nothing thereof guilty: And of this they
put themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid H. and I. in like manner:
And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be made, the
same T. and A. for the aforesaid A. say, that the aforesaid H. and I. ought not
to have their action aforesaid thereupon against them, because they say that
the aforesaid I. the day and year aforesaid, on her the said A at E. aforesaid
made an assault, and her there would beat, wound, and evil entreat, unless
she the said A. had then defended her self: And so the evil, if any to her
the said I. then, and there happened, that was of the proper assault of her the
said I. and in the defense of the said A. And this the same T. and A. for the
aforesaid A. are ready to aver: Whereupon they pray judgment whether the
aforesaid H. and I. ought to have thereupon their action aforesaid against them
etc.

AND the aforesaid H. and I. say, that they by any thing before pre-alleadged,
ought not to be debarred from having their action aforesaid against the said
T. and A. for that they say, that the aforesaid A. by force and arms of her
proper injury, and without such cause by them above alleged, on her the said
I. the day and year above written, made an assault, and her the said I. did
beat, wound, and evil treat, as the same H. and I. above by their Writ and
Declaration aforesaid against them complain; And this they pray may be
inquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid T. and A. for the aforesaid A. in
like manner, etc.

One Defendant pleades for assault demesne, and the other justifies as parting
a Pray.
AND the aforesaid T. and R. by W. H. their Attorney come and defend the force
and injury, when, etc. And as to the coming by force and arms, as also the
whole Trespass aforesaid, besides the assault, beating, and evil handling
aforesaid, say, that they are in nothing thereof guilty: And as to the assault,
beating, and evil handling, the same T. and R. say, that the aforesaid
Plaintiff ought not thereupon to have his action aforesaid against them,
because the same T. says, that the aforesaid Plaintiff the day and year
aforesaid at A. aforesaid on him the said T. made an assault, and him then, and
there would have beat, wound, and evil handle: By which the same T. himself
against the aforesaid A. then, and there did defend: And the evil, if any to
him the said A. then, and there happened: That was of the proper assault of him
the said A. and in the defense of him the said T. And the aforesaid R. says,
that for that, that the aforesaid A. the day and year aforesaid at A.
aforesaid on the aforesaid T. made assault, and him would have beat, wound, and
evil handle, by which the same R. being then and there personally present for
the preservation of the peace of our Lord the King, lest one of them the said
A. and T. should do any corporal hurt each to the other, he softly laid his
hands as well upon the aforesaid A. as upon the aforesaid T. to separate them
from being together: Which said laying on of his hands out of the cause
aforesaid, is the same assault, beating, and evil handling, whereof the
aforesaid Plaintiff above now complains: And this they are severally ready
to aver: Whereupon they pray judgment whether the aforesaid Plaintiff ought
to have his action aforesaid against them, etc.

AND the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing by them the said T.
and R. before alleged, ought not to be debarred from having his action
aforesaid against them, because he says, that the aforesaid T. and R. by force
and arms of their own proper injury, and without such a cause by them above
alleged on him the said A. at A. they made an assault, and him did beat,
wound, and evil handle in manner and form as he above by his Writ and
Declaration supposes: And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country:
And the aforesaid T. and R. in like manner, etc.

AND the aforesaid I. D. in his proper person comes, An agreement pleaded in
assault and battery.
and defends the force and injury, when, etc. And as to the coming by force and
arms, or whatsoever which is against the peace, etc. says, that he is in
nothing thereof guilty. And as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid above
supposed to be done, the same I. says, that the aforesaid T. ought not to have
his action aforesaid against him, because he says that long after the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, to wit, the first day of May in
the two and twentieth year aforesaid at M. aforesaid, the same I. and T. by the
mediation of R. D. and W.W. their friends, in a friendly manner coming between
them, in such manner it was agreed together between them, that is to say, that
the aforesaid I. should pay to the aforesaid T. in amends, and satisfaction of
that Trespass a Pottle of Claret wine, which said I. the same Pottle of Claret
wine to the aforesaid T. then, and there paid according to the force, form,
and effect of the concord aforesaid: And this, etc. Whereupon he prays
judgment, etc.

No such action pleaded
ANd the aforesaid I.H. says that he by any thing pre-alledged ought not to be
debarred from having his action aforesaid; because he says that there was
never any such agreement had between them the said I.H. and I.D. in manner and
form as the same I.D. has above alleged by pleading. And this he prays may
be inquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid J.H. in like manner etc.

Justification of assault and battary by a Vicar for disturbance in the Church.
ANd the aforesaid T. by R.B. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. and as to the coming by force and arms, and whatsoever which
is against the peace etc. says that he is not guilty, etc. and as to the
residue etc says that the Plaintiff ought not to have his action aforesaid
against him; because he says that he is, and at time of the Trespass
aforesaid supposed to be made, was Vicar of the Parish Church of the said
village of S. And the aforesaid W. the same time wherein etc. in the same
Church at evening prayers then there celebrated did prattle and talk so
loudly, that the same evening prayers with that solemnity as it ought could not
be celebrated; by which the same T. as Vicar of the same Church and Curate
aforesaid, the same VV. then and there did Canonically reprove, and by his
authority in that behalf admonish that he would desist therefrom; and the
same W. this to do did contumeliously deny: By which the same T. on the same
W. so disobeying him as his Curate did softly lay his hands upon him, and him
out of that Church did softly put out and remove, as it was lawful for him to
do; which said laying on of hands of him the said T. on the aforesaid W. out of
the cause aforesaid, is the aforesaid assault, beating etc. of the same W.
whereof he above against the same W. complains; and this etc. whereupon he
prays judgment whether the aforesaid W. ought in this behalf to have his
action aforesaid against him, etc.

The Plaintiffes reply, that he did it of his proper injury.
ANd the aforesaid Plaintiff says, that he by any thing before alleged, ought
not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against the aforesaid T.
Because he says that the aforesaid T. the day and year aforesaid of his proper
injury, and without any such cause by him above alleged, on him the said W. at
S. aforesaid, he made an assault, and him did beat, wound, and evil handle,
in manner and form as the same W. above against him complains: And this he
prays may be inquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid T. in like manner,
etc.

ANd the aforesaid S.P. by R.H. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. and as to the coming by force and arms, or whatsoever which
is against the peace, Justifies the assault in the defense of his title to put
the Plaintiff out of the Houses.
etc. as also the whole Trespass aforesaid, beside the breaking of the Closes
and Houses aforesaid, and the assault aforesaid says, that he is nothing
thereof guilty etc. and as to the breaking of the Closes and Houses, and the
assault aforesaid the same S. says that the Plaintiff ought not to have his
action aforesaid against him; Because he says that the Closes, and Houses, as
also the places in which the Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made, are,
and the aforesaid time wherein etc. were seven Messuages, and four Gardens with
the appurtenances in the parishes of St. Sepulchers, and St. Martins, and St.
Brigets aforesaid in the Ward aforesaid, of which said seven Messuages and
four Gardens before the said time wherein etc. one I.S. was seized of his
demesne as of fee; and so being thereof seized before the said time wherein
etc. thereof enfeoffed the aforesaid S.P. to hold for him and his Heirs for
ever; By virtue of which Feoffement the same S. was thereof seized in his
demesne as of Fee; and the aforesaid E. claiming the Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances by color of a certain Deed or Demise to him thereupon made
for term of his life by the aforesaid J.S. long before the said Feoffement of
the same Tenements with the appurtenances to the aforesaid S. in form
aforesaid made, were nothing of the same Tenements with the Appurtenances unto
the possession of her the said E. ever passed into the same Tenements with the
appurtenances before the said time wherein, etc. and enter upon whose said E.
her possession, thereupon the aforesaid time wherein etc. peaceably re-entred,
and the Houses and Closes brok, and upon the same E. then being there, softly
laid his hands, and commanded her the said E. then and there to go out of the
Messuages and Gardens aforesaid, under the danger which by the Law otherwise
might come to her the said E. as it was lawful for him to do. Which said soft
laying on of hands, and entry, and breach of Closes and houses aforesaid, out
of the house aforesaid, is the same assault whereof the aforesaid E. above now
complains; and this he is ready to aver; whereupon he prays judgment
whether the aforesaid E. ought to have her action aforesaid against him, etc.

And the aforesaid E. says, that she by any thing before pre-alledged, ought
not to be debarred from having her action aforesaid against him, because she
says, that as to the aforesaid Plea of him the said D. of the assault, etc.
aforesaid above pleaded, the same E. says that the aforesaid S. the day and
year in the said Declaration of her the said E. above specified at London
aforesaid in the Parish and Ward aforesaid of his proper injury, and without
any such cause by him the said S. in his bar aforesaid above alleged on her
the said E. made an assault, and her then and there beat, etc. in manner and
form as the same E. above by her Writ and Declaration above against him has
declared. And this she prays may be enquired of by the country. And the
aforesaid S. in like manner, etc. And as to the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid
S. to the breaking of the Closes and houses aforesaid above pleaded, the same
E. says, that long before the said I. S. had any thing in the Tenements
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, the same E. was of the same Tenements
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances seized in her demesne as of Fee; Until the
aforesaid S. her the said E. long before the trespass aforesaid made unjustly,
and without judgment disseised by which the same S. was of the same Tenements,
with the Appurtenances seized in his demesne as of Fee by disseisin: and he by
that disseisin being so, etc. The same S. before the said time wherein, etc.
thereof enfeoffed the aforesaid I. S. to hold to him and his heirs prove: By
virtue of which said Feoffement the said I.S. was thereof seized in his demesne
as of Fee: And so being thereof seized before the said time, wherein, etc.
thereof enfeoffed the aforesaid S. to hold to him and his heirs for ever: By
virtue of which said Feoffmenent the same S. was of the same Tenements with the
appurtenances seized in his demesne, as of Fee, in manner and form as the same
S. above by pleading has alleged: Upon which the said S.P. his possession
thereupon the aforesaid E. before the said time, wherein, etc. did enter, and
was thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee; Until the aforesaid S. the
aforesaid time of the trespass aforesaid made by Force and Arms, etc. the
Closes and houses of her the said E. with the appurtenances, he did break in
manner and form, as the same E. by her Writ and Declaration aforesaid above,
against him has complained: And this, etc. Whereupon for that the aforesaid S.
the Trespass aforesaid above acknowledges, she prays judgment, and her
damages by reason of that Trespass, etc. to be adjudged unto her etc.

The Defendant maintains his plea, and traverses the disseizin.
AND the aforesaid S. as formerly says, that long before the said time wherein
the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be made, the aforesaid I.S. was of the
same Tenements with the appurtenances, seized in his demesne as of fee, and he
being thereof seized before the said time, wherein etc. thereof Enfeoffed him
the said S. to hold to him and his Heirs for ever, by virtue of which
Feoffement the same S. was of the same Tenements with the appurtenances seized
in his demesne, as of Fee, in manner and form as the same S. in his aforesaid
above has alleged: Tranverse.
Without that that the same S. dis-seized the aforesaid E. of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, as the aforesaid E. in her replication
aforesaid above has alleged: And this etc. whereupon he prays judgment,
and that the aforesaid E. may be debarred from having her action aforesaid
against him, etc.

ANd the aforesaid E. as formerly says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid S. dis-seized her the said E. of the Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances, as the same E. in her replication aforesaid above has
alleged, and this she prays may be inquired of by the Country, and the
aforesaid S. in like manner, etc.

ANd the aforesaid W.S. in his proper person comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. and as to the coming by force and arms etc. as also the whole
Trespass aforesaid, Justification by virtue of a Justices of peaces warrant.
besides the assault aforesaid says, that he is in nothing thereof guilty,
etc. and as to the assault aforesaid, the same W. says, that the aforesaid
plaintiff ought not to have his action aforesaid against him; Because he
says, that before the time of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, to
wit such a day and year at C. in the County of N. before T. C. Earl of
Devonshire, then one of the Justices of the peace of our Lord the King in the
County aforesaid assigned to be kept, came the same W. S. then and there before
the same Earl, having taken his corporal oath upon the holy Evangelist, that
he the same W. S. damage and corporal hurt to him the said W.S. by him the
said W. C. and his companions upon him the said W. S. to be brought he did
grievously dread and fear, the same W.S. then and there supplicating, that the
same Earl him the said W. C. might be bound to put in sufficient security of
the peace, keeping toward him the said W.S. and all and every the liege people
of the Kings one in form of law; by pretext whereof the same Earl, a certain
warrant under his scale to the Constable and Bailiffes of the Hundred of M. as
also to R.N.H.H. and T.F. directed, he made and delivered, commanding them the
said Constable and Bayliffes, and the aforesaid R.H. and T. jointly and
severally by the same warrant on the behalf of our Lord the King commanding
them that the same Constables, Bayliffes, R.I. etc. and every one of them, that
they should cause to come the aforesaid W.C. before the aforesaid Earl, or any
other Justice of the peace of our Lord the King in the aforesaid County of S.
assigned to be kept immediately, for the finding sufficient security of the
peace in form aforesaid: And if the same W.C. so to do, should refuse, then
the same Constables, Bayliffes, and the aforesaid R.I. etc. or either of them
the same R. C. should cause to be brought to the Goal of our Lord the King of
Y. in the same County of D. by force of that warrant, there to stay until the
aforesaid WC. should find the security aforesaid, according to what law
requires in that behalf; By which means the same R. carrying with him the
warrant aforesaid, to him the said W. C. at H. aforesaid, the same day the
Trespass aforesaid was supposed to be made; And to him the said W. of the same
warrant, and of the matter and effect of the same warrant, then and there
before the same assault made gave notice by virtue of the same warrant, then
and there requiring the same W.C. that he the said W.C. before the said Earl,
or other Justice of peace of our said Lord the King assigned to be kept in the
same County, to find sufficient security of the peace in form aforesaid,
together with him the said R. he would go; which said W. C. to do this then
and there refused, for which cause the same R. him the said W.C. then would
have taken and arrested (but the same W.C. would not stay, nor obey that
arrest) but at the same arrest then and there drew his sword, and also what in
him lay offered to rescue himself from that arrest; By which the aforesaid R.
and N. and the aforesaid VV.S. as the servant of him the said R. and by his
command, at the time of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be made, by
laying their hands upon him the said VV. C. and compelling him the said VV. C.
to stand to that arrest, him the said VV. C. then and there they took and
arrested, as it was lawful for them to do; which said laying on of hands out
of the cause aforesaid, is the same assault whereof the same VV.C. above
against him complains: And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays
judgment whether the aforesaid VV. C. ought in this behalf to have his action
aforesaid against him, etc.

AND the aforesaid W.C. not acknowledging any thing by the aforesaid W.S.
before alleged to be true, says that he by any thing therein before
alleged ought not to be debarred from having his action aforesaid, because
he says, that the aforesaid W.S. by force and arms of his own proper injury
on him the said W.C. did make an assault, and him did beat, wound, and evil
handle in manner and form as he the said W.C. above by his bill has declared.

Traverses the notice of the Warrant.
Without that, that the same R. to him the said W.C. of the warrant aforesaid,
or of the matter and effect of the same warrant before the time of the
Trespass aforesaid made, did give notice, as the aforesaid W.S. above by
pleading has alleged: And this he is ready to aver; whereupon for that the
aforesaid W.S. the Trespass and Battery aforesaid above acknowledges, he the
said W.C. prays judgment and his damages by occasion of that Trespass to be
adjudged unto him, etc.

AND the aforesaid W.S. says, Issue upon the Traverse.
that the aforesaid R. to him the said W.C. of the Warrant aforesaid, and of
the matter and effect of the same Warrant long before the time of the Trespass
aforesaid, supposed to be made, did give notice in manner and form as he the
said W. S. above by his pleading has alleged: And of this he puts himself
upon the Country: And the aforesaid W. C. in like manner etc.

Middlesex R.M. complains of I. H. in the custody of the Marshall, Declaration
in assault and battery.
etc. for that he (such a day and year) by force and arms on him the said R.
at Westminster in the County aforesaid he made an assault, and him the said R.
then, and there beat, wounded and evil handled; so that of his life he did
despair, and also so grievous a wound upon the upper part of the left shoulder
of him the said R. then, and there put on him; so that the same R. by reason of
the extraordinary effusion of blood out of the same wound flowing, and arising,
fell into great sicknesses, and weaknesses of his body then, and there, and
stood in great danger of losing of his life by reason thereof for a great time,
that is to say, for the space of one month then next following: As also diverse
great sums of money for his healing and curing there in that behalf, to lay
out, and spend then, and there, was forced and compelled: And diverse difficult
business of him the said R. then to be done, and finished by the aforesaid
space of one month remained undone: And other harms, etc. Against the peace,
etc. to the damage, etc.

AND the aforesaid I. H. by W. Astrie his Attorney comes and defends the force
and injury when, etc. Concord pleaded.
And as to the coming by force and arms, etc. says, that he is in nothing
thereof guilty, etc. And as to the residue etc. says, that the aforesaid R.
ought not to have his action aforesaid against him, because he says, that
after the aforesaid time wherein the Trespass aforesaid, was supposed to be
made, to wit (such a day and year) I.E. in the County of Norfolk there was such
an agreement had between the aforesaid R. and him the said J. to wit, that he
the said I. should give to the aforesaid R. one Gallon of Sack in recompense
and satisfaction of the Trespass aforesaid, which said Gallon of Sack, the
same J. afterward, to wit, the same day and year at S. aforesaid, gave to the
aforesad R. according to the form and effect of the concord aforesaid: And
which said Gallon of Sack, the same R. of the aforesaid I. in full recompense
and satisfaction of the Trespass aforesaid then, and there accepted: And this
he is ready to aver: Whereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid R.
ought to have his action aforesaid against him, etc.

The Plaintiff replies no such Concord.
AND the aforesaid R. says that he ought not by any thing before pre-alleadged
to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against him, because he says,
that between him the said R. and the aforesaid I. there was not any such
agreement had as the aforesaid I. above by pleading has alleged: And this he
prays may be enquired of by the Country: And the aforesaid I. in like manner
etc.

'Against a Butcher for selling by deceitful weights.
London, THo. Smith complains of H. Vasey, for that that is to say, whereas the
aforesaid Henry (such a day and year) and by many years then last past, was a
Butcher, and by a great part of that time at London in the Parish, etc. the art
of a Butcher so used and exercised, and accustomed to kill and dress both Oxen
and Cowes in the best manner behoved his art; and the flesh of them by
Haverdepoys weight according to the Laws of this Kingdom of England was wont,
and accustomed for a great part of the time aforesaid, to put to sale, and
utter to diverse of the liege, and faithful subjects of our said Lord the King,
he the same H. afterward at diverse times, to wit, between the same such a day,
etc and the fifth day of May then next following at London in the Parish, etc.
three hundred weight of Ox beef, not being according to the Laws of England
Haverdepoys weight to him the said T. he did falsely, and fraudulently put to
sale, the aforesaid Henry faithfully affirming the weight by which he the said
H. the aforesaid three hundred weight of Ox beef to him the said T. had sold
as aforesaid, to be Haverdepoys weight according to the Laws of England, to the
great deceit of him the said T. Whereupon he says that he is worsted, and has
damage, to the value of 10 s. And thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

Justification in Trespass for a ^^rriot custom.
AND the aforesaid I. Randal by I.S. his Attorney comes and defends the force
and injury when, etc. and as to the coming by force and arms, he says, he is
in no wise thereof guilty: And as to the taking and driving away of the
aforesaid two Cowes, he says, that the aforesaid A. ought not thereupon to
have his action aforesaid against him, because he says that long before the
said time of the trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, one N. Dering lately
the husband of the aforesaid A. dead, was seized in his demesne, as of Fee of,
and in two Tenements, whereof one Tenement called A. and the other Tenement
called B. lying and being in L. aforesaid, in the aforesaid County of
Southampton within the Hundred of Odham: And that the same N. held the
aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances of the aforesaid John Randal by
fealty, and a certain rent by the year, that is to say, the aforesaid
Tenement called A. by fealty, and the rent of three shillings and four pence,
and the other Tenement called B. by fealty, and the rent of one shilling and
six pence; And further the same I. R. says, that within the Hundred of O.
aforesaid there is had, and time out of mind there has been had an ancient and
laudable custom, that is to say, that within the Hundred of O. aforesaid,
every Lord of every Tenant for the time being, after the death of every Tenant
who dyed seized in his demesne as of fee, of any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments within the same Hundred in manner and form aforesaid, that is to
say by fealty, and a certain rent only, should take the best living beast of
the cattle of the same Tenant in manner and form aforesaid dying, of which
the same Tenant died possessed, for a Herriot for every such Tenant; and the
same I.R. in fact says, that the aforesaid N. after and before the said time
of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be made, to wit, the tenth day of
December last past before the day of the obtaining of the Bill aforesaid, he
the said I. R. being thereupon Lord, and the aforesaid N. Tenant of him the
said I. R. within the aforesaid Hundred at the time of his death being, and of
the aforesaid two Cowes being possessed at Warblington in the aforesaid County
of Southampton, of the aforesaid two Tenements dyed in his demesne as of Fee
seized, after whose the said N. his death, by reason of the premises, the
aforesaid I.R. the aforesaid two Cowes of the best living beasts of the cattle
of which the aforesaid N. dyed possessed for and in the name of Herriots,
according to the aforesaid ancient and laudable custom of right used, and due,
he took and drove away, as it was lawful for him to do; and this he is ready
to aver, whereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid A. ought to have
her action aforesaid against him, etc.

AND the aforesaid A. says, The Plaintiff pleads by protestation that as to
the taking of one Cow no such custom for plead son tort Demesne, and
traverses the plea.
that she by any thing before alleged ought not to be debarred from having
her action aforesaid against him the said I. because by protestation that the
aforesaid N. in his life time, held not of the aforesaid I. the aforesaid two
several Tenements called A. and B. by the services aforesaid, as the aforesaid
I. above alleges. And as to the taking of one Cow of the Cowes aforesaid,
for a Herriot, for the aforesaid Tenement called H. the aforesaid H. by
protestation says, that within the Hundred of O. aforesaid, there is not had,
nor time out of mind there has not been had, any such ancient and laudable
custom, that is to say, that the Lord of every Tenant for the time being,
within the Hundred of O. aforesaid after the death of every Tenant, who dyed
seized in his demesne as of fee of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
within the same Hundred, should take the best living beast of the cattle of
the same Tenant in manner and form aforesaid dead, of which the same Tenant
dyed possessed for a Herriot for every such Tenant; yet for plea, the aforesaid
A. says that the aforesaid J. the day and year aforesaid in the Declaration
aforesaid above specified, of his own proper injury, and without such cause by
him the said I. above by pleading alleged, the Close of her the said A.
aforesaid at L. aforesaid, he did break, and the aforesaid one Cow of the
aforesaid Cowes he took and drove away, in manner and form as the same A.
above against him complains.

Traverse of the place.
Without that, that the aforesaid Tenement called A. is within the Hundred of O.
aforesaid, as the aforesaid J. above by pleadings has alleged; and this etc.
whereupon for that that the aforesaid J. the taking of one Cow of the aforesaid
Cowes taken for a Herriot for the aforesaid Tenement called A. above
acknowledges, the same A. prays judgment, and her damages by occasion of the
taking and driving away of that Cow to be adjudged unto her, etc.

The Plaintiff pleads as to the other Cow that the Defendant took the Cow de
son toyt demesne, and traverses the custom
And as to the taking of the other Cow of the aforesaid Cowes for a Herriot for
the aforesaid Tenement called B. the aforesaid A. says, that the aforesaid J.
of his own proper injury, and without such cause by him above by pleading
alleged, the aforesaid day and year in the Declaration aforesaid above
specified, the Close of him the said A. aforesaid, at L. aforesaid he did
break, and the aforesaid other Cow of the Cowes aforesaid he took and drove
away in manner and form as the same A. above against him now complains.
Traverse of the custom.


Without that, that within the Hundred of O. aforesaid, there is had, or time
out of mind there has been had any such laudable and ancient Custom, Issues
upon both Traverses.
that is to say, that the Lord of every Tenant for the time being within the
Hundred of O. aforesaid, after the death of every Tenant who should dye seized
in his Demesne as of fee of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within the
said Hundred held by fealty and rent, should take the best living beast of the
cattle of the same Tenant in manner and form aforesaid dead, of which the
same Tenant dyed possessed for a Herriot, for every such Tenant as the
aforesaid I. above by pleading has alleged, and this etc. whereupon for that
the aforesaid I. the taking and driving away of the aforesaid other Cow of the
Cowes aforesaid above in like manner acknowledges for i^ Herriot for the
aforesaid Tenant called B. the same A. in like manner prays judgment and her
damages, by occasion of the taking of that Cow to be adjudged unto her, etc.

AND the aforesaid I. as to the taking of the aforesaid one Cow of the Cows
aforesaid, for a Herriot for the aforesaid Tenement called A. taken and driven
away as formerly, says, that the aforesaid Tenement called A. is within the
Hundred of O. aforesaid, in manner and form as the same I above by pleading
has alleged; And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the
aforesaid A. in like manner, etc. and as to the taking and driving away of the
other Cow of the Cowes aforesaid for a Herriot for the aforesaid Tenement
called B. the same I. as formerly says that within the Hundred of O. aforesaid
is had, and time out of mind there has been had any such etc. (as before in
the last Traverse) in manner and form as the same I. above in like manner by
pleading has alleged; and of this in like manner the aforesaid I. puts
himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid A. in like manner etc. therefore
as well to the trying etc. the Jury thereupon is to come etc.

AND the aforesaid W. and R. by R. D. their Attorney, Justification of cutting
of wood for Estators by prescription.
come and defend the force and injury when etc. and as to the coming by force
and Arms, or whatsoever which is against the peace, etc. as also the cutting,
taking, and carrying away of a hundred Oaks, and two Ashes, and 80 Cart-load
of under wood, of the aforesaid C. Cart-load of under-wood says, that they are
in no wise thereof guilty; And of this etc. And as to the taking and carrying
away of twenty Cart-load of the aforesaid C. Cart-load of under-wood residue,
as also the whole residue of the Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be made,
they the same W. and R. say that the aforesaid E. ought not to have her action
aforesaid against them, because they say, that the Close aforesaid, as also the
places wherein the Trespasses aforesaid are above supposed to be made, and at
that same time wherein those Trespasses were supposed to be made, were a
certain Wood called Mylnehop Wood, containing in it 60 acres of Wood with the
appurtenances in M. aforesaid, and that long before the said time wherein etc.
as also at the same time wherein etc. the aforesaid W. was seized of one
Message, and twenty acres of Land with the appurtenances in M. aforesaid in
his demesne as of fee, and that to the same Message and twenty acres of Land
with the appurtenances, the same W. and all his Ancestors, and all they whose
estate the same W. now has and the aforesaid time wherein etc. had of, and in
the aforesaid Message, and twenty acres of Land, with the appurtenances had,
and from time out of mind were accustomed to have for themselves, their
Farmers, and Tenants of the same Message, and twenty acres of Land with the
appurtenances reasonable Estators in the aforesaid C. acres of Wood for their
own proper necessary fire-boot in the same Message of him the said W. to be
spent and burnt as unto the same Message, Fire-boo^
and twenty acres of Land with the appurtenances belonging: By which he the
same W. in his own proper right, and the aforesaid R. as the servant of him
the said W. the same time wherein, etc. in the aforesaid sixty acres of Wood,
with the appurtenances, did enter: And the aforesaid twenty Cart-load of
underwood residue, etc. for the aforesaid necessary fire-boot of him the said
W. according to the custom aforesaid, in the aforesaid Message to be spent
and burnt, in the aforesaid sixty Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances then
growing and uncut by using there the common of Estevors of him the said W. they
cut down, took, and carried away, as it was lawful for them to do: Which
said entry into the aforesaid sixty acres of wood, with the appurtenances out
of the cause aforesaid, is the same entering and breaking of the Close
aforesaid: And which said cutting down, taking, and carrying away of the
aforesaid twenty Cart-load of underwood, residue of, and for necessary fireboot
aforesaid, according to the custom aforesaid in the aforesaid place in which,
etc. as aforesaid cut down, taken and carried away are the same cutting,
taking, and carrying away of the same twenty Cart-load of underwood, residue,
etc. whereof the aforesaid E. above against them complains: And this they are
ready to aver: Whereupon they pray judgment, whether the aforesaid E. ought to
have her action aforesaid against them, etc.

AND the aforesaid E. says that she by any thing before alleged by them the
said W. and R. ought not to be debarred from having her action aforesaid
against them, because by Protestation, that the aforesaid sixty acres of wood
with the appurtenances are, and the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid
made, were, the sole and freehold of the aforesaid E.

Traverse of the Prescription.
Without that, that the aforesaid W. and all they whose estate the same W. now
has, and the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid made, had, of, and in
the aforesaid Message and twenty acres of Land, with the appurtenances have
had, and time out of mind were accustomed to have for themselves their Farmers
and Tenants of the same Message and twenty acres of Land with the
appurtenances reasonable Estators in the aforesaid sixty acres of wood with the
appurtenances for their proper and necessary fireboot in the said Message of
him the aforesaid W. to be spent and burnt as unto the same Message, and
twenty acres of Land with the appurtenances belonging, in manner and form as
the said VV. and R. above by pleading have alleged: And this he is ready to
aver: VVhereupon for that that the aforesaid VV. and R. the Trespass aforesaid
above acknowledge, he prays judgment, and his damages by occasion of that
Trespass to be adjudged unto him, etc. Issue taken upon the Traverse of the
Prescription.

AND the aforesaid Prior I.L. and I.F. by VV.C. their Attorney come and defend
the force and injury when, etc. The Defendants all plead not guilty as to the
force and arms, and one as to the rest; And the other justify by virtue of a
Warrant.
And as to the coming by force and arms not guilty, etc. And the aforesaid
Prior, as to the residue of the Trespass aforesaid says, that he is in
nothing thereof guilty: And of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc. And
the aforesaid J.L. and J.R. say, that the aforesaid J. B. ought not to have his
action aforesaid against them, because they say, that long before the time of
the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be made, our Lord the King that now is, was
seized of the Manor, and Lordship of Leeds in his demesne as of Fee, within
which said Manor our Lord the King that now is, held his Court called a
Court Baron, as in right of his Manor aforesaid from three weeks to three
weeks, before his Steward for the time being there to be held; And says that
our Lord the King, so being seized by his Letters Patents, whose date is the
tenth day of October in the seventeenth year of his Reign granted unto the
aforesaid Prior, and Covent the custody of the Manor and Lordship of Leeds
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and the joysting of the Park there, To hold
to him, and his successors from (such a day) next to come, unto the end of
twenty years from thence next following fully to be complete and ended,
rendering therefore yearly to our said Lord the King in his Exchequer at the
feasts of Easter, and St. Michael the Archangel by equal portions for the
custody and joysting aforesaid 24 l. of lawful money of England as they before
had paid, and also sustaining the Closes and Edifices, and also supporting all
other charges to the same Manor belonging and appertaining so long as they
should have the custody and joysting aforesaid: By virtue of which said Grant
the same Prior and Covent were thereof possessed, long before the Trespass
aforesaid supposed to be made, and at the day of the Trespass aforesaid
supposed to be made: And they say also further, that long before the trespass
aforesaid was supposed to be made, that is to say (such a day and year) one
J.S. Knight before R.C. then Steward of the same Prior of his Court aforesaid,
in the same Court brought a certain plaint against the aforesaid I.B. of a
plea of Trespass, by force of which said plaint, the same Steward then, and
there commanded a certain precept to one VV.R. then Bayliffe of the Manor
aforesaid directed to attach the aforesaid I.B. by his goods and chattels
within the Precinct of the same Manor, to appear before the aforesaid Steward
at the next Court there to be held, that is to say, the second day of September
then next following, to answer the aforesaid I. S. in his plaint aforesaid; by
force whereof the same Bayliffe the aforesaid time of the Trespass aforesaid
supposed to be made: And the aforesaid I.L. and I.F. as the servants of the
same Bailiff and by his command, the aforesaid I B. by two Horses, and six Oxen
aforesaid then in the place in which, etc. which is within the Precinct of the
Manor aforesaid found, they did attach; And the same Oxen and Horses then
there they impounded, and held impounded, as it was lawful for them to do,
which said taking, impounding and detaining of the Cattle aforesaid out of the
cause aforesaid, are the same Trespass, taking, etc. of which the same I.B.
conceives his action aforesaid, etc. Which all and singular they are ready to
aver: Whereupon they pray judgment whether the aforesaid I. B. ought to have
his action aforesaid against them etc.

The Plaintiff replies that they did it of their proper injury without such a
cause.
AND the aforesaid J.B. says, that he by any thing before alleged, ought not
to be debarred from having his action aforesaid against them, because he says
that the aforesaid I. L. and I.F. of their own proper injury, and without such
cause by them the aforesaid I.L. and I F. above alleged with force and arms
aforesaid have made in manner and form as he the said I. B. above against them
complains: And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country: And the
aforesaid I. L. and I.F. in like manner, etc.

Issue upon the Traverse.
AND the said I. M. as before, says, That the said Tenements, with the
appurtenances are, and from the time of the memory of man were customary
Tenements and Lands, and demised, and demisable by Copy of Court Roll of the
said Manor, in manner and form as the said I.M. before in pleading has
alleged: And of this he puts himself upon the Country; And the said I.
S. in like manner. Therefore, etc.

Trespass upon the Case.
Midd. ss. BOnaventure Ashby Gentleman, Declaration in Trover, of a reclaymed
Falcon. Pasch. 19. Eliz. Roll. 499.
complains of John Gifford Gentleman in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for
that that is to say, whereas the aforesaid B. (such a day, year, and place) in
the County aforesaid, was possessed of a Falcon reclaimed and tamed, of the
price of 40 l. with two Belles to the value of 12 d. and two Varvils, in which
the name of the aforesaid B. was inscribed to the value of 5 s. as of his
proper goods and chattels: And the same B. so being thereof possessed, the
Falcon aforesaid, with the Belles and Varvils aforesaid out of his hands and
possession did casually lose, which said Falcon afterward, that is to say
(such a day, year and place) to the hands and possession of the aforesaid J.G.
by finding came: Judgment had for the Plaintiff and damages, 18 l. 16 s. and
8 d.
And the aforesaid J.G. knowing the Falcon aforesaid to be the proper Falcon of
the aforesaid B. and to him the said B. of right to belong and pertain, that
Falcon although often required etc. to render or deliver, has wholly refused:
And that Falcon voluntarily has used and handled so ill, so that that Falcon
by the ill usage and handling aforesaid afterward (to wit, such a day, year,
and place) dyed, to the damage of him the said B. 40 l. And thereupon he brings
his suit, etc.

Ss. A B. complains of W. B. in the custody of the Marshall, Declaration for
keeping a dog accustomed to bite sheep.
etc. for that, that is to say, whereas the aforesaid W. did knowingly keep and
retain a certain Dog accustomed to bite sheep at M. in the County aforesaid,
which said Dog ten Ew-sheep, and ten lambs of him the said A. to the price of 4
l. at M. aforesaid, found (such a day, and year, and place) did so grievously
bite, that those sheep, and lambs by the biting of the Dog aforesaid, then, and
there dyed: Whereupon the same A. says, that he is worse, and has damage to
the value of 10 l. And thereupon he brings his suit.

The like with some addition.
Ss. B. F. complains of R. W. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for that,
that is to say, whereas the aforesaid R. (such a day, year, and place) a
certain Dog accustomed to bite sheep he knowingly retained, which said Dog,
the day, and year aforesaid at H. aforesaid the sheep, that is to say, a
hundred and fifteen Ewes, and eighty Weathers of him the said B. did chase and
bite, so that by the chasing, and biting, eighty of the Ewe sheep of the sheep
aforesaid of the price of 40 l. dyed, and forty of the Weathers aforesaid of
the price of 30 l. dyed in like manner: And the residue of the aforesaid Ewe
sheep great with young, cast their lambs abortive: And the residue of the
Weather sheep were much worsted: And other harms, etc.

Norfolk HEnry Darcy Knight complains of John Leigh Gentleman in the custody
of the Marshall, Declaration upon warranty of a Hawk.
etc. for that, that is to say, whereas the aforesaid I. (such a day, year,
and place) in the County aforesaid, in consideration of 5 l, 2 s. and 6 d. of
lawful money of England to him the said I. by the aforesaid H. before hand
paid, had bargained and sold to the aforesaid H. a certain Hawk, called a
Gos-hawk, the same I. in consideration thereof then, and there warranted the
Gos-hawk aforesaid to him the said H. to be sound, and in good health: whereas
in truth that Gos-hawke then, and there was troubled with diverse great
infirmities, and much grieved, of which said infirmities the Hawke aforesaid
(such a day) then next following at O. aforesaid dyed: By which the same I. at
O. aforesaid the aforesaid H. of the Hawk aforesaid, and of the aforesaid 5 l.
2 s. and 6 d. against the form of the Warrant aforesaid falsely and
fraudulently deceived to the damage of him the said H. twenty Marks: And
thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

A B. complains of I.P. the elder, and I.P. the younger in the custody of the
Marshall, Declaration for making of a bank, by which the Plaintiffes land was
downed.
etc. of a plea wherefore whereas a certain course of water called C. ought to
run in a certain stream at C. in the County aforesaid for the serving of the
Lands and Tenements, near the Watercourse aforesaid, the aforesaid I. and I.
not ignorant of the premises, plotting the aforesaid A. to worse and hurt in
his Lands and Tenements goods, and chattels, a certain bank on cross the
Watercourse aforesaid at C. aforesaid they made, by reason of which the water
aforesaid was hindered of his course aforesaid; By which six hundred acres of
Pasture of his the said A. near adjoying to the VVater-course aforesaid was so
extraordinarily drowned, that the same A. the profit of that his pasture for a
great time he lost: Whereby he says he is worsted and has damage, etc.

SS. W. J. Mercer complains of T. B. in the custody of the Marshall,
Declaration against an Inne-keeper for selling his guests horse.
etc. for that whereas the same T. (such a day, year, and place) a certain
horse of his the said W. of the pr^ce of 15 l. to have kept in the Stable of
the aforesaid T. and there to be fed and dressed, and that horse safely and
soundly to be kept, and to him the said W. when he should be thereunto required
to be redelivered, and in consideration of a certain sum of money between
them agreed upon, that is to say, for every day and night, as long as the horse
aforesaid, with the aforesaid T. as is aforesaid should happen to be three
pence at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, had assumed upon
himself, yet the aforesaid T. plotting the aforesaid W. falsely, deceitfully,
and fraudulently in that behalf to deceive and defraud the horse aforesaid,
although often required etc. to the aforesaid W. he has not re-delivered, but
that horse afterward, to wit, (such a day, and year, and place) to a certain
unknown man for 24. s. to him the said T. in hand paid, falsely, craftily,
and deceitfully he there sold, and the money thereof coming to his own proper
use he there converted, disposed to his damage 30 s. etc.

Ebor. ss. T. F. was attached to answer A. F. of a plea wherefore whereas the
same A. had bargained to buy twenty Oxen of the aforesaid B.T. at B. the same
T. knowing these Oxen to be fallen into diverse diseases and infirmities;
Declaration upon warranty of cattle.
these Oxen by warranting them to be sound and in good health for a great sum
of money, the Oxen aforesaid to the aforesaid A. he falsely and fraudulently
here sold to the damage of him the said A. 40. l. as he says; And whereupon
the same A. by S. L. his Attorney complains, that whereas the same A. (such a
day and year) had bargained to buy of the aforesaid T. twenty Oxen at B. the
same T. knowing these Oxen to be fallen into diverse diseases and infirmities,
that is to say, of (such a disease) those Oxen for a great sum of money, that
is to say, for 60 l. (warranting them to be sound and in health) then and there
sold falsely and fraudulently, whereupon, he says, that he is worsted and
has damage to the value. etc.

AND the aforesaid T. by W. B. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. by protestation, that he the time wherein it is supposed the
aforesaid A. with him the said T. for the Oxen aforesaid to have bargained, had
no Oxen but what were sound and in good health; and that he sold not to him the
said A. the aforesaid twenty Oxen, for plea he says that he did not warrant
the same Oxen to be sound and in good health, as the same A. by his Writ and
Declaration above supposes: And of this he puts himself upon the Country:
And the aforesaid A. in like manner.

Action of the case upon a promise upon a bargain.
Sur. T. B. complains of VV. R. and VV.B. Tanners in the custody of the
Marshall, etc. for that whereas the same W. and W. (such a day, and year, and
place) had agreed with him the said T. to buy of him the hides and skins of all
and singular the Oxen, Horses, Cowes, and Calves, which he the said T. from the
aforesaid (such a day) until (such a day) then next following should happen to
kill or slay, the aforesaid W. and W. in consideration thereof did assume upon
themselves, and unto him the said W. W. did then, and there faithfully promise,
that they the said W. and W. would well, and truly pay to him the said T. for
every hide of each such Ox or Heifer by him the said T. within the time
aforesaid, killed, or slain, and by the same T. to them the said W. and VV.
within that time delivered 3 s. 4 d. and for every hide of a Cow by him the
said T. within the time aforesaid, killed, and as aforesaid delivered two
shillings: And for every dozen of the Calves skins by him the said T. within
the time aforesaid as is aforesaid killed and delivered four shillings; By
reason of which said promise and assumption of them the said VV. and W. in
form aforesaid made, he the said T.B. five hundred and three hides of Oxen and
Heifers, two and fifty hides of Cows, and fifty dozen of Calves skins by him
the said T. within the time aforesaid killed, according to the form of the
bargain aforesaid to the aforesaid VV. and W. at diverse days and seasons
within the time aforesaid at S. aforesaid, he did deliver, the true value and
price of all the hides and skins aforesaid in form aforesaid delivered
according to the bargain aforesaid, do amount unto the sum of 88 l. 16 s.
and 10 d. And the aforesaid T. B. trusting to the true and faithful payment of
them the said W. and W. of the aforesaid 88 l. 16 s. and 10 d. at the aforesaid
(such a day) according to the bargain aforesaid to him faithfully to be paid
and contented (such a day, year, and place) had assumed upon himself, and
faithfully promised to one R. B and diverse other persons to whom the aforesaid
T. was then indebted, to pay them the like sum of money, yet the aforesaid W.
and W. not ignorant of the premises, knowing the aforesaid T. to have promised
the payment of the aforesaid sum of 88 l. 16 s. and 10 d. to the aforesaid
R.B. and diverse other persons to whom he, as aforesaid, then stood indebted,
plotting and contriving him the said T. in that behalf craftily, and subtly
to deceive and defraud, although they the said. W. and W. (such a day and
year) and often afterward at S. aforesaid, have been required to pay to him
the said T. B. the aforesaid 88 l. 16 s. and 10 d. according to the bargain
aforesaid, to him the said T. B. hitherto they have not paid, nor either of
them has paid; by reason whereof he the said T. B. his day of payment with
the aforesaid R. B. and diverse other persons to whom he the said T. B. as
aforesaid then stood indebted, in no wise could keep: And so the same T. B. of
his fidelity, trust, and credit in his name, and the businesses wherein with
the same R. and other honest persons he was used to have in buying, selling,
and lawfully bargaining, he stands much hurt, worsted, and lessened; and in
very many other troubles, charges, and expenses, by that occasion burdened,
wearied, and vexed to his damage 150 l. And thereupon he brings his suit, etc.

I. H. complains of N. B. in the custody of the Marshall, Action of the case
against one for playing with false Dice.
etc. for that that is to say, whereas the aforesaid N. plotting and subtly
intending him the said I. to defraud, and deceive, and diverse great sums of
money from him the said I. fraudulently and subtly to obtain, did (such a
day, year and place) entice, stir up, and procure him the said I. to play at
Dice with him the said N. at a certain play at Dice called (Five or Nine) for
diverse sums of money: By whose said N. his inticement, and stirring up, he
the said I. with the aforesaid N. at Dice at the play aforesaid, called Five or
Nine, certain Dice truly marked, and even to him the said I. he did then, and
there deliver to them withal: And when these Dice in course happened to come
to the hands of him the said N. he the said N. these true Dice then, and there
subtly and fraudulently he withdrew, and certain other false Dice, on which
the numbers of Five or Nine by any chance could never happen, subtly,
falsely, and fraudulently, he then, and there cast down, and with the same
fa^se Dice, he then, and there played, by reason of which he the said I. great
sums of money, in the whole amounting to 41 l. 6 s. and 8 d. of lawful money
of England to the aforesaid N at that play he then, and there lost, and
thereupon by the aforesaid N. subtly, fraudulently, and covinously was
deceived and defrauded; to the damage of him the said I. 50 l. And thereupon
he brings his suit, etc.

RIchard Morley complains of John Clarke in the custody of the Marshall, etc.
for that whereas he the said R. (such a day, year, Action of the case upon
trover of a Recog^izance,
and place) was possessed of a certain writing obligatory; with the seal of
him the said I. C. signed, and (such a day, year, and place) before G. D. then
Mayor of the City aforesaid, and I. B. Gentleman, then Clarke, deputed for the
taking of acknowledgements of Recognizances of debts in the same City, by which
the aforesaid I. C. by the name of J.C. of, etc. acknowledged himself to owe
unto the said R. by the name of R. M. of, etc. 200 l. of lawful money of
England to be paid to him the said R.M. at the feast of the Nativity of St.
John Baptist then next following) as of his proper writing: And he being
thereof possessed, he the said R. that writing afterward, to wit (such a day,
year, and place) out of his hands; and possession he did casually lose, and
let go, which said writing so lost, afterward, to wit (such a day, year, and
place) to the hands and possession of the aforesaid I. C. by finding came, yet
the aforesaid I. C. knowing the writing aforesaid, to be the proper writing of
him the said R. and to him the said R. of right to belong and pertain,
plotting, and contriving him the said R. wholly to debar and exclude from the
recovery of the aforesaid two hundred pound; That writing to him the said R.
although afterward, to wit (such a day, year, and place) he has been
thereupon required, he has not delivered, but that writing to deliver to him
the said R. hitherto he has altogether refused, and the writing aforesaid,
and the profit thereupon coming; afterward, to wit (such a day, year, and
place) to his the said I. C. proper use and profit he has converted, and
disposed, to the damage of him the said R. three hundred pound: And thereupon
he brings his Suit, etc.

Tr^ver for a Ring.
Sur. I. G. complains of G. C. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for that,
that is to say, whereas the same I. (such a day, year, and place) was
possessed of a certain gold Ring, and one precious Stone, called a Puffyn, set
and infixed in the same Ring, as of his own proper Ring: And so as in other
Actions of Trover.

The Defendant pleads he bought it in open Market.
AND the aforesaid G.C. in his proper person comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. And says, that the aforesaid I. ought not to have his action
aforesaid against him, because by protestation, that the aforesaid Ring, the
aforesaid time wherein, etc. was worth but seven shillings, and no more: And
that the aforesaid I. was not thereof possessed, as of his proper goods, and
chattels in manner and form as the same I. above against him complains: For
Plea he says, that the City of London is an ancient City of our Lady the
Queen, and of her Progenitors late Kings of England: And that within the same
City there is had, and from time out of mind there has been had a certain
public and open Market in every open place within the same City weekly every
day in the week (the Lords day only excepted) for all manner of persons to buy
and sell whatsoever matters and merchandises within the City aforesaid, in
every part of the same City in all open places and shops of the City aforesaid,
every day in the week (the Lords day only excepted) from the rising of the
Sun to the setting of the same: And that long before the said time, wherein,
etc. to wit (such a day and year) one R.A. was possessed of the Ring aforesaid
at the City of London, in the Parish of St. Botolphs in the Ward of Aldersgate
London: And so being thereof possessed, afterward, to wit (such a day and
year) at such a place in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, that is to say, about
ten of the clock before noon of the same day in a certain open shop there in
a certain place called Little-Britain in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the
same Ring then there being sold to him the said G. for seven shillings, to him
then by the aforesaid G. paid: By virtue of which said sale in form aforesaid
made, the aforesaid G. was of the Ring aforesaid possessed as of his proper
Ring: By which he the said G. the Ring aforesaid the time wherein, etc. to his
own proper use and profit, as it was lawful for him to do: And this he is
ready to aver, whereupon he prays judgment whether the aforesaid I. ought to
have his action aforesaid against him.

ANne Lady G. complains of M. N. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for
that, that is to say, Action of the case for scandalizing of a title.
whereas the same Lady A. (such a day and year) and long before, and
continually after hitherto, was seized in demesne as of Fee, of, and in the
Manor of S. with the appurtenances in the County of C. whereof a great piece
of Land containing a hundred acres called the Warren is, and time out of mind
was parcel: And whereas also the same Lady A.G. and all they whose estate she
now has, of, and in the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances from time out
of mind were used to have a free Warren of Conies in the aforesaid hundred
acres of Land called the Warren: And the aforesaid Lady A. of the Manor
aforesaid, and the aforesaid hundred Acres of Land called the Warren being
seized, as aforesaid, had conference with diverse persons of, and for the sale
of the Manor aforesaid, and Warren aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and
thereupon might have had diverse great sums of money for the Manor and Warren
aforesaid, yet the same M. not ignorant of the premises; plotting and
contriving her the said Lady A. greatly to disturb and vex: And to bring into
scandal, and ignominy the right title and interest of her the said Lady A. of,
and in the Manor and Warren aforesaid, with the appurtenances (such a day,
year, and place) to very many of the faithful subjects of our Lady the
Queen, and chiefly to I.P. Esquire, who had conference with the same Lady A.
of, and for the purchasing of the Manor and Warren aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, and who then intended to buy the same Manor and Warren with the
appurtenances of the same Lady A. falsely and maliciously spoke, pronounced and
published that one R.G. then was the true Lord and Proprietor of the third part
of the aforesaid hundred acres of Land and Warren aforesaid, with the
appurtenances: And that she the Lady A.G. had no good right, state, title, or
interest in the same third part of one hundred Acres of Land and Warren
aforesaid: Whereas in truth the aforesaid R. G. then was not Lord or Proprietor
of the aforesaid third part of the one hundred Acres of Land and Warren
aforesaid, nor of any parcel thereof, but the same Lady A. was, and yet is,
the true and sole Lady, and Proprietor of the whole hundred Acres of Land and
Warren aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and thereof sole seized in her
demesne as of Fee. By reason of which said false speaking, asseveration, and
publication, the aforesaid state, title, and interest of her the said Lady A.
in the Manor and Warren aforesaid with the appurtenances, are fallen into
great scandal and ignominy: And the aforesaid I. P. who would have given for
the Manor and Warren aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be purchased from
the aforesaid Lady A. two thousand pounds, and had offered to purchase the
Manor and Warren aforesaid of the same Lady A. has thereupon now refused to
give any manner of sum for the same to her the said Lady A. and as yet
refuses, nor by that means can the same Lady A. the same Manor and Warren
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, nor any parcel thereof be able to sell to
any person for any complete sum of money, to the damage of her the said Lady
A. five hundred pounds, and thereupon she brings her Suit, etc.

Action of the Case against the Bayliffe of a Liberty in the nature of an escape
E W. complains of J. Pelson Bayliffe of the Liberty of Thomas Wentworth
Knight, Lord Wentworth of his liberty of Stepney in the County aforesaid in the
custody of the Marshal, etc. for that that is to say, whereas one R.E. Citizen,
etc. was indebted to him the said E.W. in 9 l. 13 s. and 4 d. of lawful money
of England for nine pound of black stitching silk to him the said R E. by the
aforesaid E. W. formerly delivered, to be paid to him the said E.W. upon such a
day then next following: And whereas also the aforesaid E.W. for the recovery
of the debt aforesaid, for that the aforesaid R.E. (the aforesaid such a day
and year) the aforesaid 9 l. 13 s. and 4 d. to the aforesaid E. W. had in no
wise paid or contented out of the Court of her the said Lady, the Queen before
her the said Lady the Queen at Westminster in the County of Middlesex had
procured a certain precept of her the said Lady the Queen directed to the
Sheriffs of Middlesex. By which the same Lady the Queen commanded the aforesaid
Sherifs, that they should take the aforesaid R. E. if etc. And safely, etc. So
that they might have his Body before our Lady the Queen at Westminster (such a
day) to answer the aforesaid E.W. of a Plea of Trespass. By virtue of which
said precept A. Avenon and H. Baskerfield at that time Sheriffs of the said
County of Middlesex afterward to wit, (such a day, and year, and place) on
the behalf of our Lady the Queen commanded the aforesaid I. then Baylife of
the Liberty aforesaid, that he should take the aforesaid R. E. if, etc. And
safely, etc. So that he might have his Body before our Lady the Queen at
Westminster the aforesaid Friday next after the Morrow of the holy Trinity to
answer the aforesaid E. W. of the Plea aforesaid. Which said Bailiff, by virtue
of the Precept aforesaid afterward to wit (such a day and year aforesaid at
Mile-end in the aforesaid County of Middlesex, within the Liberty aforesaid,
took and Arrested the aforesaid R.E. And him the said R. E. under that Arrest
by the space of five days thence next following, he then and there had and
kept. And whereas also in the aforesaid Court of our Lady the Queen, held
before her the said Queen there was, and time out of mind was had such a
Custom that every party appearing a Defendant in the same Court under Arrest of
any Sheriff or Minister, by virtue of any such like precept, should be bound to
answer as well the Plaintiff in the same precept specified, as all and singular
other the Subjects of our Lady the Queen, complaining against such person of
and in all and singular Actions, Suits, and Playnts of Debt or Trespass, which
any such like Subjects of our Lady the Queen, would prosecute against any such
like Defendant so appearing in the same Court, yet the aforesaid I. not
ignorant of the premises, plotting the aforesaid E.W. of his debt aforesaid to
defraud, has neither returned the Warrant aforesaid of the aforesaid Sheriff,
nor has brought in the Body of the aforesaid R E. but the same I. afterward
to wit, (such a day, year and place) permitted the aforesaid R.E. to go at
large, whether he would, without any appearance had or made in the said Court,
he the said E. W. being in no wise satisfied of his Debt aforesaid. And the
aforesaid R. E. afterward fled to places, to the aforesaid E. W. altogether
unknown, by which the aforesaid, E. W. is wholly defr^uded of the Recovery of
his Debt aforesaid to the damage of him the said E.W. of 20. l. And thereupon
he brings his Suit, etc.

T: D. Esquire Complains of G. S. in the custody of the Marshall, Action of
the Case against one for hindering the Steward from keeping Court.
etc. for that, that is to say, whereas the aforesaid T. (such a day and year)
was seized and yet remains seized in his demesne as of see of and in the
Manor of R. with the Appurtenances Situate and being at R. in the aforesaid
County of D. And the same T. D. and all they whose Estate the same T. now has
of and in the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances have had and held, and of
right ought to have and hold a Court Baron at that Manor from three weeks to
three weeks. By virtue whereof, the aforesaid T. D. not only diverse gains,
profits and Commodities, by reason of the Court aforesaid from time to time got
and obtained, but also diverse Neighbourly agreements and friendships which
between the Tenants and Suitors of the Court aforesaid, and the aforesaid T.
interchangeably by the keeping of that Court diverse ways did increase, arise,
and were preserved.

And whereas also the aforesaid T. D. (such a day and year and place) so being
seized of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances in his demesne as of fee
intended and endeavored to hold a certain Court Baron by one W.M. then being
his Stuard of the Manor aforesaid, for that within three weeks then last past,
no Court Baron had there been held, and by public Proclamation in the presence
of E. D. and I. B. Tenants of the Manor aforesaid, and of diverse other
Tenants of him the said T. of the Manor aforesaid, at that Manor in the Court
there endeavored to proceed, the aforesaid G. S. plotting him the said T. D.
to hinder from all the profits, advantages, and Commodities of the Court
aforesaid by force and Arms, that is to say, with Swords, etc. By contumelious
words and threatenings such and so great threats of danger of their lives of
them the said Steward and Tenants and of mayming them the said Steward and
Tenants in their Members, so then and there gave out; That the same Steward and
Tenants durst not any further to proceed in the same Court, there to be held,
for fear of those threats, but the same Steward and Tenants upon that occasion
were caused to depart from the same Court, leaving the business thereof
undone, by which he the same T. all the profit, gain and Commodity of his
Court aforesaid did wholly lose and was deprived of, to the damage of him the
said T. 100. And thereupon, etc.

Declaration in Trespass upon the Case for cancelling a Bond.
A. A. Widow complains of R. F. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. for that
that is to say, whereas the aforesaid A. (such a day and year) at L. etc. had
delivered to the aforesaid R. her certain writing Obligatory, in which was
contained that one I.F. was bound and obliged to her the said A. in 24. l. of
lawful money of England, to be paid to her the said A. when he the said I.F.
should be thereunto required, to be safely and securely kept for her the said
A. by him the said R. and to her the said A. when he should be thereunto
required: yet the aforesaid R. at London in the Parish and Ward aforesaid,
such a day and year then next following, the writing obligatory aforesaid
delivered to him the said R. by her the said A. to be safely kept and
redelivered as aforesaid, he the said R did maliciously break, tear and
cancel, to the damage of her the said A. 40 l. And thereupon she brings her
Suit, etc.

H. R. complains of R.C. Innkeeper of a common Inn, Against an Innkeeper
for a Horse lost.
called the Sign of the George in S. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. For
that, that is to say, whereas according to the Law and Custom of the Realm of
our Lady the Queen that now is of England, Innkeepers who hold and keep Common
Innes to lodge, and entertain Men traveling by those parts where such like
Innes are and lodgings in them, are bound to keep both by day and night, their
goods being within those Jnnes without any diminution or loss: So that by
default of these Inne-keepers or their Servants, no damage should happen or
come to their Guests by any means. And whereas the aforesaid R. before the
20th. day of F. such a year etc. And the same 20th. day etc. held and kept the
Common Inn aforesaid, called the Sign of the George in S. aforesaid in the
County aforesaid. And him the said H. in the same Inn as his Guests then and
there entertained; And the same H. R. then and there one Gelding of a
Flea-bitten color of the price of 8. l. he brought into the Inn aforesaid
with him, which said Gelding the aforesaid R. in his custody then and there
received and had, yet certain Malefactors unknown to him the said H.
afterward, to wit the aforesaid 20th. day of F. in the eighth year aforesaid,
A. S. aforesaid the Gelding aforesaid being under the custody of the aforesaid
R. B. in the aforesaid Inn then and there found for want good keeping of the
said R. B. and his Servants they took and led away against the law and custom
aforesaid. Whereupon the same H. says, that he is worsted and has damage to
the value of 20. l. And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

Case against an Execution upon the promise of the testator to pay money at
several days where they allege assetts. Hill. 37. Eliz. Roll 935.
Israel Owen complains of Sara de Bohault Executrix, etc. of John de Bohault
a Foreign Merchant lately her Husband deceased in the custody of the Marshall,
etc. for that, that is to say, whereas the aforesaid Israel (such a day and
year at London in the parish, etc.) had held and delivered to the aforesaid
John Bohault in his life time to the proper use and behoof of him the said John
54 Chests of powdered Sugar, to the value of 543. l. 6. s. and 11. d. The same
John in his life time in consideration thereof, afterward to wit, the day,
year, and place aforesaid, assumed upon himself, and to him the said Israel
then and there faithfully promised that he the said John 543. l. 6 s. and 11 d.
of lawful money of England to the aforesaid Israel in manner and form
following, would well, and faithfully Content and pay, that is to say, upon the
17th. day of September in the 35th. year of our Lady the Queen that now is
aforesaid then next following the one half of the said sum of 543. l. 6. s.
and 11. d. being 271. l. 13. s. 5. d. ob. parcel of the aforesaid 543. l. 6 s.
and 11. d. And upon the 17th. day of December from thence next following the
other half of the said sum of 543. l. 6 s. and 11. d. being the residue; And
afterward, to wit, the 6th. day of August in the 35th. year of the Reign of
our Lady Elizabeth aforesaid at London in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the
aforesaid John de B. made his last Will and Testament in writing: And by the
same constituted the aforesaid Sara his Executrix thereof. And afterward there
dyed, yet the aforesaid Sara the promise and assumption of the aforesaid I. de
B. so as aforesaid made, little weighing but plotting, and fraudulently
intending him the said Israel of the aforesaid 271. l. 13 s. and 5. d. ob.
parcel of the aforesaid 543. l. 6 and 11. d. upon the aforesaid 17th. day of
September in manner as is aforesaid, to be paid craftily and subtly to
deceive and defraud the same 271. l. 13 s. and 5. d. ob. after his the said
John de B. death in the aforesaid 17th. day of September in the 35. year
aforesaid, to the aforesaid Israel, according to the promise and assumption of
the aforesaid John de B. in his life time, in manner and form aforesaid made,
she has not paid, although to do that the same Sara afterward to wit the
18th. day of September in the 35th. year aforesaid at London in the Parish,
etc. by the aforesaid Israel, she has been thereunto required; And although
also sufficient Goods and Chattells, which were the aforesaid John de Bohault^,
at the time of his death, as well to pay to him the said Israel the aforesaid
271. l. 13. s. 5. d. ob. as all other debts, Funeral Expenses and Legacies of
the aforesaid John de Bohault to the hands and possession of the aforesaid
Sara, after the death of him the said John de Bohault at London, etc. in the
Parish etc. came, and as yet in her hands remain unadministred. By which the
same Israel in his credit toward diverse the subjects of our Lady the Queen
aforesaid, and chiefly to, etc. is much hurt and made worse, whereupon he
says, that he is dampnified, and has damage to the value of 466. l. And
thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

To this the Defendant pleads a special plene administravit, That the Testator
was indebted to another in the sum of 2500 l. by Obligation, who commenced
Suit against her, and had a Recovery in the Town Court of New Windsor. And that
she had not Goods over and above, etc. and this pleaded at large with an
averment that she as Executrix is the same Person against whom that recovery
was had, and not other and diverse. And that John de Bohault in the Record
aforesaid named, and the aforesaid I. de B. in the Declaration aforesaid named
one and the same Person and not other and diverse, etc.

To this the Plaintiff replies and acknowledges it to be true, that there was
such an obligation, and such a Recoverie, but pleads that that Recovery was had
by fraud, etc.

The Defendant maintains his plea and traverses the fraud, and upon the
traverse the plaintiff takes issue, and had a verdict and judgment for 271. l.
13. 5 d. ob. damages, and 15 l. 19. s. Costs thereupon recovered. Whereof a
Fifa. issued for the Damages of the proper Goods, and a Casa. for the Costs
and charges after a Devastavit returned upon a Testatum Fifa.

H L. complains of R. D. in the custody of the Marshall, Declaration: Case by
way of deceit in a bargain.
etc. wherefore whereas he the same H. had such a day, year and place,
Covenanted and bargained with the aforesaid R. well and sufficiently to make,
fabricate, and burn for him the said H. 80 thousand of Bricks for a certain
sum of money, that is to say, for 8. l. to the aforesaid R. before hand paid
and afterward to be paid. And the same R. had promised and assumed upon
himself the aforesaid 80 thousand of Bricks well and sufficiently to make,
fabricate and burn, and to him the said H. at a certain day last past to wit
such a day, etc. to deliver, yet the aforesaid R. plotting the aforesaid H.
craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud, 60 thousand of the Bricks about
the time aforesaid, he so negligently and improvidently he made, fabricated and
burnt; That the aforesaid 60 thousand of Bricks for want of due making,
fabricating and burning of them, would in no manner be serviceable for the
aforesaid H. for the doing of the work and business they were to be employed
about, by which the business and work of him the said H. is much hindered and
worsted, whereupon he says that he is damnified, and has damage to the value
of 40. l. And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

MIdd. ss. Richard Gresham Knight Citizen and Alderman of London complains of
Thomas Bridges in the custody of the Marshall, Action of the Case for scandal
of an Alderman of London for saying he was an Extortioner, etc.
etc. for that that is to say; Whereas he the same R. is a true loyal and
faithful Subject of our Lord the King that now is, and as a true loyal and
faithful Subject of our Lord the King without any crime of falsitie, deceit
or extortion, or of any other hurtful crime from the time of his Nativity
hitherto he has governed and behaved himself: And of such unblemished honesty
and conversation has been reputed and taken amongst all the faithful Subjects
of our Lord the King unspotted of any wicked crime of falsity, Theft, Robbery,
or Extortion, or of any manner of deceit; and so for the whole time aforesaid
was reputed; As also with the most excellent and mighty Prince King Henry the
8th by the Grace of God, etc. was so taken and judged. And thereupon in diverse
weighty and difficult businesses of him the said Lord the King was used and
employed in, and into the Office first of one of the Sheriffs of London
aforesaid, and next Major of the same City by occasion of the premises was
chosen, and with unanimous, free, and voluntary consent and friendly election
of all the Citizens of the City aforesaid was established and constituted: and
by force thereof the government tutelage and care of the said City and
Commonwealth of the same under our Lord the King, as a faithful Deputy of our
Lord the King, as Major of that City by a whole year from the Feast of the
holy Apostles Simon and Jude in (such a year, etc.) unto that Feast then next
following he took upon him, and had; And by the same whole time that City as a
faithful Deputy of our Lord the King he kept and preserved safe and unhurt; As
also with all the Nobles, Pears, and Privy Counselors of our Lord the King:
And all the great and eminent Persons of this Realm of our Lord the King, and
withal other the Subjects of our Lord the King, of whatsoever state or
condition for the whole time aforesaid, as such a true loyal and faithful
Subject as is aforesaid, from whatsoever crime of falsity, or extortion to any
the Subjects of our Lord the King, has been accepted and taken to be unspotted
and untouched; yet the aforesaid T.W. not ignorant of the premises, etc. of his
own perverse malicious and wicked will, plotting him the said R. of such his
credit, state, honesty, and reputation, falsely, maliciously, subtly, and
wickedly to deprive (such a day and year) those false English words following
to the aforesaid R. in the presence and hearing of diverse siege and faithful
Subjects of our Lord the King at W. in the County of Middlesex with great oaths
he did speak and pronounce, that is to say (you are a Powler and an
Extortioner; And the Country (meaning the County of Suffolk) is the worse by a
thousand pounds for you. And this I will prove) by reason of which said false,
scandalous and malicious words, he the said R. is not only very greatly vexed
and grieved in his body, and by disbursing diverse sums of money for charges
and expenses about the prosecution of his Suit in that bbehalfe, for the
purging of himself of the premises is very much damnified: But also the same
R. into very great distrust and infamy, as well with our Lord the King and his
Council aforesaid, as with the Nobles and Pears of this Realm of our Lord the
King of England, as also with all other the faithful Subjects of our Lord the
King, is by that means brought and fallen into, To the damage of him the said
R. 100. l. And thereupon he brings his Suit.

J Fisher Haberdasher, Declaration against one for frequenting Company with
another man's, Wife unlawfully and dishonestly.
complains of Richard Washington Gent. of of a Plea of Trespass, upon the Case:
And whereupon the same I. by etc. complains, that whereas he the some I. F. by
the space of ten years and more, at London in the Art of a Haberdashers craft,
and other Arts with his Neighbors, and other the liege people of our Lord the
King, well and lawfully has used and exercised, and by that occasion, many
great gains, profits, and commodities to himself thereupon, by the time
aforesaid has gotten and obtained: And has been of good name, same, and
estimation, as well with all his Neighbors, as with diverse other faithful
Subjects of our Lord the King, taken and reputed. By reason whereof, many such
faithful Subjects of our Lord the King with the same IF. for the time
aforesaid, before othermen, they have had commerce and trading, yet R. the
aforesaid sufficiently knowing the premises plotting him the said I. as well in
his Goods, as in his aforesaid good name and estimation to hurt and worst, and
him the said I. to defraud of all such like gains and profits, which by reason
of the exercising of his Art aforesaid, by the time aforesaid he got and
obtained, And him the said I. F. into so great scandal and infamy to bring
with all the faithful Subjects of our Lord the King, that the same Subjects of
our Lord the King from the company and fellowship of him the said I. F. should
wholly withdraw and estrange themselves (such a day and year, and place, etc.
and diverse other times and seasons between the same, (such a day and such a
day then next following) did frequently and unlawfully repair and come to one
Elizabeth then, and as yet the Wife of the aforesaid I.F. at London, etc. And
then and there openly in the Shop of him the said I.F. he then and there had
unlawful fellowship with the same E. And the same E. then and there at some
times by lacivious words, and other deceitful and flattering glances, and
kisses, and unchaste, and dishonest provocations, and by diverse other unlawful
ways and means did in a Devilish manner provoke and incite her the said E. to
Luxury, and the committing of Adultery with him the said R. And by such his
frequent and unlawful accesses and repayres to the aforesaid E. and the evil
behavior and conversation of him the said R. he the said I. could scarsely
have her the said E. in the Shop of him the said I.F. openly before the
Neighbors of him the said I.F. and all the people there passing then and there,
at other times for the space, etc. by the aforesaid R. for that time used by
his the said R. having brought the same E. unto so great scandal, infamy of
the crime of Luxury and Adultery. By reason of which, etc. the aforesaid I. not
only all the profit and advantage which he by the aforesaid E. in managing of
his household affairs and other businesses from the aforesaid (such a day until
such a day) was very likely to have gotten, if the premises had not been
committed, has totally lost, and is deprived of, but also he the said I F. is
drawn into great shame, scandal, and infamy, by reason thereof: And remains
so disturbed and unquieted in mind, that he about the necessary businesses
concerning his Art aforesaid, cannot seriously and earnestly intend. And the
same businesses for the whole time aforesaid by reason of the evil behavior
of the aforesaid R. as aforesaid to him the said I. remain undone: To the
damage of him the said I. 100. l. And thereupon he brings his Suit.

E. P. Complains of R A. Esquier in the custody of the Marshall, etc. For that
whereas according to the custom of the Realm of our Lady the Queen of England
hitherto used and approved every one of the same Kingdom is bound to keep his
fire safely and securely day and night. So that for want of good keeping of
such like fire, any hurt or loss may in any manner happen to any of their
Neighbors, yet the aforesaid R. a Fire in a certain house of his the said R.
at E. in the County aforesaid kept so negligently and improvidently that for
want of good keeping of his Fire, One Barn of his the said E. as also his
Goods and Chattells (that is to say etc. to the value, etc. in the same Barn
then and there being, were burnt to the damage of him the said E. etc. And
against the form of the Custom aforesaid. And thereupon he brings his Suit,
etc.

A B. Complains of C. D. in the custody of the Marshall, etc. for that that is
to say whereas the aforesaid Plaintiff and Defendant (such a day year and
place) had accounted together between them selves of diverse sums of Money to
the aforesaid A. formerly due, etc. And upon that Account the same Defendant
was found in arrerages toward the aforesaid Plaintiff in 100. l. Gilders of
Flanders money amounting unto the sum of etc. of lawful money of England. And
being, etc.

WHerefore whereas the same Plaintiff had bargained with the aforesaid
Defendant (such a day year and place) to buy of him ten Quarters of Malt, the
aforesaid Defendant knowing that Malt to be corrupt and insufficient to make
bear withal, by warranting that Malt to be good and sufficient to make bear
thereof, the aforesaid Malt to him the said Plaintiff for a certain sum of
money falsely and fraudulently he there sold, To the damage of him the said
Plaintiff 40. l. etc.

STATUTE OF MAYNTENANCE
Declaration upon the St^^^^ of (...) in (...) by Origin^^^. Much 11, (...) 6.
Roll. 84.
JOhn King of London Draper, and Nicholas Bulloyne of London Merchant, were
attached to answer as well to our Lord the King, as F. N. otherwise called,
etc. of a Plea, wherefore whereas in the Statute at Westminster lately
published, amongst other things it is contained, that, No person of the Realm
of England of whatsoever state, degree, or condition soever he were of, should
maintain or uphold in the Country or elsewhere, under the pain of
imprisonment, and making fine and redemption to our Lord the King, at the will
of every such Lord the King, that is to say according to their Estate, degree
and demerit: And the aforesaid I. and N. a Plea of Complaint which was in the
Court of our Lord the King ^^^s City of London, before S. Brown one of the
Sheriff of the same City without the Writ of him our said Lord the King,
according to the Custom of the City aforesaid, between the aforesaid F and I
Garr^n Merchant of Catalonia, of the debt of 68 l. 10 s. and 6. d. which (...)
^^me I G. required from the aforesaid F. at Burton in the Clay, for, and on the
part of him the said I. G. have maintained and sustained in the contempt of our
said Lord the King, and his the said F. great damage; And against the form of
the Statute, etc. And whereupon the same F who as well, etc. in his proper
person Complains for that, whereas in the Statute at Westminster lately
published, amongst other things, it is contained, that no person of the Realm
of England of whatsoever state, degree, or condition he should be of, should
maintain or sustain any playnt in the Country or else where, under the pain
of imprisonment, and making fine and redemption to our Lord the King, at the
will of every such Lord the King, that is to say, according to their Estate,
degree, and demerit, the aforesaid J. L. and N. (such a day, year, and place)
the plaint which was in the Court of the Lord the King of his City of London
before S. B. one of the Sheriffs of the same City, in Guild Hall of the City
aforesaid in the Parish of St. Lawrence in the old Jury, in the Ward of Cheap
London, without the writ of him the said Lord the King, according to the
custom of the City aforesaid, between the aforesaid F. and I. G. Merchant of
Catalonia of the Debt of 68 l. 10. s. and 6. d. which the same I.G. required of
the aforesaid F. at Burton in the Clay, for, and on the part of him the said I
G have maintained and sustained, in the contempt of our said Lord the King, and
the damage of him the said F. 200. l. And against the form of the Statute
aforesaid; And thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

AND the aforesaid John Linge and N. de Boloyre in their proper person come and
defend the force and injury when, One of the Defendants pleads not guilty and
the other a special Justification.
etc. and all contempt and whatsoever, etc. And the aforesaid John Linge says,
that he is nothing guilty of the mayntenance and sustentation aforesaid on him
in form aforesaid imposed, and of this he puts himself upon the country. And
the aforesaid F. in like manner, etc. and the aforesaid N. says, that the
aforesaid F. ought not to have his Action aforesaid against him, because he
says that long before the maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be made, the
same N. was dwelling in the City of London, holding a certain common Inn in
the Parish of Saint Georges in the Ward of Billings-gate London, for
whatsoever Foreigners to that Inn coming and going to lodge and entertain.
And says that the aforesaid J. Garron long before the said time, of the
maintenance aforesaid ^upposed, and at the same time wherein the same
maintenance was supposed to be made, was lodged and entertained in the Inn
aforesaid with him the said N. whereupon he the said I. G. told and reported to
him the said N. that he had brought against the aforesaid F. in the G^ild-hall
of the City aforesaid before the aforesaid S. B. then one of the Sheriffs of
the City aforesaid, the playnt aforesaid of the debt aforesaid, desiring him
the said N. that whereas he the said I. was a Stranger, and not knowing how to
speak the English tongue, that he the said N. would go with him the said I. to
Guild Hall aforesaid, to provide him of sufficient Counsel in the plaint
aforesaid for the debt aforesaid, and would declare the matter of the same
plaint to his said Counsel in the English tongue. Whereupon he the said N. at
the request of him the said I. went with him to the Guild Hall aforesaid, at
the time wherein the maintenance aforesaid is supposed to be made, and did
provide for him the said I. G. Counsel in the plaint aforesaid of the Debt
aforesaid, and that matter to the same Counsel in the English tongue did
declare, desiring the same Counsel that they would advise and help the
aforesaid I.G. in that plaint as should be just, Traverse the place.
as it was lawful for him to do, without that that the same N. is guilty of
the maintenance and sustentation of the plaint aforesaid of the Debt aforesaid
in the said County of Bedford, in the form wherein the same F. above by his
Writ and Declaration aforesaid above supposes; And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

Issue upon the traverse.
AND the aforesaid Playntife says that he ought not by any thing before
prealleaged to be debarred from having his Action aforesaid, because he says
that the aforesaid N. is guilty of the maintenance and sustentation of the
playnt aforesaid, of the Debt aforesaid in the said County of Bedford, in
manner and form as he the same F. above against him has complained: And this
he prays may be enquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid N. in like
manner, etc. Therefore the Jury thereupon is to come before our Lord the King,
from the day of Saint Martin in fifteen days wheresoever, etc. And who
neither, etc. To recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to
the Parties aforesaid, etc. And the Process thereupon being contained between
the parties aforesaid by the Jury put in respit thereupon between them before
our said Lord the King, from the day of St. Hillary in fifteen days then next
following wheresoever, etc. for want of Jurors, etc. At which day before our
Lord the King at Westminster came the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and the Jurors of that Jury being impannelled, and called in like
manner, The Entry of a Verdiction the Statute of Maintenanc^.
come, who being chosen, tried, and sworn to speak to the truth of and upon the
premises say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid N. is guilty of the
maintenance and sustentation aforesaid, in the form wherein the aforesaid F.
above against him the said N, complains, and they assesse the damages of him
the said F. by the occasion of the maintenance and sustentation aforesaid above
his costs and charges, etc. unto 100. l. And for his costs, etc. unto eight
pounds: And further the same Jurors upon their Oath aforesaid say, that the
aforesaid I. L. is in nothing guilty of the maintenance and sustentation
aforesaid, etc.

Therefore it is considered that the aforesaid F. recover against the aforesaid
N. his damages aforesaid, as well by occasion of the maintenance and
sustentation aforesaid, as for his costs and charges by him about his Suit in
that behalf laid out by the Jury aforesaid to 108. l. in form aforesaid taxed,
etc. And that the same N. be taken, etc. And that the aforesaid F. be in mercy
for his false claim against the aforesaid I. of the maintenance and
sustentation aforesaid, for that the same I of the maintenance and sustentation
aforesaid, by the Jury aforesaid above stands acquitted: And that the same I.
L. go without day, etc. Afterward, to wit the second day of June in the
eleventh year of the Reign of our Lord the King that now is the aforesaid N. is
committed to the Marshall, etc. for the damages aforesaid, there to remain
until the aforesaid F. of those damages shall be fully satisfied, and that he
shall have made his Fine to our Lord the King in that behalf, etc. A
remittiter entered.
Afterward, to wit, the eleventh day of July (such a year) came the aforesaid
F. before our Lord the King at Westminster, in his proper Person, and freely
remits and releases his damages aforesaid, as also all manner of execution
which against him by reason of the premises, he either has or may have:
Therefore it is considered that the aforesaid N. go without day, etc.

AND the aforesaid Defendant says, Justification in Maintenance as for a
servant.
that he at the time of the levying of the plaint aforesaid: And before the
levying of the same Action, and before the maintenance aforesaid supposed to be
made, and at the time of the maintenance aforesaid supposed to be made, was a
Companion of the Society of Lincolnes Inn London, in the Ward of Farington,
without which said Society is a certain Society of Men of the Courts of the
Temporal Laws, and of Counselors of the aforesaid Laws, and from time out
of mind has so been: And that he before the levying of the playnt aforesaid,
and before the maintenance aforesaid supposed, and at the time of the
maintenance aforesaid supposed, was, and yet is a Counselor learned of and in
the Law aforesaid: And says that he at and by the request of the aforesaid I.
B. and W. T. in the Bill aforesaid named before the maintenance aforesaid
supposed was retained at F. in the County of B. to be of Counsel with them the
said I and W. in the Bill aforesaid named, Taking therein for his Counsel as
then and there between them was agreed: By virtue of which Reteynder the same B
was of Counsel of the aforesaid I and W. as well in the matter in the plaint
aforesaid contained, as in all other their Law matters, and them counseled
according to the best of his understanding, knowledge, and conception of the
Law, at the time of the maintenance aforesaid supposed, and had Communication
with other persons of their Counsel, and them he requested and labored to be
of their Counsel, as it was lawful for him to do, which is the same
maintenance whereof the aforesaid Plaintiff in his B^ll aforesaid complains.
Which all and singular the same Defendant is ready to aver. Whereupon he
prays judgment whether the aforesaid Plaintiff ought to have his Action
aforesaid against him, etc.

The Plaintiff says that the Defendant was a Lay man, and not a Counselor.
AND the aforesaid A. says, that he by any thing before prealleadged ought not
to be debarred from having his Action aforesaid, because he says, that at the
time of the maintenance aforesaid, the aforesaid Defendant was a Lay man and
not a Counselor learned of and in the Law aforesaid, as the aforesaid
Defendant has above alleged: And this he prays may be enquired of by the
Country: And the aforesaid Defendant in like manner, etc.

Justification in mayntenance as an Attorney, by warrant of Attorney.
AND the aforesaid I. B. in his proper Person, comes and having heard the Bill
aforesaid defends the force and injury when etc. and all contempt, and
whatsoever, etc. by Protestation that the Bill aforesaid contains not in it
sufficient matter to enforce him the said I. to answer the same matter, for
Plea he says that he presumes not that our Lord the King will impeach or
molest him the said I. of the maintenance aforesaid by occasion of the Bill
aforesaid, because he says that the aforesaid R.P. before the time wherein the
maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be made, that is to say (such a day and
year) in the Court of our Lord the King, before him the said King at
Westminster the aforesaid plaint, then depending in the same Court by Writ of
Attaint, by a certain Warrant of Attorney, residing here in Court,
constituted, and ordained, and put in his place him the said I.B. to prosecute
for him the said R.P. the aforesaid Writ of Attaint, or to gain or loose in
that plaint, and the same I. B. was to this admitted by the same Court, as it
appears here in the same Court amongst the Warrants of Attorney of the Term of
the Holy Trinity in the 34th year aforesaid: By which the same I.B. the said
Writ of Attaint for the aforesaid R. P. prosecuted and for him the said R. P.
apeared in the same plaint as Attorney of him the said R. P. by virtue of the
Wa^^ant aforesaid the said time wherein, etc. as it was lawful for him to do,
which said prosecution and appearance, are the same maintenance whereupon the
said Lord the King prosecutes his Action: And this he is ready to aver as the
Court etc. whereupon he presumes not that the said Lord the King him the said
I. B. of the maintenance aforesaid by occasion of the Bill aforesaid in this
case will impeach or molest, and prays that he may be quietly therefrom
dismissed, etc.

And the aforesaid R. F. by G.L. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. and all contempt, and whatsoever, Justification in Maintenance
by cause of Consanguinitie.
etc. And says that the aforesaid W. C. ought not to have his action aforesaid
against him, because he says that he the same R. F. is, and the said time
wherein the Maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be made, was Cosen of the
aforesaid R. M. that is to say, Son of Margaret Sister of Alice, mother of the
aforesaid R.M. for whose part the aforesaid W.C. supposes him the said R.F. to
have maintained the plaint aforesaid. And the same R. F. says further that the
aforesaid R. M. for whose part, etc. before the said time wherein the
maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be made at S. aforesaid came unto him the
said R. F. and requested him the said R. F. that he the said R. F. would
procure a certain man learned in the Law of the Land to be of Counsel of him
the said R. M. in the playnt aforesaid. And that the same R. M. would well and
sufficiently reward him for his Counsel. By virtue of which request he the
said R.F. the said time wherein the maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be
made at S. aforesaid came unto one E. L. learned in the Law of the Land, and
requested him the said E. that he would be of Counsel with him the said R. M.
in the playnt aforesaid, and told him the said E. that the aforesaid R.M. would
well and sufficiently reward him the said E. for his Counsel; Which said
coming to the aforesaid E. requesting and speaking to him the said E. out of
the cause aforesaid, are the aforesaid maintenance, whereof the aforesaid W. C.
brings his action aforesaid; And this, etc. as the Court, etc. Whereupon he
prays judgment whether the aforesaid W.C. ought to have his Action aforesaid
against him, etc.

And the aforesaid W. C. not acknowledging that the aforesaid R.F. is a Cosen
of the aforesaid R. M. in the form wherein the same R. F. above supposes, The
Plaintiff replies that the Defendant gave money to the Jurors of his own to
give a Verdict.
for Plea he says that he by any thing before alleged, ought not to be
debarred from having his Action aforesaid, because he says that the aforesaid
R. F. the said time wherein the maintenance aforesaid was made, at S.
aforesaid, gave o^ his own proper Money to one I. P. 6 s. 8 d. being one of the
Jurors who were impannelled on the aforesaid Writ of Novell desseisin to be
arraigned, and before the aforesaid I. P. and R. L. Justices of Assizes of our
Lord the King in the County aforesaid assigned to be taken, returned between
the aforesaid R. M. and the aforesaid W.C. the now Plaintiff. And unto T. R. 3
s. and 4 d. another of the Jurors on the aforesaid Writ of Assize of Novel
desseisin in like manner impannelled, and before the aforesaid Justices between
the same parties in the playnt aforesaid named to speak their verdict with the
aforesaid R.M. in the same plaint. Which said gifts are the same mayntenance
upon which the same W. C. conceives his action aforesaid: And this etc. as the
Court etc. whereupon he prays judgment, etc.

And the aforesaid R.F. says that he gave not of his own proper money to the
aforesaid I.P. the aforesaid 6 s. and 8 d. nor any penny thereof, nor to the
aforesaid T.R. the aforesaid 3 s. and 4 d. nor any penny thereof, to speak
their verdict for the aforesaid R. M. Defendant in the playnt aforesaid, as the
aforesaid W.C. above by pleading has alleged. And of this he puts himself
upon the Country; And the aforesaid Plaintiff in like manner, etc.

AND the aforesaid T.W. by L.D. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when etc. and all contempt and whatsoever. etc. And says that the
aforesaid I. H. ought not to have his Action aforesaid against him, because he
says that the aforesaid I. W. the said time wherein, etc. and long before and
after was the servant of him the said T. W. retained with him in the service of
a Common Labourer at D. in the County of R. And further says that the
aforesaid I. W. for whose part, and long before the said time wherein the
maintenance aforesaid was supposed to be made at D. aforesaid, came unto him
the said T.W. and requested him that he in the name of him the said I.W. would
ask a certain man learned in the Law of the Land to be of Counsel with him
the said I.W. in the plaint aforesaid: And that the said I.W. would well and
sufficiently reward him for his labor. By virtue of which request, the same
T.W. the said time wherein the maintenance aforesaid is supposed to be made at
W. in the County of Middlesex came unto one W. F. a learned man in the Law of
the Land and asked him the said W.F. to be of Counsel with him the said I. W.
in the plaint aforesaid, and told him the said W.F. that the aforesaid. I. W.
him the said W. F. would well and sufficiently reward him for his labor: Which
said coming to the aforesaid W.F. asking and speaking to him the said W. F.
out of the Cause aforesaid, are the aforesaid maintenance, whereof the
aforesaid I. H. above complains: And this, etc. whereupon, etc.

AND the aforesaid I. H. says, The Plaintiff replies be was not his servant.
that he by any thing before alleged, ought not to be debarred from having
his Action aforesaid, because he says that the aforesaid I. W. the said time
wherein, etc. was not the Servant of him the said T W. now retained in Service
with him the said T.W. as the same T.W. above by pleading has alleged, and
this he prays may be enquired of by the Country, and the aforesaid Defendant
in like manner, therefore Command is given to the Sheriff that he cause to
come before our Lord the King at W. (such a day) twenty four as well Knights,
etc. of the Visenage of D. aforesaid by whom etc.

SVffolk ss. T. A. who prosecutes as well for our Lady the Queen is for
himself, Declaration upon the Statute of mayntenance for buying of a title of
Land.
complains of John Calfe in the custody of the Marshall, etc. of a plea that
he render to her the said Lady the Queen, and the aforesaid T. A. two hundred
marks for the value of one Message and eight Acres of Land Situate and lying
in the fields of C. in the County of Suffolk, which to them the said Lady the
Queen, and the aforesaid T. he owes and unjustly detaines, for that that is to
say whereas in the Statute in the Parliament of our Lord King Henry the 8th.
late King of England, Father of out Lady the Queen that now is at Westminster
in the County of M. the 28th. day of April in the 11th. year of his Reign
held and there begun, and from thence unto the 23 day of July then next
following by diverse proroguings then and there held, amongst other things it
was enacted that no person or persons of whatsoever state, degree, or condition
soever they should be of, who should from thence following, bargain, buy, or
sell, or by any ways obtain, gain, or have any right or title, of any person
or persons in or to any Manors, etc. (And so recite the Statute until) One
Moyetie of the said forfeitures to be to her the said Lady the Queen, and the
other Moiety to the party who thereupon should prosecute in any of the Courts
of our Lady the Queen of Record, as in the Statute aforesaid, amongst other
things more fully is contained, yet the aforesaid I. little weighing the
Statute aforesaid, nor seating the punishment contained in the same, the 24 day
of June in the 4th. year of our Lady the Queen, one Message and eight Acres
of Land with the Appurtenances in C. at C. in the County aforesaid of one R.F.
by him the said I. then and there paid, and afterward to be paid, bought,
obtained and had to him and his Heirs for ever: knowing that the same R. F. nor
any of his Ancestors had any right or claim to the aforesaid Message, and
eight Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, nor were thereupon ever possessed
of the same Message and eight Acres of Land nor of any reversion or remainder
thereof. And knowing also that he the same R. F. received not the Rent or
profit thereof by the space of one whole year next before the said bargain
grant and provision so between them as is aforesaid made; Which said Message
and eight Acres of Land aforesaid with the Appurtenance, are worth to be sold
two hundred Marks at the least. By which the Action accrued to her the said
Lady the Queen, and to the aforesaid T. A. to require and have of the aforesaid
I. the aforesaid two hundred Marks for the value of the Message and the
aforesaid eight Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, yet the aforesaid I.
although often required, etc. the aforesaid two hundred Marks to her the said
Lady the Queen, nor to the aforesaid T. hitherto he has not paid, but the same
to them the said Lady the Queen, and to the aforesaid T. hitherto to pay he
has denied, and as yet denies, and the same to them the said Lady the Queen,
and the aforesaid T. as yet unjustly detaineth. Whereupon he says that he is
worsted and has damage to the value of 200 s. And thereupon as well for our
Lady the Queen as for himself be brings his Suit, etc.

The Defendant pleads he bought not the Land against the form of the Statute.
AND the aforesaid I P. by T.S. his Attorney comes and defends the force and
injury when, etc. and all contempt and whatsoever, etc. And by Protestation not
acknowledging any thing in the Declaration aforesaid specified to be true, for
Plea he says that the same I. bought not obtained, or had to him and his
Heirs of the aforesaid R. F. the aforesaid Message and 8 Acres of Land with
the Appurtenances against the form of the Statute aforesaid, in manner and
form, as he the same T. above, by his Declaration alleges, and of this he
puts himself upon the Country. And the aforesaid T. A. who as well prosecutes
for our Lady the Queen, as for himself in like manner, etc.

Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, where the Defendant took promise to have
parcel of the Land.
Declar. (as before) yet the aforesaid R. little weighing the Statute aforesaid
after the publishing the Act aforesaid, to wit (such a day and year) at Derby
for a certain sum of money, between him the said R and one W. L. of C. in
the County of W. Yeoman, agreed upon, took of the same W. a promise to have the
Moyetie of eight Messuages, three Cottages, and twenty Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Derby, of which said Moyetie of the same Tenements, with the
Appurtenances, the aforesaid W. or any of his Predecessors, or he by whom the
said W. clayms the same Moyetie with the Appurtenances, was not, nor were not
in possession, nor seized of the same in Reversion or Remainder, nor did
receive or recovered the Rent or profits thereof, by the space of one whole
year next before the promise aforesaid thereupon made. And the same W. B.
says that the aforesaid R. D. the aforesaid time of the promise of the Moyetie
of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances in form aforesaid, made known
that the aforesaid W. L. or any of his Antecessors, or those by whom the same
W. claims the same Moyetie, was not, nor ever were in possession, nor seized
of the same Moyetie with the Appurtenances in Reversion or Remainder, nor did
receive or received the Rents or profits thereof by the space of one whole
year next before the promise thereupon made. And further the same W. says
that the true and entire value of the Moyetie of the Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, in manner and form of the aforesaid promise in the
aforesaid time of the same promise, did amount to the sum of 200. Marks: By
which the Action did accrue to him the said W. who as well, etc. to require and
have of the aforesaid R. for the aforesaid Lady the Queen, and for himself the
aforesaid 200 Marks, the value of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances against the form of the Act aforesaid, so promised, yet the said
R. although often required, the aforesaid 200 Marks to him the said W. who as
well. etc. he has not as yet rendered, but the same him to render hitherto
has denied, and as yet denies; Whereupon the same W. who as well etc. says
that he is worsted, and has damage to the value of twenty pounds, and
thereupon he brings his Suit, etc. And the aforesaid R. by D.C. his Attorney
comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. and by Protestation in that
the aforesaid W. was in possession of the aforesaid Moetyie of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and received the Rents and profits thereof,
by the space of the aforesaid one whole year next before the aforesaid one and
twentieth day of July in the sixth year aforesaid. By protestation also that
the true and entire value of the aforesaid Moyetie of the Tenements aforesaid
with the Appurtenances the aforesaid one and twentieth day of July did not
amount to the aforesaid sum of two hundred Marks. For Plea the same R. says,
that he took not of the aforesaid W. L. the promise to have the Moyetie of the
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances against the form of the Statute
aforesaid, as the aforesaid W. B. by his Declaration aforesaid above against
him supposes. And of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the
aforesaid W. B. in like manner, etc.

Declaration upon the Statute of scandal mayntenance of 2 Richard the 2.

Damage recovered by the Bishop of Winester, against T. Jones upon this Action.

See Trin. 2 H. 8. roll 30.

The like Easter 7 Hen. 8. Roll. 43.


SVff. T. Lucas late of London Gent. was attached to answer Edward D^^e of
Buckingham of a Plea, Wherefore whereas in the Parliament of our Lord King
Richard the second, late King of England after the Conquest held at Gloucester,
in the second year of his Reign, published, amongst other things it is
ordained and strictly prohibited, none should be so bold as to affront, speak
against or defame the Prelates, Dukes, Earls or Barons of his Realm of
England, nor of the Chancellor, Treasurer or Clerk of the private seal,
Steward of his household, Justices of our Bench nor of other great Officers of
the Kingdom aforesaid by any false news, lies, or any the like false
scandals, whereby any scandal or discords within the aforesaid Kingdom may
arise; And that whosoever should do this, should have and incur the
punishment otherwise thereupon ordained by the Statute of Westminster the
first, as in the same Statute more fully is contained, yet the aforesaid T. L.
little weighing the aforesaid Statute, diverse false and horrible lies of the
aforesaid Duke, then being one of the Pears of this Kingdom at Rasbie
scandalously spoke and reported, and in English words publicly published the
words subscribed in English following, that is to say (That the said Thomas
said, that he set not by the Duke two pence, and that the said Duke has no
more conscience then a Dog, and so the said Duke may have goods he force not
how he come thereby) Whereby great scandal and discord to him the said Duke
then there within the said Kingdom might arise, in contempt of our said Lord
the King that now is, and to the damage of him the said Duke one thousand
pounds, and against the form of the Statute aforesaid, etc And whereupon the
same Duke by I.C. his Attorney says, etc. that the aforesaid T. Lucas the
Statute aforesaid little weighing (such a day and year) diverse false and
horrible lies of the aforesaid Duke then one of the Pears of this Kingdom
being at R in the County of Suffolk aforesaid scandalously spoke and reported,
and in English words publicly published the words subscribed in English
following, that is to say (that etc.) Whereby great scandal and discord to him
the said Duke then there, within the said Realm, might arise in the contempt
of our Lord the King that now is, and to the damage of him the said Duke one
thousand pounds, etc. And against the form of the Statute aforesaid, and
thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

HErtf. ss. Richard Warnecomb lately of etc. under-Sherife of T.C. Esquier,
Sheriff of the County aforesaid, Declaration upon the Statute of 23. Hen. 6.
against Extorrion in any Sherifs, etc. Mich. 2^. Hen. 8. Rollo. 358.
was summoned to answer I. E. who prosecutes as well for our Lord the King, as
for himself, of a Plea that he render him forty pound which he owes him, and
unjustly detaines, etc. And whereupon the same I. E. who prosecutes for our
Lord the King in that behalf, for the same Lord the King says that, Whereas
in the Statute in the Parliament of our Lord King Henry the 6th. late King of
England held at Westminster in the 23th. year of his Reign, amongst other
things it is ordained and established that no Sheriff, undersherife, Baylife of
any Liberty or franchise, or any other Baylife, by occasion or color of his
Office, should take any other thing by them etc. (and so recite the Statute:)
And that all Sherifes, under-Sherifes, Bailiffs of liberties, or other
Bayliffes; or any other Officers or Ministers who should do contrary to the
Ordinance aforesaid, or any the Articles in the same should loose to the party
grieved in that behalf, his damages to the trouble, and should forfeit the
sum of forty pound, each Sheriff wherein he or any of them should do
contrary to the Ordinance aforesaid. Whereof the Lord the King was to have one
Moyetie to the use of his household and no other ways, and to him who in that
behalf will prosecute another moyetie thereof, as in the same Statute more
fully is contained: yet the aforesaid Defendant little weighing the aforesaid
Statute (such a day and year) then being under-Sherife of the County aforesaid
at (such a place) by color of his Office aforesaid, took Extortiously of one
I. D. by the hands of one R. W. (for the making and returning of a certain
pannell upon a Writ of Venire facias, at the Suit of the aforesaid I. D.
against R. H. and others in the same Writ contained in a Plea of trespass
prosecuted) thirteen shillings and four pence against the form and effect of
the Statute aforesaid, by which the Action accrued to the said Lord the King to
require and have of the aforesaid Defendant the aforesaid forty pound, yet the
aforesaid Defendant allthough often required, etc. the aforesaid forty pounds
to the said Lord the King, he has not as yet rendered it, but the same to him
hitherto to render he has denied, and as yet does deny. Whereupon etc.

The Defendant pleads that he took not against the form of the Statute.
AND the aforesaid Defendant by W.C. his Attorney, comes, etc. and says our
aforesaid Lord the King him the said Defendant by occasion of the premises, in
an thing to impeach or trouble ought not, because he says that he took not of
the aforesaid I. D. the aforesaid thirteen shillings and four pence against
the form of the Statute aforesaid, as the aforesaid I. C. for our Lord the
King aforesaid above has alleged. And of this he puts himself upon the
Country; And the aforesaid I. which, etc. for our Lord the King, in like
manner, etc. Therefore, etc.

VVITHERNAM.
WIlts. ss. Command was to the Sheriff as it was often commanded him, Entries
of a Plure Replegiare.
that instantly and without delay he should cause to be replevyed to R. D. his
cattle which E.P. I. D.W.S. and W. W. took and unjustly detained, or that he
should be before our Lady the Queen in eight days of Saint Hillary last past,
wheresoever, The Sheriff returns the cattle were so far off remved, etc.
etc. to show wherefore the command of our Lady the Queen, so oftentimes
thereupon to him directed, he had contemned, and the same Sheriff to her the
said Lady the Queen, at that day returned that the Cattle aforesaid were
removed afarr off to a place unknown unto him, by the aforesaid E.P. and
others, so that he could not have the view of them. Therefore command was to
the same Sheriff, The entry of a Withernam and Pone.
that of the cattle of the aforesaid E P. and others in his Bailywick he
should take in Withernam, and the same to the aforesaid R.D. he should cause to
be delivered, to be held to him until the aforesaid E. and others would
deliver the cattle aforesaid; and in what manner he should have executed the
same precept he should make known to our Lady the Queen, from the day of Easter
in fifteen days, wheresoever, etc. The return of the Writ.
Command was also to the same Sheriff that if the aforesaid R.D. should make
him secure of prosecuting his Complaint, as also of returning the cattle
aforesaid, if the return thereupon should be adjudged, then he should put by
sure and safe pledges the aforesaid E.P. and others, that they should be before
our Lady the Queen at the aforesaid Term, to answer the aforesaid R. D. of the
taking and detaining of the cattle aforesaid. At which day before our Lady the
Queen at Westminster came the aforesaid R. D. by M. Moseley his Attorney; And
the Sheriff returned that the aforesaid R. D. had made him the said Sheriff
secure of prosecuting his Complaint aforesaid, and of the return of the
cattle aforesaid, if the return hereupon should be adjudged, and that the
aforesaid E.P. is attached by Pledges of W.P. and G.G. as also that the
aforesaid, I.T. W.S. and W.W. has nothing within his Baily-wick whereby they
can be attached. The same Sheriff also returns that he the 24th. of March in
the one and twentieth year of the Reign of our Lady E. now Quen of England took
in Withernam two horses, whereof one is of Color white, and the other very
gray, and three Ma^^s, whereof one is of a bay Color, another of a Gray
color, and another of a daple Gray, and eighteen Sheep of the Cattle of the
aforesaid E.F. and others, and the same to the aforesaid R. D. he has caused
to be delivered, to be held unto him until the said E. and others the cattle
aforesaid formerly taken they will deliver, as it was commanded unto him, and
the aforesaid E. P. and others the fourth day of the plea being solemnly called
by R. Best their Attorney in like manner came, upon which the aforesaid D.
declaring aganst the aforesaid E. P. and others, complains that they (such a
day and year) at Lockeridge in the Parish of Fifeeld in the County aforesaid
in a certain place there called the Common Field, took the cattle of him the
said Robert, that is to say six Geldings of the price of 24. l. and them
unjustly detained against Sureties and Pledges, etc. Whereupon he says he is
worsted, and has damage to the value of forty pounds, And thereupon he brings
his Suit, etc.

Judgment for the Plaintiff in a Replevin upon a Demurrer in Law. Easter 30.
Eliz. Rot. 196.
THE Plaintiff declares, and the Defendant pleads in acknowledgment, etc. and
the Plaintiff pleads in Bar, and the Defendants rejoines to the Bar, and
thereupon the Plaintiff demurs in Law, and they join in Demurrer, and Judgment
was had for the Plaintiff as follows. (Because as yet, etc. at which day
before our Lady the Queen at Westminster came the parties aforesaid by their
Attorneys aforesaid. Upon which all and singular the premises being seen here,
and by the Court here fully understood, and mature deliberation being thereupon
had, for that that it seems to the Court of our Lady the Queen here that the
Plea aforesaid by the aforesaid Defendants above pleaded, and the matter in the
same contained are not sufficient in the Law to have return of the cattle
aforesaid, or to debar him the said Plaintiff from having his Action
aforesaid against the aforesaid Defendants, It is considered that the aforesaid
Plaintiff ought to recover his damages against the same Defendants by occasion
aforesaid. But because it is not known to the Court of our Lady the Queen here
what damages the aforesaid Plaintiff has sustained by occasion of he premises,
therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that by the Oath of honest and
lawful men of his County he diligently enquire what damages the aforesaid
Plaintiff has sustained, as well by occasion of the premises, as for his Costs
and Charges, A writ of Enquiry of Damages awarded
by him about his Suit, in that behalf laid out. And the Inquisition which he
shall thereupon make to our Lady the Queen from the day of Easter, in fifteen
days, wheresoever, etc. under the Scale, etc. and Seals, etc. he shall send,
together with the Writ aforesaid, to him thereupon directed: The same day is
given to the aforesaid Plaintiff here, etc. At which day before our Lady the
Queen at Westminster, came the aforesaid Plaintiff by his Attorney aforesaid,
and the Sheriff to wit P. T. Esquire, returned a certain Inquisition taken
before him at G. in the County aforesaid, the tenth day of April, in the
thirtieth year of our Lady the Queen that now is, by which it is found that
the aforesaid Plaintiff had sustained Damages by occasion of the Premises,
besides his Cost and Charges, etc. to six and twenty shillings and eight pence,
and for those Costs, etc. unto twelve pence; therefore it is considered, that
the aforesaid Plaintiff should recover against the afore-Defendant his Damages
aforesaid, by the Inquisition aforesaid, The Judgment for the recovery of the
damages.
in form aforesaid assessed, as also sixteen pounds for his Costs and Charges
aforesaid, to him the said Plaintiff by the Court of our Lady the Queen here of
his assent of increase adjudged, which Damages in the whole amount unto
seventeen pounds seven shillings and eight pence. And the aforesaid Defendants
in mercy, etc.

E. D. by his Attorney, Withernam, and Retorno Habendo in one writ.
offers himself the fourth day against I. M. Gentleman, of a Plea wherefore
he took the Cattle of him the said E. and them unjustly detained against
Sureties and Pledges, and he came not, and was sought for; Therefore it is
considered of, that the aforesaid I. should go without day, and the aforesaid
E. and his Pledges of prosecuting, to wit John Do, and Richard Roe should be
in mercy, and the aforesaid I. should have return of his Cattle aforesaid,
etc. and in what manner that Writ should be executed, he should make known to
the Keepers, etc. from the day of Saint Martin, in fifteen days; At which day
before the Keepers, etc. at Westminster, came the aforesaid I.M. in his proper
person: And the Sheriff, to wit W. N. Esquire returned the Writ aforesaid, in
all things served and executed in these words. The Cattle formerly taken, and
in this Writ mentioned to the within named I. M. I could not return, therefore
by virtue of the same Writ, I have taken in Withernam, of the Cattle of the
within named E. that is to say, six and twenty Ewes, to the value of the
Cattle within mentioned, formerly taken, and the same to the within named I.
M. I have caused to be delivered, to be held until the same I. should have
return of the Cattle aforesaid, by him formerly taken; and the aforesaid E. is
attached by the Pledges, I. D. and I. F. afterward, to wit on Friday next,
after fifteen days of the holy Trinity, then next following, before, etc. at
Westminster, came the aforesaid E. in his proper person, and rendered himself
to the Prison, etc. who by occasion of the Premises is committed to the
Marshall, etc. and, he prays that he may be admitted to the making of his
Fine, with the Keepers, etc. by occasion of the contempt aforesaid; And he is
fined by the Court of the Keepers, etc. to three shillings and four pence,
which by commandment of the Court here he paid to D. W. Coroner and Attorney
of the Keepers, etc. in the Court of the Keepers etc. before, etc. for
necessary Reparations in the Court here to be made and done, therefore the same
E. is to be thereof quit: And upon this before, etc. at VV. came S. C. and R.
S. and became Pledges, and each of them became Pledge for the aforesaid E. as
well for the Prosecuting his Complaint, as of the Cattle aforesaid, which to
the aforesaid I. M. in the Court here before, etc. were adjudged by the default
of him the said E. to be returned, if the return of them should be adjudged,
each of the Pledges aforesaid, under the pain of ten pounds, which said Sum of
ten Pounds, the Pledges aforesaid, and either of them by himself acknowledges
to be made of his Lands and Chattels, and to the use of the aforesaid I. to be
levied, if it shall happen that the aforesaid E shall not deliver the Cattle
aforesaid to the aforesaid I. etc. upon which the same E. by the Statute prays
the Writ of the Keepers, Second Deliverance granted.
etc. of second deliverance, and it is granted unto him, etc. By which Command
was given to the Sheriff, that the Cattle aforesaid to the aforesaid E.
without delay he should cause to be delivered, and that he should put by sure
and safe Pledges the aforesaid I. M. that he be before, etc. in eight days of
Saint Michaell, etc. to answer the aforesaid E. of the aforesaid taking and
detaining of the Cattle aforesaid, the same day is given to the aforesaid E.
etc. at which day the Plaint aforesaid was adjourned by the Writ of the
Keepers, etc. of common adjournment before, etc. at W. unto the Morrow of all
souls. At which day before, etc. at W. aforesaid came the aforesaid E. in his
proper person, And the Sheriff returns that before the coming of the Writ
aforesaid to him thereupon directed, those Cattle by him in Withernam taken
were removed afar of to places unknown unto him by the aforesaid I. M. And
therefore after the receipt and before the return of that Writ, the Cattle
aforesaid to the aforesaid E.D. he could not cause to be delivered according to
the purport of the Writ aforesaid. And that the aforesaid I. is attached by
pledges, to wit I. D. and R.R. And upon this Command is given to the Sheriff,
that he take in Withernam so many of the cattle of the aforesaid I. M. as are
of the value of those cattle, and the same to the aforesaid E. D. he cause to
be delivered, until these cattle to the aforesaid E. he will deliver, and put
by sure and safe pledges the aforesaid I. M. that he be before, etc. (such a
return, etc.) to answer the Keepers, etc. as well of the contempt, as the
aforesaid, etc. of the damages and injuries to him in that behalf brought. The
same day is given to the aforesaid E. etc.

THE TABLE.
A.
ABatement where two Tenants in Common, and but one named in the writ: Title of
Abatement. Fol. 1 Abatement for Misnomer of a Town pleaded, and Issue upon it.
2 Abatement for Misnomer of the addition of a Name. 2 Abatement for Misnomer in
the Sur-name. 3 Appeal of Robbery against the Principalls and Abbettors, where
some are Bailed, and others, not the trial and Verdict. 5 Avowry for Rent
arreare: title Replevin. 25 Avowry for Rent arreare: title Replevin. 27 Avowry
for services and suit of Court undone, title Replevin. 29 Avowry for homage
unperformed, and Rent unpaied, title Replevin. 32 Avowry for Rent arreare,
title Replevin. 34 Avowry for Rent behind, and services undone, title Replevin.
38 Acknowledgement to an avowry, and Judgment thereupon, title Replevin. 39
Avowry for Damage-feasant, title Replevin. 38 Avowry for Rent unpaid, and
services, and suit of Court undone, title Replevin. 40 Avowry for Rent arreare,
title Replevin. 41 Attornment of tenant to the Lord, title Replevin. 43 Avowry
for Rent behind, and homage and fealty, title Replevin. 44 Avowry by one
Defendant, and justification as a servant by the other for a Rentcharge
behind, title Replevin. 49 Aid prier, and joynder thereupon, title Replevin.
50 Avowant maintains his plea, and traverses; Nonage pleaded in bar to him,
title Replevin. 51 Avowry by virtue of a special custom within a Manor, title
Replevin. 54 Avowry of taking goods by a Mayor of a Town, for tole denied,
title Replevin. 55 To the avowry the Plaintiff pleads that he is Burgess of the
Borough of B. and that by reason thereof he is discharged of all toles within
the Town of H. title Replevin. 56 Avowry as to part of the Cattle, that he
took it for a Herriot, and as to the other that he did not take, title
Replevin. 58 Avowry by one Defendant as damage feasant, and no caption by the
other, title Replevin. 67 Avowants plead that they took the Cattle by the
name of a Distress, and they put them in open Pound where they perished, title
Replevin 69 Aid prier after issue joined, title Trespass. 35 Assise upon no
^ell disseisin of tenements, etc. and judgment upon it, and a Habere facias
Possessionem, title Assise. 9 In assise the Original an^ the return thereof,
title Assise. 10 In assise the Habeas Corpus Juratorum and return, title
Assi^e. 11 Assise upon novell disseisin, a declaration in it, title, assise. 11
In assise no disseisin pleaded, title assise. 12 Audita querela upon an escape
by a Bailiff of a Liberty, title Audita querela. 15 In Audita querela, the
Defendants appear by Attorney, and imparle, 18 Admission of one under age to
sue by Prochain ^my to be entered upon record upon the Rule, where the
declaration is entered, title error 40 Affirmation of a judgment after a writ
of error in the Exchequer chamber, title error. Fol.
B.
BAR especial to an advow^^ ^^tle Replevin. 2^ Bar to an advowry, for that the
Defendant took the Catter out of his Fee, title Replevin. 31 Bar to an advowry,
for that the Defendant has nothing in the tenements, etc: title Replevin. 36
Bar to an advowry, that he did not hold the Land by the services, etc. title
Replevin. 40 Bar to an advowry, that the Defendant was never seized of the Rent
and services, etc. title Replevin, 43 Bar to an advowry, that the Defendant
took the Cattle out of his fee, etc. title Replevin. 45 Bar to an advowry,
that the property of the Chattells himself, and not in another, title
Replevin. 47 Bar pleaded in Avowry by Nonage, title Replevin. 50 Bar to an
Advowry that the Land wherein a Herriot was taken, was without the Fee, title
Replevin. 66 Bar for want of enclosure, pleaded to an Avowry for
Damage-feasant, title Replevin. 67 Bar to a justification, that it is the Free
hold of the Plaintiff, and not of the other, title Trespass. 83
C.
CAse for scandal of a title: Title trespass upon the case. 72 Case for
scandalous words, that the Plaintiff was a Felon, title trespass of the case.
74 Case for stopping of a way, title trespass of the case. 76 Case upon a
promise in consideration of money to secure goods beyond the ^eas, title
trespass upon the case. 77 Case against a Sherif for not arresting one upon an
execution being in his presence, title trespass upon the case. 79 Case upon an
assumpsit to save one harmless from an Obligation, title trespass upon the
case. 82 Custom of London that the Rector of any Church may let the Land of
his Church with the assent of the Wardens of that Parish, and of honest
Persons, Vestrie men, title Trespass. 89 Custom special pleaded amongst
heirs in Gavelkind, title Trespass. 96 Color pleaded, the manner of it, title
Trespass. 101 Conveyance pleaded in consideration of Marriage, title,
Trespass. 101 Color by demise of Copy of Court Roll, Title Trespass. 110
Color by Feoffement Title Trespass. 30 Custom for a Mortuarie pleaded, Title
Trespass 32 Charge given to the Jury upon Assize Title Assize. 13 Conspiracy,
Declaration in it for causing one to be endicted for witch craft, Title
Conspiracy. 20 Conspiracy, Declaration in it for one who was indicted
together with others before the Justices of the Peace, and afterward acquit by
the Justices of Assize, Title Conspiracy. 22 In Conspiracy, one Defendant
Justifies as a Counselor giving advice, and the other as witnesses, Title
Conspiracy. 23 Case upon a Trover and conversion of a Reclaymed falcon, Title
Trespass upon the Case. 73 Case for keeping a Dog accustomed to bite Sheep,
Title Trespass upon the Case. Case upon Warrantie of a Hawke, Trespass upon the
Case. 74 Case for stopping of a Watercourse, title, Trespass upon the Case. 74
Case against an Inne-keeper for selling his Guests Horse, title, Trespass upon
the Case. 75 Case for warrantie of Cattle fold, title, Trespass upon the Case.
75 Case upon a promise on a Bargain, title, Trespass upon the Case, 76 Case
against one for cheating with false Dice, title Trespass upon the Case 77 Case
upon a Trover of a Recognizance, title, Trespass upon the Case. 77 Case upon a
Trover and Conversion for a Ring, title, Trespass upon the Case. 78 In Case upon
trover and conversion the Defendant pleads that he bought the goods in open
Market, etc. title, Trespass upon the Case 78 Case against one for scandalls of
a title, title Trespass upon the Case. 79 Case against a Bailiff of a liberty
in the nature of Escape, title, Trespass upon the Case, 80 Case against one for
disturbance of a Steward in keeping of a Court, title, Trespass upon the Case.
82 Case for Cancelling of a Bond, title, Trespass upon the Case. 82 Case against
an Inne-keeper for a Horse lost, title, Trespass upon the Case. 83 Case against
an Executrix upon the promise of the testator, title, Trespass upon the Case.
84 Case by way of deceit in a Bargain, title, Trespass upon the Case. 85 Case
against one for scandalous words of an Alderman of London, title, Trespass
upon the Case. 86 Case against one for frequenting Company in a dishonest
manner, with another man's Wife, title Trespass upon the Case. 87 Case against
one for negligent keeping of his fire, whereby another man's house was burnt,
title, Trespass upon the Case. 88 Continuance of a December tales, title of
Continuance. ibid. Continuance upon a Summons ad auxiliandum, title
Continuance. ibid. Continuance of a Demurrer in Law and an issue, title,
Continuance. Conspiracy Declaration in it upon the Statute of 8. Hen. the 6.
title, Conspiracy. 25 Conspiracy for indicting of one as a common Baretter,
title, Conspiracy. 31 In Conspiracy the Defendant justifies what he did as a
Juror with others, etc. title, Conspiracy. 29 Conspiracy, Action upon it
brought by the Man and the Wife for Felony supposed to be done by the Wife,
title, Conspiracy. 27 Continuance of a Scire facias in a Writ of Error, title,
Continuance. 34 Continuance of a Judgment after a verdict, title Continuance:
34 Continuance of an Exigent, title, Continuance. 35 Continuance of a
Distringas, title, Continuance. 35 Continuance of a Jurata for want of Jurors,
and a December tales awarded, title, Continuance. 35 Continuance of a matter in
Law, title Continuance. 35 Continuance of a Writ of adjournment, title,
Continuance. 36 Continuance of a Jurata where the Plaintiff acknowledges one of
the Defendants to be dead, title, Continuance. 36 Continuance of a Jurata by
consent of the parties, title, Continuance. 36 Committitur of a Prisoner to the
Marshall, being in the custody of a Sheriff by virtue of a Case. 38 Committitur
of a Prisoner upon a Capias ad satisfaciend, title, Commititur. 38 Committitur
after judgment, title Committitur. 38 Certiorare to the chief Justice, title,
Error. 40 Certificate of the chief Justice, title, Error. 40 Custom of the
Common Bench alleged for the Manor of entering of judgment, title, Error. 41
D.
DEclaration in Debt upon a Bill to be paid at the day of Marriage, title,
Debt. 1 Debt for an Administrator against an Administrator, title, Debt. 1 Debt
upon the Statute of Mayntenance, title Debt. 1 Debt upon the Statute of
Perjury, title Debt. 3 Debt upon a Judgment, title Debt. 5 Debt upon the
Statute for Costs for not prosecuting, title Debt. 6 Debt upon an escape made
by a Sheriff, title Debt. 8 Debt in Account after Auditors assigned, title
Debt. 10 Demurrer adjudged good, and a Writ of Enquire of Damages in Trespass
and Battery, title, Trespass. 111 Demurrer in Law to matter of Error, title
Error. ibid.
E.
Entry of a Recognizance after issue joined, Title Debt. 5 Essoyne cast, Title
Replevin. 39 Entry of an Essoyne, and joining in aid, Title Trespass. 99
Escape pleaded in Audita querela, and issue thereupon, Title Audita querela. 18
Error in assault and Battery, the especial matter of Error alleged and
pleaded to, Title Error. 39 Error for want of admission by prochainamie the
party Plaintiff being within age, Title Error. 40 Escape against a Sheriff,
Title Error. 40 Escape upon a Bill of Middlesex, against the Sheriffs, Title
Escape. 47 Escape against a Sheriff for not having the body of one arrested at
the return of the Writ, Title Escape. 50
F.
FIne pleaded, Title Replevyn. 42 Form of pleading of an Outlawrie after
Judgment, Title Trespass upon the Case. 79 Form of pleading where Land is
granted by Copy of Court Roll. Title Trespass. 110 Form of pleading, where the
Lands accrued to the Husband under the Wifes title, Title Trespass. 40
Feoffement pleaded, Title Trespass 41 Feoffement pleaded, Title Assize. 12
I.
JVdgement by nihil dicit in Debt, Title Debt. 9 Judgment and verdict in
Appeal, Title Appeal. 8 Incursion and issue upon it, Title Replevyn. 27 Issue
in aid Prayer, Title Replevyn. 34 Joynder in Aid, Title Replevyn. 37 Issue
upon a Traverse of Disseisin, Title Replevyn. 37 Issue upon a Traverse of
Prescription, Title Replevyn. 39 Issue upon the Tenure, Title Replevyn. 41
Issue upon the seisin of Rent, Title Replevyn. 44 Judgment of a Playnt
returned by the Sheriff upon Recordare, Title Replevyn. 44 Issue upon the
taking of the Cattle out of his fee, etc. Title Replevyn. 45 Justification of
taking Cattle as servant to another, the Cattle doing damage to the Master,
Title Replevyn. 46 Justification of the taking of Cattle as Bailiff to another
in the name of Distress for parcel of a Rent Charge, Title Replevyn. 52 Issue
taken upon a Prescription, title Replevin. 55 Justification. ibid. Inrollment
that the Defendant secure Delivery of the Cattle, Title Replevyn. 69
Imparlance in Replevyn, Title Replevyn. ^^ Justification of taking of Cattle
as Bailiff to another for arreares of a Rent charge, title Replevyn. 71
Justification Especial in an Action of the Case for standing of a Title with a
Replication thereto, Title Trespass upon the Case. 74 Justification in trespass
as servant to one that had the freehold, title Trespass. 83 Issue upon a Custom
in Gavel-kinde and a Venire facias, awarded out of the body of the County,
title Trespass. 98 Justification in trespass by virtue of a Demise, title
Trespass, 101 Judgment after a verdict in Assize, title Assize. 13 Jurie put in
respite in Audita querela, title Audita querela. 18 Jurata either in Debt,
Trespass or Ejectione firmae, title Continuance. ibid.
L.
LEtters Patents pleaded, title Trespass. 71 License pleaded by the Defendant in
Trespass, title Trespass. 48
N.
NOnage pleaded in Bar to an Avowry, title Replevyn. 50 Not guilty pleaded to
an Action of the Case, title Trespass upon the Case. 82
P.
PRohibition where the Plaintiff suggests the Lands, out of which Tithes are
required to be Priorie Lands, title Prohibition. 11 Prohibition a Declaration
for prosecuting in the Court Christian after the Prohibition delivered. 14 In
Prohibition the Defendant pleads, he did not prosecute after the Prohibition to
him delivered, title Prohibition. 21 Prohibition to the Court of Admiralty,
upon the Statute of 13 of Richard the second, title Prohibition. 22
Prescription to Destrain for Rent, title Replevyn. 27 Prayer in Aid by the
Plaintiff in title Replevyn 28 Prayer in Aid and joynder in Aid upon
Summons, title Replevin. 33 Prayer in aid and Summons upon it title Replevin.
36 Prescription for common of Pasture, title replevyn, 39 Playntiff in mercy
and the Defendant without day, etc. title Replevyn. 44 Plea as to taking part
of the cattle, and Chattells, that he did not take them, and as to the residue
the property in a strange, title Replevin. 45 Playntiff replies that the
property was in himself, etc. title Replevin. 46 Plea that the property was
in a stranger, title, Replevin. 46 Prescription to take toll in a Market by a
Major of a Borough, title Replevin. 55 Property of part of the goods pleaded
in Bar to an Action of trespass, and not guilty to the rest, title Trespass. 84
Prescription for common for all manner of cattle, all times of the year, title
Trespass. 104 Prescription for a foot way to the Church, title Trespass: 31
Prescription for a Mortuary, title Trespass. 32 Prescription for a Horse and
Foot way, leading from one Village to another, title Trespass. 47 Prescription
for cutting of Wood for Estovers, title Trespass. 69
R.
REplevin, a Declaration in it, see title Replevin. 28 Replevin to which some
of the Defendants plead, that they took not the cattle, and the others
justify as servants, etc. by prescription for Rent arreare, title Replevyn. 29
Replevyn, Declaration in it, parcel in the Detinuit, and parcel in the
Detinet, title Replevyn. 34 Replevyn, Declaration in it for taking of Hides in
a Market, title Replevyn. 55 Replevyn, a Declaration in it for taking of
cattle, title replevyn. 58 Replevyn, Declaration in it for taking of several
cattle in several places, title replevin. 68 Replevin where the cattle were
taken in one town, and were impounded and detained in another, title replevyn.
70 Replevin for taking and detayning of beasts and chattells, title replevin.
70 Release pleaded in trespass by the wife of the Playntiff whilst she was sole
title Trespass. 100 Recognizance entered into in an Audita querela, title Audita
querela. 17 Return of a Scire facias in an Audita querela, title Audita
querela. 17
S.
STate in tail made by Fine, title replevin. 42 Statute, a Declaration upon
the Statute of 1. and 2. of Phillip and Mary for impounding of cattle out of
the County, title Trespass upon the Case. 75 Statute of 1 Edward the 6th. for
suppressing Chantries and singing pleaded, tittle trespass. 91 Statute of 8.
Henry the 6th. of forcible Entries, a Declaration upon it, title trespass. 5
Justification pleaded in Bar to the Statute by virtue of a certain Demise,
and issue thereupon, title trespass 7 Sole Seizure pleaded, and a traverse of
the tenure in common, title Abatement. 2 Scire facias awarded in an Audita
querela, title Audita querela 17 Statute of Mayntenance, Declaration in it,
title Statute of Mayntenance. 90 Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, a
Justification especial, because of consanguinity, title Statute of
Mayntenance. 95 Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, one Defendant pleads not
guilty, and the other justifies especially, title Statute of Mayntenance. 91
Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, Justification pleaded as a Counselor, title
Statute of Mayntenance. 93 Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, Justification
pleaded by virtue of a Warrant of Attorney, title Statute of Mayntenance. 94
Upon the Statute of Mayntenance, Justification as a servant, especially
pleaded, title Statute of Maintenance. 96 Satute of Mayntenance, a Declaration
in it for buying a title questioned, title Statute of Maintenance. 97 Statute
of Mayntenance, a Declaration in it, where the Defendant took promise to have
parcel of the Land, title Statute of Mayntenance. 98 Statute of Scandalum
magnatum, a Declaration upon it, title Statute of Mayntenance. 101 Statute of
23. Henry the 6th. a Declaration upon it, title Statute of Maintenance. 101
T.
TRaverse of a misnomer in the Addition to a name and issue up-it in the title
Abatement. 3 Traverse of a misnomer in the Surname, title Abatement. 3 Traverse
of a tenure, title Replevin. 34 Traverse of Desseisin, title replevin. 37
Traverse of a prescription, title Replevin. 39 Traverse of disseisin and issue
upon it title replevin. 48 Traverse of a prescription to be free from paying of
toll, title replevin. 57 Traverse of a Custom of E^closu^e and issue
thereupon, title replevin. 68
Trespass.
IN trespass the Defendant justifies as tenant to the Plaintiff by Copy of
Court Roll, title Trespass. 84 In trespass the Plaintiff confesses the Defendant
to be his tenant by Copy of Court Roll, but that he has forfeited his Estate
for wast, title Trespass. 85 In trespass the Defendant justifies by virtue of a
Custom of a Manor giving liberty to cut down trees upon their freehold,
title Trespass. 86 Traverse of the prescription and Custom and issue upon it in
title Trespass. 87 and 88 In trespass justification as servant by virtue of a
certain Demise, title Trespass. 89 Traverse of a Demise and issue thereupon,
title Trespass. 93 In trespass, Justification as servant of one who had the
freehold, title Trespass. 93 Traverse of land being parcel of a Manor, etc.
and issue thereupon title Trespass. 94 In trespass Justification as Lessor of one
of the Coheirs in Gavelkinde, title Trespass. 95 Trespass, a Declaration against
two who plead severally, title Trespass. 104 In trespass, Justification by
prescription for Common, title Trespass 104 Traverse of a Prescription of Common
and issue thereupon, title Trespass. 106 Trespass for taking and leading away a
Horse, title, Trespass. 107 The Defendant pleades that the property of the
Horse was in him till such time as he was stole, and that finding of him he
took him, title, Trespass. 107 In trespass the Defendant justifies, for that
the tenements were Customary Lands, title Trespass. 109 Trespass and false
Imprisonment, title, Trespass. 111 Trespass with a Continuando, title,
Trespass. 112 In trespass Justification for that the tenements were customary
lands, etc. title, Trespass A. 1 To the Justification the Plaintiff pleads in
Bar a custom, that if any customary tenant does abide out of the Manor for a
year and a day, then it shall be lawful for the Lord of the Manor to seize
his customary Lands, title Trespass 3 In trespass, justification as damage
feasant by virtue of a Demise, title Trespass 9 Justification in trespass,
for that the Lands in which, etc. were Gavelkinde, title Trespass 12 In
trespass, the Defendant justifies as servant to another, the Cattle doing
damage, title Trespass 15 In trespass, the Defendant justifies by virtue of a
Demise made by the Master and Fellows of a College title Trespass. 17 In
trespass, a justification by a prescription for a Procession way in another
place then in the Declaration, with a traverse of the place and issue upon it,
title Trespass 25 In trespass, justification for a Custom of a Herriot, title
Trespass 26 Plea in bar to the justification that the Lands were not held by
such or so many services, and that he did the trespass De injuria sua propria,
and traverse the Custom, and issue upon the Herriot Custom, title Trespass
27 In trespass, some of the Defendants plead not guilty, and others justify
for that that the place in which etc. is the Kings high way, title Trespass 28
The Plaintiff replies that they did the trespass of their own proper injury,
and traverses the place to be the Kings high way and issue upon the traverse,
title Trespass 29 The Defendants plead in trespass, that a stranger was seized,
etc. and enfeoffed certain J. S. and R. B. and justify the trespass as
servants to the Feoffees, title Trespass 30 Trespass assigned a new, title
Trespass 30 Justification to the new assignment for a foot way to the Church by
prescription over the premises, title Trespass 31 The Plaintiff by protestation
says, that the Defendant had no such way for plea that he trod down the Grass
out of the way, etc. the Defendant pleads not guilty thereto, title Trespass 31
In trespass, the Defendants-justifie by virtue of a Demise, the taking of a
Mortuary, etc. title Trespass 32 The Plaintiff alleges the Custom of the
Mortuary to be otherwise then the Defendants have pleaded, title Trespass 33 The
Defendant maintains his plea in bar, and traverses the Custom alleged by
the Plaintiff, and issue upon the traverse, title Trespass 34 In trespass the
Defendant pleads the Goods taken as a pawn for money lent; title Trespass 35
The plaintiff replies that he took those goods De injuria sua propria, without
such cause, etc. title Trespass 35 In trespass the Defendant justifies the
taking of the Cattle as Strayes within his Manor, and traverses the place of
Caption, and issue upon the traverse, title Trespass 36 In trespass, the
Defendant pleads the property of the Horse in a stranger who in open Market
sold it to the Defendant, title Trespass 37 The Plaintiff pleads the property in
another stranger who sold to him, and traverses the sale made to the Defendant,
title Trespass 37 In crespasse, the Defendant iustifies for want of reparation
of the hedges by the Plaintiff, title Trespass 38 In trespass, justification as
the servants of a Vicar who was seized in right of his Vicaridge, title Trespass
38 The Plaintiff replies that the Vicar demised to him; to which the Defendant
by rejoinder maintains his plea, and traverses the Demise, and issue upon the
traverse, title Trespass 39 In trespass, justification by virtue of a demise
made to the Testator, who bequeathed the same to his wife, title Trespass 40
The Plaintiff replies that before the Demise, etc. the aforesaid Feoffee
infeoffed the Plaintiff and others to the use of astranger, etc. title Trespass
41 The Defendant maintains his Plea, and traverses the Feoffment, and issue
upon the traverse, title Trespass 42 In trespass, justification of taking of
goods by the Defendants wife while she was sole from the Plaintiff, title
Trespass 43 In trespass, justification as a servant for killing Hoggs and Sheep
by his Masters command, title Trespass 46 The Plaintiff replies that he did it of
his proper injury, and traverses the Command, and issue upon the traverse,
title Trespass 47 In trespass, justification for a Horse and Foot way by
prescription leading from one Village to another, title Trespass 47 The
Plaintiff replies that he did it of his own proper injury, and traverses the
Prescription, and issue upon the traverse, title Trespass 48 In trespass, a
License pleaded by the Defendant, title Trespass 48 The Plaintiff replies that
he did it of his own proper injury, and traverses the License, and issue upon
the traverse, title Trespass 49 In trespass and battery, a justification by the
Defendants as Magistrates, for that the Plaintiff was suspected to be a Felon,
title Trespass 49 The Plaintiff replies, that they did it of their proper
injury, without any such cause, etc. title Trespass 50 In trespass, assault and
battery, justification by virtue of a Warrant of the Peace, title Trespass 54
The Plaintiff replies, that he offered security, and traverses the denying to
come before the Justice, and issue upon the traverse, title Trespass 51 In
trespass, justification by the Statute of Winchester, for taking and detaining
of him in his Watch at unlawful hours suspiciously traveling, title
Trespass 52 In trespass and Assault, etc. justificacation by a Constable for
taking a Whore making disturbance of the peace, title Trespass 53 The
Plaintiff replies, that they did it of their proper injury, without any such
cause, etc. title Trespass 54 In trespass, assault, and imprisonment,
justification by virtue of the Statute of Richard the second, made against
Vagrants and Vagabonds, etc. title Trespass 54 The Plaintiff replies, that he
dwelt at E. in the County of S. exercising there his trade of a Tailor, and
traverses the being a Vagrant, and issue upon the traverse, title Trespass 56 In
trespass and imprisonment, justification, the seizing of the Plaintiff as a
Ward within age, for that the Father held of the Defendant in Knights service,
etc. 56 The Plaintiff by protestation, that the Father did not dye seized, For
plea that he held by fealty and rent of twenty pence only for all services,
and traverses the holding in Knights service, and issue upon the traverse,
title Trespass. 57 In trespass and assault against the Man and the Wife; the
Man pleads not guilty, and Se^-assault demesne for his Wife, and issue upon it,
title Trespass 58 In trespass and assault one Defendant pleads seu assault
demesne, and the to her justifies as parting a fray, title Trespass. 58 The
Plaintiff replies, that they did it of their own proper injury, with out such
cause, etc. title trespass 59 In trespass and assault, and Agreement pleaded,
title trespass 59 The Plaintiff pleads there was no such agreement; and
thereupon takes issue, title trespass 60 Justification in assault, and Battery
by a Vicar for disturbance in the Church, etc. title trespass 60 The Plaintiff
replies that he did it of his proper injury without such a Cause, etc. title
trespass 60 In trespass, Justification in defense of his title to put the
Plaintiff out of the house, etc. title trespass 61 In trespass, Assault, and
Battery, Justification by virtue of a Justice of Peace's warrant, etc. title
trespass 63 The Plaintiff replies that he did it of his proper injury, and
traverses the notice of the warrant, and issue upon the traverse, title
trespass 65 Trespass, Assault, and Battery, a declaration in it, especially
drawn, title trespass 65 The Defendant pleads an agreement in Assault and
Battery, title trespass 66 Justification in trespass for taking of cattle for
Herriots, title Trespass. 66 The Plaintiff pleads by Protestation that as to one
Cow no such custom for plea, de seu tort demesne, and traverses the place of
taking. ibid. And as to the other cow the Plaintiff says the Defendant took
the Cow de seu tort demesne, and traverses the Custom, and issues taken upon
both traverses, title trespass. 67 and 68 In trespass justification for cutting
of Wood for Estovers by prescription. 69 The Playntiffe replies, the freehold
was in him at the time, etc. and traverses the prescription and issue taken
upon the traverse, title trespass. 70 In trespass all the Defendants plead not
guilty as to the force and arms, and one as to the rest of the tresprs, and
the other justify by Virtue of a Warrant, title trespass. 71 The Plaintiff
replies, that they did it of their proper injury without such cause, etc. title
trespass. 72 Traverse of the dying seized, and issue thereupon, title Assize. 12
Trespass upon the case upon an in simul Computasset, title trespass upon the
Case. 89 Trespass upon the case, upon a warrantie of goods, title trespass upon
the Case. 89
V.
VErdict in Assize, title Assize. 13 Verdict Especial in Audita qurela. 19
Verdict and judgment in Maintenance upon the Statute of Maintenance. 92
WIthernam the entry of it, and a Pone, title Statute of Maintenance. 103
Withernam the return of it, title Statute of Mayntenance. 104 Withernam, and a
Returno haben do in one Writ: 105
FINIS.

