The QVAKERS WILD QUESTIONS Objected against the Ministers Of the GOSPEL, And
many Sacred Acts and Offices Of RELIGION. With brief Answers thereunto.

TOGETHER WITH A Discourse of the Holy Spirit, His impressions and workings On
the SOULS of Men.

Very seasonable for these times.

By R. SHERLOCK, B. D.

(...),

1 COR. 11.19. London, Printed by E. Cotes, for R. Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, 1654.

To the Honorable Sir Robert Bindloss Baronet.
SIR,
THese following Questions being sent to your house, and receiving their short
and sudden answers under your roof; and the Author his subsistence from your
courtesy and beneficence; It being also your desires they should be made
public, if perhaps some satisfaction might be given to any of those too too
many seduced and wavering souls amongst us: Be pleased therefore, that under
your name and patronage they may appear, as a covert to veil their
imperfections and defects: Defective they must needs be in many respects;
neither can the Answers to so many strange, scrupulous, and unheard of
questions, being conceived on a sudden, by way of answer to a Letter, be
expected to be satisfactory and full, as to all particulars: Longer time for
further and more mature deliberation, might in some good measure have supplied
many defects; but that I was unwilling to add any thing to what was dispatched
away by way of answer to the Letter (or rather Libell) of the scrupulous
Questioner, that so both might appear to the eye of the world verbatim, without
addition or diminution.

Hereunto, as a back or second, I have annexed a Discourse, both short and
plain, Of the Holy Spirit of God, so much by those s^duced souls pretend^d
unto; and to the grief of all good Christian hearts, too much profaned by such
pretenses: And it is a Discourse which was desired by your virtuous Lady, for
her private satisfaction: The subject whereof being fully cleared to the minds
of men, by some more wise and abler judgments, would both discover, and strike
at the root, and dissolve the groundwork of many those infectious errors,
which at present so much overspread and prevail amongst us.

And indeed, how can we expect or hope for other, since 1. unity and uniformity
both in the public worship of God (whereby all men of the same Church and
Religion, do worship God in the same way, even with one heart, and one mouth,
and after one manner) is not only decryed, but also dismissed our Congregations:
And since 2. the Pale of Ecclesiastical discipline is pulled down, by whose
coercive laws all men were kept within the limits of the true Faith, and of
Obedience and Charity, as to the external profession thereof: And since 3.
under the name and privilege of Liberty of conscience, licentiousness of
opinion has got footing in the minds of men; who take liberty under that
pretext to become vain in their imaginations, to be of this, or that, or what
opinion they please in Religion: As also to perform the public parts of divine
worship, according to the several dictates of their own minds, even in any
way, but what is decent, reverend, uniform and orderly: Since such (I say) is
the sad and confused condition of our Church, it is no marvail though there
daily arise new Sects, and new Opinions; such which are not only strange,
wild, and fanatic, but even destructive to the very being of true
Christianity: Nor must we hope for other, till the God of all truth and peace
be pleased, together with his truth, to restore unity and order in his worship;
whereof for our manifold sins he has so long deprived us.

It is most true, what the Apostle says of the necessity of heresies, 1 Cor.
11.19.
They must come, Ad hoc enim sunt Haereses, ut fides habendo tentationem,
habeat etiam probationem, Tert. de praesc. adv. Haeret. c. 1.
that they which are approved may be made manifest: But it is as true, what our
Savior says of Offenses in general, Matt. 18.7.
Woe unto them by whom they come: Their condition must needs be sad and
deplorable who broach and introduce the infection, as being herein the
instruments of Satan; or in the language of our Lord, They are of their Father
the Devil, Joh. 8.44.
and his works they do; for he was a liar from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth: Now although this Grandfather and promoter of lies and untruths, be
by the God of all power and goodness enchained and limited, otherwise he had
long since overrun the world, as in times of Paganism of old: Yet sometimes
for the sins of a people (whereof we are now too sensible) his chain is
lengthened, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and the roaring Lion has more scope then ordinary to roam about, seeking whom
he may devour: And he devours or destroys the souls of men two ways: 1. By
blinding their unstandings, whereby they become apt to be seduced in the
entertainment of erroneous. opinions and belief of lies. 2. By poisoning their
affections with the false paint of worldly vanities, whereby they are inveigled
into sinfulness and vice. And now (Sir) that neither you, nor any that belongs
unto you, may in either of these respects be deceived and perish; neither with
the blind and giddy to fall into the ditch of error on the one hand, or with
the vicious and unclean to wallow in the mire of sinfulness on the other, but
to keep the way of the righteous, and to walk in the path of the just; which is
no other undoubtedly but the way of your own peace and tranquillity here, and
eternal felicity hereafter; it shall be the endeavor, and is the daily prayer
(Sir) of

Your respective Devotor R. Sherlock.

The Quakers Questions.
The Letter of Questions Endorsed.
To the Priest at Borwick, deliver.

manuscript direction or address on the Quakers' letter The Quakers Questions
directed by them as above.
To all you professed Ministers, who have taken the title of the Ministers of
the Gospel of Christ upon you, who is the end of the Law and Prophets, and
shadows who shadowed him forth, a few Questions to you that have taken this
office upon you. Oxford or Cambridge, when the Apostle says, The Gospel he
preached was not after man, neither was he taught it by man.











to stand praying in the Synagogues before Sermon, and after, and whether the
Apostles did so.

David's Psalms to sing in meeter; these things which you now practice, answer
them by the Scriptures or the Apostles practices, without consequence or
imagination.









but the Lord or no.







Galatians were bewitched, Gal. 3.1.







100 or 200. l. a year for preaching the Gospel.

Church, whereas the Church is in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.

Amen, and have groats a piece of the world to maintain his trade?



10 or 20 s. for preaching a funeral Sermon?





If thou be a Minister of Jesus Christ which exercises a pure conscience
toward God, and toward Man, clear thy self from the guilt of these things,
and answer them in writing by the Scriptures, or Saints examples; or else in
silence confessethy self to be guilty, and one of those that Christ cried woe
against, acting the same things now, as they did then, filling up the measure
of thy fathers iniquity, which said they were Jews and were not but were of the
synagogue of Satan. Thou say they must be learned men, and brought up in
Scholasticall ways, and by that means they must open the Scriptures; because
thou say, they were first given forth in Greek and Hebrew which you call the
Original, and therefore ignorant men cannot understand them, but must have
your meanings, interpretations, and dimensions of your own brain, and thus you
deceive the simple.

But answer me this question, Whether the Scriptures as they are written in
English be true as Christ and the Apostles spoke them forth; and if they be
true as they are in English, what need any other language be learned by an
English man to know them?

R. H.

THE QUAKERS Several Questions: WITH The Answers Returned.
R. H.
FOR what relative title to give you without offense I understand not: I
received you paper of many strange scrupulous Questions: And though it be most
true, that one fool may ask more Questions then 100. wise men can answer, (as
the common proverb goes) yet we are taught by a more authentic proverb, Prove.
26.5.
sometimes to answer a fool in his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.
I say not this to upbraid your person, but with reflection on the follies and
errors displaid in your several questions; which will appear I believe in the
following answers, if you read them as becomes a good Christian, without
prejudice, partiality or obstinacy of mind, but with the spirit of meekness,
1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
and a desire to try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

Whether your Gospel be the same which the Apostles preached, and if it be,
why go you to Oxford or Cambridge, when the Apostle says, the Gospel he
preached was not after man-neither was he taught it by man?

Act. 2.1, 2 3, 4.
and miraculously inspired with extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, inabling
them both more fully to understand, and more powerfully to preach the Gospel,
then any mortal man could ever hope for since: But we do neither pretend to
any such sublime and eminent gifts, neither do we, or ought we to depend upon
any such immediate and miraculous revelation from heaven; Schools they had at
Bethel, 2 King. 2 3. at Jericho, v. 5. and Elishas College was so full that
they enlarged it, 2 King. 6.1. and at Naioth 1 Samuel 14.20. and upon the hill of
God, 1 Samuel 10.5, 10.
but do use those ordinary means and helps, which God in his merciful
providence has in all ages afforded his people, viz. by study and industry in
the Schools of the Prophets.

Neither go we to Oxford and Cambridge to learn the Gospel we preach, but to
learn the knowledge of those tongues and languages, arts and sciences which are
that external means enabling us to understand and open the meaning of the
Gospel, by the good hand of God upon us, prospering our labors and studies,
to that end that being well grounded in the truth, we might not be deceived and
mistake the inventions and errors of men, and doctrines of seducing spirits,
for the doctrines and commandments of God. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
Even as you went to School to learn to write and read, that you might read the
Scriptures indeed, but not pervert them to your own d^struction; 2 Pet. 3.16.
and that you might write your mind in truth and sincerity, but not to write
scrupulous questions to puzzle and poison the souls of the simple, who cannot
see into the depth of your delusions.

Whether you can give another meaning to the Scriptures then they are, or
whether the Apostles did not give the meaning to them when they spoke them
forth, yea or no, and if they did, what need learned mengive a meaning to them?



And that it belongs to learned men to give the sense and meaning of the
Scriptures, we have in the old Testament the example of Ezra the Scribe, ^eh.
8. 4, 5, 6, (...) 8.
(that is, the Learned) who stood upon a Pulpit of Wood high above all the
people, made purposely for preaching; and the Levites caused the people to
understand the Law: and this they did not only by reading the Law distinctly,
but they gave the sense says the Text, and caused the people to understand the
reading.

In the new Testament Christ himself took a text and preached upon it: Luke
4.17, -- 22.
Philip took the text which the Eunuch read in Esaias and preached Christ unto
him, Act. 8.30, -- 37.
converting the Eunuch by giving the sense of the text, being of himself not
able to understand without an Interpreter.

Show me by the Scripture who ever was made a Minister of Christ, that was
called of men Master.

Fathers, and such as were bred under them, to be made capable of that
function; as young Scolars are now in Oxford and Cambridge, to be capable of
the Ministry; were termed the Sons of the Prophets: 2 King. 2.12, 15.
under the Gospel besides the titles of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
ordinary or common Ministers are termed Doctors, Pastors, Shepherds of souls,
which are terms of more eminency and respect, then Master, Sir, or the like;
and what else is meant by the Masters of the Assemblies, Eccles. 12.11.
but the Pastors and Teachers of the people assembled in the service of God;
Masters is a title of civil respect and honor, and we are commanded not only
in general to give honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13.7.
but particularly to pious and painful Ministers, Let them be counted worthy
of double honor that labor in the Word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 5.7.
Now as on the one side it is a Gospel duty to give titles of honor to whom
they are due: so on the other fide it is a Gospel sin to affect titles of
honor through pride, vainglory, and popular applause. Nor was it a sin in the
Scribes and Pharisees to be called Master, but because they loved to be called
of men Master, Mat. 23.6, 7.
Master, their vainglorious affectation of the title was their offense, and of
this no man can tax us, but only God who knows the heart.

Show me by the Scriptures when ever the Ministers of Jesus Christ took tithes
of the people, or augmentations for preaching of the Gospel.

1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
Know you not (says the Apostle) that they which minister about holy things
eat of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? Even so also has the Lord ordained that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Even so must the Ministers of
the Gospel be maintained, as were the Priests under the Law; and that was by
Tithes and offerings: Luke 11.42.
Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye tithe mint, and rue, and
all manner of herbs, and passover judgment and the love of God; these things
ought you to have done, (mark that) and not leave the other undone. Whence you
see, that to take and pay tithes is no other but what ought to be done, and the
fault cried woe against was the neglect of judgment and the love of God.

Show by the Scriptures, and what Scripture have you, which speaks of the Word,
two Sacraments, which you tell the people of, and deceive the simple?

Sacrament is not in the Scriptures, but the holy actions which we call
Sacraments are positively and expressly commanded there.

The first Sacrament of Baptism is commanded, Mat. 28.19.

And for the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the words of institution
expressly command us to observe it, Take, Mat. 26.26, 27.
eat, do this. And sure we do not deceive the people, when we tell them of no
other things, but what Christ himself commanded both us and them to observe.
But you do deceive your own soul, and the souls of those simple people you
converse with all, whilst you deny and oppose your self against the very
express commands of our Lord.

Show me what Scripture you have which speaks, that the Apostles sprinkled
Infants.

to Baptize all Nations, and that they did Baptize whole families, Act. 16.33.
is clearly expressed in the Scripture. And surely children are a part of all
Nations; though you should say there were no Children in those families that
were Baptized; which is a thing very hard and improbable to affirm.

But further, for Chrildrens Baptism we have several grounds out of the
Scriptures.

1. Children under the Law were circumcised, Romans 4.11.
and Circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith, as Baptism is
now; for other external visible seal of our admission into the Covenant of
Grace, we have not commanded in the Scriptures, or practiced in the Church of
Christ: And that this seal of Baptism, both outward and inward, must pass
upon all, before they be admitted actual members of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom here, which is the way to his eternal Kingdom hereafter; our Savior
expressly teaches, saying, Joh. 5.3.
Except a man be borne again of water and of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

2. That Children are of the Kingdom of God, and to be admitted unto Christ,
himself expressly affirms, and strictly charges all men not to oppose it,
saying, Suffer little Chrildren to come unto me, Luke 18.15.
and forbid them not, for of such also is the Kingdom of God; If they must
come unto Christ, we must not stop up the way against them, by denying them the
seal of admission: And if the Kingdom of God belong unto them, surely the
privileges of the Kingdom also; whereof Baptism is one.

3. That Infants are in some measure capable of the Spirit of God, is manifest
from the example of the Prophet Jeremiah, and of John Baptist: Jer. 1.5, 6.
Luke 1.66, 80.
And if they be capable of the inward Baptism which is the holy Ghost, much
more of the outward which is water; for can any man forbid water (says Peter
in the like case) that these should not be Baptized which have received the
holy Ghost as well as we. Act. 10.47.


4. That Children are capable of being received and admitted into the Kingdom
of Christ, himself does intimate, saying, Except ye receive the Kingdom of God
as a little Child, ye shall not enter therein, so that receive it they may,
though they know it not. For as the sin of the first Adam is imputed to
children, and they are defiled therewith, though they understand it not: so the
righteousness of Christ the second Adam, may be, and we believe is, by Gods
secret and unknown way communicated to Infants, though they know it not: As to
men born deaf, and fools, and such as are not capable of understanding, for to
such God forbid we should deny the mercies of God through Christ.

Show me what Scripture you have to stand praying in the Synagogues before
Sermon and after; and whether the Apostles did so.

Sermon, because 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
We are commanded to pray continually.

2. Because prayer is the more chief and principal part of Gods service, for
it is written, Mat. 21.13.
My house shall be called the house of prayer to all Nations.

3. That by prayer and devotion we might obtain the assistance and blessing of
God, both

First, upon our Labors in opening the Scriptures; and

Secondly, upon the peoples duty in learning and attending thereunto; the
prayer before Sermon refers to the one, and after Sermon to the other.

And in this question I must also further tell you, you confound public and
private prayer, and thereby pervert and misapply the words of our Savior, When
thou prayest thou shall not be as the Hypocrites, Mat. 6.5.
for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, etc. that they may be seen
of men; in which place our Savior forbids only private prayer to be offered in
public places, out of vainglory and oftentation to be seen of men: and you
falsely apply them against public prayer, which is both commanded and practiced
by public persons and in public places, and to the end that they may be both
seen and heard of men; see for this the example of the Levites, both for
preaching, Neh. 8. and 9.3, 4.
Neh. 8. and for public praying with a loud voice standing up upon the stayres
that they might be heard, Romans 15.4.
Neh. 9.3, 4. Now what is written aforetime, is written for our learning. And
that the Apostles did both pray inpublick for and with the people, Act.
20.36.21.5.
and also preach in public and in the Synagogues of the Jews, is more then
once or twice expressed in the Scriptures.

Show me by the Scriptures when the Apostles went into the world, and gave the
people of the world David's Psalms to be sung in meeter; The things that you
practice answer them by the Scriptures or the Apostles practice, without
consequence or imagination.

Psalms) that they are not properly called Psalms, if not sung in verse and
meeter; and for David's Psalms, as you too scornfully call them; know, that they
are the very dictates and breathings of Gods holy Spirit; therefore are we
commanded to be filled with the Spirit speaking to our selves in Psalms and
Hymns, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
etc. And whereas all things in all Psalms are not at all times applyable to
all persons, yet there is something in every Psalm applyable to every person,
either by way of instruction or devotion; and what in this or that Psalm is
not applyable to our present condition, may be hereafter, and therefore it is
fit they should be used, both for present devotion and benefit; and also for
the future, that we may be thoroughly furnished with instructions and devotions
against the time of need.

And for the Apostles practice herein, it is sufficient we have their command,
for surely what they commanded others they practiced themselves; you may see
they did so Act. 16.25. At midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sung Psalms unto
God.

But herein you demand an answer without consequence or imagination, you might
as well have said, without reason or judgment, which is all one, as if you
should bid me read your paper of Questions without my eyes.

Whether a man shall over come the body of sin whiles he is upon the earth, or
no.

* It is overcome but not wholly, a conquered enemy may trouble, there is still
a war Romans 5.23. and the warfare endures until death, Rev. 2.10.
the body of sin whilst we are in this world: for it is therefore called the
body of sin, because there will be some relics of sin, some rebellions of the
flesh against the spirit, whilst we carry this body of flesh about us, and are
composed of flesh and spirit. As a tree whilst there is life in it will bring
forth fruit; so the flesh whilst it is quickened with spirit of life, 1 King.
8.46. Job 14.4. Prove. 20.9. 1 John 18.10. Eccle. 7.22.
will bring forth some kind of fleshly fruits or other; which is clear from
manifold texts of Scripture.

Whether the curse be not upon him that preaches another Gospel then Christ
and the Apostles preached, yea or no.

preach another Gospel, Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
or else pervert and poison the truth of this Gospel, which we have received
from Christ, and the Apostles: And I would to God neither you nor any of your
sect, and followers were either guilty of the sin, or liable to the curse.

Whether a^y natural man can preach the Gospel, yea or no.

a natural man, because,

1. The contents of the Gospel are the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.13.
which the natural man receives not, neither knows them: and

2. Because knowledge, Isa. 11.2.
wisdom and understanding, especially of spiritual things, are the gifts of
the Spirit, with which gifts spiritual, the Ministers of the Gospel, are
through the use of means endowed; some more plentifully, some more sparingly, 1
Cor. 12.11.
according as God by his holy Spirit blessing our studies has imparted unto us,
who distributes to every one severally as he will.

Whether that any Ministers of God was made Ministers by the will of man, or
no, show it me by the Scriptures.



1. God by his holy Spirit puts it into our hearts, to use the means to be
qualifyed for so great a calling.

2. He blesses and prospers our studies and endeavors for the attainment of
those gifts which qualify us for it.

3. He gives us hearts to imply those qualifications in his service; which
gifts and qualifications being examined and approved by the more able learned
and reverend Fathers of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. Tit. 1.5.
we are so by them through fasting, prayer and imposition of hands set apart to
this office: Paul and Barnabas though they were called of God immediately and
by miracle to the office of the Apostleship, Act. 13.2, 3.
which no man must hope for since; yet even they were commanded by the Elders
to be sent forth through fasting, prayer and imposition of hands.

Show me it by the Scriptures whether a man shall grow up to that condition
that he need no man teach him, but the Lord or no.



1. They have souls more or less capable of teaching.

2. As they more or less apply themselves to the means which God has ordained
for our learning and instruction; and according to our endevors in the use of
means, so God gives his blessing thereupon.

That promise, Jer. 31.34.
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, for
all men shall know me, from the least to the greatest, is expressed indeed to
be fulfilled under the Gospel, Heb. 8.4, 10.
because the means of knowing God under the Gospel are more plentiful and
effectual then under the Law: to wit, through the revelation of Jesus Christ,
and the miraculous inspiration of his Apostles immediately from heaven. And
whereas it is promised, thy children shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13.
this promise is fulfilled in that we have the teaching, the doctrine of the
Lord Jesus, even his holy Gospel, who came down from heaven on purpose to
teach us, Tit. 2.11, 12. Tit. 2.11, 12.
The grace of God which brings down salvation has appeared unto all men:
teaching us that denying, etc. thus we are taught by the Lord Jesus, outwardly
in the doctrine of his Gospel, and inwardly by the motions and dictates of his
holy Spirit: And yet for all this the best and most knowing of men aim not to
such a perfection of knowledge in his gifts, as not to need teaching, because
whilst we are in this life we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.11, 12.
and prophecy but in part, but when that which is perfect, etc.

Whether they be not Antichrists and disobey Christ that have the chiefest
places in Assemblies, stand praying in the Synagogues, which Christ did forbid
his Disciples to act such things, and cried woe against those that did act
them.

seem to apply these mistaken and misunderstood sayings of Christ to all
Ministers, and most uncharitably demand whether such be not Antichrists; to
this I shall only say, the Lord forgive you the hardness of your heart, and
unjust censures of your Christian brethren. Is it a mark of Antichrist, to
preach and pray with the people of God in public; and at such times to stand
in an higher and more convenient place that the people may hear and join with
us? examples of which practice I have already given you out of Scripture. If we
do these things in the pride of our hearts, the Lord only knows it, and will
avenge it. It Is not for you to censure and condemn us herein, for in so doing,
you discover more pride of heart, and look more like Antichrist, then those you
uncharitably tax and term so.

Whether they be not Antichrists and of the Devil, and no Ministers of Christ
which does not abide in the Doctrine of Christ.

spirit of Antichrist: 1 John 4.6.
And they that oppose the dictates and commands of the Spirit of truth speaking
in the words are led by the spirit of error, Isa. 8.44.
which is the Devil, who was a liar from the beginning, Mat. 4.4, 6.
and afterward colored his lies with errors, with the words of truth
perverted; quoting and misapplying the Scriptures, the better to insinuate his
falsehoods; which things I could wish were not too applyable to you and your
sect: I am sure that your malice and hatred to Ministers because they oppose
your errors, your bitter envyings, raylings and revilings both of them and
other your Christian brethren, whom you call carnal, the wicked, and the
people of the world; your false and uncharitable applications of the woes and
curses of the Scriptures, to all such who are wiser then to be brought under
your delusions; and in a word, your justifying your selves, and condemning
others, are all of them undeniable signs that you are not led by the spirit of
truth, which is the spirit of meekness and humility, of unity, love and
charity. Gal. 6.1. Col. 3.12, 13. 1 John 4.6, 7.
Hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error, 1 John 4.6. Even
by love and charity, therefore it follows, Beloved let us love one another,
for love comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God, and knows
God, and he that loves not knows not God, for God is love.

Whether they be not seducers that draw people from the anointing which is in
them, and tell them they must be taught of a man, whereas the anointing
teaches them, they need no man teath them, but as the anointing teaches them,
and the promise is to him that does abide in it eternally.

anointing within, is meant that measure and proportion of spiritual wisdom
and understanding in the things of God, 1 John 2.27.
whereby according to command we are enabled to try the spirits whether they be
of God, or no; 1 John 4.1.
because many false prophets are gone forth, which the foregoing words does
imply, etc. 26. These things have I written unto you concerning them that
deceive you: Now this spiritual unction or knowledge of the truth, which is
from the Spirit, whosoever has received, need not be taught of man, if he
abide in the truth which he has received, and do not give heed to seduceing
spirits. And I would to God that all who are called the Lords people had their
hearts sprinkled with this spiritual ointment, and their eyes anointed with
this eye salve, Romans 3.38.
that they might see to discern betwixt light and darkness, betwixt true
prophets, and such as deceive the simple, lest suffering themselves being blind
to be led by the blind they both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15.14.


Whether they do not bewitch the people, who withdraw them from the spirit
within, to observe the ordinances of the world and traditions of men without,
as the Galatians were bewitched, Gal. 3.1.

1 Timothy 4.12. Mat. 7.15. 1 John 4.1.
who foretelling of false Prophets and false Spirits often in the Word
commands, exhorts, admonishes to beware of such, not to give heed to such, and
not to believe every spirit, but to try them.

Whether they be not seducers which tell people these are the ordinances of God
which God never commanded, as sprinkling Infants, telling people of a Sacrament
which there is no Scripture for, and draw them from the spirit within to follow
your imaginations and inventions.



And for the spirit within, I have already told you out of Scripture, that we
are not blindfolded to follow the dictates thereof, but to try them by the
Spirit speaking in the Word. And thus to draw men from the spirit within, is
not to follow our own imaginations, since God by his holy Spirit commands the
same.

Whether you have the same spirit which was in Christ, the Apostles, and
Prophets which gave forth the Scriptures, seeing you act contrary to the
Scriptures, and follow your own inventions and tradition, and so err from
them.



Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did first Baptize, and then preach faith
and repentance twenty or thirty years afterward.

Heb. 12.2.
and repentance, for he was above both; of faith he was the author and
finisher, Joh. 3.16. 1 Pet. 2.22.
the person in whom we are to believe; and of repentance he was not capable,
who knew no sin; and the Baptism of Christ sure it is to be our pattern and
grand example.

The Apostles also baptized many persons, who had not true Faith and
Repentance, but were Hypocrites, as Simon Magus, Alexander the Coppersmith,
Demas, Diotrephes; And Simon Magus had repentance preached unto him, after he
was baptized many days; Act. 8.13, 22.
as the Texts clearly expresses: From all which Examples it is manifest, that
Faith and Repentance are not necessarily required of all persons as to the
reception of Baptism, but to the blessed effects and fruits thereof: pardon of
sin, etc.

2. Neither are children also absolutely and altogether destitute of Faith and
Repentance; they have these Graces in the power, though not in the act; In the
seed, though not in the fruit: Lev. 25.41, 42.
In the promise for, and in their behalf, though not in the present actual
performance; Mat. 18.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 16.33.18.8.
Therefore called the servants of God, believers, little ones, that believe in
me: And under the general notion of families and households, they are rankt
amongst persons baptized, converted, and serving the Lord.

Whether ever Christ and his Apostles received 100 or 200 pounds a year, for
Preaching the Gospel.

l. Mar. 15.41.
or 200 l. a year; for many of their Converts sold all their estates, Act.
4.34, 37.
and brought it, and laid it down at the Apostles feet; for says the Apostle,
Romans 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter, if we reap
your carnal things?

What Scripture is there to limit God to a place, calling it a Church; when as
the Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1.

Jer. 23.23. Mat. 18.20.
and fills the World; but yet after a special manner, When two or three are
gathered together in his Name to worship him, and call upon his Name, there is
he in the midst of them; And this place of Assembly we call a Church, because
the Church or People of God do there assemble to his Service: and it is a
Scripture term too, though you know it not; for as there is a Church in God,
and in Christ Jesus, 1 These. 1.1.
1 These. 1.1. that is, persons devoted to Gods service, in and through Jesus
Christ: 1 Cor. 11.22.
So there is a Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.22. The place, namely, where such
persons do assemble and join in Divine Worship. But since you cry down all
distinctions; (as savoring of humane Learning) whereby the naked truth of
things might be clearly and distinctly seen as they are in themselves, without
conjunction with other things, it is no marvel, you are so blind as not to
distinguish men from houses; persons from places; the servants of God from the
places of his service.

What Scripture is there to have a Clark to say Amen, and to have groats a
piece of the world for his trade?

Psalm. 106.46.
and this you shall find both commanded and practiced in the Scriptures, Neh.
8.6. 2 Pet. 3. ult. Rev. 22.20.
if you do but consult the Marginal Texts: I may therefore rather demand of
you, why do not rather all the people say Amen, then you ask of me why one man
does so? And for the Groat he receives yearly of some persons in the world (who
are not all of the world, as you uncharitably censure them) I conceive it is
not to be so much for saying Amen, as for many other Offices wherein he is
useful both to Pastor and People.

What Scripture is there for taking money for burying the dead; or to have ten
or twelve shillings for Preaching a Funeral Sermon; or to take money for
marrying man or woman.

5 Tim. 5.17, 18.
the Apostle gives this general rule, The Labourer is worthy of his wages: and
what their wages is for their particular pains and labors in this or that
Ministerial Function, whether more or less, is not of our choosing; but partly
the liberality of Founders and Benefactors; partly custom amongst all people,
in all Christian Countries, has settled it.

When did any that was sent of Jesus Christ to Preach the Gospel, sue men at
the Law?

1 Cor. 11.16.
for if any list to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God; But many such differences may arise betwixt party and party concerning
temporal rights, properties, and interests as cannot well be decided without
suit of Law: Act. 19.38.
So that it is not always a fault in it self to go to Law, and sue one another,
but when it is done either contentiously or uncharitably; and they that are
guilty in this kind, let them answer for themselves.

And now for your conclusion, Conclusion.
you say: If thou be a Minister of Jesus Christ which exercises a pure
conscience toward God and man, clear thy self from the guilt of these things;
and answer them in writing by the Scriptures or Saints Examples, o^ else in
si^^n^e confess thy self guilty, and one of those Christ cried woe against;
acting the same things now, as they did then, filling up the measure of thy
Fathers iniquity, which said they were Jews, and were not, but were of the
Syn^gogue of Satan.

is the reviler and accuser of his brethren: Rev. 12.10.
But I dare own my calling in spite of all the venom that the Devil and all his
Instruments can spit against it; and will be ever ready to maintain my
integrity in the conscientious Exercise thereof, in despite of all that oppose
it; your railing Scripture woes and curses are very much misapplyed, you have
mistaken the object: Prove. 26.2.
The curse causless shall not come, Prove. 26.2. You shoot out your arrows, even
bitter words, at the mark they cannot hit, the venom whereof is so far from
being dreadful to me, that it ministers rather cause of spiritual joy and
exultation, remembering the words of my Lord and Master, Mat. 5.11, 12. Mat.
5.11, 12.
Blessed are ye when men revile and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you for my sake, falsely, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you.

I have according to your desire answered your several questions in writing, I
will not retort your uncharitable application of Scripture woes and threatenings
against your self, least I should become guilty with you of the same sin: but
rather with all meekness beseech you in the fear of God, seriously to weigh and
consider what I have said, and the Lord give you a right understanding in all
things. 2 Timothy 2.7.


There remains yet one conclusive question, which you ask so peremptorily, as
if it were impossible to give you an answer, and thus it is Prefac'd.

They must be learned men, and brought up in Scholastic ways, and by that
means they must open the Scripture, because thou say, they were first given
forth in Greek and Hebrew, which you call the Original; and therefore ignorant
men cannot understand them: But answer me this question, Whether the Scriptures
as they are written in English, be true, as Christ and the Apostles spoke them
forth, and if they be true, as they are in English, what need any other
Language be learned by an English man to know them?

Hebrew and Greek, which we do truly call the Original. And as by learned men
they are translated; so by learned men, who understood both the Translation and
the Original, which are most fully and clearly understood. As waters be more
clear and pure in the Fountain, then in the stream: so the holy Scriptures are
more clear and intelligible to them that see them in the Fountain, and read
them in the Original, then to those who only can see and read them in the
stream, as they are derived unto them from the hands of the Translators; And I
must here tell you, withal, that it is very ill manners in you and not
becoming either the humility or thankfulness of a Christian, or a reasonable
man, to vilify and undervalue Learning and learned men, as to the
understanding of the Scriptures, since neither you, nor any other man that only
understands English, had ever come to know any thing in the Scripture, if
learned men had not translated them to your hands.

2. Since there has been many Translations of the Scriptures out of Hebrew
into Greek, out of Greek into Latin, out of Hebrew and Greek into Latin, out
of Latin into English, out of Greek into English, out of Hebrew and Greek into
English; which Translations being made at several times, and in several Ages,
do therefore very much differ and vary in several places: It is very unlikely
sure that ignorant men, who understand only their own Native Language, should
yet as well understand the Scriptures as the learned, who have the gift of
these several Languages, and can examine and compare these several Translations
with the Original and Fountain Truth.

And would it not much conduce, think you, to the understanding of the
Scripture to read the Interpretations and pious Discourses of those holy
religious Fathers of the Church, which lived either in, or about the Apostles
time, or immediately afterward, and so are most likely to know the meaning of
the Apostles in their writings, then we who live so many hundred years since.

This I believe, no man that has not lost his sense and reason will deny, Now
to read and understand those ancient writings, and the Scripture by those
helps, Greek and Latin is necessary; for they wrote in those Languages.

that they who are endued with the Spirit of God, understand the things of God
without all this labor and lea^ning.

Esa. 11.2.
and that we must wait upon God for them by Prayer; Jam. 1.5.17.
for from him comes every good and perfect gift: but yet God communicates not
these gifts to the sons of men by miracle, Dan. 1. compare v. 4. and 6. with v.
17.
but through the use of the means; And to neglect and contemn the use of those
ordinary means, God has given us to attain spiritual wisdom by; and to depend
upon extraordinary and miraculous revelation from Heaven, is to tempt the good
Spirit of God, Mat. 4.7. 2 These. 2.10, 11.
and to provoke him to give us up to strong delusions, and to give heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, which too often appear and insinuate
themselves into the minds of men, 2 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.
under the visard, show, and semblance of Revelations and Infusions, and
Qualifications of the Spirit of truth; and this by sad experience we daily see
to be too true, and has appeared in your several questions: Now God Almighty
deliver you, and all Christian people from under the power of such delusions;
It Is the daily Prayer of your Christian brother

R. S.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Holy Spirit, His Workings and Impressions ON THE SOULS of
MEN.

(...).

1 Cor. 12.5. Rectum est Index sui and obliqui. London, Printed by E. Cotes for
R. Roysion, at the Angel in Ivy lane, 1654.

TO THE TRULY VIRTUOUS THE Lady Rebecca Bingdloss.
MADAM,
THis following Discourse of the Holy Ghost, his impressions and workings on
the soul of man, was first intended only for private satisfaction to your
Ladyships pious desires; That being well grounded in the Orthodox Doctrine, and
having a right understanding of the true Spirit of God, it might be as an
impregnable Bulwark against so many suggestions and temptations of the false
and deceitful spirit: For the mind of man, being either devoid of the Spirit
of Grace and Holiness; or else of a right understanding of the things of Gods
Spirit, who is the Fountain both of Grace and Truth; is too apt and prone to
close with the suggestions of the evil spirit, who is the author and promoter
of sinfulness and error: Never Age produced so many spiritual Monsters, as this
wherein we live. And I think few parts of England be so much infected with
them, as these Northern parts be. They were very impudent and daring, when they
adventured to tempt your virtuous mind, and by enticing words to allure your
good opinion of them; as full well knowing, if they could but have effected
thus much, to have made you not an enemy to their proceedings, though you did
not close with them; it would have given much luster and credit to their
erroneous Sect: But God be praised that you are better grounded, then to be
Proselyted by such Ignoramo's; better resolved then to be taken with such
shallow delusions, which a good Christian with half an eye unprejudiced, may
easily see through.

It is your goodness (for Bonum quo melius eo communius) to desire the public
communication of this short Discourse of the Spirit, as a Doctrine both
seasonable in respect of the many spreading infectious Errors, so much
prevailing amongst us; and also necessary as an Antidote against that contagion
which issuing out of the mouth of Hell, presumes most impudently and impiously
to hide its venom under the name and title of the Holy Spirit: I could wish
the Doctrine were for this end, manfully and satisfactorily cleared to the
minds of men, by the Pen of some more Judicious Writer; This mean Tract the
Author in all humility acknowledges to be guilty of many defects and
impertinencies, and himself one of the meanest of the faithful and obedient
sons of the Church: The small acceptance it shall find in the world, will be
derived from your white Name and Virtue: in which Sanctuary it may escape the
black-mouthed Detractions of the Censorious, and rest secure of the good
acceptance, if not benefit of others.

May you be every day more happy in the increase of all Christian virtues,
growing up in the knowledge of God, and persevering in the constant Profession
of his holy Truth, and conscientious practice of the same, till you arrive at
the Haven of true Happiness. This (Madam) shall be the constant endeavor, and
is the daily prayer

Of your most faithful and affectionate Servant in Christ, R. SHERLOCK.

The Introduction.
NO Age has ever brought forth more pretenders to the Spirit of God, then this
wherein we live: And amongst this Generation, there be many so ignorant, that
they know not what they mean by that Spirit, whereunto they so much pretend:
but blindfolded suffer themselves to be led by they know not whom, and with the
hoodwinkt Samaritans, Joh. 4.32.
they worship they know not what. Whose ignorance accompanied with excessive
pride of heart, which makes their ignorance the greater, that through pride,
they will not know, or acknowledge it upon this ground; The Devil has sown
his crop and reapt his Harvest, even the cursed tares of many and strong
delusions: for that subtle Serpent full well knows how both easily and
powerfully to insinuate his Lies and Errors into minds unsettled, and not
grounded in the knowledge of the Truth; So that most truly is that complaint of
the Lord by his Prophet Hosea verified of this people, Hos. Hos. 4.6.
4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; even for lack of what they
so much boast of; That grand Enemy the Prince of Lies, has taken them in the
very Net themselves have made, even in the snare of self-conceited knowledge,
and holiness, Romans 1.22.
whilst supposing themselves wise they became fools. And pretending to the
Spirit of God, whom they rightly know not, they are intrapt by the Spirit of
Error: and miserably seduced to the ruin of their souls.

Hence it is (chiefly, though not only hence) through ignorance intermixed with
pride, that the Devil has made so great a harvest of tares overgrowing and
choking the pure wheat of Truth: Matthew. 13.25.
No Age of the Church having ever been so fruitful in Heresies and Errors;
whilst the ever blessed Name of the Spirit of God is abused, by persons most
impudently pretending to him, that yet remain ignorant of him; for had they
known this Lord of life, it had not been possible the spirit of Delusion could
have prevailed so far with them, as to infix so many Lies, Impostures and
Blasphemies upon his score; as therefore Saint Paul directed the Athenians to
the knowledge of the true God, whom they ignorantly worshipped, Act. 17.23.
and so their pious intentions through ignorance degenerated into gross
Idolatries; so it cannot but be an office both seasonable and charitable, as
also of great benefit, and present necessity, plainly to set down and deliver
the true Orthodoxall Doctrine of the Holy Ghost, his Impressions and Workings
on the soul of man, that so men may have a right understanding of this ever
Blessed Person of the Godhead so much mistaken, and his Sacred Name (to the
high offense of his Majesty) so much profaned by impudent and false pretenses.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Holy Spirit.
Nicene Creed thus clearly and fully set down, I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeds both from the Father and the Son, who
together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by
the Prophets. To give you my Comment upon this Text, were but to hold a candle
to the Sun, the Doctrine delivered is so clear and perspicuous. All that can be
said upon this Article of our Christian Faith is reducible to four heads.



2. Of his Office or Workings on the minds of men.

3. Of the trial of the true from false spirits.

4. Of the means to be made partakers of the Spirit of Truth.

The two first are doctrinal and speculative points, for the rectifying and
fitting the understanding, rightly to conceive and believe aright this Article
of Christian Faith.

The two last are practical and applicatory for the guidance of our actions and
Christian performances according to this belief.

Qui been distinguit, been docet, The way to teach well, or clearly to deliver
any truth, is rightly to distinguish that truth from other truths that are of
near affinity thereunto either in name or nature; or in the words of the
Apostle, which is the language of the Spirit of Truth; Rightly to divide the
Word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.5.
which was one of those many qualifications of the Apostles of Christ,
wherewithal they were immediately inspired by this Spirit of Truth, for the
propagation of the Gospel; intimated in that he descended from Heaven upon
them, in cloven or divided Tongues.

Spirit is in holy Scripture applied to the creature, sometimes to the Creator.

Heb. 1.14.2.
Are they not all ministering spirits, etc. Heb. 1.14. 2. Those cursed
inhabitants of the nether Hell, the chained Devils, (...), Ephesians. 6.11.3.
the Apostles styles them, Ephesians. 6.12. spiritual wickednesses, or wicked
spirits. 3. The souls of men, which quicken and enliven these our frail and
mortal bodies, every man being composed of two natures, a body and a soul, or
flesh and spirit, Genesis Get. 2.7.
2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the earth, meaning his body,
and breathed into his Nosthrils the breath of life, meaning his soul, and so
man became a living soul, or living by his soul or spirit created, or infused
by God, into his earthly body. Psalm. Psalm. 150.6.
150.6. Let every thing that has breath, or spirit, praise the Lord: All these
are several kinds of created spirits, some more, some less pure, fine and
spiritual.

creatures, which are spirits; so that God is termed a Spirit Analogically,
because Angels or Spirits are the purest, finest, quickest, most active and
intelligent beeings. But that we may not rank God with Angels or Spirits: for
he has no match or equal, we must learn this one general rule in Divinity:
Whatsoever is spoken of God in the Scriptures, and withal is applyable to any
creature, must be understood of God eminenter, by way of eminency and
transcendency, as the Prototype and grand Exemplar of that perfection which is
applied to the creature: As here Angels are Spirits, and the souls of men are
spirits, but God is not a Spirit at they are spirits, for he is the Fountain,
the Original and all perfect pattern of the Perfection and Purity of all
created spirits: therefore termed the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb.
2.16. Heb. 12.9.
Numb. 22.16. and the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9.

worship one God in Trinity, we must rightly distinguish betwixt the Substance
and the Persons, or betwixt the Essence and Subsistence of God: which is
necessarily to be remembered and observed in relation to the Article of Faith in
hand: For sometimes God is termed a Spirit Essentially, in respect of his
essence, nature, or Godhead: sometimes Personally, the term being applied to
this or that particular Person of the Godhead: Joh. 4.24.
1. Essentially, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, (that is, he is such a God whose
essence, nature, or being, is eminently and transcendently pure and spiritual.
2. Personally, Matthew. 3.16. Matthew. 4.1. Ephesians. 4.30. so here and in many other
places the term is peculiarly appropriated and applied to the third Person of
the Trinity, who is termed (...), the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, for
Ghost and Spirit is the same, the one an old English word, the other a Latin.

Holy Spirit as it is particularly applied to the third Person of the Trinity,
expresses and sets forth unto us his Person and Office, his Personal
subsistence in himself, and his Office or working in relation to us.

1. His Person in the term Spirit.

2. His Office in the Attribute Holy; Sanctus dicitur, quia sanctificat, and
Spiritus, quia spiratus.

He is called the Holy Ghost from his Office, which is to sanctify, or make
holy, and the Spirit from his Person, which is spired or proceeding.

the Holy] not holy only in respect of his Person, as is also the Father and
the Son, which is employed in that celestial Trisagion perpetually sung by the
Quire of Heaven, to the glory of this ever blessed Trinity, Esai. 6.3. Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of hosts, etc. Holy three times to denote the holiness of
all the three Persons of the Godhead, Holy Father, Holy Son, Holy Ghost: But
the Holy Particuliarly and pecularly in respect of his Office, which is to
sanctify and hallow most especially the hearts of men; as to God the Father is
appropriate the Work of Creation, who is therefore called the Almighty; the
Omnipotence or Almightiness of God being most apparent in the Creation of all
things: And as to God the Son is appropriate the work of Redemption, who is
therefore called the Word of God, Joh. 1.1. and the Wisdom of the Father, 1
Cor. 1.24. Gods manifold Wisdom being made apparent in the Redemption of
mankind; for it is a mystery which the very Angels themselves desire to look
into, 1 Pet. 1.12. Even so the work of Sanctification is appropriated to the
Holy Ghost, who is therefore called the Holy One: Gods holiness being most
apparent in purifying and sanctifying the unhallowed souls of men, Bonav.
Isai 10.17. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for
a flame: Spiritus Sanctus est lumen illuminans, sanctus sanctificans, flammaque
inflammans, The Holy Ghost is that Divine light which illuminates our darkened
understandings; A Holy one who sanctifies our souls, and polluted hearts; that
sacred and celestial fire, which inflames our cold earthly affections, even as
of old he enlightened, sanctified, and enflamed the minds of the Apostles of
Christ, which was signified by his Descension, not only with a rushing wind,
which purifies, cleanses, and changes, but also in Tongues of fire, which warms
and enlightens, Act. 2.23.

The Spirit] not only (...), of a spiritual Nature, but (...), the Spirit,
expressing his Personal Essence received from the Father, and from the Son, by
spiration and procession: Even as the second Person of the Trinity, receives
his Personal Essence from the Father only, (...), by Generation, and is
therefore called the Son of God. The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor
created, but begotten: So the Holy Ghost receives his Personal Essence from the
Father and from the Son (...), by procession or spiration; and is therefore
termed the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is from the Father and from the Son,
not made, nor ereated, nor begotten, but proceeding; proceeding from the
Father, and therefore often termed the Spirit of the Father: proceeding from
the Son, Joh. 15.26.
and therefore often termed the Spirit of the Son: Gal. 4.6.
proceeding both from the Father and the Son, and therefore termed the Spirit
of God. Romans 8.14.


the Holy, and the Spirit, both the Personal Essence, and also the Office of
the Holy Ghost is employed: For 1. he is therefore called the Holy, not only in
respect of his Office, as before, but also in respect of his Personal Essence;
Lib. 7. cap. 3.
for therefore says Isidore in his Originals is he called the Holy because he
is the Co-essential and Consubstantial holiness of the Father and the Son. 2.
He is therefore termed the Spirit not only in respect of his Personal Essence
as before: but also in respect of his Office, which is to inspire and infuse
his divine and celestial blessings into the Souls of men.

Isaiah does of the Sons generation from the Father, Isai. 53.8. Who shall
declare his generation? It Is not only ineffable, not to be declared, but
unconceiveable also: The heart of man conceives it not, neither can the tongue
of men or Angels express it.

Inter illam generationem and hanc processionem distinguere nescio, Aug.
non valeo, non sufficio, quia and illa, and ista est ineffabilis, (that is) to
distinguish betwixt the Generation of God the Son, and the Procession of God
the Holy Ghost is impossible, because both the one and other be for the manner
thereof unspeakable. Isid. ibid.
Hoc autem interest, says Isidore, inter nascentem filium, etc. betwixt the
Son of Gods generation, and the Spirit of Gods procession, there is this
difference indeed, That the Son is from the Father alone; but the Holy Ghost is
both from the Father and the Son; procedens, non genitus, etc. proceeding, not
begotten, to distinguish him from the Son, proceeding, not unbegotten, to
distinguish him him from the Father; the which we are to observe, lest contrary
to the true Catholic Faith, we should admit either of two Sons, or two Fathers
in the ever blessed Trinity; or any way confound the several Persons therein,
as if they were not distinct each from other really, but nominally only, and in
relation to us, which was the Error of the Patripassians and others, struck at
by that clause of the Athonasian Creed; so there is one Father, not three
Fathers, one Son, not three Sons, one Hoby Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.

receiving the Holy Ghost; Act. 9.2. Psalm. 2.4.
being filled with the Holy Ghost; and made partakers of the Holy Ghost; and
all Scriptures which speak of having the Spirit, being endued with the Spirit,
Heb. 6.4.
and the like, we must in the third place rightly distinguish betwixt the
Personal Essence of the Spirit, and the impressions or workings of this Spirit
upon the minds of men: For to be filled with the Holy Ghost, or made partakers
of the Spirit of God, is not to be understood of the Spirit in respect of his
Personal Essence; for thus he fills the world, Wisd. 1. Psalm. 139.
and contains all things, being really existent and present in, and with all
things and creatures, giving unto all their life and breath, and all things:
Act. 17.
In whom we live, and move, and have our being, viz. by his inexisting
presence, and this in respect of his Personal Essence. If we should say then,
that the Spirit of God is in his Saints and servants here upon Earth in a
greater measure then in other men, Personally, and in respect of his Essence,
we should so divide and consequently define, and limit the Essence of God,
which is undivided, infinite and unlimited, see Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand,
and not a God a far off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should
not see him, for do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Thus then
those Scripture phrases of receiving the Holy Ghost, etc. are not to be
understood of the Spirit in respect of his Personal Essence, which is
undivided, unlimited and fills all things, and so not one man more then
another. But 2. In respect of his impressions and workings on the souls of men,
in respect of his gifts and graces, which are various and diverse, and carry
their name from the cause or Author of them; There are diversity of gifts, but
the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4. where the Spirit is plainly distinguished from
his gifts, as the cause from the effect, the workman from the work of his
hands; or as the body of the Sun is distinguished from the light and heat which
is darted and displayed from it. And whereas it is said the Spirit is but one,
but his gifts are diverse, we may hence observe; that if we should confound the
Spirit of God with the gifts and qualifications dispensed from him, we should
be so far from acknowledging and worshipping the true God, which is but one,
that we should fall into that gross Idolatry of the Heathens of old, making as
many Spirits of God, as they made gods, who deified the moral virtues, and
worshipped their several virtuous qualifications as gods.

soul, has suffered the shipwreck of the true Christian Faith; for being by
the cunning suggestion of the spirit of Lies once persuaded in their hearts,
that they have the Spirit of God, and that personally abiding in them, they are
hereupon puffed up with such an excessive spiritual pride, and self-conceited
eminence, as not only to exalt themselves above, and despise their Christian
brethren, who are better qualified, then themselves: but even to extol
themselves above the heavens, and most blasphemously to profess and boast of an
equality with God; a blasphemy however it is salved and minc't, that cannot be
paraleld, but with that Original pride of the Devil, Genesis 3.
He said in his heart I will be like the most High: and to this he tempted our
first Parents, persuading them to rebel against their Maker, and become as gods
themselves, knowing good and evil; this was the very sin, that hurled Lucifer
like Lightning from Heaven, his pride and presumption to be like the most High,
and therefore with all his Apostate crew he is now reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, ^ude 6.
to the judgment of the Great day. And for our new Sect of Enthusiasts, had
they the Spirit of God as they pretend abiding in them, and speaking in them
Personally and Essentially, thi^ blasphemy must necessarily follow, that they
are equal with God, in respect of the Spirit in them, as themselves affirm it,
though not as George Robert, etc. To avoid which blasphemy and many other
absurd and wicked opinions of the like nature, which would follow thereupon,
and wherewith too many unstable souls are now infected, we must remember that
to have the Spirit in the language of the Scripture, is not to be understood of
his personal Essence, but of his qualifications.

the gifts and qualifications of Gods holy Spirit, by the name of the Spirit,
as Exodus 31.2, 3. Exodus 31 2, 3.
Behold I have called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri, etc. whom I have filled
with the Spirit of God, (that is) with the gifts of the Spirit, for it follows,
in all wisdom and understanding and knowledge, and in all workmanship: Numb.
11.17.
so Numb. 11.17. I will come down and talk with thee, and take of the spirit
which is upon thee, and put upon them, and they shall bear the burden with
thee: where what else can possibly be meant, by the spirit which was upon Moses
to be put upon the Elders, but that they should partake of the same spiritual
gifts with Moses, enfitting them to bear the burden with him, as to the
administration of justice amongst the people, even the gifts of wisdom,
understanding and knowledge, impartially, and without respect of persons to
execute justice and judgment: so The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,
Isai. 11.2. verse. the gifts of the Spirit, for so it follows, The spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. He then that is a wise man may be said
in the language of the Spirit which is the Scripture, to have the Spirit of the
Lord upon him, or to have the Spirit of God; because the wisdom he has is from
Gods Spirit, it comes down from above, and the means to fetch it thence is holy
prayer: If any man lacks wisdom, let him ask of God who gives, etc. Jam. 1.5.
so the wisest of men obtained wisdom, 1 King. 3.9. His prayer which brought her
down from Heaven is recorded, Wisd. 9. And the same may be said of counsel,
godliness, etc. therefore these graces are termed from the cause and Auhor of
them, The spirit of wisdom, the spirit of godliness, etc. So Zach. 12.10. I
will pour upon the house of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of
grace and supplication, (that is) by my Spirit I will enrich their souls, with
the grace of piety and devotion, to be frequent and fervent in prayers and
supplications, according to the Apostles admonition, Ephesians. 6.18. praying with
all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit: (that is) not only in the
fervency and godly zeal of our own souls, or spirits; but also praying thus in,
or from the powerful influence of Gods Spirit, who inflames our own cold frosty
devotions, and assists our frailties in prayer; we pray in the spirit, when
both our prayers are the voice of our spirits, and our spirits also are taught
and sanctified by Gods Spirit, as Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage unto fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father: Clamamus not, says Augustine, we cry, August.. Ep.
not the Spirit; but Gal. 4.6. it is said the spirit within us, And because ye
are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts which
cries Abba Father: Non hic ait, etc. says the Father, he says not here as in
the former place, by whom we cry, but the Spirit himself cries, quo efficitur
ut clamemus nos; for what else is clamans spiritus in nobis, but clamantes nos
faciens? The spirit crying in our hearts is no other, but that he makes us by
the virtue of his grace to cry unto God the Father, and pour forth our souls
before him in prayer, which is also the meaning of that misapplyed text against
forms of prayer, Romans 8.26. The Spirit likewise helps our infirmities, for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be expressed: We know not what
we ought to pray, he could not be ignorant, Id.
says the Father, of the Lords Prayer, neither could they be ignorant of it,
to whom he said thus, but such and so pressing are our infirmities, that first
many times we know not what to ask for in relation to our bodies and outward
estates, sometimes even praying for what is harmful, or at least not at all
profitable for us; and this infirmity of ours the holy Ghost helps, by the
precepts and promises, and forms of Prayer recorded in the Word of God, which
are the dictates of the Spirit: And many times 2. we know not How to ask, for
what is needful, by reason of the dullness and deadness, and frosty coldness of
our hearts; and this infirmity the Spirit helps, by quickening our devotion, as
it follows, The Spirit makes request for us, Aug.
Qnid est enim interpellat, nisi interpellare nos facit? what else can be the
meaning of this, The Spirit makes intercession for us, but that he makes us to
intercede for our selves, by his grace secretly and unspeakably enlivening our
devotions; so that even with penitent and fervent sighs and holy breathings
after God we pour forth our prayers before him: so Matthew. 10.20. It is not you
that speaks, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. Where the
assistance of Gods holy Spirit with us, is so expressed, says Augustine, Vt ipse
facere dicitur, quod ut faciamus facit, He is said to do that himself in us
which by his grace he stirs us up to do. As therefore no man can be wise,
without the spirit of wisdom, nor knowing without the spirit of knowledge, nor
godly without the spirit of godliness, nor charitable without the spirit of
love; so no man can pray as he ought, without the spirit of prayer and
supplication, not that there are so many kinds of spirits as these, but all
these works one and the same spirit dividing to every man severally as his
will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

From the meaning of all which places, and many more which might be alleged,
it is manifest that by the spirit in us, ie not meant the spirit of God in
himself, but in his graces: for how can the Spirit of God who is (says the
Father) one perfect and eternal beatitude with the Father and the Son, Aug.
be said in himself, or according to himself, personally to speak, to sigh, to
cry, to pray in us? no otherwise surely but as by his gifts and graces we are
enabled to speak the truth, to sigh and breath after God, to cry unto him in
the fervency of our souls, and devoutly to pour forth our prayers before him.

several qualifications, to several perfons, and that severally, even in
several ways and kinds; to some in one kind, to others in another, to some
more, to some less. Unto every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. or according to the measure of the
Spirit, who is the gift of Christ, and distributes to every one his measure of
gifts, to some more plentifully, to others with a smaller scantling; and this
according as he finds the hearts of men, more or less soft and pliable,
capable, and enfitted to receive his impressions; Amb.
In quo quis animum intendit, in eo accipit donum, according to the intention
and pliableness of the mind to this or that study, or employment, whether
divine or moral; accordingly so does the holy Ghost communicate his gifts and
blessings thereupon.

1. Graces. 2. Gifts. (...).



1. By the graces of Gods Spirit we are sanctified and enabled to serve God.

2. By the gifts of the Spirit we are qualified and enabled to benefit and
edify one another: by the first we are made Christians: by the second we are
made Ministers; And these two kinds of the holy Spirits qualifications are
represented unto us by these two types or figures of the Spirits descension
upon the Apostles of Christ; the one of the wind, Act. 2.2. and the other of
the fire, ver. 3. By the wind were represented those divine and celestial
graces, wherewithal the Apostles were endued, and whereby the souls of men are
ayr'd, cleans'd and purified, and so sanctified to the sacred service of God;
and by the fire was represented the gifts they were enriched withal, for the
enlightening of the minds, and enflaming the affections of others.

graces represented by the wind, Joh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists,
and thou know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one
that is born of the spirit. As the wind being a pure, fine, thin, subtle
nature, is invisible, we perceive it not; neither can we conceive whence it
comes, or whither it goes; all the perception we have of the wind is by its
effects and operations; when it moves theayr, tosses the clouds, shakes the
trees, raises the dust of the earth, etc. nay so active and subtle a thing is
the wind, that if it act not, we say, it is not: when nothing is moved or
stirred by the wind; we say, there is no wind: so is every one that is born
of the Spirit; (that is) every one whose soul is animated and actuated by the
graces of Gods Spirit: For 1. the workings of the Spirit of grace within us,
are quick and insensible, it is unconceiveable, how, and in what manner he works
upon our hearts: Only, 2. we know him by his effects and workings: as when he
moves and enclines the soul to what is holy, just, and good; or when he shakes
the heart into contrition, compunction, and godly sorrow for sin; or when he
raises the mind out of the dust, and rubbish of earthly vanities, and mounts
it upon the wings of heavenly desires and meditations, etc. And 3. as when we
see no stirring, no moving of the air, but all is calm and still, we say there
is no wind: so when there is no good motions or desires within us, no
inclinations to piety, or charity, no godly contrition for sin, no rising of
the mind toward heaven, nor breathing after things divine and heavenly; we
may well say, that soul is becalmed, the Spirit of God is not there, neither
has the heavenly wind of the Almighty breathed therein.

graces of Gods Spirit, represented by the wind, are the very essentials, the
very life and being, the very spirit and soul of true Christianity; and are as
necessary to the being of a good Christian, in the life of graces, as is the
natural wind, or breath of his Nosthrils to his being and living the life of
nature; therefore we are termed the Body of Christ, Romans 12.5.
the soul that animates us, being the grace of his Spirit; and every man
therefore that has the name of Christ called upon him, is but nominis
Christiani extrinsecus superficies, an empty outlide superficial christian,
that is not in some measure endued with his graces: To all persons it
necessarily belongs to be partakers of them; whether Pastor or people, Lay or
Clergy, gifted or ungifted men; whether we have the gifts of the Spirit or no,
we must not be destitute of his graces; but upon all hearts this heavenly wind
must blow, to purify and cleanse, to air and dry up the superfluous
naughtiness of our natures, that so our souls and bodies may be the temples of
the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.16.
even by the grace of Gods Spirit devoted and consecrated to the sacred service
of his heavenly Majesty.

Gal. 5.22. for they are the same which are there termed [the fruits of the
Spirit] The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no
Law. These are called the fruit of the Spirit for two reasons.

1. Because as material fruits grow not, but upon trees; neither do these
graces grow in the soul, but upon the tree of life, Joh. 14.4, 5. As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye
except ye abide in me; I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do
nothing.

2. As material fruits are to the body and corporal taste, so are the fruits of
the Spirit to the soul, they are both pleasant and delightsome, and also
satisfy and feed the soul unto life eternal; therefore it is said, against
such there is no Law; there is no law can condemn such, as bring forth these
fruits in their lives and conversations, as Romans 8.1. Now then there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit.

gifts: represented by the fire, Matthew. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost and with fire, (that is) he shall endow and sprinkle the souls of
men, with such gifts of the holy Ghost, as are by fire represented, viz. gifts
which like unto fire, shall be effectual and powerful to enlighten the
understandings, melt the hearts, and inflame the affections and desires of men.

And as the fire burns not for it self, but for the light and warmth of others;
so the gifts of the Spirit are imparted to the sons of men, Matthew. 5.15.
not to be hidden like a lighted candle under a bushel, not to wrapped up in a
retired obscurity, Luke 19.20.
with the talent of the unprofitable servant in a napkin; but to be employed to
appear, to shine forth and manifest themselves for the profit, benefit, and
edification of others: therefore called the manifestations of the Spirit, as
showing what the end and intent of the donation from the Spirit is; viz. to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 11.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to
every man to profit withal: As the end and use of the several parts of the
body, is neither to be idle, nor yet to be employed for it self only, as the ey
is to see, and yet not for it self only, but for the direction of the hands,
feet, etc. the feet are to walk, and yet not for themselves only, but also for
the eyes, hands, etc. Even so the end and use of the several gifts of Gods
Spirit, to several members of Christ's body, severally, is both that they should
be employed, and employed too, not only for private use, but for the mutual
benefit and edification each of other; 1 Cor. 12.
as Saint Paul at large in the same chapter: the main subject whereof is the
gifts of the Spirit; a catalogue whereof you have ver. 9, 10, 11. To one is
given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the
same spirit, to another faith by the same spirit, etc. Faith is in this place
reckoned amongst the gifts of the Spirit, and in the former place, Gal. 5.22
amongst the fruits or graces of the Spirit, that we may not confound the graces
of God for sanctification, with his gifts for edification, we must remember
that there is a twofold Faith, the one doctrinal, speculative, and notionary,
viz. a right understanding and firm belief of the several Articles of the
Christian Faith, and so it is a gift of Gods Spirit, and in this place rankt
amongst them.

The other kind of faith is practical and obediential, viz. the squaring,
regulating, and ordering of our lives and actions, according to the principles,
precepts, and commands of the Doctrinal Faith of Christ, and so it is a grace
of Gods Spirit, and rankt amongst them in the former place.

for the public instruction of others, after an especial and peculiar manner,
they concern the Ministry of the Gospel, viz. such persons whom God first
extraordinarily and miraculously, since ordinarily, and in the use of means
has ordained for the guidance and direction of his people, in the ways of his
service, and their own salvation: and this I suppose is clear from S. Paul,
Ephesians. 4.8. Ephesians. 4.8.
Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men, not unto all men, but unto some only; these words (...)
restrain these gifts to some few whom he selected from the rest of mankind,
Exodus 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
as conveyances of the Gospels light unto others; for so it follows immediately
(only a Parenthesis betwixt, which breaks not the sense) He therefore gave some
to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ; implying a manifest and clear distinction,
betwixt some whom he has ordained for the work of the Ministry, and endued
with gifts after a special manner for that end; and since others who are not of
that society, yea though they be Saints, and of the Body of Christ; a like
difference is clearly employed, 1 Cor. 12.28.
1 Cor. 12.28. where having through the whole chapter discourst of the gifts of
the Spirit, to be impl yed for the mutual good and benefit of each others, as
members of the same body; lest we should think that these gifts are equally
common to all persons as for public use and edification, he adds, and God has
ordained some in the Church, 1. Apostles, 2. Prophets, 3. Teachers, etc. Some
for the Office of Public instruction, he has ordained; not all that lift, as
in the days of Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.33.
when every man that would became a Priest unto the Lord, which the Apostle
cuts off by this pathetical Interrogation, immediately following, verse. 29. Are
all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Teachers? q. d. not so surely, this is
as if all the body were but one member; not all then, but some only: even that
some whom God has ordained, and manifested this his ordination, by the
spiritual gifts of wisdom, knowledge, faith, tongues, and the rest before in
the chapter remembered.

Should all men, who own the name of Christians, be endued with spiritual
gifts, for the public instruction of others, two grand inconveniences would
necessarily follow.

1. The gifts of the Spirit would be thereby made contemptible, for who would
care for that which every man has?

2. The end of the Spirit in distributing his gifts would be frustrate: for how
shall one member profit another, which is the end of these gifts, when all men
have the same gifts? The most wise God therefore in ordaining some to the
Ministry, and not others, and distributing his gifts accordingly, provides, 1.
That his gift be magis augustum, more reverend. 2. That the body of his Church,
be magis ordinatum, better proportioned.

For the same reasons also, the spiritual gifts are various and diverse, and not
given to all, no not of the Ministry, alike, but discretely, Ephesians. 4.7.
and (...) according to the measure of Christ; Christ keeps a measure in his
gifts; himself indeed the Head, received the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3.34.
Ephesians. 1.11.
but none of his members ever received it but in measure, and this measure, is
according to the counsel of his own will, who respects in the distribution of
his gifts, (...), what is good and profitable, and most tending to edification:
as it is in the natural body, in every part and member of the body, God has
jioned beauty and convenience together, so that every limb has such a
proportion, as is both comely and useful; So it is in the mystical Body of
Christ, the Church; it is una, but varia, a Body consisting of many members,
Ephesians. 4.4.
and all quickened by one Spirit; There is but one Body, and one Spirit, but
many members; and in each member the gifts of the Spirit do vary; There are
diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit: 1 Cor. 12.
There are diversity of gifts, because diversity of offices, but one Spirit;
and therefore as they all flow from one Fountain, so they are all of one
nature, and tend all to one common end, The beauty and benefit of the Church;
so S. Ambrose, In donis, officiorum est diversitas, non naturae: all the
members are therefore quickened with the same Spirit; aeque, but not
aequaliter, 1 Cor. 12.11, 12, 13.
all drink of the same Spirit, but not the same draught, for fullness of
measure, which makes each one useful in his way, but not in the same degree;
all contributing to the beauty and benefit of the whole: verse. 21.
As therefore the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor,
etc. so neither is any member of the Church (...), sufficient of himself, but
is necessarily engaged to desire the benefit of the Communion of Saints.

Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? It was a mutinous speech of Korah,
Dathan, Numb. 16.3.
and Abiram, who said unto Moses, You take too much upon you, since all the
Congregation is holy, Numb. 16.3. ver. 32.35.
Their Divine qualification did not license them to invade Moses's chair, or
sacrilegiously usurp the Priesthood; they paid dear for that usurpation; when
the fire came out from the Lord, and consumed the most forward of them, and the
Earth opened her mouth and swallowed Corah and all his company: a fair warning
(any man would think) for laypersons to beware how they intermeddle with the
Ministerial Function; if they do it maliciously, let them remember the curse of
Corah; if they have more fair, but mistaken purposes, let them remember what
was the sad portion of Vzzah, for his over-bold approach to the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
which belonged to the Priests Office.

and so they have in the Laws also: and by the same reason, that the one, by
the same the other also, may be dispensed by all men promiscuously without
order, without distinction, which must necessarily end in confusion. It Is true
that under the Gospel all true believers are Priests unto the Lord, and have
spiritual sacrifices to offer: 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.
But it is one thing for a man to be a Priest to himself, another thing to be
so to the whole Church: Revel. 1.6. Romans 12.1.
It is one thing to offer up our selves a living sacrifice acceptable unto God:
another thing to represent the Congregation unto God: All ordinary and private
devotions may and are to be done by private persons; but the solemn, ritual and
public Worship of God, must be left to the public Minister. There is no good
man but wishes with Moses; I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11.29. Numb. 11.29.
But it is one thing to be qualified as the Prophets of the Lord; another thing
sacrilegiously to invade their Office: Being qualified, they may do the Office
of Prophets privately, to themselves and their family, both by prayers for,
and with them, and also by teaching and instructing them: But in Gods house and
in the presence of the whole Congregation, to dispense the sacred mysteries of
Salvation, is only peculiar to the Stewards of his house, nor may others
presume to intermeddle therewithal.

No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, Heb. 5, 4.
as was Aaron, who was called of God, but consecrated by Moses; Exodus 28.1, 2.
agitatus a deo, consecrationis principe, says Dionysius, God was the
principal Author, and Moses the Minister of his Consecration; Heb. 5.5.
so likewise Christ did not glorify himself to become High Priest, but he was
personally chosen and sent, or in his own language sealed of the Father, Joh.
6.27.
and sent into the world (that is) ordained to be Priest and Prophet of the
world.

The Apostles of Christ received their Commission from him, Matthew. 28.19.
Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing, etc. And that
we might understand, that they had by virtue of this Commission power to
Commissionate others, to be their successors in all succeeding Generations of
the Church; it follows, And lo I am with you until the end of the world; with
you your selves, until you have fulfilled your course, and served your own
Generation, and with you in your successors, until the end of the world: and
more plainly in those other words of their Commission, Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. Joh.
20.21, 22, 23.
As my Father has sent me, so send I you: and when he had said this, he
breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost: whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained: which spiritual power, and spiritual gifts communicated to
the Apostles was not sure to expire with them, except we will also say, all
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government ended with the Apostles, and that all
scandals and offenses, herefies and errors, sins and vices are left remediless
and without cure, or at least without a Physician to prescribe, administer, and
apply to wounded Consciences, and sin-sick Souls, their proper salve and
medicine: As my Father has sent me, so send I you] and as I have sent you,
Act. 14.23. Titus 1.5.
so you are to send others; and this we read they did, They ordained Elders in
all Churches: and gave Commission to whom they ordained, to Ordain others: The
Ordination was theirs, but the power was from above, and so the Apostles
themselves acknowledged in the very first instance of Ordination, when they
chose Matthias in the room of Judas: They prayed, saying, Thou Lord show
whether of these two thou have chosen, Act. 2.24. Act. 2.24.
God chooses, and man ordains; God calls the person to the Office, and man
instals him therein: The power is Origninally from God, as the Fountain, but
conveyed through the Ministry of man as the Conduit.

All power is given unto me, both in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18, 19.
Go ye therefore, etc. But because there is no man how sacrilegiously soever he
invade the Ministerial Office, but will pretend a call and a power from God
thereunto; and he that is most bold and forward to publish his follies in this
kind, is also apt to mistake his boldness, for a call from God: he may fancy a
call from above, when it is only a noise in his own head, or a deceitful echo
of his own heart; therefore we must know this call from God to so high and
honorable an Office, as to be ordained for men in things pertaining to God, is
either extraordinary, or ordinary; the first beginning of a lasting necessity
is extraordinary, and it is made ordinary in succession, and by the lasting
continuation of a fixed and determinate Ministry; as Adam at the first was
extraordinarily formed, immediately created by God himself, but all mankind
since ordinarily by the mediation of parents; so the the Apostles of Christ who
received the first issues of the Evangelical Ministry, were extraordinarily
called; but all that have succeeded them, have been admitted by an ordinary
vocation, because the succession is but of ordinary necessity; now for any man
to pretend to an extraordinary calling and immediate from God without the
Ministry of man, is to pretend also to a new Gospel, and new Revelations,
distinct from what Christ and his Apostles have delivered, and such can be no
other then the dictates of seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils: and indeed
such a pretense of immediate and extraordinary power and commission from above,
can (in a fixed and settled Ministry by ordinary means) have no other end and
issue but to belie the Spirit of Truth, and cosen the too credulous souls of
the people, when ever they have a mind to it; now is it a mere pretense of
folly to expect or rely upon an extraordinary calling, or abilities, by
immediate infusion from heaven, without the use of means, as to the Ministerial
Function, since by ordinary and common means they may be supplied, for it is
all one, as if we should expect men to be created, and by the hands of God
immediately, as Adam was at the first; or being so formed, to be fed and
nourished with food from heaven, without any care or industry for provision
here upon earth.

Ephesians. 4.11.
for then he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, etc. So it has also
other gifts of the Spirit attending, as necessary contributaries to the
accomplishment thereof, that this gift may be completed and fitted for the
edification of the body of Christ, ^ers. 12,
through the work of the Ministry, which proportionable to the twofold
calling, are either extraordinary, or ordinary also; extraordinary they were,
even plentiful and miraculous in the persons of the Apostles, viz. in such a
measure, and after such a manner, as no mortal men could ever hope for since;
and very good reason there is that it should be so: For the Apostles charge was
much greater, and their task more difficult then any man's either was or can be
since. They had all mankind to instruct and principle in the doctrine of
Christ; the stiff obdurate and incredulous Jews to convert; the fullness of the
Gentiles to bring in, both the rude Barbarians and learned Graecians to master
and subdue. The whole world was their Diocese, the world sitting in darkness,
and in the shadow of death; devoted to the service of sin and Satan, the Prince
of darkness: Now to master and subdue the whole world, Act. 26.18.
and to turn all men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to the
living God; required, sure, gifts and endowments more then ordinarily powerful
and effectual; even such as were extraordinary and miraculous: and whereof none
of their successors, none that ever followed them since in the Ministerial
Office, could possibly hope to be partakers; for all Ministers since have but
an handful of men in comparison to deal withal, and these broken to their
hands, being born and brought up in the holy Christian Religion; As therefore
there is no need of any such extraordinary qualifications; so neither do we;
the best of us do not, dare not stand, either to such sublime and eminent gifts
of the Spirit, or to any such immediate and extraordinary infusion of spiritual
gifts.

filled with the holy Ghost, Act. 2.4.
Act. 2.4. filled as full as they could hold, they were endued with as many
eminent gifts for the execution of the Apostolical Function as they were
capable of; but we, even the best and ablest of the sons of men, are not so
full, but they could hold much more; their's was a Baptism with the holy Ghost,
Act. 1.5.
ours, is at the best, but a Rantism; they were washed, washed as it were all
over with the Spirit; we but sprinkled with his gifts: they had the anointing
of the holy One more plentifully, we in a smaller scantling; they were anointed
above, far above all their fellows and successors, who received ordinarily but
an Hin to their Epha. Their Unction was like the Ointment poured upon ^^al.
133.2.
the head that ran down to the beard; and all others since but like the thin
droppings upon the skirts of the garment.

Act. 2. But we, as we can pretend unto no such extraordinary gifts; so neither
do we pretend unto, or depend upon any such extraordinary and immediate
infusion of spiritual gifts; but ordinarily and in the use of means, even by
much study, labor, and industry in the ways of wisdom, learning and knowledge,
we do acquire our qualifications according to the command of the Apostle to
Timothy, we study for them, 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.15.
Study to show thy self approved, a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth; and yet Timothy sure had less need to study
for his gifts, then any of us, as having more of immediate Inspiration then the
best of men can hope for since.

qualifications are still the gifts of the Spirit; all our wisdom and knowledge
is from above, even as of Daniel and the three children, it is recorded that
God gave them knowledge and understanding in all learning and wisdom, Dan. 1.17.
Dan. 1.17. And yet it is said before verse. they were brought up and instructed
in knowledge (and that (...) and among the Heathen too) and we^^ taught the
learning and tongue of the G^ld^^nt; So our humane learning, tongues and
languages (so much declared against by the ignorant) are the Handmaids to
spiritual and Divine wisdom and knowledge, and both the one and the other,
though acquired by instruction and study in the Schools of the Prophets, are
yet of Gods merciful donation, they are still the gifts of the Spirit.

And that first because from the Spirit of God it is that we have minds
capable, and minds inclinable to use the means, for the attainment of such
gifts: for even our natural endowments, and moral qualifications are gifts of
the Spirit; perspicacity, quickness of wit, ripeness of judgment, together
with a studious, diligent and industrious mind, in the search and dexterity,
in the discovery of the several ways of learning and knowledge even all of them
are the gifts of God; for every good and perfect gift, whether natural, moral,
or divine, comes down from above, Jam. 1.17. Jam. 1.17.
for a man can receive nothing except it be given from above, Joh. 3.27. Joh.
3.27.




to profit withal; and then is Gods blessing the greater, and the influence of
his Spirit upon our studies, the more effectual and powerful, when we have in
them no other aim or intention, but to be thereby enfitted and enabled to
become useful instruments of Gods service, and his peoples edification. And
both in that we do direct our studies to this end, and also employ our gifts
acquired by study to this end also, it is from the Spirit of God: who works in
us to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.15. Phil. 2.15.


And lastly, all this is acknowledged, that our gifts in all these respects are
from the Spirit of God, though studied for; In that together with those means
that are outward and moral, we use the Divine means also, viz. prayer and
devotion, Jam. 1.5.
commanded Jam. 1.15. If any man lacks wisdom, let him ask it of God, who
gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

That the Ministers of the Gospel notwithstanding their gifts are from the
Spirit, are yet bound to use all means, both Moral and Divine, for the
acquiring thereof; is manifest even from Gods own example in the use of their
Ministry: In that God himself who is not tied to means, neither has need of
any, is yet pleased to use the means and Ministry of some men for the
instruction and conversion of others; There is no question, but he who at the
first created man after his own Image, could without the Ministry of man, have
again repaired the decays of his blessed Image in man: But yet in all ages it
has seemed good to his infinite wisdom to use the mediation and Ministry of
men herein; And this he does out of his tender respect to men's infirmities,
considering the vast distance betwixt God and man; which moved the Israelites
to petition for a Minister betwixt God and them, Exodus 20.19. Exodus 20.19.
Deuteronomy. 5.27. and 18.16.
Talk thou with us and we will hear, but let not God talk with us lest we dye.

As therefore no Minister of God may think that God uses his Ministry because
he needs it: Heb. 12.19.
so neither may the people think there is no need of Ministers, because God
uses them: and he uses them as his subordinate fellow-laborers in the whole
course of man's salvation; Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 3.2. Matthew. 16.19. 1 Timothy 4.16.
the Ministers are said to beget men unto Christ; to nourish them in Christ; to
bind and loose their souls; to open and shut heaven, and in a word, to save,
because all these things Christ does by them: they are causa conjuncta,
cooperating with and under Christ; so Paul compares his Corinthians to a
written Epistle, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.
the Authors whereof were himself and the Spirit: the external writing was his;
the internal seal upon their hearts was the Spirits. These two then may not be
severed; Neither 1. may we look for Inspirations from heaven without the
Ministry of man upon earth: Nor yet 2. may we imagine, that the Ministry of man
upon earth can be effectual without inspiration from Heaven.

that so they may be mistaken for holy virtues, and divine qualifications. To
instance in some particulars;

First, It is a truth by the Spirit of God both foretold, promised, and
performed, That the actings and impressions of Gods Spirit upon the minds of
men, are both more strong and frequent, as also more general and common under
the Gospel then they were under the Law: That the gift of the Ministry it self
is dilated, being not limited to the single Tribe of Levi; but all men of what
quality soever have a title thereunto, meaning Genera singulorum, not singula
generum (that is) men of all sorts and kinds, not all of all kinds; but
hereupon to make void, pull down, and level with the undistinguisht multitude,
the high and solemn order and offices of the Priesthood instituted by God
himself, both under the Law and under the Gospel; For a people to snatch the
Divine Oracles from the lips of the Priest, and presume to teach their
Teachers; to invade the chair of Moses, and offer incense with unhallowed
censors; for private persons to assume the public administration of
Ministerial Offices, without a lawful Call and due Ordination thereunto; though
they may be otherwise qualified with knowledge and piety: These are false
glosses imposed upon the former truths. by the spirit of lies; Tares sowed by
the Enemy of mankind amidst the purer wheat: And that,

1. To the high dishonor of God, and profanation of all that is religious and
sacred.

2. To involve the Church of Christ, and bury it in the rubbish of confusion
and disorder.

3. To take away those bounds and limits, distinguishing Priest from people,
which all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, all Ages of the Church, both Ancient and
Modern, have kept firm and inviolable.

4. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 26.16, etc.
To pull down heavy judgments upon the heads of all such sacrilegious Usurpers
and Invaders of Divine Rites.

2. Prove. 3.5.
etc. and not to lean to our own understanding, or trust too much to our own
wit, judgment, reading, learning, or the like; as knowing full well, That the
Lord gives wisdom, Prove. 2.6.
and from him comes knowledge and understanding; But hereupon either to
despise or neglect those ways and means, and helps, which God in his merciful
providence has afforded us for to attain wisdom, etc. as the study of Tongues
and Languages, Arts and Sciences, the reading and distinctly weighing the
Discourses of the learned; and to depend upon immediate Revelation and Infusion
of such gifts from Heaven, as if they should drop upon our barren hearts, as
did the Manna in the Wilderness upon the Tents of Israel, out of the clouds,
and by miracle; this is a false gloss which the spirit of delusion puts upon
the former truth, thereby to inveigle us,

1.

2.

3. Ignorance again as the Mother of Devotion, which all men know, (but who are
blinded with ignorance) to be the Dame of superstitious errors and confusions.

3. hereafter, this is an impression of Gods Spirit on the soul of man; and in
respect hereof we are said to have the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13.
2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed therefore have I spoken, faith as it is doctrinal, being a spiritual
gift, and reckoned amongst them, 1 Cdr. 12.9.
1 Cor. 12.9. And as it is practical, being a grace or fruit of the Spirit, and
reckoned amongst them also, Gal. 5.22.
Gal. 5.22. But now to mingle and divide, and as it were to cut asunder, this
true Evangelical Faith, as it stands full and entire, in all its integral
parts, both of doctrine and practice, so as to be vainly puffed up with a conceit
of being engraffed into Christ, and thereby to be justified here, and sure of
heaven hereafter; whether we live according to the rule of Faith, and in
obedience unto the Gospel of Christ, or no: to define and measure our Faith,
not by the sacred acts thereof commanded, which is called the righteousness of
Faith: Romans 10.6.
but by our own too too credulous fancies, and apprehensions, as if it were no
more to be in Christ, but presumptuously to pretend unto it, and impudently
without just ground to believe it: This surely cannot be that true Evangelical
Faith, whereunto so many promises are annexed; but a false gloss which the
spirit of Error has put thereupon; thereby, 1. to puff up the hearts of too
too credulous men, with spiritual pride and presumption, and make them swell
with the empty conceit and airy fancy of their own happy and eminent state and
condition, when there is no such matter.

And 2. to inveigle men to neglect the use and practice of Christian graces,
those fruits of the Spirit, which are, as it is already said, the very life and
soul of Christianity, and consequently the way to heaven, if ever we mean to
arrive there.

4. 1 King. 19.14
To be zealous for the Lord of Hosts, (that is) to be exceedingly fervent and
forward, earnest and desirous by all possible ways and means to advance the
religious worship and service of God: But to be so factious and forward, so
fiery and furious as by any illegal, extravagant and disorderly means to
advance the truth it self, much less to set up any private opinions in relation
to Gods Service, which have not been, Vincent.
semper, and ubique, and ab omnibus, The three rules of Catholic Doctrine and
Worship, to be generally and for the most part of the Primitive times at least,
of all persons, at all times, and in all places received, and not now and then,
here and there, by heretics and schismatics only introduced; I say to be
zealous for such pieces of Religion, Doctrine and Worship: and that per fas
nefasque through just or unjust means, by right or by wrong, to endeavor the
advancement thereof: this is not true zeal, but a false gloss which the Devil
puts thereupon, even through the violence of this distempered heat,

1.



he is endued: But withal observe, that to be active and zealous to seduce and
deceive, to inveigle and draw men aside into false and erroneous opinions in
Religion, is not a heat cast forth from the fire of Gods Spirit; but it arises
rather from the fire of hell; it comes from our adversary the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who also continually goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour: And his Disciples they be, and consequently in the same woeful state and
condition with him, who take pains to proselyte persons unto the ways of error
and perdition. Matthew. 23.15.
Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites, for ye compass sea and land
to make one Proselytes, and when he is made, you make him twofold more the
child of hell then your selves.

Matthew. 18.15.
active and forward, to counsel, advise, admonish, and in some cases, and at
some times to reprove one another, Prove. 12.1.
and tell men of their faults, and He that hates reproof is a fool: but to
rail and revile, censure and judge, and condemn our brethren; and say it is only
a telling them of their faults, and telling them what they are, or to meddle
with other men's matters that concern us not, or to reprove other men's faults,
whilst our selves are guilty of greater; These are no true parts of Christian
fraternal admonition, but false glosses that the Devil puts hereupon:

1.



erroneous opinions on the one hand; so into sinful actions on the other, are
we allured and inveigled by the same subtle wile of Satan, obtruding his false
counterfeit coin of wickedness under the show and semblance of the impressions
of the Spirit of holiness; gilding, painting, and setting out sinfulness and
vice, with the title, show and flourish of godliness and virtue; thus
covetousness on the one hand wears the painted mask and flourish of providence
and good husbandry: and prodigal profuseness on the other hand of nobleness and
generosity: Thus riot and excess, drunkenness and gluttony carry the fair
flourishing titles of bountifulness, good fellowship, and freedom of spirit;
Thus wantonness and uncleanness are painted over with the specious terms of
amorous kindeness, and Courtship; and pride, and haughtiness, of magnanimity,
greatness of spirit, superiority of rank. I might instance in most of sins and
vices, how men are inveigled and cousened into them by the Devil, under the
shows and false glosses of pretended virtues: For full well that subtle Serpent
knows, that there is nothing so beautiful and comely, nothing that has so much
power to win upon the hearts and affections of men, as virtue and holiness; and
therefore in their habits and attire, does he dress his deformed strumpet
vices, puts them in colors, and sends them forth under their names and titles;
and hence it comes to pass, that the silly souls of men are so often cheated
with the beautiful poison of sinfulness, whilst vicious dispositions
undiscernibly insinuate themselves into our affections, under the attire and
dress of virtuous qualifications: 2 Cor. 11.24.
But thus the Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light, whilst baiting
his suggestions either with counterfeit virtues on the one hand, or with false
glosses of spiritual graces on the other; he entraps the souls of men in the
snares of sinfulness and error, and leads them captivity captive to his pit
destruction.

two Familiars, whereby the Devil does ordinarily work, and lay his secret and
subtle snares, to catch, cosen, and delude our souls thus into sinfulness and
error; and these are either 1. the spirit of man; or 2. the spirit of the
world: The dictates and workings of both which kind of spirits, being stirred
and quickened by the evil spirit, diametrally oppose the impressions and
workings of the Spirit of truth.

Matthew. 16.17.
Matthew. 16.17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. So that flesh and blood has their Revelations (that is)
private men have their opinions and conceits, which oppose the truth that is
revealed from heaven. The same opposition of private resolution to holy
inspiration, does St. Peter observe, 2 Pet. 1. ult. 2 Pet. 1. ult.
For prophesies of old time came not by the will of Man: but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, not as they were moved by their
own private will, wit, judgment, reason and resolution; but as they were
moved by the holy Ghost: Et haec ideo dicuntur, etc. Glos. ord.
These things are therefore said by the Apostle, that no man should presume to
interpret the holy Scripture after his own private mind or fancy; as too
often, opposing and thwarting, perverting and wresting the same, and the
meaning of the holy Ghost therein.

The Church of Christ has in all ages been infested, and in these last times,
more then ever, with such kind of persons, who pretending to be holy men of
God, to have the gift of prophecy, and interpretation of scripture, even to
speak by the holy Ghost; and yet are led by their own ghost only, following
their own private will and desires, imaginations and opinions, as their only
guide and dictator; who pretend to the Spirit of God, and yet will not admit at
any hand of other spirit then their own, of other truth then the vision of
their own heads, or of other directions then the motions of their own hearts;
rejecting, renouncing, and crying down all but what themselves call holy; with
the Donatists of old, Quod volumus, sanctum est, that they will have to be
holy, right and true; shall be so, and nothing else: it is the very ground
whereupon this last upstart crew of Quakers, build all their resolutions, and
strange fanatic opinions, and heresies; even that which they call the light
within us; This (say they) is the only Judge we must follow, the Pilot we must
steer by, the voice whereunto we must give ear, the only Sanctuary to which we
must fly for resolution; never remembering how this sanctuary is profaned, by
continual acts of spiritual fornication or idolatry therein committed; whilst
in stead, and even in opposition to God and Spirit of all truth, they enshrine
and idolize their own fond; vain, and lying imaginations, which the Lord by
his Prophet calls the vanity and deceitfulness of their own heart. Jer. 14.4.
Jer. 14.14. The Lord said unto me, the Prophets prophecy lies in my Name, I
have not sent them, neither did I command them, neither spoke I unto them, but
they prophecy unto you a false vision, and divination, and vanity, and the
deceitfulness of their own heart. But this delusion of man's own spirit,
following the deceitful dictates of his own heart, is seldom mentioned in
holy scripture, without heavy threats denounced both against such deluders, and
all that suffer themselves to be deluded by them: as you may read in the
following words. And again, Ezekiel. 13.3. Ezekiel. 13.3.
Woe unto the foolish Prophets, which follow their own spirit, and have seen
nothing; nothing but what their own foolish spirit dictates to them.

Nor were there such under the Law only, but under the Gospel also: They are
noted by the Apostle, Col. 2.18. Col. 2.18.
Who intrude into those things which they have not seen, (or, which they
understand not) being vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind, sensualitalis, non
rationis; Gloss.
following the dictates of sense, rather then of right reason; and in this
place, the word (...) is remarkable; for even by that it is easy to distinguish
betwixt the dictates of a man's own carnal and sensual spirit, and the
impressions of Gods holy Spirit, for the guidance of the mind: The dictate of
the fleshly spirit is (...), inflatio, a puffing up; but the impression of the
holy Spirit is (...), afflatio, an inspiration indeed, but without inflation,
or puffing up: The heavenly wind of Gods Spirit may fill, but it never puffs
up, or swells the heart, but rather humbles and abaseth the Spirit of man, which
is most conformable to the Spirit of Christ, according to his own command,
Matt. 11.29. Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; the mind that is either puffed
up with pride, vainglory, and false conceited excellency in it self; or that
swells with malice, hatred, or envy toward others, is not inspired with the
celestial Breath or Spirit of the holy Jesus, but follows its own carnal and
corrupt dictates and conceits; being thereunto raised and moved, by that grand
Impostor, the spirit of Delusion.

A spirit of the world, opposing and poisoning the truths of Gods Spirit: The
Apostle distinguishes and opposes these each to other, Cor. 2.12.
1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have not received the spirit which is of the world, but
the Spirit which is of God: which spirit of the world, he calls a little
before, the wisdom of the world, and of the Princes thereof, verse. 6. and
opposes the same to the wisdom of God, verse. 7. And what else can be this
wisdom of the world, but those humane policies, so frequent in the world,
whereby men steer their actions to their worldly ends and interests? with this
spirit of the world are all such possessed, who having set up and enshrined the
world in their hearts, do thereupon ground their Religion, and thence deduce
all their reasons, arguments, and religious conclusions; so that they can find
in their hearts to be thus far religious, and to close with this or that sect,
society, and opinion in Religion, as it stands with their worldly profit,
pleasure, credit, preferment, or the like: It was from the dictates of this
spirit that Jeroboam the Son of Nebat made Israel to sin; pulling down the holy
and true Religion established amongst the people by the laws of God, and
erecting two golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, which became a snare unto the
people, who were thereby inveigled into idolatry, the cause of their utter
ruin and extirpation in the end: 1 King. 12.28, 29.
And what other Spirit was it that moved this wicked Usurper thereunto, but
that of his own worldly respects and interests; there was no other way as his
worldly spirit dictated to him, to uphold his present estate, and new gotten
Monarchy? so we read 1 King. 12.26, 1 King. 12.26.
etc. And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom return to the house
of David, etc. Rather then the people should return to their obedience to their
liege Lord and Sovereign, religion must down, and the true worship of God be
laid in the dust, to make way for superstition and idolatry to be set up; the
Priests of the Lord shall be discarded, and the lowest of the people exalted to
that dignity, and to make the Office more contemptible, every one that list,
may take up the trade, and consecrate himself to be a Priest of the high
places, 1 King. 13.33. 1 King. 13.33.


It was this very spirit also that stirred up the Highpriests and Pharisees to
take counsel against our Savior to put him to death; for say they, If we let
him alone, all men will believe on him, (...), The Romans will come and take
away our place and Nation, Joh. 11.48.

It was this spirit also that stirred up Demetrius the Silversmith, with the
rest of the Crafts-men of the like occupation, against St. Paul and his
companions, and the holy Christian Religion preached by them; his pretense was
Religion (such a kind of Religion as it was) viz. Lest the Temple of the great
goddess Diana should be nothing esteemed, and her magnificence, whom Asia and
all the world worshipped, should be destroyed; but this Religion was blown by the
wind of his own worldly ends; his profit, his gain which he got by making
silver shrines for Diana, was in danger to be lost, and therefore it was now
time for to stir, not so much for the maintenance of her honor, as his own
profit, Act. 19.27. Act. 19.27.


And it is this spirit of the world, that possesses the greatest part of the
world; generally, and for the most part, men measure and square out their
Religion by the rule of their profit, or pleasure, or preferment, or credit and
esteem amongst men; or indeed at the best, by the rule of self-preservation; so
far perhaps they will sail by the wind of Gods Spirit as the sea of this world
is calm, peaceable, pleasant, and the navigation gainful, or at least not
chargeable; but if any tempest arise, any gusts of trouble or opposition
against the truth blow in the face of its professors; if any damages or dangers
pursue them in their course, they presently tack about, and will sail no longer
by the heavenly wind of God, but by the earthly wind of their own worldly ends
and interests; not by the wind which blows from heaven, but by that which
arises out of the caves and hollows of an earthly mind; suffering themselves
by this wind to be tossed to and fro, Jam. 1.6.
and driven to be of this, or that, or any Religion, that shall cost them
nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24.
nothing of charge, trouble, or danger; ebbing and flowing in this worlds vast
sea, as the tide either of prosperity or adversity, danger or security makes
for or against them. But this sense sure is such a spirit as blows quite cross
and contrary to the spirit which guided and directed the Apostles, for they
finished their course over the troublous sea of this world, to the celestial
Canaan, by sailing in all weathers, encountering all oppositions, and passing
through all storms that met and opposed them: In afflictions, in necessities,
in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors, by watchings, by
fastings, etc. 1 Cor. 1 Cor, 6.4, 5, 6. Aug.
6.4, 5, 6. And yet in all these difficulties, still says the Father, The yoke
of Christ is easy, and his burden light; nay, there is ease, peace, and
comfort to the soul in the midst of all the troubles, dangers, wants or
necessities that can in this life encounter us, whilst the holy Ghost secretly
by his comforts both cheers our spirits, and fills the sails of our desires
with the hopes of arriving safe in the end at the harbor of eternal peace and
felicity.

3. Genesis
man's own deceivable spirit, and the spirit of the world, does thus many ways
counterfeit, poison, pervert, and consequently obstruct, impede, and overthrow
the workings of the spirit of grace; as an Antidote against this poison of the
serpent, and that his countermines prevail not to the subversion of our souls;
we must make use of that friendly admonition of the Apostle, never so necessary
to be observed and practiced as now; Dearly beloved, 1 John 4.1.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God, or no;
for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

The admonition is twofold:

First, negative, Believe not every spirit.

Secondly, positive, try the spirits; and there is one general reason given
for both, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. He then that
shall be so credulous, as to give heed to every one that pretends to the Spirit
of truth, and under that pretense treats of holy and spiritual things; and
shall not first by the rule of truth examine and try such things and persons;
shall be sure to have lies and errors obtruded upon him, under the dress and
attire of Truth; because there ever was, and ever shall be, by Gods permission
and the Devils suggestion, false Prophets or false Teachers in the world, and
yet as fair and great pretenders to the truth, as the very true patrons and
promoters thereof; such there were ever in the Church of God, both under the
Law of old, and under the Gospelanew. 2 Pet. 2.1.
2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you; which privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them; and shall bring upon
themselves swift destruction: And 'twere well if the poison spread no further,
so that others were not infected therewith also: but so nauseous is Truth to
the minds of men for its age, and antiquity, and so acceptable are Lies and
Errors for their novelty, that these false Teachers never fail of many
disciples and followers; so it follows verse. 2. 2 Pet. 2.2.
And many shall follow their destructions, by whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of.

believe them not, follow them not, be not cousen'd by their fair pretenses, so
as to be infected with their false doctrines: It Is our Saviors own command,
Matt. 24.23. Matt. 24.23.
If any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or, Lo there, believe it
not; for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs, and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive the
very elect. (But that being forewarned, ye may be armed against their
delusions) Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say unto
you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; Behold, he is in the secret
places, believe it not.

The same care and caution was commanded by God to his people under the Law: If
there arise among you a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.1,
or a Dreamer of dreams, (and give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign and
the wonder which he has told thee, come to pass) saying, Let us go after
other Gods, Verse. 2.
which thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto
the words of the Prophet, or unto that Dreamer of dreams: all your soul: From
whence is also further observable, The reason why God suffers false Prophets to
arise, viz. for the probation and trial of our proficiency and integrity in
the love and service of God; for so says the Father upon those words, Aug.
[for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God
with all your heart, and with all your soul]: Tentat nos Dominus, non ut sciat
ipse quem nihil latet, sed ut scire nos faciat, quantum in ejus dilectione
profecerimus: God suffers us to be tempted, tried, and proved by the lying
wonders of false Prophets arising amongst us, not that he himself may know what
is in us, to whom the hearts of all men are naked and bare; but that we may
thereby know our selves, and our own proficiency, and constancy to the
principles of truth and integrity.

The very same reason is given by the Apostle for the necessity of heresies, 1
Cor. 1 Cor. 11.19.
11.19. For there must be heresies among you, that they which are approved
among you may be known: Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 18.
Quolibet errore caecentur, etc. With what error soever our enemies are
blinded, or with what wickedness soever they are depraved, it is for the proof,
trial, and exercise of the graces of Gods Spirit within us: Have they received
power to afflict, persecute, imprison, etc. It Is for the trial of our patience
in suffering, and charity in loving our enemies, and praying for our
persecutors, as becomes the disciples of Christ, Matt. 5.44. Matt. 5.44.
Do they only by fair words and cunning speeches distill their false and
poisonous doctrines? It Is for the trial of our wisdom in resisting, Gal. 6.1.
and beneficence in persuading and endeavoring to restore them with the spirit
of meekness; proving whether God will give them repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth; that they may escape the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
of whom they are taken captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

Try the spirits, whether they be of God or no] Try them, how? but by the
revelations of the Spirit, which is of God, who being the Spirit of truth, must
necessarily therefore in all his qualifications and impressions, be
consentaneous and agreeable to himself; Aug.
Veritas veritati congrua, one truth ever holds proportion with another; nay,
all truths are as it were the images and resemblances one of another; they are
all links of the same golden chain, which affixt to the throne of heaven,
displayes its radiant luster unto the minds of men upon earth: They are all
but streams flowing from one and the same fountain, the God of truth. There is
nothing then that we are to receive for truth, but what is consonant and agrees
with the Spirit of truth; which ever blessed Spirit speaking in the Word, has
thereby prescribed and given us a sure and infallible rule of truth.

Gal. 1.8.
Gal. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven should preach unto you another
Gospel, besides that you have received, let him be accursed.

Though we] preferring the authority of the Gospel, they had preached, before
their own authority the Preachers thereof; nay before the authority of
celestial spirits; Though an Angel from Heaven, etc.] Aug.
He saw, says the Father, that it might so come to pass, that Satan
transforming himself into an angel of light, and working by his mediators and
instruments, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
those deceitful workers who transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ,
might so cosen and deceive them, if they did not keep close to the Gospel
received; which is the true rule of faith: therefore he says another Gospel
besides, etc.] praeter, any thing that is besides, that holds not square, and
is not level to that rule: Qui praetergreditur fidei regulam, non procedit in
via, sed recedit a via; he that goes besides, and not according to the rule of
faith, goes not forward in the way, but backward from the way of truth; so 1 John 4.8. We are of God, (speaking of himself, and the rest of his fellow
Apostles) He that knows God hears us, (acquiescendo doctrinae nostrae)
cleaves to our doctrine, Lyra.
and he that is not of God, hears us not, neither is obedient to our word:
And hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, q. d. He that
cleaves to our doctrine is guided by the Spirit of truth, and he that does not
so, by the spirit of error.

scriptum est likewise, as he did against our Lord himself, Matthew. 4. And all
heretics and schismatics do generally allege scriptures, and wrest the very
sayings of the Spirit of truth against himself, to insinuate thereby their lies
and errors. For as Tertullian observes of the writings of Ovid, Virgil, Homer,
both the matter of them has been transferred unto other uses, and the verses
applied to other matter: Even so do heretics deal with the holy writings of
inspired men: De Praescr. adv. Haer. cap. 39.
Nec periclitor dicere, etc. I fear not to say, that the Scriptures were so
disposed by the wisdom of God, that they might accidentaliter, and by the by,
even administer matter to Heresies; since I read that heresies must come, and
without the Scriptures they cannot come. For it is in the production of
heresies, as of natural things, Corruption unius est generatio alterius; the
corruption of truth is the generation of herefie; all heretical opinions being
generally grounded upon, and following from the fountain of truth, the
Scripture; not as they are in themselves rightly interpreted and understood,
but as they are wrested and perverted either in the words, or in the sense,
either by additions or diminutions; or by not considering them together, but
divided into parts, and taken up by shreds and pieces; for the avoiding whereof
these following rules must be observed in the trial of spirits by the
Scriptures.





allegorical; a true history, or a parable only: For many things are spoken in
the Word by way of type, figure, allegory, parable, and the like; which if we
should apply in the plain and literal sense, would prove strange monstrous
lies and contradictions; which God forbid any man should be so blasphemous, as
to impose on the Spirit of truth and wisdom.



2 Timothy 1.13.
that (...), or form of sound words, in faith, we must hold sast; Jude v. 3.
that model of faith once given to the Saints, for which we must contend, and
consequently receive no private sense or interpretation of Scripture that is
contrary thereunto; 2 Pet. 1.20.
remembering that no Scripture is of any private interpretation, 1 Cor. 14.32.
but that even the spirits of the Prophets themselves are subject to the
Prophets.

Charity, Romans 13.10.
which is the fulfilling of the Law, is an infallible rule of trial of the
spirits, whether they be of God or no; Hereby (says the Apostle) we are sure
we know God, if we keep his Commandments; he that says, I know God, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John
2.34. 1 John 2.34.
It is not the Spirit of truth, but the spirit of error, if it oppose, or
deny, or any way impede and hinder our obedience to the laws of God: For says
the same Apostle again, He that keeps his Commandments dwells 1 John 3.24.
in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, even by that
Spirit which he has given us; even by the spirit of obedience to the
Commandments of God: So that even from hence it is clear, that both to have the
Spirit abiding in us, and the way to know we have him also, and not a false
counterfeit lying spirit, is, if thereby we be moved and enabled to keep Gods
Commandments: This is the very rule our Savior himself prescribes to examine
his own doctrine thereby, Joh. 7.17.
Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self: And this is the first general
rule of trial of the Spirits, even the Word of God.

Matt. 7.15.
Matt. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves: Beware of false Prophets:] for many such
are gone out into the world, who in respect of their exterior dress and
outward appearance, so plausible are their pretenses, so spiritual are their
expressions; so much of the language of the Spirit, and scripture phrases flow
from them, that you would take them for the true sheep of Christ, and
undoubtedly to belong to his fold; and yet for all this, inwardly, really, and
truly they are wolves in sheeps clothing, limbs of Satan, deceiving and
devouring the souls of the simple. But by their fruits you shall know them]
which is confirmed by an apt similitude, v. 16. Matt. 7.16,
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? q. d. No man can be so
foolish as to expect this, but every tree, whether it be good or whether it be
bad, brings forth fruit suitable to its good or bad nature: So, 17.
every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth
evil fruit; nor is it possible it should be otherwise. 18.
A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit; even so false Prophets cannot bring forth the fruit of good,
true, wholesome, sound doctrines, and religious manners: So Menander, (...), No
man being good in himself produces evil actions: on the other side, says
Antoninus, (...), etc. He that will not have a wicked man to commit
wickedness, is like unto him that will not have a fig tree to bring forth
figs: It Is then an infallible trial of the spirits, whether they be of God, or
no, by the fruits they bring forth.

The fruit of the Spirit (viz.) which is of God, is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, Gal. 5.22, 23.
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: The first of these
fruits, and the fairest too, even of largest extent, and most lasting, which
this tree of life brings forth, is Love, even the love of God above all, and of
our neighbor as our selves: This therefore must needs be an infallible
touchstone to try the spirit of truth; from the spirit of error; for the
spirit of truth is the very spirit of love; and that first in respect of
himself, being that essential love, and loveknot of the Father and the Son:
And secondly, in respect of us, being that sacred vinculum, that invisible
chain which unites us unto God by faith, which works by love, Gal. 5.6.
and which unites one to another by charity, peace, amity, the inseparable
fruits of a true faith. So that the Spirit of God is vinculum unitatis, both in
respect of his person and office; and that 3 ways: First, he is the bond of
unity betwixt God and God: Secondly, betwixt God and man: and Thirdly, betwixt
man and man: therefore called the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. Ephesians. 4.3.
The devil on the other side, is of a quite contrary nature; as being the
author, fautor, and fomentor of all division: He divides and separates man
from God by sinfulness and error; and man from man by envy, malice, hatred,
strife, and variance; therefore is he so well known amongst the vulgar by his
cloven foot, the emblem of division.

If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar; 1 John 4.20.
for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen? For, Joh. 14.23, 24
if any man love me (says the Lord) he will keep my words, and my Father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him: And he that
loves me not, keeps not my Words; and the Word which you hear, is not mine,
but the Fathers which sent me: And what is the Word he means, and so often
particularly commands, but to love one another? This is my commandment, that
ye love one another, as I have loved you, Joh. 15.12. And this is the fruit he
gives us in charge to bring forth, verse. 16, 17. even to love one another: So
that then, where there is malice, hatred, strife, variance, bitter envyings,
railings, revilings, etc. for such kind of persons to lay claim to the Spirit,
of unity, is a piece of impudent vanity, and a false suggestion, either from
their own corrupt erring spirit, or from the spirit of error himself, the
Devil, who is a hater, a reviler, and the accuser of his brethren: Rev. 12.10.
And on the other side, where there is peace, love, unity, amity, etc. they are
unquestionable marks and tokens of the Spirit of truth and unity: Therefore St.
John in the forecited place, having told us, that hereby know we the Spirit of
truth from the spirit of error; adds immediately, Beloved, let us love one
another; 1 John 4.6, 7, 8.
for love comes of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows
God; and he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.

Vnde caetera tanquam ex capite exorta, and religata contexuit, says the
Father of the fruits of the Spirit, Aug.
as they are reckoned up by the Apostle, They all arise from, and are summed up
in this one; therefore is love the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. It Is the
fulfilling of the Law in three respects:

1. Reductive, in that the whole Law is reducible to this one command of Love;
and like Homer's Iliads in a nutshell, the whole volume of the Law is contained
in this short precept, Mat. 22 37, 39, 40.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self.

2. Formaliter, the very essential form of our obedience to the Laws of God,
being our love to God: That Is the very form, life, soul, spirit of a truly
holy and acceptable obedience, both in piety toward God, and charity toward
man, when it proceeds from the love we owe to God himself, and to our neighbor
for Gods sake; and therefore is Love also styled the end of the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1.5.
1 Timothy 1.5. For, finis in moralibus habet rationem formae, the end why we do
this or that moral action is the very essential form of the action done.

3. Effective, obedience is the effect, the issue, the product of our love to
God, flowing from it as an effect from the cause; therefore it is said as
before, Joh. 14.23.
If ye love me, ke^p my Commandments.

Love then is, and needs must be an exact, true, and infallible touchstone or
trial of the truth of Spirits, since it is the chief, the fountain, the
abridgement of all the fruits thereof.

Act. 2.2.
And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a mighty rushing wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting.

This heavenly wind or breath of the Almighty, wherewith all the Apostles were
filled, is expressed here to have four properties. 1. 'Twas Sudden, 2. Vehement,
3. From heaven, 4. It filled the place where they they were sitting.


All these are the properties of Gods Spirit, whose motions and inspirations
are,

First, sudden, and unexpected, neither admitting of any delays nor put offs:
For, Ambr.
nescit tarda molimina Spi^itus sanctii gratia.

Secondly, vehement, for the conversion and quite turning over of the soul he
blows upon; 2 Cor. 10.4.
casting down of strong holds, (the fortifications of sin and Satan) and
bringing into subjection every thought that exalts it self.

Thirdly, from heaven, as being the Spirit of God, who dwells in the heavens,
and to heavenward wings and raises the soul which he inspires.

Fourthly, it filled the house where they were sitting: ever tends to the good
of the Church, which is the household of faith: 1 Pet. 2.5.
This heavenly wind never blows, but for the good of Gods household; therefore
are his people called a spiritual house.

then the true Spirit does; and there is good reason for it: for the false
spirit wanting the native strength and genuine efficacy of the truth to support
it, flies therefore to force and violence, earnest zeal and forwardness to
bear up in the minds and good opinions of the world.

For the trial of spirits then, according to this rule, we must look upon the
two other properties of this divine divine wind, which are not ordinary, and
common, and not natural to that wind which blows in the air.

it came from heaven] Winds do not naturally come from heaven, but out of the
caves and hollows of the earth, or out of the middle region of the air; neither
do they blow desursum, downwards, as this wind did, but laterally, from one
coast or climate to another; but this wind came directly downwards, and de
coelo, from heaven it self.

filled the house where they were sitting, and no house but that: The wind
naturally blows upon all places alike, within its circuit; but this wind blew
electively as it were, and by discretion, making choice of one place only to
blow upon, and no other; so that in both these respects it is manifest it was a
wind extraordinary, and supernatural.

And by these two properties we may try and examine, both the truth of our
own, and of the spirits of others.

de coelo, from heaven; so that they tend to make us heavenly minded, to wean
our hearts from the world, to elevate and raise up our affections to things
above, to form and frame our conversations toward heaven: Col. 3.2.




respects, have the private aims and intentions, either of ambition, vainglory,
and popular applause, as in some, or of worldly profit, benefit, and
preferment, as in others; or of hatred, malice, revenge, as in a third sort of
men: etc. If either they smell rank of the world, or taste of any fruits of the
flesh, recorded, Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, adultery, fornication, etc. Then this wind surely comes not from heaven,
there is nothing in it but what is either natural, or worse; suggested by the
spirit of error: It Is either a revelation of flesh and blood, arising out of
the caves and hollows of an earthly mind; or else it is inspired and blown
from those regions of the air which are the habitation of unclean spirits: It Is
not defluxus coeli, a divine breath inspired from heaven, but either exhalatio
terrae, a terrene exhalation drawn from the hollows of a corrupt heart; or
blast from the spiritual powers of the air, a suggestion of Satan.

The holy Spirit of God, 4. Genesis
which in the shape of a dove, the emblem of the Spirit of love, Matt. 3.16.
descended upon Christ our Lord; and which afterward both visibly and publicly
also came down from heaven, Act. 2.
and filled the Apostles of Christ extraordinarily and miraculously with his
heavenly gifts and graces, does daily descend still upon the members of Christ's
mystical body, though not in such a plentiful measure, nor yet after such a
visible miraculous manner; yet ordinarily and invisibly in the use of means he
comes still, and by his secret celestial influence, visits, enlightens, and
sanctifies the souls of men, in every good thought, in every good motion and
pious desire of the soul, in every devout sigh and sorrowful groan under the
weight and burden of sin, in every striving and raising of the soul from
under that weight, in every elevation of the soul from the dust and rubbish of
worldly vanities, and aspiring toward heaven, in every beam of holy truth, and
divine grace, whether relating to piety or charity, the holy Ghost descends
from heaven: Thus he daily comes unto us, and thus he will ever come and be
with his Church and people, unto the end of the world, Matt. 28.20.
according to that promise of our Lord, Matt. 28.20. And lo, I am with you
always even unto the end of the world: He will be with us, if we will be with
him, and not neglect the means he has ordained to be made partakers of his
ever blessed presence with us.

grace here, that he may exalt us to his glory in the heavens hereafter;
besides those natural and moral means for the attainment of spiritual gifts
before remembered, which are also dispensed from the Spirit of God; the divine
means or conveyances of the Spirit, are either, 1. Outward, 2. Inward.


The outward means are no other but those three essential parts of divine
worship: 1. Holy Prayer, 2. The holy Word, 3. The Holy Sacraments.
The most holy God commanding us nothing but what are the means and ways of
our own happiness; viz. the means of grace and sanctification here, as the way
to our glorification hereafter: For there is nothing that we poor, frail,
mortal dust and ashes can perform, that may any way add, really add to the
glory or happiness of the most high, most glorious, and ever blessed God: And
in that he lays his commands upon us, and enjoins us several ways of
acknowledging our obedience to him, it is of his tender care and respect to
usward, even for our guidance and direction in the ways of our own felicity:
The laws of God are no other then the rules of man's perfection, even the sacred
paths we must tread to attain the pitch of perfection, whereunto we are
created, being instampt after the blessed image of our Maker: So that the parts
of Gods service commanded, are to us the means of grace and salvation sincerely
obeyed.

1. Holy prayer in all the parts and species thereof, is a means to fetch down
the holy Spirit of God in his gifts and graces: So says our Lord positively
and clearly, Luke 11.13. Luke 11.13.
If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him? And
that we might know what is here meant by the Spirit, St. Matthew records the
words of our Lord thus, Matt. 7.11.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give good things unto them that ask
him? [All good things] being comprised under the name of the Spirit, as the
fountain from whence they flow: And Joh. 14.14. Joh. 14.14.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it; and presently after he
promises, as the sum of all that they could ask for, I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, etc. God is
in himself the fountain of all perfection; every good and every perfect gift,
every divine, celestial, soul-sanctifying grace is in God, as the original,
prototype, and grand examplar; as the root from whence the sap of every grace,
as the Sun from whence the beam of every gift for illumination is derived unto
us; from the holy heavens they must come, Jam. 1.17.
for there is their perfect seat and habitation; as the Wise man confesses,
Wisd. 9.
when he petitioned the God of heaven for the wisdom of the Spirit: And the
same means must we use to fetch down both wisdom and the rest of the graces of
the Spirit, even by prayer, commanded Jam. 1.5. Prayer is the blessed mean that
unites God and man, brings heaven and earth together: It Is that golden chain
(says Basil) that ties the gracious ears of God to the hearts and tongues of
men: It Is the hand which reaches from earth to heaven, and takes forth every
good thing out of the Lords treasury: Therefore it is said, Matt. 7.7.
Matt. 7.7. Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you; so that it is also the ring or hammer wherewithal we
knock at the gates of heaven, and beg a blessing from the great Lord that
dwells there: Nay, it is the key of heaven, says Aug. which opens unto us
those everlasting doors of glory: It Is the blessed engine wherewithal we storm
the heavenly Jerusalem, and (as it were) by force and violence make our
entrance into the holy City, which is full of wealth and never fading
treasures. The Kingdom of heaven (says our Lord) suffers violence, Mat. 11.12.
and the violent take it by force: fervent importunate prayers being the
scaling ladders; represented by Jacob's ladder, which being set upon the earth,
Genesis 28.
the top thereof reaches to the heavens; our several prayers upon all
occasions, wants, and importunities, are as it were the several rounds of this
celestial ladder, whereupon the desires and affections of our souls ascend
from earth to heaven; and leaving these frail earthly tabernacles of clay,
make their way unto the most high God which sits in the heavens. Or it may be
represented by that fiery chariot of Elijah, 2 King. 2.11.
wherein he was wrapped from earth to heaven, for so by fervent prayers and
devotions are the souls of holy and religious men; they are thereby enwrapt and
mount from the earth to have their conversation in heaven with God on high;
whence they again descend enricht with celestial blessings, or with the Spirit
of God. This is also further proved by the example of the Apostles, who after
they had prayed, the holy Ghost descended on them, Act. 4.31. And when they had
prayed, the place was shaken where they assembled together; and they were all
filled with the holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with boldness.

holy Word of God in general, but the Gospel of Christ in special, in the
preaching, or reading, hearing and understanding thereof, is an effectual
means for the obtaining of the Spirit; for all scripture is given by
inspiration; 2 Timothy 3.16.
they are the very dictates, the breathings of the Spirit upon the souls of
men, and are therefore profitable for doctrine, or to teach the truth; for
reproof, to convince which is false and erroneous; for correction of the
negligent and delinquent, and for instruction in righteousness to the
proficient: Gloss. Lyra.
That the man of God, he who is ordained to divine offices, as Timothy was, may
be to that end perfected and thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy
3.16. And of the Scriptures in the verse before it is said, they are sufficient
to make us wise to salvation, viz. being spiritually understood, says the
Interp. Gloss. That they are the means both of our illumination and
sanctification, which are the ends of the Spirit, is clear from the prayer of
our Lord, Joh. 17.17.
Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is truth: The Word of God
is the Word of truth for our illumination, and the Word of grace for our
sanctification; and this prayer of our Lord was granted, says Lyra, in behalf
of his Apostles, when the holy Spirit descended on them at the feast of
Pentecost: Regeneration, which is the same with sanctification, and to be born
of God, and to be born of the Spirit, is ascribed to the Word of God, as the
conveyance of the Spirit in this respect; or as the means of our new birth.
Jam. 1.18. Jam. 1.18. Joh. 1.17.
Of his own will begat he us, by the Word of truth. And Joh. 1.17. The Law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: Now, what else are
the gifts of the Spirit, or at least, whereunto do they tend, but to the clear
understanding of the truth of God revealed by Jesus Christ, which revelations
are the sum of his Gospel? and what else are the graces of Gods Spirit, but
accumulative, an obedience to this truth, even an obedience to the Gospel of
Christ? 1 Cor. 1.24.
Hence it is termed the power of God, and the wisdom of God. And his Gospel,
the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 3.6.
3.6. So that the preaching, reading, hearing, or in a word, the clearing of
this Gospel unto the minds of men, is the conveyance of the Spirit thereinto:
An example whereof, see Act. 10.44. Act. 10.44.
Whilst Peter yet spoke these words, the words of the Gospel, the holy Ghost
fell on them all that heard the Word.

Holy Sacraments, both Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, are effectual means
also for the conveyance of the holy Spirit: It Is promised upon our Baptism,
with repentance, Act. 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you, Act. 2.38.
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost: And this is also verified from the example of
Christ our head, upon whose baptism in Jordan, the heavens were opened, and
the holy Ghost descended in shape of a dove, and lighted on him, Matt. 3.16.
Matt. 3.16.
denoting unto us, that by the virtue and power of Baptism not only the
heavens are opened, Remig.
but also the gift of the holy Ghost is received; therefore are we said to be
born again of water, and of the holy Ghost, and without that the heavens are
shut against us: There is no admission into the celestial Kingdom. Joh. 3.5.
Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again of water and the holy Ghost he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven: The Apostle St. Paul couples both Sacraments
together, 1 Cor. 12.13.
as the conveyances of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all
baptized into one body, and are all made to drink of one Spirit; where we have
the Spirit joined with Baptism, and with the Lords Supper also; for what else
can be meant by drinking of one Spirit, but an allusion to the eating and
drinking of the holy body and blood of our Lord? whereof himself testifies,
Joh. Joh. 6.55, 56.
6.55, 56. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him; that is,
is made partaker of my Spirit, or of my gifts and graces: For in such a
spiritual sense we must needs understand the words; except we admit them in the
gross, carnal, and corporal sense of the Romanists: Hence Christ is termed
by the Apostle, a spiritual m^at, and a spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4.
4. And they did all eat that same spiritual meat, and did all drink of the
same spiritual drink; for they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them,
and that rock was Christ: A spiritual meat and a spiritual drink Christ was to
the Israelites of old, in those sacramental Symbols of his presence with them,
the Rock and the Manna, and the like he is to us, in those consecrated Elements
of his holy Supper, which being rightly administered, and rightly received, are
spiritual food indeed; for we eat and drink the very Spirit of Christ
therewithal; that is, are made partakers of his gifts and graces.

Intus existens prohibet alienum; when the fruits of the flesh have overgrown
the soul, there is no room for the fruits of the Spirit to take rooting there:
These two kinds of fruits cannot grow both in one heart, but the one will
choke, overgrow, and destroy the other.

To this outward means of grace then, and of the Spirit, the inward
qualifications, the infitting of the soul to receive the impressions of the
Spirit must be added; Actus activorum in patiente disposito; as the Patient is
disposed and fitted to be wrought upon, accordingly so is the power and
efficacy of the Agent; so that according as the hearts of men are more or less
perspicable and pliable to the impressions of the Spirit, accordingly so are
his workings and inspirations upon the heart.

The holy Spirit is compared in Scripture to water, Joh. 7.38, 39.
and as the water is of a diffusive nature, and knows no bounds but as it is
limited by the channel or vessel that holds it; so the Spirit is in himself of
a spreading quality, and is only straitened by the narrowness of the hearts
whereinto he flows, as 2 Cor. 6.12. 2 Cor. 6.12.
Ye are not straitened in us, that is, in our Ministry, we preach abundance of
grace unto you; but you are straitened in your own bowels, through the
hardness of our hearts, being not capable of the graces of the Spirit.

And the heart is made soft and pliable for the impressions of the Spirit, by
repentance and mortification: the good seed of Gods Spirit will not take root
amongst the thorns of impiety: therefore says the Lord, Jer. 4.4.
Jer. 4.4. Break up the fallow ground of your hearts, and sow not amongst
thorns, be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts,
(that is) hardness of your hearts, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Deuteronomy. 10.16.
called also the circumcision of the Spirit, Act. 2.29. because it makes way for
the Spirit; Col. 2.11.
and Col. 2.11. A circumcision made without hands: even the putting off the
sinful body of the flesh, meaning the sinful crop of fleshly lusts, which
infest and infect the soul, of these the soul must be disarayed and divested by
repentance and mortification; Romans 8.13, 14
Romans 8.13, 14. If ye live after the flesh, etc. The coherence of which
verses imply, before we can be led by the Spirit of God, we must mortify the
deeds of the flesh, before she can be clothed with the splendid garments of
the Spirit of grace. In vain is it to pray unto God for any spiritual grace or
mercy while we continue in our sins, for God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. In
vain to hear or read the Gospel of grace, Ephesians. 6.15
except our feet be shod with the preparation of repentance, whereby we forsake
our sins. Therefore before the Gospel it self was published, this was first
proclaimed both by Christ and his forerunner, Repent, Mat. 3.2. and 4.17. 1
Cor. 11.28.
for the kingdom of God is at hand: In vain to participate of those mysteries
of our salvation, the body and blood of our Lord, till first by
self-examination we have cast out the venom of our sinful doings by
repentance and steadfast purposes of amendment. In a word, it is our sins
unrepented that make void and ineffectuall all the blessed means of Grace and
of the Spirit; 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30.
by those it is we quench the Spirit, we grieve the Spirit, we resist the
Spirit, we provoke the Spirit, and poison the blessed nature of life; so that
all the conveyances of the Spirit are barren and unfruitful whilst they
reflect upon hardened and impenitent hearts. See therefore repentance enjoined
as to the receiving of the holy Ghost, Act. 2.38. and 8.19. And I would to God
that all who pretend to the holy Spirit of God, or to any the fruits and graces
of the Spirit, would first learn before they make their boast of the Spirit;
truly to repent them of their sins, and to root out of the ground of their
hearts all the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
which are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, etc. When these, all of these
sinful fruits are extirpated out of the ground of the heart, there may be then
some hopes, that our prayers and other divine acts and offices performed in the
sincerity of our souls, may prevail with God for the direction and comfort of
his Spirit of grace and truth.

God, which have taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by the sending to
them the light of thy holy Spirit; grant us by the same Spirit to have a right
judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort, through
the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and reigns with thee in
the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without end, Amen.

THE END.
From Borwick in Lancashire, December. 1. 1653.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol.

The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of Henry Hammond
D.D. in two volumes in 4o.

Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore
Henrico Hammond. in 4o.

A Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 12o.

Of Schism. A Defense of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of the
Romanists, in 12o.

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D. viz.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the Year; Together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness, and Separation
of the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o.

3. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2d
Edit. in fol.

4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o.

5. An Apology for authorized and Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o.

6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Beleivers,
in 4o.

7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12o.

8. The Rule and exercises of holy dying, in 12o.

9. A short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion, in 12o.

10. The Real Presence and Spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament
proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8o.

Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the
late Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together
with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12o.

Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted
souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12o.

The life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr. Hudson in 12o.

Motives for Prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker
Knight, in 12o.

The Guide unto True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
directing man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 12o.

Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Vicar
of Hoxne, in 4o.

The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly D. D. in 4o.

Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by
Thcoph, Wodnote, in 12o.

Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil society: by Thomas
Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o.

An Essay upon Statius, or the five first books of Publ. Papinius Statius his
Thebais, by Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S. Edmonds-bury, in 8o.

Nomenclatura Brevis Anglo-Latino Graeca in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis,
per F. Gregory, in 8o.

Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in usum Scholae Collegialis Wignorniae, in 8o.

A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir Geo. Strode Knight, in 12o.

The Saints Honeycomb full, of Divine Trums, by Rich. Gove Preacher of Henton
S. Gorge in Somersetshire, in 8o.

Devotion digested, into several Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most
holy Prayer: Together with additional Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords
Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The Creatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God,
The Mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God; by Peter
Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o.

Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation, by
Hen. Fern D. D. in 12o.

Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John White M. A.
in 8o.

The Exemplary Lives and Memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of the
world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4o.

The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of promises out of the Word of God, in
12o.

Judicium Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Foedere, Juramento
Negativo etc. in 8o.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversaries of our times by Jasper Main D. D. in 4o.

Janua Linguarum Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium,
Auctore Cl. Viro J. A. Comenio, in 8o.

A Treatise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for all Ages, by Tho.
Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o.

Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir
Walter Rawleighs History of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12o.

Fifty Sermons preached by that learned and reverend Divine John Done, in fol.

Wits-Common-wealth, in 12o.

The Banquet of Jests new and old, in 12o.

Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8o.

Quarles Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o.

Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles.

Amesti antisynodalia, in 12o.

Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by John Tombs in 12o.

Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountain's Letter, in 4o.

A Tract of Fortifications, with 22 brass cuts, in 4o.

Dr. Griffubs Sermon preached at S. Paul's, in 4o.

Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o.

A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical, in 4o.

An Account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by
Edward Boughen D.D. in 4o.

An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the
Author of the Observations up. Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4o.

Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, by Hen. Fern D.D. in 4o.

A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before His Majesty, by Hen. Fern D. D.
in 4o.

The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright, in 4o.

An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o.

A Treatise of Self-denial, in 4o.

The holy Life and Death of the late Vi-countesse Falkland in 12o.

Certain Considerations of present Concernment: Touching this Reformed Church
of England, by Hen. Fern, in 12o.

Englands Faithful Reprover and Monitour, in 12o.

Newly published,
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons, by John Allington, B. D. in
12o.

Now in the Press, Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H.
Hammond, D. D. in 12o.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle subscribed Devotor r. Devotour, p. 1. Q. 1. li. 1. add after
Gospel, you preach. p. 5. Q. 19. for are, r. act. p. 5. Q. 21. for retain r.
receive. p. 7. l. 7. for dimensions r. divinations. p. 10. l. 22. for visible
r. visibly. p. 11. l. 11. for that r. the. p. 24. 5. for imply r. employ. p.
25. l. ult. for aim r. arrive. p. 28. for with r. and. p. 39. l. 26. for
understood r. understand. and l. 27. for which r. they. p. 47. l. 18. for
manfully r. more fully. p. 12. l. 28. for souls r. selfs. p. 81. l. 29. for
since r. some. p. 85. l. 19. for silent r. silenc't, p. 94. l. 2. for stand r.
pretend. p. 109. l. 27. for beautiful r. banefull. p. 111. for private men
have. r. men have their private. p. 126. l. 17. for following r. flowing, p.
141. l. 1. for the r. their. p. 145. l. 28. for perfect r. proper. p. 148. l.
11. for which r. what. p. 153. l. 12. for perspicable r. prospicable. and for
and r. or. and for our r. your. p. 255. l. 19. for nature r. waters.


