White Salt: OR, A Sober Correction OF A MAD WORLD, In some Wel-wishes to
GOODNESS.

By John Sherman, B. D.

St. MARK. 9.50. Have Salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

(...). Ar.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

To the Reader.
READER,
ON purpose I would not have thee look for any thing in this paper: for, the
Kingdom of heaven comes not with expectation. Yet, if any read it, he shall
not lose much time; for he shall soon have done: and if none read it, I have
not lost much time; for, being short, it was not long in doing.

The design of it is such, as I desire the success of it may not differ. It is
thus. The world is now old, and earthy. It is cold and dry; and has need to be
made warm with Charity, and moist with Repentance. And God is wont to make use
of man's moral suasion, to work himself effectually by. But upon whom this lot
shall fall, whose lot is it to understand? Where is he that shall dip his pen
in discretion with sweet reproof, as Jonathan did his rod in honey, to
enlighten the eyes of the people, as he did his own? I dare not ask the
question, Master Jesu is it I that shall do thee this service? Could this be
done by me, and were there two felicities; this should be my second. The men of
this age rejoice in goods, but oh the joy of doing good! Is there no balm in
Gilead? is there no Physician there? Alas! why is there not a College of
Divines to consult the public cure of these ill humors? Until there be such,
every one may exercise a general duty without any need of a revelation; and
though none is bound to convert, yet every one to endeavor it.

And therefore, though I know nothing in my self toward this end, yet am I
not, me thinks, thereby justified in my neglect; since infirmities are of use
to Gods glory. And if he will do us the honor, to honor himself by them, we
have reason to be glad that we had them for him. O my Savior, since I have
nothing else to serve thee with, let me serve thee with them.

If any one then, or every one finds the defects of this piece, he shall not
find me to be of another opinion. Here Is no depth of judgment; no strength of
reason; no curiosities of fancy; no patness of history; no fringing of the
margent with variety of choice reading. Such things I do not pretend to Others
make the world more learned. Would I could make it more good.

Neither is there such usefulness of exact Scholarship in this morality; as
also is it not now so much in fashion. Yea, it may seem now seasonable, because
we have sometimes to do with them which do not love their enemies, whereof
Learning is one. So that I am in the more capacity to be loved, because I have
as little in me of that against them, as I have of malice.

Let them do what they will to me, it is more then they can do to make me their
enemy. Am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? as St. Paul sa^d.
It is natural to men, as the Historian notes, to hate those whom they have
wronged: yet is it necessary for Christians to do well to their enemies,
because they love them. And if we love virtue, we hate no man: because we are
more afraid that men should do evil, then that we should suffer it. We do not
desire that they should have their desire upon us in our confusion: but we do
desire to have our desire upon them in their conversion.

This Goodness is the theme which I would commend to all Christians, who cannot
construe that name without it. Certainly those who have taken the engagement of
the Gospel, should be obedient to the Law. And why should Righteousness be so
far from Piety, and Piety from Righteousness in the Subject, when he is not a
right Christian, in whom both do not dwell together? Indeed he that has
righteousness and no true piety, is as an Heathen: and yet he that has but a
show of piety and no righteousness (and he that has no righteousness, has but
a show of piety) is worse then an Heathen. Oh that we had one heart for the two
Tables!

Had we had this Goodness which is spoken for, we had not had a Church more
miserable then can be spoken. Goodness is then real, when the principle of it
is in the heart, and the end of it not on earth. And had we so intended it, the
Gospel would not have been pleaded to destry Polities, or Churches. St.
Cyprians rule and saying would have saved us this harm, Mali non possunt obesse
bonis, sed boni possunt prodesse malis, The bad cannot hurt the good, but the
good may do good to the bad. Had we been good, we would have loved them, till
they had been better; and then have loved them better, because they were
better: but Goodness is not belonging to the nature of Separation, one or other.

Some parts of Goodness I have not pursued, as Charity; which is part of our
obedience to God. Indeed there is no necessity any thing should be spoken for
this part of a clear and pure conversation. Neither needs any thing be said
against Uncleanness; which does so foully and enormously profane the temple of
the holy Ghost; and therefore, like filth, should be swept out with the besome
of ancient Discipline. It is a sin which the Sun will not look upon; and they
ashamed to be seen when they do it; therefore does not ordinarily, as other
sins, come into open rebuke: And since it is a sin against the body, as the
Apostle speaks, it makes naturally its punishment in it. So that I had no great
reason to say much against this vice, whith is plainly bestiall, but hardly
discovered.

So thou have the project of this Script: with the easing of my mind in the
discharge thereof. Who can endure to see his Nation and the Church in the dust
before him? And why should we not redeem our own misery (may some think) when
we can never be safe till men be good?

This is all toward a Preface; which according to art, should be last made:
and I was not very forward to it. Is is but as the cackling of the hen when an
egg is laid; and in this regard I should have made none, for here is nothing
laid. More might have been, it may be, had we not been driven out of our nest.
If any thing seem to be amiss, take it with a grain of Salt. If any thing
smart, that is not my fault.

No more. Love thy enemies; whereof I am none. And if thou do love thy
enemies, thou will certainly love him who desires no greater favor then to
think so well of him, as to let him do thee good.

Now I leave it to thee, and thee to God. Farewell.

J. Sherman.

WHITE SALT: OR, A Sober Correction OF A MAD WORLD, In some WELL WISHES TO
GOODNESS.
CHAP. I.
SInce I am not so good as I should be; nay nor so good as I would be; nay nor
so willing to be good as I should be; it is reasonable for me to wish well to
it. There may be a wish of impossibilities, though there be not a will properly
of them. And it seems to me so hard to come by any goodness, that it seems
somewhat to have it in a wish. And yet he that is contented with what he has
of this, has none. Godliness, as the Apostle says (in his 1 Epistle to Tim.
6.6.) is great gain with contentedness; but not with a contentedness in
godliness, but in gain. We shall never have enough of goodness until we come
into heaven.

And this goodness has a necessary connection with happiness; and therefore if
we do apprehend it, how can we escape at least some velieties of it? For that
which is necessary to our end, we desire upon the same account.

So that the subject of this paper is such that will please every one that is
in the way of happiness. Neither is it therefore out of my way to commend it to
others: for this will more impress it upon my self, that I may have some
benefit by the operation, though others have no benefit by the work; as he
said. Surely also this is the season with all of us of being good, when we have
made the times, as we call them, bad. Sin comes always too soon, always
unseasonably; Virtue neither: but in times of troubles and uncertainties, we
have more necessities of this commodity: and yet how much are we worse;
because we are worse, and should be much better?

There is no time appointed for the commission of sin; but punishments; and
we have had them sorely upon us; and one would think we should now have less of
sin, because we have had such a measure of punishments.

We have had opportunities of being richer, and some have taken them, and the
water, which way soever it ran; although they have not quenched their thirst;
and yet have drunk so much that it will not stay with them, but they must
refund.

We have had fair occasions of being wise and discreet, and prudent to preserve
our contentment; and have thought it fit not to be heart of Oak, but to be
flexible and moveable with the winds: we have taken a full proportion of the
wisdom of the Serpent, and more then will be allowed with the innocence of the
Dove. The Serpent has too much beguiled the Dove.

We have had in these years vicissitudes many; variety of turns and changes,
and are still rolling to the bottom; and yet what good turns have we had? what
returns to God and that which is good? There is not such a point as Goodness in
all our Compass.

We have had many complaints of hard and difficult, and afflictive and
squeezing times; and we have been weary of our calamities over and over: but
our sins are in full weight and number, and measure upon us; and we are not
troubled with them. St. Paul groaned under the burden of sin, but gloried in
afflictions: but we are contrary; for we groan under afflictions, and do rather
glory in our shame. It is like S. Paul in that 7, chapter to the Romans does
speak of himself regenerated: for sin in state of nature is in us as in its
proper place; and we do not feel it: And so it has been with us. And
whatsoever we have lost, we have kept this: we have loved it naturally as ours.

We have had within the space of few years many books imprinted; wherein Civil
causes and some Ecclesiastical causes have been tossed and agitated on this
side and on that; that we might be settled in our dangers, or moved to our
former term: but have not found many books written to make us right
spiritually; and to make us better; many good books; but how many of goodness?
I hope more then I have seen: but more would be seen.

And yet if there were more, and seen, and read, and got by heart, yet how
shall we get them into the heart? Oh, how odd and awk is the nature of man to
this goodness! It will not come alone to us: yea when we are in a manner driven
to it by corrections, we are ready to run away from it, as if we could not be
miserable but with it.

And therefore I am afraid I shall not please all, because I shall speak for
that which does not. We do not like to hear of that we have no mind to follow:
we are offended with it directly and by reflection from others. And others are
our enemies because we are not good; whereas we should not be enemies to
others, though they be bad.

But this does not make a reasonable impediment of this little enterprise; for
he that pleases all, has no small danger of Christ's woe; and of Gods curse
for not pleasing one, namely him: And notwithstanding we have enemies, we
should be encouraged; for we have the more to conquer, as one said.

And yet we have further encouragement by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.13. And who is
there that will hurt you, if you follow that which is good? Or shall we be
harmed because we write of that which is good? May we do it, and not write it?
This is spoken of in our own defense.

Had we taken in hand some thornie business about the subject and change of
Civil Power, we might have incurred some danger in way of right and
righteousness: but since all the matter we would have is goodness, we have no
cause to fear any but those who have no mind to think it to be necessary for
them to be good, unless they can get somewhat by it in this life.

And if any one will conceive, that this is a Theme to meddle with not for any
but some of those who are a great deal better: I shall make my apology easily.
With all my heart am I contented that others should go before me in this
contention. I would be willing to follow their steps in holiness, although in
the order of the Church they go not that way, which more have gone to heaven
in, then are like to do by any other.

But because I have nothing in me of goodness, I have more need to speak for
it, upon my own apprehensions; neither can any one keep away from me this right
and liberty of good options for my self and others. The time and utmost bound
of goodness is to be in heaven. And to this pitch should every one ascend. And
the ascent of this glory is by degrees of grace. This goodness is the milky way
to Jupiters Palace. To strengthen you in it, take not this morning milk, but
some morning meditations.

CHAP. II.
O Thou blessed Daughter of Heaven, where shall we find thee in thy essentials
that we might define thee? or how shall we give thee a proper definition, when
thou art a transcendent? It is not sufficient for thee to have the nature of a
singte virtue, but thou must have many to thy complexion. Thou art not a virtue
of one denomination, but art truly Catholic. If thou should be any one herb,
thou should be grace; or as that Heliotrope amongst flowers, which constantly
follows the motion of the Sun of Righteousness: but thou art a compound of
most wholesome herbs; and a posie of most delicate flowers. Thou art not a
Star, but a Constellation. Thou art often private, but never alone. The Virgins
that be her fellows shall bear her company, as the Psalmist speaks.

He that is not good in all virtues is good in none; but this is an
universality by consequence, and holds true even unto singular virtues; since
there is the same root and reason of all. But this goodness is a general virtue
in the very nature of it, as we commonly understand it; as it is said of
Justice, that it is every virtue. -- (...). Namely, because the legal justice
does order all acts of other virtues unto the public civil good. And as it is
said by Divines of holiness, that it does direct and determine all actions unto
a divine end, the glory of God; even so is goodness an universal virtue, which
does apply and dispose all the operations to a good end; although it has some
more respect to charity, as holiness has unto piety, if we consider them more
strictly. Strictly indeed some of the Jews before our Saviors Incarnation did
take the notion of it, when they distinguished, for morality, men into three
sorts; some wicked, some just, some good. So is interpreted most-what their
(...). And these three kinds of men had their kinds of sayings: the first
this, That which is mine is mine, and that which is thine is mine. And what
then are they amongst us which in effect say as much, that all belongs to them;
and no body has any right to any thing but they? The second sort said thus;
That which is mine is mine, and that which is thine is thine. The third sort
said thus; That which is thine is thine, and that which is mine is thine: they
would not take away from others, but would give unto others; these were the
good men. And to this distinction of men, as is thought by some, St. Paul
alledes for the commendation of Gods love to us by Christ, Romans 5, 7, 8. For
scarcely for a just man will one dye; yet for a good man one peradventure would
even dare to dye: but God commends his love to us in that when we were
sinners, (wicked) Christ dyed for us. Yet for a good man (which is more then
just) one it may be would dare to dye.

This was their notion then of goodness, in a supereminence to justice in the
restraint of acception. We shall speak of it here more largely as it has it
self in every virtue, not as exceeding any, but as running through all. For
this is a very busy thing, and will have a hand and somewhat to do in every
action, if it be in men, as at home. O that it were at home!

It is too much a stranger with us; and will scarce stay so long with us as to
have the picture of it taken. And we cannot take measure of it to fit it with
suitable conceits and terms. It will not be familiar to understanding, until we
have it in fruition of God. We cannot here get enough of it for our use. It
runs away as it were from us, because we do not give it good entertainment. But
let us follow it, that we may overtake it. And let us so carry our selves as to
be accounted at least well wishers to it. It will not be married in this life:
yet we may love it. It is like Truth, which is always a Virgin, though some
would corrupt her, and have her proper to them: so is goodness always single;
not as not having many virtues of the same conjugation, but no husband. Some,
like the Donatists, would have it go along altogether with them, and not so
much as look upon any other which is not of their Congregation. But goodness
never took parts: It is for practice, not for faction: It goes right on; it
loves no sides; and those who would have it belong to their party, they are not
yet acquainted with its disposition; which is, to be loved of all. It should
have all corrivals; but in love, not only to it, but one another.

He that would not have others to be esteemed virtuous, would have such wares
in his shop only, that so he might have all the custom and more price for
them. Hypocrisy does not love to be outblazed. Nor does a Sect endure to be
outshined in a show of sanctity.

But how little has he of goodness that has none of charity! and how little
has he of charity, that thinks what others have he has not, and what he has
others have not! He that shrinketh and pincheth this goodness into a separate
confederacy, lesseneth the Church of Christ by many, and is in danger of not
esteeming others better then himself (which is the precept of the Apostle) and
so is in peril of lessening the Invisible Church by himself.

He that phansieth he cannot be good, unless others be naught; is certainly
naught because others are good. As if we were injurious to other men's credits,
because we endeavor to be as good as they, not in hatred or envy of them, but
in love of virtue: As if we might not build higher in good works, because our
superstructure stands in their light.

Oh! let us take heed of such Impropriations: we had better impropriate Tithes
then Goodness: for every part of goodness is holy to God. And this belongs to
every one to have.

Therefore let me not love goodness, if I would not have it more common, then
it is, or some would think so. But since thou art like glory in heaven,
communicable to all without detriment to any, let me not imagine that I can
have the less, because others have more: but let me have more, because I would
have others have more.

And since, O blessed Savior, out of thy pierced side did flow both blood to
pardon, and water to cleanse; let the blood, if thou please, be as large as
the worth of it; and let the water be as common, as common water. I shall fare
the better by the Communion of Saints: and am likely to be more good, if more
be good. Oh, let me not be near the Devil in envy of good, lest I be ever with
him, and always envy it. But let me be like unto thee, O Lord, who art good to
all, and would have all good. So make me good to all, as much as may be; and
contented to be the worst of all the world; not by my badness, but by others
excellency. And because the World is now in its decrepit age, and ready to be
dissolved, make it, O blessed God, before its end mindful of its end; that it
may not go out in a blaze of hypocrisy, or a stench of iniquity.

CHAP. III.
THat which does exceed by way of eminence, does suppose under it that which is
exceeded. As ingenuity superaddeth to justice: it is so much and somewhat more.
As the rational soul does include the others. And upon this account, as piety
does include righteousness and temperance; so does also goodness. And therefore
thus have we reason not to pass by the consideration of this morality in the
matter of it, if we did understaand goodness in that perfection. But we take it
here as it does diffuse it self over other virtues, and has somewhat of its
nature in them all. And therefore in this regard also, must we not baulk the
consideration both of temperance and of righteousness. And because others are
more negligent of them, therefore we must not; if we would have our selves and
others better. But thus certainly has the Devil gulled and deluded the minds
of men which are not mortified, with a conceit, that if they exercise
themselves in outward holiness of actions toward God, they need take no great
care of any other obedience.

That which excels other things makes those things inferior to seem not to
be at all; which is the ground of the Hebrew rule of understanding in Scripture
many times a comparative in a negative; but it does not make that which is
excelled not to be at all: and therefore it is to be understood by a
comparative. As for instance, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, says God
by the Prophet, Hos. 6.6. not that God did forbid sacrifice; for that was yet a
commanded service of the Jewish Church; but he would have mercy rather then
sacrifice, as it is expounded in the following words, and the knowledge of God
rather then, or more then burnt offerings.

And therefore those who would be esteemed such as do believe in God and
Christ, should not believe that it does become them to separate any virtue from
piety: as if because other virtues were supposed in piety, therefore they might
be excluded. They are sunk in the notion of piety: but they must appear in the
subject. If they be not all to be found in the same Congregation, yet they are
of the same Combination. If we take holiness in such a real abstraction as to
take away that which is another without any loss of holiness, we deceive two
together, our neighbor, and our selves. And at length we shall have the worst:
for their loss will be but of their goods, but we shall lose our souls.

And he that will imagine he may glut and swill, and yet do well, if he be
careful of the outward part of Religion, has indeed, as we may speak, his
bellyful of godliness; (whose belly is his God) and yet none.

But are there any in all the world of Christians that can have any such
imagination? One would think not: and yet thus we must interpret them by their
conversation.

Therefore a sober word or two we must put in for temperance: and a just
admonition for righteousness.

We will begin with temperance, that we may better understand the practice of
righteousness: for while we are under the command of this vice, we are not in
capacity to be righteous. When we have taken too much, are we then fit to give
every one his own? Indeed when we have taken too much of the creature, we are
unrighteous unto God, and therefore should seem to begin first with
unrighteousness: but we are even so, first, intemperate before we be
unrighteous; and therefore shall begin with intemperance.

Whereof we can hardly speak without excess, when we are to speak of it. And
yet we need not say much against them, for when they are to be blamed, they can
say nothing for themselves; but every word they speak betrayeth the fault.

This is one of the vices betwixt which and Christianity there appears to be
an incompossibility. Temperance is one of the virtues, which in Christians
should have no contrary. A Christian is I know not how many fourms above it. He
is deep in his Bible, and in practical Divinity, if not mystical; whereas he
that is learning temperance, cannot yet speak his letters right. What? is their
soul of use to them only for salt (as he said) to keep their bodies from
rotting? But what have they to keep their souls from rotting? not one grain of
salt. Intemperance is that sin which should have no punishment prescribed, like
paricide, because it should be thought no body would commit it; and because if
it be committed, it makes its own punishment. Were there neither Scripture nor
Religion, there is in Reason reason enough against intemperance of one or the
other kind; for both go into the paunch. And if I would make any part of me a
God, it should not be the Belly; because that so easily passes into the
account of the Dunghill gods. And thus we should be without doubt pious by the
vice, and the more we took in, the more we should magnify the Divinity. God
deliver me, said the Arabian, from him that kills his King, and eats his God:
and certainly he is not far from eating his god who has his Divinity in his
sensitive appetite; and puts his god in his belly; as the covetous man puts him
in his pocket. He that is of this persuasion to have his god thus always about
him, and in him, is he not religious when he is hungry, and is he not Zealous
when he is thirsty?

The glutton has his sacrificing knife also. Every knife to him is such; his
trencher is his Altar; his Sacrifices, meat offerings of all sorts; and his
Sacrifices are salted: but he has also his Sacrifices of fish. The nidor of
the meat is his Incense. He is his own Priest; but his Cook is his Levite, and
the heat of his stomach is the fire that consumes his bnrnt-offerings. The
drunkard has his drink offerings, and extends his religion beyond reason:
The Psalmist said he would take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of
the Lord: but he takes the cup of damnation, and in effect calls upon the
name of the Devil. Indeed we do not read that any Devils entered into Horses;
but we read they entered into Swine. The Glutton is like the Horse; the
Drunkard, like the Swine: the latter as full as it can tumble; and the former
as full as cannot go but stumble. Oh! how truly is it said, That it is better
to be a beast, then to be thus like a beast! Were we baptized into the
Christian Faith by clean water, that we should immerse and dabble our souls in
the pollution of unclean liquor? Or do they transubstantiate the blood of
Christ in the other Sacrament into the blood of the Grape? The Hebrews express
a Cup and an Owl by the same word: and these drunkards by their cups are
buzled like Owls; and can see nothing clearly. Rabbi Eleazer the Jew said a man
might be known by these three things, (...); which others express by a like
adnomination in the Latin, Oculo, loculo, poculo. By their immoderacy in cups
they discover their secrets and their shame: by their sparkling eyes they
discover their fell passionateness: and by the sparing of their purse they do
discover their miserable covetousness and baseness. I would they were more
sparing in their cups, more free in their purses, and more sober in their
passions: If they were not so dissolute in their pots, they might have more
money to give unto those who are fain to drink water while they drink wine; and
might be more able to bear an injury, if they had not drunk more then they can
bear.

The Lacedaemonians when they had taken the Hilots, besides other sordid
services they put them to, were wont in their Feasts to make some of these
fearfully drunk, that they might show unto their youth the loathsomeness and
abominableness of this vice. Their end was better then their means; to
demonstrate to their eye the filthiness of this sin. But hereby they signified
their abhorrency of this intemperance, which they would scare and fright their
young men from, by such an abuse of their most forlorn Captives. Blessed God!
what do we then, if we make others, or our selves, the servants of Christ, to
wallow in the ordure and uncleanness of this most unreasonable iniquity; and
not as they, to make others more to loath this transgression, but by our
example to make them like us?

In the fear of God think upon that formidable text, Hab. 2.15, 16. Woe be to
him that makes his neighbor drunk, that put thy bottle to him, and make
him drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness, or privities. Thou
art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be
uncovered: The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned to thee, and
shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. That text is by some thought, as
Isidore Clarius notes, to be expounded, in the letter of Nebuchadonosor, who
made other Kings, who were captives to him, drunk, that he might mock and
deride them. Thou that delightest in the overthrow of others by the power of
wine, consider what bitterness thou shall have in such a cup of vengeance, when
fearful spewing shall be on thy glory. The word is very Emphatical; as being a
compound; whereof there are but few in the holy language: yet there is one for
thee (...) shameful spewing, or a double shame, as some would have it to be
rendered, on thy glory. Their reckoning is like to be much inflamed, and they
may expect a double retribution of shame and vengeance for not being temperate,
and for their unreasonable devouring of those creatures which were not made nor
given to that purpose.

There was wont to be a Sea betwixt us and those sots, and we were on this
side; they who were beyond measure were beyond Sea: but now we have learned to
pledge them in kind, and we follow it, as if we would overtake them, or be
overtaken.

Christian, think upon thy Master. Has thy Maker Christ taught thee no better
lessons? As Soon as he came into the world, he taught thee sobriety; for he
would not go into the Inn, but was born in the out-house of the Inn. There
was no room for Christ in the Inn: it is like where there is wont to be such
had company, there is no room for Christ. To be sure, they are not like to be
gathered together there in his Name; and it may be we may fancy that this
might give hint to the ancient Fathers of their prohibitive Canon, that Clergy
men should not enter into drinking houses, because they specially should be
like their Master, and he was without.

Christ, once upon an extraordinary occasion, turned water into wine, to show
his Divinity: but how often do thou turn thy wine into swill, to show thy
bestiality? Did he redeem thee with the blood of his soul, as we may speak,
that thou should captivate thy self to sin by the blood of the grape?

Do thou consider how thou do commit a sin, which as soon as thou have
committed it, thou can not repent of? Other sins, as soon as we have done
them, we may bewail and repent of: but this drunkenness will not let us soon be
delivered or discharged of the Commission. Repentance is the vomit of the soul,
which clears it: but the other vomit will come up sooner then this; because by
the fumes of the wine the apprehension is bound, and not able freely to
exercise it self in actions reasonable, much less spiritual. Neither head, nor
eye, nor foot perform their office in him, but here he lies and wallows in his
mire, or staggers and reels; as if the ground were not resolved to bear him
with his load of vice and drink.

Enough, enough, drunken Christian; if it be not a contradiction, as indeed it
is. Alas! too much it is. Do thou thus answer thy Saviors thirst upon the
Cross, with the lustful thirst of forbidden excess? Did he pour out of his
wounded side blood and water, that thou should fill thy sides with wine or
drink?

Get thee home, as soon as thou can go, and weep out thy superfluities in
tears; and let thy amendment be as dry and solid, as thy forrow fluent and
soaked. And if thou have any superfluities of estate, thou can not be long
and far from better occasions for the improvement of then, them to run out.

But if thou art resolved to drink deep into hell, let those diseases thou do
brew in thy body by the swash and heat of drink, make thee sensible of a
vengeance behind. And think what speed thou make by thy vice to have thy
punishment. Thou can not excuse thy self the second time, as Theodoret in his
questions did Noah for his drunkenness, that he did not know then the power of
that wine; for thou have been often vanquished, and lien under the strength of
it: but me thinks thou may consider that every time thou go upon score
with death, and thou know not how speedily thou will be laid up. Take heed
betimes of those sins which make thee miserable ipso facto; and presently, for
ever. But we leave them to God, who can only reduce and order these beastsmen;
the flying creatures, light headed men: the Serpents; those that are deceivers:
the Lions; those that are fierce and angry: the Swine; those that wallow and
tumble in their pudly pleasure: the Wolves; those that are ravenous; as Clem.
Alexandrinus moralizeth them.

So much difference, he says, there is betwixt those who are men, and those who
are like beasts.

How comely is a man, said the Poet, while he is indeed a man!

CHAP. IV.
HEre we must a little hunt the Wolves, which have not yet taken away all,
because they have not taken away our liberty of endeavoring, not to right our
selves, but to make them right. And certainly they will betray themselves to be
very unjust, if we may not speak against injustice to this purpose, the best
that can be. Nay, when they have been sufficiently injust to others, they will
afterward show themselves unjust to themselves, if they will not let the
spiritual edge of an wholesome reproof to enter into them. We ought not to
escape the edge of the spiritual sword. It will be worse for us if we do. Until
we be thus wounded, we shall never be whole.

Unrighteousness respects others and our selves; others in the object; our
selves in the guilt, and sometimes in the loss. Almost, as has been said, in
that wherein we look for gain, we make loss. And as the Eastern Fable is, a
Woolf took away a Pig, and as he was carrying it away a Lion met him, and took
it away againfrom him: whereupon the Woolf admired how that which was not well
gotten did not well thrive. So it comes to pass sometimes, that although
justice be another man's good: yet unrighteousness is our own loss.

But why do we make any words against unrighteousness in the Kingdom of Christ?
Is there any more of it then the mere notion of it in all Christendom? Has
this accident any inherence in any subject amongst Christians? If we would find
an example of this inquity, must we not travail for it? to the Getes or
Massagetes, shall we go to see an action of unrighteousness; or to those who in
cruelty and savagenes differ little from what they live amongst, wild beasts?

Oh! those that do not give every one their due, dwell hard by. And they are
those who go under the account of Christians. The name of Christ is named upon
them: and they would think men should do some of them a great deal of wrong,
if they should not esteem them to be very good Christians, although they can
wrong others.

These are the Spleen of the Commonwealth, who draw all from others to swell
their bags. These are the Leeches, which suck the blood of men's estates, until
they burst asunder as Judas did, after he had betrayed his Master for money:
these are as Moles, that keep a pudder and a grubbling in the earth to make
their hillocks of earth a little bigger; and they spend their pains in this
Earth, as if their eyes, like those of Moles, were fitted only to work in the
ground, and by and by comes a foot that throws down the hill; or a spear that
enters into the Earth-grubber. These are not the servants of the high God; no,
but they are the servants of the low and base Mammon; which, if they did not
deceive others for, yet will certainly deceive them and therefore is called the
unrighteous Mammon by our Savior: for deceit is comprehended under
unrighteousness.

Righteousness is comprehensive of significates: which we have no reason here
to give account of. We take it here as a quality to be inherent in us for the
disposing us to be obedient to the Laws of God in the second Table; and
specially to the eighth Commandment.

There is a right sense of righteousness which does run through every Precept,
and the veins as it were of every Law of the second Table; and does give
obedience which is due to Parents, in the fifth, Natural, or Civil, or
Ecclesiastical; does give obedience to God in the proserving the life of our
neighbor, according to the sixth; in preserving the just relations, in the
seventh; in preserving the estate of our neighbor, in the eighth; the good
name of our neighbor, in the ninth; does keep our desires in due proportion of
contentedness against coveting what is our neighbors, according to the tenth.

As it is divided against piety, which does immediately, in regard of object,
respect God; and against temperance, which does immediately likewise respect
our selves; so it does take in all that duty which we owe to our neighbor. As
it is contradistinguished unto the fifth, sixth, seventh, ninth, and tenth
Commanmandements, so it is taken restrictively with relation to the eighth.

Take we it how we will, I would we had it any way. For if we had it any way
upon true principles, we should have it every way. For true principles are
intrinsecally influxive unto universal obedience: since there is the same law
and reason of obedience to all.

Have we indeed considered our Master Christ, who took not away that which was
another, unless their sins, which would never do them good. He took upon him
the nature of man, that man might be restored to himself, and redeemed from
those enemies which necessarily would have destroyed him.

Christian! what can thou see in him, which can afford thee any intimation of
unrighteousness, if thou would be ruled, as thou should be, by his example?
whatsoever he was, as man, he was for thee. Whatsoever he did, he did for thee.
Whatsoever he suffered, he suffered for thee. He so far from unrighteousness,
that he would be poor. He emptied himself for thee. Whatsoever thou see in
him was mercy. He came not to any purpose but to pay for thee a price infinite.
He came not to take away thine inheritance, but to make thee coheir with him.
He put not in his head into another man's house: for he had not where to lay his
head: He showed not his just Dominion over the creature; but that thou might
see his Dominion over thee. He took not up the sword even in his own defense,
but when it was drawn by one of his servants, he caused the sword to be put up;
and he did put up the injury. He got nothing in his conversation for thee, but
reproaches, and hunger, and weariness, and blows, and wounds, and death, and
all for thee.

What can thou read in all that is said by him, or those who were sent by
him, to teach thee salvation and duty, but laws of righteousness, and truth,
and mercy? Look upon thy Copy; is it not written exactly straight and right;
and every letter has its due proportion: and every word duly and orderly
joined? Why is then thy writing wrong? Why are some letters left out? Why one
letter for another? Why does one letter take the place of another? Why do
thou write such an hand, which no man can read whether it be a Christian hand
or not? Why do thou write a red letter or a letter in red, and a theta too,
which should not be in red, nor such? Thus thou do write the Roman hand: but
this is not the Christian hand; Christ did not write thus: we have not so
learned Christ. Indeed he did write some letters in red, but in passion, in
suffering: so his example is; so his copy. It is the notion of St. Peter's, and
his expression in his 1. Epistle, 2.21. For unto this are ye called; for Christ
also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that ye should follow his steps,
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered did not threaten, but committed it to him
that judges righteously; who himself took up our sins, or bare our sins upon
the cross in his body; that we being dead to sin should live to righteousness;
by whose stripes we are healed: such his example; such his copy, as it is in
the Greek; (...) we find it to be; to write under.

Tell it not in Gath, neither publish it in Askelon, that any one of all the
Christians in the world has showed more unrighteousness, then would have
become him, though he had not been such. What? true Christians, and not true
men? Incompossibility of incompossibilities! Shall the Turk from us take
occasion to insult over Christ and his Religion by our unrighteousness? we take
the honor of our Masters livery to his infinite dishonor. The Roman soldiers
took off his own coat, and put on another, and then abused him: but we abused
him as it were in his own clothes. We make use of his name for our advantage of
unrighteousness; as if we would have him undo himself.

Blessed God! must those be accounted such as do make the Word of God the rule
and measure of their faith, whose word we cannot in any degree make the measure
of our belief of them? Or are they the singular professors of Truth
Theological, who have in them so little of Truth Moral?

Lie not against the truth, says St. James, 3.14. If you lie, and yet will be
esteemed to be good Christians, and true Christians; you lie against the Truth.
He that lies is an open enemy to the Truth. That which he does, bears
witness against what he pretends. And most disingenuous souls they are, who go
about to cosen all the world of all comfortable society: for if all men were
thus disposed, to what purpose or how should we live one with another? If we
will not speak truth, what do we amongst men? Wherefore did God put speech into
our mouths, but that thereby, when there is occasion, we should faithfully
interpret our minds, in what we think, and what we intend? Has God given us a
tongue to be an instrument of deceit? or as a false Alarm to betray men? or to
catch men as we do birds with a false call; or as a clapper to toll men to
their destruction? Is our language given us to tell others what is not? Let all
the letters be mutes, and the hedge of our teeth for ever quick-set, if our
heart be not always at our mouth when we answer or promise; when we are to say
what is, or what we will do. Or let our tongue for ever keep within doors,
rather then it should go our to deceive our neighbor. Has God made our speech
to pass through so many instruments, that we should make nothing of a lie?

When the paint of outward holiness shall melt at the fire of Gods Tribunal,
and the frame of Nature taken apieces, and every thing discovered, the gloss
which is set upon bad actions will go off, every thing will be naked in its
principles; and lying will be then found to be worse then swearing, in several
regards. 1. Because swearing is not absolutely unlawful. If it be in the right
form, upon due occasion, and the object be God, it is an act of Religion: but
there is no right form of lying; there can be no just occasion; there is no
object for it: it is against judgment, truth, and righteousness. We ought not
therefore to ly, though thereby we could save a world; although what so
frequent as to tell a lie, to save or get a farthing?

2. Lying is worse because it is more unreasonable. For it is opposite to the
principles of being. It is impossible that the same thing should be and not
be, is a prime principle: now the lie, in the nature of it, does thwart this
principle: for it would make the matter of the lie to be and not to be. As in
the example of Gehezi, the Prophet asked him where he had been, he said he went
no whither; here was the lie, he spoke contrary to the thing known, for he did
go after Naaman for his advantage. That he did go, was true in the fact; and
that he did not go, he would have true in his word: and so the effect of the
lie is, to have both the parts of the contradiction true, that he did go, and
he did not go. And if this might be granted, it would unravel all the world,
and we could not affirm God or any thing. This is the mind of going against
our mind in speech: so it is repugnant to prime principles, and the prime
verity, who is.

3. It is more heinous, because it is more destructive of all communion with
men: swearing is not in it self destructive, but is, if duly performed, of use
to preserve the rights of men, in their good name, or estate, or life; as when
an Oath is made before a lawful Judge, for the ending of debates.

4. God cannot lie, for it is sin; and therefore he cannot do it; and all in
him is being, and therefore he cannot lie; but God has sworn in his wrath, if
they shall enter into his rest, as in the 95. Psalm.

5. Because lying is an act, as we may speak, of filial obedience to the god of
this world, the Devil, who is the Father of a lie, as St. John describes him,
Joh. 8.44. He was a liar from the beginning, and so he destroyed man. And that
which is symbolical to the first sin, is like to be a chief sin. We do not read
of the Devils swearing: for they have no mind to do that which upon any
conditions should be a religious act; and also men will believe him without
swearing.

6. This sin of lying was odious to the very Heathens; and as odious as hell,
was he that said one thing and meant another.

So heinous this vice is, which I have not taken such notice of, as if I would
favor swearing; for I shall give it its correction in its due place. But I
have given it the sharper censure, because it deserves it, and because it is
more common, and more abominable in those who abominate Oaths.

Were there any Christian blood running in our veins, we would blush at such
enormity, which, had we not been Professors of Christianity, we might have
scorned. Can we make any pretense of interest in the God of Truth, when there
is no truth in us? Let us not therefore any longer dishonor the faith of a
Christian, in making that to be a cloak of our iniquity, which when we put it
on, was made to signify that we would put off lies. Lie not one to another,
since you have put off the old man with his works; and have put on the new man
which is renewed in knowledge according to the Image of him that created him;
as St. Paul exhorts us, Col. 3.9. When God created the world, he saw all things
good, which supposes them to be conformable to his forms of them in his own
mind: and when God re-creates, renews man, he puteth in him this principle to
show himself conformable outwardly to the image and types of things in his own
mind.

If an Heathen should lie unto me, he should deceive me, because I look for
truth from him upon account of reason: but if a Christian tells me a lie, he
deceives me more, because that worthy and holy name, wherewith he is
recommended to my belief, makes me to presume that he will be true to his
profession, and to me. And therefore though it be not unlawful for Christians,
when the case is duly put, to swear: yet me thinks he should not be urged to
any other form, then upon his honor. The word of a Christian makes a kind of
spiritual oath: and although he does not touch the book, yet it is made by it;
yea the Christians word should be more credible then another man's oath: because
the Christians word should proceed from an internal principle of sincerity; the
other man's oath may be caused by some extrinsecal end.

To say no more, it is time for the whole world to shut up shop, if there be no
hold of men's words. And we might make it a question, whether, if the laws of
men were punctually to be accommodated to the use of Society, there should not
be as great a punishment for a lie, as for a stealth; since some lies are
redundantly more injurious to the Public then some stealths. Had we not as
good take the Sun out of the Firmament, as take away righteousness? and truth
of words is organical to righteousness in actions. It is no matter whether the
Sun shines or not, if by the light of men's words we cannot see what is, or what
they mean. This base falsity leaves us more in the dark, so that we know not
where to set a sure step in any civil course. And it came from the Prince of
darkness, and it will return thither again to be punished with him, and by him,
who in envy to God brought it into the world, that he might make the world as
bad as himself, who abode not in the truth.

But what shall we say of them who are more to be believed when they do not
promise you; and promise and protest with high devotions to deceive you: whom,
when they have spoken, we are to understand backwards, as we do read some
verses, and some languages. We are never right, unless we read them wrong.

Let such for their congruous and condign punishment be banished into deserts,
where they shall have none to deceive; or let them be amongst men, but not
allowed to speak a word, until they will speak so, as one may understand them
by their words, and not their words by them.

Oh blemishes, and spots, and everlasting reproaches of the Christian name!
Change your name, or your manners. Or if you will not do as Christians should,
there is another name which would more become you, and by which you would be
better known; surely Jesuits.

Such took their Institution for these two ends; to teach Grammar and the
Gospel; and how they have performed their duties, you may learn by their
Disciples: for they have taught the world a new Lesson and a new Gospel. They
can learn you to speak so, as if you understand them so, you are undone. And if
you do not think that they think somewhat contrary to what they say, they will
think you are not like to be Politicians; and therefore for their turn, that
you may be ridden like English Catholics.

Such variety of justice we now meet with in these rare and glorious times,
wherein there is such use made of the Gospel, as never before. Wherein we have
more liberty, because more Masters: and are bound to rejoice that we have the
freedom to keep our money till they call for it. O Saints superlative!

Are there not such in the world? Is it not more difficult to name them then to
find them? And if such be Christians, who would be saved? are these the men
that with the Apostle look not after those things which are seen, but those
things which are not seen? Is it not the representation of hypocrisy, to
color the outward carriage with shows of holiness for the more expedite
prosecution of unrighteousness; either in the substance of commodity, or the
price, or the weight, or the measure, or propriety?

All that are just, are not in other things good; but all that are good, are
certainly just: for grace which exceeds the principle of reason, does always
suppose it; and therefore if we judge these men by their actions, they are not
right: if we feel their pulse, they are not sound Christians. If those who do
not good works shall not enter into heaven, what shall become of those who do
evil works? as the Father said, Can those look to live in heaven, by whom we
cannot live on earth? May those expect an heavenly inheritance to be given
them, who can take away inheritances on earth from them to whom they were
given? What pity it is that it should be possible to be said by any, Had it not
been for such a Christian, I had not been undone?

Is heaven like to fall into the mouths of those who gape for other men's
estates? No, heaven is for those who seek the good of others: not for those who
seek the goods of others. Those whose affections are so inherent in the pelf of
the world, are not yet disposed to the happiness of another kind. And if those
who love their own too much shall not enjoy God, what place in heaven can be
found for those, who love that which is another?

CHAP. V.
TO this commendation of temperance and righteousness might now be annexed some
answer to some questions about Morality. The questions may be two or three.

1. Whether morality in the Heathens was sufficient to happiness.

2. Whether morality is to be regarded by the Christian.

3. What should be the cause, why so many Christians are so much negligent of
morality, unto which, reason, as such, even after the fall, may direct and
dispose.

Briefly of all, specially of the two first.

1. Whether morality in the Heathens was sufficient to their salvation. This
indeed would deserve a just and full volume; but I shall not go far or deep in
it. Some of the Primitive Ecclesiastique Writers made great reckoning of this
morality in two regards; first, as retaining a respect to their old principles
of Philosophy, as having been several of them Philosophers: and secondly, that
they might more freely discourse against the Manichees: so that they speak very
liberally of those who live (...), according to reason; as if that were
sufficient to happiness with God.

Our answer hereunto we may include in several propositions.

1. Morality is in it self highly laudable; as also in order to public use.

2. Those who have been studious of morality, shall certainly have less
punishment; as St. Austin in his De Civitate Dei, determins the case; Fabritius
shall be less punished then Catiline; Non quia magis bonus, sed quia minus
malus; not because he was more good, but because he was less evil.

3. We cannot tell what mercy may be laid up in him, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and therefore we cannot absolutely say that
Christ in his infinite wisdom and knowledge does not know, though it be secret
to us, some way of applying the benefit of his death even unto those of the
Heathens who lived orderly. And if they shall not be condemned for their
unbelief, as is generally believed of Christians, we cannot say that the merit
of Christ may not be indulged unto some of them who have been careful to live
regularly to such laws as they found within them; although they have not done
optimum quod sic, as no Christian ever did live proportionably to his
principles. And if the blood of Christ may be secretly sprinkled upon Infants,
who cannot know Christ; some would think it may as well be communicated in the
merit of it to some of age, who have not known Christ.

But 4. We must leave this in medio, and refer them to God: To their own Master
they stand or fall. We can conclude no otherwise then according to the mind of
God in his Word, Act. 4.12. For there is not salvation in any other: for there
is no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved: no other name given
amongst men; or, given for men, as it may be rendered by an Enallage of the
preposition; which does absolutely exclude any other cause or author of
salvation. So that if any of them be saved, they must be saved by the merits of
Christ. But it is not necessary to our purpose to say any more of this
question, unless we could determine it affirmatively. Then it would serve us for
an infinite motive unto this morality.

And yet the second query, Whether morality is to be accounted of by
Christians, we may and ought to put an affirmative to: and we shall make up the
answer in some propositions also.

1. Morality, ut sic, is considerable, even in its native rational principles:
as whatsoever is conformable to any rational principles has a pulchritude and
beauty naturally belonging thereunto. And thus all moral actions are good in
their kind, as being solid and true to positive principles.

2. The same actions in specie, which do in Heathens refer to temperance and
righteousness, are to be done by Christians through the virtue of an higher
principle; namely grace; which directs the understanding by a greater light;
and inclines the will by an higher motive of obedience to God therein. So that
the matter of the morality, which respects the second Table, is to be exercised
by principles of the first: and it is to be done out of the love of God, fear
of God. So Joseph to his Brethren, Do this, for I fear God, Genesis 42.18. He does
demonstrate fair dealing toward them by his fear of God: and therefore
obedience to God in temperance and righteousness do come under the duties of
the Gospel, and the lessons thereof, as we have it clearly delivered by St.
Paul, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all
men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, godlily and righteously in this present world, etc. to the end of the
chapter, where we have the end of the Gospel, to make men zealous of good
works: and if the use of the Gospel be to make men zealous of good works;
surely then it is not improper to the Gospel to make men zealous of just works.

Therefore 3. Although the Christian, as such, is above morality, as resulting
from the dictates of mere reason; yet the Christian, as such, is not above
morality in the matter of obedience to God in the duties of the second Table.
He is to do them also with diligence and care, although he does them upon an
higher account. For,

1. There is the same legislative authority in the second Table, as in the
first. He that said, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, said also, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother; thy Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical Parents. He
that forbad all spiritual fornication in false worship, forbad also all carnal
fornication. He that in the affirmative included does command all worship to
him, does also command us to give whatsoever is due to our neighbor. He that
has enjoined us not to swear, has also forbidden us to deceive our neighbor
by lying or stealth, or any kind of frand. He that has commanded us not to
take the Name of the Lord in vain, has also commanded us not to bear false
witness against our neighbor. He that commanded to keep holy the Sabbath, has
commanded also not to covet. So that all the laws of the second Table come
under the account and rate of the same service to God. They have the
inforcement of the same Author; and the object person of their obedience is the
same, namely God; although they differ in their matter, and in the object of
the matter: for the first Table has God the object of the matter thereof; the
second has man for the object of the matter: but God is the object of
obedience in the second Table too; because he gives the law. And therefore
though man be the object of the external act, yet God is the object of the
internal act, wherein the formal consideration of obedience does consist, And
if we do not these actions toward men which are contained in the second Table
in the fear of God, in love of him, and in respect to him, we do them not in
way of obedience, but upon some other respect. And so in regard of author, in
regard of principle, and in regard of end, the whole law is one copulative.

2. This morality, in the matter of it, is worthy of a Christian, and it
becomes him well, because it is more difficult for him to perform the outward
acts of it, then the outward acts of the first Table, upon two considerations;
First, because the obedience to the second Table, in some Commandments at
least, works against carnal lust; whereas there is no carnal lust which does
work against the obedience to the first Table, in the outward acts thereof.
Secondly, because there is less disprofit in outward obedience to the first
Table, as in hearing, reading, praying, talking of Religion, urging this or
that way of the Church, then in the obedience to the second Table; by breaking
whereof we think we can mend our estates well, and yet come off handsomely with
the world in the greater practice of more outward holiness. And thus our
singularity in outward piety may also be of use to our interest, and by a
stickling in outward reformation, we may raise a dust to blind men's eyes so
far, as they may easily think, that while we have our eyes lifted up to heaven,
we are not like to have an hand in their pockets.

3. This morality is much to be regarded by those who bear the Name of Christ
upon them in their general profession, because hereby we adorn our Christian
calling most; for that such actions do run into the eyes and ears of men
without dispute. As for actions of outward piety, they are subject to debate
even amongst Christians, and therefore more likely are controverted by those
who yet are not Christians: but these actions of morality are such, wherein
there is no controversy, whether good or not, because they come from common
principles. So that if we have any mind to bring Christian Religion into any
credit with the obstinate Jew, or the blind Gentile, we cannot do it with more
probability and hope, then if we order our conversation so, as they may
conceive that Christian Religion has some truth in it, because those who are
Disciples of it have so good lives. It has been said, that Christianity is
more to be seen in the leaves of Authors, then in the lives of men: but those
who are aliens from the Church of Christ, do not turn over the leaves of
Writers; and if they did, yet would sooner be converted by the practice of
Christians, were it such as it should be, according to that denomination. Some
would think that the time of the conversion of the Jew is now near: but it
seems not to be so near by our conversation. Therefore says our Savior, Let
your light so shine before men, that others (which are strangers) seeing your
good works may glorify your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5.16. which is
indeed chiefly applied to the Ministers of the Gospel, but also is appliable in
some proportion to all Professors of the Gospel. Though our persons are not
justified with God by our works: yet our objective faith is surely justified
with men by our good works. But we are now so far from being justified by our
good works, that we cannot justify our works to be good.

True it is which Tertullian says, We do not esteem the faith by the person,
but we esteem the person by the faith. It is right, if it be understood as
amongst Christians, one with another. But Heathens or Jews would esteem better
of our faith, if they did see or hear in our persons of such actions, as
certainly do most become Christians; not simply, but in opposition to the
contrary; because intemperance and injustice do most unbecome them. Therefore
let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, as the
Apostle. But how then comes it to pass, that Christians should be so careless
of good demeanor in these morals?

This is the third question; to which we need not say much, that it is so. The
(...) of it is proved every day: As it was in St. Paul's time, so it is now; The
name of God is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles by you, Romans 2.14.

What is the cause hereof? 1. They see some Heathens, or some Civil men, as
they are called, excellent herein, and they think, if they should be very
accurate herein, they should carry away no great commendation: and therefore
they desire to be seen more in those actions, which are not so common. As some
have a mind to be liberal rather to those who are strangers to them, then to
their kindred, because there is not so much notice taken of courtesies to their
relations, as to those who can less expect it. So if they do what Heathens, or
Jews, or civil men do, they conceive they shall have no thanks: but if they be
forward and eager, eminent in those things, as of piety, which others do so
little of, then they render themselves in the opinion of the world to be men of
high note, and of great name. Yet (Christians) if this be your aim to get
repute by doing that which is not so common, then take heed you forget not
morality, which is now less regarded then, I think, ever. 2. Another thing
which is the cause of their negligence in righteousness is, because it is an
unprofitable virtue; and they may lose by it in this life. As for excellency in
external holiness, it comes naturally to them for their advantage: for hereby
the people, who cannot distinguish, are led on into an opinion of their
admirable godliness, which is of use to more respect, and commerce and trust.

Like those Silversmiths in the Acts, who pretended their Goddess, minded their
gain: so do too many of these Christians make a flourish of more religion then
ever came from heaven or their hearts, that there may fall into their lap more
of earth, which they heartily love.

The Schoolmen from St. Austin do inform us, that God is an object of fruition
only; and all other things, even virtues also, are objects of use; because that
only is to be enjoyed, which we are to rest in, and not to refer to any higher
end; and that is God: but this sort of men have got a trick to make use of God
and godliness, and virtue too, for other ends, even ends of gold and silver.
Thus they draw God into their party and service. If it were not for the first
Table some men would be undone. They could not tell what shift to make, if they
could not make a color of holiness in things of God. Although it be no duty of
the text to be rich: yet they think it will not sufficiently appear that they
are Gods children, unless he gives them a full blessing in great bags, or good
lands. This is their real Argument of being the people of God; and therefore
are they so bold as to commute with God by more outward sanctity for a
dispensation in point of righteousness; unless they take it for granted, that
they are Gods, and all is Gods, and therefore all is theirs.

Whatsoever calling they are of, their singular profession of godliness brings
in most. This fills their purses. If they did not break the second Table, they
could not mend their estates, and maintain second dieties.

3. They do not consider the nature of obedience to God in the contents of the
second Table. I dare not say they do not know; they would think I should do
them wrong, if I should conceive so ill of their abilities: but they do not
meditate thereof. For if they did, it were morally impossible, that those who
are curious in prying into the first Table, should be so backward to the
observation of the second. If they would perpend that he who wrote the one in
stone with his own finger wrote also the other, they could not put off the
practice of the second, as they do. The reason of this obedience we touched
before: and therefore we shall say little.

Because of connection of obedience intuitive to all is that of the Apostle, St.
James, 2. chap. v. 10. He that shall keep the whole Law, and shall offend in
one is guilty of all.

He is guilty of all, as in respect of condemnation: for, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do them,
Gal. 3.10. and it is written Deuteronomy. 27.26.

2. It may be meant thus; not that he is guilty of all distributively; for it
is supposed that he has kept all the rest: but collectively (as Estius notes)
for that he does transgress the law, which is a collection of all precepts;
namely, as the law is one copulative: As the whole face is said to be hurt,
when but one part is hurt, as Isidor Clarius notes.

But 3. He is said to be guilty of all, because he does offend against him that
did give all; he violates that absolute and supreme authority by which all is
established, and so does by way of interpretation, and in effect, transgress
all; in as much as he does sin against that Majesty, by which all was equally
imposed. And this Exposition is agreeable to what follows in the Apostle, For
he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill:
and thus every Commandment even of the second Table does oblige our obedience
upon the consideration of the same Lawmakers, God.

Had the Laws of the second Table been no more then humane, had they had no
other Majesty for their sanction, but such as breaths in the clay, we might
then have conceived an alleviation of the fault, in compare with Commandments
purely Divine, (And yet also Humane laws do bind in the virtue of a law Divine,
that we should be obedient to them, the matter being lawful) but since all the
Precepts which respect our neighbor have one and the same authority with the
rest, and were informed by the same eternal Majewy, we can have no excuse for
our disobedience, specially if we do withal take notice that God in Scripture
has given us such signification of his will, that sometime he would have us
perfer our duty of obedience to those of the second Table, before those of the
first Table: when the matter of the first Table is ceremonial, and the case of
the second Table is necessary; then that word of God takes place, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice. For the laws of the second Table are moral, and
commanded because they are good: the ceremonials of the first Table are
positive, and therefore good because commanded. Now though in Divine
Commandments we are not to look at the matter, but intuitively the Author; yet
when he gives us a law to prefer the matter, we shall not be obedient to the
Author, unless we do as he bids us. And these practical notions God has so
engraven in our rational natures, that they bear as great a relation to our
practical understandings, as speculative principles to the contemplative. And
therefore they do remain in man, notwithstanding the fall, because the nature
of man cannot be conserved without them. They are kept in the (...); which is
that part of Conscience, wherein are laid up the rules for action; that by the
light of them it may direct; and if we do otherwise, or not so, may correct and
burn.

4. Another cause of Christians defectiveness in the point of morality may in
part be from Satan, who does so much vie with God, as we may speak, for
obedience and service. And therefore he does mightily endeavor to disgrace and
slurre the profession of Religion by the most sordid and base actions of
unrighteousness in the Professors thereof; so that men may be moved to abhor
the practice of piety for the sakes of those who do most abuse it, because they
do but use it for better expedition of their iniquities. To this purpose the
Devil, who is influxive into the fancy, does raise and stir up the dainty
imaginations of felicity in things temporal; that the fancy kindled may
inflame the affections, and the affections inflamed may in an heat and tumult
mutiny against the counsel and command of Conscience, to have their
satisfaction.

For did not the populacy of these affections interpose against the dictates of
reason and conscience in point of action no more then they do against reason in
point of assent to principles speculative, we could not be so full as we are of
evil deeds. But as evil words corrupt good manners; so evil manners, by
custom, corrupt our principles of action. And as no man does forget what
naturally he knows, that the whole is greater then the part, as Aquinas
observes: so neither would we forget our selves in any wickedness to others,
but that love to our selves, which the Devil tickleth our fancy with, does
put in against the practice of what is right, but not commodious for our
interest.

Such the account, why Christians are no better in their morals. But indeed the
main cause is yet behind, and it is this, because they are not right
Christians; in profession such, and that is all. They are not real Christians;
they have nothing of Christ in them. For if they had, they would not for shame
of the Christian world be outgone by Heathens in any actions which are fit for
men. If Christ dwelled in their hearts, he should dwell there by Faith; if by
faith, that works by love; if by love, it would show it self in keeping Gods
commandments: and so piety in the root would be righteousness in the fruit.
Habits which are of a middle nature betwixt acts and powers, are by God
infusedly given to dispose the faculties to those acts, which are regulated by
the will of God, either toward him, or our selves; or toward men. And of
those toward men we know the general rule which is both expressed and
impressed, that as we would have others do to us, so we should do to them; not
that we should not do acts of righteousness upon higher motives, but according
to this proportion, that general Axiom of practical reason is attendant
according to the rule of society, not the beight of duty. We should do so to
others, as we would have others do to us, but upon higher considerations,
namely in obedience to Gods command, and to his glory, for the good and good
example of others. And those who have grace in their hearts will do thus; since
the Image of God in their regeneration is renewed in righteousness and true
holiness, as the Apostle speaks. And therefore those who are called Christians,
and are unrighteous, are false Christians, true hypocrites. Those who are right
are so far from taking away that which is another, that they are ready
according to their ability, andoccasions to give unto others what is their own.
Quaintly therefore said the Christian Philosopher Athenagoras, No Christian is
bad unless he be an hypocrite.

CHAP. VI.
NEed we to say any more of righteousness or for it to Christians? A word to
the wise is sufficient, and are Christians fools? Truly some are so far from
wisdom, that they account them fools who will not however take their
opportunities of mending their secular conditions. Alas! if the wisdom be only
this to feather our nests, and to thrive in temporals, how many fools are there
in heaven, and how many wise men in hell!

But in love to goodness that is in righteousness, let me add one word of
formal motive. And yet why should I, since it is so reasonable? And yet this
may be a motive, because it is so reasonable. Even reason is a reason toward
it. It is due, and just, and equal, of all conscience, even of Heathens.
Therefore as the Apostle makes use of that of the Prophet to provoke the Jews,
By a foolish Nation will I make you emulous, Romans 10.19, 20. so may we move
Christians to this reasonable service, even by those who account Christ
foolishness. You sufferfools gladly, seeing you your selves are wise, said the
Apostle in another case: but will you suffer these fools to put you down, and
to go beyond you, in this virtue, if you your selves be wise? Shall those fools
of the Gentiles be put in the upper fourm for having this lesson so perfectly
by heart, and shall the wise men of Christendom be turned down to hell for their
unproficiency herein? O blessed Savior, if thou be our Master, let us
either do better, or leave thy School.

2. Consider what that is thou art unjust to thy Master, or to thy friend, or
to thy neighbor for. What is it thou do transgress for? how much? how
lasting? earth, and little, and perishing. What thou gettest, will it amount to
so much as a point of that which is but as a point to heaven in quantity? How
little then is it worth? Could thou by every evil act get all the world to
thy self, thou would be an infinite loser: for in such a bargain God is lost.
It may be what thou go a bout unlawfully, thou will not compass. If thou
do, it may be it will not stay, being not at home. If it does, thou will not
have joy of it. If thou have, there is the more sorrow coming even also for
that joy. And when thou art dying, what will thou think of all thy filthy
lucre? Had thou any dispensation under Gods own hand for dishonest gain, thou
might seem more adventurous with some excuse, but since there is none to be
had, advance some thoughts of what horror and amazement, in apprchension of
divine vengeance, will seize upon thy soul, when all the comfort of the
creature is fled, and thou art for ever to go upon thy trial with that Judge,
who will make no such difference in abominableness betwixt the Babylonish
garment and the wedge of god; Know ye not, says the Apostle, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven? 1 Cor. 6.9.

Therefore bethink you what your loss will be, and which will be greater; your
advantage or disadvantage. Meditate upon the hope of happiness, and the promise
of maintenance, as far as is convenient, and let Gods providence save thy
prudence, the danger of losing thy soul for that which cannot make thee good,
were it well obtained; does make thee wicked, by the evil attainment, and
miserable for ever by the deprivation of the infinite good for the deprivation
of temporal good.

Then, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be contented with
such things as you have: for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13.5.

And here we have an hint of a third disswasive from any unrighteousnes;
because it is so obvious to every one to construe it with covetousness in the
cause.

And how ill does it beseem one who in the contents of Christianity includes
everlasting glory with God, to discredit his hope with inordinate affections to
those things after which the Gentiles seek. Thou a Christian, and covetous?
Thou an heir in another country, and not contented with the expectance? Has
the Pontifician split the tenth Commandment into two, and do thou make
nothing of it? He that can be patient under the suspicion of covetousness, let
him have what he will, for his punishment. We cannot in such patience possess
our souls.

Did God send his Son from heaven to be in flesh for man, to be poor for man,
to lay down his life for man, that by his purchase he might enjoy the vision of
God? and shall he that believes as much, and pretends an interest in this his
Redemption, say with St. Peter, in a worse sense, without so good company, It
is good for us to be here? And shall he build himself Tabernacles with other
men's materials?

What said Thaddaus, if the story be true as Eusebius relates it, to Agbar
after he had preached the Gospel for which he was presented with massy gold,
(...); If we heave left that which was our own, how shall we take that which is
another? And shall we who talk of as much godliness now or more then there was
ever in the world, be so far from self-denial, that we will not bear our own,
but take that which is another? Therefore if we have any desire not to be
suspected of covetousness, let us take heed of unrighteousness. And if we have
a desire to abhor that vice which has undone a Nation and a Church, then have
we great cause to abhor covetousness.

And if we seem herein to be wanting in charity; we shall now come to it.

CHAP. VII.
SOme annex charity unto righteousness, as making that which we can well spare
above our condition to be due unto the poor in point of justice. And thus they
interpret some texts which are spoken of righteousness in the term to be meant
of charity: because, as they conceive, charity is comprehended under
righteousness. And so particularly they expound that Text, 2 Cor. 9.9. He has
dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures for
ever. We intend not Criticisms in this plain discourse: and therefore we need
not say that righteousness there may be understood of charity; not because
charity is contained under the common nature of righteousness, but because it
is signified by the same word in the Hebrew, which signifies righteousness;
and the Greek is made by the Apostle to complie with this usage of the Hebrew.
However we may take our own liberty to subjoyn charity to righteousness: and
indeed there is reason that righteousness should go before, and direct the
steps of charity, because we are to give of that which is our own. First give
every one their due; then give alms; otherwise we give away that which is
another. But God hates robbery for burnt-offerings, Esai. 61.8.

This charitableness in the notion of the holy language is the goodness; and is
so accounted in the opinion of men. And therefore, we must not bawlk this in
our desires of goodness.

Goodness has belonging to it a cheerly complexion, and is to be pictured with
an open hand, and as going abroad for exercise, and refreshment freshment to
others. It keeps at home no more then is necessary to keep good works. It keeps
the poor at work, or with these good works.

Indeed it now keeps in too much, as if it were in fear of being laid up, if it
should be seen out of doors or at doors: and the difficulty of the times is
held to be a full apology for doing little in this kindeness. And though now
there is more need then ever in the poor, yet because the times are hard, and
money goes out more, comes in less then formerly, men persuade themselves that
therefore there was never more need of abatements of liberality. Surely they
are mistaken, if the Preachers argument be good, Eccles. 11.2. Give a portion
to seven, and also to eight, because thou know not what evil shall be upon
the Earth. Our argument of excuse is retorted with more force upon us. Never
such times to be liberal, as when they are most dangerous. Then we had need to
give somewhat to secure the rest. We assure our goods which are in danger by
Sea, with men: and will not we assure them with God? That which is charitably
given is always sure money. So the Heathen could say, That which is laid out to
the poor is always good money. Nay it does sanctify; it does sometimes
multiply the rest. There is that scatters, and yet increases: and there is
that withholdeth more then is meet, and it tends to poverty, Prove. 11.24.
Like the meal and the oil, after the Prophet had his part given him, diminished
not; but more came, 1 King. 17. Like the loaves which multiplied in breaking:
so there is a time, when he that gives, gets more then he that makes a long arm
to reach that which is another.

And there is good reason in perilous times, to be giving, because this is the
way to have Gods blessing in the time of trouble; Blessed is the man that
considers the poor: the Lord shall deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord
will preserve him and keep him alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth;
and thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies. The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will turn for him all his bed
in his sickness, as the Psalm. in the 41. Psalm. 1, 2, 3.

The poor you have always with you, said our Savior. And we do not see by
these times how it is not like to be so still with us. But this we have no
reason to complain of, but to be thankful to God, that he has given us an
ability to do good, that he has given us a mind to do good, and that he has
provided for us objects to exercise this virtue upon. God does not only provide
for us, but also for our virtues: he provides prosperity for the improvement of
our humility; he provides affliction for the improvement of our patience; he
provides poverty in others for the improvement of our charity. What should
Christians do if it were not for the poor?

And therefore it is said of one of the ancient Christians, that he was wont to
fall down upon his knees to bless God, when he met with any poor body: thinking
that God had done him a great favor to lay in his way such an occasion of
doing good. We are not wont to be pleased with the providence of such objects:
he thanked God for them. As if he had been mindeful of our Saviors sentence;
It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Act. 20.35. Nay this giving
is a way to receive too more then was given by what God will give. Give
somewhat, and take somewhat, was an old rule: this is Gods Law; Forgive, and it
shall be forgiven; give, and it shall be given, good measure, pressed, shaken,
running over shall men give into your bosom, Luke 6.38 As if there were no such
good husband as the liberal man, as if he did thrive more by what God had in
his hand of his, then by what he had in his own hand: It is received by God,
and it remains with him in Divine acceptance; and he gives thee his word, a
Bill for it; his word in Scripture; Prove. 19.17. He that shows pity to the
poor lends to the Lord: and the Lord will return him a retribution: lends
unto the Lord as upon use; and the Lord will return him a reward or retribution.

Many have been undone by lending to men: but no body ever lost by God. And if
men did believe this, they would not be so miserable. As faith works by love,
as the Apostle speaks: so love would work by faith. Did we give any credence to
Gods faithfulness, we could not make such scruples of a little courtesy to the
poor.

In the 6. of St. Luke, the 35. we have a precept to lend hoping for nothing
again, (...), so we must construe it in relation to the verse antecedent. Some
would interpret it, as not despairing, for so the word ordinarily signifies:
we may easily compound the difference thus; lend, hoping for nothing again from
man; (And this is against usury) but also not despairing of a reward from God:
for the reward shall be great in heaven; and ye shall be the sons of the
Highest; for he is kind to the unthankful and to the wicked; as it follows.

What will you give to be sons of the Highest? What will you give? Give, give
alms to the poor. And yet thou give him that which is Gods: thou give unto
God that which is Gods, thou give him of his own: and he will give thee more
then is thine own. He will give thee that inheritance which thou have
forfeited. Some virtues in Christians seem to be operative from him, as
meekness, and righteousness; and yet they redound again to him in comfort and
joy spiritually: but this charity which seems to be most operative from him to
God and others, does again return to him not only in his conscience
spiritually, but to his person temporally.

Had those who have professed faith unto justification, been so careful, as
they should have been of good works, it would never have been made such a
controversy, whether we be justified by good works: but because men have
separated good works from faith in their practice, others have added good works
to justification in the controversy. Merit of good works came in, as we may
imagine, upon this regard, to raise the spirits of men to the performance of
them. And so that which was brought in in way of Rhetoric, crept in afterward
into Divinity. And the word which was not intended in the Fathers sense to this
purpose, received occasion to be urged so, as if we might purchase Heaven by
that which is due; and not our own; and not any way proportionable, if it were
more perfect.

If I would love my self indeed, I would do more of this kind: because he
loves himself surely best, who loves himself in that which is best: And this
self-love the Philosopher commends; which consists in the care and study of
virtue.

Because this liberal action is not common, do the more; for there is the more
need. And if this argument were multiplied, it would starve the virtue and the
poor together.

Take it for an honor from God, that he has made thee able to be like him in
doing good. As he said, it is good to be Gods Alms-man: but it is better to be
his Almoner.

Because the Papists think to merit by their good works, do thou communicate
more, lest thou do decline their error by another. Distinguish betwixt their
Substantives and their Adjectives in Religion. Shall not we pray or fast,
because they make a sat is faction in them? Their actions in Religion are due
in their substance: their conceit of merit is added. When two do the same
thing, it is not the same thing done, as the rule is. Because others herein
deal with God by way of commutative justice, will thou show no mercy to the
poor? Because others require infinite use for their money given, by manner of
debt; wilt not thou put out thy money to use upon Gods favor; such use as will
not bite thy neighbor, and yet may increase thy own? Let us vindicate our
Doctrine from their slanders by our works. And let us show it to be as
necessary for us to do good works, as for them, though we do not hold them to
be meritorious; and more, because no man can rightly be said to be bound to
merit: but when salvation is freely given us, we are the more obliged to do
good works, in duty, and thankfulness, and ingenuity. We are not at liberty
herein, because we are plenarily redeemed by Christ without any purchase of
ours: but because we are thus redeemed, we are more bound.

I have heard of one who commended in three sorts of men, three several things;
good works of the Papist: sound faith of the Protestant: good cheer of the
Puritan. But let the sound faith of the Protestant work by love, and cheer the
poor; that the Pontifician may be ashamed to impute the want of our practice to
the severity of our tenet. Whosoever separated that which is just from that
which is profitable, is under Socrates's curse, as Clem. Alexandrinus has it:
and to be sure he that separateth true charity from right faith is not like to
have Gods blessing. And he is not like neither to have a good word given him
from man, that will not do a good work to man.

Do not thou shut up thy bowels, Christian, but open thy heart and thy hand;
and do not say the times are hard; for if thou pleadest that thou can hardly
live with that thou have, how shall they live who have nothing, nor work, but
good works of others to live upon?

But charity begins at home. Yes, therefore communicate; lay it out for
advantage; traffic with it; Improve it. Pay Tithes, that you may be rich, as
the Jew said: and scatter thy seed, and give it to the poor, that thou may
have a good harvest. Riches are rather in the use then in the possession, said
he in his Rhetoricks. And he is rich, not that has much, but that has given
much; as St. Chrysostom. Dorcas was full of good works which she had done, Act.
9.36. She had done them, as we may gloss, and she was full of them. We are full
of nothing more then that we have done well.

Shall I give my bread and my meat? But who said it? Nabal, and folly was with
him. The fool, nabal, has said in his heart there is no God: They think there
is no God, to whom these things in propriety do belong: In respect of one
another we have a propriety; but in respect of God we are but as Stewards and
dispensers of these things; to all as they have need; but specially to the
household of faith. All the world is Gods great house; we are to take care of
all; but specially of his children. Yet we cannot be deceived in the object, if
we find him to be man. God has given him in his nature a ticket to thee for
his entertainment. If thou do shut him out of thy house, take heed God does
not shut thee out of heaven.

If he be bad; yet it is good for thee to do him good, that he may be better.
Thou can not do ill in doing as God does. And he does good to them who are
not good. Either thou art not good: or thou have been not good; if thou art not
good, what would become of thee, should God deal with thee, as thou dealest
with him? if thou have been naught, remember what mercy God has showed to
thee: and do thou likewise.

Therefore let thy love be as universal as man. There is no man a stranger to
thy nature. And did not he that made thee make him? Have we not al one Father,
as is said? Abraham said of Sarah, that she was indeed his sister, for she was
the daughter of his father, though not the daughter of his mother; although the
terms be taken largely according to the manner of the language: so he,
whosoever he is, is thy brother, and he is the child of thy Father, God; though
he be not the child of thy Mother, Jerusalem which is above, (which is the
Mother of us all, as the Apostle speaks.) Were he thine Enemy, yet thou must
love him: otherwise thou art not thy heavenly Fathers own child. A Christian
is one that has no enemy; as one of the Fathers said; he has enemies, and he
has not enemies: he has enemies to him; such as hate him: but he has no
enemies from him; such as he hates. There is not such another creature in the
world, as a Christian, if he be right: as there is not a worse creature in the
world, if he be false. For then he is a white Devil: and worse as white, then
as Devil. What shall we do with him? where shall we have him? If he were not a
promising Christian, we would not trust him. If he were not an hypocritical
Christian, he would not deceive us.

But a true real Christian is one of the Admirables under heaven; Nay, indeed
there is none but he. And declaratively toward men, all that he is, he is by
charity; whereby his spirit and affection goes over all the world in an
universal diffusion, and would do, had it efficacy, good to all the Earth at
once; but would serve those which are good in a special intention. First it
wraps all men together in one community of notion: but in particular
consideration would prefer those whom God has preferred. Thou have not where
withal to give thy neighbor grace, for it exceeds morality: but have the grace
to give more to those who are virtuous, because it is more of charity.

As for any exhortations to this virtue, there is no need of any to those who
know more delight in it then in any thing else. We have reason to love it: for
it is love. He that does not, has a misery in the negative, greater then in
the contrary. St. Paul gives it the prelacy, 1 Cor. 13. ult.

Those three are the three Worthies amongst the Theological virtues: And he
that was wrapped up into the third Heaven, makes this the chief of the three,
because this will go up thither to be perfected there. There is no more
substantial virtue here: for the very matter of it is substantial; beside the
morality of the affection, and the spirituality of the end, the very matter of
this object is profitable unto others. And so is not the matter of some other
virtues.

2. Other virtues, even those two, faith and hope, they both draw toward us;
faith unites to the person, and hope expects to the person: but this charity as
it has relation to others puts from us, and moves upon the inferior sphere of
others. Faith takes in into the mind, hope looks out for the person; but
charity gives out. Faith sees it and believes it as existent: hope holds out
the head to wait for it as coming: but charity deals out that which is present
to the use of others. Without faith we could have no hope: without hope we
could not stay for our reward; the heart would break: but without charity faith
were dead, and hope too, and the poor could not live, and we should have no
reward. In the time of the Law, none were to appear before the Lord empty: at
that great day none must appear before the Lord of glory, empty of good works;
With such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.

3. According to the mind of St. Paul, Charity is the greater virtue of the
three, because charity is that virtue which shall remain in heaven; because
that is the fruitive virtue: for by mediation of it we are joined to God the
chief good in glory. Love is an affection of union unto the chief good, which
is the chief object; and according to the degrees of the good which are
apprehended, so is the degree of this love; and therefore the infinite good
when it is acknowledged, must infinitely ravish. So the Schoolmen, summum
bonum, the chief good being clearly seen, does ravish the will. Therefore when
in heaven we shall clearly see God to he the chief good, we cannot choose but
infinitely as we are able desire him, and delight in him; for there we shall
have as much as we can desire; for it is always present. We are as in the
Ocean of goodness; and we have as much as we can take in. Here we see him but
confusely as it were to be the chief good: and the interposition of other
temporal good things does hinder our clear sight of him: yet according as we
see him here, we love him here: but as the light in heaven shall be cleared, so
the love in heaven shall be perfected. Faith which is in the nature of it
imperfect (though sufficient for its use) shall sink into Vision. Hope which is
also imperfect in the nature (though sufficient for its use) that shall also
sink into fruition: those two graces shall not be perfected in heaven, though
they be imperfect here; because their imperfection is in nature, not in degree,
and therefore their imperfections shall not be made up in heaven, but they
shall cease in their acts, which in the kind of them were imperfect and
accommodated only for this state here below: but charity which has alone the
capacity of fruition proper to it, that shall be perfected in heaven, which was
imperfect here; because the imperfection of it was not in the nature of it, but
in the degree. This virtue Theological in the nature of it is dispositive to go
into the happiness of the chief good. Here it has not a full sight of the
chief good, but shall have in heaven; then this virtue shall be always at full.

And therefore he that has not charity here, which in the flame of it goes up
to God, but with the heat of it warmeth those near it; he shall not have glory:
for he has not that which goes into glory by the perfection of its degrees. He
has not that grace which shall be made glory. Wherefore let not those talk of
heaven, which yet have nothing in them toward it. God does receive into the
life of glory immediately upon his love of complacency, which respects his
children, as being like him in goodness. He cannot delight in for ever those
who have not here some likeness to him; and in what but charity? For faith and
hope belong not to God; because they are imperfect in their kind. So then if
we will not be charitable, we must be miserable.

CHAP. VIII.
WE have spoken last of a virtue which makes more nearly a connection betwixt
obedience to the first and second Table, and that is charity; which has the
wellhead plainly in the first Table, for it is an internal duty, the love of
God; yet streameth in the second Table to our Neighbor.

And this then may conveniently lead us to a little consideration of the point
of piety, wherein is the third part of our obedience to God. And here God is
the object of the internal and external act of our obedience: for the actions
of piety do not only regard him in his command, and in the end of their
performance; but also in the object of the matter. And therefore here comes in
the godliness in a proper sense, because here the matter respects God
immediately.

For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time
when thou may be found, Psalm. 32.6.

This prayer is an act of piety wherein we acknowledge God in his Being, and
in his Attributes, Omniscience, Omnipresence, Wisdom, Power, Justice,
Goodness, Faithfulness to his promise. He has given us a commandment and a
promise together of it, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I
will hear thee, and thou shall praise me. This act of religious worship does
properly belong to God: so he says; Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I
will hear thee, and thou shall praise me; which personalities seem to be
exclusive, Call upon me, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me; our
commandment is to God; our hearing we have from God himself; our object of
praise is God himself. We have no order to pray to Saint or Angel: we have no
certainty they do hear us: we have no leave, much less injunction to praise
them; because they cannot perform our requests.

Hereupon the Pontifician is put to distinctions, two or three. First, they do
not pray to Saints or Angels, so as that by them the prayers of those on earth
should be made known to God; for they deny not that he hears them: but so, that
by their merits and prayers those requests should receive accomplishment; as
Aquinas distinguishes in his 2da. 2dae. 83. q. 4. ar. To which is added
another distinction, that the Saints or Angels are not immediate to God, as if
they were above Christ: for they confess Christ to be the next Mediator to God:
but they are they say, Mediators betwixt us and Christ.

To which two distinctions one text is sufficient of St. Paul, in 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
If they say there are more Mediators; Christ is the only Mediator of
Redemption, others of Intercession; the text does contradict, there is one; as
one God; so one Mediator; as is noted: so that there is not one for Redemption,
another for Intercession: If they say though there is none betwixt Christ and
God, but betwixt us and Christ; it is answered from the text, that there is one
betwixt God and us; not betwixt God and Saints, or Angels: so that our prayers
are immediately commended to Christ, and by him to God. Estius upon the place
here says, that here is not excluded other Mediators of an imperfect account:
But what account shall we make of any other, when in their own confession
Christ is a perfect Mediator, and others are imperfect? And what esteem can we
make of their intercession, when Christ is acknowledged to be the only Mediator
of Redemption?

For 1. they do not keep this distinction in their practice, but pray to the
Saints, as if they were also Mediators by redemption.

2. If they do perform an office of intercession under Christ, they do it by
their merits; as Aquinas before: That they do not intercede thus, appears
thus;

1 Because they cannot prove any. merit. 2 If they have any, they have none to
spare for others surely. 3 If they have any to spare, they have all from
Christ. And if they have so much from Christ as some superfluous, what hinders
but that they should be Mediators of Redemption, as well as of Intercession?
For Christ intercedeth by the same whereby he did redeem: now he redeemed by
his merits; therefore he intercedeth by his merits: therefore by the same
proportion that they do intercede for us by their merits, they may also redeem
us by their merits; and so they enterfeer in their own distinction. But to
leave this discourse.

This prayer is an act of high worship which belongs to God by Christ: to him
we should go in our prayers; and by Christ we should: we have warrant for this.

And in the frequency of this devotion does goodness appear, as we take it in
the latitude. Goodness strictly has in it a respect to communication: but yet
as it has some respect to grace, so it also attends the means of reception.
And if we cannot give well without charity; and cannot have charity but from
God; and cannot have it from God but by prayer; then goodness will be exercised
in prayer to God, that he would be good to us, in giving us that grace, which
most properly does denominate us good.

The Heathen could see that we are not good by outward goods; and therefore if
one has a better estate, he is not the better man, but has the better estate;
so if he has the better horse, he is not the better man, but has the better
horse; if he has better clothes, he is not the better man yet, but has the
better clothes.

But neither are we said formally to be good by faith and hope; because the
acts of those habits are terminated toward us; but the actions of charity are
terminated from us; either to God, or our neighbor for God.

Why should we not then use this excellent mean of supplication for this
excellent quality? How can we do better then in asking that gift from God,
whereby we are disposed to do good? Not that we should beg this only; (for it
will not go alone) but because unless we beg it of God, we shall not have it;
and unless we have it, those that beg of us are like to go without; and we
shall do no good in the world. The uncharitable man is the man (...), that
conferreth nothing to the public.

Indeed we have other virtues to solicit the Throne of grace for. There is
faith the prime virtue, as being the root of other virtues, which denies any
thing in us toward salvation, and lays hold on Christ and his righteousness.
There is hope, the Anchor of the soul, amidst all the storms of afflictions.
There is humility, which is in season, when we are in prosperity; there is
patience, which is proper, when we are low and in adversity: there is meekness,
when we are enraged or provoked. But charity is all, or supposes all. That
which it is not, it does include. Particularly it supposes faith. By faith I
go out of my self, that I may receive Christ, and happiness by him: but by
charity I go out of my self, that I may be wholly Gods, because he has made
Christ mine: and as he gives me Christ by faith; so I give my self to him and
to others for him by charity.

Therefore if thou will de any thing, pray: and if thou will pray for any
thing, pray for charity; which has relation to all the world; God, Neighbors,
Enemies, Infidels; all.

St. Chrysostom has a conceit that no temporal thing is to be the object of
prayer; (...); nothing that belongs to this life of ours: so much that holy
Archbishop was for mortification, so little for the world: and therefore that
petition for daily bread they understood of spiritual and Sacramental bread. As
if they only had understood and practiced that precept of our Savior, Matthew.
6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you; in way of overplus. But then by this account
this grace of charity is most to be desired: for this is it which throws about
here and there these temporal things; this is it, without which the poor cannot
live. Although the begging poor are not wont to have any virtue: yet they live
by a virtue in others, and that is charity. That which is not necessarily
connexed with our happiness, we refer to Gods infinite wisdom, and so save our
selves the care of it; but that which no man can use ill, (as a principle) that
which God works in us, and without us; that which is it, whereby we live
well, (as he describes virtue) that we must desire; and that if any other, is
charity.

And for our encouragement, if we request spirituals, we make an argument not
to be denied; because they are such; and such as do belong to Evangelical
promises; which like election, are absolute; yet not without means; and
therefore we must pray for them. In things temporal we may lose our hope: but
in things spiritual, we cannot; if we do not lose our hold. So then, let us
never give over prayer, let us pray continually, as the Apostle bids us: not as
if we ought never to leave off the act of prayer, as some anciently conceived;
but never leave off the duty; and continually in regard of seasons and need.
And therefore how often we should pray, who can tell? for who can tell how
often we shall have occasion? At evening, and in the morning, and at noonday
will I pray and make a noise, and he shall hear my voice, Psalm. 55.17. In the
beginning, and in the middle, and in the end of the day prayer has its season;
for it is the beginning, and progress, and perfection of a Christian; though
not ultimately; yet dispositively. For this way he begins, he continues, he
is perfected in goodness, because thus he attaineth what God dispenses. For
prayer is directed to God, as Thomas noted, not as to change Gods purpose; but
to obtain, what he has by his Providence disposed for us.

In this good action were all good men conversant! Surely in this some
hypocrites are much: but without it was never any which was real. It is not
therefore a trial of our goodness, but a necessary condition. It is not a
distinctive property, but a certain ingredient. He that uses it may be bad, as
the Pharisees were, who prayed long for a pretense, and devoured widows houses:
but none that do not use it, can be good. How can we be children without prayer?

So it is more easy to discern the negative; he is not good, because he does
not pray; then the affirmative; he does pray, therefore he is good; For the act
may be done in hypocrisy: and that is worst of all. Indeed inward acts of
duty, or acts of inward duties are good arguments that we are good; as if we
love God, fear God, rejoice in God, hope in God: but outward acts are not, as
such; as outward; because they may be done extrinsecally for the end. God
loves Adverbs, as he said, because they respect the internal act of the
performance, and have relation properly to the form, not the matter of the
action.

Yet let not the hypocrite make thee an Atheist: as if because he does not pray
but for secular ends; therefore thou should not pray at all. Do that which he
does, but do it not as he does it. Pray better; and pray that he may pray
better.

CHAP. IX.
HE that knows not how to pray, let him go to Sea, as it is said: The
Mariners with Jonah, when they were in a storm, cried every one to his God, if
any could help them. But we need not go to Sea for need of prayers, we have so
much necessity of them on the land. We have rocks, and sands, and tumults, and
waves, and Freebooters, and storms without being at Sea. But we had need go to
Sea to have water enough to mourn.

Next to prayers therefore we speak for tears; for indeed we should speak to
God in prayer for tears. Nay we should not speak for them without them, that it
might be seen what we speak for; unless we should have so many tears, as for
them we could not speak.

Tears with prayers do excellently; they make our prayers more fluent, and our
voice more liquid, and more acceptable to heaven. The very Heathen gave his
good word of mourning men, that they are good men.

God gave us tears only for sin, says the Father homiletically, St.
Chrysostom: yet we may also with them lament the sad conditions of others.

Surely that which we should mainly spend these superfluities upon, is the
superfluity of naughtiness (which is not to be understood distinctively of some
sins, but affirmatively of all:) but yet we may weep for the evil of punishment
upon others. Otherwise we are not so good as Hoggs, which will bemoan the cries
of their fellows.

Even Christ wept passionately over Jerusalem upon this consideration. He that
was to shed blood for them, began first in tears. He turned afterward this
water into wine for them: but he also did weep, as for their sins, so for their
miseries.

David did mourn for the sins of others, not exclusively to their sufferings,
had they been in them, Psalm. 119.136. And Jeremy did mourn for the sufferings
of the Jews, not exclusively to their sins, Jer. 9.1.

And therefore we use the liberty, or not the liberty, but the duty of
bewailing the stain of our people, which have been cut off by the civil and
cruel sword. Take which side we will; we are on an Isthmus, betwixt two Seas of
lamentations. I hope no good body will interdict us water of sorrow for those
who fell on either side, as we take side very improperly: for the right cause
has no sides: but sides are declensions from the right way. Sides have been in
some men's way much; but they are out of the High way. Those who were by some
false Prophets misled by plausible pretenses unto an offense, have more cause
to be sorrowed for; as having the advantage of piety; that good intentions
without malice should be abused without a cause. And those that fell in a good
cause deserve double affectionateness of mourning, because they fell and the
cause with them into disgrace for want of prosperity.

It is very strange to prove the cause after the victory; and not to know what
we fight for, until we have done. And it will undo all the Diptycks to make
virtue always fortunate. Yet nothing is more deplorable then afflicted virtue,
unless it be triumphing wickedness; which draws God into danger (in the opinion
of the World) either of appoving evil, or not approving good.

We understand nothing of heaven or earth, if we think we cannot have a
blessing derived to us from God, unless it be lapped up in a temporal success.
But that the world should think so, and those who would be accounted Gods
eldest children, this is, if any other, a lamentation.

Shall we conclude the way we go is good, because we find a bag of gold in
it? And shall we conclude that the way is naught, because we find a cross in
it? This indeed was the case betwixt Job and his friends, they would persuade
him that he was wicked, because he was forsaken, as they thought, of God.
Because he was persecuted of the Devil and his friends, therefore also he must
be persecuted of God too. Alas! they understood not, nor Job neither well,
(which was the negative cause of his trouble) that there is a sort of
afflictions, which belong to trial, and are as the sufferings of martyrdom,
neither punishments, nor yet also properly chastisements: Had they been
chastisements, the person morally had been safe: but since they were trials,
the person was more glorious, to have the honor of the combat laid upon him.

To say no more to this point; as for them who measure the cause and their
goodness by the event, how ticklish a ground do they stand upon? If they stand,
they tremble: if they fall, they perish by their own argument. Some have been
already ashamed of this argument: and if things succeed not always to others,
what will they think? and what shall we do then for them? Will they give us
leave then to mourn? The prosperity of the wicked is sad to envy: but indeed it
is more sad to virtue; because he has it by sin, and a curse, which will soon
make it a miserable bargain.

If they could tie God to them, as the Heathens did their gods, they might be
more confident: or if they could draw him down, and he not draw them up; they
might raise up their crests: but he knows their day is coming. And when the
mighty Lord will, he draws them up to him in faith and obedience, and
heavenliness; that they may look for signs of Gods favor from his right hand
in spiritual things, not from his left hand in temporals.

But I have hitherto kept no order in grief. We have so many objects which call
for sorrow, and so importunately, that we are confounded in perplexities, and
know not whereupon to begin our first fruits of tears.

And yet (O blessed Savior) the first fruits do belong of due to thee, who
have redeemed the world by more then tears, even blood. Thou who came into
the world to expiate our sins with the price of thy blood, may justly require
that they should cost us tears also, least they should not seem to go out, as
they came in too much, by our eyes. Thou that badest the daughters of Jerulem
to weep not for thee, but for themselves and their children, Luke 23.28. did
therein show rather thy ingenuity then their duty. As, if thou should bid us
sit at thy Table, in receiving the Communion, (which yet thou have not done) it
would be rusticity in us not to interpret thy courtesy by our reverence of thy
Divinity?

We have read of one that came laughing into the world, but was not happy in
it. Yet if there were any born without tears; surely there was none born again
without tears.

And we have reason to weep, because Christ was born for us who deserved to
dye. We should dye before we sin, although we sinned in our first Parents
before we were born; and he lived that he might dye, that we might live and not
dye eternally. He had a better life before he was born: and should he live such
a life for us? And if you say, that we have reason to rejoice that he was born
for us: that is true too. And yet we have cause of sorrow, that upon our
occasion he thus humbled himself to be man for man. We may weep for joy, and
his sorrow.

And can we tell how to avoid a lamentation for his bitter passion and death
with such pain and shame? Shall the Sun be darkened; and we not in mourning?
Shall the rocks be rent, and not our garments? Shall the graves be opened; and
our hearts shut? Shall the Earth shake; and we not moved? the vail of the
Templerent; and we remain undisturbed?

O Christian! he shed blood; thou sheddest tears: Compare now blood and tears,
Christ and thee. And what disproportion! And yet how much greater
disproportion, if thou do not shed tears! What have we to do here now in this
valley of tears but to weep? Open the floud-gates; and let them pour out. That
sour Apple which was eaten by us in Paradise may make our eyes water, that we
are foolishly fallen into such a necessity, that the Son of God must mediate a
peace with his life and death.

But why should we mourn for our sins, since they are pardoned, Yes; Oh more.
Weep for thy sins because they are committed: but weep for them more, because
they are pardoned. This love, this mercy, is an argument which enters into the
soul; and makes it go, as it were, through fire and water; inflames it and
melts it into ingenuous sorrow, which is more abundant for such a pardon after
such provocations. Nothing is, in effect, so coactive, as love; nor formally
less, because it makes us so willing. The love of Christ constrains us, as
the Apostle speaks. I am ashamed to be so often pardoned, as he he said to a
gracious Prince, whom he had been disloyal often to; as if in abhorrence of his
iniquities he would have a punishment, as being more able to bear it, then the
weight of the courtesy, clemency.

O my Savior, since thou have been pleased to wish my soul in thy blood, let
me also wash it in my tears; not to make it whiter, but because it has been so
foul: not to add to thy righteousness (for what can be added to that which is
infinite by me who am nothing?) but to do justice upon my self for all my sins,
which have put thee to all this trouble for me.

But how soon shall we want water for the bewailing of one sin? How little
shall we then have for all, and so great as a Christian makes them, had they no
other aggravation. O my God, it is easier for thee to pardon my sins, then for
me to number them: and therefore how shall I be able to sprinkle the
remembrance of all my sins with a little water of repentance? And since my sins
are in number, as the hairs of my head; how will there be drops enough of my
eyes, that I may have but a drop for every sin? And since they are in number as
the sands by the Sea; should not I have a Sea of this salt water for my sins?

O make my sorrow more, that I may have more joy; for now, in this condition of
sinners, there is left us no joy but after sorrow, or out of it. Let me never
be dry, lest I burn; specially let this humor more abound, when we have for it
the good seasons of the Church to move them; or when we have too much
opportunity of our own bad practices, to deserve them. But let me on one day of
the year not be without good store of this affliction. And what day can that be
but on the Passion day? Let me think upon Christ then, and if I think upon him
then (as can I but think upon him?) let me think upon him passionately, lest I
be not a Christian any day of the year, because not then.

Blessed Savior, who did bid thy servant St. Peter to come to thee upon the
water, help me to come to thee upon this water of repentance: and stretch out
thy hand lest I sink; yea also since my tears are not clean, but have earth and
filth in them, and therefore they need tears, and those tears other tears, and
so to infinity; therefore do thou wash even my tears also in the pure fountain
of thy most precious blood; lest I go into such sorrow as should be, because my
sorrow is not such as it should be. And for as much as I have no tears to spare
for the world; let me and my enemies have no more sorrow then in a virtue. And
if they have none; let me have the more, until I may be like them without a
fault.

We have not yet therefore done our wet work. We are not yet over the water:
for Jerusalem, our Jerusalem is in the suds. After we have lamented our
spiritual condition, that we are no better, we have great occasion to lament
the public, that it is so bad; undone with wars; rent in pieces with schisms;
overgrown with heresies; groaning under its burden of error and sin; and
trembling under the decay of its foundations.

The chief Butler of Pharaoh forgot his engagement and Iosoph: but we should
not forget the afflictions of Joseph: we should, as we may speak, broach a new
vessel of tears for him. Nehemiah the Kings Cupbearer had more affection to
Jerusalem, and gave the King a good account of his sad countenance in the 2.
chap. 2, 3. verses. He, good man, was as ready to fill Gods bottles with tears,
as the Kings cup with wine; that God might power out a blessing upon Jerusalem.
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. Indeed we are like narrow
mouthed vessels; we can take in but as by drops: and we can let out also but by
drops: if we could open our eyes, and fill up the measure of tears; or rather
had we no measure; we should have more of Gods mercies.

See if there were ever sorrow like unto this in the land of our nativity: we
are an Island without; but within we should be as it were all Sea in sorrow for
the most desperate breaches which ever Satan imagined, and man made. We had a
Kingdom as great as those who had more compass. In those things which are not
great by bulk, the goodness is the greatness, as his rule is: And this Nation
was great by some kinds of goodness, not by quantity. Had it been but of
indifferent credit and name, it had not been envyed: had it not been envyed, it
had missed these calamities. When Excellency goes before, Envy is like to go
behind to trip up the heels. Sin has deserved it: but envy, and covetousness
of our own has done it, undone it.

If ever laughter was madness, as the wise man says, then certainly now, when
we seem all to have lost our reason.

After the body of the Nation had lost so much blood, then to take off the
Head, what is it? when ever so done? by whom? Can it be said to be done by two,
whereof one would be next to Christ, the other to Jesus? One would have it to
be done, according to their principle; the other, in form of justice, according
to their hypocrisy. Where lived he who wished all had but one neck, that he
might be but once cruel? And when but then did all lie under one head? Head of
the Church, and of the Commonwealth could not stand together. The head is
taken from our Master; so then our Master is taken from our head; and as he
said, We are rather without a Master, then in liberty; unless to weep; if even
this. Was not the punishment ours? for we were beheaded? And what is left in
the body, but a few equivocal spirits? The breath of our nosthrils is taken
away, and how then do we live?

It is necessary, said he, to put unity before all multitude: but we have
preferred a multitude; and when many are put before one, what do they stand
for: Surely we are in a vertiginous disposition; and our feet are where our
head was; and we think we are in England, when we are out of the Kingdom.
Beelzebub has now found out, being the Prince of flies, such flies, as the
Roman Eagle will catch. And he has found out a way to gratify the Italian
with such servants as will make their own liveries with home-made cloth. I
would the servant of servants had that foot in the grave which was wont to be
kissed: but I am afraid he has set that foot on our ground. Indeed we seem to
drive him out, as some do drive out beasts out of the corn, when they drive
them more in, and they cry him down, as those who mingle with the Hue, that
they may not be discovered.

But this object seems to exceed our faculty; and we cannot almost think of it
without sinking by the weight of it into sorrow without a bottom, and without
hope. For those that are dead, we sorrow not without hope, in obedience to the
precept, 1 These. 4.13. for they shall have a glorious Resurrection: but for
them who are living, we sorrow without hope; for there is little hope of a
resurrection from this condition, unless we hope in him that quickens the
dead, and makes those things which are not as though they were.

We have in our selves the sentence of death, as the Apostle there, in another
sense. In our selves what have we to make us think that we are not condemned to
uttter ruin, when we think of all our enemies, and all our sins, which are yet
whole in us? What is there to be broken so soon as our hearts? And what is
there which is not broken, but our hearts? What vengeance may that Nation look
for, which by unamendment, yea greater iniquities requires more punishment? or
if it be spared, without contrition, even that may be the greatest punishment.
Nolo hanc misericordiam Domine, said the devout man; Lord, let me have none of
that mercy. And therefore all the comfort is, that we are yet punished, that
all the dose of the purge is not yet taken.

There is no doubt but we are weary of our punishments: but we should be more
weary of our sins; and until we be more weary of our sins, it is a favor not
to be eased of our strokes and burden of adversities. We should have been
weary of our sins before the rod came: but I would we were weary of them now.
If any of our sins be not now committed, are they yet mortified? It may be some
of them do not come abroad in the exercise: but they keep close at home in the
mind. And that which locks them in, is security.

We are like men in sleep upon the top of a mast, when the winds blow, and the
waves roar, and the Ship reels on this side, and on that side, and the Pilot
thrown over, and yet every one scuffling for the goods; and every one will
handle the rudder. And yet we are fools and enemies, if we do not like this
condition. How much do we suffer, because we will not be deceived!

Have we not cause to mourn for these things? have we not cause to mourn that
we cannot mourn, as we should? have we not cause to mourn that we cannot mourn,
that we cannot mourn; and so make our mournings infiinte?

What can we think of in the land, which will keep us from bleeding to death in
tears, had we so serious apprehensions of things as their nature and
circumstances do require? Or if we had not matter enough within our own
Territories for grief, we might enlarge our selves, and expatiate into the
whole world. For every Christian is Ecumenical; and has a care of the whole
world; and if he be right, he does grieve, that the world has so much work of
repentance to do, and yet has so little time: and that there are so many
contrefait Christians, who, if they mend not, must go soon from the white Devil
to the black. And what is there yet more deserving to be washed with this briny
water then this, that when sins and errors do so much every where abound, yet
that those who think themselves to be the Favorites of Heaven, should vaunt
that these are glorious times, because they have their humors and the interess?

What? shall the Heathen State-Historian say, that nothing is to be expected to
be prosperous which is not ingenuous; and shall we do any thing for our
advantage; and if we attain it, make use of this argument? but mark the issue.
Will it not be bitterness in the end? That and thou cannot prosper together.

Do we not look to have our Master Christ to rend off our liveries, and to
scourge us for all our enormities? Blessed Savior, is not this abusing of thee
by our sins more grievous to thee then thy suffering upon the Cross? for that
passion was for our redemption; but this does more abuse thy patience. That was
done by soldiers; These things therefore the soldiers did, as it is said: but
this is done by those who are of thy household, in Profession, Christians. If
these be real Christians, who are not? Let us either have other names, or
lives. And let us not say, We shall have peace though we walk after the
stubbornness of our own hearts: if we do, the wrath of the Lord shall smoke
against that man; he will not be merciful to him: but, all the curses of the
book shall light upon him, and God shall put out his name from under heaven,
Deuteronomy. 29.20.

How many have been cut off from the earth and from under heaven; and for what?
Need we any mourning women to move dolor, when we have so many widows, that
cannot be hired from it? Is not this doleful, that as in a mist we have killed
one another, to please our adversaries, and yet shall not have the courtesy to
be last destroyed, but first? We have found them horses; and they have found
riders, who have ridden us, and spurred us, and blouded us on both sides. Even
like to the Horse in the Poets Apologue, which, when the Stagge was too hard
for him with the horns, desired a Man to take his back and drive the Stagge out
of the pasture; and when that was done; the man would not leave his back: so we
have desired others to ease us of oppression, as we conceived; and when that
was done, we are yet ridden; and have such upon our backs as will not let us
groan.

Mary wept, because they had taken away her Lord, and she knew not where they
had laid him, St. Joh. 20.13. And may not we be sorry that they have taken
away Religion, and we know not where they will lay it? Is it not doleful that
Religion should go on one side, and on the other side; and that he who should
endeavor to set it right, should be reckoned an enemy on both sides? Or can we
without heaviness consider, that since betwixt no religion and that which is
irregular there should be so little, and yet none should pass for religious
people, but those who are irregular? Is it not worth a tear to see that no
reformation will please the people, but that which takes away the subject
thereof; and that this must be done hand over head? Will our eyes be dry, when
we have a mind to observe how many wise men we have had in our Nation, and yet
we should be such fools as not to see when we are well, nor yet neither when we
are ill? So true is that of Tertullian in his Apology. Caecitatis duae species
facile concurrunt: two sorts of blindeness do easily concur; that those who do
not see that which is, seem yet to see what is not: and also when men seem to
see what is not, they do not see what is. Before they would see nothing right,
but all amiss; and therefore they will not see now, or will not acknowledge
what is amiss.

I am weary of this sad work, and yet we have need of a fresh supply of
lamentations for the perplexities of weaker Christians, who are pulled out of
the way on this hand and on that, and do not know where to set a sure foot in
actions of the Church, or actions Civil. For the Masters of each faction are
very careful to persuade the people, that each way is that which the people
should have Gods blessing in. And whereas the Heathen Poets feigned several
gods to be favorable to several Nations: we have the boldness to make the one
true God to be favorable to diverse ways. As the Apostle said, Is Christ
divided? is God divided? Both sorts stand for the Kingdom of Christ; and
enemies to one another upon that account; because they put Christ his mark upon
their commodities.

To say no more in this kind; The Church of England has nourished them up
unto so much piety, as that now they are too good for their Mother. It has
bred them: and now they cast her off; and are ready to give testimonies of
their own, if the Church of Rome needed them, that there is no such thing now
as the Church of England. What sport do our adversaries make of this, that they
have ordered our hands to sacrifice to their Moloch? And that they have
beguiled us to make us guilty of their errors and their evil practices, that
we may no more speak against them, lest we speak against our selves? So they
have made us their fools, to laugh at us: and yet (which is the greatest folly)
we must laugh too; or else we are looked upon as those who are disaffected; ill
affected. O tyranny over the minds of men! which, he that likes it, does very
well deserve. And when liberty, which is promised, comes, his fault and his
punishment should be together, to be a servant of corruption. And if he be of
the Clergy, he should be served right, if he were degraded, for his degradation
of it.

CHAP. X.
THere is another act of piety, which is indeed outward, and that is hearing of
the Word of God. And this would be better done after repentance; and also
repentance would be better, if it did follow it. And yet also, if we did go to
Church with more broken hearts, we might return with more comfort. Had we gone
under any contrition before, the Word of God had had less to do upon us, and we
should the sooner have been fitted and squared for our spiritual building. But
how little of that which is spiritual do we spiritually?

We are up head and ears in Religion, as we may say; in talking of religion,
and in hearing; and yet we have none within. We have no more then is in
hypocrisy. And how much has hypocrisy; when that which has light and no heat,
shall have for the convenient punishment in hell heat without light. Alas! too
much have we got Religion by the end; but yet have no principle. If all
godliness be in the going to Church, and sitting there, we have all. If none be
in them who have none but there, or in other outward profession, we have as
little as any. Even as it was in Ezekiels time, 33.31. For they come unto thee
as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people sits, and hear
thy words, but will not do them; for with their mouth they make shows, but
their heart goes after their covetousness. Take them in the Church, how brave
Christians? Take them in their shops how false? Naught in both, because not
good in both: Hypocrites in their piety; because not true in their dealings. We
cannot know by their following Sermons, whom we shall not be cousened by in
their trade.

Nevertheless, what has the Ordinance of God deserved, that we should not love
it, because some abuse it? Wilt not thou serve God in his Ordinance, because
some make God and it to serve their turns? Take not tech at the duty, because
some do the matter of it only in show. It is as if thou should not work in
thy calling, out of obedience to God, because some work in it for covetousnes.
Or as if thou should not eat for the strengthening of thy body for Gods
service, because others eat to make them able for the commission of sin. Since
some do this action so ill, it becomes thee to do the same better, that God
may have honor if not by all persons, yet in all his Ordinances.

Here would come in some questions about hearing: three at least; how; when;
whom: whereof might be much said, if this paper were intended for discourse.
Therefore in three words to them.

1. How; This our Savior gave warning of, Take heed how ye hear, Luke 8.18.
St. Mark. 4.24. Take heed what you hear. The thing is to be regarded in the
manner. Therefore God loves Adverbs, which connotate the act, but express the
manner: from whence the denomination rather comes, because the manner does
proceed from the disposition of the mind; the act outward may be for outward
ends: The manner of hearing has relation to the Word, to the Soul, and to God.
To the Word; and it is to be heard in love to it. To the Soul; and it is to be
heard with a desire of profit. To God three ways; as ordaining it to be mean of
spiritual good. 2. To God as speaking by man. 3. To God as blessing it. As he
ordains it; so we ought to have a great regard of it. He that rejects
Ordinances, does contemn God, and does contrary to what he should pray for,
that the Name of God may be hallowed. Then he must respect God, as blessing it;
therefore he must use prayer to him, that he would vouchsafe his grace, so as
the Word may come into the heart; and the Word may be turned by practice into
work. But also he must attend God, as speaking by the Minister: for else he
attends but to the word of man. For the authority of the institution makes it
not to be the Word of God; because that authority may be impressed upon other
Ordinances: but that which makes it to be the Word of God, is because God
speaks by man; and so the Thessalonians were commended by St. Paul, that they
received the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of God,
1 Epistle, 2.13. And this makes it distinctively Gods house, because God
speaks there. The Commission which he has given to men to speak there,
makes it to be an Ordinance of God that Ministers should preach there; but it
is his speaking by them, which makes it as the Word of God, which is spoken;
so the place the House of God, where it is spoken: The Ordinance of God is upon
Judicature also; and yet the place is not called the House of God. It is called
the Kings Court, because he speaks there: it is not called Gods Court;
because he does not speak immediately there, as he does in the Church by the
Minister.

And if this were duly regarded that God speaks in the Church, this would
remedy a great many enormities; namely, irreverence in the place and service.
Is any one covered in heaven? This would cure the itching ear; the curious eye;
the wandering thought; the critical censure; and the defects of the soul, which
by it are either to be corrected, if peccant; or supplied, if wanting.

The daintiness of these times will not endure to hear some Ministers: which by
way of interpretation is as much as if they went to hear men. If they go to
hear God, they will mind his word by any messenger, any Ambassador; for he
represents his Master. If the Ambassador be mean, we show the more respect to
him that sent him. The ground of what we say, is in the Word of Christ who is
God. We have it in Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. He spoke it of
the seventy, whom he sent out by couples, by two. I pray God we have one left.
And he says to them all distributively, He that hears you, hears me; not
he that hears such a pair, or such a pair, or one of the two; but of every
couple, and of every one, He that hears you, hears me. But some we are not
for; No? Is there any difference in God? He that has a mind only to some man,
has no heart to God.

Was that less then a blasphemy in him of Geneva, who being extremely devoted
to Calvin, said, If Paul and Calvin were to preach at the same time, he would
leave Paul to hear Calvin? For he did not only prefer Calvin to St. Paul; but
in a manner he did prefer Calvin before God; as if he would not hear God,
unless he would speak by Calvin? Unless he would send by the hand of Calvin, he
would not receive his message. This is no other then most errant peevishness,
to give audience to none but those who are directed how to please us.

This bad humor is to be discussed; for it is like to breed. Nay I speak too
late; it has bred schisms and heresies. Had we good stomachs, or any respect
to the Founder, we would not nauscate good meat, which God sends us, because
it is not served up in our fashion, or be not dressed in our way, and to our
palate. And must God speak in an affected tone; or else we will not be affected?
If thou do not like the Minister; what, not God neither? Thus thou despisest
him who might prove, under God, thy spiritual Father. And somewhat to this
purpose has been told me by a party, who, when one came up into the Pulpit
that seemed not to be able to speak any thing to the purpose, despised him at
heart: but before he had done, she had done despising him; and afterward
highly esteemed him.

Take heed lest this luxury of the ear cost thee not a remedy by Fasting: and
that the Gospel be not removed, because we do not like it but by whom we like;
and lest we be not worthily punished by those who cannot long please us, for
our disrespect to those Ministers, who had much worth, but none of our
irregular opinions.

Therefore, if thou find a Minister, do not stand upon the circumstance of
person, or parts, or texts or expressions: but be ready to hear what the Lord
will speak by him He that has a desire to choose his Ambassador, is to be
suspected that he has a mind to choose the message too. Take heed, unless thou
can choose, whether thou would be saved.

But when must we hear? when others may preach; in season, out of season; Be
instant, or insist in it, or urge the word in season, out of season, 2 Timothy
4.2. which, by some, is to be understood proverbially, that he should never
give over this work: or may be understood disjunctively, as Isid. Clarius
notes; namely thus, in season, if it may be; if not for such a business, out of
season. To be sure, the command intends frequency of Preaching; and
consequently frequency of hearing.

And yet diligence in men's outward calling is to be considered, as such a duty;
that if we be not able conveniently to be at Church on the week day in regard
of trade and family, we may conclude it not fit to leave the particular calling
upon that account. And the reason is, because, if the fourth Commandment be
moral, (as they account it) we are under a Commandment of working six days:
but we are not under a Commandment of hearing so often as there be a Sermon on
the week day; and therefore that which is negative, cannot prejudice that which
is positive. And if there were a command for it, yet it were reducible unto a
ceremonial law, which gives way to morals, in a competition; according to the
rule, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And therefore even upon the Sabbath,
as our Savior said, it was lawful to do good, to heal; and so to show mercy.
And we doubt it not to be a duty, even in time of public Service, to leave
the Church, to quench a fire, or to be helpful to any in a necessity. If thou
be therefore a Christian, as thou would be reckoned by the love of the
Word, remember to provide for thy family, lest thou deny the faith, and be
worse then an Infidel.

To the third question somewhat is to be said, besides what has been said. We
touched formerly the duty of hearing Ministers, as they were compared with
Ministers. And we thought it not arbitrary to us, whether we will hear those
which are appointed to us, although they are not so excellent as others: but
now we compare Ministers with those who are by a very long prescription (even
from Ignatius's time) called Laiques, or Laymen: and the question is, whether
we should hear Laymen preaching.

This is a question of the season: but this is not necessary for me to
determine. It is enough here, that it is no question whether we should hear
Ministers, I think also by their own confession: then if others were wise to
make sure of their duty, they would hear Ministers, and not them; because there
is no doubt of the one, but there is as great doubt of the other; or, if you
will, let it be out of doubt; in the negative.

State the case, and take it. That it is no act of piety for any of the people
to hear them, is plain upon their own principles, at least most of them who are
most sober: because they say they do not preach authoritatively; and if not
authoritatively, then not by any command. If not by any command, then it is no
act of piety for them to preach: or if it be an act of piety without any
command, then it is a will worship, which they so much impute to the Church of
England. But then the question will be, whether it be lawful to hear them. This
may be also resolved by their own axioms; for if they say that nothing is to
be done in the Worship of God (which is their supposition against the
Ceremonies) without his command, then this also is not to be done upon the same
reason; because they are not commanded it, but they do it as an action of a
free spirit; and not of supererogation, but perfection.

This is but a perstriction of the irregular practice of those who undertake to
preach before they know the text; and therefore are not like to understand what
they say of what. Our Savior in the Revel. 1.8. calls himself the Alpha and
Omega. Is it fit that those should preach the Gospel, who have not once read
the Alphabet? and know not one letter of Greek, from the first to the last? If
they preach by the Spirit, then let them speak languages as the Apostles, by
the Spirit; and if they prophecy by the Spirit, let them pretend revelation,
not gifts. If he pretends revelation; let him go to those who do not acknowledge
the Scripture, and confirm the truth of his revelation by miracles.

To be short; he whom thou go to hear, being not a Minister, is either
ignorant, or not. If he be ignorant; why do thou hear him? If he be not
ignorant, but speaks as a Clerk; suspect him not to be a private man that
follows Christ; but a private one that follows Jesus. Such come up under the
expectation of Laymen to undermine the Ministry and the Church. This the
people will not see, lest they should see their infelicity at the best of being
helpers hereunto. Lest they should seem to have been deceived, they will be
deceived further. So at the end, we may fear the accomplishment of that former
saying, If ever Popery comes into England, the Puritan will bring it in.

If any one on the behalf of the gifted brethren, will make a scruple of the
authority of those to be Ministers who are bred Scholars and in orders: it will
give occasion to make use of such a kind of answer, as our Savior did make,
when he was asked, by what authority he did those things, Mat. 21.25. He
returns them a question: The Baptism of John was it from heaven, or of men? and
they debated amongst themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he will
say unto us, Why do ye not then believe him? if we shall say from men, we fear
the multitude, for all hold John for a Prophet. So let me ask the people; The
Preaching of these private men, is it from heaven, or of men? If of men, why do
you hear them? if from heaven, where is their Commission? and why do they not
baptize? so John did, and so the Apostles who were sent by Christ, in the end
of St. Matthew. And as for the Preaching of those who are Scholars ordained; is
it from heaven, or of men? If from men, why do you hear them at all; for it is
no Ordinance? if from heaven; why do you hear any other? Hear Christ, He that
hears you, heaveth me. You; whom he had sent, which excludes those whom he
had not sent: that which he said to them, he did not say to all: for why then
said he it to them after he had called them and sent them? So St. Paul, How
shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15.

Hear then: but whom? not those who are not Ministers; because they are not
such. Reject none that are Ministers, because they are such. And in the hearing
remember to be a Christian, not a Critique. If thou go to Church to carp at
what is said, thou art not a doer of what is said, but a Judge, as we may
allude to that of St. James 4.11. Thou do not resort to Gods house to find
faults in the Minister, but how to mend the faults which are in thee. Discern
betwixt him in his own person, and in his representation.

Think not meanly of him who is sent to thee from God with such good news of
the Gospel, as if thou be obedient in faith and practice, thou may be
saved. Who ever refused an Ambassador because he did not speak in his phrase?
The Greeks indeed when they were at a need, rejected once a fair proffer of a
great lo an, because he that proffered it was out in an accent only: but will thou forsake the tender of reconciliation, because it is not made in thy tone,
or according to thy wild humor; wherein thou would be pleased without
profit? And before the Sermon do thou pray for the Minister and thy self, that
he may be assisted in the overcoming of thy lusts; which victory will be most
thine. Consider that no man goes to the House of God in vain. Every time we
go, we go for ever. Think whom thou art to meet. And give not, by thy
unprofitable hearing, occasion to God to show thee the mercy of his Ordinance,
when he has taken it away. Prevent the loss of that blessing by the use. And
prize it as if the Market were shutting up. And if thou would thrive by this
spiritual nourishment, digest it into thy soul by heat of meditation.

CHAP. XI.
MEditation is, in general, of great use. And we should first meditate of the
use of it. There be three things, as is observed, which make a good Scholar;
reading, conference, meditation. Reading (parts being supposed) makes a full
scholar. Conference, a ready scholar. Meditation makes a deep scholar. So also
in some proportion, Meditation makes a good and solid Christian; Reading makes
him know what is the letter of Gods will. Conference with others may help him
to know the sense of it distinctly, and to apply it to cases. Meditation works
all into the mind, and roots it in for use.

Meditation at large has many objects. It may have reference to God in his
Essence: but this exceeds the mind of man. In an Infinite being there is
nothing to terminate the Intellect; because it is infinite. It may have
reference to God; as One singular Essence is communicated to three Persons, the
Father, the Son, the holy Ghost. But this does more swallow up our
contemplation, because it does more transcend reason. For if the principles of
reason, which are not negative to the being of a God, should also clearly
extend to the discerning of one exclusively; they would be more puzzled at this,
how that one Divine Essence should be communicated to three, and yet there
should be but one. And therefore says the Father, When I think upon one, there
comes into my mind three: and when I think upon three, there comes into my
mind one. And therefore this mystery is rather to be admired then meditated:
because the conceits thereof, such as we can make, are not to be expatiated,
but squared and fixed according to such apprehensions thereof as we have in
Scripture.

But meditate we may and ought of God in regard of his effects; in Nature, and
in Providence. For his effects in Nature do give us occasion to praise his
excellent Attributes; his wisdom in the beauty of them; his power in the
greatness of them; his goodness in the usefulness of them, as St. Basil
meditated in his Book upon the six days work. And reasonably is it thought that
one of the chief ends of the Institution of the seventh Day to the Jew for a
Sabbath, was this, that man might be at leisure that day to reflect upon the
creation, and to give God the honor thereof; of all; great, and also of those
which are not great, in quantity: for God is magnus in minimis, as he said,
great in that which is least.

And we have cause to meditate of him in his providence toward that which he
has created, and does sustain every moment by the word of his power; His
Providence is either toward good or evil; namely, the good or evil of
condition. By the former he engages us to obedience; by the latter to
repentance: And this affliction we have need of. It is St. Peter's expression in
his 1. Epistle, 1.6. Though now (if need be) you are afflicted with diverse
trials. It is as necessary to us as our daily food: nay more. We may live for
ever without that food: but it may be we should not live for ever without this
adversity.

This is a meditation of the season, because we are now so full of punishment;
and surely we have the more, and are like to have the more, because we have not
thought, as we should have done, of this: as in Ieremies time the Jews, so we
now, Ier. 8.6. No man spoke ought; no man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, What have I done? Every one turned to their own race, as the horse
rusheth into the battle. How many have how much complained that they are
undone, undone! but how few have at all complained of what they have done! We
would have our Fathers blessing, but will not be brought upon our knees. And we
would have the rod removed before it be kissed. Not that we ought to approve
what man has done; but what God has done; to quicken us in our obedience to
him. Therefore it is well said, That which man does foolishly, God does wisely.
We should submit in patience, to his correction; but we are to follow his will
revealed, in our obedience. By dispensations of providence he affords us
trials, whereby we are proved, whether, when a cross lies in the way of duty,
we will leave the plain way, that we may decline the cross. Oh that we had as
great a disaffection to sinning, as to suffering! And yet which is more evil,
or indeed which is evil, but that of fault? Oh that that which first moved God
to punish, were first removed! Oh that sin could not be done, because it should
not!

Such meditations we might go further in, were there not four other things,
which, because they are last (quatuor novissima, as they are called) should be
first thought upon, heaven, hell, death, judgment. Can thou believe there is
an heaven, and not think upon it? Can thou look up to Heaven; and not
consider the place of happiness? Is thy treasure there, and not thy heart? Or
is thy heart there, and not thy thoughts? or are thy thoughts there; and yet
inordinately upon the world? Impossible. Why should we not have a desire of as
many thoughts of heaven, as there are stars; and every thought greater then
these sublunaries?

Christian, where is thy mind? Is not heaven worthy of thy contemplations?
whither does thy uncorrected fancy gad and ramble amidst the variety of these
temporal unsatisfactions? Call them back, and bid them home. Thou have surely
nothing better then heaven to reserve thy mind, and thoughts and affections
for. Nothing more natural to thy soul; more proper to thy capacity. Nothing but
this is homogeneous to thy end, and thy perfection. If the rest and center of
our desires be not above, man was made in vain.

And whatsoever is necessarily connexed with thy end, thou do naturally
desire in order thereunto; for, where one is for one, there is but one; as the
rule is. And what can be more influxive, nay intrinsecal into thy happiness,
then the sight of God, with such enjoyment, as cannot be expressed here, since
it cannot be comprehended there, as it is, but as we are able. There is no more
to be said of it; because never enough. Here, on earth, how much pleasure is
there in the converse, though short, with one real Christian? There God; there
our Head Christ; there the Holy Ghost; there Angels confirmed; there Saints
glorified: and for ever.

Or, if it be nothing desirable to be positively happy; is it any boot to thee
to be certainly miserable?

Sink and fix thy meditations a while then upon the valley of lamentations,
which is below, this valley of tears; where there is sorrow and mourning to no
end, without end.

No man can desire to be miserable, because it is contrary to his will. And if
any could be so fond as to wish it, it would be upon a phansy of pleasing
himself in a wild conceit of happiness by that which is misery. Whether it be
better not to have been then to be in misery, is made a question: but to be
sure, to be in misery is not far from not being; because every one that is
would not be miserable. And what misery is that like to be which is by God
prepared for those who would not let him have the honor to save them by his
mercy? What vexation is like to come upon those who had a Commandment to be
happy and would not? Let not Satan or the world by thy flesh delude thee with a
seeming felicity and short; that thou might lose a real felicity and
everlasting. And take up the Bible, and read and see if there be not in
perpetual torments sufficient to fright thee out of that lethargy, wherein thou
do forget thy self more then he that forgot his own name. Advance some sober
apprehensions of that endless calamity, before thou art in it, and imagine
whether the remembrance of all thy irregular pleasures will, in hell, make any
abatement; or will not rather make a reinforcement of sense and loss. If thou
could live without the blissful enjoyment of God, and that incomparable
superilluxion of those quintessential joys, which he has designed in himself
for those who are his children of adoption; yet can thou live in unquenchable
flames? and can thou conflict with everlasting vengeance?

Bethink then thy self while thou art on this side of that calamity, and every
step thou take in thy natural life, make a thought of esciping the wrath of
God, and recovering of his favor; which thou art made capable of by Christ.
How often have thou been warned to flee from this wrath to come? Take good
counsel in time.

For how little a time is gone before we are gone! Therefore also thirdly set
apart some moments (upon which depends Eternity) to reminde thee in what a
readiness thou art in to dye, before thou art ready for it. Snapp'd we are on a
sudden how many? And who has exempted thee from the number of this possibility?

Let death then enter into thy thoughts, before it enter into thy body. If thou will ever be wise; now. For every minute of neglect does set off so much of the
account of thy wisdom; which is not be valued by a possible deferring of the
ruin, but by a constant preparation against it, in omnem eventum; whatsoever
happens. We may soon be at our home in misery, before we think of it, if we do
not think of it. Our natural principles of body are in the dust: and how far
then have we thither? How presently may we come into our inheritance of earth;
which no body can hinder us of? And man returns to [his] earth, as Psalm. 146.4.
such earth, as the word is, as Adam was made of; and such earth as Adam
conveyed to us by his lapse. He has no earth so proper to him as this: This
he came of; this he comes to. Dust to dust is own to own. This is intailed to
us by our Forefather; and this Intail cannot be cut off.

Some do not live any longer then to be born; and no time betwixt that which
was present and past. Yea, some come dead into the world; stil-born; ever dead.
And all from the time they live they dye, by a natural Consumption. We have as
it were one foot in the grave before we can go: and when by age we are past
going, we then are swiftest in our passage home.

God has set death a day to come for thee, by a private warrant; and when it
will arrest thee, thou know not. Be always prepared, for death will not stay
when it comes. If Deaths servant, or Sergeant stays any while with thee; yet
when Death comes, there is no delay. The time and man is expired together. And
whither then? Alas whither? whither go thou? Were we to be only, after
death, in that state we were in before life, of negativeness, it were not so
full of horror to think of going into our first infinitude, (as we may call
it) of nothing: but to lose our beatifical good, and to be overwhelmed in such
a punishment, should not this be set to our breast, as a thorn to prick us, and
awaken us, lest we fall into such a sleep as we awake out of in hell.

If after some millions of years we might have any hope of deliverance and
recovery, there would be some light in hell by comfort of hope; which being
present to the mind, although the time were long, would alleviate our sorrow:
but such weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever, for ever, it may
sooner be avoided then expressed.

Take up then betimes. See how much of thy sand is run out. Make up thy account
speedily; which is never done too soon. How thin a bulwark is thy latthie
flesh, to keep out any bullet which may be sent into thee by any of Deaths
weakest soldiers? How apt and pressed is thy nimble soul to leap out of thy
crazy tenement? Or if thou have a mass of flesh as much as thou can waddle
under, a disease will have more hold on thee, and make a deeper impression; and
more entertainment for worms. No man has received a Commandment to provide
for worms, but thou have taken care that they should not starve.

Alas, for how little a time is this curious frame of the Divine architecture
of this body of man raised! In how small a revolution of time does it fall into
pieces! He comes up upon the stage, and walks a few turns, and acts a short
part, whether tragical or comical; it may be applauded, it may be not; it may
be plays the part of a religious man, in the old notion of an hypocrite; then
retires, untires; and is not. Like a variegated tulip, by degrees which opens,
and then blazeth a small space, and then rolls and shuts it self up again: Even
so this man comes out of the same bed; rises and spreads, and by and by
dwindles and withers, and goes to bed again.

Man is as a continual miracle, that all the gimmers should any time consist:
and when he cease, he cease not to be admired in the consequences of one
exhalation. How many curious imaginations were nested and breeding in his
brain, which he hoped in good time would have been flegge, and would have come
out of their causes to good effect; and on a sudden all dead in the nest! What
a vast distance is there made in an instant betwixt himself by the change? What
a muss and scramble does this evaporation of life make amongst those who mind
other men's deaths more then their own; who watch to catch what they can, when a
tree falls that has any fruit upon it; if it be near them? If we live to age,
we have the more time and longer death. For then death, as Plato says, (...),
takes security of us for the whole by an Eye or an Ear; takes away our sight,
or our hearing. But who can promise himself to run through so many providence
to that time, which every one would come to; and when they are at it, they are
weary of? Indeed, as the Heathen said, We have not little time, but do lose
much. Nothing so precious as that which so many take care to drive away. Time
follows the motion of heaven: our time should. We cannot spend it better, nor
improve it, then for Eternity.

Is not this great Babel which I have built for the house of the Kingdom by the
might of my power, for the honor of my Majesty? said Nebuchadnezzar: but what
then? Nay, that is all can be said of it, or him. All makes but great
confusion. And the greatest condition is the greatest vanity. What is this to a
man, (not to say to a Philosopher, much less to a Christian) what is this to a
man, that he has been some body in the the world, and has strutted it here,
and taken up so much ground as if he would not have his neighbors walk by him?
What is all this? What will it come to? Wherein will it be resolved? One
meditation of death is better then all the world. For that may bring in also
good works, which will follow one after death; so the Poet also;

(...) -- Only this godliness goes along with men in death; whether men live or
dye, it perishes not. Godliness is profitable for all thigs, and has the
promise of this life and of that which is to come; as St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.8.
This life that now is; is now, and but now, for ought we know. Every moment we
change a possibility of death with life. Therefore let us not trouble our
selves for much provision; for there is another life in the promise, and this
life is very short. Let us make it longer by doing more good, lest when we die
nothing follow us, neither good words on earth, nor good works to heaven;
nothing but sorrow without a virtue, after judgment without mercy.

Take notice of a day of judgment. God has appointed a day, wherein he will
judge the world in righteousness by the man, whom he has ordained, whereof he
has given assurance unto all men in that he raised him from the dead, Act.
17.31. When we stand before this judge, what shall we say? How shall we answer?
Who shall answer for us? Thou shall answer for me O Lord my God, as the
Psalmist speaks.

There is no such answer as Christ does make. For he answers by satisfaction
and payment of that punishment which was due to us, and of that obedience which
was due from us. The handwriting (of works) which was against us he has
blotted out, has taken away, has nailed unto his Cross, Coloss. 2.14. Christ
has made sure of this bond. It is blotted out. It is taken away. It is nailed
unto his Cross. And it is nailed with such a nail, as he was nailed with; such
a nail as makes it immovable; for this nail was above all price.

We are not like to be ashamed of our hope in Christ, when he comes to be our
Judge. He that is the Judge, is our Advocate, our Jesus, our Savior. He will
not pass sentence against his own pleading and satisfaction. Therefore Grotius
when he was dying, had his full understanding, when (for his last words almost)
he said to him that reminded him of Christ for salvation, thus (as it is
recorded of him) In solo Christo omnis spes mea reposita est, all my hope is
reposed only in Christ. He could not die well without Christ his satisfaction.
He cannot answer without it at the day of judgment.

But yet our actions will be discussed, though they be pardoned; that those who
shall see others to have committed as great sins as they, may by reflection be
more punished, because they did not repent and believe: and that those, who
have repented and believed, may see the fruit of their virtues, when others who
have not done worse are condemned, and that they may glorify God for that
grace which has discerned them.

If we would have this severe tribunal in our thoughts, we should more
consider what we are doing, and what account we shall be able to give of it
then, when our own conscience (if Christ who is God did not know it) shall bear
witness against us in that judgment, unto the expectation whereof it has
privately prepared us. Did we think upon these things as we ought, would we
adventure so dreadful a reckoning for so little, so short pleasure, or profit,
or honor? Would we throw away our immortal souls upon a presumption that what
we do may be lawful; if we did perpend and ponder it within us, that this
would be called over again in that supreme judicature, wherein we shall be
sentenced not according to our opinion of it, which blind lust has impetuously
huddled up; but according to the proportion it does bear to the law of God,
which we are bound to know?

Weigh it then beforehand, whether thy subtle distinction will bear any weight
in that even balance of the high Court of justice. Will not thy waxie
distinction melt at the fire of that great day? Will this washie distinction
have any substance and depth, when it shall be openly brought into the
examination and decision of him who knows his own law and thy heart?

In the course of thy secular affairs, the debate in thy soul betwixt interess
and duty goes thus; by carnal reason which speaks for interess, thou art
advised thus; If I go this way, I shall get much, and I shall live splendidly,
I shall be made: then conscience which is for God and duty, advises otherwise;
If thou do thus, thou do undo thy immortal soul; and thus it sticks a
while, peradventure. But then carnal reason, which is eager to satisfy the
appetite inordinate, devises how to satisfy consoience about the lawfulness
in such cases, and either puts it off with easy arguments, or determins
tumultuously against it. Alas! poor Christian! how long will the pleasure of
this resolution hold? until the heat of the appetite, and of the advantage be
over. Then conscience returns and doubles the sorrow of guilt, and when the
lust of thy interess is cooled, fills thy soul with nothing but horror. Or
if thy conscience by thy habit of sin and Gods judgment be laid fast asleep;
yet remember there is a trumpet which will awaken thee, and it. Think upon it
and that great Assize; and before thou do conclude what to do in a case of
doubt, meditate with thy self, which part Affirmative or Negative is nearest
unto virtue; and which thou will wish thou had taken, when thou do appear
at the Judgment seat of Christ; and do accordingly. Wherefore has God put in
thee an ability of flying back, in thy mind, upon time and actions past unto
repentance, and so also of running forwards in the thoughts of what is to come,
but that by the presensation of that formidable trial, thou might prevent
repentance, and condemnation; repentance now; condemnation then?

Thou have a small voice within thee to direct thy practice, and to check thy
errors, and to threaten thee with another manner of proceeding at the day of
judgment.

There is another voice without thee; the voice of the Minister, who is to lift
up his voice like a trumpet (as the Prophet was bidden) to tell thee of thy
sins, and what thou must expect, when the judge comes, if thou do not
mende. Do not silence the first voice, nor the second. Refuse to hear neither
of these. But if thou do, there is another great voice of a Trumpet of the
Archangel, which at last will sound and will awaken thee. Think, as the Father
did, that thou do hear always sounding in thy ears, the Trumpet, Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment.

This Supreme and last Court will examine, and judge, and sentence our
thoughts, our words, our actions; will cut up and lay open all our plots and
designs and private haunts, and undeliberated motions, and will sentence them
in their guilt, though it does not redound to the person through Christ, unto
those who are in him accepted unto life and glory. O sweet sentence! Come ye
blessed!

But what confusion and amazement will fall upon the wicked then, when the
universe shall be dissolved by that terrible conflagration; when conscience
shall then loudly accuse, Christ shall everlastingly condemn, and Satan shall
take them home to be punished with him, because they have been obedient to him
against the law of God, the dictates of conscience, the tenders of grace and
reconciliation. So just it is with God to appoint Satan for their Executioner
of punishment, whom they have served as a Tempter in their sin, as Aquinas
notes.

O that dismal sentence, Go ye cursed! Go then into thy closet, and think
seriously of these things. Adventure all rather then the loss of thy immortal
soul in an everlasting death.

Make peace with thy God through Christ betimes, before there is no peace to be
made. Consider the differences of those two places; but two; there is no place
for a third. And if thou be tempted of Satan through the world by the flesh,
with hopes or fears to forsake God, or Christ, or the truth, or righteousness;
say as the Martyr said, (whom St. Basil speaks of) that they cannot threaten
thee with any thing so bad as Hell; and they cannot offer thee any thing so
good as Heaven: thou art worse threatened, and better offered. Be as wise now,
as thou will wish thou had been when that day comes.

CHAP. XII.
WE have hitherto spoken somewhat in commendation of Goodness in several
parts of it. The formal respect of this goodness, as has been touched, does
lie in obedience of our actions unto God. And in this we have not, as I know
of, any dissenters. All carry up in true obedience a respect to God from whom
the commandment of service and worship does come.

But the present world seems to make it a great question, whether there be any
goodness accountable in obedience to lawful authority amongst men, either in
Civil or Ecclesiastical things. And they do, in effect, place a goodness in
inobedience thereunto; since they will not allow any degree of goodness unto
those who will not relinquish conformity to former principles. Yea too many
have put an high godliness in high disobedience to some known laws.

I have been moved to think upon this case, and it does somewhat concern me.

Therefore first Negatively; where unto we shall premise some cautionary
conclusions, to avoid misprision.

1. We do not say that there is no goodness in any of those who are inobedient
to men. Some may be led away in simplicity of their hearts, as is said of the
people who went with rebellious Absalom, and followed him. It may be some think
that those who complied with the present turns, were in this wise men; but it
is best for them to be simple, otherwise their sin is the greater.

2. We do not say that inobedience to that which is bad, is not good. That
which is not good, it is good to decline; understanding that which is not good,
not of things indifferent, which in themselves are neither good nor bad, but of
that which is unlawful.

3. We do not put an equality betwixt the laws of God, and the laws of Men: God
forbid.

For 1. Humane laws cannot injoyne any new doctrine of faith to be subscribed,
or new worship to be practiced: this belongs to the written Word of God; which
is the adequate rule of faith and worship.

2. Divine laws require intuitive ebedience, as coming from God, who has
authority absolutely supreme; and cannot command any thing bad. Humane laws
require but a limited and conditionate obedience; as coming neither from
absolute authority, but subordinate to God; and also may, though he cannot
justly, impose that which is not right.

Therefore 3. Divine laws bind immediately: but Humane laws bind by mediation
of the Divine law; in general, as Matthew. 23.2. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. Heb.
13.17. to name no more.

4. There is no distinction of duty by active or passive obedience in the laws
of God; because the authority is absolutely absolute; and the matter morally
good, therefore commanded; or good, because commanded by him: but in Humane
laws there is use thereof; so that if in regard of the matter we cannot obey
actively; yet in regard of the lawful authority he has from God, we should
obey passively, and not resist. Therefore in obedience to Divine laws we look
first to the Author: in obedience to Humane laws we look first at the matter.

5. Divine laws require internal obedience even of external actions; which God
can examine and judge; but humane laws are satisfied with external obedience;
because the Court of man merely can go no further. Indeed obedience should be
given to men heartily: but this comes under the law of God; and is not included
in the law of man.

6. Humane laws do more properly bind the person. Divine laws do bind the
conscience directly, because we cannot dissent from the matter of the command;
as we cannot but dissent from some laws of men. For the conscience being
intellectual cannot close with that which appears to be wrong, and cannot but
embrace in its assent that which appears to be right, as suitable to the law
of God. So that liberty of Conscience as to Humane laws, is not in regard of it
self, infringed by them.

So then, these things being premised; by virtue of the former texts, it is
easy to conclude negatively; There is no goodness consisting in the nature of
inobedience, much less of disobedience to the laws of men. And those that
pretend to a duty of obedience only to God and Christ, and not to man, are not
obedient to God and Christ. As for that plea of some, to follow their
conscience, is good; they follow their conscience: it is a very weak one; and
needs no answer, but in courtesy.

This makes it not simply good to be inobedient, that herein they follow their
Conscience; which does not necessarily, but by evil accident dictate this to
them.

2. To follow conscience simply is not simply good, but to follow conscience
regulated by the Law of God; for then St. Paul had done well in persecuting the
Church of Christ, according to his conscience, with Zeal. Those that follow
their conscience erroneous negatively or affirmatively, they do not sin, in the
formality, against conscience, because they do according to it: yet they sin in
the matter against the Law of God, which ought to rectify their conscience.
The erroneous conscience, as the rule is, does not bind them to do so, because
it is erroneous; but it binds them not to do against it, because it is
conscience.

Therefore as we should have a quick conscience to move; so should we have an
informed conscience to direct: otherwise we may do, as some have done, the
Devils work in Gods name. That of Tacitus is very considerable, Plurasaepe
peccantur dum demeremur, quam dum offend mus; in thinking to do well we often
offend more then in plain offenses So then there is no urging conscience for
things bad.

Affirmatively now, there is a goodness belonging to humane obedience, in the
right state of it, first if there be authority in him that makes the Law.
External power does not morally ground obedience, which has relation to due
authority. 2. For the matter of the law, it must not be contrary to the Law of
God, because no man can be bound against the Law of God, who is absolute in his
authority, and infallible in his reason of Law. 3. In respect of the formal
motive of this obedience to man; and this should be their love to the Law of
God, who has commanded it as before. So that the principal object in this
obedience to man, is God.

Under these conditions of obedience to man, what should hinder, but that this
obedience should be part of our goodness, which we have now so great reason to
commend? And it is included in our obedience to God in the fifth Commandment?
And Supreme Governors are reasonably comprehended under Parents; because they
are such superiors to us; because they are as Fathers of the Country; and
because Kingly government, as Aristotle also, is rationally grounded in jure
paterno.

And therefore if there be any goodness in obedience to the precepts of God,
then there must be goodness, pro part, in this obedience to humane laws. And
if those sins are the greater, and wasting the Conscience, (as Divines say)
which have in them most dangerous consequences toward the vastation of
Societies; then what should be thought of those men that deny all duty of
obedience to men, and make it to be a duty to be disobedient? In Judge. 17.6. it
is said, In those days there was no King in Israel, but every one did that
which was good in his own eyes. Whereby it is inferred that when there was a
King, they did what was appointed; and the want of a King then, is signified to
be the cause of corruption of Religion; which might have been restrained by him.

Indeed if after the lawful command of a lawful Magistrate it were free for us
to do what we pleased, then not only would there not be any virtue in
obedience, but also there would not be the nature of obedience conserved. And
therefore although humane laws cannot properly, and in themselves bind the
Conscience; yet I do not yet see (those things being considered which are to be
considered) how the person should not be bound in conscience to obey the law,
if the thing be not opposite to the law of God; or to submit to his authority,
if he be the lawful Magistrate.

It is true, Calvin, who had the hap to mould Religion in way of opposition to
the Roman tyranny, denies all obligation of conscience by humane laws, as
being contrary to Christian liberty, in his third Book of Institutions, the 19.
chapter. Only to avoid scandal, he says, we ought to abstain from the use of
our liberty, in charity to a weak brother. This supposition of his many
embrace; only they add, that humane laws do also bind against contempt.

With respect to any that differ, me thinks this must not serve. If they bind
only in these cases, what will become of humane laws? To what purpose are those
Divine precepts of obedience to men? Will not every one say, though they do
nothing in obedience, they do not contemn the authority? And yet indeed some
have cruelly contemned it. So that they have not stood to their own principles
herein. And that binding against contempt respects authority in things
unlawful. Is there no more respect to be given to authority in things lawful
and convenient?

And if they bind, besides this, only in case of scandal; then first, put case
one thinks in his conscience he is bound in conscience to be obedient; is he in
an error, or not? If he be not; why are not they of the same mind? If he be in
an error; what will they do toward him? If they do not obey, they offend him:
if they do obey, they harden him in his error. 2. If they bind only in case of
scandal, besides the other case before; then even after imposition of them by
lawful authority, they are yet in the state and condition of things
indifferent: for even in these things charity binds against the use of
liberty, in point of scandal. And so we shall make nothing of authority, and so
we shall disanul the Ordinance and Laws of God. 3. Whenever they do not obey,
they give scandal to some or other; therefore as toward practice they should
always obey. 4. Had they the authority and power in their hands, would they be
contented with such obedience? No, they would not be contented: but would have
the world know, that their laws are the laws of Christ, and whosoever is not
obedient is a rebel to Christ.

And therefore though I have no mind to differ from any one; yet, if I have
liberty of conscience, I cannot in conscience join with them in this their
supposition. Neither can we imagine how those cases of scandal and contempt can
give satisfaction, when they are applied unto the former texts which require
obedience. Are we to give obedience to the law of God, which commands obedience
to the laws of men, rightly qualified, only in case of scandal? or can we
conceive that under obedience to lawful Magistrates in lawful things, there is
no more to be understood, then, if there be no scandal by inobedience, no
contempt by disobedience? Shall we think he has no power in things
indifferent? for if his power be only in the punishing of those who are
breakers of the Laws of God, and rewarding of those that are observers thereof;
then is our obedience enjoined to him only passive.

Therefore, if the question be thus stated, whether humane laws do bind the
Conscience; in these terms absolutely taken, it is denied: because we are
assured that no man has of himself any authority over the conscience; and
because we cannot be assured that that which is commanded, by virtue of his
command is right, but if the question be stated thus, Whether we are bound in
conscience to obey a lawful Magistrate in lawful commands, not only in the
former respects; I have no scruple sufficient against the affirmative.

One Argument may be this,

All Gods Commandments do bind in conscience. That we should be obedient to
humane laws is one of Gods Commandments; and therefore are we bound in
conscience to be obedient to humane laws; because we are bound to Gods law
concerning them. By the Law Divine we are obliged in conscience to them by
manner of the object of the thing. If we compare the humane law with the Divine
law touching it, the humane law, in the whole, is considered but as a
particular matter of the Divine law. And if we be bound in conscience to the
law of God in all matters of it, how should we not be bound to the Law of God
in this? So that if we do not obey, we do not offend a weak brother only, but
the great God, by whom Kings reign.

2. We are more bound to our Civil Parents, then children are bound to their
natural Parents. But children are bound in conscience to their natural Parents;
so then we are bound in conscience to our Civil Parents. That we are more
subject to our Civil Parents, appears in several regards; because first the
days we are preserved in, are more happy then those we were born in, since the
condition of our birth is uncertain, as the Orator says well. 2. The natural
Parent has not authority of life and death over the child, as the Civil
Parent has; which is given him immediately by God, as is noted; since the
people, even upon supposal of election, cannot give him this; as having not
power over their own lives. And 3. Because even the natural Parents are
subjects to the Civil Parent; so that if the natural parent should bid his
child do one thing, and the Civil parent should bid him do another, the
command of the natural parent must be sinked in obedience to the Civil; as the
rule is, The precept of the inferior does not bind, when it is contrary to the
precept of the superior.

Now for the Assumption, that children are bound in conscience to be obedient
to their parents, who, in conscience, can deny; since they have this impression
in them by law of nature, which binds the natural conscience, as Romans 2.15.
and because also their obedience has a Divine promise annexed to the command
of God, that they should be obedient to them, Ephesians. 6.2. Honor there is to be
expounded by obedience in the first verse. Now what promise can we say is made
by God, but in order to such obedience as we are not in conscience free to?
Indeed they should be obedient to their parents in the Lord, as in the text.
But this does not derogate from their due obedience, but does qualify it. It
does not abate their subjection in those things wherein they should be subject,
but does restrain the extension of it. Or it does terminate their obedience in
God; does not withdraw any lawful respect to their parents; therefore the next
words in the 2. verse are, Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

Thus, in brief, as toward our obligations to laws Civil, and the goodness of
obedience thereunto.

But some there are who will make a difference betwixt our obligedness to laws
Civil and laws Ecclesiastical.

To this in few, and in way of propositions. First, with us, the supreme
authority for the constitution of Ecclesiastical things is the same; and
therefore there can be no difference on that part. And as for them who hold
that no Civil authority is necessary to the sanction of orders for the Church;
if they could make their supposition good, they would further the conclusion;
for so the authority is more immediately from Christ himself.

2. Ecclesiastical constitutions which have the same authority with us, in
regard of their original issue of Supreme power; are like to bind as much as
Civil, by reason of as great assistance to be presumed for the framing of them,
as for the framing of those which are political: since we have a promise from
Christ of his blessing successively to the greatest actions, to be sure, of the
Church, in the end of St. Matthew, I will be with you to the end of the world;
which does not only respect Credends, but Agends also. And there is a reason of
such assistance in order to the third proposition.

The peace of the Church, unto which the Ecclesiastical constitutions do bind
in uniformity, is as considerable as the peace of the Nation. And if then the
political laws do bind as to the preservation of the public good in order,
and peace, and strength, and plenty; then why should not laws of the Church be
as valid in obliging unto unity, and peace, and order, and defense against the
adversaries thereof? And this is strengthened by the fourth proposition which
respects the end of all the orders of the Church; which is better to dispose
them by the means of grace which are dispensed in the Church, (and conveniently
ordered and administered by Discipline) to glory, which is the universal end of
all the world; and therefore even of polities. So that we may without much
demurre conclude, if we be bound in religion to obedience of laws Civil; we
have as much reason to be bound in obedience of religion to Church laws.

And to say no more at this time about this subject, we have experience to
compel, as much as may be, a more sober and strict and serious apprehension of
the necessity we have to forbear hereafter the violaof Ecclesiastical orders;
since we have paid so dear for our liberty in our breaches, which will not be
made up by further differences, and rents, and dissolutions.

When all is done or undone, we shall then sadly see, that, if any thing must
save this Nation and this Church, then it will be this, to do as we did, but
better. Conformity to God and men would reconcile us to God and man. Had we had
this goodness of obedience, we had not been at this day the astonishment of the
world in misery; as before in prosperity and glory of such a Nation and such a
Church, as could not be endured by envy and enemies.

CHAP. XIII.
TO commend now goodness to some sorts of men with a little more singular
respect, will make an end. For this is the way to our end.

We have hitherto spoken of it in communi, as unto persons. We shall now in our
wishes recommend it to some, from whom it may be more derivative to others: and
when we have dedicated the consideration of it to them, we have done.

Every man, in his own naturals, as such, has a duty to prosecute this
goodness: but yet they have a more peculiar obligation hereunto, who have
outward qualities, wherein every one does not communicate. Those that are
superior to others should be more eminent herein in virtue; and they should be
distinguished by this excellency. No such Characteristique of greatness, as
goodness. And yet if honor went by virtue, how many hypocrites should we have?
Every one would be like Galba, worthy to be a Prince, if he were not a Prince:
Nevertheless, if men be not the highest, because they are best; yet they should
be best, because they are highest. For every sin they commit, which is known,
is notorious, and exemplary; and sin from them goes easily down tumbling into
the valley of the people.

The Prince amongst the Jews was to have a copy of the law (and some will say
he was to have the best copy, such as with points) that he might read in it
diligently, and observe it for himself and others. As there is no worse way of
security to the people then resistance: so there is no better way of security
to the Prince then goodness. Power is the secular motive of obedience: the
moral motive is virtue. It is like to go well with a Nation when the Prince is
feared, and the people loved: but surely also it will not go amiss if the
people be loved by the Prince, and the Prince loved by the people. But here is
the mischief; the people will not account that a virtue, which is not directed
by their prudence; nor that to be goodness, which is not dictated by their
understanding. And then he that pleases the people, does not do his duty. It
were very desirable that Princes had no faults, or that the people had not a
fault, to desire to look into them. It is natural for men to love but little
those who are above them, because men have no mind to be ruled; and therefore
have more need of it: and also they would not seem to have such imperfections
as might make them fit for obodience. And therefore how brave were it, that as
the authority, so the worth of Princes were unquestionable; so as no man might
covet his place, or dislike his rule. And it would be happy if their subjects
would not suspect them the more, because they have so much liberty; or that
Princes would not take their liberty. And they have the less reason to take it,
because they have it. He is a good Prince, said he, whose vices do not exceed
his virtues: but should we northen love him, who is not yet charged with any
vice?

But this is too lofty a Theme for a deducted style. It is fit there should be
those who by their place and abilities should more move them at less distance.

And as for Nobles, if it did become me to speak of them, what would more
become them, then to be as they are called: not to be base in disingenuity and
vice? Surely there can be no better Nobility then in Royal blood. And there can
be no higher blood then the blood of Christ. And why then should not those who
are to be accounted Nobles, though they were not Christians, yet be as much
Christians as others, and so be more Honorable because they are made good,
then because they were born Nobles? To be well born and to live ill, is a
contradiction in the Original. Lewdness in a Noble, is as a dunghill in a
Courtyard; if I might say it.

But to press the engagements of goodness, upon these great personages is
rather meet for those (and such there have been) who have descended from Nobles
to be Clerks. These may speak home.

As for me; my mind is toward the Clergy of these Kingdoms; in whom surely
virtue is most expected; and whose coat it most adorns; and from whom it is
most influxive into the residue of men. Holy orders do make an appropriation of
it to them. No man can be well without it, surely not they. The Imposition of
hands does lay this charge upon them. They are consecrated to God; they are
elect vessels; they are to be clean; they are to be holy, they not for common
usages. Their faculty, as none other, has its end in heaven; and the action
of them is to draw men up from earth, and out of the danger of hell to heaven;
and what they teach, should they not do? St. Luke in the first verse of the
Acts speaks of his relating what Christ did do and teach; first what he did.
Practice of the people follows more easily the Ministers teaching, when the
practice of the Minister goes before his teaching. A good Minister preaches
all the week: He has never done his Sermons that does them. His Ministry is
good without goodness: but his Ministry is not so profitable without it, nor
is he a good Minister without it. Their Ministry is not so apt to work upon
men without virtue: although the acts of their Ministry are as valid as of
others. For who can know who are really good? And if the efficacy of their acts
did absolutely follow the goodness of the Minister, the goodness must be
without dissimulation and hypocrisy; which to know belongs to him who knows
the hearts; not to them who see their faces. Yet as God works by weak means;
so can he work by bad men. And if their badness make the success more
difficult; this does more set out the power of God. By how much the Instrument
is wanting of fitness, the Agent gains of praise by the effect. We have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God,
as St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4.7. So there is this treasure in bad vessels, that the
excellency of the power might be of God. He gives the grace of gifts for the
good of the Church: he gives the gift of grace for the good of the soul of him
to whom he gives it. The function is formally and properly executed by gifts;
which are not made effectual by the grace of the Minister, but by the grace of
God in the hearer. The grace of the Minister may move morally: but it is the
grace of God which works effectually.

Yet wickedness in a Minister is not a single inconvenience; but as a calamity.
How much good he may do by his learning, I cannot say: but he might do more
with goodness. There is no real worth in all the world but in learning and in
virtue: and how worthy were Ministers, if they had their part in this
combination!

Scholarship without piety what is it like? It is like a Gem in a toades head.
Like spots in the Moon. Like a Surplice soaking in a swill-tub. Like a remedy
with poison in it. Like one of Aarons bells with a flaw in it. Good words
without any Syntaxis. It is as that which is best in that which is worst.

Infirmities without sin we have cause to thank God for; for they may be of
great use to make private Christians: but abilities without sin, how much
should we bless God for! for they would make brave Ministers, and such
Ministers would make a brave Church. The world will be ere long, it may be,
weary of their humors in the businesses of the Church: and such Ministers
would the sooner help them to it. Such lights and integrities would soon put
out their new lights without integrity.

If any men were born without original sin, they should be Ministers. If any
could live without actual sin, they should be Ministers. If there were any
venial sin, it should not be in Ministers. If any sin be unpardonable in
subjecto, it is the sin of Ministers. If any men's sin by their profession comes
near to the sin against the holy Ghost; then the sin of those who commit it
against holy orders, and who should be ghostly Fathers. If any should be as
Angels in flesh, then the Ministers. If any should be negligent of their
bodies, and yet careful, then Ministers: Negligent for themselves; careful for
God. If any man should be the best man in the Parish, then he that keeps the
best house: And who is to keep the best house, but he that keeps the house of
God? If any man's sin deserve seven years penance, then the Ministers. If any
man's sin be infinite by redundance, then the Ministers. If any man's sin may
spare the Devil a tentation of the people, then the sin of Ministers. If any
man's sin calls God and Religion into question, then a Ministers. If any man's sin
be as Hell in Heaven, then a Ministers. If any man's sins be monsters, then
Ministers; as Parisiensis said.

God make me able to do the offices of a Minister; but God deliver me from the
punishment of a Minister. As he has the highest place in the Church, which is,
as he said, the terrestrial heaven; so shall he have the worst place in Hell.

Thou that bear the name of Christ in the quality of thy calling, do thou
make it bear the reproach of thy unworthyness and lewdness? Thou may well be
able to bear reproach for the name of Christ; but can thou endure that the
name of Christ should bear any reproach for thee? Is it not enough, O my
Savior, that thou must suffer by my inabilities; but must thou also suffer by
my sinfulness? Since thou have made me thy servant by my function; make me also
thy servant, as I am a Christian; that I may not be less a Christian then
others, since I am more a servant of thine then others. Let me not be thine
enemy, since thou have made me thy especial servant: but since thou have
honored me in this employment, let me endeavor to please thee in all things.
And if thou do ever put me into any house of thine, let me not use it as the
Devils farm-house. Let me not be covetous for a world, who am sequestered from
the world, to work for thee. If we had no bodies, nor no use of bodies in thy
work, what should we have to do with secular affairs? but since we have no
duty to mind them, let us have them more with thy love then with ours. And if
thou do take away thy part from us here; make us contented in expectation of
our part with thee above what can be expressed. Let us serve thee though for
nothing, if we can. It is impossible but to have enough in thy service: since
we cannot desire more then we shall have in thy reward. Let me not be covetous
in Zeal to my Nation and the Church; or in spite to all the mischiefs, which it
in most men, and particularly in the Clergy, and in some other officers has
brought upon them. How can I teach Heaven, and love this earth! Why do I not
leave thee, if I do not love thee? Let me be any thing rather then an Hypocrite
in the Church.

Alas! we do not please our heavenly Father in being more rich: neither is it
according to his mind we should be politic without virtue. No man speaks so
well for him, as he that is not afraid of poverty. Nor can any man preach
against Covetousness (which is his great enemy) heartily, but he that has it
not in his heart. Longinus in his (...), said well, No man can speak highly who
is covetons: certainly no man can speak well for heaven who is covetous. And
therefore let the world consider whether those are to be accounted the best
Preachers, who now are known to be most covetous. This fault has indeed been
imputed to some others of the Clergy, and to some of those who are highest in
the Church. Surely in Overseers it is a great oversight. But had it not been
more in others, the Church had not had less now. We are not now miserable
because some Bishops amongst us were covetous; but because some covetous
amongst us were not Bishops.

But somewhat of a good wish would be reserved for temperance in Priests;
without which they cannot speak. Would thou not have the people follow thee?
Yes, but which way? Whither? To the tap-house? Do such sots so direct
Christians to salvation? Use a little wine for thy stomach sake, and thy
ordinary infirmities, as St. Paul advises Timothy, 1 Epist. 5.23. But drink
not too much for thy souls sake; and many scandals to thy people. Remember,
Timothy before drunk water. Remember, the dose he is prescribed is but small.
Remember, he had many infirmities, and this was his Physic. The best way of
using delights is as Physic; not for themselves, but for their use and end.
Take heed, there is death in this pot; as was said to the Prophet, death in
this pot to thee; to the Sons of the Prophets, and to the people by thy
example. Think upon the Priest, who when he found once the misery of this vice,
would give to the party which confessed to him this sin, no other penance.
Think upon the Chaplain, who was often overcome of this fault, and often
ashamed of it; and to shame himself the more and publicly, rid his horse into
the water, loosed the bridle to have him drink, put down his head to have him
drink more, (it may be whistled him to it) but the horse would no more then
would serve him; then he took off his ornaments, his hood, and put it upon his
horse, and so rode into the Court, to show unto them by his own confession that
the horse had more wit then he, and therefore better deserved that habiliment.

How easily would a Satyr come alone against this intemperance in those who
scarce have leisure to eat or drink for their necessities? Had they a mind
soberly to defend that Church which others go about (as he said) soberly to
destroy, they should abound with tears more then wine.

This little is enough against them, and truly for them, if any words would
reclaim them. And certainly, if the condition of the Church, the calamities of
the Nation, the contempt upon the Clergy, the danger of all that had any
English name and honor upon it, will not yet make them serious and stayed, and
dry, and wet with sorrow; then there is no power in words which will be
effectual; unless in the word of God; which such have no desire to preach or
hear against their beloved lust.

And thon that swearest idly and wickedly, should thou not teach others
not to swear? Or do thou preach against oaths (for which the Land mourns,
as the Prophet) and yet art thou not unblameable herein? Do thou by
blasphemous oaths call down God to bear testimony of thy impiety, and to be
avenged of thee? or do thou by such expressions as are within danger of
being accounted formal oaths, grieve those that are not scandalized herein?
Who is there that should abstain from all appearance of evil, if not he who
has an engagement of particular profession against it? He that shall break the
least Commandment, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5.19. And what shall thou be called then, who beakest not a small
Commandment? And if thou say thou teach men otherwise: It may be so in
thy Sermon, yet seldom or coldly, but yet thou teach men also so. Out of
thy own mouth will God condemn thee. And out of thy own mouth thou teach
them so, in thy practice. At thy Ordination thou did take from the Bishop
that Book into thine hand to urge unto faith and good life; and do thou take
the name of God also in vain? Will he hold thee guiltless? There is nothing
for thee to do, but to do better. If thou do not speak against swearing, thou
do offend in commission: if thou do speak against it and do so, thou
do offend by thy hypocrisy and thy example. How are the people like to
profit by thee, unless in the vice? Thy Doctrine is indeed good, but thy Use
is contrany.

And as Clerks are twice to be blamed for every sin they do, and for every
duty they do not: so also are some to be reproved by others for doing
nothing. Wherein they seem to do nothing but ill, because they do ill in doing
of nothing. If ye have not work enough as you are Christians, have ye not work
enough to do as you are Ministers? You have no holy days but in your
conversation. That day wherein others do rest, is your chief workyday. What
term are you expressed by in Scripture, wherein you can find any intimation of
ease? And if there be any for intermission, the end of it is labor. Therefore
they may be out of their study, but never in idleness. Could they do well
without sleep, they should do well not to sleep, that others may rest: even thy
very idleness is sacrilege; for therein thou take away from God that time
which thou did give him, and consecrate to him, when thou did take orders.
Thou art not thine own upon the account of a Christian, how should thou have
any thing for thy self, as thou art a Minister? The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7.
Their lips drop the honey, but it cost them time to gather and make it.

Oh! Brethren, take we little care for the discharge of this voluminous work;
when as hereby we do in these times encourage the Layman to lay hold upon that
action, without capacity and imposition of hands?

Undoubtedly as the gross sins of those who would communicate in the Sacrament,
has given advantage to them who had an affection to separation: so the
perfunctory expedition of Ministerial work has furthered the boldness of
private men to put their hand to this plough; although it be more fit for
another.

Do they think they do ingenuously, when they are taking away our maintenance,
to take away also our work? But let us show unto them their folly by our
wisdom. Do thou show unto them their inability by thy abilities; their
impudence by thy modesty and courage; their inauthority by thy authority; which
God has given thee for edification, not for destruction, unless of them: which
also thou can not do but in thine own defense. O glorious Reformation! O
unheard of propagation of the Gospel! This we have to comfort us for all
losses, that we shall be taught by those who never learned to understand those
Languages wherein Christ upon the Cross was set out; as if those Languages had
been upon the Cross, that they also might be crucified.

What a misery it is that we have not the trick of recovering our joy by
falling into their opinions of these times! We want but one good conceit of the
present world to be as happy as others in their sense, and miserable in ours.

If we may have the leave to do them a Christian favor, we pity them; because
they will be wrong, until they have nothing left them but repentance.

I follow them thus into digressions: To return. If the Clergy bear yet a
filial respect to their Mother, the Church of England (as many do) and would
have it flourish as then when it was feared by the Adversaries; let them return
to their obedience in great industry and good life, with subjection; lest it
never be in any other condition then to be laughed at by the enemies of it, and
also by those, who have other words, but the same practices. Good God! what
will become of irregular Clergy? And if they be irregular, what will become of
the people? And if the people be irregular, what will become of the Church? And
if the Church be not better, what will become of the Nation?

Let us bethink our selves how much the glory of God, and the prosperity of the
whole does lie upon the diligent performances, and pious conversations of the
Ministers of the Gospel. If they were better, the people would be better; if
the people were better, the Church would be better; if the Church were better,
the Nation would be better. If the vine were fruitful, the elm would not be cut
down.

There were two pillars in the porch of the Temple set up, which were called
Jachin and Boaz, 1 King. 7.21. And there be two great pillars which uphold the
house of God, the Church, there are for this also Jachin and Boaz, the pillar
on the right hand, Jachin; the Magistrate: the pillar on the left hand, Boaz
the Minister. Moses and Aaron; King and Priest. God has in his indignation
despised the King and the Priest, as Jeremy complained in his Lament. 2.6. The
same hand raises up. The word in the Hebrew is fit for our devotions; he raise
up. The other pillar signifies strength. And if the strength of a Realm be in
God, it is in order thereunto in those who have holy orders. And therefore if
those who remain, would have the honor of their place, and of their use, let
them who are faulty, preach well; and if they would do well, let them live
well. And if we would be stronger, let us hold together. Our unity would
scatter our Adversaries. If we had any thing to do for them, we should differ.
We have much to do for the conversion of the Jew and the Gentile, let us agree.
How shall they come to us, when we go away from one another?

There is a memorable story of a Present that was sent to the Great Turk from
Queen Elizabeth; and it was a very fair Bible richly bound: but one of his
great Attendants told him, that those who professed the religion of that book
were very much divided amongst themselves. The Turk then said to this purpose:
then we are as well. Oh Christians, have you any bowels, any compassion toward
those who differ from your Religion? Then hold togother in it. And let them
conceive your Religion is true, because you are good. And let the Ministers be
best; otherwise they are worst: as Salvian said of Christians; We are the
worse, because we should be better: so Ministers, who should be the best of
Christians, must otherwise be the worst of men. And if, as he said, we must
give an account at the Day of Judgment of what we have done in our own body:
what account shall we give of that which we have done in the body of Christ,
the Church?

He is Head of his Church; He is King of his Church; He is the Archbishop of
his Church: We are all his servants: and servants to none else; but for him:
This was St. Paul's Complement, We Preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

Let us not be inconformable to him, that we may please men or women. Remember
St. Paul, Gal. 1.10. If I should please men, I should not be the servant of
Christ.

Christ did conform to the observing of the Feast of the Deditation, which was
not commanded by God: so we read in the 10. of St. John, 22, 23. verses.

Therefore we do not so learn Christ, to be inconformable. If we will be like
him, we must be obedient to God; and if we are obedient to God, we are to Man.

To conclude all; we have had many unhappy changes with new principles, and
old lives: but surely, we shall never do well, until we come again to our old
Protestant principles, but new lives.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 28. lin. 12. read Master for Maker.

P. 70. l. 21. dishes f. dieties.

P. 85. l. 9. leave f. bear.

P. 145. l. 15. leave out and.

P. 146. l. 3. Apologet f. Apology.

A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in sol. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of Henry Hammond D.D. in two volumes in 4o. Differtationes quatuor,
quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico Hammond. in 4o. A
Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 12o. Of Schism. A Defense of the
Church of England, against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12o. Of
Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H. Hammond, D.D. in 12o.
The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D. viz.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the Year; Together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness, and Separation
of the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy afferted, in 4o. 3. The
History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed. Jesus Christ, 2d Edit. in
fol. 4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o. 5. An Apology for authorized and
Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o. 6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and
efficacy upon all Beleivers, in 4o. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living,
in 12o. 8. The Rule and exercifes of holy dying, in 12o. 9. A short Catechism
for institution of young persons in the Christian Religion, in 12o. 9. The
Real Presence and Spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8o. Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference
between the late King of England, and the late Lord Marquis of Worcester
concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together with a Vindication of the
Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o. The Psalter of David, with Titles
and Collects according to the matter of each Psalm, by the Right honorable
Chr. Hatton, in 12o. Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded
and afflicted souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12o. The
life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr. Hudson in 12o. Motives for Prayer upon the
seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker Knight, in 12o. The Guide unto
True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, directing man to
the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crock, in 12o. Six excellent Sermons upon
several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Viear of Hoxne, in 4o. The Dipper
dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by Dantel
Featly D. D. in 4o. Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon
old R. ecords, by Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o. Philosophical Elements, concerning
Government and Civil society: by Thomas Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o. An Essay
upon Statius, or the five first books of Publ. Papinius Statius his Thebais, by
Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S. Edmonds-bury, in 8o. Nomenclatura Brevis
Anglo-Latino Graeca in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8o.
Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8o. A
Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir Geo. Strode Knight, in 12o. The Saints
Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by Rich. Gove Preacher of Henton S. Gorge in
Somersetshire, in 8o. Devotion digested, into several Discourses and
Meditations upon the Lords most holy Prayer: Together with additional
Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The
Creatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God, The Mercies of God, The souls
complaint of its absence from God; by Peter Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in
Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o. Of the Division between the English and
Romish Church upon Reformation, by Hen. Fern D. D. in 12o. Directions for the
profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John White M. A. in 8o. The Exemplary
Lives and Memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of the world, 3 Jews, 3
Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4o. The Saints Legacies, or a
Collection of promises out of the Word of God, in 12o. Judicium Universitat is
Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Foedere, Juramento Negativo etc. in 8o. Certain
Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversaries of our times by Jasper Main D. D. in 4o. Janua Linguarum
Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium, Auctore Cl. Viro J.
A. Comenio, in 8o. A Treatise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for
all Ages, by Tho. Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o. Animadversions upon Mr.
Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir Walter Rawleighs History
of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12o. Fisty Sermons preached by that learned
and reverend Divine John Done, in fol. Wirs-Common-wealth, in 12o. The Banquet
of Jests new and old, in 12o. Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8o. Quarles
Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o. Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles.
Amesit antisynodalia, in 12o. Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by
John Tombs in 12o. Dr Stuart's Answer to Fountain's Letter, in 4o. A Tract of
Fortifications, with 22 brass cuts, in 4o. Dr. Griffiths Sermon preached at S.
Paul's, in 4o. Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o. A Discourse of the
state Ecclesiastical, in 4o. An Account of the Church Catholic where it was
before the Reformation, by Edward Boughen D.D. in 4o. An Advertisement to the
Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the Author of the Observations
up Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4o. Episcopacy and Prasbytery considered, by Hen.
Fern D.D. in 4o. A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before His Majesty, by
Hen. Fern D.D. in 4o. The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright, in
4o. An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o. A Treatise of
Self-denial, in 4o. The holy Life and Death of the late Vi-countesse Falkland
in 12o. Certain Considerations of present Concernment: Touching this Reformed
Church of England, by Hen. Fern, in 12o. Englands Faithful Reprover and
Monitour, in 12o.
Newly published,
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons, by John Allington, B. D. in
12o. The Quakers Questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, and
many sacred acts and offices of Religion, with brief Answets thereunto:
Together with a Discourse of the holy Spirit his workings and impressions on
the souls of men, by R. Sherlock B.D. in 8o.

