MR. ST. JOHN'S Argument.
My Lords,
THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament have
passed a Bill for the attainting of Thomas Earl of Strafford of High Treason.
The Bill has been transmitted from them to your Lordships. It concerns not
him alone, but your Lordships and the Commons too, though in different Respects.

It is to make him as miserable a man, as man or Law can make him.

Not loss of life alone, but with that, of honor, name, posterity, and
estate; Of all that is dear to all.

To use his own expression, an eradication of him both root and branch, as an
Achan, a troubler of the State, as an execrable, as an accursed thing.

This Bill, as it concerns his Lordship, the highest that can be in the penal
part, so does it on the other side as highly concern your Lordships and the
Commons in that which ought to be the tendrest, the Judicatory within, that
that judge not them who judge him: And in that which is most sacred amongst
men, the public Justice of the Kingdom.

The Kingdom is to be accounted unto for the loss of the meanest member, much
more for one so near the head.

The Commons are concerned in their Account for what is done, your Lordships in
that which is to be done.

The business therefore of the present Conference, is to acquaint your
Lordships with those things that satisfied the Commons in passing of this Bill,
such of them as have come within my capacity, and that I can remember, I am
commanded from the Commons at this time to present unto your Lordships.

My Lords, in Judgments of greatest moment, there are but two ways for
satisfying those that are to give them, Either the Lex lata, the Law already
established, Or else the use of the same power for making new Laws, whereby
the old at first received life.

In the first consideration, of the settled Laws; In the degrees of punishment
the positive Law received by general consent, and for the common good, is
sufficient to satisfy the conscience of the Judge in giving judgment
according to them.

In several Countries there is not the same measure of punishment for one and
the same offense. Wilful murder in Ireland is Treason, and so is the wilful
burning of a house or stack of Corn. In the Isle of Man, it is felony to steal
a Hen, but not to steal a Horse; and yet the Judge in Ireland has as just a
ground to give judgment of high Treason in those Cases there, as here to give
judgment only of felony, and in the Isle of Man of felony for the Hen, as here
of petty Larceny.

My Lords, in the other consideration of using the Supreme power, the same Law
gives power to the Parliament to make new Laws, that enables the inferior
Court to judge according to the old. The rule that guides the conscience of the
Inferior Court is from without, the prescripts of the Parliament and of the
Common Law; in the other the rule is from within; That salus populi be
concerned; That there be no wilful oppression of any the fellow members, that
no more blood be taken than what is necessary for the Cure, the Laws and
Customs of the Realm as well enable the exercise of this, as of the ordinary
and judicial power.

My Lords, what has been said, is because that this proceeding of the Commons
by way of Bill, implies the use of the mere Legislative power, in respect new
Laws are for the most part past by Bill.

This, my Lords, though just and Legal, and therefore not wholly excluded, yet
it was not the only ground that put the Commons upon the Bill, they did not
intend to make a new Treason, and to condemn my Lord of Strafford for it, they
had in it other Considerations likewise, which were to this effect.

1 First, the Commons knew that in all former ages, if doubts of Law arose upon
cases of great and general Concernment, the Parliament was usually consulted
withal for resolution; which is the reason that many Acts of Parliament are
only declarative of the Old Law, not introductive of a new, as the great
Charter of our Liberties; the Statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward
the third, of Treasons; the Statute of the Prerogative, and of late the
petition of Right. If the Law were doubtful in this Case, they conceived the
Parliament (where the old may be altered, and new Laws made) the fittest
Judge to clear this doubt.

2 Secondly, my Lords, they proceeded this way to out those scruples and
delays, which through dis-use of proceedings of this nature might have risen
in the manner and way of proceeding, since the Statute of the first of Henry
the fourth, the seventeenth chapter, and more fully in the Roll, number* 144.
The proceedings in Parliament have usually been upon an Indictment first
found, though in Cases of Treason particularly mentioned in the Statute of the
five and twentieth year of Edward the third, which had not been done in this
Case: Doubts likewise might rise for Treasons, not particularly mentioned in
the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. whether the declaratory power of Parliament be taken
away, and if not taken away, in what manner they were to be made, and by whom.
They find not any Attainders of Treason in Parliament for near this 200
years, but by this way of Bill. And again, they knew that whatsoever could be
done any other way, it might be done by this.

3 Thirdly, in respect of the proofs and depositions that have been made
against him; for first, although they knew not but that the whole Evidence
which has been given at the Bar, in every part of it is sufficiently
comprehended within the Charge, yet if therein they should be mistaken, if it
should prove otherwise, use may justly be made of such Evidence in this way of
Bill, wherein so as Evidence be given in, it is no way requisite that there
should have been any Articles or Charge at all. And so in the Case of double
Testimony upon the Statute of the first of Edward the sixth, whether one direct
witness with others to Circumstances, had been single or double Testimony;
and although single Testimony might be sufficient to satisfy private
Consciences, yet how far it would have been satisfactory in a judicial way
where forms of Law are more to be stood upon, was not so clear; whereas in
this way of Bill private satisfaction to each man's Conscience is sufficient,
although no evidence had been given in at al.

My Lords, the proceeding by way of Bill, it was not to decline your Lordships
Justice in the judicial way; In these Exegencies of the State and Kingdom, it
was to husband time by silencing those doubts: they conceived it the speediest
and the surest way.

My Lords, These are in effect, the things the Commons took into their
Consideration, in respect of the manner, and way of proceeding against the
Earl. In the next place I am to declare unto your Lordships, the things they
took into their Consideration, in respect of the matter and merits of the
Cause; They are comprehended within these six heads.

1. That there is a treason within the Statute of 25. E. 3. by Levying of war
upon the matter of the fifteenth Article.

2. If not by actual levying of war, yet by advising and declaring his
intention of war, and that by Savils warrant, and the advice of bringing over
the Irish army, upon the matter in the 23 Article; The intending of a War, if
not within the Clause of Levying War in the statute of 25. E. 3. yet within
the first treason of compassing the death of the King*

3. If neither of these two single Acts be within the Statute of 25. E. 3. yet
upon putting all together, which has been proved against him, That there is a
Treason within the first clause of compassing the death of the King.

Et si non prosunt singula, juncta juvant.

4. That he has sessed and laid Soldiers upon the Subjects of Ireland against
their will, and at their Charge, within the Irish Statute of the eighteenth
year of Henry the sixth. That both person and thing are within the Statute,
That the statute remains in force to this day, That the Parliament here has
Cognizance of it. And that even in the ordinary way of Judicature, that if
there be a Treason, and a Traitor, that the want of jurisdiction in the
Judicall way, may justly be supplied by Bill.

5. That his endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of
the Realms of England and Ireland, and instead thereof, to introduce a
tyrannical Government against Law, is Treason by the Common law, That Treasons
at the Common Law are not taken away by the Statutes of 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. c.
10. 1. Mar. c. 1. nor any of them.

6. That as this Case stands, It Is just and necessary to resort to the Supreme
power in Parliament, in case all the rest should fail.

Of these six, five of them are Treason, within the Compass of the Laws
already established, Three within the Statute of 25. E. 3. One within the Irish
Statute, the other by the Common Law of England.

If but any one of these six Considerations hold, The Commons conceive that
upon the whole matter they had good cause to pass the Bill.

My Lords, for the first of levying War, I shall make bold to read the Case
to your Lordships before I speak to it; it is thus:

The Earl did by warrant under his hand and Seal give authority to Robert
Savill a Sergeant at Arms, and his Deputies, to sesse such number of Soldiers,
horse and foot of the Army in Ireland together with an officer, as the Sergeant
should think fit, upon his Majesty's Subjects of Ireland against their will:
This warrant was granted by the Earl to the end to compel the Subjects of
Ireland to submit to the unlawful Summons and orders made by the Earl upon
paper Petitions exhibited unto him in case of private Interest between party
and party; This warrant was executed by Savill and his Deputies by sessing of
Soldiers both horse and foot, upon diverse of the Subjects of Ireland against
their will in warlike manner, and at diverse times the Soldiers continued upon
the parties upon whom they were sessed, and wasted their goods, until such time
as they had submitted themselves unto those Summons and orders.

My Lords, This is a levying of war within the statute of 250. E. 3. The
words of the Statute are, If any man do levy war against our Lord the King
in his Realm, this is declared to be Treason.

I shall endeavor in this to make it appear to your Lordships. 1 What shall
be a levying of War, in respect of the motive or cause of it. 2 What shall be
said a levying of war in respect of the Action orthing done. 3 And in the
third place, I shall apply them to the present Case.


It will be granted in this of levying of war, That forces may be raised and
likewise used in a warlike manner, and yet no levying of war within the
Statute, that is, when the forces are raised and employed upon private ends
either of revenge or interest.

Before this Statute in E. 1. time. The Title of a Castle was in difference
between the Earls of Hereford and Gloucester, for the mainetaining of the
possession on the one side, and gayning of it on the other Forces were raised
on either side of many hundred men, they marched with Banners displayed one
against the other. In the Parliament in the 20. year of Edw. 1. this adjudged
only trespass, and either of the Earls fined 1000. marks a piece.

After the Statute in Hillary Term, the fiftieth year of Edward the third, in
the Kings Bench, Rot. 3. Nicholas Huntercome in a warlike manner, with 40 men
armed, amongst other weapons, with Gunnes (so ancient as appears by that
Record they were) did much spoil in the Manor of the Abbee of Dorchester, in
the County of Oxford: This no Treason: So it has been held by the Judges,
that if one or more Townships upon pretense of saving their Commons, do in a
forcible and warlike manner, throw in Enclosures; This is only a Riot, no
Treason.

The words of the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. clear this Point, that if any man
ride armed openly or secretly with men at Arms against any other to kill and
rob, or to detain him until he has made fine and ransom for his
deliverance; this is declared not to be Treason, but Felony or Trespass, as
the case shall require, all the printed Statuts which have it covertly or
secretly are mis* printed; for the words in the Parliament Roll, as appears n.
17. are Discovertment ou secreretment openly or secretly.

So that my Lords, in this of levying war, the Act is not so much to be
considered, but as in all other Treasons and Fellonies, quo animo, with what
intent and purpose.

Obj. My Lords, If the end be considerable in levying war, it may be said,
that it cannot be a Treason war, unless against the King: For the words of
the statute are, If any man levy war against the King.

Ans. That these words extend further then to the Person of the King appears by
the words of the Statute, which in the beginning declares it to be Treason to
compass and imagine the Kings death, and after other Treasons, this is to be
declared to be Treason to levy war against the King. If the levying of war
extend no further then to the person of the King, these words of the Statute
are to no purpose, for then the first Treason of compassing the Kings death had
fully included it before, because that he which levies war against the person
of the King does necessarily compass his death.

Its a war against the King when intended for alteration of the Laws or
Government in any part of them, or to destroy any of the great Officers of the
Kingdom. This is a levying of War against the King.

1 Because the King does protect and maintain the Laws in every part of them,
and the great Officers to whose care he has in his own steed delegated the
Execution of them.

2 Because they are the Kings Laws, He is the Fountain from whence in their
several Channels they are derived to the Subject; all our inditements run
thus, Trespasses laid to be done, Contra pacem Domini Regis, the Kings peace
for exorbitant offenses, though not intended against the Kings Person, against
the King his Crown and Dignity.

My Lords, this construction is made good by diverse Authorities of great
weight ever since the statute of 25. E. 3. downwards.

In R. the 2ds. time Sir Thomas Talbot conspired the death of the Dukes of
Gloucester and Lancaster, and some other of the Peers; for the effecting of it,
he had caused diverse people in the County of Chester to be armed in warre-like
manner, in Assemblies. In the Parliament held the seventeenth year of Richard
the second, number the 20. Sir Thomas Talbot accused of high Treason for this;
Its there declared, that insomuch as one of them was Lord high Steward of
England, and the other high Constable of England, that this was done in
destruction of the estates of the Realm, and of the Laws of the Kingdom, and
therefore adjudged Treason; and the judgment sent down into the Kings Bench,
as appears in Easter-Tearme in the seventh year of Richard the second in the
Kings Bench, Rott. 16. These two Lords had appeared in the eleventh year of
Richard the second in mainetenance of the Act of Parliament made the year
before; one of them was of the Commissioners appointed by Parliament, and one
of the Appellours of those that would have overthrown it: The Duke of
Lancaster likewise was one of the Lords that was to have been indicted of
Treason for endeavoring the maintenance of it, and therefore conspiring of
their deaths is said to be in destruction of the laws; This there declared to
be a Treson that concerned the Person of the King and the Commonwealth.

In that great insurrection of the Villains and meaner people in Richard the
seconds time, they took an oath, Quod Regi and Comunibus fidelitatem
servarent, to be true to the King and Commons, that they would take nothing but
what they paid for, punished all theft with death, here is no intendment against
the person of the King; The intent was to abolish the Law of villainage and
servitude, to burn all the Records, to kill the Judges; this in the Parliament
of the fifth year of Richard the second, number the one and thirtieth and two
and thirtieth, the first part, is declared to be Treason against the King and
against the Law.

In the eleventh year of Richard the second, in Parliament the raising of
forces against the Commissioners appointed by act of Parliament the year
before adjudged Treason by all the Judges.

The Statute of 1. Mar. cap. 12. enacts that if twelve or more shall endeavor
by force to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdom, he shall from
such a time there limited be adjudged only as a fellon; This act was to
continue but to the next Parliament, it is expired; it shows by the words
only that the offense was higher before the making of it.

My Lords, In Queen Elizabeth's time, Grant and diverse Prentices of London, to
the number of 200. rose and assembled at Tower Hill, carried a Cloak upon a
Pole instead of a banner, their intent was to deliver diverse Prentices out of
prison that had been committed upon a sentence in Star Chamber for ryots, To
kill the Lord Major of London, and for setting prizes on victuals. In Trinity
Term 37. Eliz. diverse of the Judges consulted withal, and resolved that this
was a levying of war against the Queen, being intended against the
government and officers of the Queen, and thereupon Grant and others executed
as Traitors.

Afterward in that Queens time, diverse of the County of Oxford consulted
together to go from house to house in that County, and thence to London and
other parts to excite them to take Arms for the throwing in of all enclosures
throughout England, nothing was done, nor no Assembly: The Statute of 13. Eliz.
cap. 1. during the Queens life made it Treason to intend or advise to levy war
against the Queen.

In Easter Term, 39. Eliz. All the Judges of England met about the case, it
was resolved by them, that this was a war intended against the Queen, they
agreed that if it had been of one Towneship or more upon private interest and
claim of right of Common, it had not bin Treason; But this was to throw in all
enclosures thorough the Kingdom, whereto these parties could pretend no claim;
that it was against the Law, in regard that the Statute of Merton gave power of
Enclosures in many Cases. Upon this Resolution Bradshaw and Burton were
executed at Aynestowe hill in Oxfordshire, the place where they intended their
first meeting.

So that, my Lords, if the end of it be to overthrow any of the Statutes, any
part of the Law and settled Government, or any of the great Officers entrusted
with the execution of them; this is a war against the King.

My Lords, it will be further considerable, what shall be accounted a leavying
of war in respect of the Actions and things done; There Is a design to alter
some part of the Laws and present Government, for the effecting thereof
people be provided of Arms, gathered together into troops, but afterward
match not with Banners displayed, nor do Bellum percutere. Whether the arming
themselves and gathering together upon this Design, whether this be a war or
such prosecution of the Design with force as makes it Treason within the
Statute?

First, If this be not a War in respect that it necessarily occasions hostile
preparations on the otherside?

2. From the words of the Statute, shall levy war, and be thereof probably
attainted of open Deed by people of their Condition, although the bare
conspiring be not an open Deed, yet whether the arming and drawing men together
be not an open Declaration of War?

In Sir Thomas Talbots case before cited in the seventeenth year of Richard
the second, The Acts of force are expressed in the Parliament Roll: That he
caused diverse of the people of the County of Chester to be armed in a war like
manner in assemblies; here is no marching, no banners displayed.

In the eighth year of Henry the 8th. William Bell and Thomas Lacy in Com'
Kanc. conspired with Thomas Cheney, called the Hermit of the Queen of
Fairies, to overthrow the Laws and customs of the Realm, and for the
effecting of it, they with two hundred more met together, and concluded upon a
course of raising greater forces in the county of Kent, and the adjacent
Shires: this adjudged Treason, these were open Acts.

My Lords, for the application of both these to the Case in question

First in respect of the end of it, here was a war against the King, It was
to subvert the Laws, This being the design, for the effecting of it, he
assumed to his own person, an arbitrary power over the lives, liberties and
estates of his Majesty's Subjects, and determined Causes upon paper petitions
at his own will and pleasure, obedience must be forced by the Army, this
declared by the Warrant.

2 My Lords, if it be said, That the Warrant expresses not any intent of
subverting the Laws, It expresses fully one of the principal means whereby
this was to be done, that is, obedience to his arbitrary orders upon paper
petitions, this was done in reference to the maine design.

In the Cases of the Town of Cambridge and Sr. William Cogan, that have
formerly been cited to your Lordships, upon other occasions, the things in
themselves were not Treason, they were not a levying of War.

In that of Cambridge, the Town met together, and in a forcible manner broke up
the University treasury, and took out of it the Records and Evidence of the
liberties of the University over the Town.

In the other, they of Bridgewater marched to the Hospital, and compelled the
Master of the Hospital to deliver unto them certain Evidences that concerned
the Town, and forced him to enter into a bond of two hundred pound.

These, if done upon these private ends alone, had not been Treason, as
appears by the very words of the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. before mentioned of
marching openly or secretly.

But my Lords, these of Cambridge and Bridgewater, they were of the conspiracy
with the villains, as appears in the Parliament Roll of the first year of
Richard the second, number the one and thirtieth, and two and thirtieth, where
the Towns of Cambridge and Bridgewater are expressly excepted out of the
general pardon made to the Villains. This being done in Reference to that
design of the villains of altering the Laws, this was that which made it
Treason.

If the design went no further then the enforcing obedience to these paper
orders made by himself, It was sufficient, it was to subvert one fundamental
part of the Laws, nay in effect the whole Law: what use of Law if he might
order and determine of men's estates at his own pleasure? This was against the
Law notoriously declared in Ireland.

In the close roll in the Tower, in the five and twentieth year of Ed. 1. a
Writ went to the Justices in Ireland (that Kingdom at that time was governed
by Justices) declaring that upon petitions they were not to determine any
titles between party and party upon any pretense of profit whatsoever to the
King.

6 In the eight and twentieth year of Henry the sixth, the second Chapter,
Suites in equity, not before the Deputy, but in Chancery, Suits at Common Law,
not before him, but in Cases of life in the Kings Bench, for title of land or
goods in the proper Courts of the Common pleas, or Kings Bench.

This declared in the Instructions for Ireland in the latter end of King James
his time, and by the Proclamation in his Majesty's time, my Lord took notice of
them, called the Commissioners narrow-hearted Commissioners.

The Law said, he should not thus proceed in subversion of it* he says, he
will, and will enforce obedience by the Army. This is as much in respect of the
end, as to endeavor the overthrow of the Statutes of Laborers, of victuals, or
of Merton for Enclosures. Here is a war against the King in respect of the
end.

2. In respect of the Actions, whether there be either a levying of war, or an
open deed, or both.

My Lords, there was an Army in Ireland at that time of two thousand horse and
foot, by this Warrant there is a full designation of this whole Army, and an
Assignement of it over unto Savill for this purpose. The Warrant gives him
power from time to time to take as many soldiers, horse and foot, with an
Officer, throughout the whole Army, as himself shall please, here is the
terror and awe of the whole Army to enforce obedience. My Lords, if the Earl
had armed two thousand men, horse and foot, and formed them into companies to
this end, your Lordships would have conceived that this had been a war, It Is as
much as in the case of Sir Thomas Talbot who armed them in assemblies.

This is the same with a breach of trust added to it. That Army was first
raised and afterward committed to his trust for defense of the people, is now
destined by him to their destruction. This assignation of the Army by his
Warrant under his hand and seal is an open Act.

2. My Lords, here is not only an open act done but a levying of war, soldiers
both horse and foot, with an Officer in warlike manner sessed upon the subject,
which killed their Cattle, consumed and wasted their goods.

Ob. O, but five or six were the most employed at any time, a mighty war of
six men, scarce a Riot.

Ans. Your Lordships observe a great difference where six single men go upon a
design alone, and when sent from an Army of six hundred, all engaged in the
same service, so many were sent as were sufficient to execute the command; if
upon a poor man fewer, more upon a rich; if the six had not been able, the
whole Army must make it good; the reason that the Sheriff alone, or but with
one Bayliffe to do execution, is, because he has command of the Law, the
Kings Writ and the posse Comitatus in case of Resistance; here is the warrant of
the General of an Army, here is the poss^ exercitus, the power of the Army,
under this awe of the whole Army, six may force more then sixty without it, and
although never above six in one place, yet in the several parts of the
Kingdom at the same time might be above sixty; for sessing of soldiers was
frequent, it was the ordinary course for execution of his orders.

The Lord Lieutenant of a County in England has a design to alter the Laws
and government, nay admit the design goes not so high, he only declares thus
much, that he will order the freeholds and the estates of the Inhabitants of
the County at his own will and pleasure, and does accordingly proceed upon
paper petitions; foreseeing there will be disobedience, he grants out warrants
under his hand and seal to the deputy Lievtenants and Captains of the train
bands, that upon refusal they shall take such number of the train bands
through the County with Officers, as they shall think good, and lay them upon
the lands and houses of the refusers; Soldiers in a warlike manner are
frequently sessed upon them accordingly. Your Lordships do conceive that this
is a levying of War within the Statute.

The Case in question goes further in these two respects.

1 That it is more against the declared Law in Ireland, not only against the
Common Law, but likewise against the Statute of the eight and twentieth year
of Henry the sixth, against the Acts of the Commissioners, against Proclamations
in pursuance of the Law, against that himself took notice of, Narrow hearted
Commissioners.

2 In this that here was an Army, the Soldiers, Soldiers by profession, Acts
of hostility from them of greater Terror than from freeholders of the same
County.

My Lords, I have now done with the first of levying war.

2 The second is the machination, the advising of a war; The case in this
rests upon the warrant to Savill, and the advice in the 23 Article.

The Warrant shows a resolution of employing the old Army of Ireland, to the
oppression of his Majesty's Subjects and the Laws.

In the 23 Article, having told his Majesty that he was loosed and absolved
from rules of Government, and might do every thing which power might admit, he
proceeded further in speech to his Majesty, in these words; You have an Army in
Ireland you may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

My Lords, both being put together, there is a machination, a practice, an
advise to levy war, and by force to oppress and destroy his Majesty's
Subjects.

Obj. It has been said, the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. is a penal Law, and
cannot be taken by equity and construction, there must be an actual war;
the Statute makes it Treason to counterfeit the Kings Coin, the conspiring the
raising of furnaces is no Treason, unless he does nummum percutere, actually
coin.

Answ. My Lords, this is only said, not proved, the Law is otherwise, ^ 9. of
Henry the sixth, fol. 47. there adjudged that the conspiring and ayding to
counterfeit coin was Treason; and Justice Stamford fol. 3. and 44. is of
opinion, That this, or conspiring to counterfeit the great Seal is Treason.
The Statute is, If any shall counterfeit the great Seal, conspiring to do it
by the book, is Treason; if a man take the broad Seal from one Pattent, and
put it to another, here is no counterfeiting, it is tuntamount, and therefore
Treason, as is adjudged in 2. Henry 4. fo. 25. and by the opinion of Stamford.

If machination or plotting a war be not within that clause of the Statute of
levying war, yet it is within the first of compassing the death of the King,
as that which necessarily tends to the destruction both of the King and of the
people, upon whose safety and protection he is to engage himself: That this
is Treason, has been adjugded both after the Statutes of the first of Henry
the fourth, chapter the tenth, and the first of Queen Mary, the first chapter,
so much insisted upon on the other side. In the third year of King Henry the
fourth, one Balshall coming from London, found one Bernard at plough in the
parish of Ofley in the Connty of Hertford; Bernard asked Balshall, what news,
he told him the news was, That King Richard the second was alive in Scotland
(which was false, for he was then dead) and that by Midsomer next he would
come into England; Bernard asked him, what was best to be done; Balshall
answered, get men, and go to King Richard. In Michaelmas Term, in the third
year of Henry the fourth, in the Kings Bench, rot. 4. this advise of war
adjudged Treason.

In Queen Mary's time, Sir Nicholas Thr^gmorton conspired with Sir Thomas Wyat
to levy war within this Realm for alteration in Religion, he joined not
with him in the execution. This Conspiracy alone declared to be Treason by the
Judges. This was after the Statute of the first of Queen Mary so much insisted
upon. That Parliament ended in October, this opinion was delivered the
Easter-Terme after, and is reported by Justice Dyer, fo. 98. It Is true, Sir
Thomas Wyat afterward did levy war, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton he only
conspired, this adjudged Treason.

Story, in Queen Elizabeth's time, practiced with Forreiners to levy war
within the Kingdom, nothing done in pursuance of the practice; The intent
without any adhering to Enemies of the Queen or other cause, adjudged to be
Treason, and he executed thereupon. It Is truemy Lords, that year 13.
Elizabeth by Act of Parliament, it is made Treason to intend the levying of
war; this case was adjudged before the Parliament. The case was adjudged in
Hillary Term, the Parliament began not until the April following; This my
Lords, is a case adjudged in point, That the practicing to levy war, though
nothing be done in execution of it is Treason.

Obj. It may be objected that in these Cases, the conspiring being against the
whole Kingdom included the Queen, and was a compassing her destruction, as
well as of the Kingdoms; here the advice was to the King.

Ans. 1. The answer is, first, that the warrant was unknown to his Majesty,
that was a machination of war against the people and Laws, wherein his
Majesty's person was engaged for protection.

2. That the advice was to his Majesty, aggravates the offense, it was an
Attempt not only upon the Kingdom, but upon the Sacred person, and his office
too; himself was hosts patriae, he would have made the Father of it so too;
nothing more unnatural, more dangerous; To offer the King poison to drink,
telling him that it is a Cordial, is a compassing of his death. The poison was
repelled, there was an antidote within, the malice of the giver beyond
expression. The persuading of Forreiners to invade the kingdom holds no
proportion with this: Machination of war against the Laws or kingdom is
against the King, they cannot be severed.

My Lords, if no actual war within the Statute, if the counselling The third
general Head.
of a war, if neither of these single Acts be Treason within the Statute; The
Commons in the next place have taken it into their consideration, what the
addition of his other words, Counsels, and Actions do operate in the case, and
have conceived, That with this addition all being put together, that he is
brought within the Statute of 25. Edward 3.

The words of the Statute are, if any man shall compass or imagine the death
of the King, the words are not, if my man shall plot or consult the death of
the King, no my Lords, they go further than to such things as are intended
immediately, directly, and determinatively against the life and person of the
King, they are of a larger extent; to compass is to do by circuit, to consult
or practice another thing directly, which being done, may necessarily produce
this effect.

However it be in the other Treasons within this Statute, yet in this by the
very words there is room left for constructions, for necessary Inferences and
Consequences.

What has been the judgment and practice of former times concerning these
words of compassing the Kings death, will appear to your Lordships by some
cases of attainders upon these words.

One Owen in King James his time in the 13. year of his reign at Sandwich in
Kent, spoke these words, That King James being excommunicated by the Pope, may
be killed by any man; which killing is no murder: being asked by those he
spoke to, how he durst maintain so bloody an assertion? he answered that the
matter was not so heinous as was supposed; for the King who is the lesser, is
concluded by the Pope who is the greater; and as a Malefactor being condemned
before a Temporal Judge, may be delivered over to be Executed; so the King
standing convicted by the Popes sentence of excommunication, may justly be
slaughtered without fault; for the killing of the King is the execution of the
Popes supreme sentence, as the other is the execution of the Law: for this,
judgment of High Treason was given against him, and execution done.

My Lords, here is no clear intent appearing that Owen desired the thing
should be done, only Arguments that it might be done, This is a compassing,
there is a clear Endeavor to corrupt the judgment, to take off the bonds of
conscience, the greatest security of the Kings life; God forbid says one of
better judgment than he, That I should stretch out my hand against the Lords
anointed, no says he, the Lord does not forbid it, you may for these reasons
lawfully kill the King.

He that denies the Title to the Crown, and plots the means of setting it
upon another head, may do this without any direct or immediate desiring the
death of him that then wears it, yet this is Treason, as was adjudged in 10.
Henry 7. in the case of Burton, and in the Duke of Norfolks case. 13. Elizabeth.

This is a compassing of his death, for there can no more be two Kings in one
Kingdom, than two Suns in the Firmament; he that conceives a title, counts it
worth ventring for, though it cost him his life, he that is in possession
thinks it as well worth the keeping. John Sparhauke in King Henry the fourths
time, meeting two men upon the way, amongst other talk said, that the King was
not rightful King, but the Earl of March, and that the Pope would grant
indulgencies to all that would assist the Earls title, and that within half a
yeree there would be no Liveries nor Conizances of the King, that the King had
not kept promise with the people, but had laid taxes upon them. In Easter Term
in the third year of Henry the fourth in the Kings Bench, Rot. 12. this
adjudged Treason. This denying the title with motives though but implyedly of
Action against it, adjudged Treason, this is a compassing the Kings death.

How this was a compassing the Kings death, is declared in the reasons of the
judgment; That the words were spoken with an intent to withdraw the affections
of the people from the King, and to excite them against the King, that in the
end they might rise up against him in mortem and destructionem of the King.

My Lords, in this Judgment and others which I shall cite to your Lordships,
It appears that it is a compassing the Kings death by words, to endeavor to
draw the peoples hearts from the King, to set discord between the King and
them, whereby the people should leave the King, should rise up against him to
the death and destruction of the King.

The cases that I shall cite, prove not only that this is Treason, but what is
sufficient evidence to make this good.

Upon a Commission held the 18. year of Edw. 4. in Kent, before the Marquess
of Dorset and others, an Indictment was preferred against John Awater of
High Treason, in the form before mentioned, for words which are entered in the
enditement sub hac forma, That he had been servant to the Earl of Warwick,
that though he were dead, the Earl of Oxford was alive, and should have the
government of part of the Country, That Edward whom you call King of England,
was a false man, and had by art and subtlety slain the Earl of Warwick and
the Duke of Clarence his brother, without any cause, who before had been both
of them attainted of High Treason.

My Lords, this Indictment was returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity Term
in the eighteenth year of Edward the fourth, and in Easter Term in the two
and twentieth year of Edward the fourth he was outlawed, by the stay of the
outlawry, so long it seems the Judges had well advised before whether it were
Treason or not.

At the same Session Thomas Hober was indicted of Treason for these words, That
the last Parliament was the most simple and insufficient Parliament that ever
had been in England. That the King was gone to live in Kent, because that for
the present he had not the love of the Citizens of London, nor should he have
it for the future. That if the Bishop of Bath and Wels were dead, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, being Cardinal of England, would immediately lose
his head. This indictment was returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity Term
in the eighteenth year of Edward the fourth. Afterward there came a Privy
Seal to the Judges to respit the proceedings, which as it should seem was to
the intent the Judges might advise of the Case, for afterward he is outlawed
of High Treason upon this indictment.

These words were thought sufficient evidence to prove these several
Inditements, That they were spoken to withdraw the peoples affection from the
King, to excite them against him, to cause risings against him by the people,
in mortem and destructionem of the King.

Your Lordships are pleased to consider that in all these Cases, the Treason
was for words only, words by private persons, and in a more private manner,
but once spoken and no more, only amongst the people, to excite them against
the King.

My Lords, here are words, Counsels more than words, and actions too, not only
to dis-affect the people to the King, but the King likewise toward the people;
not once but often, not in private, but in places most public, not by a
private person, but by a Counselor of State, a Lord Lieutenant, a Lord
President, a Lord Deputy of Ireland.

1 To his Majesty, That the Parliament had denied to supply him; a slander upon
all the Commons of England in their affections to the King and Kingdom, in
refusing to yield timely supply for the necessities of King and Kingdom.

2 From thence, That the King was loose and absolved from rules of government,
and was to do every thing that power would admit. My Lords, more cannot be
said, they cannot be aggravated, whatever I should say would be in diminution.

3 Thence, You have an Army in Ireland you may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

To counsel a King not to love his people, is very unnatural, it goes higher,
to hate them, to malice them in his heart; the highest expressions of malice,
to destroy them by war: These coals they were cast upon his Majesty, they
were blown, they could not kindle in that breast.

Thence, my Lords, having done the utmost to the King, he goes to the people*
At York the Country being me^ together for Justice, at the open Assizes upon
the Bench, he tells them, speaking of the Justices of the Peace, that they were
all for Law, nothing but Law, but they should find that the Kings little finger
should be heavier than the loins of the Law.

They shall find, my Lords, who speaks this to the people, a Privy
Counselor; this must be either to traduce his Majesty to the people as spoken
from him, or from himself, who was Lord Lieutenant of the County and
President, entrusted with the forces and Justice of those parts, that he would
employ both this way; add, my Lords, to his words there the exercising of an
arbitrary and vast Jurisdiction before he had so much as Instructions or color
of warrant.

Thence we carry him into Ireland, there he represented by his place the sacred
person of his Majesty.

1 There at Dublyn, the principal City of that Kingdom, whither the Subjects
of that Country came for Justice, in an Assembly of Peers and others of
greatest rank, upon occasion of a speech of the Recorder of that City touching
their Franchises and Legal Rights, he tells them, that Ireland was a conquered
Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased.

2 Not long after, in the Parliament 10. Car. in the Chair of State, in full
Parliament, again, That they were a conquered Nation, and that they were to
expect Laws as from a Conqueror; before, The King might do with them what he
would; now, They were to expect it, that he would put this power of a
Conqueror in execution. The Circumstances are very considerable, in full
Parliament, from himself in Cathedra, to the representative body of the whole
Kingdom.

The occasion adds much, when they desire the benefit of the Laws, and that
their Causes and Suites might be determined according to Law, and not by
himself, at his will and pleasure upon paper Petitions.

3 Upon like occasion of pressing the Laws and Statutes, That he would make
an Act of Counsel board in that Kingdom as binding as an Act of Parliament.

4. He made his words good by his actions, assumed and exercised a boundless
and lawless Jurisdiction over the lives persons, and estates of his Majesty's
Subjects, procured judgment of death against a Peer of that Realm, commanded
another to be hanged, this was accordingly executed, both in times of high
Peace, without any process or color of Law.

5. By force for a long time he seized the yarne and flax of the Subjects, to
the starving and undoing of many thousands, besides the Tobacco business, and
many Monopolies and unlawful Taxes, forced a new Oath not to dispute his
Majesty's royal commands, determined men's estates at his own will and
pleasure upon paper Petitions to himself, forced Obedience to these, not only
by Fines and Imprisonment, but likewise by the Army, sessed Soldiers upon the
refusers in a hostile manner.

6. Was an Incendiary of the war between the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland.

My Lords, we shall leave it to your Lordships Judgments, whether these words,
Counsels, and Actions would not have been a sufficient Evidence to have
proved an Indictment drawn up against him, as those before mentioned, and many
others are; That they were spoken and done to the intent to withdraw the Kings
heart from the people, and the affections of the people from the King, that
they might leave the King, and afterward rise up against him to the
destruction of the King; if so, here is a compassing of the Kings death within
the words of the Statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward the third,
and that warranted by many former judgments.

My Lords, I have now done with the three Treasons within the The fourth
general Head.
Statute of the five and twentieth of Edward the third. I proceed to the fourth
upon the Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth, Chapter the third
in Ireland; I shall make bold to read the words to your Lordships,

That no Lord, nor any other of what condition soever he be, shall bring or
lead hoblers, kerves, or hooded men, nor any other people, nor horses to lie on
horseback or on foot upon the Kings Subjects without their good wills and
consent, but upon their own costs, and without hurt doing to the Commons, and
if any so do he shall be judged as Traitor.

1. The Argument that has been made concerning the Person, That it extends not
to the King, and therefore not to him, weighs nothing with your Lordships, Rex
non habet in regne parem, from the greatness of his office to argue himself
into the same impossibility with his sacred Majesty of being incapable of
High Treason, it is an Offense, no reason; The words in the Statute, No Lord nor
any other of what condition soever he be, includes every Subject.

In Trinity Term in the three and thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, in the
Kings Bench, Leonard Lord Gray, having immediately before been Lord Deputy of
Ireland, is attainted of High Treason, and judgment given against him for
letting diverse Rebels out of the Castle of * Dublin, and discharging Irish
hostages and pledges that had been given for securing the Peace, for not
punishing one that said the King was an Heretic, I have read the whole
Record, there is not one thing laid to his charge but was done by him as Lord
Leivetenant: He had the same Plea with my Lord of Strafford, That these things
were no adhering to the Kings Enemies, but were done for reasons of State, That
he was not within those words of the Statute of the five and twentieth year of
Edward the third, himself being Lord Lieutenant there, they cost his life.

Obj. 2. It has been said, That the Soldiers, sessed upon the Subjects by
him, were not such persons as are intended by that Statute, Hoblers, Kerves,
and hoodedmen, these rascal people.

Answ. My Lords, they were the names given to the Souldiary of those times,
Hoblers horsemen, the other the foot, but the words of the Statute go further,
Nor any other people, neither horse nor foot, his Lordship sessed upon them
both horse and foot.

Object. 3. The Statute extends only to them that lead or bring* Savill led
them, my Lord only gave the warrant.

Answ. To that I shall say only thus, plus peccat author quam actor, by the
rule of Law, agentes and consentientes pari plectuntur pana, if consent, much
more a command to do it, makes the commander a Traitor. If there be any
Treason within this Statute, my Lord of Strafford is guilty.

It has been therefore said, That this Statute like Goliah's sword has been
wrapped up in a cloth and laid behind the door, that it has never been put in
execution. Answ. My Lords, if the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland had certified
your Lordships that upon search of the Judgments of Attainders in Ireland, he
could not find that any man had been attainted upon this Statute, your
Lordships had had some ground to believe it, yet it is only my Lord of
Straffords affirmation: Besides your Lordships know that an act of Parliament
binds until it be repealed.

It has been therefore said, that this Statute is repealed by the Statutes of
the eighth year of Edward the fourth, the first Chapter; and of the tenth
year of Henry the seventh, the two and twentieth Chapter, because by these two
Satutes, the English Statutes are brought into Ireland.

The Argument, (if I mistook it not,) stood thus; That the Statute of the first
of Henry the fourth, the 10. Chapter, says, that in no time to come, Treason
shall be adjuged otherwise, then it was ordained by the Statute of the 25.
year of Edward the third: That the Treason mentioned in the 18 year of Henry
the sixth in the Irish Satute is not contained in the Statute of the 25 year
of Edward the 3. and therefore being contrary to the statute of the first of
Henry the fourth, it must needs be void.

My Lords, the difference of the times wherein the statute of the first year
of Henry the fourth, and that of the 18 year of Henry the sixth were made,
clear the Point, as is humbly conceived; that of Henry the sixth was made
forty years after the other.

The statute of the eighth year of Edward the fourth, and the tenth of Henry
the seventh, bringing in the English statutes in order and series of time, as
they were made one after another (as afterward is proved they did) it cannot
be that the statute of the first year of Henry the fourth made forty year
before, should repeal or make void the statute of the 18. Henry 6. made so
long after. The rule of Law is, that Leges posteriores priores abrogant, that
latter laws repeal former: But by this construction a former Law should
repeal and make void a Non ens; a statute then was not.

If this were Law, then all the statutes that made any new Treason after the
first year of Henry the fourth, were void in the very fabric, and at the
time when they were made; hence likewise it would follow, that the Parliament,
now upon what occasion soever, has no power to make any thing Treason not
declared to be so in the statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward the
third; This your Lordships easily see would make much for my Lord of Straffords
advantage; but why the Law should be so, your Lordships as yet have only heard
an affirmation of it* no reason.

But some touch was given, that this statute of the tenth year of H. the
seventh, in words makes all the Irish statutes void, which are contrary to the
English. The Answer to this, is a denial that there are any such words in the
statute: This statute declares, that the English statutes shall be effectual
and confirmed in Ireland, and that all statutes, before time, made to the
contrary shall be revoked: this repeales only the Irish statutes of the tenth
year of Henry the fourth, and the nine and twentieth year of Honry the sixth,
which say that the English statutes shall not be in force in Ireland, unless
particularly received in Parliament; It makes all the Irish statutes void,
which say that the English statutes shall not be in force there.

It is usual when a Statute says, that such a thing shall be done or not
done, to add further that all statutes to the contrary shall be void.

No likeli-hood that this statute intended to take away any statute of Treason;
When but in the Chapter next before this, Murder there is made Treason, as if
done upon the Kings Person.

That this statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth remains on foot
and not repealed, either by the Statute of the eighth year of Edward the
fourth, or this of the tenth year of Henry the seventh, appears expressly by
two several Acts of Parliament, made at the same Parliament of the tenth year
of Henry the seventh.

By an Act of Parliament in H. the sixth's time, in Ireland, it was made
Treason for any man to procure a privy Seal, or any other Command whatsoever,
for apprehending any person in Ireland for Treason done without that Kingdom,
and to put any such Command in execution; Diverse had been attainted of Treason
for executing such Commands: Here is a Treason so made by Act of Parliament in
Henry the sixth's time: In the third Chapter of this Parliament of the tenth of
Henry the seventh, an Act is passed for no other end, then to repeal this
statute of Henry the sixth, of Treason.

If this statute of Henry the sixth of Treason, had been formerly repealed by
the statute of 8. Edward 4. or then by the two and twentieth Chapter of this
Parliament of 10. Henry 7. by bringing in the English statutes, the Lawmakers
were much mistaken, now to make a particular Act of Parliament to repeal it,
it being likewise so unreasonable an Act as it was.

In the eighth Chapter of this Parliament, of the tenth of Henry the seventh;
It is enacted, That the statutes of Kilkenny and all other statutes made in
Ireland (two only excepted, whereof this of the eighteenth of Henry the sixth
is none) for the Commonweal shall be enquired off and executed. My Lord of
Strafford says, that the bringing in of the English statutes, has repealed
this statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth; the Act of Parliament
made the same time says no; it says that all the Irish statutes, excepting
two, whereof this is none, shall still be in force.

Object. Oh! But how ever it was in 10. H. 7. yet it appears by Judgment in
Parliament afterward, That this statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the
sixth is repealed, and that is by the Parliament of the eleventh year of
Queen Elizabeth, the seventh Chapter, That by this Parliament it is enacted,
that if any man without license from the Lord Deputy, lay any Soldiers upon
the Kings Subjects, if he be a Peer of the Realm, he shall forfeit one
hundred pounds, if under the degree of a Peer, 100 marks. This statute, as is
alleged, declares the penalty of laying Soldiers upon the Subjects, to be
only a hundred pounds; and therefore its not Treason.

Answer, My Lords, if the offense for which this penalty of one hundred pounds,
is laid upon the offender* be for laying Soldiers, or leading them to do any
acts oftensive or invasive upon the Kings people, The Argument has some force;
but that the offense is not for laying Soldiers upon the true Subjects, that
this is not the offense intended in the statute, will appear to your
Lordships, Ex absurdo, from the words of it.

The words are, That if any man shall assemble the people of the County
together to conclude of peace, or war; or shall carry those people to do any
Acts offensive or invasive, then he shall forfeit one hundred pounds; If
concluding of war and carrying the people to Acts invasive, be against the
Kings Subjects, this is high Treason within the words of the statute of the
five and twentieth year of Edward the third: For if any Subject shall assemble
the people and conclude a war, and accordingly shall lead them to invade the
Subject, this is a levying of war within the word of that statute; and then
the statutes of the five and twentieth year of Edward the third, the first of
Henry the fourth, and the first of Queen Mary, which the Earl of Strafford in
his Answer desires to be tried by, are as well repealed in this point, as the
statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth, he might then without fear
of Treason have done what he pleased with the Irish Army; for all the statutes
of levying war, by this statute of the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth were
taken out of his way.

In Ireland a Subject gathers forces, concludes a war against the Kings
people, actually invades them; bloodshed, burning of houses, Depredations
ensue; two of those, that is, murder and burning of houses are Treason, and
there the other felony; by this construction the punishment of Treason and
felony is turned only into a fine of one hundred pounds; from loss of life,
lands, and all his goods, only to loss of part of his goods.

3 The third absurdity; a war is concluded, three several Inrodes are made
upon the Subject; in the first, a hundred pound damage; in the second, five
thousand pounds damage; in the third, ten thousands pound damage is done to
the Subjects; the penalty for the last inrode is no more than for the first,
only one hundred pounds. This statute by this construction tells any man how
to get his living without long labor.

Two parts of the hundred pounds is given to the King, a third part to the
informer; here is no damage to the Subject that is robbed and destroyed.

My Lords, the Statute will free it self and the makers of it from these
absurdities.

The meaning of this statute is, That if any Captain shall of his own head
conclude of peace or war, against the Kings Enemies or Rebels, or shall upon
his own head invade them, without warrant from the King, or the Lord Deputy
of Ireland, that then he shall forfeit an hundred pounds.

The offense is not for laying of Soldiers upon the Kings people, but making
of war against the Irish Rebels without warrant; the offense ^s not in the
matter, but in the manner, for doing a thing lawful, but without mission.

1 This will appear by the general scope of the statute, all the parts being
put together. 2 By particular clauses in the Statute. 3 By the Condition of
that Kingdom at the time of the making of that statute.
For the first, The preamble recites that in time of Declination of Justice
under pretext of defending the Country and themselves, diverse great men
arrogated to themselves Regal authority under the names of Captains, that
they acquired to themselves that government which belonged to the Crown. for
preventing this Its enacted, that no man dwelling within the Shire grounds,
shall thenceforth assume or take upon himself the authority of name of a
captain within those Shire grounds, without Letters Pattents from the Crown,
nor shall under color of his captaine-ship make any demand of the people of
any exaction, nor as a captain assemble the people of the shire grounds; nor
as a captain shall lead those people to do any acts offensive or invasive
without warrant under the great Seal of England, or of the Lord Deputy, upon
penalty that if he do any thing contrary to that act, then the Offender shall
forfeit an hundred pounds.

My Lords, the Rebels had been out, the courts of justice scarce sat for
defense of the country, diverse usurped the place of Captains, concluded of
war against the Rebels and invaded them without warrant; invading the Rebels
without authority is the crime.

2. This appears further by the particular clauses in the statute; None shall
exercise any captaine-ship within the shire grounds, nor assemble the men of
the shire grounds to conclude of war, or lead them to any invasion.

That that had anciently been so continued to this time, that is, the Irish
and the English pale, they within the shire grounds were within the English
pale, and ad fidem and legem Angliae; the Irish that were without the pale were
enemies always either in open act of hostility or upon leagues, and hostages
given for securing the peace. And therefore as here in England, we had our
marches upon the frontiers in Scotland and Wales, so were their Marches
between the English and Irish pale, where the inhabitants held their Lands by
this tenure to defend the Country against the Irish, as appears in the close
Rols of the Tower in the twentieth year of Edward the third, membrana 15. on
the backside; and in an Irish Parliament held the 42. year of Edward the 3.
Its declared, that the English pale was almost destroyed by the Irish enemies,
and that there was no way to prevent the danger, but only that the owners
reside upon their Lands for defense, and that absence should be a forfeiture.
This act of Parliament in a great counsel here was affirmed, as appears in
the close Roll, the 22. year of Edward the third, membra. 20. dorse.

Afterward as appears* in the Statute of the 28. year of Henry the 6. in
Ireland, this hostility continued between the English marches and the Irish
enemies, who by reason there was no difference between the English marches and
them, in their apparel, did daily not being known to the English, destroy the
English within the pale. Therefore its enacted, that every Englishman shall
shave the hair of his upper lip, for distinction sake. This hostility
continued, till the 10. year of Henry the 7. as appears by the Statute of the
tenth of Henry the 7. the 17. Chapter; and so successively downward, till the
making of this very statute of the 11. year of Queen Elizabeth, as appears
fully in the ninth chapter.

Nay immediately before, and at the time of the making of this statute, there
was not only enmity between those of the Shire grounds; that is, the English
and Irish pale; but open War and Acts of hostility, as appears by History of
no less authority, then that statute it self. For in the first Chapter of
this statute is the Attainder of Shane O Neale, who had made open War, was
slain in open War. It Is there declared, that he had gotten by force all the
North of Ireland, for an hundred and twenty miles in length, and above a 100.
in breadth; that he had mastered diverse places within the English pale. When
the flame of this war by his death immediately before this statute was spent,
yet the firebrarnds were not all quenched; for the rebellion was continued by
John Fitz Gerard called the white Knight, and Thomas Queverford: This appears
by the Statute of the 13. year of Queen Elizabeth in Ireland, but two years
after this of the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, where they are attainted
of high treason, for levying War this eleaventh year, wherein this Statute
was made.

So that my Lords, immediately before, and at the time of the making of this
Statute, there being War between those of the Shire grounds mentioned in
this statute, and the Irish, the concluding of War, and Acts offensive and
invasive there mentioned, can be intended against no others, but the Irish
enemies.

Again the words of the statute are; no captain shall assemble the people of
the Shire grounds to conclude of peace or war: Is it to be presumed that
those of the Shire grounds will conclude of War against themselves? nor says
the statute shall carry those of the Shire grounds to do any Acts invasive; by
the construction which is made on the other side, they must be carried to fight
against themselves.

Lastly the words are; As captain, none shall assume the name or authority of
a captain, or as a captain shall gather the people together, or as a captain
lead them. The offense is not in the matter, but in the manner: If the acts
offensive were against the Kings good Subjects, those that went under command
were punishable, as well as the Commanders; but in respect, the Soldiers knew
the service to be good in it self being against the enemies, and that it was
not for them to dispute the authority of their commanders, the penalty of a
100. pounds is laid only upon him, that as Captain shall assume this power
without warrant: The people commanded are not within the Statute.

My Lords, the logic whereupon this argument has been framed stands thus;
Because the statute of the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth inflicts a
penalty of a 100. pound, and no more upon any man, that as a captain without
warrant, and upon his own head shall conclude of, or make War against the
Kings enemies: therefore the statute of the 18. year of Henry the sixth is
repealed, which makes it Treason to lay soldiers upon, or to levy war against
the Kings good people.

But my Lords, observation has been made upon other words of this statute,
that is, that without license of the Deputy, these things cannot be done: This
shows, that the Deputy is within none of the statutes.

My Lords, this Argument stands upon the same reason with the former, because
he has the ordering of the Army of Ireland for the defense of the people, and
may give warrant to the Officers of the Army, upon eminent occasions of
invasion, to resist or prosecute the enemy, because of the danger that else
might ensue forthwith by staying for a warrant from his Majesty out of England;
Therefore it is no Treason in the Deputy to employ the Army in Ireland,
whenever he pleases, for the subversion of the Kings good people, and of
the Laws.

My Lords, the statute of the tenth year of Henry the seventh the 17. Chapter
touched upon for this purpose, cleares the business in both points; for there
it is declared, that none ought to make war upon the Irish rebels and
enemies, without warrant from the Lieutenant, the forfeiture a 100 pounds as
here the statute is the same with this, and might as well have been cited for
repealing the statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the 6. as this of the
11. year of Queen Elizabeth: but if this had been insisted upon, it would
have expounded the other two clear against him.

Object. My Lords, it has been further said, although the statute be in force,
and there be a Treason within it, yet the Parliament has no jurisdiction; the
Treasons are committed in Ireland, therefore not triable here.

Answ. My Lords, Sir John Perrot his predecessors in the 24. year of Queen
Elizabeth was tried in the Kings bench for Treason done in Ireland, when he was
Deputy; Orucke in the 33. year of Queen Elizabeth judged here for Treason
done Ireland.

Object. But it will be said, these trials were after the statute of the 34.
year of Henry the eight, which enacts, that treasons beyond sea may be tried
in England.

Answ. My Lords, his predecessor my Lord Gray was tried and adjudged here in
the Kings bench, that was in Trinity term in the 33. year of Henry the
eighth, this was before the making of that statute*

Object. To this again will be said, that it was for Treason by the Laws and
statutes of England; but this is not for any thing, that is Treason by the Law
of England, but by an Irish statute.

So that the question is only, whether your Lordships in Parliament here have
cognizance of an offense made treason by an Irish statute in the ordinary way
of judicature without bill, for so is the present question.

For the clearing of this, I shall propound two things to your Lordships
consideration:

1. Whether the rule for expounding the Irish Statutes and customs be one,
and the same in England, as in Ireland.

2. That being admitted, whether the Parliaments in England have cognizance or
jurisdiction of things there done in respect of the place, because the Kings
writ runs not there.

For the first, if in respect of the place, the Parliament here has cognizance
there; And secondly, if the rules for expounding the Irish statutes and
Customs be the same here as there, this exception as I humbly conceive, must
fall away.

In England there is the common law, the statutes, the acts of Parliament, and
customs peculiar to certain places, differing from the common Law; if any
question arise concerning either a custom or an act of Parliament, the common
Law of England, the first, the primitive and the general Law, that is the rule
and expositour of of them and of their several extents; it is so here, it is
so in Ireland; the common Law of England is the common Law of Ireland likewise;
the same here and there in all the parts of it.

It was introduced into Ireland by King John, and afterward by King Henry the
third by act of Parliament held in England, as appears by the pattent Rolls of
the 30 year of King Henry the third, the first membrana. The words are, Quia
pro communi utilitate terrae Hiberaniae, and unitate terrarum Regis, Rex vult,
and de commune consilio Regis provisum est, quod omnes leges and consuetudines
quae in regno Angliae tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur, and eadem terra eisdem
legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut Dominus Johannes Rex cum
ultimo esset in Hibernia, statuit, and fieri mandavit. Quia, etc. Kex vult quod
omnia brevia de communi Jure quae currunt in Angliae, similiter current in
Hibernia sub novo sigillo Regis, mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc. quod pro
pace and tranquillitate ejusdem terrae, per easdem leges eos regi and deduci
permittant, and eas in omnibus sequantur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege, apud
Woodstock, decimo nono die Septembris.

Here Is an union of both Kingdoms, and that by act of Parliament, and the same
Laws to be used here as there, in omnibus.

My Lords, That nothing might be left here for an exception, that is, that in
treasons* felonies, and other capital offenses concerning life, the Irish
laws are not the same as here. Therefore it is enacted in a Parliament held in
England in the 14. year of Edward the second (it is not in print neither, but
is in the Parliament book) That the Laws concerning life and member shall be
the same in Ireland, as in England.

And that no exception might yet remain, in a Parliament held in England, the
fifth year of Edward the third, It is enacted: quod una and eadem Lex fiat tam
Hibernicis, quam Anglicis. This act is enrolled in the Patent rolls of the
fifth year of Ed. the 3. part. 1. membr. 25.

The Irish therefore receiving their Laws from hence, they send their Students
at Law to the Innes of Courts in England, where they receive their degree; and
of them, and of the common Lawyers of this kingdom, are the Judges made.

The petitions have been many from Ireland, to send from hence some Judges more
learned in the Laws then those they had there.

It has been frequent in cases of difficulty there, to send some times to the
Parliament here, sometimes to the King by advice from the Judges here, to send
them resolutions of their doubts: Amongst many I Will cite your Lordships only
one, because it is in a case of treason upon an Irish statute, and therefore
full to this point.

By a Statute there made in the fifth year of Edward the fourth, there is
provision made for such, as upon suggestions are committed to prison for
Treason, that the party committed, if he can procure 24. Compurgators, shall be
bailed, and let out of prison.

Two Citizens of Dublin were by a grand Jury presented to have committed
Treason; They desired the benefit of this statute, that they might be let out
of prison upon tender of their Compurgators. The words of the Statute of the 5.
year of Ed. the fourth in Ireland being obscure, the Judges there not being
satisfied what to do, sent the case over to the Queen desired the opinion of
the Judges here; which was done accordingly: The Judges here sent over their
opinion, which I have out of the Book of Justice Anderson, one of the Judges
consulted withal. The Judges here delivered opinion upon an Irish Statute in
case of Treason.

If it be objected, That in this case the Judges here did not judge upon the
party; their opinions were only ad informandam conscientiam of the Judges in
Ireland; that the judgment belonged to the Judges there.

My Lords, with submission, this and the other Authorities prove that for which
they were cited; that is, That no absurdity, no failer of justice would ensue,
if this great Judicatory should judge of Treason so made by an Irish Statute.

The common Law, the rule of judging upon an Irish Statute, the Pleas of the
Crown for things of life and death, are the same here and there. This is all
that has yet been offered.

For the second point, That England has no power of Judicature for things done
in Ireland; My Lords, the constant practice of ages proves the contrary.

Writs of error in Pleas of the Crown, as well as in civil causes, have in
all Kings reigns been brought here, even in the inferior Courts of
Westminster Hall, upon judgments given in the courts of Ireland: The practice
is so frequent, and so well known, as that I shall cite none of them to your
Lordships: no president will (I believe) be produced to your Lordships, that
ever the case was remanded back again into Ireland, because the question rose
upon an Irish Statute, or custom.

Object. But it will be said, That writs of error are only upon a failer of
justice in Ireland; and that suits cannot originally be commenced here for
things done in Ireland, because the Kings writ runs not in Ireland.

Answ. This might be a good plea in the Kings Bench, and inferior Courts at
Westminster Hall; the question is, whether it be so in Parliament. The Kings
writ runs not within the County Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor within the
five Ports; neither did it in Wales before the union in Henry the eighth's
time; after the Laws of England were brought into Wales in King Edward the
first's time, suits were not originally commenced in Westminster Hall, for
things done in them, yet this never excluded the Parliament: suits for life,
lands, and goods within those jurisdictions are determinable in Parliament, as
well as in any other parts of the Realm.

Ireland, as appears by the statute of the thirtieth year of Henry the third,
before mentioned, is united to the Crown of England.

By the Statute of the eight and twenty year of Henry the sixth in Ireland, it
is declared in these words; That Ireland is the proper Dominion of England, and
united to the Crown of England, which Crown of England is of it self, and by
it self, fully, wholly, and entirely endowed with all power and authority
sufficient to yield to the subjects of the same full and plenary remedy, in all
debates and suits whatsoever.

By the Statute of the 33. year of Henry the eighth, the first Chapter, when
the Kings of England first assumed the title of King of Ireland, it is there
enacted, That Ireland still is to be held as a Crown annexed and united to
the Crown of England.

So that by the same reason, from this, that the Kings writ runs not in
Ireland, it might as well be held, that the Parliament cannot originally hold
plea of things done within the County Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor
within the five Ports and Wales; Ireland is part of the Realm of England, as
appears by those statutes, as well as any of them.

This is made good by constant practice. In all the Parment rolls, from the
first to the last, there are receivers and tryers of petitions appointed for
Ireland. For the Irish to come so far with their petitions for justice, and
the Parliament not to have cognizance, when from time to time they had in the
beginning of the Parliament appointed receivers and tryers of them, is a thing
not to be presumed.

An appeal in Ireland brought by William Lord Vescye against John Fitz Thomas
for treasonable words there spoken, before any Judgment given in the case
there, was removed into the Parliament in England, and there the defendant
acquitted, as appears in the Parliament pleas of the two and twentieth year
of Edward the first.

The suits for lands, offices, and goods, originally begun here, are many; and
if question grew upon matter in fact, a Jury usually ordered to try it, and the
verdict returned into Parliament, as in the case of one Balliben, in the
Parliament of the five and thirtieth year of Edward the first. If doubt arose
upon a matter tryable by Record, a writ went to the Officers in whose custody
the Record remained, to certify the Record, as was in the case of Robert Bagot
the same Parliament of the five and thirtieth year of Edward the first, where
the writs went to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer.

Sometimes they gave judgment here in Parliament, and commanded the Judges
there in Ireland to do execution, as in the great case of Partition between
the copartners of the Earl Marshall, in the Parliament of the 33. year of
Edward the first, where the writ was awarded to the Treasurer of Ireland.

My Lords, The Laws of Ireland were introduced by the Parliaments of England,
as appears by three Acts of Parliament before cited.

It is of higher jurisdiction dare Leges, then to judge by them.

The Parliaments of England do bind in Ireland, if Ireland be particularly
mentioned, as is resolved in the Book case of the first year of Henry the
seventh, Cokes seventh Report, Calvin's case, and by the Judges in Trinity
Term, in the three and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth: The Statute of the
eighth year of Edward the fourth, the first Chapter in Ireland recites, that
it was doubted amongst the judges, whether all the English Statutes, though not
naming Ireland, were in force there; if named, no doubt.

From King Henry the third his time downward to the eighth year of Queen
Elizabeth (by which statute it is made felony to carry sheep from Ireland
beyond seas) in almost all these Kings reigns, there be statutes made
concerning Ireland.

The exercising of the Legislative power there over their lives and estates, is
higher then of the Judicial in question. Until the nine and twentieth year
of Edward the third, erroneous judgments given in Ireland, were determinable
no where, but in England; no, not in the Parliaments of Ireland, as it appears
in the close rolls in the Tower. In the nine and twentieth year of Ed. the
third, mem. 12. Power to examine and reverse erroneous judgments in the
Parliaments of Ireland is granted from hence; Writs of error lie in the
Parliament here upon erroneous judgments after that time given in the
Parliaments of Ireland, as appears in the Parliament rolls of the eighth year
of Henry the sixth, membra. 70. in the case of the Prior of Lenthan. It is
true, the case is not determined there, for it is the last thing that came into
the Parliament, and could not be determined for want of time; but no exception
at all is taken to the jurisdiction.

The Acts of Parliament made in Ireland have been confirmed in the Parliaments
of England, as appears by the close rolls in the Tower, in the 42. year of
Edward the 3. membra. 20. dorso; where the Parliament in Ireland, for the
preservation of the Country from the Irish, who had almost destroyed it, made
an Act, that all the land-owners, that were English should reside upon their
lands, or else they were to be forfeited: this was here confirmed.

In the Parliament of the 4. year of H. the 5. chap. 6. Acts of Parliament in
Ireland are confirmed, and some privileges of the Peers in the Parliaments
there are regulated.

Power to repeal Irish Statutes, power to confirm them, cannot be by the
Parliament here, if it has not cognizance of their Parliaments; unless it
besaid, That the Parliament may do, it knows not what.

Garnesey and Jersey are under the Kings subjection, but are not parcels of the
Crown of England, but of the duchy of Normandy; they are not governed by the
laws of England, as Ireland is; and yet Parliaments in England have usually
held plea of, and determined all causes concerning land, or goods. In the
Parliament of 33. E. 1. there be placita de Insula Iernesey; and so in the
Parliament 14. E. 2. and so for Normandy and Gascoyne; and always as long as
any part of France was in subjection to the Crown of England, there were at the
beginning of Parliaments, receivers and tryers of petitions for those parts
appointed.

I believe your Lordships will have no cases showed of any plea to the
jurisdiction of the Parliaments of England, in any thing done, in any parts
wheresoever, in subjection to the Crown of England.

The last thing I shall offer to your Lordships is the case of 19. El. in my
Lord Dyer 306. and Judge Comptons book of the jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 23.
The opinion of both these books is, that an Irish Peer is not triable here.
It Is true, a Scottish or French Nobleman is triable here as a common person; the
Law takes no notice of their Nobility, because those Countries are not governed
by the Laws of England; but Ireland being governed by the same Laws, the
Peers there are triable according to the Law of England, only per pares.

By the same reason the Earl of Strafford, not being a peer of Ireland, is
not triable by the Peers of Ireland; so that if he be not triable here, he is
triable no where.

My Lords, In case there be a Treason and a Traitor within the statute, and
that he be not triable here for it in the ordinary way of judicatory, if that
jurisdiction fails, this by way of Bill does not; Attainders of Treason in
Parliament are as legal, as usual by Act of Parliament, as by Judgment.

I have now done with the statutes of 25. E. 3* and 18. H. 6. My Lord of
Strafford has offended against both the Kingdoms, and is guilty of high
Treason by the Laws of both.

5 My Lords, In the fifth place I am come to the Treasons at the common Law,
the endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and government of the
Kingdom, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannycall government.

In this I shall not at all labor to prove, that the endeavoring by words,
counsels, and actions to subvert the Laws, is treason at the common Law, if
there be any common-Lawtreasons at all left; nothing treason, if this not, to
make a Kingdom no Kingdom: take the polity and government away, England's
but a piece of earth, wherein so many men have their commorancy and abode,
without rancks or distinction of men, without property in any thing further
then possession; no Law to punish the murdering or robbing one another.

That of 33* H. 8. of introducing the Imperial Law, sticks not with your
Lordships: It was in case of an appeal to Rome: These appeals in cases of
marriages, and other causes counted Ecclesiastical, had been frequent, had in
most Kings reigns been tolerated; some in times of popery put a conscience
upon them, the statutes had limited the penally to a Praemunire only: Neither
was that a total subversion, only an appeal from the Ecclesiastical Court
here in a single cause to the Court at Rome; and if treason or not, that case
proves not; a treason may be punished as a felony, a felony as a trespass, if
his Majesty so please; the greater includes the lesser: In the case of
Praemunire in the Irish reports, that which is there declared to be treason,
proceeded upon only as a Praemunire.

The thing most considerable in this is, whether the treasons at common Law be
taken away by the Statute of 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. or 1. Q. M. or any of them.

My Lord, to say they be taken away by the Stat. of 25. E. 3. is to speak
against the direct words and scope of that Statute.

In it there is this clause, That because many other like cases of treason might
fall out, which are not there declared, therefore it is enacted, That if any
such case come before the Judges, they shall not proceed to Judgment till the
case be declared in Parliament, whether it ought to be adjudged treason, or not.

These words, and the whole scope of that Statute shows, that it was not the
meaning to take away any treasons that were so before, but only to regulate the
jurisdiction and manner of trial. Those that were single and certain Acts, as
conspiring the Kings death, levying war, counterfeiting the money, or great
Seal, killing a Judge, these are left to the ordinary Courts of justice; the
others not depending upon single Acts, but upon constructions and necessary
inferences, they thought it unfit to give inferior Courts so great a latitude
here, as too dangerous to the subject; those they strained to Parliaments.

This statute was the security of the subject, made with such wisdom as all
the succeeding ages have approved it: It has often passed through the furnace,
but, like gold, has lost little or nothing.

The statute of 1. H. 4* cap. 10. is in these words, Whereas in the Parliament
held the 21 year of Richard the 2. diverse pains of treasons were ordained,
insomuch, that no man did know how to behave himself, to do say* or speak,
It is accorded, that in no time to come any treason be adjudged otherwise then
it was ordained by the Statute of 25. E. 3.

It has been said, to what end is this statute made, if it takes not away the
common Law treasons remaining after the statute of 25. Edward 3.

There be two maine things which this statute does: First it takes away for the
future all the treasons made by any statute since 25. E. 3. to 1. H. 4. even to
that time: For, in respect that by another Act in that Parliament, the statute
of 21. R. 2. was repealed, it will not be denied, but that this statute repeals
more treasons then these of 21. R. 2. it repeals all statute treasons but those
in 25. E. 3.

Secondly, It not only takes away the statute treasons, but likewise the
declared treasons in Parliament after 25. E. 3. as to the future. After
declaration in Parliament the inferior Courts might judge these treasons; for
the declaration of a treason in Parliament after it was made, was sent to the
inferior Courts, that toties quoties the like case fell out, they might proceed
therein: the subject for the future was secured against these; so that this
statute was of great use.

By the very words of it, it still refers all treasons to the provision of 25.
E. 3. it leaves that entire and upon his old bottom.

The statute of 1. Q. M. cap. 1. says, That no offenses made treason by any
Act of Parliament, shall thenceforth be taken or adjudged to be treason, but
only as be declared and expressed to be treason, by the statute of 25. E. 3.
concerning treason, or the declaration of treason and no others: And further
provides that no pains of death, penalty, or forfeiture, in any wise shall
ensue for committing any treason, other then such as be in the statute of 25.
E. 3. ordained and provided; any Acts of Parliament, or any declaration, or
matter to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

By the first part of this statute, only offenses made treason by Act of
Parliament are taken away, the Common Law treasons are no way touched: The
words ( and no others) refer still to offenses made treason by Act of
Parliament; they restrain not to the treasons only particularly mentioned in
the statute of 25. E. 3. but leave that statute entire as to the Common Law
treason, as appears by the words immediately foregoing.

By the second part, for the pains and forfeitures of treasons, if it intend
only the punishment of treason, or if it intend both treason and punishment,
yet all is referred to the provision and ordinance of 25. E. 3. any Act of
Parliament, or other declaration, or thing notwithstanding.

It says not, other then such penalties, or treasons as are expressed and
declared in the statute of 25. E. 3. that might perhaps have restrained it to
those that are particularly mentioned: No, it refers all treasons to the
general ordination and provision of that statute, wherein the Common*
law-treasons are expressly kept on foot.

If it be asked what good this statute does, if it take not away the the
Common Law* treasons.

1. It takes away all the treasons made by Act of Parliament, not only since
the first of H. 4. which were many, but all before 1. H. 4. even until 25. E.
3. by express words.

2. By express words, it takes away all declared treasons, if any such had
been made in Parliament, these for the future are likewise taken away; so that
whereas it might have been doubted, whether the statute of 1. H. 4. took away
any treasons but those of 21. and 22. R. 2. this clears it both for treasons
made by Parliament, or declared in Parliament, even to the time of taking the
statute.

This is of great use, of great security to the subject; so that as to to what
shall be treason, and what not, the statute of 25. E. 3. remains entire, and so
by consequence the treasons at the Common Law.

Only, my Lords, it may be doubted, whether the manner of the manner of the
Parliamentary proteedings be not altered by the statute of 1. Hen. 4. the 17.
cap. and more fully in the Parliament roll number. 144. that is, whether since
that statute the Parliamentary power of declaration of treasons, whereby the
inferior Courts received jurisdiction, be not taken away and restrained only
to Bill; that so it might operate no further, than to that particular contained
in the Bill; that so the Parliamentary declarations for after times should be
kept within the Parliament it self, and be extended no further. Since 1. H. 4.
we have not found any such declarations made, but all Attainders of treason
have been by Bill.

If this be so, yet the common-Law-treasons still remaining, there is one and
the same ground of reason and equity since 1. H. 4. for passing of a Bill of
treason, as was before for declaring it without Bill.

Herein the Legislative power is not used against my Lord of Strafford in the
Bill; it is only the jurisdiction of the Parliament.

But, my Lords, because that either through my mistaking of the true grounds
and reasons of the Commons, or my not pressing of them with apt arguments and
presidents of former times; or that perchance your Lordships from some other
reasons and authorities more swaying with your Lordships judgments, then these
from them, may possible be of a contrary and dubious opinion concerning these
treasons, either upon the statutes of 25. E. 3. and 18. H. 6. or at the Common
Law.

My Lords, if all these five should fail, they have given me further in
command to declare to your Lordships some of their reasons, why they conceive
that in this case the mere Legaslative power may be exercised.

Their reasons are taken from these three grounds: 1. From the nature and
quality of the offense. 2. From the frame and constitution of the Parliament
wherein this Law is made. 3. From practices and usages of former times.


The horridness of the offense in endeavoring the overthrowing the Laws and
present government, has been fully opened to your Lordships heretofore.

The Parliament is the representation of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King
as Head, your Lordships as the more noble, and the Commons the other members,
are knit together in one body politic: This dissolves the arteries and
ligaments that hold the Body together, the Laws: He that takes away the Laws,
takes not away the allegiance of one subject alone but of the whole Kingdom.

It was made Treason by the statute of 13. El. for her time, to affirm, That
the Laws of the Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown; no Law, no
descent at all.

No Laws, no Peerage, no ranks or degrees of men; the same condition to all.

It Is treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Iudicem, sed
Iudicium: He that borrowed Apelles, and gave bond to return again Apelles the
Painter, sent him home after he had cut off his right hand; his bond was
broken, Apelles was sent, but not the Painter. There be twelve men, but no law;
there is never a Judge amongst them.

Its felony to embezill any one of the judicial records of the Kingdom; this
at once sweepes them all away, and from all.

Its treason to counter feit a twenty shilling piece; here is a counterfeiting
of the Law, we can call neither the counterfeit nor true coin our own.

Its treason to counterfeit the great Seal for an acre of land, no property
hereby is left to any land at all. Nothing treason now, either against King or
Kingdom, no Law to punish it.

My Lords, If the question were asked in Westminster Hall, whether this were a
crime punishable in star chamber, or in the Kings Bench, by fine or
imprisonment, they would say, it went higher: If whether felony, they would
say? That Is for an offense only against the life, or goods of some one, or few
persons: It would, I believe, be answered by the Judges, as it was by the
chief Justice Thirning, in 21. R. 2. That though he could judge the case
treason there before him, yet if he were a Peer in Parliament, he would so
adjudge it.

My Lords, if it be too big for those Courts, we hope its in the right way here.

2. The second consideration is from the frame and constitution of the
Parliament; the Parliament is the great body politic, it comprehends all from
the King to the beggar: if so, my Lords, as the natural, so this body, it has
power over it self, and every one of the members for the preservation of the
whole: Its both the Physician and the patient: if the body be distempered, it
has power to open a vein to let out the corrupt blood for curing of it self;
if one member be poisoned and gangrened, it has power to cut it off for the
preservation of the rest.

But, my Lords, it has been often inculcated, that Lawmakers should imitate
their supreme Lawgiver, who commonly warnes before he strikes; the Law was
promulged before the judgment of death for gathering of sticks; no Law, no
transgression.

My Lords, to this the rule of Law is, Frustra Legis auxilium invocat, qui in
Legem committit; from the Lex talionis, he that would not have had others to
have law, why should he have any himself? why should not that be done to him,
that himself would have done to others

It Is true, we give law to Hares, and Deers, because they be beasts of Chase;
it was never accounted either cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes and Wolves
on the head, as they can be found; because these be beasts of prey: The
Warrener sets traps for Powlcats, and other Vermin, for preservation of the
Warren.

Further, my Lords, most dangerous diseases, if not taken in time, they kill:
Errors in great things, as War, and Marriage, they allow no time for
repentance; it would have been too late to make a law, when there had been no
law.

My Lords, for further answer to this objection, he has offended a law, a law
within, the endeavoring to subvert the laws and polity of the State wherein
he lived, which had so long, and with such faithfulness protected his
Ancestry, himself, and his whole family; it was not malum, quia prohibitum, it
was malum in se, against the dictates of the dullest conscience, against the
light of nature; they, not having the law, were a law to themselves.

Besides this, he knew a law without, that the Parliament in cases of this
nature had potestatem vitae and necis.

Nay, he well knew, that he offended the promulged and ordinary rules of law:
Crimes against Law have been proved, have been confessed, so that the question
is not de culpa, sed de poena, what degree of punishment those faults deserve;
we must differ from him in opinion, that twenty felonies cannot make a treason,
if it be meant of equality in the use of the Legislative power: for he that
deserves death for one of these felonies alone, deserves a death more painful,
and more ignominious for all together.

Every felony is punished with loss of life, lands, and goods; a felony may be
aggravated with those circumstances, as that the Parliament with good reason
may add to the circumstances of punishment, as was done in the case of John
Hall, in the Parliament. H. 4. who for a barbarous murder committed upon the
Duke of Gloucester, stifling him between two feather-beds at Calice, was
adjudged to be hanged, drawn, and quartered.

Batteries by Law are punishable only by fine and single damages to the party
wounded.

In the Parliament held in 1. H. 4. cap. 6. one Savadge committed a Battery
upon one Chedder, servant to Sir John Brook, a Knight of the Parliament for
Somersetshire; It Is there enacted, that he shall pay double damages, and stand
convicted, if he render not himself by such a time: The manner of proceedings
quickened; the penalty doubled, the circumstances were considered, it concerned
the Commonwealth; it was Battery with breach of privilege of Parliament.

This made a perpetual Act, no warning to the first offender; and in the Kings
Bench, as appears by the book case of 9. H. 4. the first leaf, double
damages were recovered.

My Lords, in this of the Bill, the offense is high and general against the
King and the Commonwealth, against all and the best of all.

If every felony be loss of life, lands, and goods what is misuser of the
Legislative power, by addition of Ignominy in the death and disposal of the
lands to the Crown, the public patrimony of the Kingdom.

But it was hoped, that your Lordships had no more skill in the Art of killing
of men, than your worthy Ancesters.

My Lords, this appeal from your selves to your Ancesters we admit of;
although we do not admit of that from your Lordships to the Peers of Ireland.

He has appealed unto them; your Lordships will be pleased to hear what
judgment they have already given in the case, that is, the several attenders
of treason in Parliament, after the Statute of 25. E. 3. for treasons not
mentioned, without nor within that Statute, and those upon the first offenders
warning given.

By the Statute of 25. E. 3. its treason to levy war against the King: Gomines
and Weston afterward in Parliament in 1. R. 2. Number. 38, 39. adjudged traitors
for surrendering two several Castles in France, only out of fear, without any
compliance with the Enemy; this not within the Statute of 25. E. 3.

My Lords, in 3. R. 2. John Imperial that came into England upon letters of
safe conduct, as an Agent for the state of Genoa, sitting in the Evening before
his door in Breadstreet, (as the words of the Records are) paulo ante ignit
egium, John Kirby and another Citizen coming that way, casually Kirby trod
upon his Toe: it being twilight, this grew to a quarrel, and the Ambassador
was slain; Kirby was indicted of high treason, the indictment finds all this,
and that it was only done se defendendo, and without malice: The Judges, it
being out of the statute of 25. E. 3. could not proceed; the Parliament
declared it treason, and judgment afterward of high treason, there is nothing
can bring this within the statute of 25. E. 3. but it concerns the honor of
the Nation, that the public faith should be strictly kept: It might endanger
the traffic of the kingdom; they made not a Law first, they made the first
man an example. This is in the Parliament Roll, 3. R. 2. number. 18. and Hilary
Term, 3. R. 2. Rot. 31. in the Kings Bench, where judgment is given against
him.

In 11. R. 2. Tresiltan, and some others attainted of treason for delivering
opinions in the subversion of the Law, and some others for plotting the like:
My Lords, the case has upon another occasion been opened to your Lordship only
this is observable, That in the Parliament of the 1. year of Henry the third,
where all treasons are again reduced to the Statute of 25. Edward 3. these
Attainders were by a particular Act confirmed and made good, that the memory
thereof might be transmitted to succeeding ages: They stand good to this day;
the offenses there, as here, were the endeavoring the subversion of the laws.

My Lords, after ^. Henry the fourth, Sir John Mortimer being committed to the
Tower upon suspicion of treason, brake prison, and made an escape: This no way
within any Statute, or any former Judgment at common Law; for this, that is,
for breaking the prison only, and no other cause, in the Parliament held the
second year of Henry the sixth he was attainted of high treason by Bill.

My Lords, poisoning is only murder; yet one Richard Coke having put poison
into a pot of potage, in the kitchen of the Bishop of Rochester, whereof two
persons dyed, he is attainted of Treason, and it was enacted that he should be
boiled to death by the statute of 22. H. 8. cap. 9.

By the statute of 25. H. 8. Elizabeth Barton, the holy maid of Kent, for
pretending revelations from God, that God was highly displeased with the King
for being divorced from the Lady Katherina; and that in case he persisted in
the separation, and should marry another* that he would not continue King above
one month after; because this tended to the depriving of the lawful succession
to the Crown, she is attainted of Treason.

In the Parliament 2. and 3. H. 6. cap. 16. the Lord Admiral of England was
attainted of Treason for procuring the Kings Letters to both Houses of
Parliament, to be good to the said Earl in such matters as he should declare
unto them, for saying that he would make the Parliament the blackest Parliament
that ever was in England, endeavoring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the Kings
sister, taking a bribe of Sherrington, accused of Treason, and thereupon
consulting with Counsel for him, and some other crimes, none of them Treason,
so clearly within the statute of 25. E. 3. or any other statute as is the case
in question.

My Lords, All these Attainders, for ought I know, are in force at this day;
the statutes of the 1. H. 4. and the 1. Queen Mary, although they were willing
to make the statute of the 25. year of E. 3. the Rule of the inferior Courts,
yet they left the Attainders in Parliament precedent to themselves untoucht,
wherein the Legislative power had been exercised. There Is nothing in them
whence it can be gathered, but that they intended to leave it as free for the
future.

My Lords, in all these Attainders, there were crimes and offenses against the
Law, they thought it not unjust, circumstances considered, to heighten and add
to the degrees of punishment, and that upon the first offender.

My Lords, We receive, as just, the other Laws and statutes made by these our
Ancesters: They are the rules we go by in other cases, why should we differ
from them in this alone?

These (my Lords) are in part those things which have satisfied the Commons in
passing the Bill: but it is now left to the Judgment and Justice of your
Lordships.

FINIS.

