Fourteen strange PROPHESIES: Besides Mother Shiptons, and Mr. Saltmarsh,
predicting wonderful events to betide these years of calamity, in this
Climate, whereof diverse are already come to pass, worthy of observation.

1. A Prophecy of K. Richard the 3. 2. Mother Shiptons Prophecy. 3. Mr.
Truswels, Recorder of Lincoln. 4. Sibyllaes Prophesies. 5. Ignatius Prophecy.
6. Merlins Prophecy. 7. Otwel Bins Prophesies. 8. Mr. Brightmans Prophesies.
9. Ancient Prophesies in Meeter.
Whereto is added the Predictions of Mr. John Saltmarch, to his Excellency, and
the Counsel of his Army. And the manner of his Death.

Printed by an exact true copy; with new marginall Notes on Mother Shiptons
Prophesies.

Wolsey.

Mother Shipton.



Printed for Richard Harper, at the Bible and Harp in Smi^hfield. 1648.

Mr. Saltmarshes Predictions declared to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and
the Counsel of his Army; with the Motives that occasioned it: and the manner
of his Death.
HE being at his house nere Y^lford in Essex, December. 4. 1647. told his Wife,
that he had received a command from God, to make known to the Army what the
Lord had revealed unto him: The like he said to Sir H. ^ Knight, a Member of
the House of Commons, as soon as he arived at London. The next die (being ^he
Lords day) he found some difficulty to procure a Horse, but after dinner he got
one, and rid alone toward Windsor. But missing his way, lodged at night 7.
miles short; where he declared, That the great and dreadful Day of the Lord is
near, when all men shall be judged by Jesus Christ, and then shall the ways
and actions of all men appear, etc. Early the next day, December. 6. he again
missed his way in a Forest, but espying a house, rid to it to demand his way,
and there made known, That God was purposed to destroy the wicked, and draw
the Saints to himself, with much more: after which he departed, and about nine
of the clock came to Windsor; where Mr. A. an Adjutator saluting him, he said
Mr. A. Depart from these Tents lest you perish with them, for the Lord has
revealed unto me, that he is angry with this Army, because they have forsaken
him. Another, a Captain asked him how he did? To whom he replied, That he had
nothing from God to say to him, because he had alwais been a seeker under
specious pretenses. Then seeing one C. D. another Officer, he said, he could
not own him, for he was for destruction. Then going to the General Council,
where many Officers were met in expectation of the General, he told them, That
he was come thither to reveal the Lords command; That though God had done much
for them, and by them, yet he had left them and their Councels, because they
had forsaken him: That God would not prosper their Consultations, but destroy
them by divisions amongst themselves; That formerly he came like a Lamb, but
now God had raised in him the spirit of a Lion, because they had ^ought to
destroy the people of God. Some said that he looked like one distracted, and
that he had been sick, and was not well recovered; to whom he replied, that he
had been sick, but well in health then, and sensible of what he said, and that
should be the last time that ever he should speak to them. Afterward he went
to the General, not moving his hat, and told him, That he had no command from
God to honor him, That he had honored him so much, as he offended God in
doting on his person, and that God would no longer prosper him, etc. Then going
to the L. Genesis who asked him how he did? he (without any respect) answered him,
That God was very angry with him for abusing the godly, and that the Armies
falling from their first Principles, would occasion their ruin and
destruction, etc. After which he departed, and on Tuesday, December. 7. went
again to the L. Genesis and declared, That he was sorry to see such obstinacy in
him, and wished him to be mindful of what God had declared unto him:
Afterward he took his leave of the Army, and said he had done his Errand, and
must leave them never to see the Army more. On Wednesday, December. 8. he came to
London, and took leave of some friends, to whom he recommended his wife. On
Thursday December. 9. he went from London to his house at Y^lford, not sick at
all, and told his wife what he had done. On Friday December. 10, he said he had
finished his course, and must go to his Father. In the afternoon he said his
head aked, and laid himself upon his Bed. On Saturday, December. 11. he was
taken speechless, and about four or five a clock that afternoon dyed.

A Prediction of King Richard the Third.
IN the Reign of King Richard the third, his Majesty with his Army lay at
Leicester the night Before the battle at Bosworth field was fought. It happened
in the Morning as the King rode through the South-gate, a poor old blind man
(by profession a Wheel wright) sat begging, and hearing of his approach said,
that if the Moon changed twice that day, having by her ordinary course changed
in the Morning, King Richard should lose his Crown, and be slain; and riding
over the bridge his left foot struck against a stump of wood, which the old man
hearing, said, Even so shall his head at his return back hit on the same
place, which so came to pass: And a Nobleman that carried the Moon for his
Colors, revolted from King Richard, whereby he lost that day his Life, Crown,
and Kingdom; which verified the Presages of that poor blind old man.

The Prophecy of Shiptons Wife in the time of King Henry the Eight.
Note, that this Prophecy was never exactly printed before.
When she heard that King Henry the Eight should be King, and Cardinal Wolsey
should be at York, she said that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York,
which the King and the Cardinal hearing, being angry, sent the Duke of
Suffolk and the Lord Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the
Kings house near York, where leaving their men they went to Mr. Besly to
York, and desired him to go with them to Mother Shiptons house, where when
they came they knocked at the door, she said, come in Mr. Besly, and those
honorable Lords with you, and Mr. Besly would have put in the Lords before
him; but she said, come in Mr. Besly, you know the way, but they do not. This
they thought strange that she should know them, and never saw them; then they
went into the house, where there was a great fire, and she bad them welcome,
calling them all by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and they
drank and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said the Duke; if you knew what we
came about, you would not bid us so welcome; she said the messenger should not
be hanged: Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said the Cardinal should never
see York; yea said she, I said he might see York, but never come at it. But
said the Duke, when he comes to York thou shall be burned; we shall see that,
said she, and plucking her hankercher off her head, she threw it into the fire,
and it would not burn: then she took her staff and turned it into the fire,
and it would not burn; then she took it and put it on again. Then said the
the Duke, what mean you by this? she replied, if this had burned, I might have
burned. Mother Shipton, quoth the Duke, what think you of me? My Lord, said
she, the time will come The Duke was afterward beheaded.
you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed.

My Lord Piercy said, and what say you of me? My Lord, said she, shoe your
horse in the quick, and you will do well, but your This proved true, for he
rose in rebellion in the North, and by not flying when he might he was taken
and beheaded at York, where his body was buried; but his head was ^^ol^ away
and carried into France. te^g^ Eliz, R.
body will be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be stolen from the
Bar and carried into France: At which they all laughed, saying, that would be
a great lop between the head and the body. Then said the Lord Darcy, and what
think you of me? She said, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it will
never do you no good; you are going to war, you will pain many a man, but
kill none: So they went away.

Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood, and going to the top of the
Tower, He asked, where stands York, and how far it was thither? and said, that
one said he should never see York; nay, said one, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. He vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then
they showed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence; he said that
he would soon be there; but being sent for by the King, he died in his way to
London, at Leicester of a laske. And Shiptons wife said to Mr. Besly, yonder is
a fine stall built for the Cardinal in the Minster, of gold, pearl; and
precious stones, go and present one of the pillars to King Henry; and he did
so.

Mr. Besly seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her to
tell him some more of her Prophesies. Mr. Besly said she, before that This came
to pass, for Trinity steeple in York was blown down with a tempest, and Owse
Bridge was broken down with a great flood; and what they did in repairing ^^e
bridge in the day time with the stone of the steeple, fell down in the night,
until they (remembering thi^ ^rophesie) laid the highest stone of the steeple
for the foundation of the bridge, and then the work stood. And by this was
partly verified another of Mother Shiptons Prophesies (viz.) That her maid
should live to drive her Cow over Trinity steeple.
Owse Bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall
fall in the night, until they get the highest stone of Trinity Church, to be
the lowest stone of Owse Bridge.

Then the day will come when the North shall rue it wondrous sore, but the
South shall rue it for evermore; when hares kindle on cold hearth Supposed to
be mean by suppression of Abbien and other Religions houses. And at the Lord
William Howards house at Naworth, a Hare came and kindled in his Kitchen upon
the hearth.
stones, and lads shall marry Ladies and bring them home, then shall you have a
year of pining hunger, and then a dearth without come, a woeful day will be
seen in England, a King and a Queen.

The first coming of the This was fulfilled in K. James his coming in, for
such a multitude of people stood at Holgate bar to behold him, as that to avoid
the press, he was forced to ride by another way.
King of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come through the
Bar, and when the King When King James was at London, his children were at
Edenborough, prepareing to come in to England.
of the North shall be at London, his tayl^ shall be at Edenborough.

After this shall water This is verified by the conducting of water into York
streets through boared Elmes: And the Conduit house has a Windmill on the top
that draws up the water.
come over Owse bridge, and a windmill shall be set on a tower; and an Elm-tree
shall lie at every man's door, at that time women shall wear great hats and
great bands.

And when there is a Lord Major A Lord Major whose house was in the Minster
yard in York, was killed with three stabs.
at York, let him beware of a stabbe.

When two Knights Sir Tho. Wentworth and Sir John Savill in choosing Knights
for the Shire in the Castle yard in York, did so fall out, that they were
never after well reconciled.
shall fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives
after.

When all Colton Colton hag in her rhyme was a Wood land ground full of trees,
which bore corn seven years, and the seventh year after that was the year of
the coming in of the Scots, and their taking of Newcastle.
hag has borne corpse of Corn, seven years after you shall hear news, there
shall two Judges In the year 1616. two Judges of Assize went out at a gate in
York, where never any Judges were known to go out before or since.
go in and out at Walmgate Bar.

Then Wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much woe to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry well away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most:
you shall not know of the war over night, yet you shall have it in the
morning: and when it comes it shall last three years: between Cardon and Air
shall be great warfare, when all the world is as lost, it shall be called
Christ's Crossed. When the battle begins, it shall be where Near Leicester, where
Richard the third was slain in battle, the Collonell Hastings was one of the
first in Arms, endeavoring to settle the Commission of Array, in opposition to
others that were then settling the Militia.
Crook-back Richard made his fray.

They shall say, to warfare for your King for half a crown a day, but stir
not, (they will say) to warfare for your King on pain of hanging, but stir
not, for he that goes to complain, shall not come back again. The time will
come when England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall be
heard to speak: then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the
one is down they will go to London Town: Then there will be a great battle
between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, and when
they come to Brammamore they fight and are again pacified for a time, then
there will be a great battle between England and Scotland at Stockmore: Then
will Ravens sit on the It is to be noted and admited, that this Cross in the
North in Mother Shiptons days was a tall stone Cross, which ever since has
been by degrees sinking into the ground, and now is sunk so low, that a Raven
may sit upon the top of it, and reach her bill to the ground.
Cross, and drink as much blood of Nobles as of the Commons, then woe is me,
for London shall be destroyed for ever after.

There will come a woman with one eye, and she shall tread in many men's blood
to the knee, and a man leaning on a staff by her, she shall say to him, what
art thou? and he shall say, I am the King of Scots, and she shall say, go with
me to my house, for there are three Knights, and he will go with her, and
stay there three days and three nights, then will England be lost, and they
will cry twice a day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knights in
Peter-gate in York, and the one shall not know of the other; there shall be a
child borne in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give
him three horses There is a child not many years since borne at Pomfret with
three thumbs.
to hold while they win England, and all Noble blood shall be gone but one;
and they shall carry him to Sheriff Huttons Castle six miles from York, and
he shall dye there, and they shall choose there an Earl in the Field, and
hanging their horses on a thorn, and rue the time that ever they were borne to
see so much blood shed. Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they
shall keep them out three days and three nights, and a penny loaf shall be
within the Bar at half a Crown, and without the Bar at a penny; and they will
swear if they will not yield, to blow up the Town walls: Then they will let
them in, and they will hang up the Major, Sheriffs and Aldermen, and they will
go into Crouch Church, there will three Knights go in, and but one come out
again, and he will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take house,
tower, or bower for 21. years, and whilst the world endures, there shall
never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or Queens, but the Kingdom shall
be governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this
shall be a white harvest of Corn gotten in by women. Then shall be in the
North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother, I have seen a man to
day, and for one man there shall be a thousand women: there shall be a man
sitting on St. Ia^es Church hill weeping his fill: And after that a Ship came
sailing up the Thames till it came against London, and the Mr. of the Ship
shall weep, and the Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he has
made so good a voyage, and he shall say; Ah what a goodly City this was, none
in the world comparable to it, and now there is le^t scare any house that can
let us have drink for our money.

Unhappy he that lives to see these days,
But happy are the dead Shiptons wife says.
In the worlds old age this woman did foretell,
Strange things should hap which in our times have fell.
Mr. Truswels, Recorder of Lincoln.
THe Lilly shall remain in a merty world, and he shall be moved against the
seed of the Lion, and he shall stand on one side amongst thrones of his
Kingdom and Country: and there shall come the Son of man beating three wild
beasts in his Arms, which Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is to be
dread throughout all the world, with a company of people he shall pass many
waters, and he shall come to the Land of the Lion, looking for help, with the
beasts of his own Country: And in that year there shall come an Eagle out of
the Bast, and his wings spread with the beams of the Son of man: And that
year shall be destroyed Castles upon Thames, and there shall be great fear
over the whole world; and in a part of the Land there shall be great battles
amongst many Kingdoms: That day shall be the bloody field, and the Lilly shall
lose his Crown, and therewith shall be crowned the Son of man. And in the
fourth year, many battles shall be for the Faith, and most of the world shall
be stoopen, but the Son of man with the Eagle shall be preferred, and there
shall be universal peace over the whole world: Then shall the Son of man
receive a mavelous token, and there shall be great plenty of all manner of
fruits, and then shall he go to the land of the cross.

The Prophecy of old Sybilla.
When Scotland hundred and ninth unconquered King,
The sixteenth hundred thirty and ninth year,
Into his age of thirty nine shall reign,
Then shall the Papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire:
For Scotland shall that blessed work begin,
Then shall the whore of Babel we had here,
Be banished quite which Bishops did bring in.
Then thou brave England, which wast led so blind
By their perverse Episcopal pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed, who cruelly have cried;
So that, that Sacred Prophetess Sybilla,
Shall shortly come to pass; she tells Tom Milla.
And Tom tell's me, and I must tell't again,
Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France and Spain.
Ignatius Prophecy.
If eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four or five.
After the ^* is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
Prevent him not, then sure his sway
Continue shall til many a day.
The ninth shall die young, and the first
Perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be the time when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three;
For then the Eagle shall have help^,
By craft to catch the Lions whelpe*
And hurt him sore, except the same
Be cured by the maidens name.
In July month of the same year;
Saturn conjoynes with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prise.
And sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion;
Believe this truly, if then you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be.
Merlins Prophesies.
ON Boreas wings then hither shall be borne,
Through Week ore Tweed, a Princely Unicorne
Who brought into the world his own fair Crest,
A rampant Lion figured on his breast,
And to his arms six Lions more shall quarter
With six French flowers inv^ron'd with the garter,
Joining by fates unchangeable dispose
The Northern Thistle in the Southern Rose:
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain,
With pious zeal during his blessed reign.
That Lincoln was, that London is, that York shall b^
Brave London prays those days she never may see.
The Prophesies of old O^wel Bins, kept by Mr. Smith Vicar of Hudderfield 40.
Years.
THen James shall seek a second Crown,
In pulling Pope and Papists down;
But James shall vanish from their face,
At half Elizabeth's Royal race.
Then using foreign policies,
Grudgings and discontents arise;
Yet shall they assemble at the seat
Of Parliament for a work most great;
But strange op^nions there shall sow
Discentions that too high shall grow:
And La^dicea's, Englands Church,
Of grace and beauty some shall lurch;
And Smiths of policy shall invent
To cast new molds of government.
While vulgar birds of weakest wing
Grow stout against their Eagle King.
Whose just integrous heart shall prove
The Adamant of Subjects love:
Then pride shall some in prison lock,
And lop a head off on a block:
By honest power they shall bring down
An aspirer that assumed a Crown;
That he whose power did Laws contemn,
^ight find a grave no Diadem.
^ome Co^ick Seenes shall then be acted
^y vulgar players much distracted;
The Gospel from a tub or tun,
shall broached by Mechan^cks r^n.
^etucoats shall in Pulpits preach,
And women be allowed to teach;
And in these gloomy dogged days
They shall tread off the Muses bays.
Thus strife and fury shall increase,
and Round heads shall disturb the peace
Of Religion, while they it toffe
(...) blankets, and pull down the Cross.
The Brownists shall no old prayers brook,
^ermons shall drown the Service Book,
Then all men in those times shall see
^reat troubles and calamity.
Then on the Irish bogs and heath,
^any a man shall taste of death.
The Soldiers wages shall increase,
Till wars at last in conquest cease:
To such as are good Landlords known,
(...) hostile times some love is shown:
^^t for all such as have great store,
^hey are in less Afety then the poor.
^hen twenty pounds of coin in hand,
(...) worth so much of yearly Land.
^^om Ireland then there shall come one
^ust lose his head upon a stone:
^ut when England does swim in floods
Of plenty and grows proud of goods,
Then from their sleope they shall be waked,
To know themselves both blind and naked.
^hrists Church must know some misery.
There shall be a doleful tragedy:
The Lord abroad his sword will send,
^^lesse they w^^ning take to amend;
Yet Germany, France and Brkeny,
This last act of my tragedy.
Good days will follow, bad ones ce^s^,
There shall be plenty and great pence:
The whore of Romes nose shall be ^^t,
And of her rich attire be stripped:
In the mean time Bishops shall be
Thrown down from all their dignity^
Their Hierarchy and their train
Shall never recover strength again:
Nor is Romes City only Rome,
But all the Popes dominion;
So that Rome feels her annoyed,
While she in Ireland is destroyed:
In forty one by computation,
The Pope shall fall by Reformation:
A Clergy man shall then suffice,
His pride with one poor Benefice^
Then Cambridge and the Oxonian
Shall be scorned by the Rotundian,
And some that cannot say nor sing,
Shall drink much at a troubled springs
And Cobblers then shall leave their last;
In Sermons up their gall to cast:
Magpies and Parrets then shall prace
Both of the Aegle and the State,
Until they bring things in conclusion,
To much disorder and confusion.
Rebels and men most seditious,
Shall make the time prove pernicious.
Rich men shall do things unbefitting,
An upright Judge be scarce found sitting;
Upstart honor shall prove dreams;
And Bishops Seas prove little streams:
While many a feathered foul shall fli^.
Beyond the Seas for jeopardy;
Rumors shall be of wars and arms,
And there shall be of Sects great swarms,
A sort of mad rude common people,
Shall pull the Cross from every steeple.
The King while they do thus presume,
Unto this Realm that right shall doom,
He shall this Kingdom wisely guide,
And other Kingdoms more beside:
Then Peers and Commons shall elect,
Whose Laws shall ever take effect.
No man shall Lawyers counsel crave,
For men at home their right shall have,
And Officers each town within,
Shall right their wrongs and punish sin;
Worthies be nine, and reckon me,
And this the tenth and last shall be:
The Moon obseur'd full sixty year,
Shall then get light, and shine full cleare^
While England then for joy shall sing,
And bless the reign of their good King,
Mistress Whi^e^ a Welsh woman on the third of May last Prophesied at follow^^^
THE 15 of this Month of May
Shall be a sad disastrous day,
And they that Charle^ his part do take
Shall dearly suffer for his sake,
And many of his friends shall fly,
Lake Dust before the Enemy:
But in the pleasant Month of June
The Byrds will sing another tune;
A Glo^ious splender shall appear,
And so protect our Severaigne dear:
Diew cathee whee Guenthlen White. Aged 112 years.
Mr. Brightmans Prophecy.
When Engands Church grows Englands shame,
Full of luke warmness, glory vain,
The worst in works and outward form,
And with contrary factions torn,
When Romish Rites by Reformation,
Shall be expelled out of this Nation,
Lord, begg^r, Bishops then shall come
To ruin and be overthrown.
The Priests shall be vile to each wite
Their downfall read with much delight;
For God will not the guiltless hold,
That have been neither hot nor cold.
The ^cotch Church shall be in condition
A Virgin free from superstition.
They shall be joined in Covenant,
Against which the world shall boast and vaunt*
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
Until she truly her self reform:
Such hurly burly, and such stir,
No form of Church shall remain in her:
But reformation must take breath
From the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Another Prophecy very ancient in old Meeter.
IN the same year that fully shall expire,
The sixth great wonder of the worlds Empire
Then Tyders i. e. Hen. Ed. Mar. Phi. Eliz.
HEMP shall end I dare arread,
Then After Q. Eliz. K. l.
E shall fall, and I shall stand instead:
In the same year a great plague shall reign,
The which a thousand days shall remain:
At Mary's Mass a Court they hold,
The which in bloody Ink shall be enrolled:
There many a plea shall pass with brawling words,
And short daggers shall be better then long swords:
On Hunsl^es heath soon after shall be seen
A fierce battle fought by a King I ween:
Of Knights there shall be three thousand there,
Of which there shall but ten back again appear:
There shall many a battle and brawle be,
And then a huge host shall pass over the sea,
Concluding a p^ace but in this wise,
Betw^xt C. C. two L. L. so long shall last two I. I.
Another.
ENgland thy proper native thee betrays,
Because all Nations hate thee and thy ways,
Spain does undermine thee, France does grow;
Wales threats, the Irish thee by snares does awe
Thy B^avest men do on a sudden dye,;
And thou thy self do wholly rained lie;
Yet see it not but under seigned peace,
Do thine own misery still more increase.
Another out of an ancient Manuscript.
When pride is in price,
And wit is in vice,
When Robbery as rife as Rye in the Rice;
When great men are Lawless,
And holy Kirk awlesse,
Gods body and blood not given the heeding,
And laics have the Church in leading,
Then shall sorrow set upon seele;
But sal Fortune turn her wheel?
When the year of our Lord is commen and began,
One thousand six hundred forte and twain,
Then zeal sal last for ever and aye
Til the Son of God take all away.
Another short, but pithy.
IN Germany begins a Dance,
Which passes through Italy, Spain, and France.
And to Ireland is a Leaper:
There the Dance lies at a stand.
Till it ventures ore into Scotland,
But England shall pay the Piper.
Another.
Ever shall {:::} be called the first of the Due,
When {^} shall bear up
Then shall England be clepid Paradise;
When {:^:} and {::} be set on side;
The name of {:::} shall spring full wide;
And when {::} and {.} drive out {^.}
Then may England sing well away:
Then it is all shent,
For then shall be another Parliament.
{:::} Shall up, and {^} shall under,
The Lion, the Rose, the Flower-de-l^^e:
The Lock shall undo;
Then shall {:::} bear the price,
And {^} shall help thereto.
FINIS.

