GOD save the KING: OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT LYME-REGIS May 18. 1660. at the
Solemn Proclamation of his most Excellent Majesty Charles the II.

By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith.

By Ames Short M. A. Minister there.

Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles,
and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.

Psalm. 21.5. His glory is great in thy Salvation: honor and Majesty have thou
laid upon him.

London, Printed for W. Roybould, at the Unicorn in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

portrait of Charles II

TO The Reverend, our much esteemed Friend, Mr. Ames Short, Minister of the
Gospel in Lyme Regis.
Reverend and worthy Sir,
WE have received much content and satisfaction in our spirits from your late
seasonable Sermon Preached to us upon occasion of our Solemnity in Proclaiming
His most Excellent Majesty, our dread Sovereign CHARLES the second; wherein you
did so clearly represent him unto our apprehensions to be in all respects a
very hopeful Prince, and his accession to the Government of these Kingdoms to
be every way so advantageous, as did exceedingly increase our joys, for His
Majesty's wonderful Preservation and Restitution, and add very much to the
Solemnities of the day: And therefore we cannot but return you our hearty
thanks for the same. And having good grounds to hope, that it may have the same
effect upon the hearts of others, into whose hands it may come, who had not the
opportunity to hear it; we do hereby make it our joint request unto you to
publish your Sermon to the View of the World, that those clouds of fears and
doubtings, which perhaps do sadden the spirits of many good people, may thereby
be dispersed, and all may be induced as cheerfully to embrace, and
affectionately to close with this hopeful way of Settlement on the good old
foundation (and as thankefully to acknowledge the great goodness of our God in
bringing us thereunto after all our sad Combustions and Confusions) as we our
selves upon these grounds unfeignedly do. Sir, we have had such large
experience of your good affection to His Majesty's Person, and just Authority,
and your desires for the healing of all our sad Breaches, that we cannot doubt
of your ready compliance with us in this thing.

Signed in the names, and by the appointment of your very affectionate friends,
the Members of this Corporation of Lyme-Regis.John Ellesdon Mayor.
Dated May 21. 1660.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL, THE MAYOR, With the rest of the Capital Burgesses of
Lyme-Regis in Dorset.
My Beloved, and much esteemed in the Lord.
FOr your and the edification of all others, the Inhabitants of this place,
this Sermon was first studied and Preached; and at your request, as appears by
your prefixed Letter, (in order to a more public benefit) with some little
enlargement, it is now Printed. I wish, that neither you, nor any that heard
it, may find cause to say of it, as Queen Elizabeth once did of a Sermon
Preached before her Majesty, and Printed at her command; of which (after the
reading of it) she said, It was the best Sermon Preached, but the worst Read,
that ever she heard and read. If you judge the like of this after you have read
it, I shall not think it strange; being well assured, that my Sermons (by
reason of the plainness of my style) are fitter for the Pulpit than the
Press, and more acceptable in preaching than they can be in reading.

And therefore, whatever you may think of it, I am fully confident, I shall be
diversely censured for the publication of it, according to the various
judgments, dispositions, and affections of such as happily may be at the pains
to read it. Some perhaps will charge me with flattery; of this my highly and
worthily esteemed Friend, in his most ingenious Epistle to the Reader, has
sufficiently cleared me. Others, no doubt, will accuse me of injuring His
Majesty, by drawing and exposing His Portraicture to public view in a dress
so homely, and unbefitting a Prince of so much worth and excellency: With these
I shall not quarrel, but beg my Sovereign's pardon, for handling His Personal
and Princely perfections in so rude a manner; and I doubt not but I shall
obtain it. He that has so freely offered an Act of Grace to his worst of
Enemies, (who shall lay hold of it) will not stick to pardon the unavoidable
weakness of a Loyal Subject, when his mercy is implored. However, having
exposed my self to censure upon your desires, you cannot but hold your selves
obliged (with the utmost of your power) to vindicate my name from all
aspersions which, upon this account, may be cast upon it. And this (besides
your continuing steadfast in the fear of God, and in loyalty to his most sacred
Majesty) is all that is at present desired of you, by

(SIRS) Your affectionate Pastor and Servant in the work, and for the sake of
Christ, Ames Short.
Lyme-Regis, June 4. 1660.
To the unprejudiced Reader.
BEing apprehended by the report of the intended Proclamation of the KING, and
carried to the Town of Lyme, I there found a Solemnity, suitable to the
occasion. The only strife was, who could excel in the testimonies of their
rejoicing. The Soldiery, with much order and galantry, discharged their part,
as a proof of their former, and pledge of their future Loyalty: The unanimous
Magistrates, being accompanied with the High Sheriff (who gratified the place
with his personal presence) proved the name of their Town to be Lyme-Regis, and
triumphed at the recovery of that honorable title; the Country flocked in with
no less joy than admiration, at the proclaiming of a King, in the twelfth year
of his reign: They now looked on themselves as delivered from any other person
who had played Rex since 48, in which time we have had such along Parenthesis of
transactions, as might be left out, without prejudice to the sense. The Guns
shouted every one according to his mouth; But cedant arma togae, the work begun
in nomine Domini: The Pulpit was first engaged, and the after Acclamations were
but the Eccho's of that sound, and repetitions of the Sermon, wherein if there
be not a composition of Piety, Loyalty and strength of reason in plain English;
I am content to publish my ignorance. Let it be perused by unbiassed persons,
and it must be granted, that there is nothing affirmed but truth, and the
probabilities are backed with such Arguments as make them next to certainty.
There can be no ground for suspicion of flattery, seeing that the publication
was not intended, and the preaching was at such a distance from the Court:
Besides, the mixture of such directions as please not those who say, Isa. 30.10
Prophecy unto us smooth things. Neither is there any alteration in the Authors
principles, who has not only refused to engage in the late changes, but boldly
set himself, and warned his people against those that were given to them. It is
confessed, that many of the giddy multitude cry out now upon Usurpers, who
lately cried them up as much Turba Remi sequitur for tunam ut semper, and odit
damnatos. Idem populus, etc.
. But there was no understanding Subject (who had not lost the sense of his
duty to God and the King) but mourned (at least) in secret for the abominable
violations of Allegiance and Covenant. How much the Protestant Religion, the
King's Royal Family, the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland have
suffered by the unparalled murder of his late Majesty, I need not tell thee
Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit, nulli flebilior quam mihi.
. We have been like a body beheaded, for which no other head will serve, how
artificially soever it be set on, and how quickly do those heads fall off, that
are but clapped on upon us? which wanting a natural conjunction, will stand no
longer than they are upheld by force; neither can there be any conveyance of
spirits where there is not the right union. But since it has pleased the
Almighty (who for the transgression of the Land has suffered many to be Rulers
thereof Prove. 28.2.
) to restore to us our Lawful Sovereign, and so to set over us our proper
head, this is matter of thankfulness. Let us adore the wonders of
providence, concurring to this blessed change, and fix our eyes on that eye in
the wheel, which has ordered all the turnings to this end. This is the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Must not the Enchanters themselves
(who have assayed to mock providence) confess, that this is the finger of God
Exodus 8.19.
? How much reason there is for our rejoicing upon this occasion, this ensuing
short Treatise will inform thee. Who could bow the hearts of the Elders of our
Judah, as of one man, to send this message to the King, 2 Samuel 19.14.
Return thou and all thy Servants, but God who has the hearts of all men in
his hands? Who could overturn, overturn, overturn, till He came whose right it
was, but God, who has made the King's enemies the Instruments of their own
overthrow? The Counsels of Achitophels are turned into foolishness, in order to
the preservation of his sacred Majesty's Person, and the twisted interests of
multitudes of the Kingdom, politickly engaged, are as prudently undone, and
cannot hold together against him. Gods patience in forbearing a Nation so
guilty, is yet followed by his justice, both in vindicating those, to whom
guilt is imputed without cause; and in testifying against such as have killed,
and also taken possession. The people that have been long kept under do now
flock together like the fishes at Strigone, (a Town situate on Danubius) and
hold their heads above water, which (they say) was a token of their change of
their Lord and Master. We are weary studying the meaning of Commonwealth, and
although we have had the name beaten into us, yet cannot possibly understand
the thing. And the (...), or lawlesness for five days amongst the Persians,
wherein there was so much robbing and killing, never made them more willing of
government again than the violencies and illegalities here, in this long
Interval, have made us ready to accept our Royal Sovereign. We have been
reckoned Offenders for a word, and the cruelty of the newerected Tribunals was
such, that the Judgment Seat little differed from a Shambles; the new Laws,
like Draco's at Lacedemonia being written in Characters of blood. But our hopes
are revived, and we trust, that if the Lord would have destroyed us, Judge. 13.
23.
he would not have showed us all these things. His most excellent Majesty has
heightened our expectations by his gracious Declaration. The best and wisest of
the Nation have done that which God, our Laws, and Covenant, and the necessity
of vindicating themselves and us from the horrid guilt of Regicide, have made
their duty. Into what Chaos was the Church and State lately reduced? there is
the power and wisdom of a Creator requisite to bring all into form; and happy
shall he be whom the King of Kings will honor, as the chief Instrument hereof.
This Sermon tells thee that Joseph and David were by their Afflictions fitted
for eminent service; and I am sure our dread Sovereign has been bred in the
same School, and doubt not but his Crown is made of gold purified in the fire.
I shall not need to acquaint thee how his return runs parallel with that of
David's, after his banishment, who made use of the General and the Priests in
order to his reduction 2 Samuel 19.11, 13
: But my hearty wish is, that the men of Israel and Judah may not dispute, who
has the greatest part in him, v. 43.
or most right to him; but that we may all join in praises, for the discovery
whereof thou art not left here without directions; and let me beseech thee (as
the Author does) for the King's sake, and for thine own sake, to take heed of
doing wickedly. 1 Samuel 12.25.
Do not think thou can contribute to settlement by studying revenge: this
will evidence that thy desire of the King is but for thine own ends; expect no
patent for profaneness, but be sure, To. 13.4.
that the Sword will be drawn for the punishment of evil doers. Do not think to
justify thy self by condemning others, who possibly refuse to drown their
reason, to prove their Loyalty. Why should not they come in amongst the Kings
friends, who pray for his health, and drink only for their own? whither has
division already carried us En quo discordia cives Perduxit miseros.
? and how open has it laid us to those enemies that wait the like opportunity?
Be of Mephibosheth's temper, to part with thine own interest for the sake of
his Majesty's quiet, Let him take all, 2 Samuel 19.30.
seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace. Let us all agree to banish
whatever may occasion any further disagreement. We have joined in our
Proclamations and Acclamations, let us join also in our Petitions to the King
of Heaven, that our King, as Solomon, may build the Temple 1 Chro. 28.6.
, and cause the Kingdom to flourish, that he may be a Melchisedeck, a King of
Righteousness, that his Throne may be established, and that under him we may
live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2.2.
; which has been, is, and shall be the hearty Prayer of him,

That confesses his insufficiency to advise thee; but, Professes his
readiness to serve thee,John Hodder, Minister of Hawkchurch.

GReat CHARLES the second's Picture's here, Peruse it;
Know that 'twas writ at distance, and excuse it:
The lines are loyal, let choice Limners mend it;
Under correction we presume to send it.
CHARLES, whose return revives each drooping heart,
And quickens each dead soul, to act its part:
Whose virtues though the French and Spanish saw,
Make England happy by no Salick Law.
This Monarch's rising, first restores to health
The Kingdom deadly sick of the Commonwealth.
Obstructions thus removed, each lively vein
Conveighs its active spirits once again.
Hark how the Bells, Guns, Drums and Trumpets ring,
And loyal Pulpits cry, God save the King!
See how the blazing earth by Bon-fires tries
To translate Heaven, and outshine the skies,
Lyme's glorious Triumphs do bespeak it glad
To gain the Title Regis, once it had.
My joys are mixed with prayers, that Charles his wain,
By Traitors hands be never o'return'd again,
That Crown and Church may flourish, and the State
Be fixed, in spite of strange or homebred hate.
That CHARLES be wise, as Solomon, to give
The Child to those would hav't united live.
Theophilus Philanax.

A SERMON PREACHED AT LYME-REGIS, May the 18. 1660. at the Solemn Proclamation
of His most Excellent Majesty, Charles II. etc.
THe Proclamation and Inauguration of Kings has been observed with great
solemnity in all ages, The Preamble.
by all Nations: In the observation of which Solemnities, none have been more
forward than God's most faithful Prophets and Priests, and Ministers of the
Gospel. And therefore that I may give a further testimony of that loyal and
sincere affection I have ever born to His most excellent Majesty, our Sovereign
Lord, Charles by the grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
King, Defender of the Faith. I shall at present apply my self to speak
something suitable to the solemnity of this day; that by so doing I may quicken
you to the observation of it, both with an inward and outward rejoicing
suitable unto it: not that I think you need a spur, being fully assured of the
sincerity of your affection, both to his Majesty's Person and Authority.

Now, the words I shall insist upon to this end, you shall find written,

1 KINGS 1.39, 40. The Text
And Zadock the Priest took an horn of Oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed
Solomon: and they blew the trumpet, and all the people said, God save King
Solomon.

And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with Pipes, and
rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.

The words are Historical, and in them you have a Relation of the Proclamation
and Inauguration of Solomon to be King over Israel.

For methods sake and your better understanding of them, you may take notice,

1. Of the Agents or Persons who were employed in the observation of these
solemnities.

2. Of their Actions, or the things done and performed by these Agents.

3. Of the Person, about whose concernments these Agents were employed.

The Agents were Zadok the Priest, (who began the solemnity) and the rest of
the people who were then present, among whom (for the honor of the solemnity)
was Nathan the Prophet, and many others, men of great account and esteem both
in the Church and State of Israel, as evidently appears by the verse
immediately foregoing. So Zadock the Priest and Nathan the Prophet and Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites went down, and
caused Solomon to ride upon King David's Mule, etc. And from hence I conclude.

That it is a thing no way unbecoming a Priest, Note.
a Prophet, a Minister of God, to act his part in the Procla mation, and
Inauguration, of his just, and lawful Sovereign.

2. The Actions of these Agents, and they are diverse, every man (in this
Solemnity) was employed in some thing suitable to his place and station.

1. Zadok the Priest begins the work, it is said he took a Horn of oil out of
the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. A Ceremony frequently used (by God's
command and appointment) in the designation, and Inauguration of Persons to be
Kings, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures, 1 Samuel 9.16. I will send
thee a man out of the land of benjamin, and thou shall anoint him to be
Captain over my People Israel, that he may save my People out of the hand of
the Philistines. So cap. 10. v. 1. Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured
it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the Lord has
anointed thee to be Captain over his Inheritance? So cap. 16. verse. 1. And the
Lord said to Samuel, etc. Fill thy horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to
Jesse the Bethlemite, for I have provided me a King among his sons. Item v. 13.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his
Brethren: and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward.
Again. 2. Sam. 2 4. And the men of Judah came and there they anointed David
King over the house of Judah: so 1. Cron. 29.22. and they made Solomon King the
second time, and anointed him to the Lord to be chief Governor. And this
ceremony was upon these considerations used.

1. To declare, that God had called, and appointed the Person thus anointed to
the exercise of the office of a King.

2. To give assurance (to others and) to the persons thus anointed, that God
would furnish them with gifts, graces, and abilities, for the discharge of the
Kingly office, to which he had designed, and called them. And from the use of
this ceremony it is that Kings in Scripture are often called the Lord's
anointed, as you may see, 1. Sam. 24.6. God forbid that I should do this thing
unto my Master the Lord's anointed, etc. Seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.
So, Isa. 45.1. thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, etc. and in many
other places.

2. The Priest having done his part, the Trumpeters performed their parts, they
blew the trumpet and by the sound of trumpet proclaimed him King.

3. All the people which were present, cried, God save King Solomon, and then
followed, after him, and piped with pipes and rejoiced with exceeding great
joy; so that the earth rent with the sound of their shouts and acclamations of
joy; an Hyperbolicall speech to express the exceeding greatness of their joy.

3. Solomon the son of David (by Bathsheba who had been the wife of Vriah) was
the person about whose concernments these Agents were thus employed. The person
about whose, etc. I say, was Solomon, who was,

1. Not only a Prince, but a lawful Prince, being appointed of God, and
nominated by David his Royal father to succeed him in his government, as you
may see by comparing the 1. Chr. 28. and 5. with this. 1 King. 1.28. etc.

2. A hopeful Prince, a Prince from whom they might expect much good, both to
the Church and Sat of Israel, and that because he was, 1. A very pious Prince.
2. A very wise, and prudent Prince. 3. A beloved Prince, beloved even of God
himself with a special love, and therefore called Jedediah. 2 Samuel 12.24, 25.
And she bare a son and he called his name Solomon, and the Lord loved him, etc.
and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the Lord. 4. A Prince of peace, or
a peaceable Prince. So much is signified by his name Solomon. 1. Chr. 22.9.
Behold a son shall be borne to thee, who shall be a man of rest, and I will
give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Solomon,
and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days. He was called so,
to show that the people of Israel should enjoy much peace under his government.
Now the consideration of these and such like things, was the cause why the
people present at his proclamation and inauguration were thus transported with
exceeding great joy and rejoicing. From all which put together you may observe
this point of Doctrine.

That the accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to the actual exercise of
Rule and Government,

1. That this is a thing greatly to be rejoiced in, etc. is evident by the
universal practice of all good and loyal subjects in all Ages Countries and
Nations: whose constant use it has been, to solemnize the accession of their
lawful hopeful Princes to actual rule and Government, with all outward
Domonstrations of joy and rejoicing. How excessively did this people here
rejoice at Solomon's accession to the Throne? this was matter of rejoicing, not
only to the common rabble and rude multitude, but to Zadok the Priest and
Nathan the Prophet also: these as well as others, who were present, rejoiced at
it with exceeding great joy. Which, being wise and pious men, they would not
have done, had it not been a thing greatly to be rejoiced in.

2 The truth of this is further evident by these two following reasons.

Because the accession of such a Prince to actual Rule and Government will
assuredly prevent, Reas.
or put to an end many (otherwise) unavoidable mischeifs and inconveniences,
to which the people of a State and Kingdom are incident, and obnoxious, for
want of such a Prince to rule and govern them. Many are the mischiefs and
inconveniences to which the people of a State and Kingdom are liable, for
want of a lawful Prince to rule and govern them; all which mischiefs and
inconveniences are either prevented or put to an end by the accession of such
a Prince to actual Rule and Government. I shall name some of them.

1. The accession of such a Prince to actual Rule and Government, will either
prevent or put to an end the aspiring attempts of proud and ambitious men, to
exalt themselves to the highest place of power and authority; together with
those many inconveniences and mischiefs that accompany or follow their
attempts. When a People are without a lawful Prince to rule them, every
ambitious person that can but head a Faction, will be ready to take the
opportunity of settling himself upon the Throne. In an Interregnum, every man
who can make a party to assist him, will be climbing up unto the Throne. Now
the mischiefs and inconveniences that befall a State or Kingdom by the
aspiring attempts of ambitious men, to possess themselves of power and
authority, are innumerable. Such were the mischiefs that befell the people of
the ten Tribes (upon this account) after their revolt from the House of David.
After they had rejected their lawful Sovereign, those that were ambitious were
still scrambling for Authority amongst them: by reason whereof innumerable
mischiefs befell them. But now (I say) the accession of a lawful Prince, etc.
will either prevent or put to an end these sad mischiefs and inconveniences.
This was the effect of Solomon's accession to the Throne; it put to an end the
aspiring attempts of Adonijah to make himself King, together with the many
inconveniences that were like to follow upon it, as you may see, 1 Kings 1.5,
49, and 50. verses compared. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself,
saying, I will be King: and he prepared him Charriots and horsemen, and fifty
men to run before him. -- And all the Guests that were with Adonijah were
afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way. -- And Adonijah feared because
of Solomon, and arose, and went and caught hold on the horns of the Altar.

2. The accession of such a Prince to rule and government will either prevent,
or put to an end, the Tyrannies and Cruelties which are usually exercised by
such as exalt themselves, and usurp Authority. It is almost impossible for a
Prince to be a Tyrant in Title, and not be a Tyrant in Exercise. Such as get
power wickedly, do (for the most part) use it unjustly: Though ( Absalom-like)
they may make fair promises, to make a party to lift them to the Throne; yet
they seldom or never observe and keep them. The truth of this evidently appears
almost in the whole series of the Kings of Israel after their revolt from the
House of David. The most of them were not only Tyrants in Title, but in
Exercise also. But now the accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to the actual
exercise of Rule and Government, will prevent, or put to a period these
Tyrannies and cruelties, which Usurpers usually exercise over an enslaved
Nation.

3. The accession of such a Prince to Rule and Government, will assuredly
prevent or put to an end, those Rapines and Oppressions whereby the people are
subject to be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his Neighbor.
When the seat of Authority is vacant or possessed by such as have no right or
ability to Rule; the people are in danger tobe oppressed every one by another.
When there was no King in Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own
eyes, though it were to the hurt and prejudice of others; as you may see, Judge.
18.1, and 18. compared, In those days there was no King in Israel, etc. and
cap. 19.1, 25. compared. And the like evils are men in danger of, when the Seat
of Authority is possessed by such as have no right or skill to Rule: hence a woe
is denounced against that land whose King is a Child, Eccl. 10.16. i.e. who is
as unfit and unskilful to Rule, and as much wedded to his own will, as a child
is. And therefore when God is angry with a people, he threatens to give
Children to be their Kings, and that Babes should rule over them, Isa. 3.4. i.
e. men of a childish disposition; in respect of wit, skill, carriage, courage,
no better than Children, or in some sort worse, because more wilful, and less
advisable. And now that land where such rule, must needs be in a woe case,
because where such rule, every man is subject to be oppressed by his neigbour;
as appears by 3. Isa. 4,5. And I will give children to be their Princes, and
babes shall rule over them and the people shall be oppressed every one by
another and every one by his Neighbor: the child shall behave himself proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the honorable. But the accession of a
lawful and hopeful Prince, etc. will undoubtedly prevent, or put to an end
these mischievous evils that else would happen to that people over which he is
to rule.

4. The accession of a hopeful and lawful Prince to Rule and Government will
certainly prevent, or put to an end those mischeivous disputes, and divisions,
which otherwise will arise amongst a people, about the particular form of
Government, the person, or persons by which they will be ruled. When the seat
of Authority is vacant, or possessed by usurpation; every man, as he is
affected, will be contending to be ruled under this or that particular form of
government, or by this or that particular person. The truth of this we have
seen made good by sad experience even in our days. How have disputes about
these things, broken and crumbled us into a thousand pieces, since the horrid
murder of his late Majesty of glorious memory, and the treacherous exile, etc.
of his present most Royal and most excellent Majesty! Now this mischief also,
the accession of, etc. will assuredly either prevent or put to an end.

5. The accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to Rule and Government, will also
prevent or put to an end those frequent and mischievous changes in government,
to which a State and Kingdom is Subject through the want of such a Prince to
Rule and govern it. Frequent changes in government, either in respect of the
persons ruling, or the form of government by which it is ruled, are very
destructive and mischievous to it. And therefore when God is displeased with a
people, he usually brings this Judgment upon them, Prove. 28.2. For the
transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, etc. And of all Kingdoms
those are most subject to this destroying Judgment, where their lawful
Sovereign is rejected, and the Throne is possessed by Usurpation. How often did
the ten Tribes change their Rulers, after their Revolt from the House of David?
and what frequent changes, both of Governors and Government have we seen in
this Nation, since the murder of our late, and Exilement of our present
Sovereign! but by the accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to Rule, these
changes are either prevented, or put to an end, Prove. 28.2. For the
transgression of a land many are the Princes thereof; but by a man of
understanding and knowledge, the state thereof shall be prolonged, i. e. by a
lawful Prince, who is wise and prudent the state thereof shall be preserved,
viz. from such frequent and mischievous changes of its Governors and Rulers.
These are some of those great mischiefs which by this means will be prevented
or put to an end; and therefore the accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to
actual Rule and Government, is a thing greatly to be rejoiced in by those over
whom he is to rule. But secondly,

The Accession of such a Prince to actual Rule and Government, Reas.
s a thing greatly to be rejoiced in; because it gives the people, over whom he
is to rule, great hope of much approaching and continued good to them, by his
rule and government over them: A lawful hopeful Ruler is a great blessing to a
Nation; and therefore God promises to bestow such upon his people as a great
blessing to them, Isa. 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and
thy Counselors as at the beginning, i. e. I will give thee Rulers like unto
those which I set over thee, when thou were first constituted a State and
Kingdom? such as were Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, etc. such as shall be
Instruments of much good unto thee; as all good and lawful Princes are to all
such as they rule over. Now the good a people have grounds to hope for upon the
accession of a lawful hopeful Prince to Rule and Government, is,

1. The enjoyment of outward peace, plenty, and prosperity. By Solomon's
accession to the throne, the state of Israel enjoyed the good of all these. The
whole time of the Reign of Solomon, they did not only enjoy peace; (acording
as God had promised they should 1 Chronicles. 22.9. For his name shall be Solomon,
and I will give Peace and quietness unto Israel in his days.) But also great
plenty and prosperity, as you may see 1 King. 10.27. And the King made silver
to be in Jerusalem as stones, and Cedars made he to be as the Sycamore trees
which are in the vale for abundance. And 2 Chronicles. 1.15. in the same words. And
thus it often comes to pass by the accession of a lawful, hopeful Prince to
Rule and Government; and therefore there is ground to hope upon the accession
of such a Prince to Rule and Government.

2. The right administration and execution of law and justice. This good and
benefit Israel enjoyed by the accession of Solomon to Rule and Government, as a
pears by many instances, especially by his decision of the difference betwixt
the two Harlots about the living child. 1 king. 3 from the 16 to the end.

3. Safety and protection from all wrong and injury, or at least justice
against such as wrong and injure them, as it is the duty, so it is (for the most
part) the disposition of lawful Princes, to protect their Subjects (yea the
meanest of them) from wrong, and injury, and to do such of them right as are
wronged and injured. This good also Israel enjoyed by Solomon's accession to
the throne, as appears by the foregoing instance.

4. Suitable rewards and preferments to their deserts and merits. Usurpers
bestow their rewards and preferments upon such as are rightest for their turn,
but lawful Princes (if they are wise and prudent) upon them who are most
deserving, but especially upon such as are most faithful to God within their
dominions, such David resolved to prefer to the honor of being next, yea
nearest to his person in attendance upon him, Psalm. 101. throughout, but
especially ver. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they
may dwell with me. He that walks in a perfect way he shall serve me. By the
faithful there he means, the truly godly in the land: as appears from the
latter part of the verse. And such were they whom Solomon advanced, upon his
accession to the throne, as appears by 1 King. 4. beginning.

5. The preservation and (if need be) the Reformation of Religion, with due
countenance and encouragement in the practice and profession of it. Usurpers,
for the most part, are Corrupters and Suppressers of the truth and power of
Religion. Such a one was Jeroboam, and those Kings that succeeded him in his
Usurpation, as you may see, 1 Kings 12.26, 27. etc. to the end. And Jeroboam
said in his heart, now shall the Kingdom return to the house of David: If this
people go up to do sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall
the heart of this people turn again unto their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of
Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam King of Judah:
whereupon the King took counsel, and made two Calves of gold, and said unto
them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; Behold thy gods, O Israel,
which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt: and so on. You may see more of
this in the Histories of his Successors, recorded in the Books of the Kings and
Chronicles. But on the contrary, such as are lawful and pious Princes, are
Preservers, Promoters, and (if need require) Reformers of Religion; yea, and
countenancers of the most sincere Professors of it. Such were all the godly
Kings of Judah: Such a one was Asa, 1 Kings 15.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And Asa did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David his Father. And he
took away the Sodomites out of the Land, and removed all the Idols that his
Father had made. And also Maacha his Mother, even her he removed from being
Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, and Asa destroyed her Idol,
etc. It Is true, his reformation was not a through reformation, but yet he was a
great Reformer; and so was his Son and Successor Jehosaphat, 1 Kings 22.41, 42,
43. He walked in all the ways of Asa his Father, he turned not aside from it,
doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, etc. Such a one was
Hezekiah, he did not content himself with the Reformation of his Predecessors,
but he carried it on to a higher degree of perfection. He did not only break
the Images, but he also removed the High places, as you may see, 2 Kings 18.3,
4. And so we find, that Solomon's accession to the Throne made much for the
advantage of Religion, and the Professors of it. For immediately upon his
coming to it, he built the Temple, and did very much beautify and adorn the
Worship and Service of God.

Now the Use and Application of this point is twofold: and,

1. CHARLES the second to Rule and Government. If I thought there were any such
present, I would enlarge upon this Use: but I hope better things of you all,
and therefore I forbear, lest I should this day sadden the heart of any, who
will otherwise rejoice.

2. with exceeding great joy and rejoicing. Now to quicken and raise your
hearts to a rejoicing suitable to the solemnity of this day, consider, you have
as good cause of rejoicing at the Solemnity of this day, as they had who were
present at the Proclamation and Inauguration of Solomon: Seeing the Prince,
whose Proclamation-Solemnities you are this day to observe, may be in some
measure (and that without flattery) compared with Solomon, at whose
Proclamation this people so greatly rejoiced: For, as Solomon was, so he is, 1.
A lawful; and 2. A hopeful Prince. I say, he is,

1. A Legitimate and a lawful Prince. He is not a spurious Mushrume
self-created Prince: but a Prince by lineal succession and inherent
birthright, being lineally descended by the Father of glorious memory, from
James of blessed memory, the 6. of Scotland, but the first of Great Britain,
France and Ireland; and by the Mother, from that great and worthy Hero of his
age, Henry the 4. of France. So that our King is, on both sides, the Son of
Nobles. And when it is so, Solomon tells you, the Land is blessed, Eccles.
10.17. And as he is a Noble, so he is a lawful Prince too. The clearness of his
Title is such, that to argue the lawfulness of it, would but darken and
eclipse it. You may as well question the shining of the Sun at noon, as the
lawfulness of his Title.

2. He is as a lawful, so a hopeful Prince. A Prince by whose accession to rule
and government we are,

1. At present freed from our fears and dangers of being haressed by the
attempts of every aspiring, ambitious Adonijah, to make himself King. We need
not now to fear the aspiring ambition either of a Cromwell or a Lambert. Nor
need we now fear of being kept in bondage and slavery by an inconsiderable
part of a Parliament, or a Phanatick Committee of safety under the notion of a
free State, or Commonwealth.

2. We have grounds of hope that his accession to Rule and Government will be a
means, in time, to free us,

1. From our unsupportable burdens of Excise and monthly Taxes.

2. From our soul-destroying and damning universal tolleration.

3. We have ground to hope that his accession to actual rule and government,
will be a means of much good both to our selves and the whole Nation. There is
now hopes,

1. That we shall enjoy a settled Government, our ancient Government of King,
Lords and Commons: the best form of Government that the wisdom of man could
ever yet contrive, to prevent Tyranny on the one hand, and Annarchy and
Confusion on the other.

2. That we may recover and enjoy a firm and lasting peace. Not only a peace
within our selves, but a peace with the Nations, which are round about us. Such
a peace as Israel enjoyed all the days of Solomon, who had peace on all sides
round about him, so that Israel and Judah dwelt safely, every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba. As you may see 1
King. 4.24, 25.

3. That we may again enjoy an equal distribution of law and Justice. We need
not now to fear of being outlawed for refusing to perjure our selves by
subscribing an Engagement, or taking an Oath of abjuration, contrary to our
former Oaths of allegiance and supremacy, or solemn league and covenant.

4. That we may again enjoy freedom of Trade both at home and abroad; and
thereby recover our exhausted and of late misspent treasure. If any thing in
the world be a means to revive Trade in the Nation, his Majesty's accession to
Government will be the means to do it.

5. That we may recover our wonted honor and renown, in foreign parts and
Countries. England has been as renowned a Nation as any in the world, both for
Courage, Policy, and Pyety. But the strange actings of some men in our late
revolutions, and changes has made us the contempt, scorn, and hatred of the
whole world. It has made most men believe that we have lost both our piety,
policy, and courage too. But now by the Restitution of his Majesty it will
appear to all the world, that there are some men both of piety, policy, and
courage left among us, so that by this means we may recover our honor again.

6. That we may now enjoy the liberty of our persons. We need not now to fear
of being imprisoned for mere pretended crimes and imaginary plots, and designs
against the State. There Is hopes now that no man's person shall be attached, or
imprisoned, but in a legal way.

7. Lastly. (Which is more then all) There is now hopes that we may see a
through reformation of things amiss in our religion; and from henceforth enjoy
the Gospel, Gospel Worship and ordinances in their full power and purity and so
(in due time) through the blessing of God, see an end of all our seperations
and Church divisions.

And all this we may hope for upon the accession of the Kings Majesty to
actual Rule and Government, if we consider, 1. The various and even miraculous
providence of God toward him. 2. If we consider his Majesty in respect of his
personal qualifications for rule and Government. I begin with the first.

1. The providence of God in afflicting of him, in suffering him to be Exiled
out of his native Country and Dominions: to be persecuted, and enforced to fly
from one Country to another, by the Tyranny of his Enemies at home; by the
falsehood and treachery of pretended friends abroad. The providence of God in
this kind, I know, has been made use of as an Argument, that God had no
delight or pleasure in him. But, Brethren, for my part, I cannot but look upon
it as an Argument that God has designed him to be an Instrument of much good
to us. And I cannot but think, that Gods design in afflicting of him, was to
humble and to fit him for Rule and Government. And indeed, God usually takes
this course with such as he has designed, to be Instruments of much good to
his Church and People. This very course he took with Joseph, Genesis 37.27, etc.
with Moses, Exodus 2.15. with David: He suffered him by the Tyranny of Saul, to
be driven out from the Inheritance of the Lord, 1 Samuel 26.19. Thus God dealt
with them, to fit them for Rule and Government; and we have reason to think
that God took this course with His Majesty to the same end. And, no doubt, he
is the better fitted for Rule and Government by his Sufferings. It is not
imaginable, that one who has so long groaned under tyranny, should become a
Tyrant; that one who has so long felt the smart of injustice, should be unjust
to others.

2. Again, there is hopes of all this good by his accession to Rule and
Government, if you consider, the wonderful providence of God over him, in the
preservation of his person, and in delivering him out of the hands of all his
Enemies. His dangers have been great, and his deliverances have been eminent,
both at Worcester and elsewhere. In this respect God has wrought well-nigh as
wonderfully for him, as he did for Moses, Joseph, or David: And this, to me, is
another Argument, that God has designed him to be an Instrument of much good
to these Nations, and to his Church and people in them. And that there is hope,
will further appear, if you consider:

3. The wonderful providence of God, in making way for his Restitution to Rule
and Government. And in this respect, the providence of God has been wonderful,
even to astonishment.

1. In plucking down Richard, by his nearest Relations, and the same hands that
set him up; by which means they opened an effeectual door for their own ruin,
and for His Majesty's peaceable Restitution.

2. In blasting and infatuating the Counsels of his implacable enemies of every
kind; so as to cause them to dash one against another, and to throw themselves
down by their own hands.

3. In stirring up the Spirit of the deservedly Renowned General MONCK, with
his faithful Army, to disown, and declare against the Council of
Turkish-Christian-Janisaries, and their Committee of Safety. Both which, by the
special providence of God, he quickly scattered as dust before the wind. First
by sitting still, and afterward by a peaceable and prudent march to London.

4. In raising a spirit of courage in the generality of the people, throughout
this Nation, to declare for the admission of the secluded Members, and the
calling of a free Parliament, both which, with the blessing of God upon the
General's prudent management of affairs, we have seen effected.

5. In putting it into the hearts of this present Parliament, (acording to
their duty and allegiance) to restore his sacred Majesty; and in turning about
the hearts of all the Commanders, both by sea and land to receive his most
Royal Majesty again into his Dominions. In all which the wonderful power and
providence of God has signally apeared. So that we may say of our Sovereigne's
Restitution what David said of our Saviors Exaltation. Psalm. 118.22, 23. The
stone which the Builders refused is become the head stone of the corner; This
is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. And upon this ground we
have reason to hope for much approaching good to these Nations by the accession
of his most excellent Majesty to the exercise of Rule and Government.

2. If you consider him in himself (I mean his most excellent Majesty) without
the least respect to these signal and (in a manner) miraculous providence of
God toward him; you shall find him in all respects a very hopeful Prince,
every way as hopeful as any that has hitherto swayed the imperial Scepter of
these Dominions. And this you shall find evidently to appear, if you please
to lay aside all prejudice, and look upon him with a judicious and impartial
eye; indeed if you look upon him under that shape and representation wherein
our late Usurpers have from time to time exposed him to public view, you
cannot but think him the unfittest person in the world to wear the Imperial
Crown of these Realms. But I hope you have attained to more grace and wisdom
than to believe what his persecuting enemies, by Jesuitical example and
inspiration, have reported of him, who have done by him as the Papists of old
did by John Husse. They have (as it were) clothed him in a coat of painted
Devils: nay, have represented him in the shape of an incarnate Devil, thereby
to make him odious to his subjects, and (if it could have been) to have rendered
his restitution to his just rights impossible. But blessed be the Lord who has
cursed this devilish policy! and has restored him to his Right. And now that
you may know him to be a hopeful Prince, I shall at present give you a true,
but short, representation of him. And this I shall do not to curry favor, but
to satisfy your doubts, and quiet your fears concerning his Majesty, whose
excellent endowments I am fully persuaded, do far transcend what my tongue or
pen can express of him. So that when I have said all, I would have you to
conceive him to be far more eminent than I can represent him unto you. However,
for your satisfaction, give me leave (as in a glass) to give you as it were a
dark and shady resemblance of him. And herein I shall speak as in the presence
of God and therefore utter nothing, but what I am fully persuaded is most true
and real. But to come to the business, if you view him well with an
unprejudiced eye, you shall find him to be,

1. A Prince most eminently stout and valiant; of the truth of this he gave an
undeniable proof at Worcester, his enemies themselves being Judges. His most
capital enemy Oliver, then General against him, at a public festival
entertainment in London upon the occasion of his victory over his Majesty's
Army, there gave this testimony of him. Which together with the
unconquerableness of his spirit under all his (sufficiently great) sufferings,
is an evident demonstration of the more than ordinary stoutness of his spirit,
acording to that of Solomon. Pro. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity. And (indeed) had not his spirit been like himself, great, it had
been impossible for him to have borne up under afflictions of so great a
weight. And this is the first qualification or princely virtue that you may
find him endowed with. And this is so necessary a qualification for a Prince,
that without it he can neither oppose his Enemies, protect his Subjects, or
execute impartial justice upon Offenders.

2. If you view him with an unprejudiced eye, you shall find him to be a very
wise and prudent Prince: a Prince, who is neither a Child in age, nor in
understanding. He is not like Rehoboam, who at 40 years of age was but a very
Baby, both in respect of wisdom and experience, as plainly appeared by his
rejecting the wise and prudent Counsels of his Fathers old and experienced
Counselors; and by embracing the violent and heady advice of his own raw and
(as to State Affairs) unexperienced Play-mates and Companions: By which his
Childish folly and indiscretion (through the just judgment of God upon him) he
occasioned the Revolt of the ten Tribes from him, as you may see, 1 Kings 12.8,
13, 14, 15, 16, etc. But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had
given him: and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and
which stood before him. -- And the King answered them roughly, and spoke to
them after the counsel of the young men, saying, my Father made your yoke heavy,
and I will add to your yoke, etc. So when all Israel saw, that the King
harkened not unto them, the People answered the King, saying, What portion have
we in David? etc. and in respect of this his imprudence he was said to be young
and tenderhearted, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. although he had at that time completed the
41. year of his age, as appears in 2 Chronicles. 12.13. -- for Rehoboam was 41 years
old when he began to reign. But, blessed be God, our Prince may more fitly be
compared unto Solomon, who, though much younger in years than Rehoboam, is yet
many years elder in wisdom and experience; which Princely virtue, together with
his right to these Dominions, he has, through the grace and mercy of God,
derived from his Grandfather James, the first of Great Britain, the Solomon of
his Age; and from his late Majesty, his no less wise and prudent Father. Now,
that he is a Prince of eminent wisdom and prudence, may as easily be
demonstrated, as that there is light and heat in the body of the Sun. And
indeed it is evident, beyond all doubt.

1. By his choosing rather to get accession to his Throne by the lawful,
dutiful, and loyal endeavors of his most pious and prudent Subjects, than by
the forcible assistance of Foreigners and Strangers. It may be, some may
think, this latter had been his best and wisest course: Seeing, by the aid of
such he might have made himself more great and absolute, than he can expect to
do, by his coming in upon the loyal and affectionate endeavors of his own
Subjects. But, that such may see their own imprudence, I would have them to
consider,

1. That his attempting to come in by such a means as this, would have been
very hazardous and uncertain, and so by consequence, imprudent. Had strangers
endeavored his Restitution by force of Arms, it is probable that many (if not
the most of those who have been active to bring him in, would have been merely
passive in it, if not active to keep him out. Besides, his settlement, by this
means, would not have been so sure and lasting as now: a Princes greatest
security lying in the affections of his Subjects. That Prince who gains the
hearts of his Subjects procures himself a firmer settlement by far, than he
does who only conquers their bodies by the force and violence of strangers, and
keeps them in subjection only by armed Guards and Soldiers.

2. That his coming in by this means would (at least) have endangered the utter
destruction, if not the irrecoverable loss of his Dominions. It Is
unquestionable, that he could not have conquered without the hazard of the
total devastation of the 3 Kingdoms. Besides, he might have been in danger of
being dethroned, by those Foreigners themselves, when they once conquered his
own Subjects. We are not without instances of the like practices of Strangers
in former Ages, who (when they have conquered their enemies) to set up
themselves, did not stick to depose those very Princes that called them in to
their assistance. And indeed he could expect no other from his Popish Allies,
without making shipwreck of that Faith whereof he is the Defender, and
reconciling himself to the Church of Rome, the Mother of Harlots: it being a
received Maxim and Principle amongst Papists, That Faith is not to be observed
and kept with Heretics. Besides, if (as it might have done) the Conquest had
fallen to the side of his Opposers; his Restitution would have proved (if not
impossible, yet) infinitely more difficult, than it has now appeared to be.

3. That a Princes greatness and happiness, does not so much consist in the
absolutenes of his power, as in the affections of his Subjects, and in their
cheerful and willing submission to his Person and Authority. Now though foreign
force may overawe, yet it cannot gain the hearts of Subjects, though it may
force them to submit to the power of their Prince, it will never cause them
cheerfully to obey their Prince. And therefore this our Prince, in choosing to
be restored by his Subjects, rather than by foreign force, has chosen the
best way of accession to his Throne, and thereby showed himself a wise and
prudent Prince.

2. He has discovered his eminent wisdom and prudence, by his choosing the
Recovery of his Right by a gracious composure of things with his truly loyal
and faithful Subjects, who in the late unhappy differences adhered both to King
and Parliament, rather than to attempt the regaining of it by the forcible help
and aid of such as style themselves The Royal party. Doubtless, he wanted not
some, who (like Rehoboams young and heady Counselors) gave him advice to take
this course. And it must be confessed that some attempts have been made to this
end: but having found by constant experience, that all endeavors this way have
proved abortive and unsuccessfull, by reason of the indiscretion of some, and
the treachery of others; he has at last rejected all Councels tending to force
and violence, and wisely resolved upon a contrary course. And this in a
juncture of time, when he had the greatest hopes of assistance, not only from
Allies and Friends abroad, but also from his most loyal and dutiful Subjects at
home; wherein he has exactly trodden in the steps of his truly Heroic and
prudent Grandfather, Henry the 4. King of France and Navarre; who, after he had
fought many Battles, and obtained as many signal Victories, chose to obtain the
possession of his Crown of France by treaty and capitulation, rather than to
endeavor the recovery of it by making use of further force and violence. And
in this respect also he has showed himself to be every way as wise, as
Rehoboam, by his contrary practice, discovered himself to be weak and foolish.

3. By casting himself upon his Parliament in order to his own and the
settlement of his Dominions. By which Act he has in a manner told them that he
is willing to be, or do, what his best and wisest Subjects shall think best
and most honorable for him, in order to the settlement of his Dominions in
safety, peace and honor; and by this also he has showed himself a truly wise
and prudent Prince; for by this means he has, and will, engage the hearts of
his conscientious Subjects to become his servants for ever. As Rehoboam would
certainly have done, had he put in execution the Counsel of the old
experienced men. 1 Kings. 12.7. Constant experience shows us that Princes
gain more by complying than they do by contesting with their Subjects. That by
gratifying them in smaller, they win upon them in greater matters: this
Solomon's old experienced Counselors did very well understand, and therefore
advised Rehoboam to comply with his Subjects and to abate something of the
rigor of his fathers Government. And this also was well understood by Queen
Elizabeth, the wonder both of her age and sex for masculine wisdom and valor
who (by gratifying her Subjects just demands in Parliament) became, in a manner
the sole and absolute Mistress both of her Subjects hearts, hands, and purses.
And this was it which made her so formidable to her Enemies, and so great a
comfort and support to her Allies and friends. Let no man therefore think our
Prince imprudent in casting himself upon his Parliament for terms of
settlement: it being the most prudential course in the world to make him both a
great and happy Prince.

4. He has showed himself a wise and prudent Prince, in resolving upon the
reformation, and settlement of the Church by consent of Parliament, according
to the advice of a select Assembly of pious and learned Divines. Which indeed
is the most proper and most prudentiall means in the world, to discover and
reform those damnable Heresies, and to make up those Church-destroying
divisions that are crept in amongst us. Who are more likely to discover the
mind of God, and to find out ways and means of reconciling differences and
divisions amongst Brethren, than godly and learned Divines, whose whole work
and business it is to study the mind and will of God? Besides, this is that
means that God himself has appointed for the curing of these evils, as Acts
15. does appear, where we find the Apostles and Elders did assemble themselves
in a Synod to this very end. Now by all this it appears, that our Prince is a
wise and prudent, and so by consequence, a hopeful Prince.

5. If your view him well with an impartial eye, you shall find him to be an
exceeding Patient and long-fuffering Prince; a virtue so necessary, that
without it a Prince cannot manage the affairs of his Kingdom. And in this
Princely virtue also he far outshines (if not all, yet) the most of his
Predecessors, his most Royal Father only excepted. And no wonder, seeing he
has been from his Youth accustomed to the yoke, and inured to affliction. Now
his eminency in this Princely virtue does evidently appear,

1. In bearing his great and extraordinary afflictions and the persecutions of
his enemies, and unkindnesses of his pretended friends in foreign parts. 1.
Without murmurring. 2. Without fainting. In respect of murmuring, (for any
thing I have heard) he was like David, dumh, and opened not his mouth, because
he knew his suffering was the Lords doing, Psalm. 39.9. And he was so far from
fainting under them, that he rather gathered strength and courage, by being
accustomed to the bearing of them.

2. This princely virtue appears eminently in him, by his waiting upon God in
his greatest straits, with hope and confidence of his goodness and mercy, to
bring about his Restitution to Rule and Government in his own way and time. In
which respect it seems he had taken up the Churches resolution. Mic. 7.9, 10. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

3. This princely virtue shines forth apparently in him, by his declining the
use of unlawful means, and by his resolution (in a way of dependence upon God)
to persist in the use of all lawful means to recover his right. Had he been
impatient he would have cast off the use of all means like that impious and
impatient King we read of, 2 King. 6.33. Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what
should I wait for the Lord any longer? Or else he would have turned aside to
the use of sinful and unlawful means, had he not been a patient Prince, he
would have been in danger of changing his religion in hopes to gain his earthly
Crowns, though by so doing he had lost an Eternal Crown.

4. That he is a long suffering Prince, appears also,

1. In that he has not been provoked and moved to Acts of revenge, by all
those wrongs and injuries that have been done him. If reports be true, when
some of those. English Soldiers that were in direct opposition against him,
were taken by the Spaniard, and put into his hand, to be disposed of as he
thought good; instead of revenging himself upon them, he fed and clothed them.

2. In that he still retains his princely and paternall affections to his
Subjects, notwithstanding all the provocations wherewith he has been provoked.

4. If again you look upon him with an unprejudiced eye, you shall find him
to be a very sober and moderate Prince. And that, 1. In his passions. 2. In his
affections. The moderation of his passions appears by his endeavors to allay
and moderate the passions of some, who style themselves the King's (or Royal)
party. The moderation of his affections appears; by casting himself upon the
Parliament, without making any the least demand of having his own power or
greatness enlarged or augmented.

5. If you look upon him with an impartial eye, you shall find him to be a
self-denying Prince, as evidently appears, by his referring the settlement of
things to the Parliament. 2. By his resolution to be advised by the Parliament
in all things which do concern both Church and Sat Affairs. 3. By his
willingness to part with his Lands and Revenues (if the Parliament shall think
fit) in order to the settlement of these Nations in peace and tranquillity.

6. If you look upon him with an impartial eye, you shall find him to be a
Gracious, merciful, and compassionate Prince, which princely virtues do
eminently appear in him,

1. By his readiness to pardon his worst of Enemies, who are not resolved to
persist in their enmity against him, excepting such as the Parliament shall
think fit to exempt from pardon. In which respect he has showed himself to be
a follower of David, (that man who was one after Gods own heart) who granted an
act of Grace to Shimei, who cursed, and threw stones at him, when he fled from
Jerusalem for fear of Absalom, as you may see by comparing 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7,
8. with 2 Samuel 19.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

2. By declaring his readiness to grant a General pardon to all parties
amongst us; as well knowing, that the best of us (yea, that such as would be
thought his best friends) do, in some respect or other, stand in need of it.

3. By his professed readiness to allow a liberty to men of tender
consciences, to such as are truly so.

4. By his declared Resolution, to extend his princely love and favor to all
his deserving Subjects, of what party soever, without putting the least
distinction or difference between them.

7. And lastly, if you look upon him with an unprejudiced eye, you shall find
him probably to be a truly pious and religious Prince; I say; probably to be
so, and this is the greatest assurance that we can have of any man's piety and
religior, in the world, 1 Pet. 5.12. By Silvanus a faithful Brother (as I
suppose.) Now that he is so, is very probable.

1. By his adhering to the true Protestant Religion, notwithstanding, 1. The
injurious dealing of professed Protestants, both with his Royal Father and
himself. 2. The many kindnesses of Papists heaped upon him, together with
their strong temptations to corrupt and seduce him. Beloved, these things
considered, we may be consident of his piety upon the account of his adhering
to the Protestant Religion; for some who do not only profess themselves to be
Protestants, but to be the most refined and reformed Protestants in the world,
have, by those not to be paralleled injuries they have done him, given him the
justest occasion that could be given, to renounce the Protestant Religion: As
namely,

1. By their impudent and abhorred murder of his Father, under a pretense of
Law and Justice; a thing never before done by any professing themselves
Protestants.

2. Their banishing him out of his own Dominions into Holland, from thence into
France, and then into Flanders, amongst the most rigid and zealous sort of
Papists: by which acts they did, as it were, bid him to go, and to be a Papist.
As David complained that Saul did in effect, bid him to go and serve other
gods, 1 Samuel 26.19.

2. As the injuries done him by seduced Protestants have been many, which might
have caused him to distaste the Protestant Religion; so the kindnesses heaped
upon him by Papists, have been great. And it is not to be doubted but they have
made use of both, as inducements to persuade him to forsake the protestant and
to embrace the Popish Religion. You may be sure they have sufficiently
aggravated the miscariages of those among us who murdered his most Royal
father, etc. charging that, and all other injuries done him, upon the
Parliament and their whole Party (though the most of them did detest it from
their hearts, endeavoring to prevent it, and do bewail it to this day) nay,
they have not been wanting to suggest unto him, that the principles of
Protestants do allow and encourage Subjects to murder and depose their King.
This and much more, doubtless, they have suggested to him, that (if possible)
they might work in him an abhorrency both of Protestants and of the protestant
Religion. Whilst, no doubt, on the other hand, they have, upon all occasions,
represented to him the Papists in his Dominions under the notion of his most
Loyal Subjects, not sticking to tell him how much they have suffered
(especially in Ireland) for their Loyalty to his late Majesty, (though the
world knows they were in open rebellion against him before the war brake forth
in England) that they might at once gain his affections both to his popish
Subjects, and their Religion. And truly these things considered, together with
his abode among Papists and his [then] dependence upon them for supply of
personal wants, and their large promises of restoring him to his just Rights
and Authority. It is even a miracle that the temptation had not prevailed upon
him: for my own part, I question whether the best of us would have held
constant to our Religion, had we been under the like temptation. Nay, when I
consider, upon how slight temptations (seemingly) the best amongst us have
changed both their principles and practice in Religion; I even conclude, that
if any of us had been in his Majesty's condition, and if his temptations had
been ours, we should not have stood so firm and unshaken as he has done. Now,
Brethren, it is either policy or piety that has preserved and kept him. But,

1. It cannot be imagined, that he has been preserved merely by policy. Nay,
(in appearance) it had been his best policy to have changed his Religion;
seeing, by so doing he would certainly have obtained all possible assistance,
both from Popish Princes abroad, and from his Popish Subjects at home: so that
I conclude, it is not policy that has preserved him; and therefore,

2. It must be piety and grace in the heart, which has enabled him (in the
midst of these temptations) to adhere unto the Protestant Religion, both in
profession and practice; and that even in those Countries where the Protestant
Religion is not allowed. And this is the first ground upon which I conclude him
to be a pious Prince.

2. That he is a pious Prince is further probable, by his desire (whilst he was
in Scotland) to be dealt plainly with, in respect of his own personal sins, and
the sins of his Family, which he apprehended were the cause the hand of God was
so heavy upon him, that he might be humbled for them. In which respect he
seemed to imitate Job, that great example and pattern of patience, who, in his
affliction, begged of God, that he would make him to know his transgression and
his sin, Job 13.23.

3. That he is probably a pious Prince, is further evident, by his meek and
humble behavior toward Mr. Douglas (both in the time of hearing and after)
who, in his Coronation-Sermon, dealt both boldly and plainly with him, in
laying open his own, and the sins of his Family. Though this Reverend man (
Nathan-like, as appears by his Sermon since printed) made use of his
ministerial Authority to reprove him; he showed not the least displeasure
against him, either in the time of preaching, or after; but by his behavior
seemed to say, as David did, Psalm. 141.5. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall
be a kindness, etc. And by this also he has manifested himself to be both a
prudent and a pious Prince.

4. 'T is further probable that he is a pious Prince, by his professed
detestation and abhorrency of profainness and impiety; his loathing of those
things, he does upon all occasions discover, by reproving men for drunkenness,
swearing, and all such like profane and impious practices. And now, Brethren,
having spoken him a pious Prince, I have expressed the best, the all that can
be said, to make it manifest to you, that he is a hopeful Prince, a Prince, by
whose accession to the Throne, we may well hope for much approaching good both
to our Church and State.

And therefore let us this day, yea, all our days, rejoice with an exceeding
great rejoicing. But here, I beseech you, let it not this day, or at any other
time, express our joy for his Restitution to Rule and Government in any way
displeasing to God, or dishonorable to His most sacred Majesty. I beseech you,
let not any of us dare to do it, so as to debauch our selves by drinking his
health, either upon our knees or otherwise. This practice, though so much used
amongst us, does better befit heathens, than professed Christians. Nay, it is a
brutish practice, against which even Heathens themselves have thought fit to
enact and make Decrees, as you may see, Esther 1.8. And the drinking was
according to the Law, none did compel, etc. Now in the custom of drinking
Healths, it is imposed upon every man, that he drink the same quantity and
measure that others do. Besides, to be upon our knees drinking, is a Ceremony
fitter to be observed in an act of worship to Bacchus, than in our rejoicing at
the Proclamation of a Prince so truly pious and Christian. So that it is not
only displeasing to God, but dishonorable to his Majesty: who therefore cannot
but dislike the debauchery of those who allow themselves in the practice of it;
seeing by so doing they represent him to the world in the shape of a sensual
Bacchus, and not (as indeed he is) a truly noble and religious Prince, who eats
in due season for strength and not for drunkenness. Let us then for ever banish
this Bacchanalian custom from this and all other such like days of Solemnity,
and let us leave it to those whose King is a child, and whose Princes eat in
the morning, and drown themselves in sensual delights and pleasures, as the
Idolatrous and usurping Princes of Samaria did, as you may see Amos 6.1, 3, 4,
5, 6. Let us, I say, banish this wretched custom whereby the God of glory has
been so highly provoked, and thousands of precious souls have been eternally
damned. And let us betake our selves to such a way of rejoicing as may be
pleasing to God, and grateful to his Majesty. And,

1. Let us express our joy in his Majesty's Restitution to his just rights both
this day and all the days of our lives, by our putting up sincere, hearty, and
importunate Prayers to God for him. Instead of being upon our knees drinking
healths to him, let us often prostrate our selves before the Throne of Grace to
pour out our selves to God for him. Thus the people here in my Text expressed
their joy at King Solomon's Proclamation and Inauguration. They cried, God save
the King, and doubtless they did it not for the present only, but every day of
their lives. And indeed this is a duty that we are commanded to perform on the
behalf of such as are lawful Rulers, whether they be Kings or others. And so
to do, the Apostle tells you, is good and acceptable in the sight of Godour
Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. Express we then our joy in his Majesty's
Restitution, by beseeching the God of life, health and Grace, 1. To give and to
bestow upon him both health of body and length of days: say we to God in his
behalf, let the King live and let his soul be bound up in the bundle of life
with thee. 2. That God would pour down upon him from day to day a greater
portion of that Princely and governing spirit wherewith he has already so
plentifully endued him. 3. That he would cause his Crown to flourish upon his
head, maugre all that malice and hatred wherewith Satan has filled his enemies
hearts. 4. That he would give our Israel, both Church and State, peace and
plenty, truth and prosperity, all his days. 5. That he would give him grace
more and more to improve his authority for his glory and his Churches good:
that so when he lays down, together with his life, this transitory and
earthly Crown, he may obtain that heavenly and immortal Crown, which God has
laid up, and will bestow upon all those who love the Lord Jesus, and long for
his appearing. 2 Timothy 4.8.

2. Let us express our joy in his Majesty's Restitution, etc. By all outward
expressions of it that are lawful and convenient. Let us eat the fat and
drink the sweet. Let the Trumpets sound, the Bells ring, the Guns roar, the
Drums rattle, The Bonfires flame, the people shout, so as if possible to make
the very earth to rend with the very loud noises of their shouts and joyful
acclamations: thus the text tells us the people here expressed their joy at
Solomon's Praclamation to be King.

3. Let us express our joy in his Majesty's Restitution, etc. By yiedling all
cheerfulobedience and submission to his Majesty's person and just Authority all
our days. And this let us resolve to do though it be improved by his sacred
Majesty (as I doubt not but it will) for the enacting of laws to curb and
restrain us in the practice of Sin, and in the satisfaction of our brutish and
sensual lusts and pleasures. Let us not obey his Authority only whilst he
commands those things that suite with our interests, lusts and humors: but also
when he commands that which is good, though it be cross and contrary to our own
wills and interests. So is the will of God that we should do, 13. Romans 1, 2, 3,
4. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. If we rejoice at his Majesty's Proclamation this day, and
disobey his Authority another day, we shall but evidence our selves to be
Hypocrites, and make our selves the more obnoxious to his wrath and justice.

4. Let us express our joy in His Majesty's Restitution, etc. By stopping our
ears for ever against the bewitching temptations of such as are given to
change. Let the smart of our sufferings under past changes, cause us to dread
the least thought of making our selves happy by tearing to pieces our ancient
and best form of Government, and attempting to erect a new. Let us no more
lend an ear to those Monsters of Treason and Tyranny, who had lately cheated
us into slavery, under a pretense of liberty, and who had brought us into
bondage unto their own wills and lusts, by promising to set us at liberty and
make us free. Let the monstrous opinions and horible confusions we have lately
suffered under them, cause us to tremble at the mention of a Commonwealth
Government, that has begotten them. And now that we have recovered our Pilot,
let us resolve never to cast (or suffer him to be cast) overboard again, lest
we suffer shipshwrack for want of him. Let us resolve, according to the command
of God, Pro. 24.21, 22. To fear God and the King, and not to meddle with those
that are given to change.

5. Let us express our joy, etc. By blessing and praising that God, who by his
power and providence has so wonderfully brought it about for us. Certainly it
has not been brought about by humane policy, might, or power, but by the
spirit and finger of God. Zech. 4.6. It Is true, Inments have been used, and as
Instruments it is fit they should be honored, and we should bless God for them.
But who was it that raised up those instruments? was it not God? who ( as the
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29.) has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise: and the weak things of the world to confound the
things that are mighty, etc. that no flesh should glory in his presence.
Again, tell me who gave them that wisdom and conrage whereby they have been
enabled to effect what they have attempted? was it not God? doubtless it was.
So that from first to last the whole work is his, and the whole glory and
praise of it is due to him. Let us then this day, and all our days, express our
joy in it, by giving God the glory of it. And in our rejoycings let us bless
and praise the God of Heaven for this his unspeakable mercy to us, and unto
these (almost) ruined Kingdoms.

1. With our souls, and all that is within us. And let us awaken and stir up
our souls so to do, as David did his upon another account, Psalm. 103.1. Let us
bless him with our souls, by loving, fearing, and admiring of him, and all his
incomprehensible attributes, discovered in bringing about His Majesty's
restitution. Let us also bless him, by our delighting our selves in him. Let us
not express our joy, by taking our fill of delight in the creatures, but by
delighting our selves in God our Creator. And indeed, this is the best way
wherein we can express our joy upon any account in the world. And such a way
of expressing our joy, at the Proclamation of His Majesty, would at once
evidence us to be the King's best Subjects, and God's best friends and servants.

2. Let us express our joy upon this account, in blessing and praising God with
our tongues. Let us open our mouths, and let our lips show forth the glory of
God this day, and all our days: God has given us our tongues to this end,
that with them we might show forth his praise. Letus then in our rejoicing this
day be speaking of God, and of those glorious attributes of God, which he has
discovered in bringing about this work: This way David resolved to bless God,
Psalm. 26.7. and 145.5. and prophesied that other men should do so too, Psalm.
145.6, 7. yea, that one generation should tell the works of God to another,
that he might not lose the honor of them, Psalm. 145.4. So the present
generation should bless God for his mercy in the restitution of his Majesty, by
transmitting it to posterity, that the generations to come may praise him for
it.

3. Let us express our joy upon this account, by blessing God with our lives.
Let our lives praise God every day that we have to live for his mercy to us, in
the restitution of His Majesty this day to his just Rights. And let us thus
bless God,

1. by endeavoring daily after a more thorough Reformation of our selves and
others, as much as in us lies. Now that God has restored His Majesty, let us
sit down and consider with our selves what our personal sins are, whereby we
did provoke God to suffer the worst of Tyrants to murder his Royal Father, and
for so many years to banish his Majesty, and having discovered them, let us
turn from them. Let us do it heartily and unfeignedly, so as never to turn to
the commission of them more. O, let us resolve never to provoke this God more,
who, notwithstanding our sinful provocations, has delivered us from usurping
Tyrants, and has restored to us our most dread and rightful Sovereign.

2. By dedicating our selves heartily, entirely and sincerely to the fear and
service of God. Let the consideration fo the great things God has done for us,
cause us to fear the Lord and serve him with our whole heart all our days,
according to that of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.24. though we have hitherto served
Satan, and our own lusts, let us from henceforth resolve to serve no Master but
God. As you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity
unto iniquity; ev en so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 6.19. and both these things I
earnestly beg of you. 1. For your own sakes. 2. For His Majesty's sake. Lest
if you still do wickedly, you provoke the Lord to destroy both your King and
your selves. According to that of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.25. But if ye shall still
do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both you and your King.

3. By doing what in us lies, in our several stations, to improve his Majesty's
Authority, for the right and proper ends of Authority. Let us not any of us
endeavor to improve it for by and base ends of our own: to scramble for
Honors, Offices, and Preferments for our selves, as others have done under the
late Usurpers: But let us improve it,

1. For the suppressing of Superstition, Heresy, and Profainnesse. These are
the things that have been the meritorious cause of all our sufferings: let us
therefore improve his Majesty's Authority to suppress them.

2. For the effecting of a thorough Reformation, both in Church and State
according to the Word of God, and the Laws of the land. And let us beg of God
to put it into his Majesty's heart so to do.

3. For the propagation of the truth and power of Godliness that all within his
Majesty's Dominions may know the truth and express the power of Godliness in
their lives and conversations.

4. Let us bless God with our lives for this his mercy to us, in restoring his
Majesty, by opening the doors of our hearts unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the
King of glory, that he may erect his throne there, so as to reign over us all
our days, according to that of David, Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9, 10. Christ, as
Mediator, guides all the Affairs of the world. And it is he that has
restored his Majesty to his authority: now in a way of thankfulness unto him
let us admit him into our hearts, that he may reign and rule over us by his
word and spirit. Let us serve the King of Kings and Lord of Lords with fear,
and rejoice with trembling. Let us kiss the son lest he be angry, and we
perish from the way, as we are exhorted to do, Psalm. 2.10, 11.

6. Let us (in the last place) express our joy in his Majesty's restitution by
giving portions to such for whom nothing is provided. There Is provision made for
you Gentlemen of the Country, something suitable to your worth and quality. Let
me desire you to express your rejoicing in this days solemnity, by giving
something to the poor for whom nothing is provided. Let us do this day as the
Jews of old did upon their Festival days of joy and rejoicing; what they did
and were enjoined to do, you may see, Nehemiah. 8.10, 11, 12. Esther. 9.22.

Now to conclude all, if you thus express your joy in the solemnity of this
day, you shall not only be truly blessed in his Majesty; but his sacred Majesty
shall be as truly happy in you. You shall not only live happily under his
Government here; but you shall for ever live and reign with him in an Eternity
of glory hereafter. Now to the only wise God who lives and reigns for ever,
and does what pleases him both in Heaven above and in the Earth beneath, be
Glory, Honor and Immortality for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

