Sr. Anthony, St. Ledger, HIS LETTER From aboard the Dovvnes, to Mr. Wareham
Horsemanden, a Cavilier in COLCHESTER, Intercepted, and brought to the
Committee of KENT.

Setting forth their true intentions toward the Scots, the Turne-coate
Mariners, the Independents and the Roundheads.

AS ALSO Their ill opinions of the Dutch and French, because they answered not
their desires in this design.

Printed at London, 1648.

Sir Anthony St Ledger his LETTER.
Thrice noble Cousin,
YOu cannot think how much it joys my heart, that any of my Kin will be so
valourous; ever long you shall see your Father a Bishop, and that function as
glorious as ever: As for those that cowardly left you, they will be ^ as well
as all the Independents and Roundheads; for all that have born Arms for this
corrupt Parliament must be ^ and then, I doubt not but to have all our ancient
Land as formerly, in whose hands soever it is: As for Hales, we have enough at
him; speak the Roundheads fair, and be kind to them till we have all as we
would, and then have at all; take notice of all that run from you. Had not the
drunken Dutch, and cowardly French deceived us, we had relieved you long since,
and then a figg for the Treaty, yet it has taken the best for us. A pox of the
Scots, they have done us more hurt then good; they are crafty Rogues, but we
will order them if we had England as we would. Many here are turned Cowards and
Fools, yet hang upon his Highness shamefully; we want money, that is the thing;
we know not how to trust those turn coat Mariners; but his Highness will never
forget their forwardness to assist the Parliament at first, we will reward them
at last; the Rogues begin to grumble for want; J. P. is turned sot, R. F.
frenzy, N. C. coward; if we have not something speedily, or can Land, and have
some to join with us, all is lost; we can do no considerable thing for the
Castles: If you hold out you will be brave fellows; if black Tom and Noll were
dead, all were our own; we drink your treble Health every day, I doubt not but
you do so by us; Last night my Master said to me, Here is to Sir Warcham
Horsmanden; This and more, and either Land or Office to maintain it; my service
to the three Noble personages with you, Lords and Dukes at least. However we
speed, our enemies are so disjointed they will never be knit again. Excuse my
haste, that am ever

From the Downs the 15 of August, 1648. Your indulgent Uncle, while I am
Anthony St Ledger.
Promise Honor, Land, or Office, or any thing for our design.



FINIS.

