A BRIEF RETURN TO A SCANDALOUS PAPER (Said to be) Published by JEREMY IVES.
I Have Two Reasons not to doubt but that J. I. is the Author of a Sheet this
day come to light, entitled, A Sober Request to the Quakers. First, Because
the Style and Language of it is so like himself. 2dly, Because F. Smith, a
professed Baptist, owns the Printing of it, otherwise I should have thought
needful to have known it from his own Mouth, which in many such like Cases is
very Necessary: But believing it needless in this, I proceed to meet this
Baptist-Champion, not only with a Sober Return, but also with a Serious Reproof
for his vain Boast, slanderous Sayings, and gross Abuses against the said
People, obvious to every judicious impartial Reader.

First, I would signify to all People, that J. Ives, barely so, I do not count
it worth my Time to write or discourse with him about Matters relating to the
pure Christian-Religion, and have several good Reasons for the same.

But as he was deputed the Mouth of the Baptist, and lately did present that
People, (among whom there have been, and are many Well meaning, Searching,
Enquiring, Simple hearted People, whom the Lord has and will in due time
answer with the Manifestation of his Love and Presence) I say as so, I have and
may concern my self with him, and endeavor to detect him and his Associates in
their Vain and Fruitless Attempts.

Now Jeremy, as to thy Boast of Charging the Quakers with being no Christians,
etc. I know (and many others who are no Quakers also know) that thou have more
Impudence and Boldness to Charge, then thou have Strength or Ability to prove;
thy Tongue, (as the Proverb goes) is no slander with many grave Citizens, and
moderate people who walk not with the Quakers; neither are all thy
Syllogistical Arguments able to prove thy self a Christian, nor them none; that
ancient Christian Evidence recorded in the 8th Chapter to the Romans, Verse 16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of
God, accompanied and demonstrated with a Holy Life, and Righteous Conversation
would stand thee in more stead then thy crafty Art of Reasoning; and thou may
remember one Day thou have been told so.

Now all People in short may understand this, that the Quakers account
themselves publicly wronged, and their Principles evilly represented to the
Nation by T. Hicks in his Forged Dialogues, and have Time after Time offered to
prove publicly the said Person (against all that abet him) a Forger, Slanderer
and Perverter of their Words, Writings and Profession, which has been hitherto
on their Part much evaded, and other Things introduced in the two last public
Meetings: Now the Quakers Business is, to prove their Charge aforesaid, in the
doing of which they will prove themselves Christians, and dismantle themselves
of those wild Beast-Skins, which the Baptist especially endeavors to wrap them
up in, that they may be hunted and devoured, as Beast of Prey: I wish with all
my Heart, it could be said of them, as Christ said of his Persecutors, Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do, if it be done through Zeal and
Ignorance, their Sin is the less.

And now if J. I. personates his Brethren in this printed Sheet, he has given
them sufficient Ground to augment their Charge; but if he speaks upon his own
Head, as single Jeremy, they may take the less Notice of his slanderous
Sayings, Lies and gross Abuses; as where he says, The Quakers have written
Doctrines, no Way reconcilable to Scripture Language or Christian-Religion, but
Destructive to both, being vile, absurd, non-sensical Opinions, proved so to
their Face, to make void all Rules of Christian-Faith and Practice; driven by
Force of Argument to such a Straight, not able to Reply; base and insolent
Behavior in his Absence; nothing to answer to purpose in his Presence: Besides
his particular Abuse of W. Penn. in rendering him and his
Christian-Acknowledgment of the Truth, according to the Scripture,
Equivocations, and he an Equivocator. Indeed Jeremy, I never met with more
Untruths in so few Lines, thou say, published by Allowance; if thou meanest,
by the Allowance of thy Brethren, another Time may minister Occasion to speak
further to them.

And as to thy earnest Request to meet the Quakers to prove them no Christians,
and their Ministers Impostors and Lying Spirits, etc. If they should lose so
much Time as to meet thee, thou would fall under the same Condemnation: And
the same Logical Arguments, by which thou would prove them such, will serve
to prove thy self and Brethren such: for my part, I must tell thee, thou art in
my Judgment fitter to appear upon a Mountebanks Stage, then in a Solemn
Religious Christian Assembly to dispute for Christianity: If they that employ
thee as their Mouth and Champion gain any Reputation or Credit by it, I fail in
my Judgment: Christianity needs no Mercenary Agents to propagate its Cause, nor
the corrupt Weapons of a Sophister to defend it; neither can all its Strength
and Cunning so much as shake any that are established and settled in it; thy
Labor is Vain and Foolish: he that sits in Heaven laughs thee to Scorn; and
his Children, who walk in the least Measure of his Heavenly Light see thy
Folly, and do desire thou may come to see it thy self, and cease from it,
that thou may adorn Christianity, and walk worthy of so venerable a Name; then
will thou lay aside thy Abusive Slanderous Sayings, and foul Aspersions of the
People called Quakers, and their Principles, till then thy Prayers for them
will not be regarded (the very Prayers of the Wicked are Sin) neither can
thou in Truth subscribe thy self their Friend; for neither thou nor thy Brother
Hicks, have so showed your selves toward them; I must needs say, you have not
done as you would be done by.

I remember when thou J.I. lately divulgedst absurd and ridiculous Opinions in
Croyden Marketplace, See a Book entitled. The Universality of the Light
asserted, and the Opinions of Jer. Ives detected.
the Person that noted them, sent thee a Copy thereof, to know whether thou
had any Thing to object, before he communicated them public, which in my
Judgment was very honest and fair. Now if thy Brother Hicks, when he had
collected diverse Opinions, which he pretends the Quakers held; and when he had
formed and fashioned his Quaker, with whom he intended to Dialogue, if he had
then sent him to the Quakers, to see whether they would own him and his
Opinions, he had dealt like a Friendly Adversary, and had prevented much
Trouble in general, and excused himself from much Guilt in Particular.

As to thy Postscript, wherein thou desire a distinct Meeting, which shall
have no Respect to what the Quakers object against T. H. As I have hinted
before, so I say again, that J. I. as so, is not worth disputing with; but if
in his printed Paper, he speaks as the Mouth of the Baptist, I know, and am
persuaded, he needs not use Importunity, nor make such a Daring Loud Challenge
to provoke them to maintain the Honor of their Profession, and to approve
themselves Christians; for they are and will be ready to do it, both by Life
and Doctrine, against all their Opposers.

By a Lover of the true Christians, in Scorn called Quakers. W. S.


