THE DOUBTFUL HEIR. A Tragi-comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN
BLACKFRIARS, WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the most worthily honored Sir Edmund Bowier.
SIR,
MAny years are vanished, and a period, not only of the Scene, but more
considerable revolutions have passed, since I had the happiness to be first
known to you. I read excellent Characters of you, when you writ but a small
Letter, and though my observations, like seeds, were not cherished (by the
fault of time) to a maturity, yet they begat in me such great respect to your
person, then budding with honor, and expectation, that now after so long
absence, I find them not extinguished; and howsoever at the first complexion, I
may appear bold, in this hasty interruption, yet your candor will be so far in
my defense, that I have presumed thus, rather to let you know I can still
honor you, than unsatisfie my self, by neglecting the first opportunity of
presenting my service. Sir, it is a piece, which perhaps you have seen in the
active representment; the estimation it gained from thence, will be short of
that grace it shall derive from your acceptance, by which you will show, how
still you dare retain your nobleness, and by renewing your smile upon me,
encourage me to write my self

Your humble Servant, JA. SHIRLEY.

Prologue.
ALl that the Prologue comes for, is to say,
Our Author did not calculate this Play
For this Meridian; the Banckside, he knows,
Are far more skillful at the Ebbes and flows
Of water, than of wit, he did not mean
For the elevation of your poles, this scene.
No shows, no dance, and what you most delight in,
Grave understanders, here is no target fighting
Upon the Stage, all work for Cutlers barred,
No bawdery, nor no Ballets; this goes hard;
But language clean, and what affects you not,
Without impossibilities the Plot;
No clown, no squibs, no Devil in it; oh now
You Squirrels that want Nuts, what will you do?
Pray do not crack the benches; and we may
Hereafter fit your Palats with a Play:
But you that can contract your selves, and sit
As you were now in the Blackfriars pit;
And will not deaf us, with lewd noise and tongues,
Because we have no Heart to break our Lungs,
Will pardon our vast Stage, and not disgrace
This Play, meant for your persons, not the place.
The Persons of the Play.
Leonario, Prince of Arragon. Ferdinand, King of Murcia. Rodriguez Noblemen.
Ernesto, Noblemen. Leandro, Noblemen. Alfonso, Father to Rosania. Olivia,
supposed Queen of Murcia. Rosania, Alfonso 's, Daughter. Violinda. Captain.
Citizens. Courtier. Officers. Soldiers.
Scene Murcia.

THE DOVBTFVLL HEIR.
ACT. I.
Enter Rodriguez and Ernesto. Rod. THis turn was not expected, Prince Leonario
Is much perplexed.

Ern. I cannot blame his Highness,
So near an expectation of a blessing,
To be thus crossed.

Rod. The Day of Marriage set,
With the applausive Vote of both the Kingdoms,
By an unlookt for War to be put of,
Would vex a royal spleen.

Er. It Is but deferred.

Rod. I do not like the hope on it.

Er. I pity
The Princely lover, worthy (without blemish
To the excelling virtues of the Queen)
Of as much goodness as her sex contains,
So Noble in his Nature, Active, bountiful
Discreet, and valiant, if we may believe
What his young fame profers to every knowledge.

Rod. This character is not flattery and yet
The Queen our Mistress is not lost in this
Just praise of him.

Er. I have no thought so Impious,
My duty never taught me to commend
But to obey, her Virgin sweetness makes me
Her just admirer but when I observe
Her prudent manage of the State, a strength
Would become many years, her pious Laws,
But that without example, made to advance
Her sexes Chastity, I forget all
Beside worth praise, though every least of her
Desert would ask a volume. It Is his Excellence.

Enter Leonario, Captain. Rod. There Is one not sorry for these Wars.

Er. It Is his
Profession; Soldiers batten in a Tempest.

Rod. And he deserves employment; yet I think
He Will never purchase with his pay.

Leo. Be confident;
Your worth will plead alone; the Queen expects me.

Ex. Leon. Capt. Your Highness humble creature; -- so, there is hope yet
After a time of ease, and surfeit, we
May cure our selves by letting others Blood.
My Noble Lords.

Ernest. 'Morrow Captain, you look blithe, and bright.

Capt. I Will put my Sword to scowring that shall shine.
I thank Heaven my prayers are heard.

Rod. What prayers?

Cap. That honest men may cut knaves throats, and bid
Defiance to the Hangman; Musk and Civet
Have too long stifled us, there is no recovery
Without the smell of Gunpowder.

Enter two Citizens. Er. But Captain --

1 C. It Is he, we must not lose him,

2 C. He has credit with the Lords it seems.

1 C. He has spied us.

Capt. My honest friends, welcome to Court. My Lords
Pray grace these honest Gentlemen, they will
Deserve to kiss your Hands.

1 C. Our business
Is to you Captain.

Capt. Do you think what these brace of Baboons come for?

Rod. Not I.

Capt. By this day for money, moneys that I owe 'em.

Er. Is It possible?

Capt. I ha'mov'd your suit Gentlemen.

1 C. What suit?

Capt. Touching the Masque. Which you two in the name
Of the whole City, offered to present
At the Town charges to congratulate
The Queens intended Marriage; I know
This Egg was long a hatching and expected,
But that your Heads could not agree, they being
Of several sizes, some upon the shoulders
Of your long-winded Officers, whose purse
Was made of the Leather with their conscience.

1 Ci. Does he talk to us of a Masque?

2 Ci. Good Captain put your Masque off, and give us.
The money that you owe us.

Capt. Was It not meant nobly?
But you my good Lords know how much
The Queen and Prince are sorry, that so rare
A President of their duty should not be
Upon record; this villainous War distracts
All civil mirth, but you will be remembered.

1 Ci. We know not what you mean, we have no anticks
In agitation; if your Captain-ship
Will pay your debts, so; there is Law and courses
To be taken, and you will find that Justice
Can deal Sir with the Sword as well as Balance.

Capt. The Puppys talk Philosophy; nay then
I must be plain, would I could tice 'em to
A little treason, theyl never hang for felony.
Why, whither do you think I am going now?

1 Cit. We care not whither so you pay us first.

Capt. Let their own Fathers swing, so they have money.

2 Cit. May be you are going to the Wars.

Capt. Yes Mongrels,
To fight for your chamlet Faces, while you stay at home
And catch the cramp with telling money,
Putting your Guts to Pension every Day,
And roots, until the wind cry out again you,
And with your belching backwards stifle Men
That walk the Street, until the Air be purged;
Must we Eat Bullets without Butter. Whelps?
Have our Throats cut, or drop like Sheep by'th' hundred,
OF the rot, to buy your Peace, you boding Screechowls?
And have your consciences so course a Nap
To ask money of us?

1 Cit. You had the conscience
To take up our commodities.

Capt. Reason good;
Should I go naked leeches?

2 Cit. No but there is reason
That you should pay good Captain for your warmth.

Capt. Pay you? for what? for Clothes, such things as these?
Your tribe is bound to keep us.

1 Cit. How?

Capt. Yes, and desire us to accept your wares,
To recompense our sufferings; it is we,
It Is we that keep your Worships warm and living,
By Marching, Fasting, Fighting, and a thousand
Dangers, (you o'r grown moths) you that love gold,
And wo'not take an Angel sent from Heaven
Unless you weigh him, you that spend the Day
In looking o'r your debt -- Book, and at Night
Can lap and lecher in your Feather Beds.
Then snort, and dream of fourscore in the hundred,
Afraid of nothing but the Gout, or what
Is a more just reward for your hard hearts
The stone, which puts you to the charge of Physic
To make you piss out your last Usurers Gallon,
Or of a Surgeon to cut you for
The Pibles, which (if you survive Incission)
You keep in penny Boxes, like deer relics,
And show your friends, when you intend to visit 'em.
And beg a Dinner.

Er. Let not passion
Make you too much abuse their qulaity;
The City does contain brave fellows Captain,
As generous, as bountiful, discreet,
And valiant too, as any boast themselves
In Court or Camp.

Cap. I grant you my good Lord,
And honor all the Noble souls within it,
But these are walking sicknesses, not Citizens;
Two such prodigious things with crooked consciences,
Though Young yet Old in Usury --

2 Cit. All this Captain
Wo'not pay us our money, which we must
Have, or Petition for to your disgrace.

Cap. Well since there is no remedy, will you take
These two Noblemens words for what I owe you?

1 Cit. Withal our Hearts.

Rod. That bargain is to make.

Er. Good Captain, at this time you may excuse us,

Capt. Why, do your Lordships think I Would let you surfer,
Come, you are my honorable friends; pass, pass
Your word, I Will pay the money; hang'em dottrels
I Will not be beholding to 'em.

Rod. We had rather you should good Captain.

Capt. No, -- come hither Capons
Will money content you; shall I walk the Street
Without a Head ache, with your bawling for
The debt when I have paid you?

2 Cit. It Is but reason.

Capt. I Will fetch you money presently -- you may follow
If you please, but these Noblemen shall see
And witness what I pay you, I Will not trust
Your Memorandums.

1 Cit. Withal our Hearts Sir.

2 Cit. We desire no more.

Capt. I Will wait on you again.

Ex. Manent Enter Leandro, reading a Paper. Rod. Ernesto. Rod. Fortune de la
guerre.
My Lord Leandro? what papers that
He so intentively peruses?

Lean. I like it and could willingly allow
The change; the Queen grows mighty in her spirit,
And this match with the Prince would swell her State
Too much; my Lords.

Rod. We are yours.

Leand. See what dangerous Papers have been scattered
To wound the Title of our Royal Mistress;
My servant brought me this; our Enemy
Who calls himself Prince Ferdinand would fain
Have us believe him Cosen to the Queen,
She an usurper of his Crown.

Er. We all know him dead.

Rod. I Am sure I did attend his Funeral.

Lean. I think I waited too.

Er. This paper says he was conveyed away,
And so escaped his Uncles cruelty,
To whose protection he was left an Infant;
He dying, we translated our obedience
To his Daughter, now our Queen.

Rod. Here Is an Impostor.

Leand. Heaven aid the Innocent say I; he has
Valentias aid and comes not to Invite
But force a resignation; I wish things
Were calm again.

Er. Prince Leonario if she prosper not,
Is like to be a loser too.

Leand. For him
It matters not, we have more to think on now,
Than love and complement.

Rod. I thought he would be General
Against this pretended Ferdinand.

Leand. What else?
Her sweet Heart, that gives Cupid in his crest.
Alas! there needs no art, nor strength of War
To advance her cause. Justice will fight for her
In The Clouds, and victory sent from Heaven, without
Her soldiers sweat, will gloriously descend
To Crown his Head with Laurel.

Er. May it prove so.

Leand. I could say things would stagger your belief,
But I forgot the Queen sent for me; to
You both a servant --

Exit. Er. I do not like my Lord Leandros winding,
He has been faithful.

Rod. Always honorable. The Queen.

Enter Queen, Leonario, Captain, Leandro, Violinda, Attendants, Ladies,
Gentlemen. Leon. I take this as the greatest honor Madam
You could confer; my name is young in War,
But my affection to your rovall person,
Armed with the virtue of your cause, shall make me
Do something worth your name.

Que. 'Twas your request.
Nor could we place our chief command, but where
It Is equald with your Interest in us
And your own merit.

Leon. Sure my Stars did mean
This way to make you know, how much my heart
Dares in your service; and if Ferdinand,
For so he calls himself, possess a soul
Above the vulgar making, we shall spare
The Blood of many, and conclude the War
In single opposition.

Leand. With your Highness pardon,
It not becomes you should Engage your Person,
And so great a cause so dangerously;
It will be too much honor to the Impostor,
And in the supposition of the World,
A strength to his pretense, to bring your Birth
So low, to humble both your self and fortunes
To his unworthy Level, a thing grown
Up in the Night, a Meteor hanging in
The Air, prodigiously, fed with vapor, and
Black Influence, ambitious to deceive
The World, and challenge kindred with the Stars;
It is too great a venture Sir.

Er. Since there must be a War
Let the armies meet in Battle there is more hope
After the worst to reinforce and prosper,
Than when the kingdoms put upon one stake,
And one Man's chance to assure it.

Que. I allow
Your Counsel Lords; but have more argument
Convincing me, not to run such a hazard
Of what must make Olivia rich hereafter;
A kingdoms loss may be repaired, but your
Life made a Sacrifice to tyrant War.
May find a welcome to the other shades,
But no tears can Invite you back, to share.
Or grief, or Joy with me; I Will have no Duel.

Leon. It Is a command, and my obedience
Shall meet it, though I fear 'twill be a sin
To be too careful of my self, but I
Shall still remember I am your Soldier.
And this considered shall not make me rash,
But wisely teach me to deserve this title
Which lives but in your honor.

Que. I Will pray for you,
And not so much for what concerns the State,
As what your merit has already gained
Upon my Heart.

Rod. Blessings upon 'em both,
A curse upon these Wars, that spoil their mirth.

Que. My Lord Leandro.

Leon. There Is your Commission Captain, I suppose
You have found ways to empty your Exchequer.

Capt. My Baggs are not brimfull my Lord. I have
Defalk'd, and made an ebb for Wine, and Women,
And other things that keep poor men alive
To do their country service.

Leon. Please you walk
With this Gentleman Captain, he shall pay you
Five hundred pieces that I owe you.

Capt. Me, your Grace owes me nothing,

Leon. I could not pay the debt in better time Sir.

Capt. Umh! I will take the money, and allow the miracle.

Ex. Capt. and Gent. Er. Did you observe the Princes nobleness?
Although the act become him. Yet the manner
Takes me especially, Heaven preserve the Captain
From being Mad.

Leon. I prosper in your Vote,
But shall I Madam, if that power, which Crowns
With victory guides me with fair success
In this your War, and triumph smile upon us,
Shall I at my return have that reward
My soul next Heaven affects? shall no delay
(Colder than Frost to lovers blood,) afflict
My expectation of our Marriage?
Although to doubt this be a sin, yet where
The ambition is so Just, I shall but right
My Heart, to have it often assured, nor can
It make your eye less rich in smiles, when it is
Only my love Encourages me to make
The busy harmless question.

Que. It does please me,
Nor can you ask so often, as I have
A cheerfulness to answer, that I love you,
And have propounded nothing dearer to me,
Than that which perfects chaste affection,
And chains two Hearts; the Priest with sadness will
Expect you safe again, but from this War
When you return, he shall not in his Register
Of Lovers, find one, with more wing has met
The bosom of her friend, than glad Olivia
To make one soul with you.

Leon. I have enough,
And thirst for action in the Field, from whence
I will bring Harvest home, or leave my self,
Happy in life or death to do you service.

Ex. Queen, Leon. Lean. Ladies, attendants. Rod. Well, I Am afraid if Hymen
should set up
His Tapers now, they would not last to light
His Priest, at their return to say his Office.

Er. Hope fairly.

Rod. I allow his spirit, but
The Prince has not been practiced in
The School of War, where stratagems prevail
Above all personal resolution.

Er. He cannot want fit counsel to direct
His early valor, besides
Ferdinand by computation as young as he
Enter Captain, two Citizens, and a Soldier. May poize the scale. See, the
Captain.

1 Cit. We always thought you Noble, and we hope
You Will take no offense, that our occasions
Prevailed above our modesty.

Capt. I know
You two are very modest; well I Am glad
I am furnished for you: my good Lords I must
Entreat you to be witnesses of what money
I pay these Gentlemen, that have trusted me.

2 Cit. And will again; command our Shops.

Capt. No, sit there, and starve,
Or if you like it better take a swing
At your own sign Post.

Er. Good words Captain.

Capt. They expect good money, and both good are too much.

1 Cit. We always loved you.

2 Cit. And do so still most virtuously.

Capt. It does appear,

1 Cit. And you shall find us ready --

Capt. I Will make but one fair motion, it will be
Sufficient trial of your honesty;
I have five hundred pounds, you see me tell it,
Faith make it up a thousand 'twixt you both
Till I come back, you will be Aldermen.

1 Cit. Never a whit the sooner.

2 Cit. Alas Sir, if it were at another time --

1 Cit. Hereafter, upon good occasion you shall find --

Capt. You both i'th'Pillotie, for selling Copper
Lace by a wrong name; well there is no remedy,
I Will keep my word; the money's ready for you.

1 Cit. You are noble Captain.

2 Cit. May you kill all the Queens Enemies.

Capt. You would not escape,
That Cosen her liege people every day, then.

2 Cit. This payment Captain will come most seasonably.

1 Cit. And do us as much good, as you had given us
The sum twice told, another time.

Capt. Before
These Noblemen, have you such want
As you profess? you have no Wives nor Children.

1 Cit. I protest upon my credit, I am to pay
This day two hundred pound, or be endangered
To an arrest.

2 Cit. And I must go to Prison
If before Sunset --

Capt. Then 'twill do you a pleasure.

Both. Cit. Above expression.

Capt. Here Is twelve pence a piece for you you are fit Men
To serve the Queen:

Both Cit. How Captain?

Capt. Why in the Wars, choose either Pike or Musket,
You shall have that favor.

Both Cit. We are both undone.

Lords. Ha, ha, but will you use 'em so?

Capt. Have they not ready money? why do you stare?
No thanks for my protection?

Both Cat. Protection?

Capt. Did you not protest you should to prison else?
Why you unthankful sons of false light, Sergeant
Take 'em to thei'r Rendevous

1 Cit. Captain, a word -- we are content --

Capt. I Am glad on it, Why do you stay then.

1 Cit. To abate half our money.

2 Cit. All, all good Captain, he shall have all, rather
Than be sent a souldiering; do you know what it is?
It Is no Artillery Garden, where you come off
With as you were.

Rod. This was his Project.

Capt. Umh'. You will forgive me both your debts?

2 Cit. And pray Heaven to forgive you too.

Capt. My Lords, bear witness,
These two would bribe me to abuse the Queen
And the present service, is this less then Treason?

Both Cit. Oh. Er. Nay, nay Captain.

Capt. There are not two more able Men in the Army,
I mean for bulk; ram me into a Cannon
If you shall buy your selves with your estates
From this Employment; Il not cosen you,
Your money is good debt still, you may live,
And ask me for it again, and I may pay you.

Rod. But shall they serve indeed?

Capt. That Is at their peril
When they come to the, field, but go they shall,
And they were my Cosen-germans.

Both Cit. Good my Lord speak for us.

Capt. You do not know my Lords, but a little suffering
May save their souls and teach 'em, if they come
Off, with a quarter of their limbs, compassion
To other Men, that venture their lives for 'em,
Their consciences are tough, and must be suppled,
When they shall fast, and march ten months in armor,
Sometimes through Rivers, sometimes over Mountains,
And not have straw at Night, to keep their Breech
From growing to the Earth, in storms, in heats;
When they have felt the softness of a trench
Thigh deep in water, and their dung to fatten it;
When they shall see no meat within a month,
But chaw their Match like Liquorish, and digest
The Bark of trees like Sallads in the Summer;
When they shall live to think there is no such thing
In Nature as a thirst, and wonder why
A Tailor was created; when they have
As much in ready shot, within their flesh,
As would set up a Plummer, or repair
A Church with Lead, beside ten thousand more
Afflictions, which they are sure to find,
They may have Christianity, and not put
A Soldier to the payment of his debts.

Rod. It Is a Mad Captain, come my Lord lets leave him.

Ex. Lords. Capt. You shall have time and place to send for money,
Or make your Wills; set on, who knows but you
Hereafter may be honest, and prove Captains;
You may have preferment in the Wars for money,
And so my Gentle Creditors, march on.

Exeunt. ACT. II. Enter Leandro with Letters.
Lean. THe hope, and care of many years, are in
One day destroyed; has Heaven no stroke in War?
Or is old providence asleep? Leonar to
Is coming home with victory, and brings
Young Ferdinand, whom I expected to
Salute a King, his Prisoner, and the Queen
With her new Conqueror, glorious in the spoils,
By putting out this light, will mix their beams
And burn our eyes out with their shine; there is
No talk but of this triumph, and the people
Whom I by art and secret murmurs had
Made doubtful at the first noise of this Conquest,
As they had borrowed souls from fear, and folly,
Adore the rising Star, and in the praise
Of him and his great fate, wonder that Heaven
Should hold a Sun, and he so bright; nor with
This flattery content, but they condemn,
(As low as all their sins shall one day them)
Him whom the chance of War has made a Prisoner.
There is no trust to policy or time,
The things of State are whirld by destiny,
To meet their period, Art cannot repair 'em.

Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, the Queen has sent for you,
She is going forth to meet the Prince, and has
Commanded none be wanting to attend
With all the State that may become her, to
Congratulate the triumph now brought home.

Leand. I shall obey. I must attend this glory;
It is not safe to wear a brow, but what
The Queens example first forms into smile.
I here contract my knowledge, and seclude
My wishes, since they prosper not. I am
Her Chancellor; as great Offices, and high
Employments, do expose us to most danger,
They often teach those possess 'em a State-wisdom,
And by Inherent virtues of the place,
Our fear to lose, makes us secure our selves,
By art more often, than by conscience;
But I may be endangered to suspicion;
I like not things; but I delay my attendance.

Exit. Enter Captain, Lieutenant, Ancient and Soldiers. Capt. Lieutenant.

Lieu. Captain.

Capt. Ancient, what think you of the Wars now?

Ant. We are come off with Honor.

Lieu. And our Limbs, Captain.

Capt. Is that all? who made you a Lieutenant?
And you Ancient? these titles were not born w'e,
You did not wear these Buffs and Feathers in
The memory of Man, when you received
The binding twelve-pence, it was otherwise.

Ant. But you received, if you remember Captain,
Beside what we releast in honest debt
Sums for this great Instalment, we have paid
I take it for our names.

Capt. And it became you,
Now you are Gentlemen my Comrades of honor,
And I dare walk and drink at Taverns w'e,
Your oaths become you now, and your splay feet;
You looked before like Magots, City Worms,
I have made you both brave fellows, fellows to Knights.
You may be Squires to Ladies too.

Ant. I think so.

Capt. We are all now of a trade,
For Mars is Master of our Company,
Our Shop is the Field, Resolution our Stock,
Honor our Purchase, and Fire and Sword
The Tools we work withal.

Lieu. But now the Wars are done, I think
We may shut up our Shop, there is no more
Pay, is there?

Capt. Pox upon you; I see your souls bleat after
Profit still, a bullet in the right place would
Have knocked out this humor of getting money;
But fear not, though you come off with more
Limbs than you deserve, you shall have pay.

Ant. Shall we and not be troubled to fight for it?

Capt. Yes, it will be necessary you fight, you will
Have your throats cut else, and be sent off like Sheep,
Do not fear payment, here be Mandrakes,
That will rore, and cudgel you to your hearts content,
You shall not walk the Streets now you are
Officers without a quarrel: pay enough.

Lieu. A Man had as good be no Lieutenant, as be
Beaten when he comes home what think you Ancient?

Ant. For my part I can endure beating as well
As another if that be all.

Capt. Will you to your Shops again?

Ant. I have no mind to Woosted Stockings again,
And Shoos that Shine, I would were colors still.

Capt. Well said Ancient come I Will take your fears off;
Do not confess you are a Lieutenant, or you an
Ancient, and no man will quarrel w'ee, you
Shall be as secure as Chrysome Children.

Lieu. Shall we? they shall rack me ever I Will confess I am
A Lieutenant or ever see the Wars.

Ant. Or I an Ancient. I Will take it upon my death
I was never a Soldier in my life.

Capt. It Is well done; now because I love you,
And see you have an Itch after honor, so
It may come without blows, Let me advise you,
You have moneys at command.

Lieut. And good debts too.

Cap. You shall both turn Courtiers.

Ant. Shall we?

Cap. I say it; for if my phisnomy deceive me not,
You two are born to be --

Both. What?

Cap. Coxbombs. I Will help to make you too;
You shall presently kiss the Queens hand;
You have moneys you say, You shall never turn
To your vomit of small Wares. I have friends
At Court, you may in time be great; And when I come
With a Petition to your honors, for moneys in arrear,
Or knocking out some rascals brains, such as you were
When you wore a girt under your chops, you two
May stand between me and the Gallows.

Ant. Hang us if we do not.

Capt. You shall buy places presently. But stay,
Have you a mind to be Officers to the Queen
In ordinary, or extraordinary?

Ant. Extraordinary by all means.

Lieut. We scorn to be ordinary Courtiers.

Capt. I commend your judgment, that will be
Chargeable: But --

Ant. Hanged, we will find money enough, but I more
Resolve to be extraordinary.

Capt. I Will bring you to a Court-Merchant presently;
You will get infinite estates.

Both. A ha Captain.

Capt. And so command the Ladies, if you be bountiful.

Both. A ha Boy.

Capt. For I know you do love Wenches;
You will have all the business, and the Country
Come tumbling in upon you like the tide,
After a month: You must keep twenty men
Between you, night and day to tell your money.
Oh it is unknown what will become on you,
If you be ruled, and take this course: Had I
Moneys like you, I would be --

Lieut. Come, we will lend thee moneys too hereafter.

Cap. Will you, come on, no more Lieutenant now
Nor Ancient.

Ant. Do ye think we long to be beaten.

Exeunt. Enter Ferdinand (in prison) Rosania (like a Page.) Rosa. Pray do not
grieve for me, I have a heart
Tha^ can for your sake suffer more; and when
The tyranny of your fate calls me to die,
I can as willingly resign my breath,
As go to sleep.

Ferd. Can I hear this Rosania
Without a fresh wound? That thy love to me
Should be so ill rewarded, thou have engaged
Thy self too much already; it is within
Thy will, yet to be safe, reveal thy self,
Throw of the cloud that does eclipse that brightness,
And they will court thy person, and be proud
With all becoming-honor to receive thee,
No fear shall rob thy cheek of her chaste blood.
Oh leave me to my own Stars, and expect
What ere become of wretched Ferdinand,
A happy fate.

Rosa. Your Council is unkind,
This language would become your charity
To a stranger, but my Interest is more
In thee, then thus with words to be sent off;
Our vows have made us one, nor can the names
Of Father, Country, or what can be dear
In Nature, bribe one thought to wish my self
In Heaven without thy company; it were poor then
To leave thee here. Then by thy faith I charge thee,
By this -- the first and last seal of our love. Kisses him.
By all our promises, when we did flatter
Our selves, and in our fancy took the world
A pieces, and collected what did like
Us best, to make us a new paradise,
By that, the noblest ornament of thy soul,
Thy honor, I conjure thee, let me still
Be undiscovered; What will it avail
To leave me, whom thou love, and walk alone
Sad pilgrim to another world? We will
Converse in soul and shoot like Stars, whose Beams
Are twisted and make bright the sullen Groves
Of Lovers as we pass.

Ferd. These are but dreams
Of happiness, be wise Rosania,
Thy love is not a friend to make thee miserable,
Society in death, where we affect,
But multiplies our grief; Live thou, Oh live.
And if thou have a tear, when I am dead,
But drop it to my memory, it shall
More precious then embalming dwell upon me,
And keep my ashes pure, my spirit shall
At the same instant in some innocent shape
Descend upon that earth thou have bedewed;
And kissing the bright tribute of thy eye,
Shall after wait like thy good Angel on thee.
There will be none to speak of Ferdinand
Without disdain, if thou die too: Oh live
A little to defend me, or at least
To say I was no Traitor to thy love,
And lay the shame on death, and my false Stars
That would not let me live to be a King.

Rosa. Oh Ferdinand,
Thou do not love me now.

Ferd. Not love Rosania?
If woing thee to live, will not assure thee,
Command me then to die, and spare the cruelty
Of the fair Queen: Not love Rosania?
If thou will but delight to see me bleed,
I will at such a narrow passage let
Out life, it shall be many hours in ebbing,
And my soul bathing in the Crimson stream,
Take pleasure to be drowned. I have small time
To love, and be alive, but I will carry
So true a Faith to woman hence, as shall
Make poor the world, when I am gone to tell
The story yonder. -- We are interrupted.

Enter Keepr. Keep. You must prepare your self for present trial;
I have command to attend you to the Judges.
That Gentleman, and all that did adhere
To your Conspiracy, are by the Queens
Most gracious Mercy pardoned.

Ferd. In that word
Thou Have brought me more then life; I shall betray,
And with my too much joy undo thee again.
Heaven does command thee live, I must obey
This Summons, I shall see thee again Tiberio,
Before I die.

Rosa. I Will wait upon you Sir,
The Queen will not deny me that poor office;
I know not how to leave you.

Ferd. Death and I
Shall meet, and be made friends; but when we part,
The world shall find thy story in my heart.

Exit. Enter Officers with Bar, Table, Stools, -- then Ernesto, Rodriguez,
Leandro, Queen, supported by Leonario, Ferdinand, Rosania, Ladies, Gentlemen,
and Guard, who set Ferdinand to the Bar. Queen. Is that the prisoner at the Bar?

Leon. He that pretended himself Ferdinand,
Your Uncles son.

Q. Proceed to his Arraignment; my Lord Leandro,
You know our pleasure.

Lean. Although the Queen in her own Royal power,
And without violating Sacred Justice, where
Treason comes to invade her, and her Crown
With open war, need not insist upon
The Forms, and Circumstance of Law, but use
Her Sword in present execution;
Yet such is the sweet temper of her blood,
And calmness of her Nature, though provoked
Ino a storm, unto the great'st offender
She shuts up no defense, willing to give
A satisfaction to the world how much
She does delight in mercy. Ferdinand,
For so thou do pretend thy self, thou art
Indicted of High Treason to Her Majesty,
In that thou have usurped relation to
Her blood; and under name of being her Kinsman,
Not only have contrived to blast her Honor
With Neighbor Princes, but have gathered arms
To wound the precious bosom of her Country,
And tear the Crown, which Heaven and just Succession
Has placed upon her Royal Head: what can
Thou answer to this Treason?

Ferd. Boldly thus.
As I was never with the height of all
My expectation, and the aid of Friends,
Transported one degree above my self,
So must not Ferdinand, though his Stars have frowned
And the great eye of Providence seem to slumber.
While your force thus compelled, and brought me hither
With mockery of my Fate, to be arraigned
For being a Prince, have any thought beneath
The Title I was born to; yet I Will not call
This cruelty in you, nor in the Queen,
(If I may name her so, without injustice
To my own right) a Kingdom is a Garland,
Worth all Contention; and where right seals not
The true Possession, Nature is forgotten,
And blood thought cheap to assure it; there is something
Within that excellent Figure, that restrains
A Passion here, that else would forth like lightning.
It Is not your shape, which yet has so much sweetness
Some pale religious Hermit might suspect
You are the blessed Saint he prayed too; no,
The magick's in our nature, and our blood;
For both our veins full of one precious purple
Strike harmony in their motion, I am Ferdinand,
And you the fair Olivia, brothers children.

Leon. What insolence is this?

Qu. Oh my Lord, let him
Be free to plead; for if it be no dream,
His cause will want an Orator: By my blood,
He does talk bravely.

Rodri. These are flourishes.

Ernest. Speak to the treason you are charged with
And confess a guilt.

Leond. He justifies himself.

Ferd. If it be treason to be born a Prince,
To have my Fathers Royal Blood move here;
If it be treason, in my infancy
To have escaped by Divine Providence,
When my poor life should have been sacrificed
To please a cruel Uncle, whose Ambition
Surprised my Crown, and after made Olivia
His Daughter Queen; if it be treason, to
Have been a stranger thus long from my Country,
Bred up with silence, of my name, and birth,
And not till now mature to own my self
Before a Sunbeam; if it be treason
After so long a banishment to weep
A tear of joy upon my Countries bosom,
And call her mine my just inheritance,
Unl^ss you stain my blood with bastardy;
If it be treason, still to love this Earth,
That knew so many of my race, her Kings,
Though late unkindly armed to kill her Sovereign,
As if the effusion of my blood were left
To make her fertile, if to love Olivia,
My nearest pledge of blood, although her power
Has chained her Prince, and made her Lord her prisoner,
Who sits with expectation to hear
That sentence that must make the golden Wreath,
Secure upon her Brow, by blasting mine.
If this be treason, I am guilty Ferd nand.
Your King's become a traitor, and must die
A black, and most inglorious death.

Ernest. You offer
At some defense, but come not home; by what
Engine were you translated hence, or whether
Convei'd? There was some trust, deceived, when you
Were carried forth to be preserved, and much
Care taken since, in bringing of you up,
And giving secret Fire to this Ambition.

Ferd. There wants no testimony here, of what
Concerns the story of my Birth and Infancy,
If one dare speak, and be an honest Lord.

Leand. Hows that?

Ferd. Whose love and art secured me from all tyranny,
Though here my funeral was believed, while I
Sent to an honorable Friend, his Kinsman,
^rew safely to the knowledge of my self
At last, till fortune of the War betrayed me
To this captivity.

Leand. I biush at thee
Yong-man, whose fate has made thee desperate,
And car'st not what man's blood thou draw'st along
^n thy black stream, or what man's faith thou make
As hateful as thy crimes.

Ernest. That confederate
Sure has some name, declare him, that he may
Thank you for his reward, and lose his head for it.

Quee. We always see that men in such high nature
Deformed, and guilty, want not specious shapes
To gain their practice friendship, and compassion,
But he shall feel the punishment; do you smile?

Ferd. A woman's anger is but worth it Madam;
And if I may have freedom, I must say,
Not in contempt of what you seem, nor helped
By overcharge of passion, which but makes
A fruitless noise; I have a sense of what
I am to lose, a life, but I am so fortified
With valiant thoughts, and innocence, I shall,
When my last breath is giving up, to lose
Its self in the air, be so remote from fear,
That I will cast my face into one smile,
Which shall when I am dead, acquit all trembling,
And be a story to the world, how free
From paleness Ferdinand took leave of earth.

Rosa. Alas my Lord, you forget me, that can
Part with such courage.

Ferd. I forget indeed,
I thought of death with honor, but my love
Has found a way to chide me; O my Boy,
I can weep now.

Leon. A sudden change, he weeps.

Quee. What Boy is that?

Ferd. I prithee take thy self away.

Quee. Your Spirit
Does melt it seems, and you begin to think
A life is worth preserving, though with Infamy.

Ferd. Goodness thy aid again, and tell this great
Proud woman, I have a Spirit scorns her pity.
Come hither Boy, and let me kiss thee; thus
At parting with a good, and pretty servant,
I can without my honor stained shed tears:
I took thee from thy Friends, to make thee mine;
Is it not truth Boy.

Rosa. Yes my Lord.

Ferd. And meant when I was King to make thee great,
And shall I not, when I can live no longer,
To cherish thee at farewell, drop a tear?
That I could weep my soul upon thee, -- But
You are to slow me thinks. I am so far
From dread, I think your forms too tedious.
I expect my sentence.

Quee. Let it stay a while.
What secret flame is this? Honor protect me!
Your Graces fair excuse, for you -- I shall
Return again --

Exit. Ferd. And I, with better guard
After my silence in the Grave, to meet
And plead this cause.

Ernest. He is distracted sure;
His person I could pity, but his insolence
Wants an example; what if we proceed
To sentence?

Leon. I suppose the Queen will clear
Your duties in it.

Leand. But I Will acquaint her.

Exit. Rod. My Lord Leandro's gone.

Ernest. His censure will
Be one with ours.

Ferd. Yet shall I publish who
Thou art? I shall not die with a calm soul
And leave thee in this cloud.

Enter the Queen and Leandro. Rosa. By no means Sir. -- The Queen.

Quee. Whose service is so forward to our State,
That when Our pleasure's known, not to proceed,
They dare be officious in his Sentence? Are
We Queen, or do we move by your Protection?

Ernest. Madam, the Prince --

Quee. My Lord, you have a Queen.
I not suspect his wisdom Sir, but he
Has no Commission here to be a Judge,
You were best circumscribe our Regal power,
And by your selves condemn, or pardon all,
And we sign to your will: The offense, which you
Call treason strikes at us, and we release it,
Let me but see one curl in any Brow:
Attend the prisoner hither; -- Kiss our hand.
Are you so merciless to think this man
Fit for a Scaffold. You shall Sir be near us,
And if in this confusion of your Fortunes
You can find gratitude, and love, despair not.
These men that now oppose, may find your title
Clear to the Kingdom too: Be Sir collected,
And let us use your arm.

Exit. Supported by Ferdinand. Rosa. What change is here?

Leand. What think you of this Lords?

Rodri. I dare not think.

Leon. Affronted thus? O my vexed heart.

Exit. Rosa. I Will follow still, and if this be no dream,
We have escaped a Brook, to meet a greater stream.

Exeunt. ACT. III.
Enter Rodriguez, Ernesto. Ernest. THough I believed her passionate, and like
A Sea, tempestuous in her anger, I
Never thought she would marry him.

Rodri. She Is the Queen,
But with what honor she could quit the Prince,
Who (without treason) did deserve her too,
Comes not within my reach.

Ernest. If you consider
He has been valiant for her to great purpose,
And brought a prisoner home, to mount his Gennet:
It was a pretty service.

Rod. How does he bear it.

Ernest. He Is here, you may enquire it.

Enter Leonario (with Letters) and a Servant. Leon. Be swift and faithful,
Arragon bleeds here,
Nothing but War can right my cause and honor.

Serve. Expect an army great as your own thoughts
To cut the way to your revenge.

Exit. Leon. My Lords Rodriguez and Ernesto.

Ambo. Your Graces servants.

Leon. A man may take the benefit of this Garden,
Without a Court offense, youh ave had the day
Of triumph, and the Queen already teeming,
To bless the Kingdom with an Heir; and yet
You see I walk like a poor Neighbor Prince,
And have my heart still.

Rod. I am glad you bear it so.

Leon. Nor have I a meaning
To run my self into despair, or strangle
My better hopes, out of pure melancholy,
I praise the influence of my Stars; there is
A fire in Cupids Quiver, that will scorch
Through armor; and what is woman's flesh and blood
To make resistance, though I did not dance
Upon the marriage night, I wished her joys
In The morning.

Ernest. Her heart showed she was pleased
With what she had done; she was as active as
The air before she went to Bed.

Rod. But I
Observed a declination in the King,
And as the night approached, which should have more
Enlarged his mirth, he grew more melancholy.

Leon. Strange! And such a Bride that took him from
So great a loss, to place him in her bosom;
But he was marked for the Queens thoughts, and I
By destiny to bring this pair of Pigeons
Together. I expect no more reward,
The Willow Garland Crowns me, but the Prince
Is here still.

Ernest. Your highness has a noble temper.

Rod. How ere he seem to cover it, his soul
Has a deep apprehension of the affront.
Let Us leave him, our discourse may be displeasing.
We are servants to your Grace.

Exeunt Lords Leon. You Have honored me.
Think I am tame still? let the inconstant Queen
Secure her thoughts, and glory in my silence;
This heart is laboring a revenge.
Enter Captain. Captain, what news? the Court is merry still?

Cap. Not altogether so merry as it was hoped for.

Leon. Can there be an eclipse already?

Cap. I have not read the Almanac for this year,
But by my Court Astronomy, I find
Our Sun and Moon are in no Conjunction;
They take their fit by turns, the King was cold
And full of phlegm last night, and they that wait
Near both, report the Queen this morning looked
As she had wept.

Leon. O, tears of joy.

Cap. Of anger rather, if you saw her sullenness.
She frowns on every man, she turned away
One of her servants but this morning, for
Presenting her with Verses, that did praise
The King, and wish her fruitful. Her own Page
Was whipped, for saying the King lay with the Queen
And might for ought he knew, get her with child ere morning.

Leon. Thou art humorous.

Cap. And so are they.

Leon. This begins well; and what
Do people talk abroad of me, and my
Affront?

Cap. Why, they say they are sorry for you,
Especially the women.

Leon. Thou art pleasant.

Cap. Some that are chief in counsel, privately
Suspect it but a trick of State; and that
You had discovered underhand the Queen
Was not --

Leon. Leave this mirth; let me indear thy care
For my intelligence at Court; I must
Not off so tamely; and expect me here,
After a small dispatch, I have more to impart.

Exit. Cap. Your humble creature still Sir. Alas poor Gent'
Were I as capable to be entertained now, in revenge
I would mount all the Madams in the Court,
There should be nothing like a woman in it,
But I would touz and tumble: Who are these?

Enter two Citizens. 1. Cit. Save you Sir.

Cap. It may be so.

2. Cit. Pray Sir take no offense, we have been enquiring
About the Court for two Gentlemen.

Cap. And cannot your four eyes see two Gentlemen
In The Court?

1. Cit. Excuse us Sir, we have seen many, you
May guess we have relation to the City Sir,
And would be glad to meet two of our old acquaintances,
A brace of our Tribe,
We hear, translated first out of the City,
To be Sons of the Sword, are since turned Courtiers.
Pray do you know 'em?

Enter Lieutenant and Violinda. Cap. Yes children of the Gown, but their
employment
Woe not give 'em leave to attend such vulgar conference,
And here comes one of the Moon-calves, does he loo^
Like a Haberdasher, that is one of the Maids of Honor
The Weisel loves a Hens-Nest, and I have settled
This persuasion, That no woman can hold out,
Now he is sworn a servant extraordinary.

1. Cit. Sir do you know us?

Lieut. No.

2. Cit. We were your neighbors, and of the same trade

Cap. They Will make him sweat; how the Rogue glotes upon 'em

1. Cit. We were of your acquaintance, when you sold Garters.

Lieut. Go hang your selves.

2. Cit. And Statute-lace.

Viol. What are these?

Lieut. Poor men that had some losses late by fire,
And would become my Clients to procure
Some Letters Patents to beg by; alas, they are half distracted.

1. Cit. He Is proud -- I have a parcel of Periwigs
Please you, for old acquaintance, put 'em off for me,
Among some friends of yours at Court, whose skulls
Are but thinly furnished; the hair is of a
Gentlewomans spinning.

Cap. I could love this Citizen, and ow him any money
For his confident abusing him.
Exit Violinda. He has bribed her absence with some Ring or Bracelet,
Least she should taste the discovery now.

1. Cit. Methinks you need not be so proud.

Lieut. I would have you to know that I am an extraordinary --

Cap. Proud Coxcomb.

Lieut. Servant to the Queen. What I was,
I am willing to forget;
What you are, is apparent, I defy the
Dunghill I came from, and it is scandalum
Magnatum to be so saucy.

Exit. 1. Cit. I will not leave your worship so.

Exit. Cap. What will this Rascal do with himself?
Here comes the other Fool to make up the Gemini.

Enter Ancient with two Petitions. Ant. Hum, I will not know him -- Let me see
--
The humble Petition of --

2. Cit. Save you Matter --

Ant. Prithee fellow do not trouble me --
Humbly praying -- The Queen shall sign it.
Let me see this other --

Cap. Who the devil will bring him a Petition,
This Whelp has discovered him, and now would
Pretend himself most busily employed
About Petitions to the Queen.

Ant. Hum, shall daily pray for -- Hum.

Cap. More wit and money a your side; for your
Extraordinary place will not hold out.

2. Cit. Sir I have a suit to you.

Ant. Is it Embroidered Satin Sir, or Scarlet?
Yet if your business do hold weight and consequence,
may deserve to wear your thankfulness
In Tissue or cloth of Bodkin; Ermines are for Princes.

2. Cit. Alas my Suite is not worth your wearing.

Ant. Good faith Sir you must excuse me, at this time
My attendance is expected at the Counsel, come
To my Chamber by five a clock in the morning
Four days hence, and you shall be sure to find
Me --

Cap. A sleep.

2. Cit. But do you not know me?

Ant. Hum. Yes I have seen your phisnomy, were you
Never in a conspicuous p^ace, called the Pillorie.

2. Cit. How, the Pillory?

Cap. A skirmish, and it be thy will.

2. Cit. If it were not in the Court Garden,
(...) would beat out thy brains.

Ant. Take heed, for I am an extraordinary -- Sir

2. Cit. Ratcatcher.

Cap. You may beat out his brains here as securely
As if you met him in the market; Marry if you do
Not kill him outright, it is but the loss
Of your hand.

2. Cit. I would it were but the loss of my left hand
To beat one of thy eyes out -- Are you an Ancient?

Ant. Thank you for that, so I might deserve
To be beaten. I am an extraordinary Sir.

Cap. And deserves to be beaten accordingly.
You may kick him without danger.

2. Cit. May I?

Enter 1. Citizen kicking the Lieutenant. Cap. Look, your friend will show you
a president
He is acquainted with the Court latitude.

1. Cit. This is no striking.

Lieut. I know it is not.

Cap. They are subtle knaves, and know the Law*

Lieut. A pox upon 'em, I feel it.

Ant. At their peril say I, these poor things
Do not believe that we are extraordinary men,
I shall know you another time, I shall.

Cap. If you had known him now it had been better
For your hanches. Well, I have not done with
These whelps yet, till they are undone.
I shall never be sufficiently revenged for their affron^
At Court. The Prince commanded me to
Expect his return here, I Will not leave
Enter Rosania. The Garden. Who Is this?

Rosa. Is perjury no sin? or can Heaven be
So busy or a sleep? Such crimes of men
Pass with impunity? Let this wake your anger:
This; Ferdinand is married, all his vows
Scattered in the air, dispersed like witherd leaves,
And hurried on the wings of some rude Wind,
Whose pride was to deflour the Spring; Oh Ferdinand,
Could thou, whilst yet thy breath was warm with love,
With love of me, call back thy faith, and tear
Thy Heart from mine to plant it in her Bosom?

Capt. How Is this?

Rosa. What though she be a Queen? could any thirst
Of present title flatter thy Soul from me?
I that left all for thee, and would have called
Death for thy cause a triumph, now must live
The scorn of my own thoughts, despised by thee.

Capt. Here Is a new business; this obscures me quaintly.

Enter Leandro. Lean. The King commands you not to leave the Garden.
He espied you from the Gallerie Window, and
Would have you here attend him.

Rosa. Sir, may I
Without offense, ask if the King be merry?

Leand. We are scarce yet acquainted with his nature,
But we observe no Jubilie in his eyes,
Nor is the Queen so pleasant as our hopes
Did promise after Marriage.

Rosa. Pray excuse this boldness.

Leand. You Will expect his pleasure here?

Exit. Rosa. It Is my ambition once more to see,
And speak with him, and if his language break not
Enter Queen, Leandro. My Heart, I Will take my leave -- the Queen.

Leand. He is a Servant to whom the King
Was pleased to show affection, when he had
No expectation of your Royal favor.

Que. I do remember, I observed him once
Use more than common passion to this servant,
And if we may build any confidence
Upon a fair aspect, he may deserve it.
Say we would speak with him; my Heart's oppressed
With melancholy, something tells my spirit
I am too tame; have I advanced a thing
Without a name to perch on the same Cloud
With me, and for his sake slighted a Prince,
My Honor, and his Faith, transported with
My folly and his charms of tongue and person?
And dares he pay me with neglect and coldness?
Oh my vexed soul! but he shall find I have
A sense of my dishonor; and yet open
Ways become trivial and poor revengers,
I will do something that shall sting him to
Repentance; my Lord you now may leave us.
Ex. Leandro. Sir of what Country are you?

Rosa. Of Valentia.

Que. Your name?

Rosa. ^iberio.
My Parents not ignoble, yet too hasty
In The apprehension of Prince Ferdinand;
His Fortune (if I may yet call him so)
Gave me to be his page, I must confess
My diligence thrived so well since I came to him,
That he did value me above his servant.

Que. Yet I Have not seen you wait since we were married.

Rosa. It was no want of duty Madam, I
Had late some wrestling with a Fever, that
Compeld me to my Chamber, and disabled me
For fit attendance.

Que. Why do weep?

Rosa. I Madam?

Que. I see the tears.

Rosa. They are not sorrow then to see my Master
Possessed of so much happiness in your love,
And I am confident, his soul so full
Of Honor and regard to your great virtues
Will seal him worth your gracious favors Madam,
And the worlds Envy.

Que. I Will not blame him now
For loving thee; and so much has thy faith
And innocence prevailed, thou shall translate
Thy service, and be mine, he shall consent.

Ros. I am to both most humble.

Que. Prithee tell me,
Making so much of thee, he does impart
Sometimes the secrets of his bosom to thee.
Tell me what fault he has, for thou know all.

Rosa. Alas Madam I know none,
Or if I did, it ill became the trust
And duty of a servant to reveal 'em

Que. Thou were his bedfellow?

Ros. Gracious Madam --

Que. Does he not wanton in the night, and talk
Of Mistresses.

Ros. By truth not to me Madam.

Que. Dissemble not
know he has a Mistress.

Rosa. If love were ever so unkind to him --

Que. Unkind? why Is It a sin to love? I shall
Suspect thy Youth has not been free, thy looks
Betray some seeds of Love.

Rosa. By all that is good
never was in love but with my Master.

Capt. Good.

Que. He is not worth it.

Rosa. Madam.

Que. Be wise, and govern well thy hopes. I Will help
^hee to a Mistress; thou have no Mistress yet?

Rosa. But you self Madam.

Que. It shall be no other.
^hy Master is ungrateful.

Ros. Goodness aid him.

Que. And wisdom thee, thou art a pretty youth,
I will reward thee better, if thou can
Be faithful and obey.

Rosa. In all things Madam
That shall become your creature.

Que. It Is not safe
To play with a Queens favors, you shall wait
Near us; forget thy Master, and be happy.

Exit. Ros. What clue can guide me in this Labyrinth?
I would when I had lost Ferdinands Heart
I had lost my understanding. She returns.

Enter Queen. Que. The King is coming this way; now be free,
Thou shall have reason afterward to bless
Thy fate, this cannot chose but vex him.

The Queen is pleasant with Ros. Enter Ferdinand. Fer. The Queen so pleasant?
she has lost her sullenness,
Plays with his Hair, and smiles.

Ros. Madam, the King
Observes us.

Ferd. Strokes his cheek too, she does want
A Ganimede; my poor Rosania
Art thou the path she walks on to revenge,
All is not well within her Heart but mine
Sinks with the heavy pressure -- she is gone.
Exit Queen The Queen does grace you much Tiberio,
Those favors are not common.

Rosa. She is pleased
For your sake Sir to cast some smile upon me;
I know 'twas your request she should be kind,
To keep my Heart a live.

Ferd. Thou Art not discovered.

Ros. Did not you discourse
My story to her?

Ferd. I?

Ros. Take heed, yet this
Will add but a thin Feather to the scale
Of my misfortune, she knows all, and in
The pity of my sufferings says you are
Not worth my love, and calls you most ungrateful

Ferd. We are both lost, till now there was some hope
How to repair thy sorrow.

Rosa. Do not mock me;
It Is a worse tyranny than to kill, to laugh
At what you have made wretched, it is as possible
To call past ages back.

Ferd. Take heed Rosania,
And be not Judge of what thou know not, dearest.

Rosa. I know too much.

Ferd. That I am Married.

Rosa. There Is no truth in Man.

Ferd. You are too rash; for there is truth in me,
In Ferdinand, though in thy thoughts held black
And staind prodigiously with breach of faith,
I have not broke my vow, do not compel me
By thy unbelief to do a Sin I hate
As much as I love thee.

Rosa. Have you a Soul?

Ferd. Yes, and thy Eye shall read it, be but calm,
That Soul, thou once did love, white with his first
Simplicity and faith; I wo'not urge
In my excuse the beauty of the Queen
Enough to melt a Scythian into love,
But call to mind my dear Rosania,
And do but put upon thee Ferdinand
So late forgotten by his Stars, a prisoner,
Slav'd like a villain at the bar, expecting
At every breath his sentence, nay admit
Rosania, the best part of his Soul
Stood like a weeping fountain to take leave
Of what she never must salute again:
In this extreme, to preserve Ferdinand
And save Rosania, would thou scorn the breath
Of mercy, that did Court thee from the Lips
Of a great Queen? could thou love Rosania,
If thou were Ferdinand to lose thy self?
Whom she would follow in a stream of tears,
And when she had made an Island of thy tomb,
Striving to swim to thee, she could not choose,
But drown her self in her own waves. I prithee
Take reason to thee, and when thou have considered --

Rosa. Persuade me I am not Rosania,
And I will say it is virtue, and that yet
Your heart may grow with mine; is not the Queen
Possessed of that which should have been my title,
A Wife to Ferdinand?

Ferd. It Is confessed the world
Does think it so, I did consent to ceremony.

Ros. Call you enjoying of the Queen but ceremony?

Ferd. Pause there, and if thou have but so much charity
To think I dare not blaspheme Heaven, I Will call
That, and the Angels boldly to my witness,
The Queen's to me a stranger yet.

Ros. A miracle.

Ferd. Retain but love, as thou preserv'st thy sweetness,
And that will teach thee to believe that Ferdinand,
How ere saluted King is still thy subject,
And though her Husband, in my faith to thee
The Marriage Bed has still our Virgin sheets;
A Brother might embrace a Sister, with
The heat I brought; that this is truth, the power
And name I have, shall only serve to make
Our flight secure into another Kingdom,
And when I part with these new shining glories,
Thy faith will be confirmed, and thou acknowledge
I ventured much to keep my Heart thy servant.

Ros. I know not what to say; is not the Queen
Displeased?

Ferd. She is, but cunningly disguiseth
Her passion to the World; but I forgot
What must enlarge my fears of her revenge
If thou be known Rosania.

Ros. Lose that fear,
I am still safe, and now I see the cause
Makes her repent her favors, and thy greatness;
Forgive me Ferdinand, and yet I know not,
All is not well, there is poison in this Balsom
Prepared for thee.

Ferd. From whom?

Ros. Rosania.

Ferd. When she shall but consent to have me dye,
She shall not trouble poison to send off
My despised life, my soul in just obedience
To her command will take a cheerful flight
In hope to serve her in the other World.

Ros. You shall know more hereafter, and let this
Secure your thoughts, she yet believes me what
This shape presents, but without wise prevention,
I fear I shall not live too long concealed;
I dare not say her honor is a bleeding,
But a Queen thus distasted may not find
That Ice within her blood; we are interrupted.

Enter Rodriguez. Rodri. Your pardon Sir; it is the Queens pleasure
This Gentleman attend her in the Gallery.

Ferd. He shall wait her commands --
Ex. Rodri. I know not what to counsel, it is not safe
Sweet to neglect her, yet my fears of some
Ill fate, are round about me like a mist,
And dark my understanding; let a kiss
And silence teach our souls some new discourse.

Capt. Why here is a volume of Intelligence
I Will stay no longer to expect the Prince,
But seek him out immediately; disguises?
King by your leave, I shall untruss your Mistress.

Ex Rosa. I know not what I feel nor what to fear,
If love ever meant a Tragedy; it is here.

Ford. If we never meet again, one more salute
Shall fortify our lives by joining breath,
Nor shall our last hard fate deny us this,
To change our faithful Souls at our last kiss.

Exeunt severally. ACT. IV.
Enter Rodriguez, Leandro, Ernesto. Ernest. I Know not what to think on it, but
if I
Have any sense, there is some new state madness
Crept into Court.

Rodri. Are we not all a sleep,
And these fine dreams perplex us?

Leand. No it is waking.

Rod. Show me the tenth part of a reason why
The Queen did Marry him.

Lea. 'Twas destiny.

Ernest. Why since should he be melancholy?

Rod. Or she so humorus?

Ernest. Not lie together? pray Heaven the Gentleman
Be found with no defective title in him.

Leand. Observe her favors to that Boy, he was
His servant, now her minion. I like not
These violent wheels; the whole frame may be soon
Endangered, if these passions be not cured.

Rod. New lodgings for him, near her own, and he
Given free access to the Bedchamber.

Leand. It Is naught
Or will be so, I pity the good King;
Though she have raised him to the highest glory
Her power extended too, yet to make this height
His precipice, and throw him into scorn,
Nay poison the best hopes he had of honor,
And love from her, and in his sight to Court
A Boy, his servant? It would vex the best
Of all our tempers, if we felt the sting on it.

Enter Rosania and Violinda (passing over the Stage.) Er. He Is here, that Lady
is the Queens Cabinet.

Lean. They are merry about the Mouth.

Er. Another summons?
It Is possible the Queen may Marry him too.

Lean. There is some mystery we cannot reach.
If we do well remember, there is a Law
Made by her self, as soon as she was Queen,
To keep Wifes Pulses temperat, and correct
The insolent Blood of Women that had Husbands.

Er. And Men were not exempted.

Leand. I say no more.
But Heaven maintain the Law, and the Lawmakers,
And conjure down that Devil,
It Is the King and the smooth Boy, lets leave 'em.

Exeunt Lords. Enter Ferdinand, and Rosania. Ferd. Was this the Ladies Message?
does the Queen
Take thee into such favor?

Rosa. I tell truth,
And though it sound but ill on the Queens part,
Because she thinks me what I seem my Lord,
You need not to wear one Cloud upon your Face
When you remember who I am, my fears
Are thick upon my Heart, how to secure
This shadow any longer.

Ferd. That afflicts
Me most Rosania, for it pleases me
To hear she can affect thee; but what way
To keep her expectation high, and thee
(My dearest) safe? her passions may be violent.

Rosa. They are already Sir, if I mistake not;
I wish to Heaven that you were reconciled
To do the office of a Husband to her,
That peace would keep her Bosom clear, and I
Should live to all the World except your self
A stranger still.

Ferd. What language speaks Rosania?
There Is death in every syllable; should I
Obey what thou desir'st, and do the office
Of a Husband, ha?

Rosa. I Will wait upon you still,
And hope you will vouchsafe me now and then
A harmless smile; her beauty will deserve
Your whole heart, and there is something in the memory
Of what she has advanced you to, will help
To make you kind.

Ferd. Should I enjoy the Queen?
Because the misery of my fate compeld
A ceremonious sin? shall I betray
The essence of my faith, and leave a curse,
When thou art known, upon my name for ever?
If thou have taken new resolves against me,
Punish my heart some other way; had she
More ornament than ever met in woman,
Mistress of more perfection than Poets
Invented for the Queen of love, to this
Were the proud Empire of the World her own,
And she would make me Lord of her, and these,
It would not buy me to the pleasure of
One Nights embrace, my body shall not carry
My soul so far astray; the Man condemnd
To live in a perpetual Snow, has not
A purer Frost within his blood.

Rosa. This but
Ingenders a new grief although it bind
Rosanias Heart there is yet one way left
And that ere I pronounce you must forgive;
There is a trembling in my tongue and I
Already feel such Winter in my breath,
My timorous Lips do wither.

Ferd. Do not fright
My Soul too much there is something threatens me
So like a loss of these, that I am left
A piece of shaking Earth, death cannot look
To make me tremble so; can thou forsake me?

Ros. Not in my Heart but give my body leave
To seek some other place my Lord to dwell in.
When I am gone into some wilderness,
You will find ease at Heart, and love the Queen,
And perfect all; I Will pray you may live happy.
And hold Intelligence with some gentle Winds
That shall convey my wishes and return
What joys do follow you; the purling Rivers
I Will teach your name and they which g^ide this way
Shall bring thee something Ferdinand of mine;
My tears I know will not be lost, which I
Will send thee daily by the courteous stream,
Clear pledges of my faith; consent my Lord
I may depart and you shall choose your way,
To every blessing here.

Ferd. Not till we meet
With one embrace, and take our flight together;
And I have thought a way to perfect it,
Observe my sweet Rosania, the Queen
Thou say affects thee, cherish it, with all
The softness of her creature; if she allow,
Kiss her, and promise what young lovers do,
Examine not, but by thy love to me
Be free in amorous language, if she have
Heat to a private meeting in her Chamber,
Obey, this shall secure our loves ambition.
Enquire not, but resolve, and let me know
The time.

Ros. You will attempt no violence
Upon the Queen?

Ferd. By this --
Kisses her.
Ros. What if she have commanded me
This Night?

Ferd. To meet?

Ros. In het Bedchamber.

Ferd. Ha! obey it.

Ros. At a late hour.

Ferd. It shall beget our comfort
If thou consent.

Rosa. But shall I not expose
My self to danger, if her love pursue
Immodest ends, since you advise I should
Apply my self to her desires?

Ferd. If she
Take too much flame, by some soft art delay her,
Till I come to close all; keep still thy person
Secret, the least discovery will destroy
Us both; the Evening with much have prepares
Thy visit and our happiness.

Rosa. I Will obey,
But be you sure to come.

Ferd. Lose thou no time
Now to indear thee to her, let us part
Love will find balm to cure the wounded Heart.

Exeunt severally A Table, and Lights, set out, then Enter Queen, and Violinda.
Que. Was he not cheerful when he promised thee?

Viol. He was, and he was not.

Que. I have a strange apprehension, and this does feed it.

Viol. I told him 'twas an honor worth his joyful
entertainment.

Que. If it should prove succesfull, my revenge
Were perfect, I Am resolute to pursue --

Viol. It makes well
For your contrivement that the King and you do
Lodge at distance -- stay, I hear a tread.

Que. I hope it is he.

Enter Leonario. Viol. Prince Leonario Madam.

Que. What comes he for?

Leon. Although I have small expectation
For my own sake, that you can pardon Madain
This bold access, and at so dark an hour,
Yet when you have heard my business, You will know
Your self so much concerned, I Will not despair
To find your mercy.

Que. You prepare me for
Something of consequence.

Leon. Please you to dismiss
Your Lady, I have something to deliver
Wo'not become her knowledge.

Que. Leave us -- now,
Ex. Violinda. Our conference is free, your Graces pleasure?
It must be matter of much essence, that
Could not expect till morning, but you are welcome.

Leon. This time and darkness Madam best becomes him,
Who for your sake blushes to see the Day,
But I came not to chide my wrongs have learned
A modest silence, my approach is not
To name a suffering of mine but to
Discover what already is prepared
Against your peace and honor.

Que. Is it treason?

Leon. It is, but threatens not your life, you may
Live many years upon the wound.

Que. You fright me.

Leon. Lose not the beauty of your cheek so soon,
Hide not beneath that cold and killing Snow,
One Rosy blush, and yet that pale would show
Like Innocence which you have lost; oh Madam
Had you not made a forfet of your truth
To me no storm could shake you but your soul
That made no change could know no fear; I come
To tell you what just providence has done
In my revenge, your breach of vow is punished
With loss of faith in him to whom you gave
The Heart you promised me, the King, whose pride
You built on my dishonor, is as false,
As you were.

Que. This is passion but be
Not yet too rash in censuring him. Whom I
Have placed so near, I must defend, nor will
He need my strength, to make their blood account
That dare traduce his honor; he has a Heart --

Leon. A false one. I was born without a fear,
And dare upon his bosom (wear he worth
The manly contestation,) write him perjured.

Que. I would this were not envy; but admit
He be thus guilty, it is a fault in him.

Leon. No Madam, it is yours; that sin that poysond
The expectation of my joys in you,
Has made him false, and will excuse his story,
When you are named that broke your faith to me;
I can have no hope now to be repaired,
But if it be worth memory to know
The triumph waits on Innocence, the World
Shall say the Queen deserved to meet a scorn
Deep as her wrongs to me.

Que. It cannot be.

Leon. Think so, and help to make the revenge greater,
Till the winds catch the black report and multiply
The shame, by scattering it about the Kingdom,
Sit still, and careless of your fame, encourage
His private lust, his Mistress now in Court.

Que. A Mistress in the Court?

Leon. Yes Madam, in the Court.
And may one day think any second place
Too narrow to contain her greatness, she --

Que. As you are a Prince no more; I have done ill,
And find the penance here It does agree
With his neglects, and adds new flame to my
Young jealousy; I feel a tempest rising;
By all your goodness leave me Sir; I cannot
Now right you more than mourn, and give belief to you.
No more I pray you, by all your love to honor.

Leon. I have done,
And take my leave, my everlasting leave,
It Is time; how like the day, that flatterd us
With cheerful light, are my desires fled hence,
And left me here a prodigy of darkness,
A walking Hearse, hung round about with night,
Whose wings must one day cover all? farewell.
If any Star look forth, it is to call
Me hence, and light me to another World.
Our Lips are never like to meet again.
Kisses Exit. Farewell, if I but stay, I shall forgive her.

Que. A Mistress in the Court? something is busy
About my Heart.

Enter Violinda. Viol. The Prince is gone.

Que. No matter.
Affronted thus? but I forgot to ask
Her name that rivals me; how this passion
Befools our understanding, and prevents
The knowledge, and the cure of what afflicts us!
The Morning will assure all; but shall this
Strike me to ashes? I may find a way
To my revenge.

Enter Violinda. Viol. Tiberio is come Madam.

Que. Wait carefully.

Viol. I know my duty.

Enter Rosania: (Kneels and Kisses her Hand.) Que. Rise,
This meeting was not meant for ceremony,
There Is something in this presence will deserve
We should put off all state, and speak like friends.
You must be covered too. I Will have it so.
We are private now.

Rosa. These graces will
Undo a youth, whose birth, and careless Stars
Ordained him to be humble, and with duty
Wait on your meanest servant.

Que. Thou shall soon have cause
To think thy Stars are careful of thee, if
Thou can be wise.

Rosa. Alas! my years are few.

Que. Thy knowledge is not wanting to distinguish
Whose favors Court thee, and apply thy self
To understand, and thank the kind bestower;
It Is in my power to make thee great.

Rosa. You may
Advance this worthless walking shadow Madam,
And when you like the free and bounteous Sun
Have blessed me with your rays, it is but like
His glorious warmth bestowed upon a piece
Of rude and barren Earth, which takes not from
The luster of your Beams, but shows more clearly,
By your own light, what poverty you shined on.

Quee. This modesty becomes you not, look in
My eye, and read what is there.

Rosa. Some thing like anger,
Enough to strike me dead.

Quee. What now?

Rosa. A smile,
And such attending sweetness --

Quee. Thus it shall
Invite thee still to gaze, and love, Tiberio,
No frown shall point on thee; I find my eyes
Were meant for thee, and all they graced before,
But objects of mistake. Here, here, O turn
Thy lovely face away, left I be seen
To blush, my heart has chose to place my love
And the reward; this would become thy tongue
A great deal better, Come sit down Tiberio.
What still an Infants understanding? Think
I am the man, and learn a little better,
What beauty dwells upon this hand, What softness,
How like the Snow, or Innocence it shows,
yet fires my heart with every gentle touch.

Rosa. Dear Madam; would the King would come.

Que. This is a happiness that Kings should sue for,
And yet there are poor comforts in these Kisses;
Let hands preserve Society with hands,
And with there change of whiteness, and of Balm,
Make wealthy one another: But let what
Was meant for kisses meet, and find out pleasure
By warm exchange of souls from our soft lips. Kisses.
Madam, how like you this?

Rosa. Madam.

Que. I suppose you a Lady all this while,
And I the man, our lips must meet again,
Will this instruct thee nothing?

Ros. Gracious Madam.

Que. And yet this recreation comes short,
Dear Lady, of what love might well allow us.
Admit you are a Queen, you are not bound
To th^n your Royal Blood with frost, but as
Your power, your pleasure should exceed; nay graut
You have a man (a man said I) that can
Keep love alive, and warm a yielding bosom,
Yet where from the invitement of your eye,
And amorous choice, I am become your servant,
You may be a little kinder.

Rosa. Madam, I know not
How with the safety of my self, my duty,
And your own name and power, to understand you,
(Yet this to some would need but little Comment)
Can you place such a value on a thing
That not deserves to breath your name? Or should
I hope these charms of Language you have spread
To catch my heart which has no wings, but where
It can believe; For you trauscend so much
In wonder of your love, a willing Faith
Not easily can reach it. But dear Madam,
I know all this is but to try my duty,
And you have pleased to choose me forth, to make
These silent hours more grateful, by the mirth
My weak replies may raise you,

Que. Miracle!
I but imagined thee a woman, now
I shall believe thee one indeed; this coldness
Becomes no masculine habit. Come, we'll in,
And change our Sexes; Thou shall wear my clothes,
And I will put on these, help on with thine,
And I will dress thee handsomely, and then
We'll act again.

Ros. Not for the world dear Madam, Not yet come?

Que. The world? This confirms my jealousy.
I Will search you to the soul, Adonis come,
I Will call thee so, and court thee with more charm
Than Venus did, when in the Idalian Groves
To buy a kiss, she offered the proud Boy
Her flaming Chariot, and her Doves of Snow.
It Is in thy power to make thy fate and heart
More happy by consent to meet with mine;
Tempt not the anger of a Queen despised,
Whose breath can like a whirlwind snatch thee up,
And drop thee in a Wilderness, where with sorrow
For thy neglect, thou by degrees may sigh
Thy self into a Mist, which no Sunbeam
Shall pity or take up into a Cloud.
But love me, and compose thy heart to mine,
We Will live with more delight, than fancy can
Enrich Elysium with. The soft hours shall stay
Till we allow 'em Wings, and while we kiss
And on each others Lips breath Incense thus,
We Will have ten thousand Cupids for our guard,
Whose Bows shall awe the destinies, and we write
The King and Queen of Fate.

Enter Ferdinand, Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Captain, Guard. Ferd. Will this
deserve your faith?

Leand. We must believe.

Enter Violinda. Viol. We are undone, the King.

Que. False Keys?

Rosa. 'Twas time to come.

Ferd. Had I not cause, my Lords, to appear sad,
When I suspected this so great affront?
My melancholy all this while was but
A mourning for this shame: Look but my Lords
Into your selves, and make this suffering yours.

Viol. Madam be raised again, I have an art
To fetch you off with honor, and the youth too.
I will persuade him there can be no cure
In this extreme. but to pretend himself
A woman; I will dress him in your Gown
Before they can be ware on it; they all know
This way he cannot fly, mean time put on
A confidence, and ^et them know you are
The Queen, not to be shaken with their power;
This will gain time.

Que. Prosper in this.

Viol. I will
Redeem my fault, or never sleep again.

Exit with Rosania. Ferd. She blushes not.
Were she nor Queen, what names could we bestow
Upon this want of modesty?

Leand. It Is plain.
We came in time.

Ferd. Most happily to prevent
Some further act of shame; can she look on us
Without a blush?

Que. I see no such attraction
In your state faces, that I should desire
Much to look on 'em. Who made you King I pray?

Ferd. Your power I dare not call it love, presuming
That I was fit to be your property,
Without a soul to see, or have a sense
Of these dishonors; This rank heat of blood,
Madam, what penitence can make this clear?
Admit your thoughts were wanton, and your flame,
Too great to be suppressed, could you find none
For your adulterate embrace, but one
That was my servant? my own hound devour me?
As if your lust had not enough of shame
And mischief to me, but your malice must
Appear in it too; with what security
Can I expect to live, when she begins
So soon to poison me?

Leand. We heard her say
They two would write themselves the King and Queen,

Rod. So we did all.

Ferd. You may consider these.

Leand. It Is impious
Madam with what grief do we
Remember now that Law you made
After your Corronation to preserve
The name of your sex chaste which gave our Hearts
Hope of your blessed progress; you made it death
To stain the Marriage Bed; where shall we expect
The life of that good act, when you begin
A breach of chastity by so black example?
If the King urge an Execution
Of what our vote confirmed by yours imposed
Upon the kingdom, you should prove your self
More innocent or give us cause to mourn
This fall from virtue

Er. Madam we grieve for you.

Que So, so, have your great wisdoms said all yet?
I laugh at you (poor things) and am so far
From trembling at your thunder, that I pity you;
And first I Will let you know you selves, you are
I take it all my subjects, I will not
Exempt you Sir, since Marriage takes not off
My Interest, and Essence here all strength
Flowing from me, and your Derivative shine
Extinct, when I frown you to darkness; by
What power dare you take an account of me?
That am above your Laws, which must obey
Me, as their Soul, and Dye when I forsake 'em?
But I will reason coolely, and admit
They live in force; against whom? are you so shallow,
To think we that created, and decreed 'em
For vulgar reformation, must be squard
And Levelled by 'em, as we meant to lose
Our Character and distinction, and stoop
Toth' common file of subjects? this were policy!
I speak not this with sense of any guilt,
So to decline it, for I here defy you,
And bring an Innocence shall strike a blush
Upon your Souls; that sinned in my suspicion.

Aside. Ferd. Where is the Boy? Ernesto take him to
Your custody, and bid him not despair,
I have contrived the rest.

Enter Rosania (like a Woman) and Violinda. Er. He Is here.

Viol. Take it upon you, if it come to searching
We Will find a Jurie.

Capt. You are deceived my Lord, with your good pardon, He is not here.

Er. Who is not here?

Capt. The he you do expect;
And your Officious Ladyship might well
Have spared your pains, to put on all this trim.

Ferd. What means the fellow?

Capt. It Is no news to your Sir.
I could have told the Queen before and you
My honorable Lords, this was no Boy,
Though now he would but seem of the the other sex,
I knew her name.

Ros. My name?

Capt. Are not you called Rosania?

Ferd. Ha! betrayed?

Capt. Yes indeed is she, you were present Sir
In The Garden when this fine Hermophrodite
Declared what sex was hid behind the Breeches,
And this I certified the Prince before.

Que. Now it is clear.

Capt. There are some tokens too I can remember,
As kisses, and excuse for marrying with
The Queen, a Virgin still, etc.

Omnes. A Woman?

Viol. But are you a Woman indeed?

Capt. And now my Lords, if you have Hearts that are
Honest and daring come about again,
For this is but a cunning piece of treason,
Against your Faith, and the Queens honor.

Ferd. We are both lost Rosania.

Capt. It Is truth, or take my Head off.

Que. You do believe this transformation,
And know this Lady, my good Lord, I did
Suspect before the cause of your neglects,
And meeting with some dark Intelligence
From the Prince, to perfect this discovery,
Did in my Chamber woo with aptest forms
Of Love, to try how long the sex would be
Concealed; you heard a part, and see us kiss,
And came in time with these wise Noblemen
To prevent further acts of shame.

Rodri. Is It possible?

Rosa. It was an ill contrivement to make me
Proof of the Queens dishonor.

Er. An apparent Plot
Against the life and honor of the Queen,
Since he would urge that Law maliciously
Against her, knowing this to be a Woman,
And his close strumpet.

Rodri. The same Law must be
Their trial.

Leand. What a change is here already?

Que. You must not Lords deny me Justice.

Rodri. It Is insufferable
Against a common person.

Er. Let his first
Treason, if you think good Madam, be urged
In accusation.

Leand. So, so.

Que. You did us service Captain.

Capt. I am bound to it, here is more news for the Prince.

Que. Use your pleasures.

Exit. Rod. What need we circumstance, let him dye to morrow.

Que. Death will be mercy to so much ingratitude,
Command them both to several custodies.
The morning shall behold 'em dead --

Ros. Now more lost then ever.

Exeunt. Manent. Ferd: Ros. and Guard. Ferd. Pray lets take
Short leave of one another, it is in vain
To reason against providence, or say
We might have lived; though I must dye, and after
Be hid in my obscurest name, and shade,
I must declare whose blood they will profane
In bleeding thee; farewell, our last, last kiss.
My heart would fain come to thee, I will make it
My humble suit with my last breath it may
Be quickly sent thee.

Rosa. We shall both meet, when
This dust falls off, and our souls kiss again.

Excunt. ACT. V.
Enter Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Servants with Lights. Er. MY Lord you tell
us wonders, it is high time
To open such a mystery.

Rodri. This change
Will exceed all, and so convincing are
The circumstances of this great discovery
They do command our faith.

Er. And you shall steer us.

Leand. Then let us lose no time; oh my good Lords,
Did you but feel the torment of my bosom,
Till I discharge the duty, which so long
Has slept in his concealment, you would call
For wings to fly, and think all motion tedious;
For Heavens sake lets make have, that we prevent
The morning, which will rise upon this knowledge
With cheerful beams, and put on all his glory.

Er. Most gladly we attend.

Exeunt. A Table and Taper set out. Enter Ferdinand (with a book in his Hand.)
Ferd. I have no Heart to think of any thing
But my Rosania, all devotion,
When I remember her, flies off, and leaves
My soul no contemplation but her safety;
They were too cruel to divide us, night
It self looks now more black by this dim taper;
Rosania's eyes would brighten all, but they
Weighed down with sleep, and sorrow, are perhaps
At rest, a thousand Angels watch about 'em;
And let some one whose office is to wait
On harmless love, present me to her dreams;
O let her hear me often call upon her,
As I am led to death, and when the stroke
Divides me from my self, and from the World,
My Heart shall pay her tribute, and my blood
Do miracles, when every Crimson drop
My Body bleeds, shall not in vain be wept,
But fall into some Letter of her name,
To keep alive our story.
Enter two Servants (with Torches) Leandro, Ernesto, Rodriguez. What lights are
these?
This place sure is not wont to be thus visited.
They are spirits, ha! yet if I have a memory
Those Faces were but late familiar to me.
They Kneel. What mockery is this? if you be substances
Of things I know, go tell the Tyrant Queen
She might allow me death without this scorn,
This jeering Antimasque.

Omnes. Long live the King.

Ferd. What King?

Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King of Murcia.

Ferd. A dream, a golden dream. What fancies wait
Upon our sleep? and yet I wake, they are
Apparitions, I Will shut my eyes, and lose 'em.
They wo'not vanish Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto?

Omnes. All your subjects.

Leand. Collect your scatterd thoughts my Lord, and be
Assured, we now pay real duties to you,
You are our King, and must be.

Ferd. Who says so?

Leand. I, whose cold fear, and frailty,
When fate of Wat had made you Prisoner,
Concealed the truth, and Justice of your title,
'Twas I that saved you from your Uncles sury
And sent you to Valentia, while I cozened
The kingdom with your death, till time might ripen
Your challenge to the scepter; if you can
Find mercy to a treason, great as this,
I Will live, and study how to merit pardon.

Ferd. Rise, rise all,
And if you be Leandro, pray come nearer.

Rod. Pray Heaven this unexpected happiness
Meet with no ecstasy, all senses are
Not armed for such extremes of Joy.

Er. The Queen,
When she finds this, will fall into a Fever,
By instinct her Head must ache this very minute.

Rod. And shake too, for the Crown is tottering.

Ferd. Pardon? thou should divide the kingdom with me.
But do all these believe it, will you not,
When I make second claim, deny me again?
Call me Impostor?

Leand. Sir forgive that first,
And I Will not ask Heaven pardon for my next
Denial, let death threaten all his stings;
And I have satisfied these Lords so well,
They are confirmed in your just claim, and person.

Rod Er. We lay our lives and fortunes at your feet.

Ferd. I may command you then, fetch me Rosania;
I Will be no King without her; do not stay
To hear how much I love her 'bove the Crown,
And all the glories wait upon it, she
That was my Page, my fellow Prisoner, Rosania.
Exit Rodrig. It Is that name next to Heaven I bow too.
Good my Lord follow him, and if she be
Awake, oh drop it gently by degrees,
(The joy is mighty, she a sad weak Virgin)
That I shall live to make her Queen.
Exit Ernest Stay you, and if I play too much the wanton with
My fate, or swell with expectation,
Speak something to allay my hopes, and say
There may be crosses yet, the Queen may want
Faith or consent, or put case the people
(A dangerous torrent to oppose) like not
This Innovation, where is the King then?

Leand. Doubt not their Loves, you had their
Hearts before;
Let nothing shake you.

Enter Rosania, Ernesto, Rodriguez. Ferd. Thou Art my better Angel.
Why then if my Rosania will be Queen,
The kingdoms ours again; she comes, she comes.
Thou make too little have to be a Queen.
I am my self again, my name is found,
I shall live to, thus to embrace Rosania
Without a fear, these Lords are all thy subjects,
I am a King.

Leand. You are.

Ferd. Then what must my
Rosania be?

Ros. Happy, if this be more
Than dream, my tears and sufferings are all paid for
If this be true.

Leand. Most true.

Ros. What a strong arm
Has Heaven?

Ferd. See how the Day has made
Have to salute Rosania, and to wait
Upon thy triumph, blushes like a Maid
When she is told she is in Love, the Stars
Are gone to tell the other World, thy beauty,
Till now Eclipsed with sorrow, has thrown off
The imprisoning veil, and shines above their brightness.
^ut how shall we Leandro now contrive
^or our Court entertainment, where the Queens
^repar'd to hear our Tragedy?

Leand. Leave me
^o order your appearance; but first Sir,
We must secure this Fort.

Er. The Captain is
My creature.

Ferd. Thou shall be all our direction.
Come my Rosania, time has turned a gen
Our Glass, and his keen since this comfort brings,
^t cuts no scepters down but to make Kings.

Excunt. Enter Leonario (reading a Letter,) and Soldier. Leon. So near?

Sold. We heard before of your affront
My Lord, and were prepared.

Leon. It has outstrip'd my expectation,
These Letters say
Mendoza is their General new returned
With victory from the Moors; his fame I honor,
My knowledge never reached his person.

Sold. Sir, he brings old Soldiers with him, the Commanders
Are such, whose faith and valor in those Wars
Already tried, he durst name to the King
To be employed here in your highness cause.

Leand. We will to Horse immediately. I long
To salute the Army.

Sold. Which but wants your person
The Soul of their design; you may soon reach 'em.

Enter Captain. Leon. I will.

Capt. Your Grace.

Leon. That we had wings, away, to Horse to Horse

Exeunt Leon. Sold Capt. Speed, and you be so hot of the spur, my business
Is but breath, and your design it seems rides post.
Enter Lieutenant and Ancient. The Earth runs upon wheels; whom do I spy?
My extraordinaries, I Will have sport with them,
But first observe 'em.

Lieut. I see no profit in these offices
That we have brought.

Ant. Not extraordinary, as the name did promise

Capt. The Rogues are poor, and now repent.

Ant. We were told by the cheating Captain
That we should want Men to tell our money.

Lieut. This it is to deal with Soldades.

Ant. We should command the Ladies too, and we
Were bountiful, a small Pox take their beauties,
It Is the greater curse, I have undone
My self in giving away enameld Rings
And Bracelets.

Lieut. Well, if I trust a Captain again.

Ant. Or I.

Capt. I Am glad they are paid; I wo'not leave 'em
I feel my antipathy strong yet.

Ant. I would venture half my soul to be revenged
If I knew how.

Capt. True Rascals!

Lieut. The Ladies love him.

Ant. They all Love Men of War.

Lieu. Would his poop were a fire.

Ant. And Battles in Bed naturally.

Lieu. Well, what Ladies give him hereafter to bu^ new Feathers, may his body
compel him to bestow upon a Surgeon.


Ant. May Diseases undermine his Flesh like Gun powder,
And blow all his skin up into blisters.

Lieu. May they that look for his Nose, go about for want of a ^ridge, and let
him wear no Legs but what he buys from the Carpenter.


Ant. May his face break out, and undo him in taffata, and may the patches at
the last be so many, till his skin be invisible, and his goggle eyes look
through a Mask.


Lieu. May he live to be as much coward as we have been, and be beaten!


Ant. Abominably beaten, and may the miracle be on our side, that we may be
valiant, and be the Men to do it, oh I would have no more mercy. --


Capt. Save you Gallants, save you Courtiers.


Both. My noble Captain.


Ant. It may be he did not hear us.


Capt. Hark you, what purchase have you two made lately?


Both. Of what?


Capt. Of Lands and loggerheads, Lordships I would say,
I know you are both rich, you cannot choose,
But I will borrow no more of you, faith besatisfied
and leave off in time with the wealth you have.

Lieu. Where is it Captain?

Ant. Can you tell where we may borrow as much money upon our extraordinary
places, as will set up shop again? For this Court trade wo' not do.


Capt. How?


Lieu. No indeed Captain we have made little benefit since we came to be
extraordinaries.


Capt. Ye took not the right way then.


Ant. That may be.


Capt. Why, cannot you lie, and swear, and pawn your souls for six pence, the
Devil could not furnish ^he City with two more hopeful Borachios. You have a
Carrot-colourd Beard, and that never fails, and your worships face is a
prognostication of preferment

Is a Prognostication of preferment, where
Beside Dominicall Letters you have all the
Conjuring Characters of the Planets.
But all this is your cunning, to dissemble your estates.

Lieu. By this empty pocket, I have but one Shirt


Capt. You jest y'saith.


Ant. And by all my no money, I have but half a one left


Capt. Come, come, you took up linen lately, I heard You did.


Ant. I, smocks.


Capt. Why they are in fashion with extraordinary Courtiers.

But if you be in earnest, I can tell, where you
May furnish your selves richly.

Both. Where? where?


Capt. W'y in the Shops for ready money, but you would Save charges.


Ant. I marry Captain.


Capt. Venture to rob a hedge, it is but hanging,
And what is that to men extraordinary?
But if your wants be real, be not dejected,
I Will set you up again my self, I have been
Beholding to you two for your good words
And wishes Gentlemen.

Lieu. It pleases you to say so, I begin
To smell. --

Ant. Not to us Captain, we have been beholding to you.


Capt. And it happens, as if fortune had made you miserable

A purpose to bless you both with such a preferment, as wo'not be offered again
in a Coronation.


Lieu. On good Captain, for we are extraordinary miserable.


Capt. Then observe; you are not ignorant how things go at Court, the King is
in prison.


Ant. So.


Capt. And his wench with him that walked in Breeches; The Queen resolves they
shall both dye.


Ant. Good.


Capt. This morning too; now in regard the King is a person of quality --


Lieu. I think he be.


Capt. And the the other a Lady, as some imagine, you two may do very well to
undertake now --


Both. Any thing.


Capt. To be a couple of Hangmen: do you mark? to dispatch the Queens enemies in
what horrid way, her counsel shall think convenient, you will do service to
the State, and have extraordinary rewards; besides the honor and reputation of
your places; what say? it is my pure love to make this first offer to you.


Ant. Do we look like a couple of Hangmen?


Capt. No you have not so good a complexion; and now I think on it you shall not
live to have that preferment come, draw you that wear your Sword like a
Bum-baly, do as I bid you, and that quickly.


Ant. It wo'not come out Sir --


Cap. No. -- this shall in then --


Ant. I will put more strength to'c.


Capt. So, now, do you mark -- kill one another.


Both. Kill one another?


Capt. Yes and do it religiously, with as much alacrity as you would devour an
Orphan: and do it hansomly, that you may not be hanged when you are dead.

I Will see it done, he that is dull shall have my goad to quicken
him: --
They fight. So, good, good again, well offered -- they fight by these Hilts
Furiously, now could I forgive 'em -- so, enough.

Lieu. This is very fine sport.


Capt. Necessity has taught 'em the noble science, come. if all fail, you shall
fight challenges; there is money and broken Pates to be got that way, you can make
legs, and gape like Gudgins for benevolence, cut scurvy capers, to show your
Legs are well, when your Head bleeds; farewell; stay, you want money, I had
forgot, there is twelve pence apiece for you.


Both. How Captain? I hope not.


Capt. They are not hearty yet, they think I serve 'em with Press money again;
no, it is my pure bounne. Go, set up again, and trust Soldiers, without
impertinent asking for your debts; they I pay you.


Ant. As you have done.


Capt. I Will hearken how you behave you selves farewell. When you are rich, I Will
visit you again, and borrow money.


Lieu. Too much is too much; humh.


Ant. Now have I a great mind to fight with your Captainship.


Lieu. So have I, now my Hands in, methinks it is nothing.


Capt. You are not desperate?


Ant. We are a little better, as good be Hanged for killing of you Captain, as
live after the rate of our disgrace. I am resolved.


Capt. Two Mastives at once may worry me. I am put to it.
They fight. Must we have the other 'bout.

Ant. This is enough at once we may come to it in time.


Capt. Why now I love you, love you, as well as you do Law.


Ant. Upon good terms we love you too.


Capt. Let Us shake Hands, you shall not to your vomit again. Now you dare sight,
I Will tell you a hundred ways to get moneys, come, we will drink and divide
fortunes, Run not back into cows again.


Ant. I Will be Ancient now again.


Lieu. And I Lieutenant.


Capt. Both my own Boys.


Ant. It Is not so hard to fight I see, if a Man be but desperate, and give his
mind to it.


Lieu. Pox a Cowards; come Captain.


Capt. Let me hug ye my brace of Mirmidons, And drink a Tun of Wine to this
conversion.


Exeunt. Enter Queen, Violinda. Que. The Prince so early met upon the way
This morning say? and with a Soldier?

Vio. And in that have too, Madam, I was told
The speed of Wings was slow, their fiery Horse
Bathing in foam, yet fled as if they meant
To leave the Wind, and Clouds behind 'em.

Que. Strange!
I could have wished him with less discontent
To have left us, but my stubborn fate designed it;
Having thus snatched away himself, it will
Become us to compose, and make the best
Of our State game; I sent a Messenger
With our command, to the Governor of the Fort,
He should attend the King by the Watergate
Leads to the Garden, we do purpose conference;
If Ferdinand wisely consent to break
The Magic that so chains his Heart to that
Idol Rosania, we will be reconciled,
And Peace shall marry once again our Hearts.
Enter Courtier. Me thinks our Lords are cold in their attendance,
Where be our train of Ladies? -- nay permit 'em,
A solitude becomes this sullen Day.
And our own thoughts; methinks thou do not look
With thy own face upon me.

Vio. Not I Madam?

Que. My eyes have lost their virtue, all I look on
Have not the shape and color they presented.
What whispers that? have?

Viol. Here was none Madam.

Que. I could be jealous of the Wind methinks,
And quarrel with the postures of those very
Shapes in the Arras; fie Olivia, call home thy reason.

Court. O Madam!

Que. What horror's in that voice? I see a treason
In's looks.

Court. O Madam, I beseech your pardon.

Que. Why? art a traitor?

Court. Not I, but there are practices I fear
Against your royal person; the Court gates
Are shut, all is in confusion within,
And I could hear abroad loud acclamations
And triumph for the King, as he were new proclaimed.

Enter Captain. Que. Which way come thou?

Cap. Over the Wall Madam; the gates are shut,
I Will tell you news; young Fordinand your Husband
Is in all state attended, and proclaimed
King in his own right, he is proved to be
What he did first pretend himself, Leandro,
And all the Lords confirm't, the Governor
Has given him up the Fort, the wise City
Her Keys, and every officer on's knees
Is praying and drinking the Kings health,

Que. Away and let thy face be seen no more,
But when the fatal noise of fire, some blood,
Or burial calls thee forth.

Capt. This my reward
For bringing news the King's alive? take heed,
Do not talk treason in your own defense, -- hark

Enter (in state) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Leandro, Ferdinand, (who takes the
Throne) Attendants. Que. From what an expectation am I fallen!

Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King.

Ferd. We thank you; and will study to be worth
Your prayers and duty; Madam the Chancellor
Can clear, and bring your faith to allow the wonder,
We are no Impostor now, nor need we borrow
A beam from you to make us shine yet still
You are our Cosen, fair Olivia,
Enter Rosania and Ladies. The Husband was a title long since due
To my Rosania, may it prosper here.
Our love and years grew up together, and
Our Souls by holy contract tied, when in
Alfonzo's House, her Father, and my Guardian
(To whose trust I was sent an Infant by Leandro)
We plighted faith; it is no blemish
To fair Olivia still to be a Virgin,
Though she have lost the Queen, she is a Princess.
And has now found a Kinsman, that shall study
What shall become his love, her blood, and honor.
Upon your Lip I print this fair assurance.

Rosa. And mine shall be to do you service Madam.

Que. If this be true, you must command my duty.

Ferd. We hear Prince Leonario is departed,
When he shall know the progress of our fortunes
He Will quit his Stars, that hid their golden Heads
To mock him with a small Eclipse, of purpose
To light him with more glory to his happiness. Soft Alarm
Ha? what clamors that? the frightfull noise increases.

Enter first Guard. Guard. Fly, and save your selves the Fort's surprised By
the Prince of Arragon, whose troops have seized the City, reeling with Wine,
and careless of their strength, in their joys for you Sir.


Ferd. The Prince of Arragon? the fates cannot
Be so injust, so envious of our blessing,
To snatch it from us in a minute; ha?
Help, help, quarter.

Diverse within cry. Ferd. They are in the Court already.

Leand. We are all undone,
Lets yield, and ask conditions honorable.

Ferd. Dye he, that dares but think so yield? no, Ferdinand
Was here too late a Prisoner; let us sell
Our lives at glorious rates, the Evening puts
A Mask upon the horror, follow me.

Exit. Leand. To certain death; Ladies stay you, the danger
Will meet us here to soon, and yet your persons
In honor challenge safety.

Ex. Lords. Que. Is there no end of my distractions?
Or has my folly yet deserved more vengeance?

Rosa. It cannot be Heaven will so soon destroy
The blessing it bestowed if thus you punish
Whom you advance, who will believe your gifts
Are more than flattery to betray our Peace?

Enter Leonario Alfonso, Ferdinand, (Prisoner,) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Soldiers.
Leon. This Lady is my prize.

Que. How Sir, your prize?

Leon. Mistake me not, there is no dishonor meant
Your person; yet I boldly may pronounce
You are, and must be mine. I am not ignorant
You are a Virgin all but name, be wise
As you are fair, and I forget what is past,
And take this satisfaction; if I meet
Contempt, where I with honor once more Court you,
You will create a flame shall never dye
But in the Kingdoms ashes; you were mine
First by your own election, sealed above,
If I must lose what Heaven bestowed upon me
The quarrel is not mine
But virtues, whose right Hand is armed with Justice.
Enter Captain. Punish not where you owe your Heart, but let
Both our revenges meet in that Impostor;
I find your noble Soul return; Lord General
While I retire with this fair Queen whom not
One violent accent shall affright, much less
A rude attempt, take hence that counterfeit,
And cut his Head off.

Ros. O my dearest Lord?

Leon. The rest may if they please find mercy.

Capt. I were best be of this side.

Leon. Away with him.

Ferd. Insulting Prince, thou dare not.

Leon. How Sir, dare not?

Ferd. I said it,
Thy better, being a King in my own right,
Without her charity, proclaimed and justified,
By Birth a Prince.

Leand. All this is truth Sir.

Leon. You must not Cozen thus my faith, away;
Cut off his Head.

Alfon. Dispatch you with the Queen,
Let me alone to make his Head secure.

Leand. Nay take mine too. I Will wait on him in death,
It shall begin my service.

Ros. Cruel Prince.

Que. What fate must I obey?

Ros. My death will add some lines
Unto thy bloody Chronicle; pray let us die together.

Leon. You shall speak, her sentence Madam.

Que. She must live then.

Leon. To all we offer mercy, but to Ferdinand,
His doom is fixed; come Madam.

Que. Whither Sir?

Leon. I know the way to your Chapel, he that loves us
Make have, and bring the Priest.

Capt. That Is I, I know
Her Chaplains, they are my friends, and all good fellows.

Exit. Ferd. Pray can you tell me, where, or what I am
Or what I must do next?

Alfon. Yes, you must dye.

Ferd. Let not that grieve you Gentlemen, it is nothing
To part with life, and if but my Rosania would not weep
Methinks I could shake off this dust, and leap
To Immortality without a guide,
And in that cheerful flight prepare the blessed
With so much praise and wonder of thy virtue,
They shall be more in love with thee, than I,
And double all their prayers to bring thee to 'em.

Ros. No, we will dye together.

Alf. You shall.

Ferd. How?

Alf. Both live, and love, and bless my age the witness.
Do You know me?

Rosa. Father?

Ferd. Guardian.

Leand. Alfonso, my noble Kinsman.

Alf. How joys flow in my Heart, to see this constancy!

Ferd. How came you to be his?

Alf. I have deceived the Prince our forces are Valentia's,
Not Arragons, which he by Letters sent for
In his revenge, but we met the Intelligence
And arrived sooner to pretend our selves
The Army he expected; you shall know more hereafter.

Ferd. I want a knowledge where to begin my gratitude,
The joys you bring are mighty, and overcome us.
O my Rosania?

Ros. This was beyond hope.

Enter Captain. Capt. So, so, it is done, he has mumbled up the ceremony;
A compendious Priest may do much in few words;
They are fast enough; the Queen was wise to take him;
You are only like to be a loser Sir; they come.

Enter Leonario, Queen. Alfon. All joys to the Prince of Arragon, and the fair
Olivia.

Leon. Why not the Queen Olivia?

Alfon. Not while this Gentleman's Head is on, believe it.

Leon. Where is Mendoza?

Alfon. Hid within this bush --
But here is Alfonso General of the Army
Sent from Valentia to assist King Ferdinand
To his native right.

Leon. Valentia?

Alfon. My Master having faild in his first aids
To Ferdinand, intended not sit down
With so much loss, but raised another Army,
Which in our march consulted our security
By Interception of all passages;
Your messenger by a party was surpised,
Him, stubborn to discover what he was,
Imperfect in his answer, we Interpreted
Some spy, and searching found your Letters fraught
With mischief and revenge, these sent to our King
We had command to hasten our design,
And steer our course by Sea to Carthagena,
How after we arrived, we gaind your faith
And purposes, Your highness knows.

Leon. Betrayed?

Alfon. Sir, be a Prince, and just to your own honor,
And having perfected your fair desires
With her, we hope you will account your self
Most happy that you mist a power to serve
Further revenge upon a lawful Prince,
My Soldiers will obey me now, although
To help your Marriage I appeared no friend
To Ferdinand.

Leand. Who was the Prince preserved
By me, and sent an Infant to this Lord,
My noble Kinsman.

Alfon. Him I bred, till time
And strength might arm him to return, and claim
His own.

Leon. Leandro denied this before.

Leand. To my dishonor, 'twas a coward fear
To lose my self unprofitably

Leon. I apprehend with wonder.

Ferd. If you repent not-love and our alliance,
She shall be worth your best embrace, and we
Forgetful of your passion, entertain you
With all affection to our blood.

Leon. I meet it,
And satisfied in this story, Joy I was
Prevented; I congratulate your Stars Sir;
Nor is this treasure of less price to me
Than when her Temples were enchac'd with Empire.

Que. This love will give my soul another form.

Ferd. Our story has been full of change, but love
Has met a glorious victory, and tied
Our souls together with most firm embraces.
My Lord Leandro you shall to Valentia,
With our best thanks and greeting to the King;
His Armies charge is ours, beside what else
We owe his Royal bounty. Once more welcome
Alfonso now my Father, witness I
Preserve my faith to my Rosania,
I hear the Priest call us to other rites,
His Altar does expect another pair,
Make have to light his Tapers with thine eyes
And make our hearts each others Sacrifice.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
Epilogue, Captain.
Gentlemen,
I Am no Epilogue, I come to pray
You Would tell me your opinion of the Play,
Is the Plot current? may we trust the wit
Without a Say-Master to autorise it?
Are the lines Sterling? do they hold conceit?
And every piece with your allowance, weight?
That when you come abroad, you will not report
You are sorry to have given white money for it?
So, so, I know your meaning, now pray tell
How did the action please ye, was it well?
How did King Stephen do, and the other Prince?
Enough, enough, I apprehend, and since
I am at questions w'ee, tell me faith
How do you like the Captain? ha? he says,
I Will tell you, you are my friends, none here, he knows,
I mean you of the Gentry, t'whom he ows
No money, will enter a false action,
And let the rest look to it, if there be one,
Among his City creditors, that dares,
He has vowed to press, and send him to the Wars.
FINIS.

