A short and true Relation, of all what has happened in Portugal unto the 23.
of March 1641. since the Coronation of the illustrious King JOHN the fourth,
Duke of Braganza, solemnized the 15. of December, 1641.
Together with the reason that has moved the Portugals to cast off the King
of Spain, and to free themselves by force of Arms from his power.
Don John by the Grace of God King of Portugal and Algarve, on this and
the other side of the Affrican sea Lord of Guinea, ye Conquered Nauigations and
Commerce of Ethiopyia Arabia, Persia and the Indies Crowned the 15 of december:
1641:

A. Michael de Vaas-Concellor Secretary; B: an Alderman of Albergaria his
Compan: C. a, Germane: D: the King taking his oath E: the Princess Margarita:
F: the Marguiz de Fereira G. the Kings Coronation H: his rideing to the
Chathedrall Church: I: his rideing to the gate of Pe^eirin to receive the Keys.



John the fourth King of Portugal and Algarve being son to the Duke of Braganza
has married Lovisa a daughter of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, being of the
house of the Gusmans, and coming from the right offspring of Edward son to
Don Emanuel; the Commons had willingly chosen him long ago for their Prince,
not only because of the yoke and great over-burdens which the Spaniards had
laid upon them, but also because they would rather see in their Kingdom a
Prince borne there: Seeing the King of Spain now busy both in out-land, and
domesticke wars, they with a unanimous consent chose this Prince, unto whom
God grant, that he may long reign and govern to his own glory, and the good
of his subjects, and thereby the children of Don Antonio, will likewise get
their own again.

After that the King of Spain had caused to be published by a great Noble
man, the last day of November 1640. a most heavy Decree, which made the Commons
to murmurre because of the extreme burdens; the chiefest and Principal men of
the Country, which two years ago already minded such a thing to free
themselves (...) a convenient time from the extreme yoke of the Castillians,
(...) now the Commons so inclinable to it, begun the first of De^^^ber 1640. to
prepare themselves to put their intention into exe^^tion, beginning in the same
manner as hereafter follows.

Upon Satterday being the first of this Month, about nine of the clock, the
Nobles of this City (having for many days together, as afterward was plainly
seen, resolved and consulted) coming with their men armed from their houses,
went into the Court, and first of all into the Secretaries Quarter, slew (A)
there the Secretary Michael de Vasconsellos, and took presently all things
into their possession, together with the High Dutch and Spanish Watch, and her
highness Princess Margarita, and some other of her Nobility; and the same
time also, all the Counselors, namely those of the Chamber of Justice, high
Counsel, the Court and Counsel of the Kings Revenews: And this being done,
they came through the streets of this City with the two Standards of the
Chamber, proclaiming the Duke of Braganza King, Don John the fourth: which
thereupon also without any contradiction, was proclaimed by the Commons of the
City, without slaying any man more, but him that is mentioned above, and another
(B) Counselor or Alderman of Albergaria, who was then by mere accident in
the Secretaries Chamber, (C) and another being a German. Whereupon immediately
Governors were chosen and elected by the said Nobles, with the two Archbishops
of Lisbone and Braga, which begun immediately to govern, and thereby the
whole City was set in peace and quietness, albeit the tumult was so great as
could be, especially there were set at liberty (in the name of the new King)
out of two prisons in this City all the prisoners, excepting those, that were
cast in prison for extraordinary theft, and albeit the same day no Court of
Law was kept, yet no disorder and confusion happened: The aforesaid Governors
governed very well for five days together. The second day the Castle of the
City was taken without making any shot against it, as also the Fort of
Bethelem, the Fort of Cabesa Seca came likewise to be taken by a stratagem, and
immediately thereupon Posts and expresses were dispatched for the City of Ville
Vilosa, which brought word of it to the King, and the same Saturday at midnight
he had notice of it, and thereupon dispatched Expresses throughout the whole
Kingdom.

(D) On Monday being the 3. of this month, the King was sworn in the City of
Evora by the Marquis de Fereira: The Nobles and Magistrates of the said City
and throughout the whole Kingdom of Portugal it was proclaimed in the same
form. Whereupon his Majesty went by post, and upon Thursday being the 6. of
this month about noon he came into this City, whereupon his Majesty immediately
and the Counsel of State sat at Counsel to consult, how to maintain war,
ordering and disposing all things requisite to be done, and being the Forts and
Castles of S. Julian and Cascais refused to yield, order was given, and forces
and Cannons were sent, wherewith they begun to batter the same, and at last
being the 12. of the aforesaid month the Fort of S. Julian was surrendered, and
Don Antonio Mascarensis was put into it for Governor and all the Forts of
Algarve, Sentuvall, Port a Port had yielded already before together with those
of Viana, and the Commanders as namely Alcaides were in all have sent to their
Cities to raise forces, and the Marquis de Ferreira and the Count of Vinnoso
(which are said to be the chiefest) go as Governors every one to his
Jurisdiction, and on Saturday being the 15. of the aforesaid month his Majesty
was sworn King in this City upon a public G Theater or Scaffold, which was
made for that purpose near the palace where the Scepter was delivered unto
him, and has sworn to observe the Ordinances of the Kingdom, and immediately
thereupon he went on horseback in a habit embroidered with gold, and with a
golden Scepter to the Cathedral under a (H) canopie accompanied by all the
nobillity a foot and bare head, and coming to the gate of Peloirin the Keys
of the I City were delivered unto him, and at his return from the Cathedral
he passed through the Rua nova and Calcetaria, and here in this City are
expected every day (M) the Queen Dona Luysa and the Prince Don Sebastian, and
the Infanta, which staid behind at Villa Visosa: in Michael de Vasconcellos was
seen an Example of the continuation of the fortunes of the world, who was come
to such a height, that he commanded all the judgment seats and Justices of
this Kingdom, his will was a law, made and unmade Earls, Marquisses and
Bishops: (O) He was slain with Bullets and stabs, and thrown out of a window
from the place where he was dwelling in the Fort, and fell upon the Terreiro do
Passo; where the people stripped him of his clothes, and his dead corpse lay there
still all that day long and the next night following till 10. of the clock at
Sunday, and then the Misericordia haled him from thence with a pair of the
Negroes without a suit or shirt, beard or eyes or shape of a man: The same
hour his house was pillaged so long till some stop was made: and the house
where his Brother Adayan Bruga dwells, belonging unto him, which he had caused
to be built Scaffans of the King being a rare building, (whence he had fled in
woman's apparel) was likewise pillaged, and they begun to break down
windows and doors, and if the Governors had not sent thither a guard of
soldiers, they would have totally pulld down the same. The aforesaid Adayan
(after that no cloister would take him in) went in a Priests habit toward
Lerya, where the Bishop his brother hid him; and it is thought, that he is gone
toward Castile: The Government of his Majesty has altered nothing in the
Offices of the Commons, only has casheir'd the providor of the Alsandiga;
because he was son in law to Dego Soars and the Count of Custenheda, who was
President of the Table of consciecne the assistants and contractours remain in
their places, as they have been before: What in Castile is done, we know not as
yet, because of this news, which is so great, whereof the whole world will
speak, Ambassadors are sent toward the North, and toward England is gone
Don Antonio Almada, and for France the upper Menteiro chief Hunter; and for
Holland Don Tristan de Mendosa, and for Rome the Bishop of Lamego, we shall see
what good success their Ambassages will have, and so the reasons, which are to
be set down and printed, and shall come abroad, and shall be added unto it.
Her Highness Margarita together with Marquis De la Puebla were imprisoned in
the palace of Enxobregas being watched by two companies, they have allowed
them yearly 14000. Duck ats for keeping of their table, in their movables they
were not touched the other Spaniards of note are kept in custody in the Castle,
and many soldiers, that married there, gave up their names to serve under the
Portugalls. Hereupon his Majesty begun presently to govern, and all things
were done in so good order that all the world cannot sufficiently wonder at it,
for after that he had mastred the Fort of S. Julian and all the Forts of his
Kingdom he sent for his Counsel, and after that they appeared before him the
last of December: His Majesty published and caused to be registered a decree
which you shall have shortly printed in English.

LONDON, Printed for Na. Butter. 1641.


