THE TOVCH-STONE OF Common Assurances. OR, A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR Treatise,
opening the learning of the Common Assurances or Conveyances of the KINGDOM.

BY WILLIAM SHEPPARD Esquire, sometimes of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for W. Lee, M. Walbancke, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL the Benchers of the Middle Temple, and to the rest
of the Gentlemen of that SOCIETY.
GENTLEMEN.
I May perhaps have been so long out of your sight that I may be also by this
time out of your mind. Nevertheless it is not out of my mind, that I having
received the seed and growth of that little knowledge in the laws of this
kingdom which God has given me in the seed-plot of your ancient and honorable
Society, do no less (by a natural equity) owe the fruit thereof to you then
the Rivers do their tribute to the Ocean, and the trees their fruit to the
planters and pruners. This therefore (such as it is) although unworthy of so
great a name, I am bold to dedicate to you, and put forth under the shelter of
your favorable wings; beseeching you to accept thereof, and my well meaning
therein, and to honor it with your patronage and countenance. And it shall
much oblige,

(Gentlemen,) Your most humble Servant W. S.

To the READER.
COurteous Reader, I do desire in all plainness to be understoo, that having
in the time of my study of the Laws of this Realm, collected some confused
Notes and Observations out of the same: And being afterward willing (for God
knows, I had no further end or aim at first in them) for mine own private help
and better readiness to digest them into some order and method, such as my
understanding could best contrive. The which things thus prepared and lying by
me, came by chance to the view of some more learned then my self, who seemed
to give some good approbation thereunto. Whereupon I first of all began to
bethink my self of making some part thereof public. And having to that
purpose advised with some of my more judicious friends, and being encouraged by
some, and not discouraged by others, I did at last resolve to attempt to
publish and p^t in print the same. And calling to mind that the Common
Assurances and Conveyances of the Kingdom (being that whereupon the whole
estates, and consequently the livelihoods of very many depend) are matters of
great importance and that concern most men; and that therefore the legal
learning thereof must needs be of great and daily use. And considering withal
the mischief arising every where by the rash adventures of sundry ignorant men
that meddle so much in these weighty matters, there being now almost in every
Parish an unlearned, and yet confident Pragmaticall Attorney (not that I think
them all to be such) or a lawless Scrivener, that may perhaps have some Law
Books in their houses, but never read more Law then is on the backside of
Littleton, or an ignorant Vicar, or it may be a Blacksmith, Carpenter, or
Weaver, that have no more books of Law in their houses, then they have Law in
their heads, and yet as apt and able (if you will believe themselves) either to
judge of a Conveyance, and by the rules of Law (of all which they are utterly
ignorant) to determine of the strength and goodness of a title or estate
already made, or to make a Conveyance to transfer the property of things from
man to man, as the most learned and best Counselor of them all; and therefore
undertake with great confidence, and dispatch without any scruple any business
whatsoever offered to their hands: wherein they deal with men in their
estates, as many that are called Physicians (but in truth Empericks) deal with
men in their bodies (an evil fit for the consideration of a Parliament). How
they come to this their supposed dexterity and skill is a wonder, except that
saying be false, Namo nascitur artifex. Either it must be born with them, or
they must have it by education, or they must not have it at all. But if they
will tell me they have good presidents, I will tell them that a good
Conveyancer must be as well able to judge of the validity of the title, and
primitive estate of him that is to convey (which a man can never do without
knowledge of the rules of Law, no more then a blind man can judge of colors)
as to make a derivative estate and conveyance by a good president; for scire
est per causas scire, as the Philosopher speaks. And as well, for ought I know,
may a man be an able Physician by certain medicines only that never read so
much as the grounds of Physic, as such men be able Conveyancers by their
Presidents only, that never read so much as the maxims of Law: Nullum
medicamentum idem est in omnibus. For my part I must ingenuously profess that
I can scarce look into a Title or meddle with a conveyance of weight wherein I
cannot make and move more doubts and questions, then I am able to resolve and
answer; and therefore these men have gotten the start of me much. And yet
(much marvel it is to see) how these Empericks of the Law (if I may so call
them) are sought unto and made use of, and that not only in lesser, but
oft-times in greater and more weighty businesses, and that without the
assistance of any others more able and sufficient; the which is not for lack of
opportunity of finding more learned men in the Law, for there is a sufficient
store of them in all places: nor do those that employ these Empericks of the
Law always save (if they think it saved) money hereby, for besides the great
mischief which is oft-times done to themselves by the unskilfulnesse of these
workmen, some of them by reason of their much custom are grown more chargeable
then an ordinary Counselor, whose fee is certain and known. But of these
Empericks of the Law and those that make use of them, I might say as sometimes
our blessed Savior said, Let them alone the blind leaders of the blind.
Howbeit being now called (as I conceive hereunto) I choose rather to admonish
them and to tell the first sort, That I conceive them to be usurpers upon, and
intruders into other men's callings, and that they thrust their sickles into
other men's harvest, and that they have not yet learned that rule of Divinity,
To abide in the calling wherein they are called, but exercise themselves in
things too high for them; nor yet have they learned this, Ne suitor ultra
crepidam, Let not the Cobbler go beyond his last; nor have they learned that,
In quo quisque norit in hoc se exerceat. And let me tell the latter sort, That
they heed not enough this saying, Caveat Emptor; nor believe that saying,
Cuicunque in art sua credendum, that every man is to be believed in his own
art. But if you will say to me, That these men do their work well, and their
work does succeed well: I will say to you, that the blind man may happily hit
the mark, and it may fall out that sometimes they do their work well, and it
does succeed well, but oft-times woeful experience shows the contrary, and
that many men have been much mischieved every where by the ignorance of these
men. Wherefore I wish both sorts of them to doubt more and to be well advised in
these affairs, as the Law does presume every one will be; for therefore is it
indeed that a Will has a more favorable interpretation then a Deed, because
men's Wills are oft-times made in have, and it is presumed men take who they can
to make them; but men for the making of their Deeds are not put upon those
straits, but they take advise of learned men therein. And the more to move men
herein and to redress the evil before discovered, I have herein set forth
under certain general Titles or Common Places, the greatest part of the
Judgments, Statutes, Resolutions, and Cases that do contain or concern the
learning of the Common Assurances of the Kingdom, so as I think I may truly
say, under reformation, that there are few material things as touching this
subject to be found any where dispersed in the Volumes of the Law, but they are
to be found somewhere herein, and that there shall not happen one Case of a
hundred but a hundred to one the diligent Reader may here find the Case it
self, or some Case that by good inference may be applied to it. Not that I
would have men now to rest upon this help, and be less careful and more
careless to take advice of the Lawyer then heretofore (for this is the disease
I labor to cure), for howbeit it may be that hereby these matters are made in
some measure conspicuous, yet to say the very truth, besides that the subject
matter of Law is somewhat transcendent, and too high for ordinary capacities,
the manner of putting of Cases is so concise, the distinctions and differences
of Law are so many, that it is hard for any man not well read in the Laws in
general, to judge or make use of any part of them in particular, and rightly
and fully to apprehend and apply the things herein set forth: and therefore I
dare not advise men to rest altogether hereupon, nor can I forbear to tell them
it is very dangerous so to do. But my aim and ends being also the uses and
commodities I expect and look after from this work, is first of all, that such
men before spoken of, may see by the view of the infinite variety of Cases,
Points, and Questions, as touching these matters, discovering also so many
by-ways wherein men conversant therein may walk, how much there goes to making
up of an able Conveyancer, and that it is not so easy a matter to judge of a
Title, give advice upon a Conveyance, and make these Common Assurances as men
dream of, and that therefore men learn more to suspect themselves and others
herein; and to these it may serve as a light in a dark place. Secondly, that by
this the Lawyer and Student may in some measure readily find together what he
desires touching these matters; and to him it may serve for a Table or
Remembrancer. And lastly, that every man may be the better able by the help
hereof to understand, open, and put his own case to his Lawyer, and to move
more pertinent questions to him: and other uses I would have no man to make of
it. In the use of this work therefore I must give thee two Advertisements or
Caveats. First, that if thou desire to find any thing in particular therein
contained, that thou read the whole Chapter, or at least the whole Question and
Division of the Chapter wherein that thing is contained. And secondly, that
thou do not confidently build and rely upon any thing therein alone without
advice from the learned Lawyer also, or at the least without a serious and
judicious perusal of the Authorities and Books themselves to which thou art
therein referred: Melius est petere fontes quam sectari rivulos. Some other
things there are also herein inserted as falling aptly under the Title, albeit
it be not altogether pertinent to the subject matter. And all these sweet
flowers of the Law growing sparsim in the great fields of the Volumes of the
Common and Statute Laws have I thus painfully gathered, bound up, and commended
to thy charitable censure: no doubt but in my desire to grasp and take up so
much, I have taken and bound up some grass withal, which I hope shall not
offend. If so be that I find it have a fragrant smell with thee, I shall think
I have recompense enough for my pains. But if any man think me too presumptuous
to attempt this enterprise; let him know first, that there is nothing mine in
it, but the method, (and that not mine neither altogether) the matter thereof
being nothing else but the Judgments, Resolutions, and Opinions of the Judges
of the Law in succeeding times: and then as I have not trusted my self, so
they shall not trust me altogether in these things. For I do freely
acknowledge mine own weakness and want of judgment, and that I am the
unmeetest and unworthiest of all men to undertake such a work, not one of a
thousand, but the meanest of ten thousand. And this I have done is a poor
something sufficient only to give them that are more learned occasion to do
something more exactly in this kind. If any man dislike the publishing of it in
the English tongue, and think perhaps it may make the Law to be the more
despised, and the Practitioner of the Law the less regarded and used: I do
wonder at the dislike of such a man; for to me there appears no more reason why
to keep the Laws in an unknown languange that they may be kept from the
knowledge of the people, then Papists have to keep the Scriptures and their
prayers in a language unknown to the people; these being the Laws by which the
people are to be governed, and the Law being the best inheritance of the
Subject. The wisdom of the Parliament has thought to commend all the Statute
Laws to the people in English, and to appoint that the pleadings should be in
English. And have we not many Books of Law in English already, as Littletons
Tenures, Doctor and Student, Finches Law, Justice Dodridge Treatises, Coke upon
Littleton, the Woman's Lawyer, and many others? and are not these useful and
profitable? And besides the greatest part of the proceedings in Chancery (the
Court of greatest employment within the Kingdom) are in English. And if it be
meet any part of the Law be in the native tongue, it should seem it is meet
this part should be so, because it concerns so many men, and them also so
much, that they may see and understand somewhat in their own Evidences. And
therefore as we have turned their Deeds from Latin to English, so let us also
turn some of the Law touching these Deeds out of French into English. Bonum
quo communius eo melius. And I see no more reason why in Law more then in
Physic the discovery of the Art should make the Art or Artist the less
regarded. But (under correction) I should rather think that it will rather make
them both the more esteemed as a jewel whose properties are known, and that it
will make them the more, and other men we have before spoken of the less to be
used and employed in their affairs, for the more men know, the less they think
they know, and the more they doubt, and nothing moves men to be so bold and
confident in these matters as their ignorance, according to the Proverb, Who so
bold as blind Bayard? And for further answer to this, I wish men to see the
Preface to the Lord Coke upon Littleton. And if any man have any thing else to
object and except (for some there are that will neither put forth their own
strength to do good, nor bear with others that do so) I wish them to
undertake the same subject, and to perfect and supply my defects. And so
committing thee to God, and this work to thy favorable censure, I am

Thy true friend W. S.

THE CHIEF CONTENTS of this Book.
OF Common Assurances in general, Chapter 1. Fol. 1 Of a Fine, chapter 2. 2 Of a
Common Recovery, chapter 3. 37 Of a Deed, chapter 4. 50 Exposition of Deeds, chapter 5. 75
Of a Condition, chapter 6. 117 Of a Covenant, chapter 7. 160 Of a Warranty, chapter 8. 181
Of a Feoffment, chapter 9. 203 Of a Bargain and Sale, chapter 10. 221 Of a Gift, chapter
11. 227 Of a Grant, chapter 12. 228 Of an Atturnment, chapter 13. 253 Of a Lease, chapter
14. 266 Of a Feoffment, Gift, Grant, and Lease, chapter 15. 284 Of an Exchange, chapter
16. 289 Of a Surrender, chapter 17. 300 Of a Confirmation, chapter 18. 311 Of a
Release, chapter 19. 320 Of a Statute, chapter 20. 353 Of an Obligation, chapter 21. 367 Of
a Defeasance, chapter 22. 396 Of a Testament, chapter 23. 399 Of an Use, chapter 24. 501
THE TOVCH-STONE OF Common Assurances.
CHAP. I. Of Common Assurances in general.
THe Common or General Assurances or Conveyances of the Kingdom (being that
by which commonly the property of things is made or changed) are of two sorts,
or are made two manner of ways, viz, either by matter of Record, or by matter
of Deed. Those that are made by matter of Record also are made either by matter
of Record of a more high nature and extraordinary way, or by matter of Record
of a more low nature and ordinary way. Those Assurances that are made by matter
of Record of a more high nature are such as are made by Act of Parliament, of
which we intend not to treat at all, neither do we intend to meddle with those
Assurances that are made by the King unto his Subjects, as being matters more
transcendent and intricate; but those we intend to treat of are only the
common Assurances or Conveyances that are made between Subject and Subject, and
are of ordinary and daily use for the transferring of the property of lands,
tenements and hereditaments from one man to another. And of these there are
observed to be ten kinds, two whereof are made by matter of Record, as a
Fine, which is said to be a feoffment of Record, and a common recovery, which
is in the nature also of a feoffement of Record: and the rest are by matter of
Deed, as First, by feoffement. Secondly, by Grant. Thirdly, by Bargain and Sale
by deed indented and enrolled. Fourthyly by Lease. Fifthly, by Exchange.
Sixthly, by Surrender* Seventhly, by Release or Confirmation, both which are in
nature of Grants. Eighthly, by Devise, or by last Will and Testament. And some
of these also serve to transfer the property of other things as well as of
lands, and some of them also have other operations and uses, as well as to
change and alter property and pass things from one man to another, as will
appear in their proper places. And the first thing we shall begin upon shall
be the learning of a Fine and Common Recovery, and first of a Fine.

CHAP. II. Of a Fine.
THis word is ambiguously taken in our Law, for sometimes it is Terms of (...)
the law, tit. Fine Co. upon Lit. 126, 127. 120 Plow. 357. West. Symb. part 2.
chap. 1.
Fine, quid.
taken for a sum of money or mulct imposed or laid upon an offender for some
offense done, and then also it is called a ransom. And sometimes it is taken
for an Income or a sum of money paid at the entrance of a tenant into his
land. And sometimes it is taken for a final agreement or conveyance upon
Record for the settling and securing of lands and tenements. And in this sense
it is taken here; and so it is defined by some to be, An acknowledgement in the
Kings Court of the land or other thing to be his right that does complain. And
by others, A Covenant made between parties and recorded by the Justices. And by
others, A friendly, real and final agreement amongst parties concerning any
land or rent or other thing whereof any suit or writ is hanging bteween them in
any Court. And by others more fully, An instrument of Record of an agreement
concerning lands, tenements or hereditaments, duly made by the Kings license
and knowledged by the parties to the same, upon a writ of covenant, writ of
right, or such like, before the Justices of the Common Pleas or others
thereunto authorized, and engrossed of Record in the same Court, to end all
controversies thereof both between themselves which be parties and privies to
the same, and al strangers not suing or claiming in due time. And in every Fine
there is a suit supposed, wherein the party that is to have the thing is called
the Plaintiff, and sometimes also in another respect the conusee Gonusee or
Recognisee. Conusor or Recognisor Deforceant.
or Recognisee, and the other that does depart with the thing is called the
Deforceant, and sometimes in another respect the Conusor or Recognisor. And it
is therefore said to be Finalis c^cordia, quia ^inem ponit negotio adeo ut
neutra pars litigantium ab eo de caetero possit recedere. And it was anciently
the end of a suit indeed, for after there had been some contention about the
thing by suit, the parties became agreed who should have it, and so a fine was
levied of it, and there was an end of the matter; and hence it is said to be
fructus or effectus legis, because it gives a man the fruit or effect of his
suit. And to this day therefore a writ does always go forth before a fine can
be levied, and this is now one of the common Assurances of the Kingdom.

There are five essential parts of a Fine. First, the original writ The parts
of it.
Co. 5. 38. 43. Stat. 5 H. 4 chapter 14.
taken out against the conusor, for without this a fine cannot be levied.
Secondly, the Kings license for the levying of the fine, and for this the King
is to have a fine or sum of money, which is called Kings silver, for this is
properly that money which is due to the King, Kings silver. Quid.
in the Court of Common Pleas, in respect of a license there granted to any man
for passing a fine. And this is part of the revenues of the Crown. Thirdly, the
Conusance or Concord it self which is the very agreement between the parties
that intend the levying of the Concord Quid.
fine how and in what manner the thing shall pass, and does begin thus; Et est
Concordia talis, etc. And this is the foundation or substance of the fine, for
if upon this the Kings silver be entered, albeit the Conusor die afterward, yet
the fine is good, and the note or foot of the fine are but abstracts out of
this. Fourthly, the note of the Note of the Fine. Quid.
fine, which is an abstract of the original Contract or Concord, and does
begin thus. Inter A. querentem et B. et C. deforcientes, etc. Fifthly, the
foot of the fine, which does begin thus. Haec est finalis Concordia, etc. and
contains all the matter, the day, year, and Foot of the Fine. Quid.
place, and before what Justices it was levied, which is therefore called the
Foot of the fine because it is the last part of it, and when this is done all
is done. And of this there are indentures made by the Chirographer and
delivered to the party to whom the Conusance is F. N. B. 147. a. Co. 5. 39.
made, which is called the Engrossing of a fine, for then a fine is said
Engrossing of the Fine. Quid.
to be engrossed when the Chirographer makes the indentures of the fine, and
does deliver them to the party to whom the Conusance is made.

A Fine is either without Proclamations, which is also called a fine Quotuplex.
at the common law, and this is such a fine as is levied after such manner
West. Symb. part 2. Sect. 19. Dyer. 216. Plowed. 265. Stat. 4 H. 7. chap. 24.
1. R. 3. chapter 7. Co. 3. 86. Stat. 32. H. 8. chap. 36.
and form as fines were usually levied before 4 H. 7. upon which no
Proclamations were made, which fine does still remain of the same force as it
was at the common law to discontinue the estate of the Cognisor if it be
executed. Or it is with Proclamations, which is also called a fine according to
the Statute, and which is such a fine as is levied with Proclamations after the
form and manner ordained by the Statute of 4 H. 7. chap. 24. (and such a fine
shall every fine that is pleaded intended to be if it be not showed what fine
it is, and of this sort were and are most fines since 4 H. 7. as being the best
kind of fine of all; and it is in the election of him that sueth out the fine
as long as he lives to have it with, or without Proclamations. A fine also
whether with or without Proclamations, is either executed, which is such a fine
as if his own force gives a present possession (or at the least in law) unto
the cognisee, so that he needs no writ of Habere facias seisinam or other
means for the execution thereof; but he may enter: of which sort is a fine Sur
cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de son done, which is in very deed the
best and surest kind of fine of all, and is thus, Et est concordia talis,
scilicet quod praedict' A. recognoverit tenementa praedict' cum pertinen' esse
jus ipsius B. ut ill'quae idem B. habet de dono praedict' A. and ill'remisit,
etc. And this kind of fine does always suppose a feoffement, Co. 7. 3^.
or gift precedent of the same thing whereof the fine is had, which the fine is
to corroborate and strengthen. Or it is executory, which is such a fine as of
his own force does not execute the possession in the cognisee, and of this sort
is a fine Sur cognizance de droit tantum, when the party that does levy the
fine is seized of the thing, and he to whom the fine is levied has no
freehold therein but it passes by the fine: and a fine Sur Done, Grant,
Release, ou Confirmation, which is after this manner. Et est concordia talis
sc. quod praedict' A. concessit et reddidit tenementa praedicta cum pertin'
praefat' B^et haered'suis durante vita ipsius A. Et praedict' A. warrant'
praed'cum pertin' praefat' B. and haered'suis totavita ipsius A. Or thus, Et
est, etc. quod praed A. concessit praed' Videinfra.
B. tenementa, etc. Habend'eidem B. pro termino vitae suae. Or thus, Et est,
etc. quod praed A. recognoverit tenementa praedict' cum pertinen' esse jus
ipsius B. and ille ei reddidit in eadem curia habend etc. Or a fine Sur Done,
ou Grant et Render. Which is thus, Et est concordia talis, sc. quod praedict'
A. recognoverit, etc. ut ill'quae idem B. habet de dono praedict' A. et
ill'remisit, etc. Et pro hac praedict' B. concessit tenementa praedict' cum
pertinen' praefat' A. Et ill'ei reddidit in eadem Curia habendum et tenend',
etc. And if these kind of fines be not levied or such Render made unto them
that be in possession at the time of the fines levied, the Cognisees must enter
or have writs of Habere facias seisinam, according to their several Cases for
the obtaining of their possessions. But if at the time of levying of such an
executory fine the party unto whom the estate is limited be in possession of
the lands passed, he shall not need any writ of execution to put him in
possession, for then the fine will enure by way of extinguishment of right, and
does not alter the estate or possession of the Cognisee, however perchance it
does better it. The fine Sur conusance de droit tantum, also does serve
sometimes to make a surrender, and then it is therein recited that the Conusor
has an estate for life, and the conusee the reversion: and sometimes it does
serve to grant a Reversion, and then the particular estate is recited to be in
another, and that the Conusor wills that the other shall have the reversion,
or that the land shall remain to the other after the particular estate spent: a
fine also is either single, which is such a fine by which an estate is granted
to the Cognisee and nothing granted or rendered back again to the Cognisor by
the Cognisee. Or it is double, which is such a fine as does contain a grant,
and render back again either of the land it self, or of some rent, common, or
other thing out of it to the Cognisor for some estate, limiting thereby many
times remainders to strangers which be not named in the writ of covenant, which
also is sometimes with reservation of rent, clause of distress, and grant of
the same over.

The manner and order of suing out or levying of a fine is thus. Experientia.
Stat. de modo levandi Fines 18 E. 1 West Simb. ut supra. 1 H. 7. 9. Broo. Fine
116.
First, there is an original writ sued out, and this may be a writ of 4. The
manner and order of levying of a Fine.
Mesne, Warrantia cartae, de consuetudinibus et servitiis, or any writ of right
(for upon these or any other writ whereby land is demanded or may be recovered,
a fine may be levied) but the most usual writ whereupon a fine is levied is a
writ of covenant. And whiles this writ is depending, for howsoever it be the
common practice to take out a Dedimus potestatem, and have the conusance of a
fine before any original writ be sued forth, yet the original writ is always
supposed in law to precede the Dedimus potestatem, and therefore does and must
evermore bear Test before it, or else it is erroneous. After the original
writ sued forth, three is a Precipe, which is the tituling of the writ whereupon
the fine is levied, and the concord and agreement of the parties, both which
are fairly written (and that most commonly in parchment:) after this, the
party or parties that is or are to knowledge and levy the fine is or are to
come in person before him or them that have power to take the same conusance;
who are to take notice of the persons, that if there be any woman that has a
husband amongst the conusors in the fine, they do examine her whether she be
willing and do it freely without compulsion of her husband. After this, all
the parties that are to levy the fine are to declare themselves before the
Judges or Commissioners (having power to take the same conusance) to be willing
to pass their right in the lands according to the agreement, and to subscribe
their names or marks to the concord: and if it be taken by a special Dedimus
potestatem, it is to be returned and certifyed under the hands and Seals of
the Commissioners into the Court of Common Pleas, that it may be there recorded
and finished. And there the party Conusee is first to compound with the King
for his license, for which he is to pay the Kings silver, and thereof he is to
have an entry on the back of his writ of Covenant, and then he is to have it
enrolled by the Custos brevium, and upon this roll the Proclamations are to be
indorsed: after this, it is to be brought to the Chirographers, who is first to
make that Note thereof that is called the Note of the fine: and hereupon if it
be a Remainder, Reversion, Rent or Seigniorie whereof the fine is levied the
writ of Quid juris clamat, Per quae servitia, Quem redditum reddit, as the case
requires, must be sued forth. And after this, the Chirographer is to enter the
fine of record to ingrosse it, and to make and to deliver the Indentures
thereof unto the Conusee, and if it be a fine with Proclamations, it is to be
proclaimed openly in the Court of Common Pleas once every one of the four
terms next after the engrossing of it, (and it was to be proclaimed within the
County where the land did lie at every assizes and sessions the next year
after the engrossing of it, but this it seems is not necessary now) and the
next term after the engrossing of it the contents thereof are to be recorded
in a Table (made for that purpose) to be set up in the court of Common Pleas at
Westminster in an open place all the term time, and so also at every assizes,
the fine may also be enrolled and exemplifyed.

A Fine is a Record as of great antiquity, so of a high nature, great Statute
of Fines 18 E. 1. Co. 1. 3. Plow. 358. 265.
5. The nature, use, and fruit of a Fine.
force, and much credit and esteem; and it is now become and serves for a
formal conveyance of land, and one of the common assurances of the kingdom,
for by this means a man may convey his land to another in fee simple, fee
tail, for life or years, with reservation of rent also. It is therefore called
a Feoffement of record, for it does countervaile a feoffement with livery of
sesin in the country, and it includes all that the feoffement does; and
works further of his own nature, and it is indeed for many purposes the best
and most excellent assurance of all others, for by the ancient common law it
was so high a bar, and of so great force, and of so strong a nature in it
self, that it did conclude and bar not only such as were parties and
privies thereto and their heirs, but all others of full age, out of prison, of
good memory, and within the four Seas the day of the fine levied, if they did
not make their claim within a year and a day. And it is still of that force,
albeit it be somewhat enfeebled by some Statutes, that either it passes all
the right and interest of the Conusor to the conusee, or else it works by way
of extinguishment and estoppell, and does perpetually bar the Conusor and his
heirs of all present and future right and possibility of right or other
collateral benefit to the thing whereof the fine is levied. And if it be a
fine with Proclamations it does in time become a perpetual bar to all others
also, that have right, except they do take care to prevent the bar by their
claim, action, or entry, within five years after the proclamations ended. And
it barreth Intailes peremptorily whether the heir do claim within five years
or not, if he make his claim by him that levied the fine.

Any person male or female, body sole, or corporate, that has capacity 6. What
shall be said a good Fine, or not: and how. 1. In respect of the persons
thereunto and their capacity. And by, or to, who^ a Fine may be levied, and who
West. Symb. in his Tract of Fines. 17 E. 3. 52. 17 Ass. pl. 17 Litt. Sect 731.
Perk. Sect 24. Fitz. Fines 120. See in grant infra chap 12. Numb. 4.
to grant, or is able to be a grant or by a deed, may levy a fine and be a
conusor therein, but there are certain persons prohibited by law, which the
Judges or Commissioners that take the conusance of fines ought not to admit or
receive, and yet if they do admit them, and a fine be levied by such persons,
the fine is good and unavoidable, Fieri non debet sed factum valet: and of this
sort are mad men, lunatikes, villains, Idiots, men that have the Lethargy,
doting old persons that want discretion, drunken men, and men that are forced
to it by threatening, imprisonment or the like, also such as are born blind, may
be conusors or conusees. And by what names.
deaf and dumb, but a man that becomes so accidentally may be received and
ought not to be refused. Also persons attainted of felony or treason ought not
to be received to levy a fine, but such persons being admitted to levy a fine,
the fine will be good against all Persons attaint.
persons but the King and the Lord of whom their lands whereof the Non san^
memoriae.
fine is levied, are held for their times: but persons waived or outlawed in
personal actions only ought not to be refused. 17 E. 3. 52. Cromp. Jur. 37.
10. E. 4. 13.
Also Infants Infants.
ought not to be received to levy a fine, and y et if an Infant be admitted to
levy a fine, and he do not avoid it by writ of error during his minority (as
he may if it be not a fine Sur Grant and Render in tail or for life, the fine
will be good for ever against him and all others. Perk. Sect. 19. Dyer 220. et
per Just: Bridgmans opinion in private.
And if he die during his nonage, before he has avoided it, it seems his
heir can never avoid it, and yet upon this point the Judges of the Common
Please have been divided on a solemn argument, and of this Just. Dod. in 17
Iac. made a Quere. 17 E. 3. 52. 30 E. 3. 5. 27 Ass. pl. 53. Perk. Sect. 19, 20.
Co. 7. 8.
Also women that have Women covert.
husbands ought not to be admitted alone without their husbands to levy fines,
and yet if such a woman alone levy a fine of her own land she has in fee
simple, and her husband do not avoid it (as he may if he will) by writ of
Ertor, entry, or otherwise during her life, or after her death during his own
life, if he be tenant by the Courtesy, this is now a good fine, and will bind
her and her heirs for ever, except she be an Infant at the time of the fine
levied, and her husband happen to die during her minority, for then in that
Case, if it be not a fine Sur Grant and Render to her in tail or for life, she
may avoid it during her minority, but if the coverture continue until her full
age, in that Case she cannot avoid it except her husband join with her in it,
but the husband and wife ought to be received together to levy any fine of her
land. If such persons as are civilly dead, as Friars, Corporations.
West. Symb. part 2. Sect. 9. Plow. 538. 575. Co. 11. 78. 1. in Magdalen
College case.
Monks, and the like, be admitted to levy a fine, the fine is void. But such
civil bodies as have absolute estate in their possessions, as Mayor and
Commonalty, Dean and Chapter, Colleges, and other Societies corporate may levy
fines of the lands they hold in common, even by the Common Law, and such fines
are good, but Ecclesiastical persons, as Biships, Deanes, Masters of
Hospitals, Parsons, Vicars, Prebends, and such like, are by diverse Statutes
restrained to levy fines of their spiritual inheritances.

Any person that has capacity to take by grant, or may be a grantee by deed,
may take by fine and be a conusee therein, as any person 3 H. 6. 42. 41 E. 3.
7. 50 E. 3. 9. 24 E. 3. 62.
male or female, of full age or under age, whether it be a Feme Covert, mad
person, lunatike, Idiot, any person in prison, or beyond the Sea, also any
person attainted of felony or treason, or outlawed in any personal action, a
Bastard, Clark convict, or Alien, may be conusee in a fine, and a fine levied
to such persons is good. 5 H. 7. 25. 19 H. 6. 25. Dyer 188.
Also Corporations spiritual and temporal may be conusees in fines, and fines
levied to them are good, but before the engrossing of such fines there goes
always a writ to the Justices of the Common Pleas, Quod permittant ^inem illum
levari. But such persons as are civilly dead, as Friars, Monks and the like,
cannot be conusees in a fine, and therefore a fine levied to such persons is
void.

The names of Cognisors and Cognisees in fines must be West. Simb. in his
Tract of Fines.
certainly set down, and they must for the most part be deseribed by their
right names of Baptism and Surname, whether they be King, Princes, D^kes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, Lords, or Knights, which be names of
dignity, but some of these are sometimes described without their Surname, as
Georg' Comes Salop. Johannes Dux Lancastr. or whether they be Esquires or
Gentlemen, which be names of worship and honor. But these additions of names
of dignity and honor given to such persons or any others, as Bishops and the
like, are used in fines rather of courtesy then of necessity, for they are not
needful in fines. But in case where there be two of one name it is safe to
make some addition by way of distinction, as Senior and Junior and the like.

If a woman living her first husband, take a second husband and 7 H. 4. 22.
with him and by his name knowledge a fine, it seems this is void because of
this mistake, but if a woman with her right husband, by a wrong Christian name,
levy a fine she is concluded by it, and cannot avoid it during her life. 1 Ass.
pl. 11.
And yet if a fine be levied to a man and his wife by a wrong name, as to A.
and Sybill his wife, when her name is Isabell, this is holden to be void. F. N.
B. 97. a Litt. Broo. Sect. 344.
But if a fine be levied by a woman by the name of Margery when her name is
Margaret, or by the name of Agnes, when her name is Anne, it seems this fine
is a good fine.

The Persons or Judges before whom a fine is to be levied are of West. Simb.
ubi supra.
2. In respect of the persons before whom it is acknowledged, and the persons
and place before whom and where it is recorded. And what persons may take
conusance of fines or record them. And where. And how, and the duty of such
persons therein.
two sorts, for some are Judges only at the time of the Cognizance, and
Certifieate thereof, and others are Judges to whom the Cognizance is to be
certifyed, and before whom it is to be recorded. The first sort are such as
have power to take such cognizance, either ex officio, and by virtue of their
offices, or by some commission general or special granted unto them by the
King out of Chancery; Stat. 15. E 2. Stat. de Carlil.
as all or any two of the Justices of the Common Pleas may in open Court take
knowledge of fines and record them by virtue of their office. Dyer 224. Cromp.
Jur.
Or the Chief Justice of that Court may by the Prerogative of his place take
cognizance of fines in any place out of the Court, and certify the same without
any writ of Dedimus Potestatem: Stat. 15. E. B. Broo. Fines 20.
and so also as it seems may two of the Justices of that Court with the
consent of the rest: or one of them with a Knight (but this is not usual at
this day.) Dyer 224. Broo. Fines 120.
Also Justices of assise by the general words of their Patents may take and
certify cognisances of fines without any special Dedimus Potestatem, but at
this day they do not use to certify them without a special writ of Dedimus
potestatem. And fines have been levied before Justices Errants.

Also cognisances of fines are taken by a special writ issuing out of Dedimus
potestatem, quid.
Cromp. Iur. 92. F. N B. 147. a. b. 146. F. G.
the Chancery called a Dedimus Potestatem, whereby commission is given in
diverse Cases to a private man for the speeding of some Act appertaining to a
Judge upon a surmise that the parties that are to do the same are not able to
travail, and by this writ upon such a surmise, power may be given to any
Serjant at law alone, or to any Knight and Gentleman together to take the
conusance of such persons, and they may by virtue thereof take the same Curia
39. and 40 E. l. 17.
either of all or some of the parties; Dyer. 220.
and that (as it seems) in any place accordingly: 8 H. 6. 21.
But a Justice or other person being cognisee in a fine may not take the
cognizance thereof himself. And all these that have power to take the
conusances of fines are to take great heed of whom they do take the same, and
whom they do admit to make such conusances before them. 34 H. 6. 19 Broo.
Fines 11. Cromp. Iur. 32. 92.
And therefore they are to see that they know the parties that are to be
Cognisors, that they suffer not one man to make a conusance in another man's
name, and that they do not take any conusance from any person prohibited by
law, for misdemeanors by such persons herein are punishable in the
Star Chamber. 42 E. 3. 7. 3 H. 6. 42 Perk. Sect. 613. Doct. et St. 155. Cromp.
Iur. 55.
And if there be any woman that has a husband that does join with her husband
in the conusance, the Judges or Commissioners must take care they do examine
her whether she be willing, and do part with her right in the land willingly
or by compulsion of her husband, for albeit she be made to do it by compulsion
of her husband yet has she no way to relieve her self when it is done. Stat.
23 El. chap. 3. Dyer 320.
And after the Commissioners have taken the same cognisances by Dedimus
Potestatem they are to certify the same truly, and the day and year when it
was taken, Dyer 220. Cromp. Iur. 92.
and not another time (for this may be a misdemeanor punishable in
Star Chamber) and to return the commission into the Court of Common Pleas
under their hands and seals within a year after the taking of the same
conusance, at the farthest. Regist. or. 68. F. N. B. 147. b.
And if they refuse to return or certify it, the party grieved may by a writ
called Cognitionibus admittendis or a Certiorare compel that Commissioner that
has it in his custody, or his executor or administrator if he be dead, to
certify it. Dyer 246.
But if any of the cognisors happen to die before it be certifyed, then it
cannot be certifyed at all, for it cannot now be made a good fine. (...) 1 H.
7. 9. Broo. Fines 124.
And so also (as some hold) if the King die. Dyer. 220. Stat. 15. F. 2. 44. 44
E. 3. 38.
But if the Kings silver be entered Cognitionibus admittendis, quid.
in paper or upon the back of the writ of covenant (as the use is) and the
party die after this, in this case the fine may go on and will be a good fine
notwithstanding the death of the party.

And Judges for the recording of fines be the Justices of the com^on Pleas
only, and therefore all cognisances of fines must be certifyed thither, for in
that Court only and not in any other of the Courts of Record at Westminster,
or in other inferior Court, or ancient demesne, are fines to be levied. 50
Ass. pl. 9.
But by special grant a fine may be levied in a base Court. Stat. 2. H. 6.
chap. 28. 37 H. 8. c. 19 5 Eliz. c. 27.
And by certain Acts of Parliament fines may be and are levied in the county
Palatine of Chester, county Palatine of Lancaster, and county Palatine of
Duresme, of lands lying within those places. And if any persons do take
conusance of fines other then such as before that have power, or any other
persons or Judges shall record fines, or they shall be levied in any other
Court or place then as before, such fines are void.

A Fine may be levied of all things whereof a Precipe quod reddat Stat. 32. H.
8. c. 7. West. Symb. in his Tract of Fines Sect. 25. 50. see in exposition of
deeds in^ra. Numb.
3. In respect of the thing whereof the Fine is levied, and of what things a
Fine may be levied or not, and by what names.
lies, and of all things which are inheritable and in esse at the time of the
fine levied, whether the thing be Ecclesiastical and made temporal or
temporal. As of an Honor, Manor, Island, Barony, Castle, Message, Cottage,
Mill, Toft. Curtilage, Dove-house, Garden, Orchard, Land, Meadow, Pasture,
Wood, Underwood, Chapel, River, Chauntry, Corrody, Office, Fishing, Warren,
Fair, Rectory, Mines, a view of Frank pledge, Waife, Estray, Felons goods,
Deodands, Hospital, Furzes, Heath, Moore, Rent, Common, Advowson, Hundred,
Way, Ferry, Franchise, Seigniorie, Reversion, Toll, Tallage, Pickage, Pontage,
Aquitaile, Services, Portion of tithes, Oblations, or the like. And therefore
fines De honor de S. or De Manerio de S. or De Castro, or De Castello de S.
cum pertinen' are good. So fines De uno mesuagio, uno cottagio, uno molendino,
without Aquatico or Granatico annexed are good. So fines De uno T of to, uno
Curtilag. uno Columbario, uno gardino, uno pomario, december acris terrae, december
acris prati, december acris pasturae, december acris bosci, december acris subbosci, de
Balliva sive officio Ballivat' de D. de Custod. sive officio custod, de B. de
custod. parci and forrestae de D. de officio senescalciae de S. cum pertinen',
december acris bruerae, december acris morae, decemacris uncariae, decemacris
marisci, december acris alneti, december acris ruscariae, are good. Also fines may be
De vis. Fran' pleg. liberate and franchesiis in D. Wardis, Maritagiis,
Eschaet. catall. felonum, waviat. extrahur. de catall. fugitivorum, utlagat.
attinct. de feriis, Market. Wrecco maris, Or, de rectoria Ecclesiae parochialis
de M. or, De decimis granorum, garbarum et soeni eidem Rectoriae spectan' etc.
Or, cum omnibus decimis granorum, garbarum, et foeni eidem rectoriae spectan'.
Or, de decimis garbaru^ ad ecclesia^ de M. qualitercunque spectan. or de
omnibus and omnimod oblationibus, decimis granoru^, garbaru^, foeni, lanae,
lini, canabis, porcellorum, aucarum, agell. or, etc. and aliis emolumentis
quibuscunque spectan', crescen', sive existen' cum pertinen' in D. Also fines
may be De cilio Salium, plumbarum, aquae salsae puteo. Or, de theolonio,
stallagio, picagio, pontagio, infra Burgum de D. Or, de quodam corrodio unius
panis, unius lagenae cervisiae pro omnibus hominibus in D. Or, de chiminio de
piscaria, or de libera warrenna, or de frankfold, de franchesia, or de nundinis
de D. singulis annis ad festa de M. ibidem tenend'. Mercat' de D. Quiet. five
libero passagio ultra aquam de D. Or, de communia, or de pastura pro omnibus
animalibus, or pro omnibus averiis, or de pastura pro december ovibus, or pro
december bovibus, equis, vaccis, porcis, spadonibus, etc. or de communia pasturae
quod praedict' M. B. habet and habere solebat pro omnibus averiis suis in
centum acris terrae ipsius I. A. in D. or de advocatione ecclesiae de D. or de
advocatione tertiae partis ecclesiae, etc. or de rectoria de D. or de advocat.
praesentat. donat. libera dispositione, and Iure patronatus Ecclesiae de D. or
de Patronagio cum advocatione vicariae Ecclesiae de D. and capell. eide^
rectoriae annex', or de tertia part advocationis ecclesiae, etc. or de
medietat' advocat. Ecclesiae, or de advocatione medietatis Ecclesiae, or de
medietate, or de tertia part messuagii, december acris terrae, or the like, and
these fines are good. Also a fine may be de homagio, or de feod militis, or de
uno feod milit' in D. or de servitio unius paris calcarium deauratorum, or de
servitio inveniendi hominem equitem or peditem ad eundem vel ad equitandum with
the cognisee in exercitu Walliae etc. or de minera plumbi and cujuscunque
generis metalli, or de proficuis officii, or de proficuo molendini, or de
gurgite, or cursu aquae currend. a loco vocat' H. infra and per terr' voc' K.
ad molend. vocat' B. or de wera sive veda in D. And fines of all these and such
like things are good, but a fine that is levied of a thing not certain, as de
tenemento or de hereditamento, or the like, is void.

A Fine may be of a rent charge which had no being before, or of a chief rent
or other rent which had a being before, but not of annuity, 21 E. 3. 44. 18 E.
4. 22. West. Symb. ibid.
and a rent will pass by the number of the things to be rendered, as De december
librat. december marcat. sex denar' or quinque solidor', or uno obolario. As
Precipe A. quod reddat B. con. etc. de 4 librat' reddit. and red dimid unius
librae piperis, ac reddit, unius paris chirothecarum, sagittae barbatae, unius
par' calceoru^, unius vomeris, 1. lib. cerae, 1 lib. piperis, 1 lib. cumini, 1
Clavi Gariophylli, 1 rosae rubae, 1 acus and Fili, 1 quarterii frumenti, unius
quarterii hordei, 2 Bracei caponum, 40 Gallorum, 20 Gallinarum, mill ovorum et
aucarum. An Honor may pass by the name of a Manor, or by his own proper name,
as De honor de Tickhill, or de manerio de Tickhill: so other things may most
of them pass by their own proper names, as de castro vicecomitatus de S.
Insula de D. Hundred. de D. Burgo de D.

A Manor may pass by his proper name without naming of the town or place,
towns are places wherein it does lie, as de manerio 19 E. 4. 9.
de D. cum pertinen.

Other things may pass in fines by the same names they are granted in deeds,
as de scit. ambit' et precinct' nuper Monasterii de D. Scit. Manerii de D.
Grangia de D. Parco de D. praebend de D.

A Castle or Hundred may be parcel of a Manor and pass by the name of the
Manor whereof they be parcel, and one Manor may be 26 Ass. p. 54. 2 E. 3. 36.
1 E. 3, 4. 27 H. 6. 2.
parcel of another Manor, and pass by the name of that Manor, or a castle may
pass by his own proper name, as de castello de S. cum pertin', so also may a
hundred pass by his own name, as de hundredo de S.

A view of frank pledge and such like things may also pass by West. ubi supra.
their own names, as De vis. frank' pleg' bonorum et catallorum, waiviarum,
felon' fugitivorum, utlagat. in exigen' positorum, felon' de se, deodand.
thesaur' invent' ac extrahur' cum pertinen' in M.

By the name of a message may pass a house, a curtilage, a garden, Plow. 169.
171.
an orchard, a dove-house, a shop, a mill as parcel of the same. The like of a
cottage, a toft, a chamber, a cellar, etc. Yet these may pass by their own
single names also, as De uno messuagio, uno curtilagio, etc.

A Chapel or an Hospital must be demanded in a fine, and may 13 Ass. pl. 2.
pass by the name of a message.

A Reversion of land may pass by the name of a Reversion, or by 43 E. 3. B1.
the name of the land it self.

A Foldage may pass by the name of De liberate unius Faldagii West. ubi supra.
et cursu ovium cum pertinen' in F. or de libero Faldagio ovium cum pertinen'
in F. or de libera Falda.

Land, Meadow, or Pasture, Wood and the like, may pass by a 16 Ass. 9.
certain number of acres, or by the certain measure of the superficial
quantity thereof, as De Hida, Carucata, bovata, Virgata, Acra, Roda, Furlingo
terrae, House-boot, Hay-boot, and Plowboot may pass by the name of Estovers,
as De rationabili estoverio in boscis, West. Symbubi supra.
viz. in december acris bosci ipsius A. in D. And a fishing may pass by the name
of Separali piscar' in aqua de S.

And High-wood and Underwood may pass by the name of wood, as de 20. acris
bosci, etc.

Parsonages, Rectories, Advowsons, Vicarages, or Tithes impropriate West. Symb.
ubi supra.
pass not by the names de advocatione Ecclesiae, but de Rectoria ecclesiae de
S. cum pertinen'. But when the fine is but of a presentation to a Church only,
it must be de advocatione ecclesiae de S. and not cum pertinen', and of all
Vicarages endowed the writ must be de advocatione vicariae ecclesiae de S. and
not cum pertinen', and where no vicarage is endowed, it must pass under these
words, de advocatione ecclesiae de S. etc.

If part of an entire thing pass, it must pass by these words, de medietate,
tertia part, quarta part, etc. as the Case is, as de duabus partibus in tres
parts dividend. 8. acr. terrae, or de medietate omnium decimarum, granorum et
foeni de ter' vocat' le Blacklands cum pertinea, in H. But if an entire thing
as a Manor or Message be parted, as if the Manor of S. be divided into two
parts, (if the division be so made that the Manor of that part be not extinct)
and a fine be to be levied of a part of it, it must pass by the name of the
whole, as de manerio de S. So if a Message and 23. acres be parted, the part
divided shall pass by the name of one Message and 10 acres of land, and not
by the name de medietate unius messuagii et viginti acr' ter'. And if things be
otherwise named then as before, sometimes the fine will thereby lose his force
in all and sometimes in part. But if a thing be twice named in a writ of
covenant, as a Manor, and a Hundred parcel of the same, this will not hurt the
fine.

The things that do pass by the fine must be named to lie in the Broo. Fines
44. 91. 9 E. 46.
Shire, Town, Parish, or Hamlet, where it does lie, for a fine is good, albeit
it name the lands to lie in a Hamlet, or in a town decayed; but it is good to
name the town wherein the Hamlet is, and that with addition for distinction if
there be diverse towns, of the same name in that county. And if a Manor extend
into diverse Towns as into A. B. and C. it is good to express all or none, as
de Manerio de S. in A. B. and C. For if any of the towns be omitted, none of
the Manor in that town will pass, but if the fine be of the Manor of S. cum
pertinen' and say not where it lies, this fine will carry the whole Manor. And
if there be diverse Manors of one name, as South S. and North S. or the like, it
is safe to set down in the writ for the fine which Manor is intended to be
passed, howsoever the fine may be good of the Manor intended to be passed
without the distinction.

The order of placing things in fines is, First, to set down the most 7 H. 6.
39. Plow. 163. Regist. 2.
worthy things before things less worthy, as a Manor before a Message, a
Castle before a Manor, a House before land, arable land before meddow, meddow
before pasture, etc. Secondly, to set down things general before things
special, as land (being the Genus of meddow, Pasture, wood, etc.) before them,
wood (being the Genus to wood grounds, as alnetum, salicetum) before them.
Thirdly, to set down entire things before parts of things, as de Manerio de S.
and medietate Manerii de B. Fourthly, to set down particular things after this
manner.

suagium, tum, lendinum, umbare dinum, ra, tum, tura cus, ra Mes, Tof, Mol,
Col, Gar, Ter, Pra, Pas, Bos, Brue, Mora, ria, cus, tum caria, ditus, Iunea,
Maris, alne, rus, red, Sectare priora.

And yet if this order be not observed, but the things be otherwise placed in
the writ, if it be suffered to pass, the Fine will be good enough.

If either the Cognisor or Cognisee at the time of the Fine levied 4. In
respect of the estate of the parties thereunto.
Stat. 27 E. 1. chapter 1. 41 E. 3. 14. 44 E. 3. 36. 39 E. 3. 16. 17 E. 3. 62. 24
E. 3. 26.
be seized of any estate of freehold in fee simple, fee tail, or for life, n
possession, reversion, or remainder, whether the same be by right ^or wrong,
the fine will be a good fine in this respect. And therefore if one that is
seized of land in fee simple, or fee tail, general or special, levy a fine
of this land to a stranger, this is a good fine. So if a Strangere levy a fine
to him of this land, this is a good fine. So also a fine levied by, or to, a
tenant for life of the land he does so hold is good in this respect. But he
must take heed of a forfeiture in this case, for if tenant for life levy a fine
Sur Cognisanc' de droit Forfeiture.
come ceo, etc. to a stranger, or levy a fine sur Grant and Release to a
stranger, to hold to the cognisee for a longer time then for the life of the
tenant for life, howsoever in this case the fine be a good fine, yet this is a
forfeiture of the estate of the tenant for life, whereof he in reversion or
remainder may take present advantage. And yet if such a tenant for life levy a
fine sur Grant et Release, to hold to the cognisee for the life of the tenant
for life, or grant his estate by such a fine to him in reversion or remainder
or by fine, or grant a rent out of the land for longer time then for his own
life, in these cases the fine is good, and 1 H. 7. 22. Co. 2. 56. 9. 106.
there is no forfeiture of the state of the tenant for life. So likewise if a
fine be levied to a tenant for life by a stranger, who does thereby acknowledge
all his right to be in the tenant for life, and release and quite claim to him
and his heirs, and go no further, this is a good fine, and no forfeiture of the
estate of the tenant for life, for his estate is not changed thereby, and it
may enure to him in reversion, but if the stranger say further in the fine Come
ceo que il ad de son done, this is a forfeiture.

But if neither the cognisor nor cognisee be seized of any estate of freehold
in possession or reversion of the lands whereof the fine is Co. 5. 123. 3. 88.
90. Super Lit. 251. 3 H. 7. 9. 5 H. 7. 41. 3. H. 6. 21. 27 H. 8. 4.
levied at the time of the levying of the same, but have only a lease for
years, or not so much, the fine is void and of no force as to any estranger,
howsoever it may be good between the parties by way of Estoppell.
Estoppell. And therefore if a lessee for years, or a disseisee, or one that
has right only to a remainder or reversion levy a fine to a stranger that
has nothing in the land, this fine is void, or at least voidable as to, and by
any stranger thereunto, and he that has cause may show that the freehold
estate and seisin of the land was in another before and at the time of the fine
levied, and that Parts finis nihil habuerunt tempore levationis finis. And by
this avoid it. And yet a vouchee after he has entered into the warranty may
levy a fine unto the demandant, but not to a stranger. And a disseifor may levy
a fine to a stranger that has nothing in the land, and this is a good fine,
for he has the fee simple by wrong in him. Also the issue in tail may be
barred by way of Estoppell, by a fine levied by Ancester being tenant in tail,
albeit neither conusor nor conusee have any estate of freehold in the land. a
26 H. 8. 9. Dyer 334. 69. Plow. 375. 338. E. 4. 13. 11 E. 4. 68.
A Joint-tenant, tenant in Common or Coparcenour, may levy a fine of his part
to a stranger, and this will be a good fine. And so also as it seems may one
Goparcenour or tenant in common to another.

One single member of a corporation aggregate of many cannot levy a fine of the
lands of the corporation, as the Mayor or Master of a College cannot levy a
fine without the communalty, or his fellows, etc. But such persons may levy
fines of the lands they are solely seized in their own right as other men may
die:

Such as have estates of freehold in in Ecclesiastical lands in the right Co.
11. 78.
of their Churches, houses, etc. as Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, Prebends,
Parsons and the like; may not levy a fine of such lands, for if they do it
will not bind the successor.

He that has an estate of fee simple in lands in the right of his wife ought
not to levy a fine thereof without her, and if he do, she Stat. 32 H. 8.
chap. 28. 12 E. 4. 12. Co. 6. 55. Broo. Fines 121. Stat. 32 H. 8. chapter 36. Co.
5. 3. 4. Stat. 1 H; 7. chap. 20.
and her heirs may avoid it after his death. Also he that has an estate of
lands given in tail by the King, or by the provision of the King, ought not to
levy a fine of this land, for it is void as against the issue in tail and the
King. Also he that has an estate of lands that are prohibited to be sold by
Act of Parliament ought not to levy a fine of such land. Also she that has an
estate of lands of her husband, or of any of his ancestors assured to her for
her Jointure, Dower, or in tail by the means of her husband or any of his
ancestors, may not levy a fine of this land, for if she grant a greater estate
then for her own life this works a present forfeiture.

In the concords of Fines some things are to be regarded in the 5. In respect
of the Concord and matters touching it. And what concord or agreement may be
made by Fine or not.
West. Symb. ubi supra. Sect. 30. Co. 5: 38.
manner and form, and some things in the matter and substance. First, when a
fine is levied to diverse Cognisees the right shall be limited to one of them.
As if a fine be levied by A. to B. and C. it shall say, Quod praedict' A.
recognoverit tenementa praedict' esse jus ipsius B. ut ill'quae iidem B. et C.
habent, etc. But the Kings tenant may acknowledge the right to be in diverse.
Secondly, the state shall be limited to his heirs only to whom the right is
limited, and not to the heirs of all the cognisees, as thus, Quod praedict' A.
cognoverit tent' praed etc. esse jus ipsius B. ut ill quaeiidem B. and C.
habent de dono praedict' A. and ill'remisit and quiet clam' de se and haered
suis praefat' B. et C. et haered ipsius B. etc. The release and warrantie must
be from the heirs of one of the Cognisors, where there be more then one, for in
a fine from diverse the fee is supposed to be in one only. And therefore it
must be thus. Quod praedict' A. and B. cogn' and ill'remisit etc. de se et
haered ipsius A. Et eidem A. et B. concesserunt pro s^ et haered ipsius A. quod
ipsi war' tenementa etc. si contra se et haereredes ipsius A. imperpetuum. But
if the fine be of lands in Gavel kind contra. Fourthly, the Concord need not to
rehearse all the special names of the things contained in the writ, but it is
sufficient to say Tenementa praedicta, as quod praedict' recognoverit tenementa
praedicta, etc. Fifthly, as a Concord cannot be without an original writ, so
it must pursue the original writ and cannot be of any forain thing. 1. such a
thing as is not contained in the writ, except it be consequent thereunto, as
when the writ is of land, there may be in the concord of a rent out of this
land, but there may be more things in the Precipe then are named in the
Concord. And a Concord may be with an exception of some part, but this
exception must always be of such things whereof the writ will lie and are
mentioned therein, must be certainly named, and must succeed the things out of
which they be excepted, as Precipe A. B. quod teneat C. D. conven^ etc. de
manerio de D. cum pertine^ in C. (except* uno messuagio, duabus acris terrae,
et advocatione Ecclesiae de C. etc. Et est concordia, etc. quod praed A. cogn'
tenementa praedict' cum pertinen' (except* praeexcept.) And in all these and
such like cases, as before where the concord is not formal, the Judges ought
not to receive the fine nor suffer it to pass, but if they do and the fine be
finished, it cannot afterward be avoided by writ or error or otherwise for
these faults.

The Concord and agreement may be made of an estate in fee simple, See in West.
Symb. diverse examples, Perk. Sect. 629. Broo. Fines 108.
fee tail, for life, or for years, it may be also of diverse remainders, and
that to them that are no parties but strangers to the fine. It may be also
single or double, with a render back again of some estate in the same land or
some rent out of it, so as a Concord may have in it a reservation of rent, a
clause of distress, or Nomine penae, and a warrantie. Broo. Fines 106, 118.
Co. 6. 33. Plow. 435. Dyer. 279. Co. 1, 76.
And therefore if A. levy a fine to B. Sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc.
And B. by the same Concord do grant and render the land back again to A. for
life without impeachment of wast, the remainder to C. the wife of A. for her
life, the remainder to A. and his heirs, this is a good Concord and by this
devise a Jointure may be and is oftentimes made to a woman. And if a ^nture.
man would have a lease for life or years made of land by fine, the Lease.
less^e must by the concord acknowledge the lands to be the right of the lessor
(who is seized of the land) as that, etc. And then the lessor must grant and
render the same land back again to the lessee (the conusor in the fine) for
life, life, or for a certain number of years as the agreement is, reserving a
rent with clause of distress, and this is a good fine, and a common devise for
this purpose. But if the lessor be tenant in tail, it seems this fine will not
bind the issue in tail. And yet if A. tenant in tail, and N. do by fine
acknowledge the land to be the right of a stranger, as that, etc. and then the
stranger that is cognisee does grant and render the land again to N. for life,
or years with clause of distress, etc. and then grant and render the reversion
to the tenant in tail, this is a good fine, and will bar the issue in tail
also, and will likewise pass the rent and the reversion to the tenant in
tail. So if a Stranger that has nothing in the land levy a fine Sur
cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad, etc. To him in remainder in tail
depending upon an estate for life, and the cognisee by the same fine render to
the cognisor for ten years to begin at Michaelmas following and dies, and
all the proclamations are made after his death, and the tenant for life dies
after the time the lease is to begin; this is a good fine, and so a good lease
to bar the issue in tail.

If A. B. and C. levy a fine to D. and D. render the land back again West. Sym.
ubi supra. Co. 7. 38.
to A. for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to C. in tail,
and the remainder to a stranger in fee, this or any such like concord as this
is good. And if A and B join in a fine of a mesuage to C and D and to the
heirs of C, who do grant and render a charg of 30l. out of the land to A for
his life, to begin after the death B, to be paid at the feasts of, etc. Proviso
semper quod pred concessio pred annualis reddit' 30l. non aliqualit' se
extendat ad on erand personas dict' C and D, sed tantummodo ad oner and dict'
mesuag' tota vita ipsius A. and then they grant and render the mesuage to A
during the life of H. the remainder to be in tail, the remainder to the right
heirs of B, this is a good fine. But in such a fine sur grant and render,
these things must be heeded. 1. None may take the first estate 1] 24. Ed. 3.
27. Bro. Fines 108.
by the Concord, but the Cognisors or one of them. And therefore if A knowledge
a fine to B, and B render and grant the land to A. Habendum sibi and E. uxori
ejus and the heirs of their bodies. So if the husband levy a fine of his
wives land, and the Cognisee grant and render the land to the husband and wife,
this is not a good Concord. 2. The render of the Rent must be to one of the 2]
Co. 2. in the Lord Cromwels case. 3] 24 Ed. 3. 26. 14 H. 4. 31. Dyer 69. 33,
34.]
parties to the fine, and not to astranger. 3. A man cannot reserve a less
estate to himself then fee; And therefore if A knowledge a fine to B, and B
render to A in tail, the remainder to himself for life, this remainder is
void. So if A by fine knowledge lands to B, and B grant and render the land to
the Conusor in tail, the remainde, to B in tail the remainder to B in fee,
the limitation of this estate in tail to B is void, and he can never have
execution of it. So if A knowledge the lands to B, and B does grant and render
to A 4] Co. 6. 33.
for life. 4. The agreement must be possible and sensible, for if there be
three Conusors in a fine, and the Conusee render to one of them for life or
years a rent, and grant the reversion to another of them for life or years
rendering a rent, and grant the reversion in fee or in tail to the third, this
is not a good Concord. 5. There 5] 44. Ed. 3. 22. 27 H. 8. 24.
can be no condition or clause of re-entrie for not payment of rent inserted
into the Concord, and yet some hold a fine levied to one in tail upon a
condition with a remainder over is good. Co. 3. 5. super Lit. 353. 5. 38.
And such Concords as these of the last sort before ought not to be received,
and if they be received, the fine in most cases may be avoided for these
^aults, but if a fine be received with a condition inserted into the Concord,
this is a good fine and not avoidable by writ of Error or otherwise.

No single fine can be with a remainder over to any other person contained in
it, but it must be to the Conusee and his heirs only. Plow. 248.
2. No rent can be reserved upon a fine that is Sur Conusance de 2] 50. E. 3.
9 3]. Co. 5. 38.
droit come ceo, etc. but upon a fine sur grant and render, or sur concessit:
only, for if one levy a fine sur conusance, etc. rendering rent, this
reservation is void. 3. No single or double fine shall be received with any
covenants or other agreements then are before mentioned, but in all these cases
also when the fine is received and levied it seems it is good and unavoidable,
and that only the remainder in the first case, the rent in the second, and the
Covenants in the last, are void, and the fine good for the residue.

A particular tenant, as for life, etc. cannot surrender his term 44 Ed. 3. 36.
to him in reversion or remainder by fine, but he may grant and release it to
him by fine.

One may grant his tenements which H does hold for life, and 44 Ed. 3. 45.
which after the death of H. ought to remain to him, to H. for life, rendering
rent with clause of distress, saving the reversion, and a fine of this form
is good.

The manors and tenements contained in the writ may be divided, 44 Ed. 3. 11:
45 Ed. 3. 12.
as if a fine be levied between A and B of two Manors, and B does acknowledge
all his right of the said two Manors to be the right of the said A, as that
which, etc. for which A does grant and render one Manor to B for life, with two
parts of the other Manor which N holds in dower, to have the one Manor and
two parts of the other Manor to B for life, the remainder after his death to A
in tail, and that after the death of N the third part shall remain to
another. So if a fine be levied of the Manor of G with 44. Ass. Plo. 11. Bro.
Fines 11^.
the appurtenances by A unto C, which A knowledgeth the right in C, as that
etc. and C grants and renders the same to A, in tail, the remainder of the
fourth part of the Manor toward the West to the said A and her heirs, the
remainder of another fourth part toward the East to I. in fee, and so of the
other two fourth parts. Or incertainly by 3. third parts in remainder to A, B
and C in remainder severally, and these are good Concords.

If T and E his wife levy a fine to R, D and T C of diverse Co. 5. 38.
Manors and lands in A, B and C, and in the fine there are diverse, grants and
renders, and one grant and render is of the Manors of A and B and the lands
therein to T and E, and the heirs of T, and in another render 100. acres
parcel of one of the same Manors is granted to E in tail, the remainder to
the right heirs of a stranger, notwithstanding this repugnancy, the Concord
and consequently the whole fine is good.

The fine must be levied and sued forth in that manner and order See before.
(...). In respect of the manner and order of levying it, and other matters.
as before is set forth, for if it be not so, but that there want an Original
writ, or if there be one, it does bear Test after the Dedimus Potestatem, or
the like, it will be a defective fine, and either ipso facto void, or at least
voidable by writ of Error.

If any one of the Conusors die before the Conusance be certified Dyer 220:
254* Crom, Jur. 92. Dyer 246,
after it is acknowledged and taken, the fine cannot now be made a good fine,
and yet if the Commissioners shall certify this Conusance with an antedate,
and so the fine be finished, this may be a good fine at the common Law, but
perhaps may be avoided by sentence in the Star Chamber. But if the Conusance
be certified and the Kings silver paid to the King before the death of the
Conusor, the fine may be engrossed and finished after his death well enough,
and it will be a good fine. And if a feme sole make a Conusance of a fine; and
before it be certified and engrossed she take a husband, this will not let but
the fine may be finished, and albeit it be recorded and sued out in her name as
sole, whereas in truth she is covert and of another name, yet is the fine a
good fine, however in this case it is not amiss to get a release of Errors
from her husband.

Lands that are bought of diverse persons may pass by one fine, West. Sym. ubi
sup^a.
and then the writ of covenant must be brought by all the vendees against all
the vendors, and they must every one of them warrant for himself and his
heirs, and such a fine is good.

If lands lie in diverse shires, it may be contained in one Concord Dyer 227. 15
Ed. 4. 33.
and good enough, but there must be several writs of Covenant in every County,
else the fine will not be good.

If a fine be levied of Covin by a lessee for years, or life, or a Copiholder
Co. 3. 78. 8. 9. 105.
of purpose, and with an intent to bar him in reversion Covin. Recovery.
or the Lord of his inheritance, this is of no force, and therefore non-claime
within five years will not hurt in this case. So that it seems Co. 3. 80. 16 H.
7. 5. See infra in Deed. Nu.
a fine or recovery may be covinous and avoidable for Covin as well as a deed,
and therefore that a fine or recovery levied or suffered of fraud to deceive
Purchasors or Creditors will be void as to them as well as any other
conveyance. So also a fine or recovery levied or Usury.
suffered in execution or pursuit of an usurious contract may be void by the
Statutes of usury as well as a feoffment or other conveyance by deed. But a
fine or recovery shall not be said to be levied Duresse.
or suffered per duresse, and avoided for that cause.

The Conusance of a Fine, and a Grant and Render therein shall 7. How the
concord of a Fine shall be expounded and taken.
Co. 5. 38. See in exposition of Deeds infra
be expounded and taken as a Charter or other conveyance between party and
party, because it is a conveyance upon Record, and not as a writ or judgment
upon Record. And therefore if A and B by fine knowledge the Manors of S, T and
W to be the right of C, and C does render the Manors of S and T to A by one
render, and after by another render limit 100. Acres, parcel of the Manor of S
to B, this shall be a good Concord, and be expounded according to the intent of
the parties. viz. That B shall have the 100. acres, and A all the residue of
the Manor.

If a fine be levied to two men and heredibus, without the word 37 H. 6. 5.
[Suis] this is void for incertainty in a fine as it is in a deed. Deed.


If a fine believed, come ceo que il ad de son done, hereby a fee-simple
Recovery.
Co. super Lit. 9. Frederick versus Wakefields case. Trin. 36 Eliz. Co. B.
will pass without any word of heirs. And so also it is in case of a common
recovery.

If the lands be limited in the Concord of a fine to B for life, and after to
the children of C begotten, and C has at the time of the fine levied two
daughters only; in this case the sons and daughters that are borne after
shall take nothing by this fine. And no averment of intent will help in these
cases. And yet an averment Averment.
lies upon a fine of the uses thereof and of no other matters as upon a deed.

A fine at the common Law, or a fine without Proclamations was Stat. 18 Ed. 1.
de ^in^bus Stat. 34 Ed. 3. 16. Plow. 373. Stat. 4. H. 7. chapter 24. 1 R. 3. chapter 7.
32 H. 8. chapter 36.
8. What persons shall be barred by a Fine, or a Fine and Non-claime. And in
what time. Or not. And how.
once a perpetual bar to all persons that had right and no impediment at the
time of the fine levied, and that did not claim within a year and a day after
the execution of the fine by possession; but now this Law is changed, and this
kind of fine will bar none but such as are parties and privies thereunto. But
a fine by the Statute, or a fine with Proclamations is now much of the same
virtue and force as a fine at the common law was, for by the Statute of 4 H. 7.
it is provided, That every fine after the engrossing thereof shall be
proclaimed in the Court the same Term, and the three next following Terms,
four several days in every Term; which Proclamations so made, the fine
shall conclude all parties privies and strangers, except women covert, persons
within 21. years of age, in prison, out of the Realm, or of non sane memory,
(being no parties to the fine) so as they or their heirs take their action or
lawful entry within five years after these imperfections removed. Saving to
all persons and their heirs (other then parties) the right claim and interest
which they have at the time of the fine, so as they pursue it by action or
entry within five years after the Proclamations. And saving to all other
persons such right, title, claim and interest as first shall grow or come to
them after the Proclamations by force of any matter before the fine, so as they
make their claim or entry within five years after the same grow due, or if
at that time there be any impediment as aforesaid, within five years after the
impediment removed. And by the Statute of 32 H. 8. (which is an exposition of
this Statute) it is provided, That all fines with Proclamations levied
according to 4 H. 7. by any person of 21. years of age of any land, etc.
before the fine levied entailed to him that does levy the fine or any of his
Ancestors in possession, reversion, remainder, or use, immediately after
Proclamations had shall be a bar against him and his heirs, claiming only by
force of any such entaile, and against all others claiming only to the use of
him or any heir of his body. By which Statute it does appear that all the
parties, to the fine Conusors and Conusees, whether they be femes Covert, men
de non sane memory, or others, (Infants only excepted, who during minority may
avoid it) and whether they have a natural or civil capacity: and privies,
viz. privies in blood, as heirs, whether they be lineall or collateral, or
privies in representation, as executors and administrators: and all strangers
also, viz. all others besides parties and privies that have or pretend any
present right or title (except women covert, and the rest that have impediment
that do make their entry or claim, or bring their action within 5. years
after Proclamations had, and those persons excepted also if they make not their
claim, etc. within five years after the impediment removed) all these are
concluded. i. so shut and closed up together, for their right is so extinct
hereby, as they can never open their mouths or lift up a finger against it.
Saving to all others. i. such as have no present right at the time of the fine
levied, and were excepted before such right, title, claim or interest as shall
accrue to them after the Proclamations upon any trust, gift in tail, or other
cause, before the fine levied, so as they make their claim, etc. within five
years after their right first accrewed if they have then no impediment, or if
they have, within five years after the impediment removed.

For a more full understanding of which Statutes and this matter, these things
in general must first be observed. 1. That the persons to be barred by a fine
are, 1 Parties. 2 Privies. 3 Estrangers. The parties if they be of the age of
21. years, are bound for ever by the fine, and shall have no time to claim to
preserve their right. The privies also, being heirs and executors to the
parties and void of impediment at the time of the fine levied, or not, if they
claim by the same title that their Ancestor had that levied the fine, are
barred for ever by the fine, and shall have no time to claim to preserve their
right. Dyer 3. pasche, 7. Jac. B. R.
And therefore if my father disseise my Grandfather of land, and then levy a
fine of the land, and then my Grandfather die, and after my Father die, by this
fine I am barred of the land for ever. And here note, Trin. 21 Jac. Com. B.
Curia in in Will. Godfreys case.
that he that is a privy within the intent of 4 H. 7. is an heir within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. Et sic e converso. And that privies or heirs in estate and
blood, as he that is heir to whom the land does or should descend are within
these Statutes, and shall be barred by the fine of their Ancestor of that land.
And so also shall privies in estate that are not privies in blood, as where one
has land in burrow English, and levy a fine of it, hereby the youngest son
is barred. So if one be tenant in tail to him and the heirs females of his
body, and he levy a fine, having a son and daughter, hereby the issue female
is barred, and yet she is not the heir of his blood. But he that is privy in
blood only, and not in estate also, is not within these Statutes, neither shall
he be barred by the fine, and therefore if lands be given to a man, and the
heirs females of his body, and he has a son and a daughter, and the son
levy a fine and die without issue, this is no bar to the daughter, for
howsoever she be heir of his blood, yet she is not heir to the estate, nor
shall need to make her conveyance to it by him. The strangers that are to be
concluded by the fine, are either, 1. Such as have present right and no
impediment, and these are barred within five years if they make not their
claim within five years after the Proclamations. 2. Such as have present
right, but have impediment of infancy, etc. and these are barred if they do
not make their claim within five years after the impediment removed. 3. Such
as have no present but future right upon cause precedent, and they are either
without impediment, and then they are barred if they claim not within five
years after their right does acrew; or they have impediments, and then they
are barred if they claim not within five years after the impediment removed.
4. Such as have neither present nor future right at the time of the levying of
the fine by reason of any matter before the fine, but whose right grows
either entirely after, or partly before, and partly after the fine, and these
are not barred at all by the fine, but they may make their claim, etc. when
they will. And parties, privies, and strangers to Plow. 538. 337, 375, 378.
fines that are barred thereby, are such as have natural capacities or civil,
for both these are barred. And therefore it is held, if such a Corporation as
has an absolute estate and authority of his possessions so as he may maintain
a writ of right thereof, as Major and Communalty, Deane and Chapter, etc. levy
a fine of their lands, they and their successors are barred presently, but if a
Bishop, Deane, or Prebend, without assent of the Deane and Chapter, or a Parson
and Vicar without assent of the Patron and Ordinary had levied a fine, this
would not have barred the successor; neither will it bar now with their
assent, for they are restrained by diverse Statutes. So also such persons are
barred by the fines that are levied by others if they make not their claim in
time, as if one disseise a Corporation aggregate of land belonging to their
Corporation, and after levy a fine of it with Proclamations, and they do not
make their claim, etc. within five years, hereby they are barred. 2. Where the
Ancestor is barred by the fine, there for Co. 9. 105.
the most part the heir is barred also. And therefore if tenant in tail be
disseised, and the disseisor levy a fine with Proclamations, and the tenant in
tail suffer five years to pass without claim, etc. hereby he and his issues
are barred for ever, so that the heir does suffer for the laches of his
Ancestor. 3. The estates that shall be Co. 9. 104, 5, 124.
barred by the fine are estates by the common Law, or by Copihold, in
fee-simple, fee-taile, or for life, or for years, the estates also of ^enant
by Statute, Elegit, and of Gardens in Chivalrie, and of Executors that have
land until debts and Legacies be paid. And therefore if one enter upon, and put
out a Copiholder of land, and levy a fine thereof, and the Copiholder suffer
five years to pass and make no claim, etc. the Copiholder and his Lord both
are hereby barred for ever. And if a lease be made for years, and the lessor
or another before entry of the lessee levy a fine with Proclamations, and the
lessee does not not make his claim, etc. within five years, hereby the lessee
is barred of his interest forever. 4. The Plow. 378. Bro. Fines. 123. Co. 5.
124.
things whereunto these Statutes do extend, are lands and tenements, and not a
Rent or other profit apprender out of the land, and therefore if I have a rent,
common, or Estovers out of land, or a way over land, or power to sell the land,
and a fine is levied of the land it self, and I do not make my claim of my
rent, etc. within five years, yet I am not hereby barred of my rent, etc. And
for this cause it is, that if a tenant in ancient demesne levy a fine of his
land, and five years pass, the Lord is not hereby barred to avoid it, for
herein he claims not the land but his ancient Seigniorie. 5. The time in
which they must make their claim, or bring Plow. Lord Zouches case, 370.
their action that have present right and no impediment is within five years
after Proclamation had, and the time for them which have impediments is within
five years after the impediments removed. 6. The time within which they must
make their claim Dyer. 3. Co. 3. 86, 91. Plow. 373.
or bring their action whose right does happen afterward, if they have no
impediment, is within five years after the time that their right does accrue,
and if there be any impediment within five years after the impediment removed.
7. The persons whose right is saved and preserved are mentioned in the first
and second Saving of the Statute of 4 H. 7. and they are strangers and not
parties nor privies. 8. They that have benefit by the first Saving of the
Statute shall have none by the second Saving, for he that will be within the
second Saving to have benefit by it must be, 1 Another person. 2 The right must
come and acrew to him first. 3 It must come to him after the fine and
Proclamations. 4 His right must be upon some cause or matter before the fine.
9. No fine shall Co. 5. 124. 9. 106.
bar any estate in possession, reversion, or remainder which is not divested
and put to a right at the time of the fine levied. And therefore if one levy a
fine of my land whiles I am in possession of it, this fine will not hurt me. So
if the tenant of the land, out of which I have a Rent or Common, etc. levy a
fine of the land, this shall not bar me of my Rent or Common, for I am still
in possession of this in the judgment of the Law. So if there be tenant for
life the remainder for life, or tenant in tail the remainder in tail, and the
first tenant in tail or for life do bargain and fell the land by deed
indented and enrolled, and after levy a fine to the bargainee, in this case
the remainders are not barred, albeit five years pass without claim, for the
Law in these cases does adjudge them always in possession. So if I make a
Lease for years of land, rendering a rent, and a stranger levy a fine of the
land, and the lessee for years pays his rent to me duly, in this case I am
said to be always in possession, and therefore am not barred by this fine of
my reversion. So if there be a tenant by Copy or lease for life, the remainder
for life, and the first tenant for life accept of a fine of the land with
proclamations and 5 years pass without claim etc. hereby he that is in
remainder is not barred. So if one have a lease for years of land to begin in
futuro and a fine is levied of the land, and five years pass after the term
begin, it seems this is no bar, because this estate is not put to a right.
And for the further illustration of all these things see the examples
following. Stat. 4 H. 7. 32 H. 8. Co. super lit. 372. 1] Co. 9. 138. 140. Dier.
3.
If tenant in tail levy a fine of the land intailed with proclamations 2.
Issue in tail barred by the fine of his Ancestor or some other.
according to the statutes, this is a bar to the estate tail, wherein these
things are to be known. 1. That wheresoever the issue does claim by the same
title, and must make his Conveyance to the lands by him that levied the fine,
there the fine will bar him, and therefore if lands be given to the husband
and wife in special tail, viz. to them and to the heirs of their two bodies
issuing, or the like, or if the gift be to them and the heirs males or females
of their two bodies, or to them and the heirs of their bodies with the
remainder to the right heirs of the husband in fee, and the husband alone
levieth a fine with proclamations, by this the issue in tail is barred. And
yet so as the right of the wife is saved so as she makes her claim etc. within
five years after her husbands death. Dier 354?
So if husband and wife tenants in special tail have issue and the wife die,
and the husband marry another wife and have issue and levy a fine Sur
cognizance de droit come ceo etc. and take back by the same fine an estate in
special tail the remainder over etc. and die, the issue by the first wife is
barred. Co. 3. 90.
So if tenant in tail be disseised, or make a feoffment in fee, and after
levy a fine with proclamations to the disseisor or to a stranger, the issues
in tail are hereby barred for ever, the continuance of the possession in a
another notwithstanding. Co. super Lit. 372.
So if a gift be made to the eldest son and the heirs of his body, the
remainder to the father and the heirs of his body, and the father dies, and
the eldest son levy a fine with proclamations and dies without issue, this
shall bar the second son for ever for the remainder descended to the
eldest. Curia trin. 21 Jac. Co. E
So if lands be given to an eldest son and the heirs of the body of his
father (the father being then dead) and he levy a fine of this land, this will
bar the younger brother. Dier. 3.
But if the issue in tail do not make his title by him that did levy the
fine, there the fine will not bar, and therefore if my father be tenant in
tail, and his brother disseise him and levy a fine, and he and my father dye,
this fine shall not bar me as issue in tail, because I do not make my title
to the land by him: but if I suffer five years to pass and do not make my
claim etc. by this means I may be barred by the fine. Plow. 435.
And if the fine be levied of another thing then the thing it self entailed,
As if the tenant in tail grant by fine a Rent, Common, or the like out of the
land intailed, this fine will not bar the issue. So if a Rent be entailed and
the tenant in tail of the Rent disseise the terre-tenant of the land out of
which the rent does issue, and then levy a fine of the land, this is no bar
to the issue of the Rent. 2. Albeit the fine be a double fine 2] Co. 76. 3. 85.
super Lit. 353. Bio. fines. 118. Dier. 279.
with a grant and render, yet it is within these Statutes, and will bar the
issue in tail as well as a single fine, so as the grant and render be of the
land it self and not of any profit apprender out of it. And therefore if
husband and wife be tenants in special tail, and they levy a fine with
proclamations, and the Conusee grant and render the land to them and their
heirs, this fine will bar the issue in tail. And if tenant in tail join
with I. S. and levy a fine to a stranger, and the stranger does grant and
render the land again to I. S. for years, and to the tenant in tail in fee
afterward; the issue in tail is barred by this fine. So if there be tenant
for life, the Remainder in tail, and he in remainder in tail accept of a fine
from a stranger, and grant and render to the stranger again for years with a
remainder over, hereby the issue in tail is bound. Plow. 435.
If tenant in tail accept of a fine of the land entailed from a stranger, and
then grant and render a Rent out of the land to the stranger by the same fine,
this will not bind the issue in tail to pay the same Rent. Dier 117.
If tenant in tail make a feoffement on Condition, and die having two sisters
inheritable to the tail, and one of them levy a fine with proclamations sur
Release to the feoffee of the whole, in this case it is doubted whether the
other sister be barred of her half or not. 3. Albeit the tenant in 3] Co. 3.
86. 87. 1 in Shelleys Case.
tail die before all the proclamations be finished, yet when they be finished
as they may be after his death, the issue, in tail are bound by the fine, for
howsoever by the death of the tenant in tail the right of the estate tail
does descend to the issue, yet when the proclamations are passed this right
that does descend is bound by the Statutes, and the issue cannot by any claim
etc. save the right of the estate tail that does descend unto him. 4. Albeit
the 4] Co. 3. 84. 91.
issue in tail be within age, out of the Realm, under Coverture, non compos
mentis, or in prison at the time of the fine levied and the proclamations
passed, yet the estate tail is barred by the fine. And therefore if A. be
tenant for life of land the remainder to B. in tail, the reversion to B. and
his heirs expectant, and B. levy a fine to C. and his heirs, and has issue
and die before all the proclamations are passed, the issue in tail being then
out of the Realm, the proclamations are made, and after the issue in tail
comes into the Realm and claims the remainder in tail upon the land, in
this case the estate tail is barred for ever. 5. These Statutes do extend to
fines levied by tenant in tail by 5] Co. 3. 90. Dier. 279. Plow. 435.
Conclusion, and the issue shall be bound by the fine of their Ancestor unto
whom they are privy in estate and blood, albeit parts finis nihil habuerunt
tempore finis. And therefore if the issue in tail in the life of his Ancestor
when he has only a possibility, As if there be grandfather, father, and
son, and the grandfather be tenant in tail, and the father levy a fine of
the land before the grandfathers death, and then the grandfather dye before the
father, and after the father dye, in this case the issue is barred by this
fine: Curia. Trin 21. Jac. Com. B. Godfry and Wades case. Dier 48.
so also if the grandfather survive the father. But in case of a collateral
descent, if the collateral Ancestor die in the life time of his father without
issue, this fine is no bar, but if he survive his father, contra. So if lands
be given to the grandfather and his wife in special tail, and the grandfather
dies and the father does disseise the grandmother, and does levy a fine with
proclamations, the grandmother dies and then the father dies, in this case
the son is barred. Co. 3. 50, 51. 9. 140.
So if lands be conveyed in tail to a woman for her Jointure within the
Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 20. and whiles she lives the issue in tail does
levy a fine of the land, by this the issues inheritable to the estate tail are
barred for ever. Plow. 434, 435.
So if tenant in tail make a feoffement or be disseised, and after levy a fine
with proclamations for a stranger, hereby his issues are barred for ever.
Curia. 21. Iac. Co. B.
So if tenant in tail die and his issue before his entry (having a freehold in
law only) does levy a fine with proclamations, this shall be a bar to his
issues and to his collateral heirs and brothers of the half blood. Idem.
So if a tenant in tail have four daughters and one of them levy a fine in
the life of the father, this will be a bar to her issue for the fourth part
of the land. Co. 3. 50, 51. 9. 140.
But in these cases before and such like where the issue in tail does levy a
fine in the life time of the tenant in tail, the tenant in tail himself may
after levy a fine of the land, and thereby bar his issue, and the Conusee
also to whom his issue has levied a fine, and therefore in all these cases it
is supposed that the tenant in tail does dye and suffer the right to descend
to his issue. Co. 10. 50. 9. 141. 3. 50, 51.
If lands be given by will to one when he shall come to his age of twenty four
years, to hold to him and the heirs of his body, and he after his age of
twenty one years levy a fine of this land with proclamations, this is a bar
to the issue in tail. If a disseisor make a gift in tail, and the donee make
a feoffment to A. and after levy a fine with proclamations to B. that has
nothing in the land, this fine will bar the issues in tail and they shall
not avoid it by pleading that parts finis nihil habuerunt etc. but it is no
bar to the disseisee, for he may avoid it by this plea when he will. Co. 3.
84.
And a fortiori therefore, if a fine be levied by the tenant in tail that has
only an estate of freehold in remainder or reversion is good: as if A. be
tenant for life, the remainder to B. in tail, and B. levy a fine, albeit this
be no discontinuance, yet it is a bar to the estate Discontinuance.
tail. Trin. 21 Iac. Co B. Will. Godfrey versus Wades case.
But if tenant in tail have issue a son and a daughter, and the son living
the tenant in tail levy a fine and dye without issue, and then the tenant in
tail dies, by this the daughter and the estate tail is not barred. So if the
younger son levy a fine in the life of the father, and then the tenant in
tail dye, this is no bar to the elder son. So if lands be given to a man
and the heirs females of his body, and he has a son and a daughter, and the
son does levy a fine of the land, this is no bar to the daughter. So if
tenant in tail have a daughter his wife being with child of a son, and the
daughter levy a fine, and after the son is borne, this fine shall not bar
the son, for these howbeit they be privies and heirs to the blood yet are
not privies and heirs to the estate. 6. Albeit the estate passed by the fine
be afterward (...) J Co. 3. 91.
before all the proclamations had avoided, yet the issue in tail is barred by
it. And therefore if tenant in tail discontinue in fee, and after disseise the
discontinuee and levy a fine with proclamations to a stranger, and take an
estate back by Render in the same fine, and the discontinuee before all the
proclamations pass enter and claim and so avoid the fine, yet hereby the
estate tail is barred. Per Popham et Fenner. Just. M. 39. 40. Eliz. B. R.
And if tenant in tail infeoffe the issue in tail and after disseise him and
levy a fine, the issue enter, and after the proclamations pass, and after the
issue in tail does infeoffe the tenant in tail which levied the fine and
dies, it seems this fine shall bar the issues in tail. 7. This is a bar
to the estate tail 7] Co. 1. 76. super Lit. 372.
and to the issues only and is no bar to him in remainder or reversion, and
therefore when the estate tail is spent this bar is at an end. And therefore
if an estate be limited to A. and B. his wife and the heirs males of the body
of A. the remainder to C. and A. and B. have issue and A. dye and B. and her
issue, or her issue alone levy a fine, this will bar the issues of the issues
whiles there be any, but they fail it will not bar C. in remainder, except
he suffer five years to pass and so be barred by his non claim. So if tenant
for life and he that is next in the remainder in tail join in a fine, this is
a good bar to the issues in tail for ever as long as that estate tail shall
continue, but not to him that is next in remainder, nor to any other that shall
come in of any remainder in tail or in fee nor to him in reversion. Co. 10.
96. and 9 Iac. B. R.
If lands be given to A. and the heirs males of his body, the remainder to B.
and the heirs males of his body, the remainder to the right heirs of A. and
A. does bargain and sell this land by deed indented and enrolled to I. S. and
his heirs, and after levy a fine of it sur Conusance de droit come ceo etc. to
him and his heirs, by this the remainder to B. is Discontinuance.
not discontinued, but it is a bar to the estate tail by the Statutes, and
causes the estate of the bargainee to last so long as the tenant in tail has
issues of his body, but if the fine had been before the bargain and sale it
had been a discontinuance of the remainder, but in neither case a bar to him
in remainder unless he suffer himself to be barred by his non-claime within
five years after his remainder happen to come in possession. 8. If there be 8]
Co. super. Lit. 372
tenant in tail the remainder to him in tail, and the tenant in tail levy a
fine of this land, hereby both his estates are barred. Et sic de similibus. y]
Bro. Fines 121. Co. 6. 55. Dyer. 4. Co. super Lit. 372. Co. 8. 17. 78.
But all this notwithstanding, If lands be conveyed to a woman in tail for her
jointure within the Statute of 11 H. 7. chap. 20. and she levy a fine of this
land, this will not bar the issues in tail. Or if lands be given in tail to
any subject by the Kings own gift or provision, and the tenant in tail levy a
fine, this fine shall not bind the issues in tail nor the King, but others it
will bar, for these fines are not intended within, but excepted out of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. but the King himself being tenant in tail of the gift of
some of his Ancestors being subjects may levy a fine of it to bar his issues
in tail. And in all cases where a recovery will not bar the issues in tail,
there a fine will not bar them.

Albeit the fine of the husband and wife together of the wives Dyer 72. Plow.
373.
2 Wife barred by the fine of her husband or some other.
land, or of the land of the husband and wife together, be a perpetual bar
to her and her heirs for ever, yet if the husband alone levy a fine with
Proclamations of such land, and then he die, in this case she is not barred of
her right, but if she do not make her claim, etc. within five years after
her husbands death she is barred of her right for ever, notwithstanding the
Statute of 32 H. 8. M. 18. Jac. Co. B. in Anne Twists case.
And if one seized of land in fee mary a wife, and after make a lease of this
land to A. for life, the remainder to B. in fee, and B levy a fine with
Proclamations, and the husband die, and the wife do not make her claim, etc.
within five years after the death of her husband; hereby she is barred of her
dower for ever notwithstanding the estate for life in A. but if the remainder
of B. had been put to a right at the time of the fine levied she might have
avoided the fine by Plea. Quod parts finis nihil habuerunt, etc. Dyer 224. Co.
2. 93.
And if the husband levy a fine of his own land and die, and his widow having
no impediment does not make her claim within five years after his death;
hereby she is barred of her dower for ever. Dyer. 358.
If a jointure be made to a woman after the coverture, and her husband and she
levy a fine of it; hereby without question she is barred of her jointure in
this land, but it is thought that this is no bar of her dower in the residue
of the land of the husband, and especially then when the fine is Sur conusance
de droit come ceo, etc. Dyer 351.
If lands be given to a man and his wife in tail, the remainder to the right
heirs of the husband, and the husband alone levy a fine of this, this will
not bar the wife except she suffer five years to pass after his death
without making claim, etc. and therefore if the fine be to the use of the
husband and his heirs in fee he may dispose it as a fee simple and his issue
has no remedy.

If a man disseise me of the land I have in fee simple, or fee tail, 3.
Disseisee and the like barred by the fine of the disseisor, etc.
Co. 9. 105. 3. 87. super Lit. 298.
and after levy a fine of this land with Proclamations, and I do not make my
claim, etc. within five years after the Proclamations had, hereby I and my
heirs are barred for ever of this land. And if I being such a tenant in fee
make a lease for years, or be the Lord of any Copyhold estate, and my lessee
for years, or Copyholder in fee, or for life be ousted, and I thereby
disseised, and the disseisor levy a fine, and neither I nor my lessee for
years, or Copyholder, do make any claim, etc. within the five years after
the fine levied, hereby we are all barred for ever. And if one disseise me of
land, and after make a lease for life of it, and then levy a fine with
Proclamations, and I suffer five years to pass, hereby I am barred both of
the reversion and of the estate for life also.

If tenant for life make a feoffment in fee, and the feoffee levy Plow. in
Stowels case.
a fine with Proclamations, and he in reversion or remainder do not make his
claim, etc. within five years, hereby he is barred for ever.

If I pretend right or title to land, and enter upon it, and put him Co. 3. 79.
out that is in possession, and then I levy a fine with Proclamations, with an
intent to bar him, and he does not make his claim, etc. within five years,
hereby he is barred for ever, albeit he had the true right, and I no right at
all.

If I purchase land of H. and after perceiving my title defeasible, and that a
stranger has the right of the land, I do levy a fine Co. 3. 79. Doct. and
St. 83. 155.
to, or take a fine from another with Proclamations with intent and of purpose
to bar him that has right, and he suffer five years to pass, and does not
make his claim, etc. hereby he is barred of his right for ever. And in these
and such like cases, there is no relief Equity.
to be had in equity. See more in Numb. 11. infra.

If there be tenant in tail, the remainder in tail, and the tenant 9. Where a
Fine shall be a bar as to one person, and not to another, or as to one part
of the land, and not to another.
Co. 10. 95. 9. 106.
in tail bargain and sell the land by deed indented and enrolled, and after
levy a fine with Proclamations to the bargainee Sur Conusance de droit come
ceo, etc. in this case as to the tenant in tail and his issue this is a bar,
but as to all others it is no bar, albeit they never make any claim, etc. So
if tenant in tail levy a fine of his intailed land, this is a bar as to him
and his issues, but as to all others it is no bar at all, and therefore he in
remainder or reversion in their times may enter notwithstanding. Co. 9. 140.
142.
So if lands be entailed to the husband and wife, and the heirs of their two
bodies, and the husband alone levy a fine of this land, this as to the husband
tenant in tail and his issues is a bar, but not as to the wife, for she
shall be tenant in tail still, and yet it seems she may not suffer Recoverie.
a recovery of this land afterward. So if a man attainted of felony or treason
levy a fine of his land, this as to the King and Lord of whom the land is held
is void, and is no bar to their advantage and title of forfeiture, but as to
all others it is a good bar. 7 H. 4. 44. F. N. B. 98. Plow.
So if one levy a fine of Lands in Ancient demesne and of other lands
together, this as to the lands in Ancient demesne is not good, nor any bar at
all, but as to the other lands it is a good bar.

By the ancient common law, he that had right, was bound to Co. super Lit. 254.
262
make claim, etc. within a year and a day after the fine levied and 10. The
time of claim, and within what time he that has right to land must make his
claim, etc. to prevent the barie of the fine.
execution thereupon, or else he was barred for ever, but this bar by
non-claime is now gone, and if such a fine without Proclamations be levied at
this day, he that has right may make his claim at any time to prevent the
bar, and avoid the force of the fine.

Parties to fines void of impediment at the time of the fine levied Stat. 1 R.
3. chapter 7. 4. H. 7. chapter 24.
are barred of the land presently, and shall have no time to avoid Parties.
the same fine by entry, claim, etc. And privies in blood, and privies in
representation claiming by the same title which their Ancestor Privies.
that levied the same fine had, shall be barred by the same fine presently, and
that whether they have any impediment or not.

Estrangers to fines, (being all such as are neither parties nor privies)
Estrangers. 1. That have present right and no impediment.
who have right to the land whereof the fine is levied, and See the Sta. Plow.
374. Co. 9. 105.
have no impediment natural or legal, shall have time to make their claim,
etc. within five years after the fine levied and Proclamations had, and no
longer. And therefore if lessee for years, tenant by Elegit, Statute, or a
Copiholder in fee, or for life, be ousted, and he in reversion disseised, they
shall have but one 5. years between them to make their claim, etc. and if they
claim not within that time they are all barred for ever, for they have all
present right and may bring their action presently: but otherwise it is where
the tenant for life, and he in reversion be disseised, for in this case he in
reversion is not barred by the first five years after the fine levied, for in
that time he can have no action, therefore he shall have time to make his
claim 5. years after the death of the tenant for life. Plow. 356. 375.
If a disseisor levy a fine with Proclamations of the land whereof the
disseisin was, the disseisee must make his claim within the first 5. years
after the Proclamations had, and if he happen to die within the five years,
his heir shall not have 5. years more, but so much time more as to make up the
time incurred in his father or other Ancestors time, 5. years, and albeit he be
an Infant at the time of his Ancestors death, yet he shall have no longer time.
19 H. 8. 7. Plow. 374. Dyer 3.
If a tenant in tail be disseised, and the disseisor levy a fine, the tenant
in tail or his issues must make their claim within the next five years after
the Proclamations passed, otherwise they be barred for ever. The like it is in
the lachesse of him in remainder or reversion. Co. 100.
And if in these and such like cases, he that has present right and is without
impediment bring upon himself any impediment, as if being within the Realm at
the time when the fine is levied, he do afterward go beyond the Sea, or the
like, in these cases he shall have no longer time then the first five years
after the proclamations had.

Estrangers to fines pestred with impediments of Infancy, Coverture, See the
statutes. Plow. 359. Dier 3. Plow. 367. 377.
2. That have present right and impediment.
Madness, Idiocy, Lunacy, Imprisonment, or absence out of the Realm, at the
time of the levying of the fine, and having then any present interest or right
shall have five years time after Infant.
the infirmity removed to make their claim etc. And therefore an Infant
regularly shall have time for five years after he come to his full age to make
his claim etc. although he be in his mothers womb at the time of the fine
levied. And yet if my fathers brother disseise him, and levy a fine with
proclamations, and a year after the proclamations my father dies, and after
and within five years my uncle dies, in this case I by reason of my infancy
shall have only so much time to avoid the same as at the death of my father
remained to come of the five years next after the proclamations, and not a new
five years, because I claim by the same title that my father had. So if my
father, or other ancestor be disseised and the disseisor levy a fine with
proclamations, and my father or ancestor dye within five years after the
proclamations, in this case I shall not have a new five years, but only so much
as remains of the old five years to make my claim etc. Madmen Non sane
memory.
Plow. 366. 375.
and Lunatickes (being strangers to the fine) shall have the like time to make
their claim etc. as Infants have, and yet if this infirmity happen after the
fine levied, and before the last proclamations be made, these persons are not
bound to the first years, but shall have five years time after they be cured of
their maladies. Women Plow. 375. 376.
Women Covert.
Covert (estrangers to the fine) shall have five years time after they be
discovert to pursue their right. But if a feme sole (estranger to a fine) have
present right, and after the fine levied she take a husband, and so five years
pass after the proclamations had, in this case she is barred and shall have no
further time to claim. Estrangers to fines imprisoned at the time of the fine
levied shall have the same time and liberty Infants have, but if such
imprisonment Plow. 360. 366. 375.
Imprisonment.
happen after the time of the fine levied and before the last proclamation
made, it seems they shall have five years after the enlargement. And
estrangers to fines being out of the Realm at the time of the levying thereof
shall have five years time after Out of England.
Plow. 366.
their return to enter or claim etc. But if they be in England at the time of
levying of the fine, and after go beyond the Seas, and suffer the five years
after the proclamations to pass, in this case they shall have no longer time,
except they be sent in the Kings service and by his commandment. (...) Sr.
Tho. Cottons case 27 Eliz.
And if the party be beyond the Sea at the time of the fine levied, and never
return but dye there, it seems in this case the fine will not bar his heir
at all.

Estrangers to fines that have diverse defects or infirmities, as 3. That have
diverse defects.
Infancy, Coverture, non-sanity of mind, imprisonment, absence Plow. 375. Dier
133.
out of the Realm, to avoid fines shall have time for five years after the
last of the infirmities removed. But if they have diverse impediments, and they
be all once after the proclamations made wholly removed, and after they fall
into the like again and dye, in this case their heirs shall not have a new
five years, but the first five years begun in their Ancestors time immediately
after the first impediments so removed shall proceed, and non-claime of their
heirs during all the residue of the said five years binds them as their said
Ancestors should have been bound thereby if they had remained void of such
impediments during all the said five years.

Estrangers to fines that have no present but a future right, and 4. That are
without impediment having future right upon cause precedent.
that such as grows wholly before the proclamations, if they be Plow. 373.
Dier 224.
void of impediment shall have five years time after their right, title,
claim or interest first grows, remains, descends or comes to them after
the proclamations. And therefore if a Mortgagee be disseised and the disseisor
does levy a fine with proclamations, and the five years pass, and after the
Mortgagor pays or tendreth the money, in this case he shall have time for
five years after the tender or payment of the money to make his claim etc. So
if a man levy a fine of his land whereof his wife is dowable, she shall have
five years after her husbands death to make her claim etc. and not be bound by
the five years after the fine. Plow. 374.
So if tenant in tail levy a fine with proclamations, and after the five
years dies without issue, the donor shall have five years after his death
without issue to bring his Formedon. Co. 78. Plow. 373. 374.
So if lessee for life levy a fine, or make a feoffement in fee and the feoffee
does levy a fine; in this case he in reversion or remainder shall not be bound
by the next five years after the fine levied, but he shall five years next
after the death of the tenant for life, and if he dye within the five years,
his heirs shall have only so much time as to make up the time before his death
five years. Plow. 374. Co. 9. 105.
So also is the law if lessee for life be disseised, and the disseisor or a
stranger levy a fine, in this case he in reversion or his heirs shall have
five years after the death of the tenant for life and shall not be bound to the
next five years after the time of the fine levied. Plow. 374. 19 H. 8. 7. Co.
3. 87. 84. Dier 3.
So if tenant in tail in possession levy a fine and dye without issue, in this
case he in the remainder shall have time for five years after the death of the
tenant in tail without issue, and if he make not his claim etc. in that time,
he and his issues are barred for ever. The same law is for him in reversion or
the donor if there be no remainder. Co. 3. 87.
And if tenant in tail discontinue in fee, and the discontinuee levieth a fine
with proclamations, and five years do pass and the tenant in tail dies, in
this case his issue shall have five years after the Descender to bring his
Formedon. 30 El.
But if tenant in tail discontinue rendering rent and dye, and the issue accept
the Rent (which does bar him for his time) and then the discontinuee levieth
a fine and dies, in this case the issue of the issue shall not be barred by
the five years after the fine, but shall have five years after the death of
the issue. Plow. 374.
And if one de non sane memory, make a feoffement, and the feoffee levy a
fine, and then the feoffer die; in this case the heir shall have 5. years
after the death of his Ancestor, and not be bound by the 5. years next after
the fine levied.

Estrangers to fines that have future right upon any cause precedent See the
Statutes Plow. 366, 367. Dyer 3. Plow. 358.
being affected with such impediments when the right first accreweth, 5. That
have future right and impediment.
shall have 5. years after the impediment removed to make their claim etc. And
therefore infants that are borne, or in their mothers womb when such right
does happen to them, women Covert, mad men, Lunaticks, prisoners beyond the
Seas shall have this time. As if a man have issue a son and a daughter, and the
son does purchase lands and die, and the daughter enters as his heir, and is
disseised by A who levieth a fine, and 5. years claim without claim, and
ten years after the father has another son who is heir to his brother;
he shall have in this case a new full 5. years after he come to his full age,
for he is the first unto whom the right descended after the Proclamations. But
if a stranger to a fine to whom a remainder or other title first accreweth
after the fine do not pursue his right within 5. years, hereby he and his
issues are barred for ever. And in like manner if the first issue in tail to
whom the title of the tail first accreweth neglect to make his claim etc.
within the first 5. years after his title accrewed, hereby he is bound for
ever, and the whole estate tail also. And if one abate after the death of a
tenant in fee-simple, and make a feoffement upon condition, and the feoffee
levy a fine, and 5. years pass without any claim made by his heir, hereby
the heir is barred for the present, but if afterward the condition be
broken, and the Abator enter, then the heir may have an assise of
Mortdancester against the Abator or enter when he will.

Estrangers to fines that have neither present nor future right at 6. That have
no right for any cause before the ^ine.
the time of the levying of the same fines by reason of any matter Plow. in
Stowels case.
before the fines levied, whose right grows entirely before the Proclamations
or partly before and partly after, may make their claim etc. when they please.
As if a father die seized of land his elder son being professed, and the
younger son enters and is disseised, and a fine with Proclamations is
levied, and then the elder son is dearaigned, in this case it seems he is
bound to no time. So if a tenant cease one year, and then a fine with
Proclamations is levied, and after the tenant cease another year, the Lord
may have his Cessavit 20. years after the Proclamations:

And estrangers to fines that have several future rights by diverse 7. That
have future rights by diverse titles.
titles growing at several times it seems shall have several five Plow.
537. 367. 372.
years to make their claims etc. commencing from the several times that their
titles do first accrue unto them. As if tenant for life the remainder in fee
make a feoffement in fee, and the feoffee levy a fine with Proclamations, and
he in the remainder suffer the 5. years to pass, in this case he is barred of
his entry upon the alienation for the forfeiture, but it has been held that
if the tenant for life die, that he shall have another 5. years time to bring
his Formedon in the remainder. So if the husband make a feoffement of his wives
Plow. 357. 368. 372.
land to another upon condition which is broken, and he levieth a fine of this
land, and the husband has issue by his wife and dies; and the first 5. years
pass, and then his wife dies; hereby he is barred of the title by the
condition, but he shall have 5. years more to make his claim as heir to his
mother. But if lands be given to H for the life of A, the remainder to B for
life, the remainder to H in fee, and H is disseised, and after the disseisor
levy a fine, and 5. years pass; in this case H is barred both of his present
and future estate and shall have no further time to make his claim etc. and
yet if Cestuy que vie and he in the mean remainder die, H shall have another
5. years to make his claim to preserve his remainder. In like manner it is if
land be given to H for the life of A, the remainder to him for the life of B,
the remainder to him for the life of C, and he is disseised, and the disseisor
levieth a fine with Proclamations; in this case, some say H for his present
right shall have 5. years by the first saving of the Statute, and 5. years
after the death of A by the second saving of the Statute. If one disseise a
feme sole, and after mary her and have issue by her, and the husband is
disseised before marriage or after, and then a fine is levied with
Proclamations, and the husband dies first, and afterward the wife dies
within the 5. years, the issue being of full age, the 5. years pass, hereby he
is bound as heir to his father, but he shall have 5. years more after the
death of his mother to make his claim 8 c. Quando duo jura in una persona
concurrunt aequum est ac si essent in diversis.

Where there is a precedent agreement amongst the parties as a Co. 10. 96. 2.
In the Lord Cromwels case.
^^. How a fine shall enure and work.
feoffement or the like there the fine shall not pass any thing, nor work by
way of Estoppell, but only by way of corroboration, and shall be guided by the
precedent agreement. And therefore if a feoffement be made to two and their
heirs, and after a fine is levied to them two and the heirs of one of them,
this shall enure as a release, and shall not alter the estate, but if there be
no precedent agreement it shall work as it may. Dyer 157. Fitz. Estoppell 211.
Co. 2. in Cromwels case.


If A enfeoffe B of certain land in fee rendering rent with condition of
re-entrie for not payment of rent, and by indenture at the same time covenant
to levy a fine of the same land to the feoffee to the uses and conditions in
the deed of feoffment, and after a fine is levied sur conusance de droit come
ceo etc. accordingly, in this case this fine shall enure as a fine sur release,
because the Conusee has the fee before, and it shall not enure by way of
Estoppell, albeit it be a fine sur conusance de droit come ceo etc. And
Estoppell. Extinguishment.
therefore the rent and condition shall remain in this case, and not be
extinct.

A fine may be avoided for many causes, as by the death of the parties See
before at Numb. 6. part. 2. F. N. B. 20. f. Stat. 23. El. chapter 3.
after the conusance before the recording of it, or by covin in the 12. Where a
fine may be avoided, or not. And how. 1. By a writ of error.
procuring of it; Also it may be avoided for other causes, as for some error in
the proceeding in the suing out of the fine, and this is done by writ of error
(but this error then that shall not make a fine voidable must be notorious,
because the thing is done by consent, and it is a rule in Law Consensus tollit
errorem.) And by this means if the husband Co. 2. 77. 2. 76.
and wife levy a fine, and both of them be within age, whiles either of them
be within age, they may avoid the fine as against them both. But if there be
tenant for life and he in remainder in tail being an Infant, and they two
levy a fine, and he in the remainder reverse it for infancy, this shall not
avoid the fine as to the tenant for life also. A fine also is and may be
sometimes avoided, or at Plow. 358. 359. Co. 9. 106.
least lose much of his force by the claim, entry, or action, of him that has
right to the land: for if the estate contained in a fine be 2. By a claim,
entry etc. And by whom a claim etc. may be made.
once within 5. years after Proclamations lawfully defeated, the party has
thereby left his whole estate both against him which did reverse the same and
against all others which had right or title paramount and made no claim within
the 5. years, albeit he which does bring the action have no judgment and
execution within 7. years after the Proclamations. In like manner if there be
tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in fee, and the first
tenant for life alien, and the alienee levy a fine with Proclamations, and the
second tenant for life claim, or enter, etc. this does make void the fine both
against him, and against him in remainder also: for it is a rule, That any one
that has any estate in possession or reversion which will be barred by the
fine when it is levied, may make a claim or entry to prevent the bar of the
fine. As tenant for his own, or for another life, tenant for years, he in
reversion or remainder after an estate for life or years, a Copyholder, or the
Lord, a Guardian in nature, or nurture, may avoid a fine. And this they may do
for themselves and others, and for others without authority precedent or assent
subsequent, and the claim of one of them in this case shall avail the other.
And by authority also any other man may make a claim, entry etc. in this case
for him that has right, and so he may do also without any authority
precedent, if the party for whom he does it do afterward agree and assent
unto it. But a stranger of his own head (unless perhaps it be for an Infant)
cannot make such a claim or entry to prevent the bar of a fine, except he
that has the right do give him authority before it be done so to do, or do
agree to it after it is done. And therefore if a stranger of his own head will
make an entry or claim into land whereof a fine is levied whereunto I have
right, and he do it to my use, and I do not agree to it within the 5. years,
this entry or claim will not avoid the fine. And yet it was held by Just.
Dodridge, M. 2* Car. B. R. that if a stranger enter in my name and to my use
that have the right, that this does vest the estate in me before agreement, and
I shall be said to agree until I do disagree.

A fine also is, and sometimes may be avoided by plea, As by Stat. 4 H. 7. c.
24. Co. 3. 141. 88. Dyer 334.
3. By a plea.
Averment of the continuance of seisin of the Land in another at, and before
the time of the fine levied, and that parts finis nihil habuer^nt t^mpore
levationis finis, and then he must show in whom the estate was. As if lessee
for years, or a disseisee, levy a fine to a stranger that has nothing in the
land, or A be disseised by B, and B be disseised by C and B levy a fine to D,
or one that has a right of a remainder only, or a disseisor make a gift in
tail, and the donee make a feoffement to A, and after levy a fine to a
stranger that has nothing in the land. But this plea it seems neither parties
nor privies, albeit they be issues in tail, may have at this day, but
strangers only, and therefore in the last case the disseisor and not the issue
in tail may avoid this fine by this plea. But if a Collateral Ancestor of
whom the issue in tail does not claim the land levy such a fine, the issue
may by this plea avoid it. It seems also the issue in tail may have this plea
to a fine Sur Release only.

Also there is a plea by which (as it seems) a fine has been avoidable, which
in effect is nothing else but an averment of seisin still Co. 3. 84. Dyer 334.
290. Stat. 27 E. 1. c. 1.
in the demandant or plaintiff or his heirs before, at, and after the time of
the fine levied. And this plea (as it seems) no man may have at this day but
the issue in tail only to avoid a fine levied Sur grant and Render, by the
Ancestor in tail, and not to avoid a fine levied Sur Conusance de droit come
ceo que il ad de son done etc. And a feme Covert to avoid a fine levied by her
husband alone.

If there be two of one name, and one of them levy a fine of the land of the
other, or a stranger levy a fine in the name of him 34 H. 6. 19. 19 H. 6. 44.
that is owner of the land; in both these cases the fine may be avoided by
pleading the special matter. And yet some hold that in this case the party
has no remedy but by action of disceit.

A fine also is and sometimes may be avoided by the sentence of 4. P^a Vacat.
a Court, when it appears to be gotten and obtained by some notorious fraud
or practice*

And now it is high time we come to the second kind of common assurances made
by matter of record. viz. a Common Recovery.

CHAP. III. Of a Common Recovery.
A Recoverie in general is the obtaining of any thing unjustly 1. Common
Recovery. Quid.
Co. super Lit. 154. See the Preamble of the stat. of 23 H. 8. cap. 10. 23
Eliz. cap. 3. Doct. and Stud. 41. West. Sym. tit. Recovery.
taken or detained by judgment or trial of Law. And it is either a common
recoverie which is such a recovery as is used for a common assurance of land,
or other recovery which is not used as an assurance of land. And the common
recovery that is used for the assurance of land is nothing else but ^ictio
juris, or a certain form or course set down by Law to be observed for the
better assuring of lands and tenements to men. And this is somewhat after the
example of the recovery upon Title, which is without consent and contrary to
the will of him against whom the same is had: for Recoveror. Recoveree. Vouchee.
there is in this a colorable suit, wherein there is a demandant which is
called the Recoverer, and a tenant which is called the Recovere, and one that
is called to warrant upon a supposed warranty which is called the Vouchee.

The common recovery is sometimes with a single voucher; which 2 Quotuplex.
is when the writ is brought against him that is to pass the land immediately,
and he does vouch over the common vouchee. And sometimes it is with a double
voucher; which is when the writ is brought against another to whom he that is
to pass the land has aliened it, and he does vouch him that is to make the
assurance, and he does vouch over the common vouchee: and this is the ^urest
way, and the sa^est kind of recovery. In this formality of a common 3 The
manner and order of suffering a Common Recovery.
recovery the course is, that by agreement of the parties a real See the
places before Co. 1. ^4. 10. 43. 45.
action is begun by a writ of entry brought by him that is to have the land
assured against him that is to make the same assurance if it be with a single
voucher, or if it be with a double voucher against him to whom he that is to
make the assurance has aliened the land. And in this suit, the recoveror that
does bring the action does ^urmise that the tenant against whom the writ is
brought has no right to the land, but that the recoveror has right thereunto,
and that the tenant came to it from such a stranger whom the demandant does
name: And to this the tenant does appear in person or by Attorney, and then
does enter into defense of the land, but in pleading does vouch to warrant. i.
does allege that he bought the land of I. S. a stranger, who in the conveyance
thereof bound himself and his heirs to warrant, and make good the title to him
or them to whom it is conveyed, and thereupon he prays that I. S. may be
called in to defend the title, and then he is allowed by the Court to call in
I. S. to say what he can for the justifying of his right to the land before* he
so conveyed it: And hereupon I. S. does appear and make show as if he would
defend the title, but does pray a further day may be assigned him to make his
defense; which being granted him by the Court, at the day appointed he by
agreement, covin and assent of the parties does not come in but make default:
And thereupon the land is to be recovered by him that brought the writ against
the tenant, and he is left for his remedy to I. S. upon his warranty, and
accordingly judgment is given by the Court that the demandant or recoverer
shall recover the land demanded against the tenant, and that the tenant shall
recover so much land of I. S. of his own land in recompense for the land
recovered from him which he ought to have warranted and defended but suffered
to be lost. And this recovery over is called Recovery in value. or pro Rata.
Quid.
F. N. B. 1* 34* Co* 9. 6.
a recovery in value or pro Rata. But if the recovery be with a double voucher,
or a treble voucher, I. S. is upon his appearance to call or vouch to warrant
I. D. and to allege in the same manner as the tenant does, and so pray that I.
D. may come in, and thereupon I. D. does appear and make default: And so if
there be more vouchers; and then there must be several recoveries over in
value against every one of them; but he that is the last vouchee is always the
common voucher who is one of the ^ryers of the Court of Common Pleas, a man not
worth any thing and one that has no land to render in value upon the supposed
warranty. And by his devisei grounded upon the strict Principles of law the
first tenant does wllingly let go the land for the assurance of the Purchasor,
and yet in truth has no recompense over because the vouchee has no land to
^ender in value. And by this means if one have ^n estate tail in lands which
he is desirous to sell or to convert into an estate in fee simple, the same is
commonly done, for the tenant in tail does cause the purchasor or some friend
of his to bring a writ of entry against him for this land, and he appears to
the writ, and in pleading ^aith that the land came to him or his Ancestors from
such a man or his ancestors who in the conveyance bound themselves to warrant
it. And thereupon that man is called in, who does appear and make default, and
thereupon Judgment is had against him in manner as aforesaid. Or if he would
have the recovery with a double voucher, then does he by fine, feoffement, or
deed of bargain and sale enrolled discontinue the land, and then cause the
recoveror that is to have the land to bring his writ of entry against the
discontinuee, and he does vouch the tenant in tail, who does vouch over the
common vouchee, and so it is done; and by this the estate tail that the tenant
in tail has or had is barred and bound, for that it appears now he had no
power to entaile the land whereunto he had no just title, and besides ^^e shall
recover a recompense over in value, and this is adjudged in law to go in
succession of estate as the land should have done, which is the reason why the
recovery is a bar to all that are in remainder and reversion as well as to the
issues in tail.

And in the suffering of these recoveries the tenants and vouchees Experientia.
do appear most commonly in person in Court, and so the recovery is finished
in the court presently without more doing, but sometimes they will not or
cannot appear in person, and then they do use to appear and suffer the
recovery by Attorney. And in that case there must be a Conusance for a warrant
of Attorney Warrant of Attorney.
taken to authorize the Attorney or Atturneys in this manner if it be for a
treble voucher.

Glouc'ss. Prec' A S and B uxori ejus quod just etc. redd' C D Manerium West
Sym. ubi supra.
de N cum pertinen' etc. que clam' esse jus ^t hered suam and in que iidem A
and B non habent ingress. nisi post disseisinam quam H H injuste and fine
Judicio fecit prefat' C infra 30. Annos jam ultim' ^lapsos etc. ut dic' etc.

Glouc'ss. A S and B po. lo* suo W W and R R A^tornat. s^^os conjuncti^ and
divisim versus C D de placito terre.

Glouc'ss. M M genesis quem A S and B vocant ad warrant. po. lo. suo I I and L L
Attornat' suos conjunctim and divisim versus C D de placito terre.

Glouc'ss. G W genesis quem M M voc. inde ad warrant' po. lo. suo R G and R S
Attornat' suos conjunctim and divisim versus C D de placito terre.

And in these cases to make two atturneys at the least, and to Co. 10. 43. Co.
1. 94.
give them an authority jointly and severally that if one of them dye before
the recovery be suffered, the other may have power to do and dispatch it. And
these warrants of Attorney for the suffering of recoveries are to be knowledged
and certified in the same manner as the conusances of fines knowledged in the
Country are, save only that Recognisances for warrants or attorney for
recoveries may be taken by any Judge of the Court of Common Pleas or any
Sergeant at law without a Dedimus Potestatem. But if any others take it they
use to do it by a special Dedimus Potestatem, Dedimus Potestatem.
which is to command the Commissioners therein named to come to such persons
and to take the names of their attorney or atturneys in the suit, and to
certify the same into the Chancery under their Seals such a day. And if there
be any woman covert that is to make the conusance it seems she is to be
examined as in the Examination.
case of the conusance of a fine. And when this is done the recoveries may be
suffered by the atturneys without the personal appearance of the parties. And
this is as good a recovery as the other which is suffered by the persons
themselves appearing in Court, but that it will require longer time for the
perfection of it, for in this case there must go forth a Summoneas ad warran'
which must have nine Returns ere the recovery can be perfected, and by that
time one of the parties may be dead. And when the recovery is thus suffered by
the parties in person or by their atturneys, the same is to be entered by some
one of the Clarks of the Court of Common Pleas upon the Rolls of the same
Court there to remain upon Record. And herein there must go forth a writ of
Execution called an Habere facias seisinam, which is sent to the Sheriff of
the Habere facias. seisinam.
County where the land does lie to put the Recoveror in possession of the land
(except the recovery be of a reversion of land after a lease for years of it,
in which case the reversion shall be in the recoverors by a claim without any
writ.) And this writ the Sheriff does return as executed according to the
contents thereof, albeit in truth he never do any thing upon it. And after
this all the same proceeding is to be Exemplified by the Clarke of the same
Court.

A recovery being matter of Record is much of the nature of a Co. 5. 41. 10.
37. 39. 3. 5. 6. 41, 42. Doct. et Stud. 41. 49, 50. stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 5. 23.
cap. 3. 7 11. 8. cap. 4.
4. The use, nature and operation of it.
fine, and such a thing as whereof the law takes notice; for it is now become
a formal and orderly manner of Assurance of lands, and one of the Common
Assurances of the Kingdom, or a common way and means to pass land from one
to another. And therefore if a tenant for life suffer such a recovery of his
land it is a forfeiture of his estate, an use may be averred upon it as well as
upon Forfeiture. Averment, Covin.
a fine, and it may be avoided for covin as well as any other kind of
conveyance. But it is of special use and has a special virtue to bar and
bind estates in tail and all the remainders and reversions thereupon. And
because many of the Inheritances of the kingdom do depend upon this
Assurance, and it is often times the greatest security purchasors have for their
money, therefore it has much favor from the law at this day. And therefore
the law will not endure it shall be disputed against, for Communis error facit
jus. And hence it is that it shall not be avoided for small errors, for it is
another rule of law Consensus tollit errorem. And if a recovery be suffered by
a tenant in tail, hereby he has not only discontinued, barred and destroyed
the estate tail, and so defeated himself and his issues the former owner of
the land, and all the remainders and reversions thereupon that should take
place after the estate tail whether they be in esse or contingent only, but
also all former estates, leases and charges made by him in remainder or
reversion: Co. 1. 62. 25. Doct and Stud. 49. 44 Ed. 3. 22^
for as when the estate tail in possession is not barred by a recovery, the
estates in reversion or remainder are not barred, for Quod non in magis
propinquo non in magis romoto valebit; So it is e converso, where the estate
tail in possession is barred by the recovery, all the remainders and the
reversions, Conditions, charges, encumbrances and estates dependent upon it are
barred also, except it be in some special cases where the remainder or
reversion is in the King. And therefore if A be tenant in tail, the remainder
to B in tail, the remainder to C in fee, and B or C does make a lease for
years of the land, or grant a rent charge out of the land, or enter into a
Statute, or the like; or grant the remainder or reversion upon condition, and
after A does suffer a common recovery of the land, and after dies without
issue, in this case the recoveror shall hold the land discharged of all these
estates and charges in remainder. But otherwise it is if A himself make a
lease, or enter into a Statute, and then suffer a common recovery of the land,
in this case this recovery does not avoid but affirm the lease or charge, for
whereas it was before voydable by the issue in tail or him in remainder or
reversion, now it is good against them all, and the recoveror also shall hold
it charged and subject to the lease and charge of the tenant in tail. This
kind of Assurance therefore is in some respects better then a fine, for a fine
will bar the heir in tail, but not him that is in the remainder or
reversion, but a recovery will bar them all.

In every good and binding common Recovery these things are 5. What shall be
said a good Common Recovery. And who shall be barred and bound thereby, or not.
West Sym. ubi supra. Co. super Lit. 372.
requisite. 1. That there be a demandant, a tenant, and a vouchee as the
efficient causes thereof, for if either of these be wanting it is not a
complete recovery. And therefore if a common recovery be had against a tenant
in tail without a voucher; this is void. And for this it is to be known that
such persons and by such names may be demandants, tenants, and vouchees in
recoveries, as may be cognisors and cognisees in fines. Benets case Hobarts
Rep. 275. Pasc. Pasc. 9 Jac. Earl of Newports case adjudged.
And therefore a recovery suffered by an Infant appearing by his Guardian is
good, and will Infant. Woman covert.
bind him and all others. Co. 10. 43. Plow. 515. 2] Doct. and stud. 52. Co. 5.
40, 41. West ubi supra.
So also a recovery had against a woman that has a husband being joined with
her husband will bind her and all others. 2. That there be land demanded as the
matter, and that the thing be demandable. And for this it is to be known that
of such things and by such names as a writ of Covenant for the levying of a
fine may be had, a writ of entry for the suffering of a recovery may be had
save, only it may not be de fossato, stagno, piscaria, un' Carucat' terre,
estoveriis, homag, fidelitat', de servitiis ^aciendis, de bovata marisci, de
selion' terre, de gardino, cottagio, crofto, virgata terre, fodina minerae,
mercatu, nec de superiori camera. And yet of some of these also it may be by
other names. Also a recovery may be had of a rent, common advouson, franchises
and the like, but not of an annuity. 3. That it be had and Co. 3. 3. stat. 23
Eliz. cap. 3.
suffered in that order and form as law requires, viz. that there be a writ
of entry brought, an appearance of the tenant in fait, a voucher, and an
appearance of the tenant in Law the vouchee, Judgment and Execution in manner
as aforesaid, for if there be any substantial defect in these things the
recovery may be thereby avoided by writ of error, but if it be only in form it
will not hurt. 4 That there be a lawful tenant to the Precipe. i. that the
writ Dier 252. Co. super Lit. 46. 3. 6.
of entry be brought against one that at the time of the writ brought is tenant
of the ^reehold, either by right. i. that has an estate for life at least in
the land, or by wrong. i. that is a disseifor of the land demanded and whereof
the recovery is had. And therefore Co. 3. 6. super Lit. 46. Lit. Bro. Sect.
519. Plow. 514 Doct. and Stud. 49. See infra.
in this case the course is where the land to be recovered is in possession and
a fine and a recovery is had of it together, the fine is sued out first, for
this does make the Conusee tenant of the freehold of the land, and then the
recovery is had against him. And when the recovery is to be had of a reversion,
and that there is an estate for life in being of the land whereof the recovery
is to be had (for an estate for years or any such like estate will not hinder
the suffering of a recovery) there the course is to get a Conditional
Surrender from the tenant for life of his estate to him in reversion or
remainder, to the end that he may be perfect tenant of the Inheritance, and
then the writ of entry may be brought and the recovery had against him, for if
a writ of entry be brought against a stranger, and he vouch the tenant in tail
in possession of the land, and so a recovery is had; or if there be tenant for
life of land, the remainder or reversion to another in tail, or in fee, and a
stranger does bring a writ of entry against him in the remainder or reversion
or against a stranger who does vouch him, and so a recovery is had; these
recoveries are not good. And yet if the writ be brought against the tenant of
the land and a stranger that has nothing in the land together, and so a
recovery be had; this recovery is good enough. And if a disseisor make a gift
in tail of the land to another, and the writ is brought against him, and he
vouch the disseisee, and he vouch the common vouchee; this is a good recovery.
5. That it be in such a case as is not prohibited Stat. 34. H. 8. ca. 20. Co.
super Lit. 37^. 2. 5. 16. Co. 8. 77, 78.
by some Statute law, for if the King give any of his own land Prerogative.
whereof he is seized, or cause or procure another in consideration of money or
other land to give the lands whereof he is seized, in tail to any of his
subjects or servants in recompense of their service, or the like, the remainder
to the King in fee simple, or fee tail; such estates in tail cannot be barred
by a common recovery: And therefore if such a tenant in tail shall suffer a
recovery of such land it is void, and it will neither bar the issues in
tail, nor any of them in remainder, nor the King. But if the King make such a
gift in tail keeping the reversion to himself, and after does grant the
reversion to another; in this case tenant in tail may suffer a recovery and
bar the estate tail and the reversion also. And where a subject by the Kings
provision does make such a gift in tail and then does grant the remainder to
the King for life or years only; in this case the estate tail, temainders and
reversion also may be barred by a common recovery. So in other cases where a
subject does make a gift in tail, the remainder to the King in fee; this
estate tail may be barred by a common recovery. And therefore if there be
tenant in tail, the remainder or reversion in fee to another, and he in
remainder or reversion by deed indented and enrolled does bargain and sell his
remainder or reversion in fee to the King; or if one covenant to stand seized
to diverse uses in tail the remainder to the King in fee, in these cases the
estates and the reversion and remainders depending thereupon may be barred by a
recovery. So if a man make a gift in tail, the remainder in fee, and he in the
remainder does grant his remainder to another for life, the remainder to the
King in fee on condition the estate shall be void upon the tender of 20 l. in
this case the estate tail, and the reversion also and condition thereupon may
be barred. So if the Duke of Lancaster had made a gift in tail, and the
reversion had descended to the King; this estate tail might have been barred
by a recovery. So if Prince H. son of H. 7. had made a gift in tail, the
remainder to H. 7. in fee, which remainder by the death of H. 7. had descended
to H. 8. in this case the tenant in tail might have barred the estate tail by
a recovery. And yet if the King make a gift in tail, the remainder in tail,
or grant the reversion in tail; in these cases a common recovery may not be
suffered to bar the entaile, remainder, or reversion. And if the husband for
the advancement of his wife in Jointure, and the preferment Stat. (...) H. 7.
cap. 20. Co. 3. 58. 61. 59.
of the heirs of their two bodies, make an estate in tail to him and his wife
and the heirs of their two bodies, and the wife after her husbands death alone
by her self or with any other husband suffer a common recovery of the land
whereof this estate is made; this recovery will not bar the estate tail. But
if in this case the recovery be suffered by the heir in tail, or by the heir
and his Mother together, it is a good recovery. And therefore if A be seized of
land in fee and he make a feoffement in fee, to the intent that the feoffee
shall reconvey it to him and his wife and the heirs males of his body, and
this is done accordingly, and they have issue a son, and she surrender, or
make a forfeiture, and he enter and suffer a recovery; this is a good recovery
and bar to the esate tail: or if the writ be brought against the mother, and
she vouch the heir in tail, and so a recovery is had, this recovery will
bar the estate tail. And howsoever at the Common Stat. 14 Eliz. cap. 8. Co.
1. 15. 62. ^0. 43. 45. 3. 6.
Law a recovery against a tenant for life with a voucher upon a lawful
warranty and a recovery in value was a bar to him in remainder or reversion,
and there was no remedy in this case, yet at this day it is otherwise. And
therefore if tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct, tenant by the
courtesy, or any other tenant for life do suffer their lands to be recovered
from them by covin and agreement either as immediate tenants or as vouchees
upon feigned titles, without the assent, and to the prejudice of him in
remainder or reversion; such recoveries are void, and will not Forfeiture.
bar the remainders or reversions, but are forfeitures of the estates of such
tenants for life. Insomuch that if tenant for life be made tenant in fait to
the writ, or tenant in law upon the voucher, and so a recovery be had, as if
tenant for life make a lease for years, and the lessee for years does make a
feoffement in fee, and the feoffee does suffer a common recovery in which the
tenant for life is vouched, and he vouch the common vouchee; these recoveries
will not bind the reversions or remainders. But there is no provision made at
this day to preserve the reversion or remainder expectant upon an estate tail,
nor to avoid a recovery of the tenant for life, where he in the next remainder
is agreeing and assenting to it. And therefore if there be tenant for life, the
remainder to A in tail, the remainder to B in tail, etc. with diverse
remainders over, and the tenant for life does suffer a common recovery, in
which he does vouch A who does vouch the common vouchee; in this case this is a
good recovery and does bar the estate tail, the remainders, and reversion
also. And if one be seized of land in fee and have two sons, A by his first
wife and B and a daughter by his second wife, and he devise the land to his
wife for her life, the remainder to B his son in tail, and the reversion of
the fee descend to A, and the writ of entry is brought against the tenant for
life, and she vouch B, and he does vouch the common vouchee, and so a recovery
is had without the assent of the heir in reversion; this is a good recovery
and a bar to all the estates in possession, remainder and reversion. And if a
writ of entry be brought against the tenant for life, and he make default after
default, and then the next in remainder in tail is received, or he pray in aid
of him in reversion or remainder, and then they vouch over, and so a recovery
is had; this is a good recovery and a bar to all the estates in remainder and
reversion. But if the writ of entry be brought against the tenant for life and
him in the remainder in tail together, and they vouch the common vouchee, and
so a recovery is had; this will be no good recovery to bar the estate tail.
See before in fines and Co. super Lit. 44.
And if Sprirituall persons as Bishops, Deanes, Parsons, and such like, suffer
a recovery of their Ecclesiastical lands; such a recovery is void and will not
bind the successor. Plow. Manxelscase Co. 10. 37^. 1. 94. Plow. 357.
But if it be not in some such prohibited case as before, and the recovery be
had and suffered by and between such persons, and of such things, and in such a
manner as aforesaid, in such cases albeit there be in truth no warranty made
upon which the voucher is had, and albeit there be nothing to be recovered in
value, for that the vouchee has no land to recover over in recompense, and
albeit that no execution be done in the life time of the party against whom the
recovery is had, yet is the same regularly a perpetual bar to the parties
against whom the same is had and their heirs of all the estates they have in
fee simple, fee tail, or for life in them and against all them in remainder or
reversion and their remainders and reversions that are depending upon the
estates: with this difference; The recovery with the Co. 3. 59. Lit. Bro. Sect.
38. Plow. Manxels case. 12 Ed. 4. 13. 13 Ed. 4. 1.
single voucher does not bar any estate but such as the tenant in tail has
in possession at the time of the recovery had, so that if the tenant in tail
be in of any other estate, as by disseisin, or the conveyance of the disseisor,
or the like, this estate is not barred. But the recovery with the double
voucher does bind and bar all interests, estates and titles that the vouchee
has at the time of the entry into the warranty. All which is further
illustrated by the examples following. Co. 3. 5. 10. 37.
If the writ of entry be brought against the tenant in tail, and he vouch the
common vouchee, and so a recovery is had; this recovery with a single voucher
is a good recovery and a bar to the estate tail if it be then in possession
and not put to a right and to all the remainders and reversions depending
thereupon. Co. 1. 135. 136. 3. 59. 12 E. 4. 19. 13 E. 4. Co. 10. 45.
So if lands be given to A in tail the remainder to the right heirs of B (B
being then living) and the writ of entry is brought against the tenant in
tail, and he does vouch over the common vouchee; this is a good recovery and a
bar to the estate tail and the remainder also. But if the tenant in tail be
disseised, and then suffer a recovery with a single voucher; or the disseisor
make a new estate in tail to the tenant in tail, and then the tenant in tail
does suffer a recovery with a single voucher; or if the tenant in tail make a
feoffement in fee of land, and then take back a new estate to himself from the
discontinuee in tail or in fee, and then does suffer a common recovery with a
single voucher; by this recovery the entaile is not barred. But by a recovery
with a double voucher in these cases the estate tail is barred. And therefore
as where the tenant in tail does levy a fine, make a feoffement, or bargain
and sell the land by deed indented and enrolled and the writ is brought against
the Conusee, feoffee, or bargainee, and he does vouch the tenant in tail, and
he does vouch the common vouchee; this does bar the estate tail and the
remainders and reversion depending thereupon: So if in these cases the conusee,
feoffee, or bargainee does make a new estate in tail to the conusor, feoffor,
or bargainor, or he disseise the conusee, feoffee, or bargainee, and then levy
a fine, make a feoffement, or bargain and sell to another against whom the
writ of entry is brought, and he vouch the tenant in tail, and he does vouch
the common vouchee; by this recovery the first and second estate tail Co. 3.
5. Plow. in Manxels case 1. 8.
and all the remainders and reversion depending thereupon are barred. So if
lands be given to I. S. and the heirs males of the body of his wife engendered,
and he has issue a son, and after his wife dies, and he discontinue and
take an estate to him and the heirs females of the body of his second wife,
and after discontinue again and take an estate to him and the heirs females
of his own body, and after discontinue again, and the writ of entry is
brought against the last discontinuee, and he does vouch the tenant in tail,
who does enter into the warranty generally, and voucheth the common vouchee;
this is a good recovery and a bar to all the estates in tail, and the
remainders and reversions also. And if A before the Statute of uses had been
tenant in tail, and had made a feoffement in fee to B and he and B had after
made a feoffement to C to the use of A and his wife and the heirs of their two
bodies, and then she had dyed, and after A had entered upon C the feoffee, and
made a feoffement to W in fee, against whom I S had brought a writ of entry,
and he had vouched A the tenant in tail; this had been a good recovery and a
bar to all the estates. And if lands be given to husband and wife and the
heirs of the body of Co. 3. 5. 6. 32.
the husband with remainders over to strangers, and the husband alone does
discontinue the whole land by fine, feoffement or bargain and sale by deed
indented and enrolled, and the writ of entry is brought against the
discontinuee, and he does vouch the husband alone without the wife, and the
husband does vouch the common vouchee, and so a recovery is had; this is a good
recovery for the whole land and a bar to all the estates in tail and
remainder and reversion, but not to the estate of the wife for her life after
the husbands death. But if lands be given to the husband and wife and the
heirs of their two bodies with remainders over to strangers, and the husband
alone discontinue, and the recovery is suffered as in the last case; it seems
this is no bar to the estates in tail or remainder or reversion for any part
of the land. And yet if lands be given to I S and I D in tail and I S
discontinue the whole, and the writ of entry is brought against the
discontinuee, and he vouch I S alone; this is a good recovery for the one half
of the land and a bar to all the estates. And if lands be given Husband and
wife.
as before to husband and wife and the heirs of their two bodies, and the writ
of entry is brought against them both, and they vouch the common vouchee, or
the husband alone does discontinue, and the writ is brought against the
discontinuee, and he vouch the husband and wife both, and they enter into the
warranty and vouch the common vouchee, and so the recoverie is had; these are
good recoveries for the whole, and a bar to all the estates in tail and to
the estate of the woman and to all other estates. And where Lit. Bro. 37.
lands are given to a man and his wife and the heirs of the body of the wife;
or to the wife and the heirs of her body, and the writ of entry is brought
against the husband and wife, and they vouch the common vouchee; these are good
recoveries and will bar the husbands and wives and the estates in tail,
remainder and reversion. And where a man has land in which his wife has a
Jointure, Plow. 514.
or to which she will have title of dower after his death, if the writ of
entry in this case be brought against them both, and they vouch the common
vouchee, and so a recovery is had, this recovery will bar them both: But the
husband alone without her cannot bar her of any such estate by a recovery,
for she may falsify and avoid it after his death. And if lands be given to
husband and wife and the Co. 3. 5. 1. 12 Ed. 4. 14.
heirs of the body of the husband, and the writ of entry is brought against
the husband alone, and he vouch the common vouchee, and so a recovery is had
with a single voucher; this is no good recovery for any part of the land, nor
bar to any of the estates albeit the husband do survive the wife. And yet if
lands be given to two Co. 3. 6.
others and the heirs of the body of one of them, the remainder over to to a
stranger, and the writ of entry is brought against one of them, and he vouch
the common vouchee, and so a recovery is had; this is a good recovery and a
bar to all the estates for the one half of the land. If lands be given to A
in tail, the remainder to B in tail, the remainder to C in tail, the
remainder to D in fee, and A does make a feoffement in fee, and the writ of
entry is brought against the feoffee, and he does vouch B (being him in the
second remainder in tail) to warranty, and he does vouch the common vouchee;
this is a good recovery and a bar to the second estate tail and all the
remainders and reversion depending thereupon; And yet it is no bar of the
first estate tail which A Cur^a Mich. 18 Jac. B. R. So was it held by most of
the Judges in the case between Pell and Brown.
has. If the writ of entry be brought against a Mortgagee and he does vouch
the common vouchee, and so a recovery is had; this is no good recovery to bar
or bind the Mortgagor, but that he may enter upon the condition broken. So if
one give lands to B and his heirs so long as C shall have heirs of his body,
and B does suffer a common recovery, and vouch the common vouchee; this is no
good recovery to bar the donor of the possibility, for in both these cases he
that is to be barred has no remainder or reversion but an interest or
possibility which cannot receive a recompense in value. But if in these cases
the mortgagee vouch to warranty the mortgagor or B the donee vouch the donor,
and so they vouch over the common vouchee, and so the recovery is had; these
will be good recoveries to bar both them and their heirs for ever. And if one
have an estate in fee simple determinable on a Limitation or a Condition, as if
lands be given to A and his heirs until B pay to him 100 l. and then that it
shall remain to B and his heirs, and A in this case does suffer a common
recovery and vouch the common vouchee; it seems this is no bar to B and his
heirs, but that upon payment of the 100 l. he shall have the land. So if one
by his will devise his land thus, I give unto A my son and his heirs for
ever my land in W paying 20 l. to B when A shall come to 21 years of age, and
then that A and his heirs shall have it for ever, and if A shall dye without
heirs of his body C being then living that then C shall have it to him and his
heirs for ever, and A pay the 20 l. to B at his full age, and then suffer a
recovery of the land; this is no bar to C of his estate. But here it mu^t be
Co. 3. 5.
noted that in the cases before where it is said that a recovery is void it is
meant as to the heirs and them in reversion and remainder, for as to the
parties themselves that do suffer the recovery the same is for the most part
good and does bind them by way of Estoppell and conclusion. And it must be
noted also that a stranger that has right to the land at the time of the
recovery suffered is not barred at all by the recovery or by his lachess of
non-claime etc. as in the case of a fine.

The recoverors in common recoveries their heirs and assigns Stat. 7 H. 8.
cap. 4. Dier 31. Co. super Lit. 104.
6. The remedy of Recoverors against the Lessees for Rents and services and
upon wast done.
shall have the like remedy against lessees for lives and years of the land
recovered, their Executors or Assigns by distress, avowry, or action of debt
for the rents and services reserved upon their leases that shall be due after
the same recoveries had: And also like actions for wast done after the recovery
had: And like remedy upon a disturbance in a Presentation to an advowson, and
in like manner and form as the lessor should or might have had if the same
recoveries had never been had, albeit the same lessees do never Atturne to the
same recoverors. And if a man make a lease for years to begin at Michaelmas
reserving rent, and before Michaelmas he suffer a recovery; in this case the
recoveror shall distraine for this rent which the lessor before the recovery
could not distraine for. But if the recovery had not been had he might have
distrained.

A recovery may be defeated, frustrated and avoided (which is called 7. Where a
Recovery may be avoided. Or not. And by whom. And how.
the falsifying of a recovery) in part or in all for many causes, as for Stat.
23 El. cap. 3. Co. 5. 40. 21 H. 8. cap. 15. (...). super Lit. 46. 104. Co. 3.
78. Dier 249. Co. 3. 4. 1. 62* 5. 39. Plow. 515.
that there is some gross and substantial Error in the manner of the
proceeding. But a recovery is not avoidable for false or incongruous Latin,
rasure, enterlining, misentring of any warrant of Attorney, misreturning or not
returning of the Sheriff, or other Fauxi^ier de Recovery.
want of form in words and not in matter of substance, because it is done by
the consent of the parties. Or it may be avoided for that he against whom the
writ of entry is brought is not tenant of the freehold by right or wrong at
the time of the writ brought, as when the writ is brought against a stranger
that has nothing in the land, and he does vouch the tenant in tail in
possession of the land. Or a recovery may be avoided for that he that has the
estate and the right is neither party nor privy to the recovery, as when the
writ of entry is brought against a disseisor, and he vouch a stranger that has
nothing in the land; or a recovery is had against the husband alone of the land
whereunto his wife has title of dower. Or a recovery may be avoided for that
another has some estate in the thing whereof the recovery is had at the time
of the recovery suffered, as when there is a recovery had of land whereof there
is alease or estate for years by Statute, Elegit, or the like. Or it may be
avoided for that the recovery is had by covin, as when it is suffered by tenant
for life to di^^^herite him in reve^sion, or when it is gotten by some undue
practice and sinister dealing, for in this case it is sometimes made void by a
Vacat or sentence of a Court. And where a recovery is avoidable or reversable
for any of these or such other like causes it must be avoided by him whom it
does concern that is barred and bound by the same recovery that should have had
the land if the same recovery had not been and not by any other whom it does
not concern. As if an erroneous recovery be suffered by tenant in tail; in
this case his issues, or if they fail, the next in remainder or reversion
shall defeat it. So also if the land be recovered against a stranger; the
tenant in tail shall avoid it; And if the land be recovered against a
disseisor, the disseis^e shall avoid it; And if the land be recovered against
him in reversion or remainder, the tenant for years by Statute or Elegit shall
avoid it: but in these last cases they shall falsify and avoid it during their
particular estates only. So also the wife shall falsify the recovery suffered
by her husband alone as to her title of dower only and no longer and further.
And he in the reversion or remainder shall falsify and avoid the recovery
suffered by the tenant for life either in the life time of the tenant or
afterward. But neither he in reversion or remainder, or any one by or under
him, or any other can falsify a recovery suffered by the tenant in tail in
possession except it be for some such causes as before. And the recoveror
himself cannot falsify a recovery. So neither can a Guardian, or a tenant of a
Manor, as if one hold land of a Manor, and a stranger recover the Manor by a
feigned title; a tenant of the Manor cannot falsi^ie this recovery. And in all
these cases where a recovery is avoidable and a man has power given him to
falsify; he must do the same sometimes by writ of Error, as in the case of an
erroneous proceeding; and sometimes by pleading and the setting forth of the
special matter, as in the case where the tenant is not tenant of the free
hold, or when the recovery is had by covin against the tenant for life, or the
like; and sometimes by the showing and setting forth of the practice to the
Court, and a motion made that a Vacat may be made upon the Judgment for the
causes alleged.

And thus having done with the Common Assurances that are made by matter of
record we come to the Common Assurances that are made by matter of Fait, viz*
by Deeds and Instruments of writing in the Country, wherein we must stay a
while upon the learning of Deeds in general, and from thence we shall descend
to the particular kinds of Deeds.

CHAP. IIII. Of a Deed.
A Deed is a writing or Instrument written in paper or parchment (...) A deed.
Quid.
Terms of the Law. Co. super Lit. 35.
sealed and delivered to prove and testify the agreement of the parties whose
deed it is to the things contained in the deed.

All deeds are either Indented, or Poll. The deed indented Terms of the Law.
Co. super Lit. 229. 143. 38 H. 6. 25.
(...) Quotupl^^. Indenture. Deed ^oll.
(which is that which is called an Indenture) is when the paper or parchment is
cut and indented. And it is defined to be a writing containing a Conveyance,
bargain, contract, covenants or matter of Agreement between two or more, and
is indented in the top or side answerable to another that likewise does
comprehend the self same matter. And this is so called because it is so
indented, for albeit it be called an indenture and begin in these words, Haec
Indentura etc. yet if it be not actually indented it is no Indenture: And of
the other side if it be not so called or these words be omitted, yet if it be
indented it is an Indenture. And this was anciently called Charta cyrographata
vel Communis, because each party had his part. The deed poll is that which is
plain without any indenting, when the parchment or paper is polled or cut
even. And this was anciently called charta de una part. And this is single and
but one, which the feoffee, grantee, or lessee for the most part has. The deed
indented is also sometimes Bipartite. i. of two parts, when there are two
parties and two parts of the deed. And then commonly the feoffor, grantor or
lessor has the one part, and the feoffee, grantee or lessee the other part.
And sometimes it is Tripartite. i. when there are three part^es and three
parts, and then commonly each party has a part of the Indenture. And sometimes
it is Quadripartite etc. And according to the parts they do seal
interchangeably one to another. And amongst these parts the part sealed by the
feoffor, grantor or lessor is said to be the principal or original, and the
rest are called but Accessory, Counterparts or Copies; and yet all of them
Counterpart.
in law do make up but one entire deed* These deeds also are sometimes Lit.
Sect. 371. 372.
times in the first person, as Noveritis etc. me A B etc. dedi and concessi
etc. And albeit it be an indenture so made yet is it good enough. And sometimes
they are made in the third person, as Haec Indentura testatur etc. quodidem A B
etc. dedit and concessi^ etc. Bro. Oblig. 51. Co. super Lit. 35. 36. West Symb.
^ib. 1. part 1. Sect. 46.
The deed Poll is usually made in the first person, but if it be made in the
third person it is good enough. There are diverse other distinctions of deeds,
for some are Public that do concern Countries, some of the Prince: And some
are Private between particular persons, and those private persons or Subjects.
And these only are intended here. And of these some are Absolute, and some
Conditional: some are enrolled, and* some not enrolled: some concern the
realty, and some the personalty: And some are mixed. And some of these also
contain matter of Grant, or Gift, amongst which feoffements, gifts, bargains
and sale, grants and leases are the chief. And some of them contain matter of
discharge, as releases, acquitances, and defeasances, and such like. And some
of them contain other matter, as confirmations and such like. Or as other
distinguish, some of them are Constitutive and making, and some are remissory
or liberatory. And the first ^ort are some of them creating. i. such whereby
any estate, property or obligation not having essence before, is newly raised
and created, as the first grant of a rent, Common, way etc. estate tail, for
life, years, etc. And some of them are conveying. i. such by which estates,
properties and the like being already created are conveyed to others, as
feoffements, bargains and sales, grants over or assignements, surrenders, and
the like. Those that are of the last sort are such as do describe and testify
some precedent contract for a duty or fact to be paid, performed or done,
released or discharged, of which sort are all acquitances, releases, and other
such like matters of discharge.

But hereby the way, two things are to be observed. 1. That Note.
See West Sym. (...). part.
there may be and are diverse other kind of deeds besides those which are named
before, for every agreement put in writing sealed and delivered becomes a
deed. And Atturnements, Exchanges, Surrenders, Partitioners, Authorities,
Commissions, Licenses, Revocations, and the like are usually made, given, done
and granted by deed. And there are diverse other Instruments concerning
Merchants and other affairs; if therefore any of these be done by deed such a
deed is for the most part subject to the rules of deeds herein laid down. 2
Albeit that feoffements, gifts, bargains, leases, Atturnements, Exchanges,
Surrenders, and such like things may in diverse cases be as well made and done
without as with a deed, yet if a man will make his claim to any thing given or
granted by such feoffement, gift, etc. by deed, the deed must be such a deed as
is a good and perfect deed by the rules here^^ after laid down.

In every deed or writing there are two parts considerable. Co. super Lit. 6.
229. 2. 3.
3. The parts of a deed.
1. The external or material part. i. The parchment or paper, wax and
writing. 2. The internal or intellectual part. i. the sense, force, virtue
and operation of the words and matter therein contained. And in the writing,
context or matter contained in diverse deeds, as feoffements, grants, leases and
the like there are certain formal or orderly parts which make up the whole of
which the law does take special notice: as, 1. The Premises, the office
whereof is rightly to set down the name of the feoffor, grantor, lessor, etc.
feoffee, grantee, lessee, etc. and to comprehend the certainty of the thing
granted or leased. And herein in some deeds there is also a recital of some
things, and in some deeds an Exception of some part of the thing granted before
by the deed. 2. The Habendum, the office whereof is to name again the feoffee,
lessee, etc. and to set forth what estate he shall have and for what time he
shall hold the thing given or granted. 3. There is set down and expressed upon
what terms and conditions the estate of the thing granted shall be held: and
therefore there is sometimes contained therein a Tenendum, to set forth by what
Tenure the grantee shall hold the land granted. 2. A Reservation or Reddendum,
to set forth by what Rent he shall hold the land. 3. A Condition. 4. A
Warranty. 5. Covenants. 6. The Conclusion after this manner In cujus rei
testimonium etc. wherein is set forth the date of the deed, containing the day,
month and year, and the style of the King or year of our Lord. And all these
are sometimes contained under the Premises and the Habendum.

All the parts of a deed indented in Judgment of Law do Plow. 134. 38 H. 6.
24, 25. Lit. Sect. 370. 9 H. 6. 35. 35 H. 6. 34.
make up but one deed, and every part is of as great force as all 4. The nature
of ^^deed indented and a deed poll with the difference that is between them.
the parts together, and they are esteemed the mutual deeds of either party
and either party may be bound by either part of the same. And the words of the
Indenture are the words of either party. And albeit they be spoken as the words
of the one party only, yet they are not his words alone but may be applied to
the other party if they do more properly belong to him: for every word that is
doubtful shall be applied and expounded to be spoken by him to whom they will
best agree according to the intent of the parties; and they shall not be taken
more strongly against one or beneficially for the other as the words of a deed
Poll shall. 11 H. 7. 22. per Brian.
If therefore A by indenture enfeoffe B upon condition and then does enter for
the condition broken; in this case it has been held that A in his pleading may
show forth the deed that he himself sealed, and that this is sufficient. And
therefore also it is thought that an Indenture made in the first Person is as
good in Law as an Indenture made in the third Person when both parties Lit.
Sect. 373.
have to this put to their Seals, for if in an Indenture made in the third
Person or in the first person mention be made that the grantor only has put to
his Seal and not the grantee, then is the indenture only the deed of the
grantor, but when mention is made that the grantee also has put his Seal to
the indenture, it shall be said to be the deed of them both.

And although both parts of the indenture are but as one part, yet the deed of
the grantor is as the Principal and the other is Finches Law 109.
not but a Counter-part. And therefore if the lessor only seal and not the
lessee, yet it is as good as if both had sealed, and if there be any difference
between the Parts, the Counter-parts shall be made to agree with the
principal, and it shall be deemed the misprision of the Clarke.

This deed is the strongest kind of deed of the two, for this Estoppell.
Plow. 434. 421.
works an Estoppell. i. does bar and conclude either party to say or except
any thing against any thing contained in it, for if a lease be by indenture,
both parties are concluded to say that the lessor had nothing in the land at
the time of the lease made, so that if the lessor hap to have the land after by
purchase or descent, the lessee may enter upon him by way of conclusion, and
the lessee by Estopell shall be forced to pay his rent. But it is otherwise of
a deed poll, for this is commonly but of one part which is sealed by the
feoffor, lessor, etc. only. And this shall be expounded to be the sole deed of
the feoffor, lessor etc. and the words therein contained shall be said to be
his words and shall bind him only and be expounded altogether in advantage of
the feoffee, lessee etc. and against the feoffor, lessor etc. and this does not
work any Estoppell against either party. But if a deed be indented or poll,
and there be therein reciprocal Covenants between Trin. 38 El. Co. B. per
Curiam. Co. super Lit. 143.
them from one to another albeit there be but one part, yet if each of them
seal it and deliver it the one to the other, this is good for both parties,
and each of them that can get the deed into his hand to show or plead may take
advantage thereof against the other. And in this case the deed is usually kept
by one indifferent between them both.

Note here first of all that some deeds are void from the beginning See Grant
infra.
5. When and where a deed shall be said to be good and sufficient. And when and
where not, but void or voi^^ ab ini^is.
and do never take effect; and amongst these some are absolutely void and void
against all persons, and some are void only to some purposes and against some
persons. Some also that are not void from the beginning are notwithstanding
voidable, and that sometimes by the party himself that made them or any
others, and sometimes by others and not by himself. And some deeds are good in
their first creation and well made at the f^st, but become void by some matter
ex post facto. And this may be either by an extrajudiciall act, as rasure, or
the like, or by a judicial act. i. when by the sentence of a Court a deed is
damned and made void, which is called a Vacat of the deed. A vacat of a deed.


To the making of every good Deed containing any agreement Co. super Lit. 225.
35. 36. Co. 2. 4. 5.
these things are requisite. 1. Writing. i. That it be written in Things
requisite to make a deed good.
parchment or paper, and that the agreement be legally and formally set down
and be sufficient in Law for the composition and frame of the words. And this
is called the legal part, the Judgment whereof belongs to the Judges of the
Law. 2. That there Perk. Sect. 149. 137.
be a person able to contract, and to be contracted with, and a thing to be
contracted for, and that all these be set down by sufficient names. 3. Reading.
i. That if it be an illiterate man that See infra.
is to seal the deed and he desire to hear it read, that it be truly read or
the contents thereof truly declared to him. 4. Sealing. i. See infra.
That the deed so written be sealed by the party or some other by his
appointment for a further testimony of his consent thereunto. 5. Delivery. i.
That the deed so written and sealed be delivered Perk. Sect. 137. etc.
by the party or some other by his appointment as his deed. And these last
things being matters of fact are to be tried by Jurors. 6. That the ground,
foundation, end, and purpose of making the Sea infra.
deed be good and not against the Law. Otherwise in most of these cases the
deed is void ab initio. Also in some cases to perfect the contract and make the
conveyance of the thing intended to be passed thereby good, some other
ceremonies or complements are requisite, as Inrollment, Livery of Seisin,
Atturnement, otherwise the deed in part at least becomes fruitless and
vain. For a deed may be void, either for that the writting is not in parchment
or paper; or being so is not legally and formally drawn; or being so, there
does want a person able to give, or make, or capable to have, or take, or a
thing to be contracted for; or if so, for that it is not duly sealed and
delivered; or if so, for that it is not truly read at the time of the sealing
and delivery; or if so, for that it is made void by some special law, as being
made upon an usurious Contract, by duresse, or the like. Or it may at least in
part lose his force afterward by neglect of inrollment, Livery of Seisin, or
Atturnement in cases where these things are requisite.

Every deed well made must be written. i. The agreement Perk. Sect. 118. Co.
super Lit. 171.
must be all written before the sealing and delivery of it: for if a 1. In
respect of the writing of it.
man seal and deliver an empty piece of paper or parchment, albeit he do
therewithal give commandment that an obligation or other matter shall be
written in it, and this be done accordingly, yet this is no good deed. 2. This
writing must be in paper or 2] Co. super Lit. 229. F. N. B. 122. Lit. 27 H. 6.
9.
parchment, for if an agreement be written on a piece of wood, linen, the
bark of a tree, a stone, or the like, and this be sealed and delivered; this
is no good deed. Co. 2. 3.
But it may be written in any language, or in any hand. And therefore it is
held that a deed written in French or Latin, and in Text, Court, or Roman
hand, is as good as a deed written in English and in a Secretary hand.

Perk. Sect. 123.
And albeit the writing be besides the lines, or the lines be written crooked,
yet this will not hurt the deed. Perk. Sect. 155. Co. super Lit. 225.
And if there be any Alteration, rasure, or enterlining made in any part of the
deed before the delivery of it; this will not hurt the deed. But in such cases
it is policy to make a Memorandum of it upon the back of the deed, and to give
the witnesses notice of it; for otherwise if it be in any place material, as
in the name of the grantor, grantee, in the limiting of the estate, or the
like, and especially if it be in a deed poll, the deed is greatly suspicious.
3. The matter written 3] Co. super Lit. 225.
must be legal and orderly for manner and matter. i. There must be words
sufficient to set forth the agreement and bind the parties, for a deed may be
void and lose his virtue in all or part for repugnancy, incertainty, and diverse
other matters (whereof see in exposition of Deeds infra.) But it is not
material whether the deed be in the Fitz. Fait and feoffements. 5 Dier 6.
First, or in the Third person so as the words be aptly applied. For if a deed
Poll be in the Third person viz. Quod presens scriptum testatur etc. quod idem
A dedit and tradidit etc. Or an obligation be in the Third person, viz. Md.
quod I S debet I D 20l. etc. these are good deeds notwithstanding the Statute
of 38 E. 3. cap. 4. which is meant only of obligations made beyond the Seas. So
if the words of a deed indented run in the First person, it is as good as if it
were in the Third person. Neither is it necessary that the English Co. 5. 121.
10. 133. See Oblig. Numb. 3.
or Latin whereby it is made be true and congruous, for false and incongruous
Latin or English seldom or never hurts a deed, for the rules are Falsa
orthographia non vitiat chartam. Falsa grammatica non vitiat concessionem.
Neither is it necessary that every Co. super Lit. 6.
deed have all the parts of a deed before set down, as Premises, Habendum,
etc. for a deed may be good without Habendum, warranty, Reservation, or
Covenant. And a deed is good albeit these Co. 2. 5. Dier. 19. Kelw. 70.
words in the close thereof In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum meum apposui be
omitted, and albeit there be no mention made in the same that the deed was
sealed and delivered so as in truth it be duly sealed and delivered and the
sealing and delivery can be proved. Co. 2. 5. 5. 117 Dier 28. Perk. Sect. 120.
Co. super Lit. 6.
Also a deed is good albeit it mention no time or place of date or making, or
have a false date. i. be dated at one time and delivered at another, and albeit
it have an impossible date, as the 30 of February or the like, for anciently
until the time of E. 2. and E. 3. the deeds had no date because the Law was
then held to be that if a deed were dated before the time of memory it was not
pleadable except it were of Record but it might have been given in evidence.
But he that does plead such a deed without any date, or with such an impossible
date must set forth the time when it was delivered.

The second thing required in every well made deed is, That the 2. In respect
of the persons parties thereunto and matter therein.
person making it be able to give, grant, make, or do the thing Co. 11. 73.
Plow. 555. Perk. Sect. 1. 119. See Grant. infra. Numb. 4. Feoffements infra
Numb. 12.
contained in it; that the person to whom it is made be capable of the thing to
be given, granted, made or done thereby, for if it be made by, or to any such
persons as are disabled, as Infants, Aliens, women Covert, Persons attainted of
Treason or Felony, Idiots, and such like, it will be void in all or part. But
any person natural male or female, or politic, as sole Corporations, or
Corpotations aggregate of many, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, not disabled by
law may give or take by deed. Also there must be some matter whereabout the
contract may be conversant. It is therefore said that in every grant there must
be grantor, grantee, and a thing to be granted and in every obligation an
obligor, obligee, and thing to which the obligor is bound, and so of
Feoffements and other deeds.

The third thing required in every well made deed is, That if the Co. 2. 9. 3.
11. 27. 14 H. 8. 25.
3. In respect of the reading of it.
party that is to seal it be a blind or an illiterate man, and desire to hear
it read that it be so, for if such a man be to seal a deed, and he desire to
hear it, or to hear the contents of it read or declared to him first, and it
be not done, and he afterward seal and deliver it; this is no good deed. So
if upon or without any such request made by him that is to seal and deliver
it, the party himself to whom it is made, or a stranger shall read the deed,
or declare the contents thereof falsely and otherwise then in truth it is; the
deed will be void at least for so much as is so misread or misdeclared. But if
the party himself that is to seal and deliver it before the sealing and
delivery thereof cause another that is a stranger covinously to read it, or to
declare the contents thereof falsely to him, and otherwise then it is, of
purpose to make the deed void; this will not hurt the deed. So if the party
that is to seal the deed can read himself and does not, or being an
illiterate or a blind man does not require to hear the deed read, or the
contents thereof declared; in these cases albeit the deed be contrary to his
mind, yet is it good and unavoydable.

The fourth thing required in every well made deed is, that it be 4. In respect
of the sealing of it.
sealed: But this sealing of deeds in times past was not used, for the Terms
of the Law. Fait. Co. fuper Lit. 225. Co. 2. 4. 5. Perk. Sect. 129.
Saxons used only to subscribe their names and to add the sign of the Cross,
and to set down a great number of witnesses. And afterward the Normans
brought in with them the sealing of deeds but by degrees, for first the Kings
and a few of the Nobility used it, and to seal with their Seals of Arms,
afterward all the Nobility used it, and then the Gentlemen, and about the time
of E. 3. all men began to use sealing of deeds, which has been continued ever
sithence, so that now it is of necessity, in so much that if a deed be never so
well written before and delivered afterward, yet if it be not sealed between
the writing and delivery, it is not a good deed* But if a stranger seal it by
the allowance or commandment precedent Perk. Sect. 130. 131. 134
or agreement subsequent of him that is to seal it before the delivery of it,
it is as well as if the party to the deed did seal it himself. And therefore
if another man seal a deed of mine, and I take it up after it is sealed and
deliver it as my deed; this is said to be a good agreement to, and allowance of
the sealing, and so a good deed. And if the party seal the deed with any Seal
besides Perk. Sect. 130. 131. 132
his own, or with a stick or any such like thing which does make a print, it is
good. And although it be a Corporation that does make the deed, yet they may
seal with any other seal besides their common Seal and the deed never the
worse. And if there be 20. to seal one deed, and they seal all upon one piece
of wax Perk. Sect. 134.
and with one Seal, yet if they make distinct and several prints; this is a
very sufficient sealing and the deed is good enough.

The fifth thing required in every well made deed is, That there 5. In respect
of the delivery of it. And what shall be said a good delivery, or not. 1. In
respect of the person that does make it.
Co. 2. 4. 5. Perk. Sect. 137. 9 H. 6. 37.
be a delivery of it. And for this it must be known, that delivery is either
actual. i. by doing something and saying nothing, or else Verbal. i. by
saying something and doing nothing, or it may be by both, And either of these
may make a good delivery and a perfect deed. But by one or both of these it
must be made, for otherwise albeit it be never so well sealed and written, yet
is the deed of no force. And though the party to whom it is made take it to
himself, or hap to get it into his hands, yet will it do him no good nor him
that made it any hurt until it be delivered. And a deed may Perk. Sect. 137. 9
H. 6. 37. Co. 11. 28. 3. 35. 47 E. 3. 3.
be delivered by the party himself that does make it, or by any other by his
appointment or authority precedent or assent or agreement subsequent, for omnis
ratihibitio mandato aequiperatun, And when it is delivered by another that has
a good authority and does pursue it, it is as good a deed as if it were
delivered by the party himself: but if he do not pursue his authority then it
is otherwise. And therefore if a deed or the contents thereof be read or
declared to a man that is to seal him; and he (being illiterate) does deliver
him to a stranger, and bid him examine him, and if it be so as it was read to
him, then to deliver him as his deed, otherwise to redeliver him to him again
that made it; in this case if the deed be in truth, otherwise then it was read,
and yet notwithstanding he to whom it was delivered does deliver him to him, to
whom it is made, this delivery shall not not avail, neither is the deed by
this delivery become a good deed. Dyer 167. Perk. Sect. 137. 8H. 26. Co. super
Lit. 36. 3. 26. 5. 119. 10 H. 6. 25. 13 H. 4. 8.


And so also a deed may be delivered to the party himself to whom it is made or
to any other by sufficient authority from him: or it 2. In respect of him to
whom it is made.
may be delivered to any stranger for and in the behalf, and to the use of him
to whom it is made without authority. But if it be delivered to a stranger
without any such declaration, intention or intimation unless it be in case
where it is delivered as an escrow, it seems this is not a sufficient delivery.
And yet if an Obligation be made to the use of a third person expressed by the
deed, and the obligor Dyer 192.
deliver it to him to whose use it is made; this is said to be a good delivery.
And albeit it be delivered before or after the day of the 3 In respect of the
time. 4 In respect of the manner and order of delivery.
date of it, yet it is good enough: but if it be delivered before it be Co. 2.
4. Plow. 492.
sealed it is nothing worth. And where it is delivered before the date, yet in
the pleading of it it must not be so set forth.

If I have sealed my deed, and after I deliver it to him to whom Co. 9. 137.
Dyer 192. 167. Co. super Lit. 36. 49. 35. Ass. pl. 6.
it is made, or to some other by his appointment and say nothing, this is a
good delivery: So if I take the deed in my hand and use these or the like
words; Here take him, or This will serve, or I deliver this as my deed, or I
deliver him you; these are deliveries. So if I make a deed of land to another,
and being upon the Land I deliver the deed to him in the name of Seisin of the
Land; this is a good delivery. So if the deed be sealed and lying in a window,
or on a Table, and I use these or the like words, There he is, take it as my
deed; this is a good delivery and does perfect the deed, for as a deed may be
delivered by words without deeds, so may it also be delivered by deeds without
words. But if a man seal and acknowledge Adjudged Trin. 37. El. B. R.
before a Major or other Officer appointed for that purpose a writing provided
for a Statute ora recognisance, this acknowledgment before such an Officer
shall not amount to a delivery of the deed so as to make it a good obligation
if it happen not to be a good Statute or Recognisance.

The delivery of a deed as an Escrow is said to be where one does 19 H. 8.
Kelw. 88. 14 H. 8. 22. 14 H. 6. 42. Perk. Sect. 141. 140. 142. 138. 143. 144.
Fits Feoffments and Fait. 4. 13. 15. Co. 9. 137. super Lit. 48. 36.
As an Escrow. Quid.
make and seal a deed and deliver it unto a stranger until certain
conditions be performed, and then to be delivered to him to whom the deed is
made to take effect as his deed. And so a man may deliver a deed, and such a
delivery is good. But in this case two cautions must be heeded. 1. That the
form of words used in the delivery of a deed in this manner be apt and proper.
2. That the deed be delivered to one that is a stranger to it, and not to the
party himself to whom it is made. The words therefore that are used in the
delivery must be after this manner. I deliver this to you as an escrow to
deliver to the party as my deed upon condition that he do deliver you 20l. for
me, or upon condition that he deliver up the old bond he has of mine for the
same money, or as the case is. Or else it must be thus. I deliver this as an
Escrow to you to keep until such a day etc. upon condition that if before this
day he to whom the Escrow is made shall pay to me 10l. or give to me a horse,
or infeoffe me of the Manor of Dale, (or perform any other condition) that then
you shall deliver this Escrow to him as my deed. For if when I shall deliver
the deed to the stranger, I shall use these or the like words. I deliver this
to you as my deed, and that you shall deliver it to the party upon certain
conditions: Or, I deliver this to you as my deed to deliver to him to whom it
is made when he comes to London, in these cases the deed does take effect
presently and the party is not bound to perform any of the conditions. So it
must be delivered to a stranger, for if I seal my deed and deliver it to the
party himself to whom it is made as an Escrow upon certain conditions etc. in
this case let the form of words be what it will, the delivery is absolute, and
the deed shall take effect as his deed presently, and the party is not bound to
perform the conditions; for, In traditionibus Chartarum non quod dictum sed
quod factum est inspicitur. Fitz. Faits and Feoffements 13.
But in the first cases before where the deed is delivered to a stranger and
apt words are used in the delivery thereof, it is of no more force until the
conditions be performed then if I had made it and laid it by me and not
delivered it at all, and therefore in that case albeit the party get it into
his hands before the conditions be performed, yet he can make no use of it at
all, neither will it do him any good. Idem.
But when the conditions are performed and the deed is delivered over, then the
deed shall take as much effect as if it were delivered immediately to the party
to whom it is made, Co. 3. 35.
and no act of God or man can hinder or prevent this effect then if the party
that does make it be not at the time of making thereof disabled to make it. He
therefore that is trusted with the keeping and delivery of such a writing ought
not to deliver it before the conditions be performed, and when the conditions
be performed he ought not to keep it but to deliver it to the party. For it may
be made a question whether the deed be perfect before he has delivered it over
to the party according to the authority given him. Howbeit it seems the
delivery Co. 5. 84. 3. 36.
is good, for it is said in this case that if either of the parties to the deed
dye before the conditions be performed, and the conditions be after performed,
that the deed is good, for there was traditio inchoata in the life time of the
parties, and postea consummata existens by the performance of the conditions it
takes his effect by the first delivery without any new or second delivery, and
the second delivery is but the execution and consummation of the first
delivery. And therefore if an Infant, or woman covert deliver a Co. 3. 35. 36.
deed as an Escow to a stranger, and before the conditions are performed the
Infant is become of full age, or the woman is become sole, yet the deed in
these cases is not become good. And yet if a disseisee make a deed purporting a
lease for years, and deliver it to a stranger out of the land as an Escrow, and
bid him enter into the land, and deliver it as his deed, and he do so, this is
a good deed, and a good lease, so that to some purposes it has relation to the
time Relation.
See infra at Number. 8.
of the first delivery and to some purposes not.

In case where a deed is merely void and does take no effect by his first
delivery, as where a woman covert does seal and deliver Perk. Sect. 154. 11 H.
6. 27.
Double Delivery.
a deed, or the like, and she after being sole after her husbands death does
deliver the deed again, in this case the deed is become good. So where a deed
originally good does become void by matter ex post facto, as by breaking the
Seal or the like, if the party to the deed seal and deliver it again; by this
means the deed is become good again. But regularly there may not be two
deliveries of a deed, for where the first delivery does take any effect at all,
the second delivery is void.

Perk. Sect. 1^4.
And therefore it is held that if an Infant or a man by duresse of imprisonment
do make seal and deliver a deed etc. i Co. 5. 119.
(in which cases the deed is not void but voidable) and after the Infant being
of full age, or the man imprisoned being at large, does deliver this deed again
the second time; this second delivery is void: Debile fundamentum fallit opus.
So if a man be disseised and make a lease for years in writing and deliver the
deed, Co. super Lit. 48.
and after deliver it upon the ground, this second delivery is void, for the
first delivery made it his deed; but if he had delivered it as an Escrow to be
delivered as his deed upon the ground, this had been a good second delivery.
And by all this that has been said it New Term^ of the Law tit. Fait. 9. Jac.
Scots case.
Subscribing of the parties name or mark not necessary.
appears, that the putting to or subscribing of the parties name or mark to
the deed he is to seal is not essential, for a deed may be good albeit the
party that does seal it does never set his name or his mark to it, so as it be
duly sealed and delivered. But it is the best and ^urest way notwithstanding to
have the name or mark of the party subscribed, for by this means the deed may
be the better proved when the witnesses are dead.

Note here that albeit a writing or Escrow that is not sealed Note.
and delivered in manner as aforesaid may not be used nor pleaded as a deed,
yet it may serve and be used as an evidence and proof of the agreement
contained therein. And whatsoever may be done by word without any writing may
much more and better be done by writing unsealed or sealed, though it be not
delivered as aforesaid.

And the last thing required in every well made deed is, that it 6. In respect
of the ground and end of it.
have a good foundation, and be to a good end, for albeit a deed have all the
qualities of a good deed before required, viz. that it be well made, read,
sealed, and delivered, yet it may be void or at least voidable for others
causes, as when it is either unjustly gotten and obtained, or corruptly in
pursuit and execution of some d^shonest agreement, or to a dishonest end or
purpose. made. A deed therefore Co. 2 9. Perk. Sect. 16. (...) 14^. 45 E. 3. 6.
whether it be a feoffment, gift, grant, lease, release, confirmation, Mana^^e
or Du^^sse. Quid.
or obligation that is made or obtained by manasse, or duresse, i. when one
does threaten another to kill or maime him, if he will not make him such a
deed, or does imprison another until he make him such a deed, and thereupon he
make the deed, a deed thus obtained by force and through fear to avoid danger
is void and will not bind him that made it nor avail him to whom it is made.
In which matter these things must be observed. 1. That there must be some
threatening of life or member, or imprisonment, or some imprisonment Bro.
Duresse in toto, 9 H. 7. 24. 21 E. (...). 13.
or beating it self, for if it be only a threatening to take away goods, or to
burn a house, or the taking and keeping of a man's goods, or the like, this will
not make the deed made upon that occasion to be per duresse. 2. It must be a
threatening, beating or imprisonment of the party himself that does make the
deed, or of his wife, for if it be a threatening, beating or imprisonment of any
other besides the party himself that does make the deed or his wife, this will
not make the deed to be by duresse. 3. The threatening beating or imprisonment
must be to this end, and hereupon the deed must be made, for otherwise the
deed shall not be said to be by duresse. As for examples. If four do threaten
one to imprison him if he will not seal a deed to one of them 4. and he do so;
this deed shall be said to be gotten by duresse and therefore void. And if one
threaten a man to kill him unless he will seal a deed to him and three
others, and he do so; this is void as to all the four. For if one threaten
another to kill or maime him if he will not seal a deed to a stranger, and
thereupon he do so; this is void as if it were to the party himself. If one
threaten to kill wound, or imprison me to make me swear or promise to seal him
such a deed, or imprison me until I do so, and afterward at another time and
in another place, and when I am at liberty I do it accordingly; this shall be
said to be made by duresse and void. If I be in prison at one man's suit, and
then another man does cause me to be used more severely in prison to compel me
to make him some deed which I do thereupon make to him; this deed shall be said
to be gotten by duresse and therefore void.

But if I be imprisoned at one man's suit (be the cause just or not) and being
in prison I make an Obligation, or any other deed to a third man: this shall
not be said to be by duresse but is a good deed. So if one threaten me to take
away my goods, burn or break my house, enter upon my land, kill or wound my
father, or mother, brother, or sister, or friend, or do imprison any of them,
and thereupon I seal a deed; this is good and shall bind me. So if one
distraine my beasts to compel me to seal a deed and will not deliver them
unless I do so, and threaten me that if I take the beasts again and not seal
the deed he will kill me, and thereupon I seal the deed; this is a good deed
and shall bind me. If I be arrested upon good cause and being in prison or
under arr^st I make an Obligation, feoffment or any other deed to him at whose
suit* I am arrested for my enlargement and to make him satisfaction; this shall
not be said to be by duresse, but is good and shall bind me. And therefore if
Auditors in an account do commit an accomptant to prison, and then he make an
obligation to his master for the Arrearages, this is good. And if one in prison
for felony grant a reversion of land to another to help him out of his trouble,
this is a good grant. If A and B enter into an obligation upon the threatening
of B only, this is a good obligation by A that was not threatened.

And if one make an Obligation by duresse, and after being at Bro. Defesance *
17.
Estoppell.
large take a defesance upon it, this makes the Obligation good again, and the
obligee is concluded to say it was by duresse. A deed also made upon or in
pursuit and execution of an usurious contract. i. such a contract as whereupon
the lender is sure to have in money or moneys worth for the loan of the thing
above the principal Terms of the Law. Co. 5. 70. 37 H. 8. chapter 9. 39 El. c. 18.
21 Jac. chapter 17. 13 El. chapter 8.
more then after the rate of 8l. for the 100l. by the year Usury. Quid.
also is void. In which matter these cases are to be observed. If one 6.
Decembris borrow 30l. until the second day of June next following to be paid
then for it 33l. for the principal loan if the son of the oblig^e be then
alive, and if he die before that time, that then he shall pay but 27l. which is
less then the principal; in this case this contract is usurious and corrupt,
and therefore the deed that does contain it is void.

If one borrow 100l. and for this mortgage land above the value Co^^^ets case.
Pasch. 7. Jac. B. R.
of 8l. by the year, on condition that if the Mortgagor pay the money at the
years end, that the estate shall cease; this is an usurious contract, and
therefore the deed whether it be a deed of feoffment, grant, or lease
containing it is void. So if I lend another man 10l. for a year and take
security by Statute or Obligation that the borrower pay me the lender 20l. for
it; this contract is usurious, and therefore the Statute and Obligation void.
But if the agreement and Statute or Obligation be, that if the borrower pay not
the 10l. within the year that then he shall pay 20l. for it; this is no usury,
and therefore in this case the deed is good. If one come to me to borrow 500l.
of me and tell me he is unable to pay it together, and therefore he desires
he may pay it in twelve or thirteen years, and does offer therefore to give
me for my kindness 200l. over and above besides the use to let him have it so,
and then the 500l. the interest, and the 200l. is cast together, and so we
agree upon an Annuity of 80l. per annum for fourteen years, which is assured
by Conveyances unto me; in this case the contract is usurious, and all the
assurances made to perfect it are void. And yet regularly where the principal
money is lost Curia Hill. 14. Ja. B. R. Sanders case.
the contract is not usurious. If a man desire to borrow of me 100l. for a
year and I am content to let him have it for the use of 8l. but withal I
compel him to take a lease of me of a house at 60l. rent which in truth is
worth but 30l. this contract is usurious and therefore the assurances thereupon
made void. Et sic de similibus. But if a man the 17th of July 1579. grant me a
rent of 20l. per Co. 5. 69.
annum for the loan of 100l. to be paid every half year, and the first
payment at Christmasse 1580. and it is agreed between us that if he pay the
100l. the 17th of July 1580. that then the rent shall cease; this contract is
not usurious, and therefore the assurances thereupon made are not void but
good. But if in this case there be a private or collateral agreement between
us that he shall not pay the 100l. and redeem the rent, and that clause be put
in only to evade the Statute, then is the contract usurious notwithstanding and
the deeds and assurances thereof void. Et sic de similibus. If one borrow 100l.
after the rate of 8l. per centum, and Hill. 7. Jac. B. R. Curia.
the borrower do afterward pay part of the principal and all the use within
the year, and the lender does receive it, or the lender does sue for his money
within the year; these subsequent acts do not make the contract or deeds or
assurances thereof void, for it is a rule, that if the original contract be
not usurious, no matter ex post facto can make it so. If one borrow of me 10l.
and bind himself Bro. Obligation 79.
to pay me by a day, and moreover bind himself that if he pay it not by the
day, that he shall pay me 20l. for it; this contract and the deed for
perfection of it are good, for this is not usurious, for all Obligations with
conditions for payment of money lent are of this nature* And yet if one borrow
100l. of me and for this mortgage land to me of a greater value then 8l. per
annum on condition that if he pay the money at any time before the years end
then the assurance to be void; this should seem to be an usurious contract, for
in this case I am sure to have by the agreement more then after the rate of 8l.
per centum, and so it is not in the last case before. If one borrow 100l. for a
year and give the Broker 20l. Per. ^ust. Brigman Hill. 7. Car.
to procure it; this will not make the contract usurious nor the assurances
void* but for this the Broker may be punished.

Also all Obligations made to a Sheriff contrary to the Statute Obligations*
made to a Sherriffe contrary to the statute. Collusion in ^raudulent
conv^yances. 1. To deceive purchasors*
of 23 H. 6. chapter 10. are void or at least voidable by pleading. But of this see
in Obligations infra. A deed also made containing Stat. 27 El. chapter 4. Co. super
Lit. 3. stat. 39 El. ^h. 18.
the Grant of any thing with intent and of purpose to deceive and defraud one
that shall afterward buy the same thing is void. For it is to this purpose
provided by a Statute Law, That all fraudulent conveyances of land or any rent
or pro^it out of land made by whomsoever with intent to deceive or defeat any
that shall purchase the land or any rent or profit out of it for money or other
good consideration of the fruit and effect of their purchase shall be void
against such purchasors for so much as they buy and against all others that
come in by or under them. But all such conveyances as are made bona fide and
upon good consideration are not to be accounted fraudulent. For the better
understanding of which Statute and the Law in these cases observe, That
conveyances bona fide are opposed to such as are upon and with any trust
express or implied: And good considerations are set down in the Statute to
distinguish from such as are not valuable, as nature, blood, and the like. If
one convey land with a present or future power of revocation or alteration at
his will that does convey it; this shall be said a fraudulent conveyance as
against him that shall afterward purchase this land: So that if one convey his
land to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of diverse of his
blood with a future power, as after the death of H, or after such a day to
revoke it, and before the Co. 3. 82. 83.
day he sell this land to a stranger for a valuable consideration; in this case
the first deed shall be said to be fraudulent and void as to him that shall
purchase the land to do him any hurt. And if one convey land with such a power
of revocation, and after with an intent to defraud a purchasor make a feoffment
to a stranger to extinct the power, and after sell the land for valuable
considerations to a stranger; in this case both the first and the second deed
as to the purchasor shall be said to be fraudulent and therefore void. And if
there be grandfather father and son, and the grandfather makes Co. 6. 72.
a lease for 100. years to the father, and the father to prevent the drowning
of the lease by the descent of the reversion to him does assign over the lease
to certain friends of his to the use of his son an infant under pretense to
pay debts, the grandfather dies, the father does continue the occupation of
the land and makes estates and does all acts as owner of the land, the son
pays no debts, and the assignement (albeit diverse persons of quality were
named assigns) was delivered to one of the assigns of mean estate in
private, and after the father does sell the land for valuable consideration, in
this case this assignment shall be taken to be fraudulent and void as to the
purchasor. And if the father make a fraudulent conveyance and after continue
the occupation of the land and it descend to the son after the fathers death,
and he sell it for valuable consideration; in this case the purchasor may avoid
the conveyance made by the father as well as if it had been made by the son
himself, and that whether the son be privy to the conveyance made by his
father or not. And if the fraudulent conveyance be made to the King, yet it is
void as to a purchasor as if it were made to a common person. And therefore if
there be tenant in tail the remainder in tail or in fee, and he in the
remainder perceiving the tenant in tail does intend to sell the land and bar
him by a common recovery does sell his remainder by deed enrolled to the King,
and after the tenant in tail does sell the land by common recovery for good
consideration, in this case the purchasor shall avoid this deed to the King,
whereby also appears that a fraudulent conveyance within this statute may be
by way of bargain and sale. And so was it ruled by the Lord Chief Justice
Hide in evidence to a Jury at Guildhall 3. Car. And if there be a lease for
years and the lessor make a fraudulent conveyance in fee, M. 4. Ja^. Cowell and
Bart. case.
and then for good consideration makes another lease to begin at the end of
the former lease; this conveyance shall be void as to the second lessee. And if
A make a lease to B for years upon good considerations, Per. 2 Just. Hill. 18
Jac. B. R.
and after he makes another lease to C of the same thing for the same term to
begin at the same time upon good and valuable consideration, and B does not
discover this but drives this bargain with C, and is witness to this second
lease, and the first lease is not excepted in the second lease; it seems in
this case the first lease shall be void as to C. And in all these and such like
cases, albeit the purchasor before he make his bargain have notice of the
fraudulent Co. 5. 60. Co. 3. 83.
conveyance, yet shall he avoid it as if he were ignorant of it. But such
conveyances and deeds made as before shall never be said to be fraudulent and
void as against him that shall have the thing afterward if he do not give a
valuable consideration for it. And therefore if one make a lease that would be
fraudulent and void as to such a purchasor to A, and after make another lease
bona fide to B, but without any rent or fine given for it; in this case the
first lease shall not be said to be fraudulent as against the second lessee,
and therefore not void. So if one covenant for the advancement of his heirs
males etc. to levy a fine of land by a day to the use of himself for life, and
after of his issue male; and before the day he make a lease that is fraudulent
for many years of purpose, and after he does levy a fine accordingly; in this
case this lease is good and shall not be said to be fraudulent and void by this
Statute as against the issue in tail. So if a man that is somewhat foolish and
given to wast be persuaded to settle his lands upon some of his friends of
purpose to maintain himself with it; and after some of his lewd companions
inveigle him and get him for a small sum of money to conveigh it to them; in
this case the conveyance first made shall not be said to be fra^dulent as
against these purchasors, and therefore it is good against them. And if one
that has a term for 60. years if he live so long make it away, Co. super Lit.
3.
and then he does forge a lease for 90. years absolutely; and after by
indenture reciting this forged lease for valuable and good consideration does
bargain and sell this forged lease and all his interest in the land to I S* in
this case it seems that the first lease is not void, and that the purchasor
shall have nothing but the forged lease.

A deed also made of any thing with intent and purpose to deceive Stat. 3 H. 7.
4. 2 R. 2. chapter 3. 1^ El. chapter 5. Co. 3. 82.
2 To deceive creditors and others of debts and such like duties.
and defeat Creditors of their just debts and duties is void also as against
such persons. For it is provided to this purpose by other Statutes. That all
feoffments, gifts, grants, alienations, bargains and conveyances of lands,
tenements, hereditaments, goods, and chattells, or any rent, profit, or
commodity out of land made by fraud or collusion of trust to him that made the
same, or otherwise with intent to hinder and delay, or put off, or put by
Creditors, or others of their just and lawful actions, suites, debts,
accounts, damages, penalties, forfeitures, hariots, mortuaries, or reliefes
shall be void as against them to whom such thing shall belong and he may
recover the thing notwithstanding, but all such as are made bona fide, and upon
good consideration, are not to be accounted fraudulent by this Statute. For the
better understanding whereof these cases following are to be heeded. If a man a
little before his Co. 5. 60. 3. 82. Dyer 295.
death make a conveyance of his land to his children or friends of his blood
with a proviso to make it void at his pleasure, and he take the profits of it
as his own, or make a conveyance of it to friends to the intent they shall not
be subject to the payment of his debts, having bound himself and his heirs by
any especialty, or to the intent that a warranty and assets shall not bind his
son for other land or the like, in this case this conveyance shall be void as
to them that should have relief upon this land by the dissent; and especially
when the conveyance is made after suites begun; and more especially when any
judgment is had upon the suits against him that does make the deed. And so also
is the law for goods. And therefore if one be indebted to A 20l. and to B 40l.
Co. 3. 80. 83. Bro. Done. 20. Plow. 54.
and be possessed of goods to the value of 20l. and A does sue the debtor for
his 20l. and hanging this suite, the debtor secretly makes a general deed of
gift of all his chattels real and personal to B in satisfaction of his debt,
and yet does afterward continue the occupation and use the goods as his own,
and after A gets judgment and execution; in this case the deed of gift to B
shall be said to be fraudulent and therefore void as against A. So if in this
case he give all his goods to B in satisfaction of his debt, and before any
suite begun by A, with any express or implicit trust, as to the intent that B
shall be favorable to the debtor, or that if the debtor provide the money that
he shall have the goods again, or that he shall suffer the debtor to enjoy and
use the goods and pay him as he can; in these and the like cases the deeds
shall be said to be fraudulent and void, for howsoever it be made upon good
consideration, yet it is not made bon^ fide. So if one in consideration of
natural affection, or for no consideration give all his goods to his child, or
cousin bona fide, this shall be a void deed as to the Creditors. Et sic de
similibus. So if one give all his goods and chattels to his executor in his
life time by deed of gift, this shall be said to be fraudulent and shall be
void as to Creditors. And albeit those to whom the deed of fraud is made know
nothing of the fraudy, yet is the deed fraudulent in that case also as well as
where they are privy to it. If after a Commission of Bankrupts be sued out the
debtor Co. 2. 25.
make a deed of gift of all his goods to one of his Creditors in satisfaction
of his debt; in this case this deed shall be void as against the rest of the
Creditors and as to the Commissioners, and they may order it with the rest of
the estate notwithstanding. But if A bona fide and for valuable consideration
mortgage his land By the two Judges of Assise Aug. 5. Car. in Com. South. Lady
Lamberts case.
whereof he has a term of years to B, upon condition that if he repay the money
to B a year after that he shall reenter, and B does covenant with A, that he
shall take the profits of it until that time etc. A does not pay the money,
and B hoping that he will pay it in time does suffer him to continue in
possession and take the profits of it two or three years after, and in the
interim judgment is had against A, upon a bond and execution awarded; in this
case execution shall not be made of this lease, for this deed of mortgage shall
not be said to be fraudulent as to the Creditor, for when a conveyance is not
fraudulent at the time of the making of it it shall never be said to be
fraudulent for any matter ex post facto.

If A be seized of the fifth part of the Manor of B, and B of the Mich. 19 Jac.
Co. B. Miller and Potscase.
6th part, and M comes to A to buy his part, and after M says to A, my
Counsel tells me I cannot safely buy of you unless B join, and after B does
grant a rent charge of 15l. per annum out of this Manor to C her son and the
heirs of his body in consideration of natural affection (and this was about
1o. Jac. C being then but about three years old) with proviso that if D (whom B
did then intend to mary) grant to the said C the like rent of 15l. and for the
like estate out of 20l. land by the year of the land of B, then the said grant
to be void, and after the said A bought the 6th part of the said Manor of B,
and D her husband being intermaried, and after A, B, and D her husband join in
the grant to M, and in this case it was ruled that this grant to C was not
fraudulent and void. If one does hold his land to pay a hariot Co. 10. 56, 57.
at the death of every one that dies tenant in fee simple, and he infeoffe his
son and heir in consideration of natural affection and marriage to be had
between the son and I, and the son (to prevent the Dower of his intended wife
during his fathers life) makes a lease for forty years unto his father if his
father live so long, and afterward the marriage is had, the father pays the
rent, the son does suit of Court for the land and after the father dies; in
this case this lease shall not be said to be fraudulent as to the Lord to
deceive him of his hariot because it was made to another Stat. 52 H. 3. c. 9.
34 H. 8. chapter 5. Co. 6. 76. Lit. Bro. Sect. 59. Plow. 49. Co. 8. 164. 9. 129.
end.

A deed also made to defeat the King or other Lord of his 3. To deceive Lords
of their wardships etc,
wardship shall be void, as to a third part of the thing conveyed. And
therefore if any tenant that holds of the King or any other Lord make a
feoffment or other conveyance of his land to defeat and defraud the King or
Lord of his wardship, primer seisin or any other benefit appointed and
preserved for the Lord by the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. shall be void as to a
third part thereof against the King or other Lord who shall notwithstanding
have their wardship and other benefits, as if none such were made. As if such a
tenant by deed enfeoffe his lineall or collateral heir within age, or make a
lease for life the remainder to his heir, or make a gift in tail the
remainder in fee to his heir, or make a feoffment on condition that he shall
reinfeoffe his heir at his full age, or make a feoffment for the payment of
his debts, preferment of his wife and children, or infeoffe another to the
intent that he shall take the profits till he have an heir male and then to
reinfeoffe him; all these are fraudulent, and void as to a third part of the
land, and as against the King or other Lord in respect of the benefit they are
to have of and by the land. But no conveyance in these cases shall be said to
be fraudulent and so void for two parts of the land. And if one make a
feoffment of land to two (whereof his heir is one) and their heirs for money
or other valuable consideration; this shall not be said to be a fraudulent
conveyance of any part. So if such a joyntenant make a feoffment of his moity
to a stranger. Dyer 9. Co. 2. 94.
And in cases where the feoffment is fraudulent for a third part as before, if
the feoffee dye or make a feoffment over bona fide before the death of the
Ancestor; in these cases the deed is become good again, and the collusion gone.
If a Dyer 268. Co. 10. 57.
man for fear of debts convey his lands to friends with condition that upon
payment of 10l, they shall convey it to those whom he shall appoint; in this
case the conveyance shall not be said to be fraudulent as to the King or other
Lord for it was done to another end, and therefore it is a good conveyance
against all men but the Creditors. Where deeds shall be void in part or in all
for want of inrollment, atturnement, livery of seisin or the like; see
afterward.

If a deed that is well and sufficiently made in his Creation shall Co. 11. 27.
5. 119. Dyer 59. 261. Perk. Sect. 123. 135. Kelw. 162. Fitz. Release 27. 14 H.
8. 25. Bro. Fait 9.
6 Where a deed good in his creation may become void by matter ex post facto.
And what will make such a deed void or not. 1. By Rasure.
be afterward altered by rasure, interlining, addition, drawing a line through
the words (though they be still legible) or by writing new letters upon the old
in any material place or part of it, as if it be in a deed of grant, in the
name of the grantor, grantee, or in the thing granted or in the limitation of
the estate, or if it be in an Obligation, when the word [Heires] shall be
inserted, or the sum increased, or in the date of either, or the like; be the
same either by the party himself that has the property of the deed or any
other whomsoever except it be by him that is bound by the deed; and be the same
with or without the consent of him to whom it is made or does belong; in this
case and by either of these means the deed has lost his force and is become
void.

And if the alteration be made by the party himself that owes the deed,
albeit it be in a place not material, and that it tend to the advantage of the
other party and his own disadvantage, yet the deed is hereby become void. But
if the alteration be made by the party himself that is bound by the deed in
any material or immateriall part thereof, or a stranger without the privity or
consent of the owner of the deed shall make any such alteration in any part of
a deed not material, (as if it be a deed of a grant containing a lease for
years, and there be inserted between [To have and to hold] and [for 30 years]
these words [from henceforth:] Or if it be an obligation and there be inserted
between [Obligo me] and [per presentes] these words [Executores meos] in both
which cases those words are needless and without any fruit at all; hereby the
deed is not hurt, but it remaineah good notwithstanding. But if the Alteration
be before the delivery of the deed, be it whatsoever or by whom soever, it will
not hurt the deed. And herein it must Perk. Sect. 123, 124. Bro. Fait. 6. Perk.
129, 127. 128.
be observed that then a rasure, etc. is most dangerous, and the deed thereby
most suspicious when it is in a deed Poll and there is but one part of the
deed; and when the rasure or other alteration is in any material part of the
deed; and when the alteration makes to the advantage of him that does owe the
deed and to the disadvantage of the other that made it; and when there does
appear some other thing to be written before; and when there is no other part
of the deed, recital, defeasance, or other matter to which this may be
compared, and that may make it appear to be before the delivery; and when
there be other parts of the deed or other matters whereunto this being compared
does not agree in that part wherein the alteration is; and when the deed has
been in the smoke, or any such like means has been used to cover the
alteration. And in these cases the matter was anciently used to be Co. super
Lit. 225.
tried by the Judges upon the view of the deed; but it is now used to be tried
by Jurors, whether the rasure, or other alteration were before the delivery of
the deed or not.

And if after the sealing, delivery and perfection of a deed, the 2. By
breaking or defacing of the Seal.
Dier 59. Co. 11. 28. 5. 23. Dier 112. Perk. Sect. 135, 136. Bro. Oblig. 83.
seal thereof happen to be broken off, or to be utterly desaced, so that no
sign or print thereof can be seen, or it appears to have been broken off and
it is glued, or the wax new heat and set on again; or the labell of the deed
has been broken off from the deed and is sewed on again; or the deed is new
sealed with other wax, be the same by whatsoever means, or whomsoever unless
it be by him and his means that is bound by the deed; in these cases and by
either of these means the deed is become void. But if any piece of the seal
remain fixed to the deed, and there be any print left upon that piece, the deed
does continue good. And if after the seal of a deed be broken off the party
that sealed it do seal and deliver it de novo; by this means it seems the
deed is become good again. Trin. 38 El. Co. B. Dier 112.
3 By redelivery or cancelling of it.


And if a deed be delivered up to the party that is bound by it to be cancelled
and it be so; or if he that has the deed does by agreement between him and the
other cancel the deed; by either of these means the deed is become void. But
if an Obligee deliver up an Obligation to be cancelled, and the obligor do not
afterward cancel him, but the obligee happen to get him again into his hands
and sue the obligor upon him, the obligor has not any plea to avoid him, for
the deed remains still in force. 4. By disagreement.
Co. 3. 26. 5. 119. Dier 167.


And if an Obligation be delivered as an Escrow to a stranger to be delivered
to the obligee on certain conditions, or to a stranger to the use of the
obligee, and when this is after tendered to the obligee he does refuse it and
disagree to it; or if an Obligation be made to a feme covert, and her husband
disagree to it, in all these cases the deed is become void. And like Law is of
other deeds in diverse such like cases. But the party bound by the deed may not
Agreement.
in these cases plead non est factum to the deed. And in these cases when the
party has once by his agreement made the deed good he cannot afterward by his
disagreement make it void: and when once by refusal and disagreement he has
made the deed void he cannot by agreement or acceptance afterward make it
good. 5. By Judgment of a Court.
Crom. Jur. 29. 40. Bro. Fait. 38.


A deed also good in his original creation may be afterward damned or avoided
by sentence and order of a Court, and this is usually done in the
Star Chamber and in the Chancery, and it is when it appears that the deed
was obtained by some fraud, Vacat of a deed.
force, circumvention of such like practice, or when it does appear to be
forged, or the like. 7. When and where a deed may be good in part and void in
part. Or good against one person and void against another. Or not.
Co. 11. 27. 14 H. 8. 27. 28. 29.


For the answer of this question these differences must be observed. 1. When a
deed is void ab initio, and when it does become void by matter ex post facto.
2. When the deed which is void in part from the beginning is entire, and when
it does consist of several clauses: and when it does consist of several
clauses when the several clauses are absolute and distinct, and when they are
several and yet the one has dependency upon the other. For if any of the
Covenants of an Indenture, or the conditions of an Obligation be against Law,
and the rest of the covenants or conditions be good and lawful; in this case
those that are against Law and the deed as to that part are void ab initio, and
the rest and the deed as for that part are good ab initio. So if three distinct
Obligations are written upon a piece of parchment, and the one of them only is
read to the obligor, and he being an illiterate man seal and deliver the deed;
in this case this is a good deed for that which was read and void for the rest
ab initio. But if an obligation be for 20 l. and it be read to the obligor an
Obligation of 20 s. this is void for the whole ab initio. Co. 11. 27. Kelw. 70.
E. 30. 31.


If a deed be read as containing the grant or gift of an estate tail and a
letter of Attorney to give Livery of Seisin, and in that sense the party does
seal it, and in truth it is a feoffement and conveyance of an estate in fee
simple; in this case albeit the letter of attorney were truly read yet because
it has dependence on the estate, it is void for all. Co. 11. 28. Fitz.
feoffements and Faits. 57. 47 E. 3. 3.


If a man be indebted to me 20 l. on a Contract and 100 l. on an Obligation,
and he pay me this 20 l. and I am to make a release for it, and the intendment
of the release is no more, and it is so read to me being an illiterate man, but
in truth it is a general release, in this case it seems it is good for so
much as it is intended and was declared and void for the rest. Dier 27.


If the condition of an obligation be altered by rasure etc. the obligation
also is hereby become void because the condition and obligation are one deed,
but if the rasure etc. be in the defeasance of an obligation, this will not
make the obligation void. 14 H. 8. 25. 26. Co. 11. 28.


If a deed contain diverse distinct and absolute Covenants, and any of these
Covenants be altered by addition, interlineation, rasure, or the like, by this
means the whole deed and not that part only is become void. Co. 5. 23. 11. 28.
3 H. 7. 5.


If there be diverse grantors, obligors, etc. named in a deed and one of them
only do seal the deed, this is a good deed as against him that does seal and
void as to all the rest that do not seal. And if diverse enter into covenants
by a deed severally, and the seal of one of them is broken from the deed; in
this case the deed is good still as to all the rest but void as to him. But if
an obligation, or the covenants of a deed be joint and not several or joint
and several, and the seal of one of the obligors or covenantors is broken, or
the obligation or covenants be altered by rasure or the like; hereby the whole
deed is become void. 14 H. 8. 29. Perk. ^o. 2.


If I be bound in an obligation to a Monk and I S, this deed is void as to the
Monk but good as to I S: So if a Monk and I be bound to another; this is good
as against me, but void as against the Monk. And so it is in case of a Grant.
Co. 1. 173. Dier 127. See in Leaks Numb. 13.


By a power of revocation or a condition a deed may be made void in part and
continue in his force for another part. And therefore it seems in the usual
case where a deed is made upon condition that if such a thing be, or be not
done that the deed shall be void, or that these presents shall be void; that in
these cases the whole deed and all the covenants therein contained are void;
But if the frame of the condition be, That upon such a thing to be, or not to
be done it shall be lawful for the feoffor, lessor etc. to reenter, or that
the demise shall be void, without more words; in these cases the estate only
and those covenants that are incident thereunto, as for quiet enjoying and the
like and the deed as to that part only is void: and for other covenants that
are collateral and have no dependence upon the estate that the deed does
remain in force and is good still, for a man may grant two acres upon condition
to reenter into one of them. If it be intended that the whole deed shall be void,
the best way is to use these words [thenthese presents and every thing therein
contained shall be utterly void.]

All deeds do take effect from, and therefore have relation to Co. 2. 4. 5. 5
H. 7. 26. Plow. 491. Dier 307. 315. Fitz. Feoffments and faits 87. 63. 95.
the time not of their date but of their delivery: and this is always (...)
How and to what time a deed shall have relation, and when it shall begin to
take effect.
presumed to be the time of their date unless the contrary do appear. And
hence it is, That if a Statute be acknowledged the 26. day of May, and the
conusee make a release of all demands dated the 25. day and deliver it the 27.
day; that by this release the Statute is discharged. And if the defeasance of a
Statute do bear date before, and the delivery of it be after the Statute;
that the conusor may show this and take advantage of it in avoidance of the
Statute. And that if a writing be dated in the minority of an Infant, and be
sealed and delivered by him when he is of full age, that this is a good deed
and will bind him. And that if a release be supposed to be made by a husband to
bar a duty due to the wife, and it be dated during the coverture but in truth
it is sealed and delivered by the husband before the coverture; that this shall
not bar the wife: the time therefore of delivery of a deed is material in
all these and the like cases, and this is always to be tried by a Jury. And
hence it is also, That if the next presentation to a Church be granted to two
several persons by several deeds of Fetz. feoff. and Faits. Batte 147.
several dates, and the deed that bears the last date be first delivered; in
this case he to whom this deed is made shall have the Presentation, and not the
other whose deed albeit it be dated first yet is delivered last. And hence it
is also that if a lease be made for Co. 5. 1.
years, to begin from henceforth, or a confectione presentium, or a die
confectionis; that this lease shall be said to begin from the time of the first
delivery and not from the time of the date.

And where deeds have a kind of double delivery, as in case of Co. 3. 35, 36,
18 H. 6. 9. 27 H. 6, 7. Plow. 344.
a delivery as an Escrow, there they shall take effect take effect from, and
Relation.
have relation to the time of the first delivery or not ut res valeat, for if
relation may hurt and for some cause make void the deed (as in some cases it
may) there it shall not relate. But if relation may help it, as in case where
a feme sole deliver an Escrow and before the second delivery she is married or
dies, in this case if there were not a relation the deed would be void, and
therefore in this case it shall relate. So if one disseise me of two acres of
land in D and I release to him all my right in my lands in D and deliver it to
an estranger as an Escrow etc. until a time and before that time he disseise
me of another acre there; in this case this release shall not by relation
extend to this other acre to bar me of that also. But as to collateral acts
there shall be no relation at all in this case. And therefore if the obligee
release before the second delivery the release is void and will not bar the
party obligee of the fruit of his obligation.

If a man that is party or privy in estate or interest or one that does
justify in the right of one that is such a party or privy shall 9. When and
where a deed must be showed in Court. And how long it shall abide there. And
who may take advantage of it.
Co. 10. 92. super Lit. 267. 317. 225. 231. 5. 74 Lit. Sect. 375.
plead a deed in any Court, although he claim but parcel of the original
estate, yet in this case he must show the original deed to the Court: and the
reason of this is, to the end that the legal part of the deed (the trial
whereof belongs to the Judges) may approve it self. i. that it may be seen
whether the composition of words be sufficient in Law or not, and then that it
may appear whether the estate be with Condition, Limitation, or with power of
revocation etc. to the end that if there be any such thing in it and there be
no other part of it, the other party may take advantage of it, and then that it
may appear to be without resure or interlining and the like, and also that it
may appear to be well sealed and delivered (the trial whereof does now belong
to the Country.) But strangers to estates that are neither parties nor privies
shall not be compelled to show the deed though they make use of him. And when a
deed is thus showed in Court it must remain in that Court all the Term
wherein it is showed in the custody of the Custos brevium, and at the end of
the Term if the deed be not denied the Law does adjudge the possession of the
deed in him to whom it does belong. But if the deed be denied then it is to be
kept there until it be determined. Also when a deed is showed in Court the
adverse party may take any advantage by it that it will afford him, as if a
feoffement be made by deed poll on condition, and the feoffee does break the
condition and the feoffor does enter and the feoffee does sue him and makes his
title by that deed, the feoffee may take advantage of the Condition.

Any man that that occasion to use or plead a deed may set forth 10. Where one
may say his deed was delivered at another time or in another place.
the delivery thereof to be at any time after the date of the deed, Dier 315.
12 H. 6. 1. Co. 2. 4, 5.
and in some cases he must do so if he will have any advantage by it. As if he
plead a release to an obligation and it bears date before the obligation; in
this case he must aver that it was delivered after or it will not avail him.
But a man may not in pleading set forth the delivery of a deed to be before the
date of the deed. And yet if it be so that a deed be dated after the time of
the delivery of it, the deed is good, and therefore if he that does use such a
deed do plead and set it forth as a deed made before the time of the delivery
and the party that made it plead non est factum to the deed, a Jury upon the
trial may find the truth of Estoppell*
the case: but if h^ by his pleading set forth the deed to be delivered before
the time of the date, then the Jury is concluded as well as the party himself,
for a Jury is estopped to find any thing contrary to that which is apparently
admitted in the record. In 12 H. 6. 1.
debt brought by an executor the defendant pleaded the release of the Testator
which did bear date after the death of the testator, but he did aver the
delivery of it in the life time of the testator, and the Court did not allow of
this plea.

Sometimes Antiquity added a place where the deeds were made, Co. super. Lit. 6.
as Datum apud B, and this was in disadvantage of him to whom the deed was
made, for if the deed be in general and without this addition he may allege
the deed to be made where he will. An Co. super. Lit. 261.
obligation made beyond the Seas may be sued here in England in what place the
obligee will, and if it bear date at the Burdeux in France, it may be alleged
to be made in quodam loco vocat. Burdeux in France in Islington in the County
of Middlesex and there it shall be tried, for whether there be such a place in
Islington or not it is not traversable in that case.

Non est factum is an answer to a declaration whereby a man 11. Non est factum;
Quid. And where this may be pleaded to a deed, or not.
denies that to be his deed whereupon he is impleaded.

If any deed or writing be used against a man in any Court and it want writing,
sealing, or delivery, or it be not sealed, written, and delivered as before is
set forth, the party that is sued upon it or against whom it is pleaded may
plead this plea to it. So also if a deed by any Alteration of rasure etc.
become void; in this case the party may plead this plea to avoid it. So also
where a deed does become void or lose his virtue by the not reading, or not
true reading of it to an illiterate man, or by refusal or disagreement as in
the cases before, the party may plead this plea to avoid it. But in all cases
where the deed is voidable and so remains at the time of the pleading, as if
an Infant, or man of full age by duresse seal and deliver a deed; or if an
obligation be well sealed and delivered by two and the deed be joint and the
obligee sue one of them; in these and such like cases the party bound by the
deed may not plead Non est factum, for in the first and such like cases he must
avoid it by special pleading with conclusion of Judgment si Action etc. and in
the last he must plead in abatement of the writ etc. And if an obligation or
any other deed be by any special act of Parliament made void the party that is
bound by it cannot plead this plea of Non est factum to it but he must avoid it
by special pleading of the matter and taking advantage of the Statute and so
with conclusion of Judgment si Action etc.

And now we come to the Exposition of deeds.

CHAP. V. Exposition of Deeds.
IT is further to be observed that Deeds for the most part consist of these
things. viz. the Premises, Habendum, Tenendum, Reddendum or reservation,
Condition, Warranty, and Covenant. And in the Premises there is sometimes a
Recital, and sometimes an Exception contained: but all these are not essential
parts of a deed, for a deed may be good albeit it have not all these parts or
it be not so formal and orderly drawn and made.

The Premises of a deed is all the forepart of the deed before the Co. super
Lit. 6. 7. Co. 11. 51. 2. 55. Plow. ^96.
Habendum. And yet this word is sometimes taken for the thing 1. Premises.
Quid.
demised or granted by the deed. And the office of this part of the deed is
rightly to name the grantor and grantee and to comprehend the certainty of the
thing granted, either by express words, or by that which by reference may be
reduced to a certainty, and the exception or thing to be excepted if there be
any. And in this part of the deed is the Recital (if there be any in the deed)
for the most part contained. And herein also is sometimes (though improperly)
set down the estate.

The Habendum of a deed is that part of the deed which does 2. Habendum. Quid.
begin with To have and to hold. And this does properly succeed Co. super Lit.
6. 7. 10. 107.
the Premises. And the office hereof is to set down again the name of the
grantee, the estate that is to be made and limited, or the time that the
grantee shall have in the thing granted or demised, and to what use. And herein
also is sometimes though needlessly set down again the thing granted. But the
deed that does usually consist of all these parts may be good notwithstanding
some of 3. Where a deed is good notwithstanding some seeming fault in the
Premises or Habendum.
them be omitted and it be not so formally made. For an estate may be made by a
deed without any Habendum at all. As if one give or grant land to another and
his heirs, without any more words in the deed; or if one give or grant land to
another, and limit no estate without any Habendum in the deed; and seal and
deliver this deed and make Livery accordingly; in both these cases the deed is
good, and in the first case an estate in fee simple is made, and in the last
case an estate for life is made. And if the name of the grantee be not
contained in the Premises, yet if it be in the Habendum, it may be good
enough. As if one give or grant land Habendum to B and his heirs, and he is
not named in the Premises, yet this is a good deed to make an estate in fee
simple. And yet if the thing granted be only in the Habendum and not in the
Promises of the deed, the deed will not pass it. And therefore if a man grant
Plow. 152* Dier 96. Perk. Sect. 251.
black acre only in the Premises of a deed Habendum black acre and white
acre; white acre will not pass by this deed. But if the thing newly added be
implied in the thing granted by the Premises of the deed, as being an incident
thereunto or otherwise, or it be the same thing, and expressed in other words
only, in these cases the Premises and the Habendum may stand together. As if
one grant a manor, Habendum the manor with the Advowson appendant to the manor;
or if one grant a Reversion of land by the name of a reversion in the
premises, Habendum the land it self, in both these cases the deed is good and
the advowson and reversion will pass. So also if livery of Seisin be made of
the thing newly added, in this case perhaps it may pass by the Livery. And if
the thing granted be lef^ out in all, or in part in the Habendum, yet the grant
is good. And thereof if one grant land to A Habendum to A his heirs etc. or if
one grant white acre and black acre to A Habendum white acre to A and omit
black acre; yet these deeds are good, and all that is contained in the
premises of the deed does pass in both cases. And if a feoffement be made to
one, Habendum Lit. 1. Co. super Lit. 46. Co. 6. 35. New Terms of the Law. tit.
Assigns.
to him and his heirs, without the word Assigns; this is a good feoffement
and the estate thereby made is assignable: as where a lease is made to one his
executors and administrators, without the word Assigns, this is a good Lease
and assignable. So if one grant land to A Habendum to him for 100. years; or
Habendum to him and his assigns for 100. years; these are as good leases as
the lease that is made by these words Habendum to A his executors,
administrators and assigns for 100. years. So if a lease of land be made to A
Habendum the land to him and his heirs for 100. years, this is a good Habendum
and the word [heirs] is void, and it shall go to his executors etc. As also
where land is granted to A Habendum to him and his Successors for 100. years;
this is a good lease, and the word [Successors] void, for it shall go to
executors etc. And if a lease be made Habendum for years, and say not how many
years; this is a good Habendum and a lease for two years.

A Recital is the setting down or report of something done before. 3. Recital*
Quid. 4. Where it is needful; or not.


When a man is to take any new estate from the King of a thing Co. 1. 45. Dier
77.
whereof there is any estate in being, there the former estate if it be good
and of record must be rehearsed and recited in the deed, or else the second
grant will not be good: but in case of a common Person there needs no such
recital, neither when a man is to derive an estate out of a former, or assign
over a term of years is it needful there should be any recital of the former
estate in being. 5. Where misrecit^l^ will hurt a deed* or not.


If one recite or rehearse an estate made for term of years, and Co. 1* 74.
then after grant over that term to another, and mistake in the recital; this
mistake may make all void. As if a Fieri facias come to a Sheriff to levy a
debt, and he by writing recite that the defendant has a term of years, and
does suppose it to begin 1o. Maii, 2 Jac. when in truth it does begin the 20th.
of August, and then sell the same term; in this case this sale is void. But if
he add withal these words in the deed [And all the interest that the
defendant had in the land] or if he make sale of it for a certain number of
years only; this grant may be good notwithstanding the misrecitall.

If one recite a former lease to be made such a day to I S and Dier 93. 160.
then make a new lease to begin after the end of the former lease, and mistake
the date of the old lease; in this case the deed is good notwithstanding this
mistake.

If one grant a reversion, and in reciting the lease in possession 8 H. 7. 3.
Fitz. Grant.
mistake the date of it only and recite all the rest truly; this will not hurt
the grant. No more then where a man does recite that such land came to him by
forfeiture, and then does grant it by name; for in this case albeit it did not
come to him by forfeiture but by surrender, yet this mistake will not hurt. And
yet in case of the King such a misrecitall may make the grant void.

If I grant to I S all the lands in Dale which I purchased from Dier 50. 87.
376.
I D or which came unto me by descent from I D, or I give all my goods to I S
which I have as executor to I D, and in truth I have no such lands or goods,
but I had them by some other means or of some other; in these cases and by
this mistake the deed is void. But if I grant to I S all my lands in Dale by
name, as white acre, which I purchased of I D and in truth I did purchase them
of another; in this case this mistake will not hurt the deed. So if I grant 20.
load of wood in Dale in the great wood which I had of the grant of my father,
and in truth I had not of the grant of my father but of the grant of another;
in this case the grant is good. But of this matter see more in Grant Numb. 4.
part 5.

An Exception is a clause of a deed whereby the feoffor, donor, 6. Exception*
Quid.
Plow. 361. 195. Dier 59. Perk. Sect. 615. Co. super Lit. 47. 3 H. 6. 45.
grantor, lessor, etc. does except somewhat out of that which he had granted
before by the deed. And this does most commonly and properly succeed the
setting down of the things granted, and is made by one of these words Except',
Preter, Salvo, Si non, or such like. And hereby the thing excepted is exempted
and does not pass by the grant, neither is it parcel of the thing granted: as
if a manor be granted excepting one acre thereof, hereby in Judgment of Law
that acre is severed from the manor. But this may be in any part of the deed,
and so has it been resolved. Hill. 17. Car. B R. Fregunnels case. Perk. Sect.
42 etc.


In every good Exception these things must always concur, 7. What shall be
said a good exception; or not.
1. This Exception must be by apt words. 2. It must be of part of the thing
granted and not of some other thing. 3. It must be of part of the thing only,
and not of all, the greater part, or the Plow. 19. Co. super. Lit. 47.
effect of the thing granted. 4. It must be of such a thing as is severable
from the thing which is granted, and not of an inseparable incident. 5. It must
be of such a thing as he that does except may have and does properly belong to
him. 6. It must be of a particular thing out of a general, and not of a
particular thing out of a particular thing or of a part of a certainty. 7. It
must be certaintly described and set down. As for examples. Plow. 195. Perk.
Sect. 641.
If a man grant al his lands in Essex saving, besides, or except his lands in
dale, or all his lands in Dale excepting one house, or one acre in certain; or
one house excepting one chamber in certain; these and such like Exceptions are
good. Dier 103. Plow. 104. 361. 67. Co. 8. 63. 11. 47. 5. 11. Perk. Sect. 642.
3 H. 6. 35.
And if one grant a manor excepting one Tenement (parcel of the manor) or
excepting the Services of I S (who does hold of the manor) or excepting one
Close, or excepting one acre, or excepting the Advowson appendant, or excepting
the woods, or excepting twenty acres of wood, or excepting all the gross
trees; these are good exceptions.

14 H. 8. 1.
And if one grant a mesuage and houses thereunto belonging excepting the barn
or excepting the dov^house; it seems this is a good exception, for they may
pass by the grant of a mesuage etc. Co. 8. 63. 5. 23.
And if one grant land excepting the Timber trees thereupon, or excepting the
trees thereupon; or if a man sell a wood excepting 20. of the best oaks, and
show which in certain; these are good exceptions. In the case of Haward and
Fulcher. Hill. 3. Car. B. R.
So if one have a manor wherein is a wood called the great wood, and he grant
his manor excepting all the woods and underwoods that grow in the great wood
and all the trees that grow elsewhere, this is a good exception. Co. 11. 64.
And if one grant a mesuage and all the lands and tenements thereunto belonging
excepting one cottage; this is a good exception. Perk Sect. 113. 644. Dier 157.
And if one grant a reversion excepting the rent; this is a good exception of
the rent and does keep it from passing by the grant. So if a man have a a rent
charge out of land and he release his right in the land except the rent; So if
the Lord release to his Tenant Salvo dominio suo, etc. these are good
exceptions. Plow. 361.
And if one grant all his horses except his white horse; this is a good
exception of the white horse. 3 H. 6. 45. Perk. Sect. 643.
And if a man be seized of a manor, and lease it by deed indented for life
exceptis and reservatis quod been liceat to the lessor succidere dare and
vendere omnes grossas arbores in dicto manerio crescentes etc. it seems this
is a good exception of the trees. But if the exception be of another thing then
the thing granted: Perk. Sect. 639. Dier 59. Plow. 361. 67. 370.
As if one grant a manor or land excepting 12 d. or excepting the Tithes, or
excepting one acre of ground which is no parcel of the manor or of the land
before granted; or if one grant the land descended to him of the part of his
father excepting the land descended to him of the part of his mother; these
exceptions are void. Dier 97. 264. Co. super Lit. 47. Plow. 153. 103, 104. 14
H. 8. 1. Doct. and. Stud. 98.
Or if the exception be such as it is repugnant to the grant and does utterly
subvert it and take away the fruit of it, as if one grant a manor or land to
another excepting the profits thereof; or make a feoffement of a close of
meadow or pasture, reserving or excepting the grass of it; or grant a manor
excepting the services; these are void exceptions. Dier 59. 263.
So if one grant his house, chambers, cellars, and shops, excepting his shops;
it is said this is no good exception. And by the like reason if one grant his
meadow and pasture grounds except his meadow grounds, this exception is not
good no more then if one grant two manors or two acres excepting one of them.
And of this opinion was the Chief Justice in B. R. Hill. 3. Car. in the case of
Haward and Fulcher. Plow. 524. Dier 264. Br. grant. 60 38 H. 6. 38.
And yet if a man make a lease for years of a Mill excepting the profits
thereof during the life of the lessor; it is said, this has been adjudged a
good exception. But I doubt of this case, for the exception of the profits of a
thing is the exception of the thing it self. And a man cannot grant an estate
and reserve a part of the estate, as make a feoffement in fee and reserve a
lease for life, or grant an Advowson and reserve the Presentation for his life.
Co. super Lit. 150.
Or if the exception be of an inseparable incident and a thing that cannot be
granted by it self and from another, as if a manor be granted excepting the
Court Baron, or land be granted excepting the common appendant thereunto
belonging; these exceptions are void. But exceptions of severable incidents are
good. Co. 5. 12. Hi^* 9 Jac. B. R. per Curiam.
Or if the exception be of such a thing as the grantor cannot have nor does
belong to him by law; as if a lessee for years assign over all his term in
the land excepting the Timber trees, earth or clay; this exception is not good.
But if lessee for life make a lease for years, or lessee for 21. years make a
lease for This difference has been agreed.
20. years; or tenant by the courtesy or in dower grant over their estate
excepting the Timber trees; these are good exceptions. And if a lessee for life
or years open a Cole-mine and then assign over his estate excepting the mines
or the profits thereof; these are void exceptions. Co. super Lit. 47. Plow. 53.
Or if the exception be of a particular thing out of a particular thing, as if
one grant white acre and black acre excepting white acre, or grant 20. acres of
land by particular names excepting one acre of them; these exceptions are void.
Perk. Sect. 643. 641.
Or if the exception be set down incertainly, as if one grant a house
excepting one chamber; or grant a manor excepting one acre, but does not set
forth which ch^mber or which acre it shall be; these exceptions are void.

A Tenendum is a clause of the deed whereby the tenure was heretoforce created.
And this does most commonly and properly 8. Tenendum. Quid.
Co. super Lit. 6. and Co. 9. 130.
succeed the Habendum, and was made by this word Tenendum per servicium etc.
But* sithence the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum when the fee simple does
pass the tenure is always of the chief Lord and is thus set forth, Tenendum
de capitalibus dominis etc. And this clause at this day is for the most part
omitted altogether.

A Reservation is a clause of a deed whereby the feoffor, donor, Co. 10. 107.
Plow. 132. Co. super Lit. 47. Perk. Sect. 625.
lessor, grantor etc. does reserve some new thing to himself out 9.
Reservation or Reddendum. Quid.
of that which he granted before. And this does most commonly and properly
succeed the Tenendum, and is made by one or more of these words Reddend',
reservand', solvend', faciend', inveniend', or such like. This does differ from
an exception which is ever of part of the thing granted and of a thing in esse
at the time, but this is of a thing newly created or reserved out of a thing
demised that was not in esse before; so that this does always reserve that
which was not before or abridge the tenure of that which was before.

In every good reservation these things must always concur. 1. 10. What
shall be said a good reservation. And what not.
Plow. 132. Perk. Sect. 626. Co. 8. 71.
It must be by apt words. 2. It must be of some other thing issuing or coming
out of the thing granted and not a part of the thing it self nor of some thing
issuing out of another thing. 3. It must be of such a thing whereunto the
grantor may have resort to distraine. 4, It must be made to one of the grantors
and not to a stranger to the deed. As for examples. Plow. 132.
If a man grant land yielding and paying money or some such like thing yearly,
this is a good reservation. But if the grantee covenant to pay such a sum of
money, or to do such a thing yearly; this is no good reservation, but a
covenant to pay a sum of money in Covenant.
gross and not as a rent. Co. 5. 111. 8. 71. super Lit. 214. 213. 99.
If a lease be made for years rendering a rent to the lessor or his heirs, in
the disjunctive; or rendering a rent to the lessor, without saying [and his
heirs etc.] or rendering a rent during the said term; and does not say to
whom; or rendering 10 l. to the lessor and ^5 l. to his heirs; all these
reservations are good. But if a lease be made rendering rent to the heirs of
the lessor; this reservation is void because the rent is not reserved to
himself first. Co. super Lit. 142.
If one grant land, yielding for rent money, corn, a horse, spurs, a rose,
or any such like thing; this is a good reservation: but if the reservation be
of the grass, or of the vesture of the land, or of a Common or other profit to
be taken out of the land; these reservations are void. Co. super Lit. 47. Co.
5. 3. Perk. Sect. 626.
If one grant a manor, mesuage, land, meadow, or pasture, or the vesture or
herbage of of land, meadow or pasture, rendering a rent; this is a good
reservation. But if one grant Tithes, rents, commons, advowsons, offices, a
corody, mulcture of a Mill, a Fair, market, privilege, or liberty, reserving
a rent; this reservation is void. And yet such a reservation also in case of
the King is good. And in case of a Subject also, if Prerogative.
a lease be made by deed in writing of any such thing for a term of years
reserving a rent; this may be good by way of contract to produce an action of
debt, though not as a rent to be distrained Debt.
for. And thus by apt words an apt rent out of manors and such like memorable
things, or diverse rents may be reserved upon one grant. As if one grant the
Manors of A, B and C rendering for Co. 5. 55. Dier 308. Co. super Lit. 47. 164.
213.
A 20 s. for B 20 s. and for C 20 s. these are good Rents and several. So if
one grant the manors of A, B and C rendering 3 l. viz. for A 20 s. for B 20 s.
and for C 20 s. this is a good reservation, but in this case the rent is
entire. Also one may reserve one rent one year and another rent another year;
as 10 s. one year and 20 s. another year, or one may reserve a rent to be
paid every second or third year, and no rent the other years, or one may
reserve one kind of rent one year and another kind of rent another year; and
these reservations are good. And these Co. super Lit. 225. 8 H. 7. 9. Bro. Fine
36. Reservation. 4.
reservations may be by fine as well as by deed, or it may be in case where the
lessor has a reversion of the land, or upon a partition to make an equality
without any deed at all. But if it be upon an exchange to make an equality, it
is not good except it be by deed. Co. super Lit. 214. 143. 47. Dier. 222.
If two Joint tenants join in the grant of their land by deed indented and the
rent is reserved to one of them; this is a good reservation and shall go to
him alone. But if it be by word or by deed Poll that the lease is made the rent
shall go to them both. Adjudge Mich. 8. Car. in Blands case.
And if a man poss^ssed of a Term join his wife with him and they both
assign over this Term by indenture rendering a rent to them two and the
survivor of them, and she does not seal the deed; in this case the
reservation as to the wife is void. And if the reservation be of the rent to a
stranger that is no party to the deed and to him only, this reservation is
void. And therefore if the father and his son and heir apparent by indenture
lease Hobarts Rep. 274. Oats and Fith Co. 3.
his land for years to begin after the fathers death rendering rent to the
son, it is void.

A Condition is a clause of restraint in a deed or a bridle annexed and joined
to an estate staying and suspending the same and making 10. Condition. Quid.
it incertaine whether it shall take effect or no.

A Warranty is a clause or covenant made in a deed by the one 11. Warranty Quid.
party unto the other whereby the feoffor, donor or lessor does for him and his
heirs grant to warrant and secure land granted to the feoffee, donee or lessee
and his heirs during the estate.

A Covenant is a Clause of agreement contained in a deed whereby 12. Covenant.
Quid.
either party is bound to do, perform or give something to the other. And of
all these see at large afterward.

In the Construction of deeds it must be considered, 1. How a Co. super Lit
302. Perk. Sect. 66.
deed in the gross shall be taken and enure. 2. How it shall be taken 13. How
and to what purpose a deed of grant in gross shall en^^re and be constr^ed and
taken.
and expounded in the several parts and pieces of it. And for the first these
Rules are to be known. 1. If diverse join in a deed and some are able to make
such a deed and some are not, this shall be said to be his deed alone that is
able, as if diverse join in the grant of a thing by deed and one alone has all
the estate and the rest have nothing in the thing granted; it shall be said to
be his grant alone that has the estate. And so e converso. If a deed be made
to one that is incapable and to others that are capable, in this case it shall
enure only to him that is capable. 2. A deed that is intended and made Dier
251. Co. 2. 35. and super Lit. 49.
to one purpose may enure to another, for if it will not take effect that way
it is intended it may take effect another way. And therefore a deed made and
intended for a release may amount to a grant of a Reversion, an Atturnement, or
a Surrender, or e converso. And if a man have two ways to pass lands by the
common law and he intends to pass them one way, and they will not pass that
way; in this case ut res valeat it may pass the other way. As if a man
beseised of two acres of land in fee, and lets one of them for years, and
after intending to pass them both by feoffement makes a Charter of feoffement
and makes livery in the acre in possession in the name of both the acres; in
this case the acre in possession only does pass: but if the lessee of the
other acre Atturne then the reve^sion of that acre will pass also. But where a
man may pass lands by the Common law or by raising of a use and settling it by
the Statute there in many cases it is otherwise. As if the father make a
Charter of feoffment to his son and a letter of Attorney to make livery, and
no livery is made; in this case no use shall arise to the son. So if a man in
consideration of marriage make a feoffement with a letter of Attorney to give
livery, and no livery is made; in this case no use will arise. And so was it
held by Chapter Justice Popham B. R. for the inte^tion of the parties does work
much in the raising and direction of uses. And therefore it is said that when a
man does intend to pass land one way it shall never pass another way contrary
to Dier 96.
his intent, as if one covenant for good considerations to levy a fine of land
to the use of I S and his heirs, if no fine be levied no use shall arise upon
the covenant. If one by words of Bargain sell, give 19 Eliz. Thorold and
Gordens case.
and grant, make a feoffement of his house for money, and intending to pass it
by way of bargain and sale and Inrolment the deed being made there being a
Master of the Chancery in the house whereof the feoffement is made, he does
acknowledge and deliver the deed before him, in this case if the deed be not
enrolled the conveyance is void and that delivery shall not amount to a livery
of seisin. And yet when the intent is apparent to pass it one way or another
Experientia.
there it may be good either way, as where one does make a feoffement in fee
with a letter of Attorney to make livery, and in the same deed does covenant in
case livery of seisin be not had to perfect the deed to stand seized to the
uses of the feoffement, in this case albeit no livery of seisin be made or
atturnement had to perfect the feoffement or grant, yet if it be in such a case
where there is a consideration sufficient to raise the uses by the covenant,
the uses will arise by the covenant. 3. When a deed may enure to diverse
purposes he to whom the deed is made shall have election which Co. super Lit.
301. Dier 251.
way to take it and he may take it that way as shall be most for his advantage.
As if a deed of grant be made by the words Dedi and concessi; this in law may
amount to a grant, feoffement, gift, lease, release, confirmation or surrender,
and it is in the choice of the grantee to plead or use it the one way or the
other. So if a lease for Co. 2. 36. Dier 30. 302.
years be made to me of land for money by the words demise, grant, bargain and
sell; I may take and use this by way of bargain and ^ale, or by way of demise
at my pleasure. So if one have a rent out Dier 109. 319.
of land whereof I and my wife are jointly seized, and he does by his deed
release, give and grant this rent to me, in this case I may use this as a
release to extinguish the rent, or as a grant of the rent as it may make most
for my advantage. Et sic de similibus. But where any inconvenience may grow by
such an election there the grantee shall not have an election but it shall enure
as it may, as where a man may pass land by the common law or by raising of use
and settling Co. 2. 35, 36.
it by the Statute there sometimes it is so. And therefore if in the same case
before, a father make a Charter of feoffement to his son and a letter of
attorney to make livery and no livery is made; hereby no use will arise to the
son as it will in case of a covenant. And if a lease for years be made of a
Manor by the words bargain, sell, demise and grant, and this is to begin at a
day to come; in this case it must pass entirely as a demise at the common law
or entirely as a bargain and sale, and the lessee has not election to take or
use it otherwise or to use it for part one way and for part another way. 4. It
shall enure as much as may be according to the apparent intent Finches law. 58.
of the parties. And therefore it is that if a feoffement be made of a Manor
with an advowson appendant; or a bargain and sale of land in possession and
land in reversion together be made and the feoffement is not well executed for
want of livery of Seisin or Atturnement, or the deed of bargain and sale is
not enrolled; in these cases albeit the advowson may pass without livery or
atturnement and the reversion without inrolment, yet because the intent does
appear to be that all shall pass together therefore neither the advowson nor
the reversion will pass by this deed. 5. When a deed is made it shall enure as
it may, and so as it may have and take Plow. 140. 59. Co. super Lit. 30^.
the most and best effect that may be according to reason, as if tenant for
life or years and he in remainder or reversion in fee join in a feoffement by
deed; this shall enure in the first case as the lease of the tenant for life
and the confirmation of him in the remainder or reversion, and in the last case
as the feoffement of him in the reversion etc. and the surrender of the lessee
for years to the feoffee and and no forfeiture of the estate in the lessee for
life. But if in this case the feoffement be by word it seems it shall enure
first as a surrender of the estate of the tenant for life and then the
feoffement of him in reversion ut res valeat. And if A be tenant for life the
remainder to B for life the remainder to D in tail the remainder to the right
heirs of B and A and B join in a feoffement by deed, in this case this is the
feoffement of A and confirmation of B but a forfeiture of both their estates
whereof the tenant in tail may take present advantage. If tenant for life
grant a rent charge to him in Co. 5* 15.
Forfeiture.
reversion in ^ee, and he by his deed does grant this rent over to another and
his heirs; this is a good grant and confirmation also to make the rent pass
to the second grantee in fee simple. So if a disseisor make a lease for life
the remainder to the disseisee and the dissee does grant the remainder over;
this is a good grant and confirmation also. If A do bargain and sell his land
to B by indenture, Co. super Lit* 147.
and before inrolment they do both grant a rent charge to C by deed and after
the indenture is enrolled: in this case after the inrolment this shall be said
to be the grant of B and the confirmation of A, and if the deed be not enrolled
it shall be said to be the grant of A and confirmation of B. If one make a
Charter of feoffement Co. super Lit. 21.
of one acre of land to A and his heirs, and another deed of the same acre to
A and the heirs of his body and deliver seisin according to the form and
effect of both deeds; it seems this shall enure by moities, viz. he shall have
an estate tail in the one moity with the fee simple expectant and a fee simple
in the other moity. If Co. super Lit. 45.
two several tenants of several lands join in a lease for years by deed
indented; these be several leases and several confirmations from each of them
from whom no interest passes and does not work by way of Estoppell. If B
tenant for life of C and he in remainder Estoppell.
or reversion in fee of the same land join in a lease for life or years by
deed indented; this shall enure during the life of C as the lease of B and the
confirmation of him in reversion or remainder and after the death of C as the
lease of him in reversion or remainder and the confirmation of B without any
Estoppell. If tenant in tail and he in reversion grant a rent charge in fee,
it shall be taken the grant of the tenant in tail and the confirmation of him
in reversion, but when the tenant in tail di^th without issue, it shall be
taken the sole grant of him in reversion. If two Jointenants be in fee of an
acre of land Perk. Sect. 80.
and they lease it to a stranger for life, and the lessee grant his estate to
one of the lessors; in this case it seems it shall enure for a moity by way of
grant and for the other moity by way of Surrender.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the Lord grant his Seigniory to his tenant
and to a stranger; this shall enure Perk. Sect. 81 Dier 140.
for a Moitie to the tenant by way of Extinguishment and for the other moitie
to the stranger by way of grant. If tenant Perk. Sect. 82, 83.
for life of the grant of a woman sole grant his estate to the husband of the
wife, this shall enure for the whole by way of grant.

If a lease be made for life the remainder for life to a stranger and the
lessee grant his estate to his lessor; this shall enure by way of grant. If
there be Lord and two Joint tenants in fee, and the Lord grant his Seigniory to
one of his tenants in fee; it seems this shall take effect for the whole by
way of extinguishment. If there be lessee for life and the reversion descend to
two coparceners, and one of them take a husband and the lessee grant his estate
to the husband and wife; this shall enure by way of grant for the whole. If the
disseisee and the heir of the disseisor (being in by Co. super Lit. 372. Co.
7. 14. 1. 147, 148. 5. (...). 4. 2.
descent) make a feoffement by one deed and livery of seisin thereupon; this is
the feoffement of the heir only and the confirmation of the disseisee. 6. If
one have diverse estates in land and he make any charge or grant upon or out of
it; this shall issue out of all his estates. And if one have a possession and
an ancient right, and grant a rent charge out of the land, or make a lease of
the land; this shall issue out of both the estates and it shall enure from him
Perk. Sect. 592.
having several estates as it shall enure from several persons having the
same estates. Quando duo jura concurrant in una persona ^quum est ac si essent
in diversis. 7. If one that has a rent charge out of a manor by grant reciting
his grant grant the same rent to a lessee for life of the manor out of which
the rent does issue, to have and perceive to him and his heirs, and surrender
to him the deed; this shall not enure to extinguish the rent but by way of
grant, of which the heir of the lessee for life may take advantage if he do
not by granting away the rent, purchasing the reversion of the manor or making
a feoffement of the manor and thereby Co. super Lit. 302.
committing a forfeiture, or by some such like means prejudice himself, for
by these means the rent will be extinct and determined. If a disseisor grant a
rent to the disseisee, and he by his deed does grant it over to another; or the
diss^isor make a lease for life or gift in tail the remainder to the
disseisee, and the disseisee does Perk. Sect. 69.
grant over this remainder, and the tenant atturne; these grants of the
disseisee shall be taken for a grant and a confirmation also ne res pereat. If
there be Lord and tenant of white acre and two other acres, and the Lord grant
by deed to his tenant that he will not distraine his tenant in white acre for
his service; this grant shall not enure to determine the Seigniory in any part,
but as a Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. B. R. Curia.
covenant, so that if he do distraine in white acre, the tenant may have an
action of covenant. If a man have a wood of 200. acres, and he grant it to
another for life or years, and that he shall cut therein 4. or 5. acres every
year; in this case albeit the wood be granted and the grant shall enure to
pass it yet the grantee can cut no more but 4. or 5. acres by the year. And
yet the grantor as this case is can not himself cut any of the wood during the
time, as in case where a man does grant to another that he shall cut every year
4. or 5. acres in such a wood; for in this case the grantor may notwithstanding
cut as much as he will. And here note that in all the cases before according to
the construction that the law makes of the deed so must the party that is to
use it set it forth and plead it, as when it shall enure as a lease then it
must be pleaded as a lease etc. See more in Release Numb. 9. Surrender Numb. 7.
Confirmation Numb. 7.

In the construction of deeds it must be observed that there are 14. How a deed
of grant shall be construed and taken in all the parts and branches thereof.
General Rules.
some general rules that are appliable to all the parts of all kinds of deeds,
and some that are appliable only to some kind of deeds and to some part of the
deed only. In the construction therefore Co. super Lit. 313. Lit. Sect. 563.
Plow. 160. 154.
of all parts of all kinds of deeds these rules are universally observed.

1. That the construction be favorable and as near to the minds and apparent
intents of the parties as possibly it may be and law will permit. for Benign
sunt faciendae interpretationes cartarum propter simplicitatem laicorum. Et
verba intentioni non e contra debent inservire, as if there be Lord and tenant
and the tenant grant the tenements to one man for term of his life the
remainder to another in fee, and the Lord grant the Services to the tenant for
life in fee; in this case howbeit a grant may enure by way of release, and a
release to the tenant for life shall enure to him in remainder and is an
extinguishment, yet because this is contrary to the intent, it shall be taken
for a suspension only of the Doct. and Stud. 39. Lit. cap. 1.
services during the life of the tenant for life and the services shall go
afterward to his heir. But if the intent of the parties be apparently against
law then the construction shall not apply the deed to their intent, as if one
give land to another and his heirs for 20. years; in this case the executor
and not the heir shall have this land after the death of him to whom it is
given. So if one by deed intending to give land to another and his heirs give
the land to him To have and to hold to him, or to him and his assigns Plow.
161. 16 H. 8. 10. Dier 15. Fitz. Bar. 237. Bro. Don. 14. 17 E. 3. 7. 46 E. 3.
^7.
for ever, without these words, [and his heires] this is but an estate for life
at the most.

2. That the construction be reasonable and according to an indifferent and
equal understanding, and therefore if I grant to another Common in all my
Manor, this shall be expounded to extend to commonable places only, and not in
my gardens, orchards etc. And if I grant to one E^tovers out of my Manor; he
may not by this cut down my fruit trees. And if one grant me (a Barrister) a
fee pro consilio; this shall be taken for counsel in Law only. And so in case
of a Physician. And if one grant to me to dig in all his lands for Tin; I
may* not by this grant dig under his house. And if one grant me Common for
all my beasts; this shall be taken for all my commonable beasts and not for
goats and the like. And if one grant me all his trees in his manor; by this I
shall not have his apple trees. And if one lease to me his house and land to
the end that I may make profit thereof in the best manner: by this grant I may
not prostrate the house or make wast.

3. That too much regard be not had to the native and proper Plow. 154. 170.
134. Dier 46. Co. super Lit. 223. 146. 217. Co. 9. 48. 10. 143.
definition, significations and acceptance of words and sentences to pervert
the simple intentions of the parties, for a manor may pass by the name of a
mesuage, or a Knights fee, if it be used so to be called. and sic e converso, a
mesuage by the name of a manor: a Remainder may be granted by the name of a
Reverter, a Reversion by the name of a Remainder: for the law is not nice in
grants, and therefore it does oftentimes transpose words contrary to their
order to bring them to the intention of the parties, and it is a rule of law,
Mala grammatica non vit^at cartam, neither false Latin nor false English will
make a deed void when the intent of the parties does plainly appear. It is
therefore held that two negatives do not make an affirmative when the apparent
intent is contrary. And it is another rule of Law, Falsa ortographia non vitiat
Concessionem.

4. That the construction be made upon the entire deed, and that Plow. 160. 161.
one part of it does help to expound another, and that every word (if it may
be) may take effect and none be rejected, and that all the parts do agree
together and there be no discordance therein. Ex antecedentibus and
consequentibus est optima interpretatio, for Turpis est pars quae cum s^^o toto
non convenit. Maledicta expositio quae corrumpit textum. If a man make a
feoffement of all his land in D with Common in omnibus terris suis; this Common
shall be intended in the lands granted in D only, and not elsewhere, for it
must be understood secundum subjectam materiam.

5. That the construction be such as the whole deed and every part of it may
take effect and as much effect as may be to that purpose Lit. Sect. 283.
Finches Ley 60. Plow. 160. 154.
for which it is made, so as when the deed cannot take effect according to the
letter it be construed so as it may take some effect or other, Verba debent
intelligi cum effectu. Et benign faciendae sunt interpretationes ut res magis
valeat quam pereat. And therefore if an Annuity be granted pro consilio
impendendo, or a feoffement made ad erudiendum ^ilium, or ad solvendum 10 s.
these shall be construed conditional grants without any words of condition,
for otherwise the party will be without remedy.

6. That all the words of the deed in construction be taken most Co. super Lit.
183. Finche of the Law 6.
strongly against him that does speak them and most in advantage of the other
party, Verba Cartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem, and quelibet
concessio fortissime contra donatorem interpretanda est. And therefore if one
seized of land in fee grant it to another, and say not for what time, this
shall be taken an estate for life. But this is to be understood with this
limitation, that no wrong be thereby done, for it is a Maxim in Law. Quod
legis constructio non facit injuriam. And therefore if tenant for life grant
Forfeiture.
the land he does hold for life to another, and does not say for what time;
this shall be taken an estate for his own life, and not the life of the
grantee, for then it would be a forfeiture. So if one be seized of some lands
in fee, and possessed of other lands for years, all in one parish, and he grant
all his lands in that parish (without naming them) in fee simple or for life;
by this grant shall pass no more but the lands he has in fee simple. So if a
man have a house wherewith there has been Copy hold land and other land
usually occupied; and he let this house and all his land thereunto belonging:
in this case and by this demise the Copy hold land does not Co. super Lit. 112.
pass; for in both these cases then there would be a forfeiture. But otherwise
by these words all the lands in both cases would pass.

7. That if there be two clauses or parts of the deed repugnant the one to the
other the first part shall be received and the latter rejected except there be
some special reason to the contrary, and therefore herein a Deed does differ
from a Will; for if there be two 4 El. the Bishop of Ely's c^se.
repugnant clauses in a Will the first shall be rejected and the latter
received.

8. That that which is generally spoken be generally understood unless it be
qualified by some special subsequent words, as it may be; for if one be seized
of a manor wherein there is a Park, and Co. super (...). 42.
he grant the manor with the custody of the Park; by this the Park will not
pass.

9. That if the words may have a double intendment and the one stands with
law and the other is against law, that it be taken in that sense which is
agreeable to law: and therefore if tenant in tail make a lease of land to B
for term of life, and do not mention for whose life it shall be; this shall be
taken for the life of the lessor 9 Ed. 4. 4.
and not for the life of the lessee, as it shall be if such a lease be made by
tenant in fee simple.

10. That things doubtfully set down be applied to him to whom they do
properly belong. As if I S make a feoffment to one of his own name, and there
is a covenant in the deed that I S shall deliver Co. 9. 48. 10. 143.
the deeds, this shall be taken of I S the feoffer and not I S the feoffee.

11. That such a construction be made of abbreviations as the deed may not lose
his force, as if one grant tot' ill'Maner' de D. and C, if it be but one manor,
the words shall be taken for totum illud Manerium, Fit. Grant 41. Plo. 317. Co.
5. 12. 22. ass. Pl. 61* Perk. Sect. 110.
if two manors, then it shall be taken for tota illa maneria. And here note
that most of all these rules run through all the cases Note*
of exposition he reafter following.

The exposition of the several parts of the deeds of grant. And how the words
and sentences therein shall be taken. 1. In the premises, and what does pass
by the grant of a thing.
Touching things granted these rules are first to be known.

1. When any thing is granted all the means to attain it and all the fruits
and effects of it are granted also and shall pass inclusive together with the
thing by the grant of the thing it self without the words cum pertinentiis or
any such like words. Cuicunque aliquid conceditur conceditur etiam and id sine
quores ipsa non esse potuit. As by the grant of Conusance of pleas is granted
the Ordinary process to bring causes to judgment. By the grant of a ground is
granted a way to it. By the grant of Trees is granted with all power to cut
them down and take them away, by the grant of Mines is granted power to dig
them; and by the grant of fish in a man's pond is granted power to come upon the
banks and fish for them. Co. super Lit. 152. Lit. Sect. 572. 229. Co. 4. 86,
87. 8 H. 7. 4. Bro. Grant. 86. 144. 43 Ed* 3. 22. Co. 10. 10. 64. super Co.
Lit. 307.


2. The incident, accessory, appendant, and regardant shall in most cases pass
by the grant of the principal without the words cum pertinentiis, but not e
converso, for the principal does not pass by the grant of the incident etc.
Accessorium non ducit sed sequitur suum principale. And therefore by the grant
of a reversion without naming the rent the reversion after an estate tail, for
life, or years and the rent reserved upon the estate will pass, so as the
tenant atturne to the grant: but by the grant of the rent the reversion will
not pass. So by the grant of a manor, the Court Baron thereunto belonging will
pass; by the grant of a house or ground, the ways thereunto belonging do
pass; by the grant of errable land, the common appendant thereunto will pass;
by the grant of Mills, the waters, flood gates, and the like that are of
necessary use to the Mills do pass; by the grant of a house, the estovers
appendant thereunto will pass; by the grant of a manor, the advowsons
appendant and villains regardant* thereunto pass; by the grant of a Fair,
the Court of Pipowders will pass; by the grant of homage or rent, the fealty
will pass; and by the grant of Escuage, homage and fealty will pass. But
diverse things that by continual enjoyment with other things are only appendant
to others, as warrens, leetes, waifes, estraies, and the like, these will not
pass by the grant of those other things, and therefore if one have a Warren in
his land, and grant the land, by this the warren does not pass. And yet if in
these cases he grant the land cum pertinentiis, or with all the profits,
privileges etc. thereunto belonging; by this grant perhaps these things may
pass. And here know that a reversion may be parcel or appendant to a thing in
possession, and pass by the grant of it, but a possession cannot be parcel or
appendant ^8 H. 6. 38. Co. 11. 47. 50. Plow. 103. Bro. Grant. 60. 129. Co. 1.
7. 28.
to a thing in reversion. And therefore if one make a lease for life of a manor
excepting 20. acres of it, and after grant the reversion of the manor; by this
grant the 20. acres will not pass. So if one be disseised of an acre parcel
of a manor, or of common appendant to the manor, and before an entry or
recontinuance of the acre or common he grant the manor to a stranger; by this
the acre of land or common will not pass. But otherwise it is in case where a
lease for years only is made of parcel of a manor. And if a lease be made for
life of 20. acres parcel of a manor, and after the manor it self is granted;
by this the reversion of the 20. acres is granted and will pass also.

And if a man make a feoffment in fee of an acre of land parcel of a manor,
and after repurchase it, and then grant the manor; this acre will not pass by
this grant, for it is not united by the new purchase. But it is otherwise of
trees, for if a man make a lease for life of a manor or other land excepting
the trees, and after grant the reversion of the manor or land to another;
hereby the trees do pass. And if a man make a feoffment in fee of a manor
excepting the trees, and after the feoffee buy the trees, in this case the
trees are united again, so that if the feoffee sell the manor the trees shall
pass with it. If I lease an acre of land to which an advowson is appendant for
term of life reserving the advowson, and after do grant the reversion of that
acre with the appurtenances; hereby the advowson does not pass. But if I grant
the advowson for term of life reserving the acre, and after grant the acre
with the advowson cum pertinentiis; by this the advowson does pass. If land be
appendant to an office, there by grant of the office with the appurtenances the
land will pass without livery of seisin. And if an office be appendant to
land, there by the grant of the one the other will pass. 3. That which is
parcel or 14 H. 8. 25. Co. 11. 50.
of the essence of a thing albeit at the time of the grant it be actually
severed from it does pass by the grant of the thing it self. And therefore by
the grant of a Mill, the millstone does pass albeit at the time of the grant it
be actually severed from the Mill. So by the grant of a house, the doors,
windows, locks, and keys, do pass as parcel of it, albeit at the time of the
grant they be actually severed from the house. 4. By the grant of the land, or
ground 14 H. 8. 1. Co. super Lit. 4.
it self, all that is supra, as houses, trees, and the like is granted, for
Cujus est solum ejus est usque ad coelum, also all that is infra, as Mines,
earth, clay, quarres, and the like. And by the grant of a 12 H. 7. 25.
house, the ground whereon it does stand does pass. 5. When any matter of
interest or profit is granted, the grant shall be taken largely. But when any
matter of ease or pleasure only is granted, Plow. 289. 19 H. 6. 4.
as a walk, or the like, the grant shall be taken strictly. 6. When a man does
grant all his lands, or all his goods; by this grant does pass not only what
he is sole seized or possessed of but also what he is jointly seized or
possessed of with another. And so e converso. If two men join together and
grant all their lands, or all their goods; hereby do pass not only all they
have jointly and together, Co. super Lit. 301. Lit. Sect. 543, 544.
but all those they have sole and a part. 7. Some words in deeds are large and
have a general extent, and some have a proper and particular application; the
former sort may contain the latter, as Dedi, or Concessi, may amount to a
grant, a feoffment, a gift, a lease, a release, a con^irmation, a surrender:
and it is in the election of the party to whom the deed is made to use it to
which of these purposes he will. And hence it is that if a Lord by the words of
dedi and concessi grant to his tenant that does hold of him his rent; or one
that has a rent charge out of land does grant it to the tenant of the land;
that in these cases the rent is extinguished albeit it be by way of grant. But
a release, surrender, confirmation etc. cannot amount to a grant etc. nor a
surrender to a confirmation or a release etc. because these be proper and
peculiar manner of conveyances and are destinated to a special end. Co. super
Lit. 5. 6. Co. 4. 88.


Amongst words whereby things do pass some are collective, The terms whereby
things are granted, expounded.
compound, or general comprehending many things, as hereditaments, lands,
tenements, honors, Isles, villages and the like including lands of several
sorts and qualities. And some words are simple or particular, as Meadow,
Pasture, Wood, Moore, and the like.

The word [Hereditament] is of as large extent as any word, for Hereditament.
Co. super Lit. 6. 16. Perk. Sect. 114, 115. 11 H. 6. 22.
whatsoever may be inherited, be it corporeal or incorporeall, real,
personal, or mixed, is an hereditament. By the grant therefore of all
hereditaments do pass Honors, Isles, Castles, Seigniories, Manors, Mesuages,
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Moors, Marshes, Furses, Heaths, Reversions,
Commons, Rents, Vicarages, Advowsons in gross, and the like things which the
grantor has in feesimple at the time of the grant, whether he has it by
purchase or descent. And the word [Tenement] is of large extent also, and it
seems Tenement.
does comprehend as much as the former. And therefore by the Bro* Grant. 143
Co. super Lit. 6. Perk. Sect. 114.
grant of all Tenements will pass as much as by the grant of all Hereditaments.

The word [Land] strictly does signi^ie nothing but errable land, Land.
Co. super Lit. 4. Co. 4. 891. Perk. Sect. 114.
but in a larger sense it does comprehend any ground, soil, or earth
whatsoever. And therefore by the grant of all Lands, does pass errable lands,
meadows, pastures, woods, moors, waters, marshes, furses, heath, and such
like, and the castles, houses, and buildings thereupon, but not rents,
advowsons, and such like things. Also by grant of any land in possession the
reversion thereof will Co. 11. 47. 50. 10. 107.
pass. And yet by the grant of a reversion of land the land in possession will
not pass.

But here it must be observed that in cases of grants and gifts of Note*
Edw. case Mich. 9. Jac. curia 9 H. 7. 25. Bro. Grant. 87. 11 H. 6. 22.
all hereditaments, tenements, or lands, consideration is had of the estate of
the grantor, for if a man be seized of some lands in fee, and have other lands
for life, or years only, and all these are lying within one parish, and he
grant all his lands, tenements, or hereditaments in this parish to another in
fee simple, fee tail, or for life, Forfeiture*
and give livery of seisin in the lands whereof he is seized in fee, in the
name of all the rest; by this does pass no more but his lands whereof he is
seized in fee, for otherwise it would be a forfeiture for those lands. But if
the livery of seisin be made in any part of the lands he has for life or
years, then that part wherein the livery is made will pass and no more. And
if the conveyance be by bargain and sale and deed enrolled, then the lands
whereof he is seized in fee simple and for life shall pass, and not the land
he has for a term of years. And yet if in this case the grant be for years,
then all the lands will pass, for then there will be no forfeiture in the
case. Howbeit it is said in Bro. Done 41. pro lege. That if a man give or
Forfeiture.
grant all his lands and tenem^nts in B, that by this leases for years do not
pass, and that these words do intend franktenements at the least.

These words [Honor, Isle, and Commote] are compound words Co. super Lit. 5.
Honor. Isle. Commote. Castle.
and of large extent. And therefore by the grant of them may pass one or more
seigniories, manors, and diverse other lands. Also a Castle may contain one or
more manors. And therefore by the grant of a Castle may pass one or more
manors. And so sometimes e converso a Castle may pass by the grant of a manor.
But by a Castle most commonly is signified no more but the house or building
Plow. 169.
and the parcel of ground enclosed wherein it does stand.

This word [Village or Towne] is of large extent also. And by Co. super Lit. 5.
Plo. 168.
Town or Village.
the grant of it a manor, land, meadow, and pasture, and diverse such like
things may pass.

This word [Manor] is a word of large extent and may comprehend Manor.
Co. super Lit 5. 58. Perk. Sect. 116. Co. 5. 11. Plow. 168. Dyer 233. 14 H. 8.
1. 9. Iac. B. R. Dyer 30. 8 H. 7. 4.
many things. And therefore by the grant of a manor without the words of Cum
pertinentiis do pass demesnesse, rents, and services, lands, meadows,
pastures, woods, commons, advowsons appendant, villains regardant, Courts
Baron and perquisites thereof that are in truth at the time of the grant
parcel of the manor. Baintons case. M. 9.
But nothing that in truth is not parcel of the manor albeit it be so reputed
will pass by the grant of the manor, and therefore if one have a manor, and
after purchase the lawday or a warren to it, and then he grant away the manor,
hereby the lawday or warren will not pass. And yet if by union time out of
mind they have gotten a reputation of appendancy, perhaps by the grant of the
manor cum pertinentiis these things may pass. Co. super Lit. 5. 26. Ass. Plo.
54. 2 E. 3. 36.
By the grant of a manor also diverse Towns may pass. An Honor also may pass
by this name. And so also may a Castle or a hundred. And one manor also that is
parcel of another manor may pass by the grant of that manor whereof it is
parcel.

The word [Knights-fee] is a compound word also and may Co. super Lit. 5. Plo.
168. 17 E. 3.
comprehend many things. And therefore by the grant of this may pass land,
meadow, and pasture as parcel of it. And sometimes by this does pass so much
land as to make a Knights fee. And some say it does contain eight hides of
land. And it seems also that a manor may pass by this name if it be usually
called so.

The word [Grange] is a compound word also, and by the grant Grange.
Co. super Lit. 5. Plow. 167.
of a Grange will pass a house or edifice, not only where corn is stored up
like as in barns but necessary places for husbandry also, as stables for hay,
and horses, and stables and sties for other cattle and a curtilage and the
Close wherein it stands at the least. And where land, meadow and pasture etc.
belonging to such houses are called all together by the name of a Grange there
perhaps by this word the whole may pass.

The word [Farme or Ferme] called in Latin ^irma is also a Fa^me.
Co. super Li. 5. Plow. 195.
compound word and does comprehend many things. And therefore by the grant of a
Ferme will pass a message and much land, meadow, pa^^ure, wood etc. thereunto
belonging or therewith used, for this word does properly signify a capital or
principal mesuage and a great quantity of demesnes thereunto appertaining.
Bro. Grants. 155.
Also by the grant of all Farms, or all Fermes; it seems leases for years do
pass.

This word is a collective word also, for by the grant of unam Oxgange of land.
Co. super Lit. 5.
bovatam terre, or of one, or of an oxgange of Land may pass land, meadow and
pasture, and it does properly intend as much as an Ox can till. And Iugum
terre or half a Plow land is as much as Half a Plow land.
two Oxen can till, and by the grant of half a plow land may pass and meadow,
and pasture.

The words [Plow land, and a Hide of Land] are Synomyna and A Plow land, or a
Hide of land.
are collective words also. And therefore by the grant of Carucatam Co. super
Lit. 5. Plo. 167.
or Hidam terre, or of a Plow land, or of a hide of land may pass 100. acres
of land, meadow and pasture, and the houses thereupon, but it does properly
intend as much land as one plow can till in a year.

This word [A yard-land] is also collective and does comprehend A yard of land.
Half a yard land
many things, but it is not certain, for in some Countries it Co. super Lit. 5.
does contain 20. acres, and in some Countries 24. acres, and in some
Countries 30. acres, by the grant therefore of virgatam terre, or a yard land
will pass that quantity of land, meadow and pasture that is called by this
name. And so by the grant of half a yard, or a quarter of a yard land. Fold
course.


The word [Fold course] is also compound, for by the grant of a ^old course
lands and tenements my pass. Et sic de similibus. And Co. super Lit. 6.
finally by the grant of any such compound thing as before for the most part
there does pass thereby so much as in common reputation Plow. 167.
is accounted part of that thing and is usually called by that name.

By the grant of a Rectory or Parsonage will pass the house, the Parsonage,
Rectorie, Vicarage.
8 H. 7. 1. Bro. Grant. 86.
glebe, the tithes, and offerings belonging to it. And by the grant of a
Vicarage will pass as much as does belong unto it, as the Vicarage house etc.

By the grant of a mesuage, or a mesuage with the appurtenances Plow. 85. 15.
171* 178. 569. Lit. Bro. Sect. 31. 185. Co. super Lit. 5. Co. 10. 65. Kelw. 57.
27 H. 6. 2.
Mesuage. Curtilage. House.
does pass no more but the dwelling house, barn, dove-house, and buildings
adjoining, orchard, garden^ and curtilage. i. a little garden, yard, field, or
piece of void ground lying near and belonging to the mesuage, and houses
adjoining to the dwelling house, and the close upon which the dwelling house is
built at the most. And so much also may pass by the grant of a house. So that
the quantity of an acre of ground or thereabouts in Orchard, Garden, and
outlet may pass by either of these names, but more then this will not pass
by the grant that is made in either of these words, albeit more have been
occupied with it, and albeit more be intended to be passed by the grant. And
therefore if there be a mesuage or dwelling house and diverse acres of land
thereunto belonging called all together by the name of Hedges. And a grant is
made by these words, of all that mesuage with the appurtenances commonly called
by the name of Hedges; by this grant nothing shall pass but the mesuage,
garden, and curtilage. See before.
And yet if a manor or farm be commonly called by the name of a mesuage, there
by the grant of a mesuage the whole manor or ferme may pass. Lit. Bro. Sect.
185. 160. Bro. Leases 55. Plow. 170. c 13 Ass. Pl. 2. Co. super Lit. 4.
And by the grant of a mesuage or house and all the lands thereunto
appertaining will pass all the land usually occupied therewith. Also by the
name of a mesuage a Chapel or a Hospital may be granted.

By the grant of a Cottage does pass a little dwelling house that Cottage.
has no land belonging to it.

By the grant of all a man's errable land there does pass no more Errable land,
Meadow, Pasture.
but that kind of land: And by the grant of all a man's meadow ground, or all a
man's meadows, does pass no more but that kind of ground: And by the grant of
all a man's pastures does pass no more but the land or ground it self employed
to the feeding of beasts, and also such pastures and feedings as he has in
another man's soil.

If a man have diverse acres or pieces of Wood, and grant to another Wood. Trees.
14 H. 8. 1. Perk. Sect. 116. Co. 5. 11. Br. Done 14.
omnes boscos suos, or all his woods, or all his woods growing in such a place;
by this grant does pass all the highwood and underwood, and not only the wood
growing upon the land or soil but the land or soil it self wherein it does
grow. But in this case if the grantor have in the same place diverse pieces of
wood and diverse closes wherein there are diverse trees growing in the hedges; it
seems in this case these trees in the hedges shall not pass by this grant in
these words, especially if the case be so that the cutting of them will be a
wast. And yet if the grantor have no pieces or groves of wood in the place, nor
trees but what are growing in the hedges and grounds, in this case it seems
all the trees except the apple trees do pass, but not his hedges and
hedgrowes. And in case where the trees only do pass, as where the grant is of
all a Co. 5. 11. 11. 50.
man's trees there shall pass no more of the soil but so much as shall serve
for the nutriment of the trees, and the owner of the soil shall have the
grass growing thereupon also. If a man grant Curia. Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
Pinchcombs case.
to another all his salable underwoods within his manor which have been usually
sold by the owners of the manor with free entry, egresse and regresse for
felling, making and carrying the same away at all times convenient; in this case
it seems the soil does not pass but the wood only. And yet if those words
with free entry etc. be omitted contra.

If one devise, grant and to term let a farm with all manner of Dyer 374. Co.
11. 48.
timber, wood, underwood and hedgrowes except the great oaks in such a close,
to have and to hold the Farm for 21. years, in this case albeit there be the
word Grant, and that the trees be not named again in the Habendum, yet the
other trees do not pass by this grant otherwise then in other leases, and if
the lessee cut any Timber to sell it is wast in him.

A Tofte is a place where a mesuage has stood, and by this name Toft.
in a grant such a thing will pass.

Bruera is a heath or heathy ground. Frassetum is a wood or Bruera. Frassetum.
Alnetum. Salicetum. Selda. Filicetum. Fraxinetum. Lupulicetum. Arundinetum.
Roncaria. Iuncaria. Ruscaria. Mariscus. Mora.
Co. super Lit. 4. 5.
piece of ground that is woody. Alnetum is a word of Elders, or place where
Elders grow. Salicetum, a wood of willows or place where willow grow. Selda, a
wood of sallowes, willowes or withies, or place where such things grow.
Filicetum is a brakie ground or place where such things grow. Fraxinetum, a
wood of ashes, or place where Ashes grow. Lupulicetum, a hopyard or place where
hops do grow. Arundinetum, a place where reeds grow. Roncaria or Runcaria, a
place full of briars or brambles. Iuncaria or Ioncaria or Iampna (which are all
one) a place where rushes do grow. Ruscaria, a place where kneeholme or
butchers pricks or broom does grow. Mariscus, a ^enne or marish ground. Mora, a
more barren and unprofitable ground then a marish. And by grant of these and
such like things, or of 20. acres of such ground, these particular kinds only
or so many acres thereof do pass. Vacaria, is a Dairie house. Porcaria, a
Swinestie. Bercaria a Tannehouse: Vacaria. Porcaria Stagnum. Gurges.
and by these names these things will pass. By the name of Stagnum Co. super
Lit. 5.
or Poole, or Gurg^s a gulf the water, land, and fish in the water will pass.

By the grant of Stadium, Ferlingus, or Quarentena terre does Stadium.
Ferlingus. Quarentena terre. Selio terr^. Acre of land. Rood of land*
Co. ^dem.
pass a ^urlong or furrow long, which anciently was the 8th part of a mile. By
the name of Selio or porcaterre does pass a ridge of land which is sometimes
longer and sometimes shorter. By the grant of an acre of land does pass so
much as in an acre by measure in that Country by the Ordinary account and
measure of the Country. By the grant of a Rood of land does pass 10. pearches
the 4th part of an acre. And by the grant of 6. foot in length and two foot in
breadth, so much only does pass. And by these and such like names land may be
granted.

By the grant of Mineras or Fodinas plumbi etc. or Mines of Co. super Lit. 6.
Co. 5. 12.
Mines.
Lead etc. the land it self will pass if livery of seisin be made thereof,
but otherwise it seems not, and then the grantee has by the grant a power to
dig only granted unto him.

If one grant to me to dig a Trench in his ground from such a Perk. Sect. 111.
Trench.
place to such a place to convey water by a lead pipe, or otherwise; hereby
also inclusive is granted a liberty at any time after to dig to amend it as
occasion shall be.

If one grant to me to dig turfes in his land or soil and to carry Co. super
Lit. 4.
Turses.
them away at my will and pleasure; by this is not granted the land it self,
the houses or trees thereupon or mines therein.

If one grant to another Common for all his beasts in his land; Co. super Lit.
4. Perk. Sect. 108, 109.
Common.
hereby is not granted Common for Goats, Pigges, and such like beasts and
cattle that are not commonable. But if the grant be of common for all manner
of beasts contra. And if one grant to another Common without number in his
land, the grantor is not hereby excluded to common there with the grantee.

And if one grant to me common of pasture for 10. Kine in his Lands in Dale; by
this grant I shall have common in his commonable grounds and lands only and not
in any other lands. And if a man grant common of pasture to me for my beasts
ubicunque averia sua ierint, and he occupy 100. acres of land with his beasts,
and after he keep no beasts; yet by this grant I may keep my beasts in those
100. acres. But if he grant to me common of pasture for my beasts wheresoever
his cattle shall go etc. by this grant I shall have no common but when the
grantor does use his common with his Cattle etc.

By the grant of Estovers will pass houseboote, hayboote, and Perk. Sect. 116.
plowboote. But if a man grant to me Estovers out of his manor, Estovers
I may not by this grant cut down any of the fruit trees within his manor.

If land be granted to me; hereby also implicitly is a way thereunto 14 H. 8. 1.
granted to me also. Clar. case Trin. 5 Jac. B. R.
So that if one have 20. acres of land Way.
and grant me one acre in the midst of it, hereby inclusive there is granted
me a way to it. Per. Williams and Yelverton Justices. Mic. 3 Jac.
And yet if a man have two Closes and he use to go over one of them for his
ease to the other Close by a new way; and after he grant the further Close cum
pertinentiis; by this grant the new way does not pass.

If a man have a Forest, Park, Chase, Vivarie, and Warren in his Co. super Lit.
5. Rice and Wisemans case. Mic. 9 Jac.
own ground, and he grant this Forest, Park, Chase, Vivarie or Warren; Forest,
Park, Chase, Warren.
hereby not only the privilege but the land it self does pass. But if the
ground be another; or if it be his own and the grant be only of the game,
etc. in these cases the land or soil it self will not pass.

If a man be seized of a river, and by his deed does grant seperalem Fishing.
Co. super Litt. 4.
piscariam, or aquam suam in the same, and makes Livery secundum formam
cartae; by this grant does pass only a liberty to fish within the water, and
not the soil nor the water it self: and therefore the grantor may take water
still, and if it be dry he may take the soil also. And if one grant all his
fish in his pond; by this is granted a power to come and fish for them, but the
grantee Fitz. Bar. 237.
may not hereby dig a trench, and let out the water to take the fish, albeit
they may not be otherwise taken.

If one be seized of 20 acres of land, and he grant to another Vesture or
Herbage of land.
Co. super Litt. 4. Dier 285. Trin. 5. Jac. B. R. accord.
and his heirs the vesture, or the herbage of it, and makes livery of seisin
in it secundum formam cartae; by this grant does pass the corn, grass,
underwood, sweepage, and the like; and for these things the grantee may have an
action of trespass for any wrong done to him. But hereby the land it self, the
houses, Profits of lands.
and great trees thereupon, and mines therein do not pass. And if one grant
the herbage or vesture of a wood; hereby is granted the grass and underwood
only, and not the timber or great trees. But if a man so seized of 20 acres of
land, grant to another the profits of this land To have and to hold to him and
his heirs, and makes livery secundum formam cartae; hereby the vesture,
herbage, trees, mines, and all whatsoever parcel of that land does pass.

If one grant to another all his deeds, or all his muniments; hereby 35 H. 6.
37.
Deeds.
will pass all his charters, feoffments, leases, releases, confirmations,
letters of Attorney, and the like.

If one give or grant to another Omnia bona, or all his goods; by Goods.
Co. super Litt. 118. 39 H. 6. 35. Dier 59. Perk. Sect. 115. 12 H. 8. 4. Bro.
Grant 96. 51. Done 39. 47. Dier 5. Co. 8. 33.
this does pass all his moveable and immovable, personal and real goods, as
horses, and other beasts, plate, jewels, and household stuff, bows, weapons,
and such like; and his money, and his corn growing on the ground, also all the
obligations and bills that are made to him, and in his own name do pass by
this, but not the debts due by such obligations and bills. And some say that
leases and terms of years of houses, lands, rents, commons, etc. rents charge
for years, wardships of tenants in Capite, and by Knights service, and the
interests that a man has by Statute Staple, Statute Merchant, or Elegit, do
pass by this grant, but of this others doubt. And if a man give or grant to
another omnia catalla Chattels.
sua, or all his chattels; hereby does pass as much as by the grant of all his
goods, and by this without question leases for years etc. do pass. But by
neither of the grants do pass those goods or chattels which the grantor has
by delivery in keeping for another, or the like. Neither does any estate of
inheritance or freehold, or the charters concerning any freehold pass under
these words. Perch. Just. B. R. 21 Jac.
Neither does any thing in action, as debts, or the like, nor hawks, hounds,
poppinjays, or the like pass by this grant. Adjudged 3 Jac. Kelw. 64. 10. Col.
4. 1. Per Flemming Just. 7 Jac. B. R.
And yet if an Executor grant omnia bona and catalla sua; hereby the goods and
chattels he has as Executor as well as his other goods and chattels will
pass. And if one grant all his leases for years which he has by any
conveyances; hereby the leases for years which he has as Executor as well as
other leases for years will pass.

If one grant to another all his Utensils; hereby will pass all Dier 59.
Utensils.
his household stuff, but not his plate, jewels, or any such like thing.

If a man be seized of land in feesimple or for life, and have an estate Grant
of all a man's estate, right etc.
Co. super Litt. 345. Litt. Sect. 613. Plow. 161. Co. 1. 153.
in it for years, by Statute Merchant, Staple, Elegit, or the like: and he
grant all his estate, or all his right, or all his title, or all his interest
of and in the land; by this grant all his estate, and as much as he is able to
grant does pass. And if tenant for life of land, the remainder to the stranger
in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the tenant for life do grant by
these words; hereby both his estates do pass. And if a tenant in tail grant
all his estate in the land; hereby there does pass as much as he can grant.
And all these words also do carry and pass reversions as well as possessions.
And if a man have a term of years of land, and he grant his term; hereby does
pass the term of years, and all his estate and interest of the land.

And note that by all these names these things may be granted, Note.
and that for such things as are grantable without deed, when Pitz Brief 581.
they pass by a verbal grant in any of these words, the words shall have the
same exposition as they have in deeds.

If one grant all his goods in such a place si quae fuerint; by this H. 6.
grant nothing does pass but the goods that are in such a place at the time of
the grant, and not any other goods that shall be there afterward.

If two men have goods in common, and have other goods severally, Bro. Done 12.
and they give me all their goods, by this grant is given all their goods they
have in common, and likewise all the goods they have in severalty.

If ^wo tenants in common, or others severally seized of land, Plow. 171. 140.
Co. 10* 106.
join in the grant of a rent of twenty shillings, or a horse, out of the land
whereof they are so seized; by this grant the grantee shall have two twenty
shillings or two horses.

If a man grant a rent of ten pound to me, To have and to hold Bro. Grant 64.
during my life and my wives life, and after the death of my wife a rent of
three pound to me for my life; in this case if my wife die I shall have both
the rents. But if there be any words of restraint or determination of the
first rent, it may be otherwise.

If one be seized of a garden plot in the parish of Sale, and grant Adjudg. M.
20 Jac. B. R. Burton versus Brown.
it to B for ten years, which being expired he does grant his garden plot to C
for twenty one years, and C does build a house upon part of it, and leaves the
other part in a garden plot still, and after the twenty one years ended, the
lessor does grant to D, totam illam peciam fundi sive gardin' plott' nuper in
tenura de B and nunc de C, lying in the parish of Sale, by this grant the house
newly built, and the plot of garden does pass.

If one grant his Manor of Dale in Dale, which in truth does Bro. Grant 53. 88.
Done 26.
extend into Dale and Sale; in this case no part of the Manor that does lie in
Sale shall pass. So if one grant all his tenements in Dale; hereby none of the
tenements in Sale will pass. So if the Manor lie within the parishes of A, B
and C, and the grant is of the Manor of Dale, lying within the parishes of A
and B; by this grant no part of the Manor lying in C, will pass. But if one
seized of the Manors of A and B, in the County of C, grant thus, totumillud
Manerium de A and B, cum pertin' in Com' C, or Co. 1. 46.
totum illud Manerium de A cum B, in Com' C, by these grants in case of a
common person both the Manors will pass.

If one grant all his lands in Dale which he had of the gift of Bro. Grant
Plow.
I S, by this grant nothing will pass but that which he had of the gift of I
S. But if one grant all his lands in Dale called Hodges which he had of the
gift of I S; by this grant all that which is called Hodges shall pass, albeit
the grantor had it not of the gift of I S.

If one grant all his lands in the occupation of I S; by this grant Dockraies
case Pasch. 12 Jac.
does pass not only such lands as I S does occupy by right, but also such
lands as he does occupy by wrong, and not only the lands whereof he has some
estate, but also such lands as whereof he has the pasturage only.

If one grant all his lands in B, and elsewhere in the County of 2 Jac. Br.
S, in the tenure of I S; by this grant nothing does pass but that which is
the tenure of I S.

If one grant his Manor of S, nec non omnes mariscos suos de S, ac Adjudge
Seignior Wentworths case. Co. 1. 46.
omnia terra, tenementa etc. in S. and alibi dict' Manerio spectan'; by this
grant the marsh does pass though it be no part of the Manor.

If one grant all his demesne lands of his Manor of Dale etc. it seems by this
the customary land parcel of the Manor held by copy do pass.

If one be seized of tithes which did belong to an Abbey, part of which were
gathered by the Almoner, and part not, and he grant Adjudge Hill. 2 Jac. B. R.
Bakers case.
omnes and omnimodas decimas granorum etc. infra dominium praedict' and
precinct' ejusdem, in dict' Comit'. Ac omnes alias decimas, proficna and
commoditates etc. infra dominium praedict' and dict' Monaster' etc. spectan' et
quae nuper per Eliemozinar' ejusdem Monasterii collect' fuer'; by this grant
shall pass all the tithes as well those that were collected by the Almoner, as
those which were not, and those words quae per Eliemozinar' etc. shall refer
only to the last, and not to both sentences.

If one grant all his lands in D, containing 10 acres, whereas in truth his
lands there do contain 20 acres; by this grant the whole Dier 80.
20 acres will pass.

If one grant the Site of an Abbie and omnia terras prat' pasturas and Dier 77.
subscript' cum pertinen' dict' Monaster' pertinen' etc. viz. such a thing and
such a thing, etc. by this grant the grantee shall have all the lands belonging
to the Monastery, and viz. shall relate to Subscript' only, and not to omnia.
See more in Grant infra at Number. 4. and in Testament, at Numb. 8. and in Fine,
at Numb.

The Exception is always taken most in favor of the feoffee, lessee In the
Exception. And how that shall be taken: 1. In the thing excepted.
Co. 10. 106. 14 H. 8. 1. 11 52.
etc. and against the feoffor, lessor. And yet it is a rule, That what will
pass by words in a grant, will be excepted by the same words in an exception.
And it is another true rule, That when any thing is excepted, all things that
are depending on it, and necessary for the obtaining of it, are excepted also:
as if a lessor except the trees, he may bring his chapman to view them if he
desire to sell them, and he or the Vendee may cut them and take them away. And
by such an exception the Lessor will have the boughs, fruit, hierons, and
hawks, that breed in them etc.

If a man be seized of a fishing from such a place to such a place, Perk. sect.
646. Fitz. Assisi 316.
and has a mill upon the water, and he grant totam partem suam piscariae de
D, quam diu terrae suae se extendunt, salvo tamen stagno molendini; this
exception does not take away the fishing of the grantee in the mill pond, but
it shall have relation only to the pool to repair the mill.

If a man seized of a Manor make a lease of it excepting all Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
per 2. Judges.
the saleable underwoods now growing, or which hereafter shall grow on the
premises, which have been usually sold by the owners of the Manor, with free
entry, egresse and regresse, for the felling, making, and carrying away of the
same at times convenient; in this case the soil is not excepted by reason of
the subsequent words.

If one be seized of a Manor and make a lease of it cum pertin' una Dier 58.
cum columbar' ac reddit' tenentium, decimis garbarum, finibus, heriot'
perquisit' Cur' and aliis omnibus proficuis, Advocac' Ecclesiae and Wrece,
except', in this the exception does begin at Advocac' Ecclesiae, and does
except that which follows and no more.

If one grant in fee excepting the trees, or any other thing to the Dier 264.
2. In the time.
grantor without saying [and to his heirs;] by this exception the thing
excepted is severed only for the life of the grantor, and then it shall pass
with the rest of the things granted. But if the thing be excepted indefinitely
without saying [for the life of the grantor etc.] nor how long; this shall be
taken to be an exception during the estate.

The Habendum as all other parts of a deed for the most part shall be taken
most strongly against the grantor and most in advantage of the grantee, yet so
as withal it shall be construed as near the intent of the parties as may be,
as in all the cases following does appear. In the Habendum or limitation of the
estate and how that shall be taken.


If land be given or granted to one habendum, or to have and to hold to him and
his heirs so long as he pay 20 yearly to I S and Plow. 557.
his heirs, or so long as such a tree does stand, or the like; this is a kind
of seesimple, but it is limited and qualified and determinable upon this
contingent. And yet this may become a pure feesimple, Feesimple.
for if land be granted to one and his heirs until I S pay 100l. and I S die
before he pay it, in this case the estate is become a pure fee-simple.

If lands be given or granted to a man, to have and to hold to him and his
heirs, this is a feesimple, pure, absolute and perpetual; Co. super Lit. 8,
9. Lit. 1. 27 H. 8. 5. Perk. Sect. 239. 240, 241. 39 H. 6. 38. Plow. 28. Bro.
Estates 4. 11 H. 7. 12. Co. super Lit. 15.
and this is made by these words [his heires] for it is a general rule that
these words [his heires] only make an estate in fee-simple in all feoffments
and grants. But this rule has many exceptions, for if feoffment of land be
made to I S and heredibus, without the word [Suis] this is a feesimple. And yet
if the grant be to I S and I D and heredibus, without this word [Suis] contra,
for this is only an estate for their lives. And if lands be given to a Bishop,
Parson or the like To have and to hold to him and his successors; this is a
feesimple. And lands be given to a Mayor and Communalty or other Corporation
aggregate generally without the word Successors, or any other word, or if lands
be given to such a Corporation for their lives, this is a feesimple. But if
land be given to a Parson, or the like To have and to hold to him, without
saying how long; or to have and to hold to him for life; by this he has no
more but an estate for life. Co. 6. 27. super Lit. 9.
And if lands be given to the King generally without any other words; this is a
feesimple. 15 Ed. 4. 13. 9 H. 7. 11, 12 H. 8, 9. H. 4. 84. 33 H. 6. 20. Co.
super Lit. 9. Ass. Pl. 12. Plow. 130. 14 H. 4. 13.
So if one grant deo and ecclesiae de D; it is said this is a feesimple in the
Parson of D. So also of a grant Ecclesiae de D. per Thirne Just. So if a grant
had been to the Monks of such a house, it had been a fee-simple in the
house. And in like manner it is in other cases; c As if one recite that B has
enfeoffed him of white acre To have and to hold to him and his heirs, and then
he says further, that as fully as B has given white acre to him and his heirs
he does grant the same to C, by this C the grantee has the feesimple of this
acre. And if one grant 2. acres to A and B To have and to hold the one to A and
his heirs, and the other to B in forma predicta; by this B has a feesimple in
this other acre, for an estate in fee simple, fee tail, or for life may be
made by such words of reference. Also if a rent be granted between Parceners
for to make an equality of partition, and it be granted generally and without
any words of heirs, yet this is a feesimple. So where lands are given in
Frankalmoigne. And so also it is in the cases of a release of right, a fine,
and a recovery.

If one give or grant land to another To have and to hold to him 27 H. 8. 27.
Lit. Sect. 31. Co. 11. 46.
and his heirs males, or to him and his heirs females, in both these cases
there is a feesimple made, but otherwise it is when these words are in a Will,
for then it is but an estate in tail only.

If one grant land to one, To have and to hold to him and his right 33 H. 6. 5.
heirs; by this he has a feesimple. And so it shall be taken if it be by
fine. So if one grant land to I S for life, the remainder to Co. super Lit. 22.
Co. 1. 95. 66.
the heirs, or to the right heirs of I S, this is a feesimple: so if one make
a feoffment in fee to the use of himself for life, and after his death to the
use of his heirs; this is a feesimple.

If one grant land to I S. To have and to hold to him and the heirs of I S;
this is a feesimple, and all one with a grant to I S and his heirs.

If one grant land to another to have and to hold to him for 20. 20 H. 6. 35.
Co. super Lit. 217.
years, and that after the 20. years the grantee shall have it to him and his
heirs by 10l. rent, and give livery of seisin; by this the grantee shall have
the feesimple.

If one grant land to the Wife of I S to have and to hold to her Co. 2. 91.
Dyer 156. Co. super Lit. 22.
for life, and after to I S in tail, and after to the right heirs of I S; by
this I S has a feesimple. And if one grant land to A for life, the remainder
to B for life, the remainder to the right heirs of A; by this A has a
feesimple.

If land be granted to a man and his wife, to have and to hold Bro. Estates 86.
to them and the heirs issuing of them, it seems this is a feesimple and not
a feetaile.

If land be granted to one and his heirs by the premises of a Co. 2. 21. 24.
super Lit. 21. 21 H. 6, 7.
deed to have and to hold to him for life; by this he has a feesimple. So if
by the premises of a deed land be granted to one and the heirs of his body
to have and to hold to him and his heirs; by this he has an estate tail and
a fee simple expectant. And so via versa. If by the premises of the deed the
grant be to him and his heirs to have and to hold to him and the heirs of his
body; by this also he has an estate tail and a feesimple expectant.

If lands be given or granted to a man to have and to hold to him Terms of
Law, tit. tail. Lit. tit. Fee toto, in and Co. super Lit. 26.
^ee tail.
and to the [or his] heirs of his body, or the [or his] heirs males of his
body, or the [or his] heirs females of his body; by this the grantee has an
estate tail. So if ands be given to a man, to have and to hold to him and the
heirs males, or to him and the heirs females of his body begotten; in both
these cases it is an estate tail.

If lands be given to a man and his his wife, to have and to hold to them Lit.
idem Co. 1. 140. Co. super Lit. 20. Co. 7. 41.
and the heirs males, or to them and the heirs females of their two bodies
begotten; by this they both have an estate tail. And if lands be given to them
and the heirs males, or heirs females of the body of the husband begotten on
the wife; by this he has an estate tail and his wife an estate for life only.
And if lands be given to A to have and to hold to him and his heirs on the
body of B begotten; by this A has an estate tail and B has nothing. So if
lands be given to a man and his wife, to have and to hold unto them and the
heirs he shall beget on her body; by this they have an estate tail in them
both. If lands be given to a man and his wife and the heirs of the body of the
husband; by this the husband has an estate in general tail, and the wife but
an estate for life. If lands be given to him to have and to hold to him and his
heirs he shall beget on the body of his wife; by this he has an estate tail
and she no estate at all.

If one give his land to his daughter or Cousin in Frankmariage; Lit. Sect. 17.
by this they have each of them an estate tail without any word of [heires, or
heirs of body] etc.

If one give lands to B and his heirs, to have and to hold to B Co. super Lit.
21. Co. 7. 41. 5 H. 5, 6.
and his heirs, if B have heirs of his body and if he die without heirs of
his body that it shall revert to the donor; by this B has an estate tail. So
if one give lands to B and his heirs if he have issue of his body; by this he
has an estate tail. So if lands be given to B to have and to hold to him and
his heirs, provided that if he die without heir of his body that the land
shall revert. So if lands be given to A and B uxori ejus and hered eorum and
aliis hered ipsius A, si dict'hered de dict' A and B exeunt' obierunt sine
herede de se etc. by this they have an estate tail. And so in all such like
cases where after a limitation of a feesimple these or such like words are
added, viz. that if he die without heirs of his body the land shall revert,
for in all these cases the habendum is construed to be a limitation or
declaration what heirs are meant before.

If lands be given to A and B, (a young man and maid unmaried) to have and to
hold to them and the heirs of their two bodies; Co. super Lit. 26. Plow. 135.
by this each of them has an estate tail, and if they mary their heirs may
inherit it.

If lands be given to the son to have and to hold to him and Co. super Lit.
7. Co. 8. 87. Ass. Pl. 47. 5 Ass. 14.
his heirs of the body of his Father; by this the son has a fee-simple. But
if the words be to have and to hold to him and the heirs of the body of the
Father engendered; by this it is an estate tail in a deed as it is in a Will.
And if the Father be dead the Law Will.
is so also, but it seems the son shall have by this only an estate for life
except he be issue in tail to his father per formam doni. So if there be
grandfather, father and son, and the father dies, and lands be given to the
son to have and to hold to him and the heirs of the body of the grandfather;
this is an estate tail in the son: but neither the father nor the
grandfather have either of them any estate in these cases. If lands be given to
I S and the heirs of the 12 H. 4. 1.
body of his wife (being dead) begotten; by this I S has an estate tail.

If one grant lands to I S, to have and to hold to him and the Co. super Lit.
385.
heirs of his body issuing, the remainder to I D and his heirs in forma
predicta; by this I S and I D, after him have each of them an estate tail.

If one grant lands to A to have and to hold to him for life the Co. 2. 91*
super Lit. 22. 39. Ass. Plow. 20.
remainder to the first son of A, and the heirs males of the body of that
first son; by this the first son has an estate in tail, and A his father
but an estate for life only. But if lands be granted to A for life the
remainder to the heirs of the body of A; by this A has an estate tail in
him. And if lands be given to a man and his wife to have and to hold to them
and one heir of their bodies lawfully begotten and to one heir of the body of
that heir; by this there is an estate tail made, yet so as it shall last only
during the lives of those two heirs.

If one grant lands to another to have and to hold to him and to Co. super Lit.
26.
his heirs of the body of such a woman lawfully begotten; by this he shall
have an estate tail, for begotten shall be intended by the donee on that woman.

If there be husband and wife and they have issue a son and Co. super Lit. 26.
daughter, and lands are given to the wife to have and to hold to her and the
heirs of her late husband on her body begotten; by this the wife has an
estate for life and the son an estate in tail, and if he die without issue it
shall go to his daughter per formam doni.

If lands be granted to the husband of A and wife of B, to have Co. super Lit.
20.
and to hold to them and the heirs of their two bodies; by this they have each
of them an estate in tail in them, for there is a possibility that one husband
and wife may dye, and then the other husband and wife may intermary.

If there be father and son, and lands are given to the father 12 H. 4. 3.
Dyer 247.
to have and to hold to him and the heirs of the body of his son; by this the
son has an estate tail but the father as it seems but an estate for life.

If lands be given to the mother for life the remainder to her son Lit. Sect.
352.
and the heirs of the body of his father on her begotten (the father being
dead) by this the son has an estate tail.

If lands be granted to I S, to have and to hold to him and the 12* N. 4.
heirs he shall happen to have of his wife; by this he has but an estate
tail and no feesimple, and his wife has no estate at all.

If lands be granted to I S and the heirs that the said I S shall Co. super
Lit. 20.
lawfully beget of his first wife, and he has no wife at the time of the
grant; by this he has an estate tail.

If A have issue by B his wife C a son and D a daughter, and A Co. super Lit.
26.
die, and lands are granted to B to have and to hold to her and to the heirs
of A her late husband on her body begotten; in this case and by this deed C
has an estate tail and the woman has only an estate for life, and if C die
without issue, D his Sister shall have the land per formam doni. But if one
grant lands to A late wife of I S, to have and to hold to the said A and the
heirs of I S on the body of the said A begotten; in this case the son and
heir shall take no estate by the grant. And the same construction shall be
upon the same words in his Will. Will.


If lands be granted to the husband and wife, to have and to hold Co. super
Lit. 26.
to them and the heirs of the body of the surviver of them; by this the
survivor shall have an estate tail after the death of the other.

If lands be granted to I S to have and to hold to him and heredibus Co. super
Lit. 20.
de carne sua, or heredibus de se, or heredibus quos sibicontigerit, in all
these cases I S has an estate tail and no more.

If lands be granted to husband and wife, to have and to hold to Co. super Lit.
28.
him and the heirs of the body of the husband, the remainder to the husband
and wife and the heirs of their two bodies begotten, this remainder is void,
and therefore by this the husband has an estate in tail and the wife a joint
estate for life with her husband and no more.

If lands be granted to I S and his heirs of the body of Co. 1. 140.
Jane a Noke begotten; by this I S has an estate tail and no more.

If lands be granted to I S and heredibus de corpore procreatis; by this the
heirs that shall be begotten afterward shall take. And Co. super Lit. 20.
if lands begranted to I S and heredibus de corpore procreandis; by this the
heirs of his body before begotten shall take per formam doni as well as those
that shall be begotten afterward.

If one grant to I S that if he and the heirs of his body be not Co. super
Lit. 146.
yearly paid 40. that he or they shall distraine in the lands of the grantor;
by this the grantee has an estate in tail in the rent, as if he grant to I S
that if he and his heirs be not paid etc. that he or they shall etc. he has a
feesimple in the rent. For life.


If one give or grant land to another to have and to hold to him, Lit. Sect.
283. 285. Co. 8. 85. 96. 2. 24. Finches Law 60. Co. super Lit. 9. Dyer 307. Co.
7. 23.
or to him and his assigns, and say not how long nor for what time, and the
grantor make livery of seisin according to the deed; by this the grantee has
an estate for his own life. But no livery of seisin be made no estate at all
but an estate at will does pass by this deed. And if he that does grant the
land be but a lessee for years of the land and he make no livery of seisin upon
the grant; by this his term of years and that estate which he has is granted.
But if he make livery of seisin upon the grant then an estate for the life of
the grantee will pass, and it is a forfeiture of the estate of the lessee for
Forfeiture.
17 Ass. Pl. 17.
years of which he in reversion may take present advantage. And if one grant to
another Common in his land when he does put in his own beasts, or Estovers in
his Manor when he comes there, and say no more, by this it seems the grantee
has an estate for life.

If one grant land to I S to have and to hold to him or his heirs, Co. 5. 112.
super Lit. 8.
in the disjunctive; this is but an estate for life and no more. So if one
grant lands to I S to have and to hold to him and his heir, in the singular
number; by this I S has only an estate for life and no feesimple.

If one bargain and sell land to another for money, and limit no Co. 1. 87.
130. Plow. 539.
time and express no estate; by this the bargain shall have only an estate
for life. But otherwise it was before the Statute of Uses, for then it had been
a fee simple.

If lands be granted to I S for life, and after to the next heir Co. 1. 66.
male of I S and the heirs males of the body of such next heir male; by this
I S has but an estate for life. But if it be to the next heirs males of I S
it is an intaile.

If one grant land to I S to have and to hold to him in fee 20 H. 6. 33.
simple, or in fee tail, without saying [to him and his heirs, or to him and
his heirs males, or the like] this is but an estate for life and no more. So
if one grant land to I S to have and to hold to him and his feed, or to him and
his issues, generally without more Co. super Lit. 8. 20.
words; by this is made only an estate for life. But in the construction of a
Will the law is otherwise in most of these cases. Will.


If lands be granted to two and heredibus without this word [Suis] 20 H. 6. 35
by this they have an estate for their lives and no longer.

If one grant lands to I S to have and to hold to him and his Co. 5. 112. 1.
140.
heirs for his own life, or for the life of I D; by this I S has an estate
for life and no more.

If one grant lands to A and B Habendum sibi and suis omitting Co. 4. 29. super
Lit. 1. 8.
all other words, or to have and to hold to them and their assigns; by this
they have an estate for life only. So if lands be granted to any natural
person to have and to hold to him and his Successors; by this he has only an
estate for his life.

If one grant his lands to I S to pay his debts to have and to Co. 8. 96.
hold to him generally without limiting any estate; in this case I S has an
estate for life only.

If lands be granted to A and B to have and to hold to them Dier 186.
for their lives to the use of C for his life; by this C has an estate for his
life if A and B live so long.

If a tenant in tail grant totum statum suum; by this the grantee Lit. Sect.
613. Co. 1. 53. super Lit. 345. Plow. 562. 162. Co. super Lit. 24.
has an estate for the life of the grantor and no longer. And if a lessee for
life grant all his estate; hereby his estate for life does pass, for this is
as much as he can lawfully grant.

If a man have a son and a daughter and die, and lands be granted to the
daughter and the heirs females of the body of the father; it seems by this
she has only an estate for life.

If one grant land to another to have and to hold to her whiles Co. super Lit.
42. 234, 235.
she shall live sole, or during her widowhood, or so long as she shall behave
her self well, or so long as he shall dwell in such a house, or so long as she
pay 10 l. yearly, or so long as the coverture between her and her husband shall
continue; or one grant lands to a man to have and to hold unto him until he
shall be promoted to a Benefice, or the like; in all these cases if livery of
seisin be made according to the deed, or if the grant be of such a thing
whereof no livery is requisite, the grantee has an estate for his life and no
more, and that determinable also.

If one grant lands to I S. to have and to hold to him for life, Co. super Lit.
183. 42. Plow. 161. F. N. B. 168.
and does not say for whose life; this regularly shall be taken for the life of
I S the lessee, and not for the life of the lessor. But if the lessor himself
have but an estate for life in the lands granted, then the lease shall be
construed to be and endure during that life only by which the lessor did hold
to prevent a forfeiture. And if he that does make the lease be tenant in tail
of the land, this shall be taken to be a lease for the life of the lessor. And
if a tenant for life of land make a lease for years of it and then grant his
reversion by the name of a reversion to another To have and to hold to him and
his heirs; by this he has only an estate for the life of the grantor and no
more. So if tenant in tail of land grant it to one for years, and after grant
his reversion to another To have and to hold to him and his heirs; this shall
be construed to be an estate for the life of the tenant in tail and no longer,
and the atturnement of the tenants in these cases will not alter the cases. And
so it is in case of a Release also, as if tenant in tail does release to B
(being lessee for years of the land) all his right to the land, this shall be
taken to enure but for the life of the tenant in tail and no longer, as if a
man retain a servant, and say not how long; this shall be taken for a year.
Constructio legis non facit injuriam.

If one grant to I S that if he be not paid yearly for his life Co. super Lit.
147. Co. 8. 85.
40 s. that he shall distraine in the land of the grantor for it; by this I S
has an estate for life in the rent. And if a man by his deed grant a rent of
10 l. issuing out of all his land quarterly at the usual feasts, this is an
estate for life of the grantee.

If one grant lands to I S and I D. To have and to hold to them Co. 5. 9. 11. 3.
during their lives, omitting these words [and the longest liver of them] by
this notwithstanding they shall hold it during the life of the longest liver of
them. And if lands be granted to A To have and to hold to him during the lives
of B, C and D without any more words; by this A has an estate during all their
lives and during the life of the longest liver of them. 38 Eliz. B. R. in the
case of Ros and Adwick.
And if lands be granted to A To have and to hold to him during his life, and
during the lives of B and C, by this he has a lease for his own life and the
lives of B and C and the longest liver of them. But if a lease be made to I S
of land to have and to hold to him during the time that A and B shall be
Justices of Peace, or during the time that A and B shall be of the Inner
Temple, or the like; in these cases the ^ailer of one does determine the
estate. Adjudged B. R. 8 Eliz. Hoba^t and Wisemores case.
And if a lease be made to B only To have and to hold to him and C for their
lives; by this B has an estate for his own life only and no more and C has
nothing at all. And here by the way let it be observed in these and such like
cases where lands are granted to one man to Co. super Lit. 41. 239. 388. Plow.
556. 28. Dier 328. 321. 264. Co. 10. 98.
Occupant.
have and to hold to him, [or to him and his assigns, or to him, his
executors, administrators and assignes] during the life, or during the lives of
others; and in most cases where a man is tenant pur auter vie. i. for the life
or lives of another or others, if the tenant pur auter vie in possession die
his estate shall not go to his heirs, executors or administrators unless
they can first get into possession after his death, but he that can first get
into the possession of the land after the death of the tenant pur auter vie
shall have it for his life, and after his death then he that can first get into
the possession again etc. And therefore if the land were let by the tenant pur
auter vie at the time of his death to any under tenant for years, or for one
year, or at will, and this undertenant be in possession at the time of the
death of the tenant pur auter vie, this undertenant shall have it for his life,
if the life or lives by which it is held so long live, for the rule in this
case is occupanti conceditur. Et capiat qui capere potest. And this estate is
called an occupancy, and he that has it an occupant. To prevent which
mischief the lessee must take care when he takes his lease to have it made to
him and his heirs during the life or lives of him or them by whom it is held,
for in this case after his death his heir and none other shall have it; or if
this be neglected, then he must take care to grant over his estate by act
executed (for by his last will he may not devise it) to some friend and his
heirs in trust for him; or he may grant it over to another, and take a regrant
of it to himself and his heirs; or he may make a lease for years of the lands
to some friends in trust, and by this means he may have the fruit of it during
the term.

When no time is set down for the beginning of an estate then Co. super Lit.
46. Co. 5. 1. 2. 5. Die^ 286. 307.
it shall begin presently, otherwise it shall begin at the time expressed For
years. When such a lease shall begin and how long it shall continue.
if it may stand with law. If a lease for years be made bearing date the 26th.
day of May, To have and to hold for 21. years from the date, or from the day of
the date; in these cases the lease shall begin on the 27th. day of May. But if
the words be To have and to hold from henceforth, or from the making hereof, in
these cases the lease shall begin on the day in which it is delivered. And if
it be to begin a die confectionis, then it shall begin the next day after the
delivery. And if it be To have and to hold for 21. years; without mentioning
when it shall begin, it shall begin from the delivery if there be no former
lease in being, and if there be, then it shall begin from the time of the
ending of that lease. If the deed have a date which is void or impossible, as
the 30 of February, or 40. of March, and the term be limited to begin from the
date, then it shall begin from the delivery. So if a man by his deed recite a
lease which is not, or which is void, or misrecite a lease that is in esse in
point material, and then say To have and to hold from the end of the former
lease; this lease shall begin in course of time at the time of the delivery of
the deed.

If one make a lease of land to A for 20. years, and then grant Co. 1. 154.
Plow. 198.
it to B To have and to hold to him from the end of the first term etc. in
this case this second lease shall begin as soon as the first lease by what
means soever shall end. But if the words of the second lease be To have and to
hold to him from the end of the 20. years, in this case the second lease shall
not begin until the 20. years be expired. And if one make a lease of white
acre to A for 10. years, and of black acre to B for 20. years, and then
reciting both the leases does make a lease to C to begin after the former
leases; this shall be taken respective, and shall begin for white acre after
the end of the 10. years, and for black acre after the end of 20. years. And if
one make a lease to two for 60. years provided that Co. 6. 36.
if the lessees shall die within the term, that then presently after the
decease of the last of them longest living the lessor shall reenter, and one of
them die; and after the lessor does make a lease to another Habendum etc. cum
post sive per mortem sursum redd vel forisfacturam of the first surviving
lessees acciderit vacare for 40. years; in this case this second lease shall
begin after the death of the lessee surviving, reentry of the lessor, or the
effluxion of time of the first lease which of them shall first happen, and the
lessee cannot at his election make it to begin at any other time.

If a man make a lease for 30. years, and 4. years after make another lease to
another man in these words. Noveritis etc. me A de Dier 261.
B predictis 30. Annis finitis dedisse and concessisse B de C etc. Habendum a
die confectionis presentium termino predicto finito usque finem 31. Annorum: by
this the second term shall begin at the end of the 30. years. And if one make
a lease to A for 20. years and after make a lease to B to have and to hold to
him from the Craddocks case. pasc. 7. Jac. Co. B.
end of the first term for 20. years to be accounted from the date of the last
deed; in this case the second lease shall begin at the end of the first lease,
and these words [to be accounted etc.] shall be rejected*

If one make a lease of land to A for 10. years, and after by Dier 112.
indenture grant it to B to have and to hold to him from Michaelmas next for
10. years, and after the first lessee does purchase the reversion by which his
term is drowned; in this case the second lease shall begin presently when
Michaelmas is come.

If two Jointenants be, and one of them grant the land to I S to Mich. 13 Jac.
B. R.
have and to hold to him for 20. years if the lessor and his companion so long
live; by this the lease shall continue no longer then they both live together,
and when either of them is dead the lease is determined. Co. 5. 9.
And if one grant his land to I S to have and to hold to him, his executors
etc. for the term of 100. years if A, B, and C live so long; and leave out
these words [or either of them] in this case if either of them die the lease is
determined. But if the words be To have and to hold for 100. years if A, B or C
[omitting or either of them] shall live so long, contra. Pasch. 30. Eliz. Co. B.
If a lease be made of land to the husband and wife to have and to hold to them
for 21. years if the husband and wife or any child between them shall so long
live; this is a good lease and shall continue for all their lives and for the
life of the longest liver of them albeit the first words be in the copulative.

If one possessed of land for a term of years grant the same to another, Dier
307. 69. Plow. 520. 524, 525. 423, 424. Co. 7. 23.
To have and to hold to him, his executors and administrators, or to him and
his assigns, or to him, without any more words: or if a man that is possessed
of a term grant his lease to another, and does not say for what time; it
seems in these cases the whole term is granted albeit no livery of seisin be
made. And in the first case if livery of seisin be made then it seems there
does pass an estate for the life of the grantee, and therefore that this is a
forfeiture of the estate of the lessee for years whereof he in the reversion
may take advantage presently. And if a lessee for years of land grant a rent
out of the land generally without any limitation; this shall be construed to
enure for a grant of the rent so long as the estate of the grantor does
continue. But if he grant a rent by express words for the life of the grantee:
by this the grantee shall have it for all the term if he live so long.

If one grant lands to I S To have and to hold to him for life Co. super Lit.
218.
reserving the first seven years a rose, and if he will hold the land over that
he shall pay a rent in money, and no livery of seisin is made; by this it
seems in certain is made a lease for seven years until the Condition be
performed; and then also it seems it is a lease for no longer time. And so
perhaps it will be if livery of seisin be made.

If one grant a rent of 5 l. per annum unto I S, To have and to Co. super Lit.
42. Plow. 273.
hold to him etc. until he shall receive 20 l. in this case he shall have a
lease for four years of this rent. But if lands be granted to I S To have and
to hold etc. until he shall receive 20 l. out of the profits of it, in this
case if livery of seisin be made the grantee has an estate determinable upon
the levying of the money, and if no livery be made he has no estate at all but
at will.

If one make a lease for life and say, that if the lessee within one Co. super
Lit. 218.
year pay not 20 s. that he shall have but a term for 2. years; by this if he
does not pay the money he has only a lease for 2. years albeit livery of
seisin be made upon it.

If one make a lease to I S To have and to hold to him, his executors Co. 9.
63. 60.
etc. for 10. years if I D shall live so long, and I D is dead at the time when
the lease is made; in this case I S has an absolute lease for 10. years.

If one grant lands to I S To have and to hold to him, his executors Plow. 273.
Co. super Lit. 45. Dier 24.
etc. for 3. years and so from 3. years to 3. years during the life of I S, or
from 3. years to 3. years during the life of the lessee; by this it seems I S
has a lease for 6. years and no more. And if one grant lands to I S To hold
for 3. years and after the end of those 3. years for 3. other years, and after
the end of those 3. years for 3. other years during the life of the lessor; by
this it seems I S has a lease for 9. years and no more. And yet if in these
and such like cases where a lease is made from so many years to so many for the
life of any person livery of seisin be made upon this deed secundum formam
chartae; this perhaps may be an estate for life.

If lands be granted To have and to hold from our Lady day pro termino unius
Anni and sic de uno Anno in unum Annum quamdiu 14 H. 8. 10. Co. 6. 35. 10. 106.
ambabus partibus placuerit; by this the grantee has a lease for 3. years only
in certain and afterward a lease at will. And if lands be granted to have and
to hold from the Nativity of Christ next pro termino unius Anni, et si in fine
dict' unius Anni ambae parts placerent quod eadem presens dimissio foret
renovata tunc habend premissa to the lessee etc. ab and post dictum festum
Nativitatis Domini usque terminum trium Annorum extunc prox' sequen'; by this
the grantee has a lease in certain but for one year only, and if the parties
agree again a lease for 3. years.

If one make a lease to I S To have and to hold to him for years, Co. 6. 35.
21. H. 7. 38.
and say not how many years: by this the lessee has a lease for 2. years and
no more.

If one grant his land to I S To have and to hold to him until Co. 3. 19.
I D shall come to 21. years of age; in this case if I D die before that time
the lease is ended.

If a man possessed of a term of years of land does grant the land to another
and his heirs, this by construction will amoumt Co. 1. 44. 7 H. 4. 42.
to a good grant of his interest.

If lands be granted to husband and wife and to I S To have Limitation of
estates to diverse persons.
Dier 263.
and to hold to them and to the heirs of the husband and I S; by this the wife
has only an estate for life in a moity with her husband and the husband and I S
have the feesimple in Jointenancy to them and their heirs. Co. 8. 87. 10. 50.
super Lit. ^5. Dier 145.


If lands be granted to two brothers, or two Sisters, or to a brother or
sister, or to a father and son or any others, To have and to hold to them and
the heirs of their bodies begotten: by this they have joint estates for their
lives, so that the survivor of them will have the whole for his life, and
several inheritances. i. estates in general tail by moities in common one
with another. And if lands be granted to two men and their wives and the heirs
of their bodies begotten: in this case they have joint estates for life, and
afterward the one husband and wife shall have the one moity and the other the
other moity in common. And and if lands be granted to a man and two women To
have and to hold to them and the heirs of their bodies: by this they have each
of them an estate tail in common with the other.

If lands be granted to husband and wife To have and to hold Lit. Sect. 27, 28,
29. Co. super Lit. 26. Dier 340. Co. 1. 100.
to them and their heirs of their bodies issuing, or in any such like manner;
by this the wife has an estate tail as far forth as the husband. But if it
be granted to them To have and to hold to them and the heirs of the body of
the husband, or to the husband and wife and the heirs of the husband which he
shall have by his wife, or in any such like manner: by this the wife has only
an estate for life and the whole estate tail is in the husband. So via versa
if lands be granted to husband and wife and the heirs of the wife upon her
body begotten by the husband: by this he has an estate for his life only and
his wife the whole estate tail. And if lands be granted to the husband To have
and to hold to him and the heirs of his body on the body of his wife begotten,
or To have and to hold to him and the heirs of his body begotten on the wife
he shall first mary, or To have and to hold to him and his wife he shall first
mary, and the heirs of their bodies begotten: in these cases the husbands have
the whole estate and the wives nothing at all. But

If lands be granted to A a married man, and to S a married wife 15 H. 7. 10.
and to the heirs of their bodies engendered: by this they have each of them an
estate tail presently executed, and whiles the wife of the husband and the
husband of the wife live they shall hold it for their lives, and if they happen
to die and these to intermary and have issues their issues shall have it
according to the intaile.

If lands be granted to A and B To have and to hold to A for Dier 126. 56.
When the Habendum shall be said to be repugnant and void. And when not, but
shall control, divide or expound the premises.
life the remainder to B in fee: by this A shall have the whole for his life
and B the feesimple afterward.

As touching this matter these differences are to be taken. Co. 2. 23. 8. 56.
Perk. Sect. 181. 14 H 8. 14. Co. super Lit. 183.
Between things that are granted and between the estates. When the things that
are granted are such as lie in grant and take effect by the delivery of the
deed only without any ceremony, or take effect by the same ceremony, and when
not but another ceremony is required to the perfection of the grant and estate.
And when there is an express estate made by the deed in the Premises thereof,
and when but an implied estate only, as for examples. If one grant land, rent
common, or any such like thing to one and his heirs by the Premises of the
deed To have and to hold to him for life, or To have and to hold to him and to
his assigns, without more words; in this case the Habendum is repugnant and
void, and by this the grantee shall have an estate in feesimple if livery of
seisin and atturnment as the case does require be duly made, for otherwise no
estate at all but at will will pass. So if a man grant a rent, or any such
like thing that lies in grant to one and his heirs To have and to hold to him
for years; this is a void Habendum, and the grantee shall have the feesimple.
But if a man grant land to another and his heirs To have and to hold to him
for a certain number of years; in this case whether he make livery of seisin
or not it is a good Habendum; and by this the grantee shall have an estate for
so many years and no more. So if one grant land, rent, common, or any such like
thing to one in the Premises of the deed without limitation of estate (which
in judgment of law is an implied estate for life) To have and to hold to him
for a certain number of years, or at will; this Habendum is good and shall
stand with the Premises and qualify it; and by this the grantee shall have
but a lease for years, or at will, as the Habendum is. And if one grant land by
the Premises Co. 8. 154. 21 H. 6. 7. Co. super Lit. 20. Dier 126. and per
curiam in Thurmans case. Pasc. 16 Jac. B. R. 21 H. 6. 7.
of a deed to one and his heirs of his body To have and to hold to him and his
heirs; this Habendum shall stand and this shall be taken an estate tail and a
feesimple expectant. So vice versa, If land be granted to one and his heirs To
have and to hold to him and his heirs of his body; this shall be construed an
estate tail and a feesimple expectant and so both shall stand together.

If lands be given to B and his heirs To have and to hold to B and his heirs,
and if he die without heirs of his body that it shall Co. super Lit. 21.
revert to the donor, it seems this is a feetaile only and no feesimple
expectant. Voluntas donatoris in carta doni sui manifest expressa observanda
est.

If a lease for years be made of land, and then the lessor by the premises of
the deed grants the land to another To have and to Co. 10. 107. 108.
hold the reversion of the land to him etc. for life; this Habendum shall
stand. So if by the Premises of the deed the reversion be granted To have and
to hold the land it self, this is good and both shall stand together, but
nothing is granted in either case but the reversion.

If the next Advowson of a Church be granted to three To have and Dier 304. Co.
5. 19.
to hold to them and either of them jointly and severally; this is joint and
the Habendum is void. Co. 2. 55.
And yet if one grant land to two by the Premises of the deed To have and to
hold to one of them for Super Lit. 183. Dier 106.
life, the remainder to the other for life; this is not repugnant but shall
stand together and make the estates several and in remainder one after
another. So if a lease be made to two To have and to hold the one moity to the
one and the other moity to the other; by this they have several estates.
Expressum facit semper cessare tacitum.

If a man have a lease for years of land, and he reciting this, by Dier 272.
Plow. 520.
the Premises of the deed does grant all his estate in the land, To have and
to hold the land or the term after his death, or for part of the time only; in
this case the Habendum is void and the whole estate does pass immediately by
the premises.

If a tenant for life surrender a moity of his land, and the lessor Dier 256.
grant it all to a stranger To have and to hold the one moity for life and the
other moity for 40. years after the death of the tenant for life; this Habendum
shall stand and enure according to the grant.

If a man seized of land in fee make a lease for life of it to one, Curia pas.
7 Jac. Co. B.
and after grant the reversion of it to another To have and to hold the
reversion and the tenements aforesaid cum post mortem forisfact' etc. vacare
acciderit; in this case the Habendum and premises may stand together. It is
usual in the Habendum of a deed to set down to what use the party to whom the
deed is made shall have the thing granted. But touching this and the matters
that do concern uses see Use infra at large. And see also more for the
Exposition of Deeds in Testaments Numb. 8. Grant Numb. 4. Leases cap. 14. Numb.
4. And here note that parol-agreements and conveyances Note.
have the same construction for the most part made upon them as are made before
upon deeds. And therefore if a man by word of mouth without any writing grant
all his lands in Dale to I S To have and to hold to him for life, but does not
say for whose life; this shall have the same construction as such a grant made
in writing has.

This is always taken most in advantage of the feoffee, grantee, Co. 5. 111.
10. 106. 8. 71 Co. super Lit. 47. 213, 214.
lessee, etc. and against the feoffor, grantor, lessor, etc. and yet so as In
the reservation of rent. And how that shall be taken.
the rent be paid during the time. And therefore if the reservation be only to
the feoffor, grantor, etc. and the deed do not say also [to his heirs,
executors etc.] this reservation shall continue only for the life time of the
grantor and shall determine with his death. And so also it is where the
reservation is to the feoffor or his heirs, in the disjunctive, for in this
case the rent shall continue only during the life of the grantor. And yet if
one make a lease for years rendering yearly during the said term to the lessor
or his heirs or executors; this is a good reservation during all the term, by
reason of these words [during the term.] So if the feoffor, or lessor be
seized in fee, and make a feoffement in fee, or lease for life or years,
rendering rent to the feoffor or lessor or his executors or assigns; in Plow.
171. 21 H. 7. 25. 27 H. 8. 19. Dier 45.
this case the rent shall continue only for the life of the lessor. But if the
reservation be to the feoffor, or lessor, his heirs and assigns, in the
copulative, or in the disjunctive to him or his heirs, or to him and his
successors (if it be the lease of a Corporation) during the term; then all the
assignees of the reversion shall enjoy it. And if the reservation be thus,
yielding and paying so much rent (without any more words,) this shall be taken
for all the time of the estate and shall go to him in reversion accordingly.
And if the reservation be, rendering so much rent during the said term, and
does not say to whom; in this case it shall be construed to be to him that has
the reversion and accordingly it shall be paid and shall continue during the
term. So held in the case of Bland M. 8 Car. B. R.
But if A be seized of land in fee, and make a lease for years of it rendering
rent to A [without saying To his heirs etc.] during the said term; this rent
shall continue only during the life of A and no longer. And yet if A be
possessed of a term only, and make an under-lease or assignement with such a
reservation; Quere.

If the reservation be thus, Yielding and paying 20 s. during the said 27 H. 8.
19.
term, omiting the word [yearly] this shall be taken, to be not once only but
yearly during the term and accordingly it must be paid. Pas 21 Jac. Hudson and
Brent B. R.
And if a lease be made for years, rendering in every middle of the year,
quolibet medio Anni 20l. this shall be paid during the term.

If one by deed indented grant lands to A To have and to hold Co. 10. 107.
to him for life, the remainder to B and the heirs of his body, and for
default of such issue to remain to D in tail, or for life, yielding therefore
yearly etc. in this case the reservation shall extend to all the estates.

If a lease be made the 10th. day of August, rendering rent at our Dier 130. Co.
5. 111. super Lit. 217.
Lady day and Michaelmas; in this case albeit our Lady day be first named, yet
the first payment shall be at Michaelmas next after the making of the deed.

If the reservation be at Michaelmas or within 20 days after: in Per Williams
and Yelverton Just. Chapter Just. contra 9 Jac. B. R.
this case the 20th day shall be taken exclusive. But if the rent be to paid at
Michaelmas or by the space of 20. days after, in this case the 20th day shall
be taken inclusive.

If a lease be made in December, from the Nativity of Christ next for one year
with this addition, Et si in fine dicti Anni ambae parts Co. 10. 106.
agrearent quod eadem dimissio foret renovata tunc habend and tenend premissa
dicto I S (the lessee) ab and post dictum festum tunc proxim. sequend. usque
finem trium Annorum. Reddendo inde Annuatim durante dicto termino dict. W S.
etc. in this case the reservation shall relate to both the terms, and the rent
shall be paid the first year although they do not agree to renew the lease.

If two Jointenants by deed poll, or by word make a lease for Co. super Lit.
214.
life reserving a rent to one of them; this shall go to them both. So if one
of them be tenant for life and the other in fee, and they join in a lease for
life, or gift in tail reserving a rent; the rent shall enure to them both. But
if tenant for life and he in reversion join in a lease for life, or gift in
tail by deed reserving a rent, the rent shall enure to the tenant for life
only during his life and after to him in reversion.

If two tenants in common make a lease of their land rendering Plow. 171. 289.
Co. 10. 106.
20 s. rent; this shall be but one 20 s. and not two 20 s. So if the lease be
rendering a Hawke or a Horse; by this they shall have but one Hawke, and one
Horse, and not two Hawks or two Horses, as it shall be in cases where they do
join in the grant of such things out of their land.

If one make a gift in tail of two acres of land, the one at the Co. 10. 106.
common law and the other in Burrow English rendering an ox to him and his
heirs, and the donee having two sons die, and the eldest son does inherit
the one acre and the youngest son does inherit the other; in this case the
donor and his heirs shall have but one ox etc.

If one make a lease of land for years if the lessee live so long, Co. 10. 107
108.
and after the lessor by his deed indented does grant the land to another To
have and to hold the reversion to the grantee for his life cum post mortem etc.
aut aliter acciderit vacare reddend inde Annuatim to the grantor and his heirs
cum reversio predicta acciderit 9 s. 4 d. per Annum; in this case this
reservation of rent shall not begin before the reversion happen in possession.

If rent be reserved to be paid at two terms, and it is not said by 13 H. 4.
Avowry 240. Co. 8. 95. 10. 47. Bro. Done 57. Fitz. Done 2.
equal portions; yet it shall be so taken and it must be so paid.

If one be possessed of a term of years of land, and grant it by In other
respects.
deed to I S for his life, and after his death to I D; in this case the whole
term is granted to I S, and his executors, administrators and assigns shall
have it and not I D. But if a term were so devised D^vise.
by Will, contra. And if one give or grant to another his horse, or his books
for his life, and that after his death they shall remain Remainder.
to another, the remainder is void, and the first shall have it for ever, for
the gift or grant of such a thing for an hour is a gift of it for ever.

See more in Use Numb. 7.

And it is now time that we come to the other parts of a Deed and first to a
Condition.

CHAP. VI. Of a Condition.
A Condition is a kind of Law or bridle annexed to ones act 1. Condition. Quid.
Terms of the Law. Co. super Lit. 201.
staying or suspending the same and making it uncertain whether it shall take
effect or no. Or as others define it, It is modus an Equality annexed by him
that estate interest or right to the land etc. whereby an estate etc. may
either be created, defeated or enlarged upon an incertaine event. And this does
differ from a Limitation, which is the bounds or compass of an estate, or the
time Limitation* Quid.
how long an estate shall continue. And this sometimes is contained 27 H. 8.
16. Co. 2. 70.
in a Testament or Will, and sometimes in a deed. And when it is in a deed it
has no proper place assigned it, but it may be in any part of the deed;
howbeit for the most part it is placed next after the Habendum, or next after
the Reservation of the rent. It is also sometimes annexed to and depending upon
estates; and sometimes annexed to, and depending upon Recognizances, Statutes,
Obligations, contracts, and other things: Conditions are also contained in Acts
of Parliament and Records. But of these we speak not here in the ensuing
matters, which are especially to be applied to such Conditions as are usually
contained in deeds and annexed to the realty. i. to estates in feesimple,
feetaile, for life, or years.

And of these Conditions there are diverse kinds. For some 2. Quotuplex.
Co. super Lit. 201. Plow. Colthirsts case. Co. 8. 43.
are in deed or Express. i. when the condition is expressed by the party in
legal terms and by express words in writing or without writing knit to the
estate, as if I enfeoffe a man of land rendering rent at a day on condition that
if it be not paid it shall be lawful for me to reenter. And some are in law or
Implied. i. when the condition is tacit created by the law without any words
used by the party. The first sort of conditions also are some of them precedent
or executed. i. when the condition must be fulfilled ^re the estate can take
effect, as where an agreement is between me and I S that if he pay me 10 l. at
Michaelmas he shall have such a ground of mine for 10. years; or I make a lease
of land to I S for 10. years, provided that if he pay me 10 l. at Michaelmas he
shall have the land to him and his heirs; and in these cases by the
performance of the condition the estate is acquired. And some of them are
Subsequent and Executory. i. when the estate is executed but the continuance
thereof depends upon the breach or performance of the condition, as where a
lease is made for years, on condition that the lessee shall pay 10 l. to the
lessor at Michaelmas or else his lease shall be void, and in this case by the
performance of the condition the estate is held and kept. These conditions also
are some of them in the affirmative. i. that do consist of doing, as providing
that the lessee shall pay the rent, or pay 10 l. to the lessor etc. And some in
the Negative. i. that consist of not doing, as provided that the lessee shall
not alien etc. And some of them are in the Affirmative which imply a Negative,
as provided that if the rent be unpaid* that the lessor shall reenter which
implies a Negative, viz. not paid. Conditions also are some of them
collateral. i. when the act to be done is a collateral act, as that the party
shall pay 10 l. go to Rome, or the like. And some are inherent. i. such as are
annexed to the rent reserved out of the land whereof the estate is made. And
some of them also are Restrictive and contain a restraint, as that the lessee
shall not alien, or do wast, or the like. And some are compulsory, as that the
lessee shall pay ^o the lessor 10 l. such a day or his lease shall be void. And
some of them be single. i. to do one thing only. And some copulative. i. to
do diverse things. And some disjunctive. i. when one thing of diverse is
required to be done. And some conditions Co. super Lit. 201.
make the estate whereunto they are annexed voidable only by entry or claim.
And some of them make the estate void ipso facto without entry or claim. And
sometimes they tend to destroy estates, sometimes to make, or to enlarge
estates, and sometimes neither to make nor destroy, but only to clogge estates,
as where a lease is made rendering rent on a day, on condition if it be not Lit.
Sect. 327.
paid that the lessor shall enter on the land and keep it till the rent be
paid. And all these ways conditions may be lawfully made. Ine^^e potest
donationi modus, conditio sive Causa.

The conditions in law or implied are either by Common law, Co. 8. 44. 3. 65.
Lit. 325. 378. F. N. B. 205.
or by Statute law. The first sort are some of them founded on skill, as where
an office is granted, there is a condition tacit implied, that if the grantee
does not execute it faithfully according to the trust the grantor may put him
out. And some are without skill, as where an estate is made for life or years
of land, there is this condition implied, that if the lessee do wast he shall
forfeit the place wasted, or if the lessee make a feoffement of the land he
shall forfeit his estate and the lessor shall enter. And where an estate ^s
made in fee of land; this condition is implied, that the feoffee shall not
alien it in Mortmaine. And these conditions do sometimes give a recovery, and
no entry, as in the case of wast. And sometimes Co. 4. 121.
they give an entry and no recovery, as in the case of Alienation in Mortmaine.
In the case of exchange also there is a condition in law, for which see
Exchange.

It is a general rule, That when a man has a thing he may condition 21 H. 7.
24. Perk. Sect. 707, 708. etc.
3. What things may be made and done upon Condition. And to what things a
Condition may be ann^xed. Or not. And how it may be made and annexed thereunto.
with it as he will. Conditions in deed therefore may be annexed to things
inheritable, to frank tenements, or to chattells real and personal: as for
example, If a feoffement in fee, gift in tail, or lease for life be made of
lands or tenements, or a grant be of a rent, Common, or the like thing in
feesimple, feetaile, or for life, these things may be done upon condition. So a
lease for years of land, or a grant of a rent etc. for years may be made upon
condition. And a lease may be made for five years on condition that if the
lessee pay to the lessor within the first two years 10. marks that then he
shall have the fee, otherwise but for five years. Also a Guardian in ^hivalry
may grant the wardship of the body and land or either of them on condition. A
tenant by statute Merchant, Perk. Sect. 281. Co. super. Lit. 274. Perk. Sect.
724. Co. 8. 98. Dier 242.
Staple, or Elegit may grant their estates upon condition. The Lord may grant
his Seigniory to his tenant on condition. The tenant for life may grant his
estate to his lessor, or him in reversion upon condition. The King may make
letters Patents of denization to an alien, or a ^harter of pardon to a man for
his life upon condition. Also releases and confirmations may be made upon
condition. And a submission to an award may be upon a condition. But an
Institution to a Benefice, or an induction may not be Co. 2. 74.
on a condition. An atturnement, or an express Manumission of Co. super Lit.
274.
a villain cannot be upon a condition subsequent, as it may be upon a
condition precedent. And a condition cannot be released upon a condition, as
some hold. But the contrary is held by others clearly and that there is no
difference between this and a release of a right Ideo quere. An award cannot be
made on a condition as was held in Sherers case 35 Eliz. A contract or sale of
a Chattell Perk. Sect. 712, 713.
personal, as an ox or the like, may be upon condition, as if A sell his
horse to B that if A do such an act, then that B shall pay 5 l. at the day
agreed upon, otherwise but 4 li. So if I agree with a Physician that if he cure
such a disease he shall have so much; and in this case he cannot have the money
until he have done the cure. As where I promise a man 10 l. when he has built
such a house, in this case he cannot have the money until the house be built.
Also retaining of servants, delivery of Charters, and diverse other things may
be done upon condition. And if an Executor assent Co. 4. 28.
to a legacy upon a condition; the assent is good but the condition is void.

And conditions annexed to estates in all the cases before Lit. Sect. 365. Co.
super Lit. 161. 216.
howsoever they are most frequently and safely made by deed in writing, yet it
seems such conditions may be made and annexed to any estate of a thing
grantable without deed without any writing Doct. and St^. 16. Perk. Sect. 715.
at all; howsoever in some cases it cannot be well pleaded nor used without a
deed, for it is a rule, That if a condition be pleaded in any action to de^eat
a freehold, the deed wherein the condition is contained must be showed. But of
chattels real, as leases for years and the like, or grants of chattels
personal, a man may plead that such leases and grants were made upon
condition, without showing the deed. And in the first case also of a condition
to avoid a freehold, it may be given in evidence to a Jury, and they may find
the matter at large as it is, and so the party may have advantage of the
condition without showing any deed of it. Also the Co. 5. 40.
pleading of a feoffment in fee on condition without deed and reentry, is good
if the party confess the condition. A condition may Co. 8. 90.
be annexed to a limitation of uses, and thereby the same may be made void. See
Use.

The nature of an express condition annexed to an estate in general Co. super
Litt. 186. Perk. Sect. 818. Litt. Sect. 358. Dier 6.
is this: That it cannot be made by, nor reserved to a stranger, 4. The nature
of a condition in deed, and of a limitation.
but it must be made by, and reserved to him that does make the estate. And it
cannot be granted over to another except it be to and with the land or thing
unto which it is annexed and incident. And so it is not grantable in all cases;
for the estates of both the parties are so suspended by the condition, that
neither of them alone can well make any estate, or charge, of or upon the land;
for the party that does depart with the estate, and has nothing but a
possibility to have the thing again upon the performance or breach of the
condition, cannot grant or charge the thing at all. And Dier 298. Co. 8. 44.
Perk. Sect. 818, 819.
if he that has the estate, grant or charge it, it will be subject to the
condition still, for the condition does always attend and wait upon the estate
or thing whereunto it is annexed: so that although the same do pass through
the hands of an hundred men, yet is it subject to the condition still; And
albeit some of them be persons privileged in diverse cases, as the King,
infants, and women covert, yet they also are bound by the condition. And a man
that comes to the thing by wrong, as a disseisor of land whereof there is an
estate upon condition in being, shall hold the same subject to the condition
also. And when the condition is broken or performed Dier 117. Co. 10. in Mary
Portingtons ca^e. Super Litt. 230. Litt. Sect. 374. Perk. Sect. 564. so. 108.
Litt. ^o. 224. Dier 127. Co. super Litt. 224.
etc. the whole estate shall be de^eated: So that if there be a lease for life
made by deed and not by will, the remainder over in fee, on condition that the
lessee for life shall pay ten pound to the lessor; if the lessee pay not this
ten pound, the estate in remainder is avoided also. Et sic e converso, unless
by special limitation it be otherwise provided, as if A grant by ^ndenture
land to B for life, the remainder to C in fee, rendering rent to A and his
heirs, with condition that if the rent be behind, to re^nter and retain the
land during the life of B and no more, and A does enter in the life time of B
for non payment; this does not destroy the remainder. And if tenant for life
and he in remainder join in a feoffment on condition that if etc, that then the
tenant for life shall reenter; this is good without defeating the entire
estate: for regularly a condition cannot avoid a part of an estate only, and
leave another part entire; neither can the estate be void as to one person, and
good as to another, (except it be in case of a condition annexed to an estate
limited by way of use, as in Frances case Co. 8. 90.) And yet if A make a gift
in tail to B, the remainder to B in fee upon condition not to alien, and B does
alien; this does defeat the estate tail only, and not the remainder. Also the
whole estate of the whole Co. 4. 121. Dier 127.
and not of some part only, shall be avoided, except by agreement the condition
be specially restrained to some part, and the reentry given in that part only,
as where a feoffment is made of two acres, on condition that if such a thing
happen, the feoffor shall enter into one of them. And further when he that has
right does ^eenter Perk. Sect. 840.
by force of such condition, he shall avoid all charges and encumbrances put
upon the land after the condition made, for he that does enter into land by
force of such a condition, must have it again in the same plight as it was when
he parted with it. And See infra.
finally, a condition for the most part will not determine the estate without
entry or claim. So that howsoever a limitation has much affinity and
agreement with a condition, Litt. Sect. 3^0.
and therefore it is sometimes called a condition in law Co. 9. 128. 8. 17. 6.
41. Plow. 413.
, both of them do determine an estate in being before, and a limitation cannot
make an estate to be void as to one person, and good as to another, as if a
gift be made in tail to one and his heirs males, until he do such a thing,
Co. 10. 40. Dier 300. Litt. Sect. 90
and then his estate to cease and go to another: yet herein they differ: 1. A
stranger may take advantage of an estate determined by limitation, and so he
cannot upon a condition. 2. A limitation does always determine the estate
without entry or claim, and so does not a condition.

Conditions anne^ed to estates are sometimes so placed and confounded Co. 2.
Lord Cromwels case. 10 Mary Portingtons case. Co. super Litt. 204. ^7 H. 8. 16.
Litt. Sect. 328, 329, ^30, 331.
amongst covenants, sometimes so ambiguously drawn, and 5. When an estate shall
be conditional. And what words will make a condition. And what not. And how a
condition may be known from a covenant, or limitation.
at all times have in their drawing so much affinity with limitations, that it
is hard to discern and distinguish them. Know therefore that for the most part
conditions have conditional words in their frontispice, and do begin
therewith, and that amongst these words there are three words that are most
proper, which in and of their own nature and e^^icacy without any addition of
other words of reentry in the conclusion of the condition that do make the
estate conditional, as Proviso, Ita quod, and Sub condition. And therefore if
A grant lands to B, To have and to hold to him and his Proviso. Ita quo^ Sub
condition,
heirs, Provided that, or so as, or under this condition, that B do pay to A
ten pound at Easter next; this is a good condition, and the estate is
conditional without any more words. But there are Si. Si contingat,
other words, as Si, si contingat, and the like, that will make an estate
conditional al^o, but then they must have other words joined with them, and
added to them in the close of the condition, as that then the grantor shall
reenter, or that then the estate shall be void, or the like. And therefore if A
grant lands to B, To have and to hold to him and his heirs, and if, or but if
it happen the said B do not pay to A ten pound at Easter, without more words,
this is no good condition, but if these or such like words be added, that then
it shall be lawful for A to reenter, then it will be a good condition.

But here note that these words Proviso, Ita quod, and sub condition, Co.
super Litt. 146. Co. 2. 70. Dier 152. 311. Litt. Bro. 256. Dier 6. 222. Plow.
136. 5 H. 7. 7. Perk. Sect. 732.
albeit they be the most proper words to make conditions, yet do they not
always make the estate by the deed to be conditional, but sometimes do serve
for other purposes; for the word Proviso has diverse operations besides; for
sometimes it does serve for, and work a qualification or limitation, and
sometimes it does serve to make and work a covenant only. And then only (being
inserted amongst the covenants of the deed) it does make the estate
conditional when there are these things in the case. 1. When the clause
wherein it is has no dependence upon any other sentence in the deed, nor does
participate with it, but stands originally by and of it self. 2. When it is
compulsory to the feoffee, donee, etc. 3. When it comes on the part, and by the
words of the feoffor, donor, lessor, etc. 4. When it is applied to the estate,
and not to some other matter, as if one grant a Manor with an Advowson
appendant, and after the Habendum and reservation of rent amongst the
covenants, there is this clause inserted [Provided that the grantee shall
regrant the Advowson for the life of the grantor] this is a good condition. And
thus it may be also a condition and a covenant: as if the words run thus,
Provided always, and the feoffee etc. does covenant etc. that neither he nor
his heirs shall do such an act, this is both a condition and a covenant. But
if the clause have dependence on another clause of the deed, or be the words
of the feoffee etc. to compel the feoffor to do something, then is it not a
condition but a covenant only, as if there be in the deed a covenant that the
lessee shall skowre the ditches, and Covenant.
then these words follow [Provided that the lessor shall carry away the earth.]
Or there is a covenant that the lessee shall repair the houses, and then these
words follow [Provided that the lessor do provide timber.] So if this clause
be applied to some other thing, and not to the thing granted, then is it no
condition, as if a lease of land be made rendering rent at B, provided that if
such a thing happen, it shall be paid at C; this does not make the estate
conditional. Or a lease is made for years without impeachment of waste,
proviso quod non prosternet domus voluntary; in this case howsoever this does
make the privilege, yet does it not make the estate conditional. Or a lease
is made for years rendering rent, provided that the lessor shall not distrain
for the rent* in this case this is a good condition, but not annexed to the
estate. So if in a deed of bargain and sale of land after the Habendum, there
are these Dier 318.
words, viz, upon these conditions following, viz. that if the vendor pay the
vendee twenty pound at Easter, and enfeoffe him of a meadow called S before
Whitsontide, that the bargain shall be void. Provided nevertheless that the
bargainer shall hold the land fortwenty years without the let of the bargainee;
it seems this Provided in this case does not make a condition. So if a lease
be 27 H. 8. 15. B^o. Condition 7.
made of a house, and amongst the covenants these words are inserted, [Provided
also that if the lessor will dwell upon it, or keep it in his hands, then the
lessee, his executors and assigns does covenant upon one years warning to
remove and give place to the lessor this lease notwithstanding;] it seems this
is no condition but a covenant only. C^^ia pasche 14 Jac. Br. in the case of
Muddy. Co. super Litt.
If a lease be made, provided that if the rent be behind, without any more
words; this is no good condition.

The word si also does not always make a condition, for sometimes it makes a
limitation, as when a lease is made for years if I S shall live so long.

There are other words also that in the Kings grant, in last Wills Co. super
Litt. 236, 237. Doct. and Stud. 122. Dier 138. Plow. 142. 7 H. 4. 22. Co. super
Litt. 204. Co. 10. 42. Dier 318. Doct. and Stu. 34.
and Testaments, and other special cases do make conditions, as ea
intention, ad effectum, propositum, intentionem, paying, and the like. So that
if one devise his land to I S, ea intention etc. that he shall pay to W S
ten pound, or paying, or so as he pay to W S ten pound, or to sell etc.
these are good conditions. But these words regularly do not make a condition
when they are used in deeds. And therefore if one make a feoffment in fee ea
intention, ad effectum etc. that the feoffee shall do, or not do such an
act; these words do not make the estate conditional, but it is absolute
notwithstanding. And yet perhaps these words being conjoined with some others
may make a condition, as if lands be granted ea intention quod si defecerit
etc. tunc quod reintrabit, or the like.

Also conditions are sometimes made especially in estates and leases Doct. and
Stu. ^4. Dier 6. 91. 63. 92.
for years, without any of these formal words when the apparent intent of the
lessor is to make the estate conditional, albeit the words be not used as the
words of the lessor, but as the words of the lessee, or indefinitely of
neither. And therefore it has been said, That if an Indenture be made between
A and B thus: It is agreed and covenanted between the parties aforesaid, that B
shall have the land for years, and that he shall not alien it; that this
estate is conditional. But it seems this is not law. But if this clause be
inserted amongst other covenants, viz. If the lessee hinder the lessor to fell,
cut, and carry away the trees upon the lands devised, that the lessor may
reenter and the lease shall be void; this is a good condition, and so it has
been adjudged in the case of Haward and Fulcher, Hill. 3. Car' B. R. And if a
lessee for years do covenant in his lease, that if he, his executors, or
assigns, shall alien, that it shall be lawful for the lessor to reenter; it
seems this is a good condition, and not a covenant only. And if a lease for
years be made, and this clause is inserted in the deed, It is agreed between
the parties that if the lessee do not pay 10 pound to the lessor at Easter,
that from thenceforth the lease shall be void; this is a good condition. And
if a lease be made with this clause inserted in the deed, it is agreed that
whosoever shall have the estate or interest, that he or they shall find
sureties within the year for the rent, otherwise the estate shall cease; it
seems this is a good condition. And if a lease for years be made with this
clause inserted, Dier 66. 65. Curia Mich. 37, 38. Eliz. B. R.
And that it shall not be lawful for the lessee to alien without license of
the lessor, under pain of forfeiture; this is a good condition. And if a lease
for years be made of a house, with this clause inserted in the deed, And the
lessee shall continually dwell upon Dier 79. 27. Co. super Litt. 204.
the same house upon pain of forfeiture of the said term; this is a good
condition. And if in a lease for years the lessee covenant to Plow. 132.
pay so much rent, and then these words are inserted, And if it shall happen
the said yearly rent etc. then the lessee does covenant and grant etc. that the
lease shall be void; it seems this is a good condition, and so has it been
ever taken as was said by Just. Dodridge, Hill. 3. Car'. And in all these cases
the estate is conditional. But in cases of feoffments in fee, gifts in tail,
and leases for Co. super Litt. 204. Doct. and St. 94. Dier 65. 138.
life, it seems words penned in this manner will not make conditions, but that
in these cases the precise and formal words of a condition are requisite. And
therefore that if a feoffment be made by deed, and therein is inserted this
clause, That it is agreed, or that the feoffee does covenant that if the
feoffor do such an act, that the feoffor shall reenter; this is no condition,
nor the estate hereby made conditional. And yet see Perk. Sect. 744.

If one make a lease for years on condition to pay rent at four feasts, and
after there is a clause in the deed. And if the rent shall Dier 348.
be behind, etc. that he shall distrain; this clause does not take away the
condition, but the same does continue and the estate is conditional still. See
more in the next question.

In the making of e^ates the cause is regarded. And in case of Co. super Litt.
204.
the grant of lands or tenements, causa does sometimes make a condition, as if
a woman give lands to a man and his heirs, causa man imonii praelocuti; in this
case if she either mary the man, or the man refuse to mary her, she shall have
the land again to her and her heirs. But of the other side, if a man give land
to a woman and to her heirs causa matrimonii praelocuti, though he mary her, or
the woman refuse, he shall not have the lands again to him and his heirs. And
in the case of a grant executorie the word [pro] may make a condition. And
therefore if a man grant me an Annuity pro una acra Co. super Litt. 204. Co.
10. 42. Plow. 141. 9 Ed. 4. 19. 15 Ed. 4. 2. Dier 6.
terre, or pro decimis etc. or if he grant me an Annuity for a way, or a
gutter through my ground, this is conditional, and if he be disturbed in the
way, acre of land, tithes, or gutter, he may refuse to pay the Annuity. So if
an Annuity be granted to an Officer for the executing of his office, or pro
consilio impendendo, if the grantee do not execute the office, or give
counsel, etc. the Annuity shall cease. But if one grant me Tithes or an
Annuity, and I grant an Annuity for these Tithes, or grant to give counsel for
the Annuity; it seems the grants that are in this manner are not conditional,
but absolute. So if I pro consilio etc. or pro una acra terre etc. make a
feoffment in fee, or lease for life of another acre, these estates are not
conditional. And if one devise land to be sold by his executors, and Dier 7.
127. See Testament.
to be distributed for his soul; by this it seems the estate or power of
Testament.
the executors is conditional. So if one devise his land to find a Preacher
or a Chaplain. But otherwise it seems it is of land so conveyed by deed in a
man's life time. And if a feoffement be made of Plow. 141. 142,
land ad erudiendum filium; some have said this estate is conditional.

The most apt and proper words to make a limitation of an estate Co. super
Litt. 234, 235. Co. 10. 42. Plow. 413. Litt. Sect. 90. Dier 290.
Limitation.
are Quamdiu, Dummodo, Dum, Quousque, Si, and such like. And therefore if A
grant lands to B, To have and to hold to him and his heirs, until B go to
Rome, or until he be promoted to a Benefice, or until B pay to A, or A pay to
B twenty pound, or so long as I S shall live, or if A grant lands to B, To have
and to hold to him, his executors, etc. if I S and I D shall live so long. Or
if A grant lands to B, To have and to hold to him for the life of B, So that B
pay 20 pound to A at Easter following; these are not conditional, but limited
to estates. So if A grant lands to B To have and to hold to him for so long as
he shall keep himself a widower, or dum sola fuit, or durante viduitate, if the
grantee be a widow, these are good limited estates, but these words do not
make the estates to be conditional.

If the words in the close or conclusion of a condition be thus, Dier 125.
Plow. 159. Perk. Sect. 740.
That the land shall return to the feoffor, etc. or that he shall take it
again and turn it to his own profit, or that the land shall revert, or that the
feoffor shall recipere the land; these are either of them good words in a
condition to give a reentry, as good as the word [reenter] and by these words
the estate will be made conditional.

The tenant by the courtesy, the tenant in tail after the possibility Co super
Lit. 233, 234. Co. 8. 44.
of issue extinct, the tenant in dower, the tenant for life, the tenant 6. What
shall be said a condition in law. And when an estate shall be subject to such
a condition.
for years, by Statute, or Elegit, Guardian, etc. do hold their estates
subject to a condition in law, so that if either of them alien his land in fee,
or claim a greater estate in a court of record then his own, he does forfeit
his estate, and he in remainder or reversion may enter, and if such a tenant
do waste, he in reversion shall recover the place wasted. The tenant in
feesimple does hold his estate subject to a condition in law, so that if he
alien his land in Mortmain, he does forfeit it, and the Lord may enter upon
him. So also he that does take land in exchange does hold it under a condition
in law, viz. that if the land he give in exchange for that land be recovered
from him that has it, that he shall enter upon his own land again. Also every
officer that has to do in the administration of Justice, all Keepers of
Parks, Stewards, Beadles, Bailiffes, and such like, hold their offices under a
condition in law; so that if they do not duly execute it, and do all that
thereunto does appertain, they may forfeit them, and the grantor may put them
out. In quo quis delinquit in eo est de jure puniendus.

To every good condition is required an external form. i. words 7. What shall
be said a good condition in deed or limitation in his original creation. And
what not. 1. For the manner, and frame, and order of making of it.
to declare an intent in the party to have the estate conditional, as in the
cases before. And an internal form. i. such matter as whereof a condition may
be made.

As to things executed, the condition must be made and annexed Perk. Sect. 717.
Co. 1. 113. Plow. 133. Co. super Litt. 146 217. Co. 2. 7^
to the estate at the time of the making of it; but as to things executory, it
may be made afterward. And if the condition be made in another deed, and not
the same deed wherein the estate is made, if it be delivered at the same time
it is as good as if it were contained in the same deed. And therefore if a man
make a feoffment, lease, or the like, by one deed absolute, and at the same
time make another deed of defeasance or condition, and deliver both together,
this is a good condition, and will make the estate conditional. But if the
defeasance be sealed and delivered before, or after the deed, contra. And
therefore if one make an absolute feoffement in fee, and before or after the
sealing or delivery of that deed the feoffor declare himself by deed: or the
feoffor and feoffee agree by deed that the estate made before, or to be made
after, shall be conditional, yet this is not conditional. And yet if an
Annuity be granted absolutely by one deed, and after the grantee grant to the
grantor, that if the grantor do such a thing, the Annuity shall cease: in this
case the Annuity is conditional.

A condition may be annexed to an estate by way of use, as if a Co. 146. Hill.
40. Jac. B. R. Warners case. Co 1. 112. Albanies case.
feoffment be made to A, to the use of B, and his heirs, on condition that B
shall pay to the feoffor twenty pound such a day; this is a good condition. So
if one covenant to stand seized of lands to the use of B and his heirs, on
condition that if he pay him ten pound, the use shall be void, or the like.
Also a condition may be Dier 1^6, 348.
annexed to an estate created by Will, as if one devise land to I S for his
life, Provided that he pay ten pound yearly to I D; this is a good condition.
Whereof see in Testament.

A rent, or any such like thing may be granted on condition, that Co. 8. 17. 24
^d. 3. 29.
if such a thing be or be not done, the rent shall cease for a time, and then
revive again, and this condition is good. But in case of land it is otherwise,
for that cannot be granted after this manner. Also a condition to make an
estate void for a part of the time is not good. And therefore if a feoffment
be on condition, that upon Co. 1. 86. Perk. Sect. 718. Co. 4. 121. Dier 6*
such a contingent the feoffor shall enter and have the land for a time, or the
estate shall be void for a part of the time; or make a lease for ten years,
provided that upon such a contingent it shall be void for five years; these
conditions are not good. And yet if a feoffment be made of two acres, provided
that upon such a contingent the estate shall be void as to one acre only;
this is a good condition.

A condition that a stranger, or the heir of the feoffor shall do Co. super
Litt. 214. Doct. and Stud. 94. 159. 100. Co. super Litt. 379. Co. 1. 84. Dier
33. 21 H. 7. 11. Dier 4. Co. 8. 95.
an act is good, as if a feoffment be made to I S on condition that I D shall
pay to the feoffor ten pound at Easter next; or if a feoffment be made on
condition that if the heir of the feoffor pay twenty shillings to the feoffee,
that the feoffor and his heirs shall reenter. But a condition to give a
stranger a reentry is void so far forth. And therefore if an estate be made
upon condition, that upon such a contingent a stranger shall enter, or the
estate shall cease, and another shall have it; howsoever this may be so drawn,
as it may be a good condition to give him his heirs etc. that does make the
estate an entry, yet it cannot be good to give the estate or the entry to the
stranger. So if a feoffment be made on condition that upon such a contingent
the feoffor and a stranger shall enter; this is not good to give an entry to
the stranger, but it is good to give the feoffor a reentry. And yet by will a
man may devise a term after this manner.

If a man enfeoffe another, upon condition that he and his heirs Co. super
Litt. 213.
shall render to a stranger and his heirs a yearly rent of twenty shillings,
etc. and if he fail of payment thereof, that the feoffor shall reenter;
albeit this as a reservation of rent is merely void, and the condition that
does call it a rent, is merely mistaken, yet the condition is good, and ut res
valeat the words shall be taken contrary to their proper sense.

If I enfeoffe I S of land on condition that if I D give to him ten Perk. Sect.
798.
pound, or go to Rome before such a day etc. that then the feoffee shall pay
to me ten pound etc. this is a good condition.

If a feoffment be made to one and his heirs, on condition that if Co. super
Litt. 207.
the feoffee pay to the feoffor ten pound, he shall have the fee of land; this
is not a good condition. But if he say further, And if he fail to pay that, the
feoffor shall reenter, this is good.

If a gift in tail be made to a man and the heirs of his body, and Co. super
Litt. 224.
if he die without heirs of his body, that then the donor and his heirs shall
reenter; this is a void condition, for when the issues fail, the estate is at
an end.

Conditions that are so penned, as they are insensible and altogether Muddy and
Gardners case. Adjudge pasche 14. Jac. B. R. Co. 6. 41.
uncertain are void: as if one make a lease on condition that if the rent be
behind to restrain, and if there be not sufficient, the ground to enter into
the premises; this condition is void for insensibility, and the estate is
absolute. Et sic de similibus.

A condition to enlarge or increase an estate may be good, as if Co. 8. 75.
Plow. 477. 481. Litt. Sect. 350. Perk. Sect. 710. Plow. 135. 10 Ass. pl. 15.
Perk. Sect. 745. 707. Plow. 25. Litt. Sect. 707. 350. Plow. 272* 482, 483. 4 H.
7. 4. See more in the Lord Staffords case, Co. 8. 73.
To enlarge an estate.
a gift be made in tail, or a lease be made for life or years, on condition
that if such an act be done or not done, the lessee shall have the land to him
and his heirs, as if one make a lease for life to one, and if the lessor die
without heir of his body, then he does grant the land to the lessee and his
heirs for ever. Or if land be granted to a man for 5 years, on condition that
if the grantee pay to the grantor within the two first years ten pound, then
that he shall have the ^eesimple, otherwise that he shall have the land but for
five years, and livery of seisin be made according to the deed; this is a good
condition, and by this upon the performance of the condition the feesimple will
pass. So if one grant land for five years rendering rent, and that if the
lessee will hold it over to him and his heirs, that he shall pay twenty pound
rent; this is a good condition, and if be pay the rent, he shall have the
feesimple. So if a man make a lease for years, and at the same time for the
surety of the term to the lessee makes a feoffment to him upon condition that
if he be disturbed in his term, he shall have the feesimple of the land, and
deliver both these deeds at one time, and give livery of seisin accordingly;
this is a good condition. So if a lease for life be made upon condition, that
if the lessor or his heirs pay to B or his heirs, ten pound at a certain day,
that then the lessor may reenter, and if he do not pay it at that time, and
the lessee pay to the lessor or his heirs ten pound at a certain day, after the
former day, that then the lessee shall have the land to him and his heirs for
ever; this is a good condition. But in all cases where these kind of conditions
are good to make the increased estate good, there must be these things in the
case. 1. There must be a precedent particular estate as an estate in tail for
life, or years, for a foundation to erect the subsequent estate upon, and that
first estate also must be certain and irrevocable, not upon contingency, or
with power of revocation. 2. The privity must remain until the time of the
performance of the condition, for if the donee or lessee do grant away the
first estate, the condition cannot afterward be performed to effect and
produce the increasing estate. 3. The subsequent estate must vest ^o instanti,
when the contingency upon which the condition depende^h, shall happen or never.
4. The first and second estate must take effect by one and the same deed, or
else by two deeds delivered at the same time, for quae incontinenti fiunt
i^esse videntur. 5. The condition upon which the increase is, must be possible
and lawful, for upon an impossible condition it cannot, and upon an unlawful
condition it shall not increase.

If one make a lease for life, provided that if the lessee die within Co. 1.
155. Dier 150.
sixty years, that his executors shall have the land for so many of the sixty
years as shall be to come at the time of his death; this is no good condition
to make the estate to increase, but it may be a Covenant. And if a lease for
years be made, on condition that Covenant.
Co. 1. 84.
if the lessor sell the reversion of the same land, the lessee shall have the
fee of it; this is no good condition to increase the estate. And a possibility
cannot decrease upon a possibility, as a lease for years Co. 8. 75.
to a lease for life by one contingent, and the lease for life to a feesimple
by another. And if a lease be made to a man and a woman for Co. super Litt. 218.
their lives, on condition that which of them two shall first mary that one
shall have the fee and they intermary; in this case neither of them shall have
the fee for incertainty.

If a man make a lease for life, and add this condition, that if To ^bridge an
estate.
Co. super Litt. 218. 50 Ed. 3. 27.
the lessee within one year do not pay twenty shillings, that he shall have
but a term of two years, and he do not pay the 20 s. by this his lease for
life is gone, and he has now but a lease for two years.

If a lease be made, on condition that if a stranger dislike it, or be 2. For
the matter and substance of it.
1 H. 8. 13.
discontented with it, that the lease shall be void; this is a good condition.

If a lease be made, on condition that if the lessee be outlawed, the Hill. 6.
Jac. B. R. Curia.
lease shall be void; it seems this is a good condition.

If a feoffment be made, on condition that if the feoffee commit Pre^og^ive.
Trin. 3 E. 6. per Curiam.
treason, that the feoffor shall reenter; in this case the condition is vain,
for if the feoffor enter, his entry is not lawful, for the King is entitled,
and his title shall be preferred.

No condition or limitation, be it by act executed, limitation of a Testament.
Co. 1. 83. 6. 43. Co. 9. 128.
use, or by devise, or last Will, that does contain in it matter repugnant, and
tending to the utter subversion of the estate, or matter

If a feoffment or other conveyance be made of land, or a grant of Repugnant
conditions. To restrain Alienation,
Co. super Litt. 223.
rent etc. in feesimple by deed or will, upon condition that the feoffee or
grantee shall not alien to certain persons, as to I S, or to I S and W S; this
is a good condition. So if one make a feoffment in fee of land, on condition
that the feoffee shall not alien it in Mortmain; this is a good condition. So
if A be seized in fee of black acre, and B does infeoffe A of white acre in
fee, on condition that he shall not alien black acre; this is a good condition.
But if the condition be that the feoffee or grantee shall not alien the thing
granted to any person whatsoever, or that if he do alien to any person, that
he shall pay a fine to the feoffor; these conditions are void in the case of a
common person as repugnant to the estate. But in case of the King, such
conditions are good. And in the cases of a common P^erogative.
person also the alienation is good until it be avoided by the feoffor. And in
Pasc. 19 Jac. B. R. it was held by Just. Dodridge and Chamberlain, that if a
feoffment be on condition that if the feoffee alien, he Brag and Tanners case.
shall pay 10 l. to the feoffor; that this is a good condition: but Chapter Just.
and Just. Haughton held the contrary, for then this shall be a circumvention of
the law. If a gift had been made to an Abbot, and his successors, on condition
not to alien, this had been a good condition. Doct. and St. 124.


If one make a feoffment of land to an infant, on condition he shall not alien
to any person; this is a good condition during the Co. super Litt. 224. 10 H.
7. 11. 13 H. 7. 23. Co. 10. 30. Perk. Sect. 739. 21 H. 6. 33.
minority of the infant, but not afterward. In like manner as if one make a
feoffment to a husband and wife, on condition they shall not alien; this
condition to some intent is good, i. to restrain alienation by feoffment or
deed, and to some intent repugnant and void, i. to restrain alienation by fine,
for that is lawful. So if a gift be made in tail, on condition that the tenant
in tail may alien for the profit of his issues; this is a good condition. And
so if land be given in tail, upon condition that the tenant in tail or his
heirs shall not alien in feesimple, feetail, nor for the term of any others
life, but for their own lives; this condition is good. But if lands be given in
tail on condition, that the tenant in tail, or his heirs in tail shall not
suffer a common recovery, levy a fine with Proclamations according to the
Statutes of 4 H. 7. and 32 H. 8. to bar the issues, or on condition that he
shall not make copyhold estates of copyhold land, according to the custom of
the place, or make leases according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. ca. 28. these
conditions are held to be repugnant, and for that cause void. And yet see, for
the last of these cases the opinion in Co. super Litt. 223. to be contrary, and
that a condition to restrain the making of such leases is good; for this power
is not incident Dier 48. Co. 6. 43.
to the estate, but given to him collaterally by the Statute, and Quilibet
potest renunciare juri pro seintroducto. But tota curia in Mary Portingtons
case is against him. If a man make a gift in tail to A, the remainder to him
and his heirs, on condition that he shall not Co. super Litt. idem Dier 227.
alien; this condition as to the estate tail is good, and void as to the other.
And therefore if an alienation be, he shall defeat it only as to the estate
tail. And if a man make a gift in tail, on condition that Co. 6. 43.
the donee or his heirs shall not alien; this is a good condition to some
intents, and void to other, and therefore if he make a feoffment in fee, or any
other estate by which the reversion is discontinued tortiously, the donor shall
enter, otherwise if he suffer a common recovery. And a gift in tail, on
condition that the tenant in tail shall not make a lease for his own life, is
not a good condition, by Co. 6. 43. against Co. super Litt. 223. If one seized
in fee of land, and Co. 6. 43. 4. 84. super Litt. 223.
make a lease of it for years or life, on condition that the lessee shall not
alien the land leased, or any part thereof during the term, or on condition
that he shall not alien it, or any part of it, during the term without license
of the lessor; these are good conditions. So if one be seized in fee of a
Manor, and he make a lease of years of it to I S, on condition that he shall
not make voluntary estates by copy; this is a good condition. But in a
feoffment in fee such a condition is repugnant and void. And if one be
possessed of a lease for years, or of a house, or of any other chattel real or
personal, and he give or sell all his interest therein, upon condition that
the donee or vendee shall not alien the same; this condition is void for
repugnancy, and the gift or sale is absolute.

If one make a feoffment of land in fee, on condition that the feoffor Co. 2.
72. Dier 318.
shall retain the land for twenty years without interruption; it seems this is
a good condition and not repugnant.

If I grant land to another for life, if it shall please me so long to Dier 94.
suffer him; it seems this condition is repugnant and void.

If a feoffment be made of land in fee, on condition that the feoffee Co. 10.
39. super Litt. 206. Plow. 77. 133. 21 H. 7. 8. 8 H. 7. 10. Perk. Sect. 731.
shall not enjoy the land, or shall not take the profits of the land, or on
condition that the heir of the feoffee shall not inherit the land, or
condition that the feoffee shall not do wast, or condition that his wife shall
not be endowed; in all these and the like cases the condition is void as
repugnant to the estate.

If a gift in tail be made, on condition that the donee or his issues Co. 6.
41. 1. 84. super Litt. 224.
shall not take the profits of the land, or on condition that if the donee die,
his estate shall go unto another, or on condition that their wives shall not be
endowed, or on condition that they shall not do wast, or on condition that
warranty and assets or a collateral warranty shall not bar the issues in tail;
all these conditions are repugnant and void.

If lands be given or granted to two and their heirs, on condition Co. 1. 84.
that the survivor shall have the whole notwithstanding partition, or on
condition that the survivor shall not have the whole albeit there be no
severance; these conditions are repugnant and void.

If one make a lease for life, on condition that the lessee shall not Perk.
^ol. 141.
do fealty; this condition is not good.

If lands be given to one and the heirs males of his body, provided Co. super
Litt. 204.
that if he die without heirs females of his body, that the donor shall
reenter; this condition is repugnant and void.

If one have land in possession, or reversion, and he grant a rent Co. super
Litt. 146. 10 H. 7. 8. Co. 6. 41. 5 H. 7. 7. 7 H. 6. 44. Perk. Sect. 732.
out of it, on condition that the grant shall not charge the person of the
grantor; this is a good condition, and not repugnant. But if a man grant a bare
annuity, or grant a rent charge out of another man's land with such a condition,
or if one grant a rent charge, on condition that the grantee shall not
distrain, nor charge the person of the grantor, or if one grant a rent out of
land, on condition that the land shall not be charged with it; all these
conditions are repugnant and void. So if two grant a rent charge out of land,
provided that it shall not extend to one of them; this condition is repugnant
and void.

If a man seized in fee of land make a lease for years rendering rent, Perk.
Sect. 733.
and after the lessee makes a lease to the lessor of other land, on condition
that he shall not distrain for his rent in the former lease made to this
lessee; this is a good condition, and not repugnant.

If one make a feoffment in fee, or lease for life, with warranty, on Perk.
Sect. 734. Dier 47.
condition that the feoffee or lessee shall not vouch to warrant, nor recover
in value, or if the lease be made without impeachment of wast, on condition
that if the lessee do wast the lessor shall reenter; these are good
conditions, and not repugnant.

All conditions annexed to estates being compulsory, to compel a Co. super
Litt. 223, 224. 207. Perk. Sect. 722, 723.
Conditions against Law.
man to do any thing that is in its nature good, or indifferent, or being
restrictive, to restrain or forbid the doing of any thing which in its nature
is malum in se, as to kill a man, or the like, or malum prohibitum, being a
thing forbidden by any Statute, or the like; all such conditions are good, and
may stand with the estates. But if the matter of the condition tend to provoke
or further the doing of some unlawful act, or to restrain or forbid a man the
doing of his duty; the condition for the most part is void. And therefore if
lands be given or granted to a man, upon condition that he shall kill a man, or
upon condition that he shall burn his neighbors house, or upon condition that
he shall forswear himself, or upon condition that he shall save and keep
harmless the grantor whatsoever he shall do, or that if he do not these
things, the grant shall be void; this condition is void. Or if lands be given
or granted to an officer, upon condition that he shall not duly execute his
office; this condition is against law, and void^ Et sic de similibus. So if a
gift be made in tail, upon condition that the donee shall discontinue, or one
give or grant Perk. Sect. 727.
land, on condition that the grantee shall be a forestaller against the
Statutes; these and such like conditions are void. And hereupon it Co. 1. 24.
6. 43.
is, that conditions annexed to land, that the profits thereof shall be
employed to superstitious uses are void. And hence also it is that Dier 343.
Co. super Litt. 206.
such conditions as are against the liberty of law, as that a man shall not
mary, or the like, are void. And hence also such as are against the public
good. And therefore it seems if one grant his land to I S, Co. 11. 53. 7 Ed. 3.
65.
on condition that he (being a husbandman) shall not sow his errable land; this
condition is void. And in all these cases if the condition Perk. Sect. 722. 725.
be subsequent to the estate, the condition only is void, and the estate good
and absolute; if the condition be precedent, the condition and estate both are
void, for an estate can neither commence nor increase upon an unlawful
condition.

Co. 6. 41. super Litt. 207. 219. 206. Dier 252. 262. Plow. 152. Perk. Sect.
935. 729. Plow. 272. 286. Co. 1. 84. super Litt. 207.
All conditions annexed to estates that contain in them matter Conditions
impossible.
at the time of making of them impossible to be done are void. And therefore if
one give or grant land on condition, that a man shall go to Rome in three days,
or condition that a man shall infeoffe a corporation, when there is none such,
or if one give lands in tail, on condition that the estate shall cease, as if
the tenant in tail be dead, or if one grant lands, on condition that a man
shall infeoffe his wife; all these and such like conditions are void. And in
these cases also if the condition be subsequent, the condition is void only,
and the estate is absolute, and if the condition be precedent, the condition
and the estate both are void, for an estate can neither commence nor increase
upon an impossible condition. And if the thing to be done by the condition be
possible at the time of the making of the condition, and do afterward by the
act of God become impossible; the condition is become void, and the estate
absolute, as if a feoffment be made, on condition that the feoffee shall before
Easter following enfeoffe the feoffor, and the feoffee die before the day, or
on condition that the feoffee shall appear in such a Court before or at Easter,
and he die before the time; in these cases the condition is gone, and the
estate is absolute.

And the same Law is for the most part of Limitations, if they be Limitation.
Co. 6. 41. 1. 84.
repugnant, impossible, or against Law, as is before showed to be of
Conditions. See more in the next division following.

It is a general rule, That such conditions annexed to estates as 8. How a
condition in deed or a limitation shall be taken and expounded. And how it must
and ought to be performed. 1. In respect of persons.
Co. 8. 90. super Litt. 219. 27 H. 8. 14.
go in defeasance, and tend to the destruction of the estate being odious to
the Law, are taken strictly, and shall not be extended beyond their words,
unless it be in some special cases. And therefore if a lease be made, on
condition that if such a thing be not done, the lessor [without any words of
heirs, executors etc.] shall reenter and avoid it; in this case regularly the
heir, executor etc. shall not take advantage of this condition. So if one make
a lease for years of a house, on condition that if the lessor shall be minded
to dwell in the house, and shall give notice to the lessee, that he shall
depart; in this case if the lessor die, his heir, executor, etc. shall not
have the like advantage and power as the lessor himself, for the condition
shall not be extended to them. And hence it is, that if a lease for years be
made, on condition that the lessee shall Not to alien.
Dier 66.
not alien without the license of the lessor; in this case the restraint shall
continue only during the lives of the lessor and lessee and no longer. And yet
this rule has an exception, for if a man mortgage Co. super Litt. 219.
his land to W, upon condition that if the mortgagor and I S pay 20 s. such a
day to the mortgagee, that then he shall reenter, and the mortgagor die before
the day; in this case I S may pay the money To pay money.
and perform the condition. But otherwise it is whiles the mortgagor does live,
for in that time I S alone without him may not tender it, and if he do, this
tender is no performance of the condition. And in case where a condition does
tend to create an estate Litt. Sect. 352. Co. super Litt. 219 Co. 8. 60.
there it shall have the most favorable exposition that may be, and therefore
in that case albeit the words be not satisfied, yet if the intent be satisfied,
it suffices. And therefore if one make To make an estate.
a feoffment in fee, on condition that the feoffee shall make an estate back
again in tail to the feoffor and his wife before such a day, and before that
day the feoffor die; in this case the condition shall be performed as near to
the intent as may be, and therefore if the condition be, that he shall make the
estate to them two Habendum to them and the heirs of their two bodies
engendered, the remainder to the right heirs of the feoffor, the estate shall be
made to the wife for life without impeachment of wast, the remainder to the
heirs of the body of the husband begotten on the wife. And if A enfeoffe B on
condition that B shall make an estate in frankmariage to C with such a one the
daughter of the feoffor; in this case albeit an estate in frankmariage may not
be made, yet an estate shall be made to them for their lives. Et sic de
similibus. Conditio beneficialis quae statim construit benign secundum
verborum intentionem est interpretanda, odiosa autem quae statum destruit
stricte secundum verborum proprietatem est accipienda.

In all cases where a time is set for the doing, or performance of Co. super
Litt. 209. 208. 219. Co. 2. 79. 6. 31. Litt. 353^ Plow. 30. Perk. Sect. 155.
779. 794 787. 793. 789. 788. 38 Ed. 3. 11. Dier 311.
2. In respect of time.
the matter contained in the condition, be it to pay money, make an estate, or
the like, it must be done at the time agreed upon, and set down in the
condition. And in cases where it is to be done before a time certain, it must
be done before that time, or else the condition is broken. But in all cases
where no time is set for the doing of the thing contained in the condition, be
it to pay money, make an estate, or the like, if the act to be done, be to be
done to the party that does make the estate, or be to be done to him and a
stranger, and be such a thing as is for the benefit of him that does make the
estate, and for his benefit only, there regularly the party that is to do the
thing shall have time to do it during his life, unless the party, feoffor,
etc. that does make the first estate, whereunto the condition is annexed, does
hasten the doing thereof by request: for if he request the doing thereof and
set no time, it must be done within a convenient time after that request; and
if he request and prefixe a time convenient when he does desire to have it
done, it must be done at that time; and in these cases the condition cannot be
broken without a request, so long as he to whom the estate upon condition is
made be living. And therefore To pay money. Testament.
in this case it is not like to a condition made by a Will, for if one devise
his land to I S, so as he pay the twenty pound to I D, the Testator does owe
him, and no time is set for the payment thereof; in this case he must pay it as
soon as it is demanded, or he does forfeit the land, and the heir may enter.
But if the thing to be done, be to be done to a stranger, and be for the profit
and benefit of a stranger only: as if a feoffment be made, on condition that
the feoffee shall To mary I S.
mary the daughter of the feoffor, or on condition that the feoffee shall
infeoffe a stranger, and no time is set for the doing hereof; in To infeoffe.
these cases the feoffee shall not have time during his life to do it, but he
must do it in a reasonable time, and that without any request at all, or else
he does break the condition. And in some special cases when the act to be done
is to be done to the party himself, the party shall not have time to do it
during his life, as if one grant land To grant an Advowson or a rent.
to I S, on condition that he shall grant an Advowson to the grantor for his
life, or on condition that he shall grant a rent charge to the grantor during
his life, to be paid at Michaelmas and our Lady day; in these cases the grant
of the Advowson must be before the Advowson fall, and the grant of the rent
must be before either of the days of payment come, and that without request,
else the condition is broken. And if the condition be that if I S do such an
Perk. Sect. 9. 798.
act, that then the feoffee shall pay ten pound to the feoffor, else To pay
money.
that the feoffor shall reenter, and no time is set when the feoffee must pay
this ten pound; in this case it seems the payment must be as soon as the same
act is done, and that without any request at all. And in case where the feoffee
etc. or a stranger be to do an Co. super Litt. 209.
act, and he alone is to do it, and it does nothing concern the feoffor etc.
as to go to Rome, or the like, there the feoffee etc. or stranger shall have
time during his life to do the thing, and it cannot be hastened by request.

If lands be granted, on condition that the grantee shall make a To make a
lease.
Co. super Litt. 220: 222.
lease for life of other lands to the grantor, the remainder to a stranger; in
this case the feoffee shall have all the time of his life to do it, if he be
not hastened by request. But if the condition be to make a gift in tail to a
stranger, the remainder to the feoffor; in this case it must be done in time
convenient without request.

If the King license his tenant to infeoffe A and B, so as they give the land
again to the feoffor, and the heirs males of his body, and he make a feoffment
accordingly; in this case it must be reconveyed before the death of the
feoffor, or else the condition is broken.

If A infeoffe B of black acre, on condition that if C infeoffe B Co. super
Litt. 208.
of white acre A shall reenter; in this case C shall have time to do To
infeoffe.
this during his life, if B do not hasten it by request.

If a lessee grant his estate to a stranger, on condition that the To ge^ the
good will of I S.
Perk. Sect. 795.
grantee do get the good will of the lessor, and no time is set when he shall
get his good will; it seems in this case he shall have time to get his good
will during the term, and that although he deny it at the first, yet if he
grant it afterward that this is sufficient.

When a time is set in certain for the payment of money, or the doing of any
other thing generally, neither agent nor patient are Litt. Sect. 342. Co. super
Litt. 213.
bound to a^^end any other time. And if the thing be to be done on a day
certain, but no hour of the day is set down wherein the same shall be done;
in this case they must attend such a distance of time before the Sun set, as
may be convenient to do that work in. And if the condition be to pay money at
a place certain, at any To pay money.
time during life; in this case the money may not be tendered at any time in the
place, in the absence of him that should receive it, but he that is to pay it
must give notice to the other party before hand what time he will tender it,
that the other may be ready to receive it. Or if at any time the parties hap to
meet at the place, a payment or tender then at that place is sufficient. And
the same law is for Obligation.
the most part in conditions of obligations.

In cases where a place is set down for the doing of the thing contained 3. In
respect of place.
Co. super Litt. 210, 211. 213. Litt. Sect. 343. 345. Bio. Condition ^0.
in the condition, there it must always be done at that place, unless by some
agreement made between the parties afterward another place be appointed,
otherwise the condition is not performed, and the parties are not bound to
attend in any other place. But in cases where there is no place set down for
the doing of the thing contained in the condition, if the thing to be done be a
corporal service, as to pay money, or any such like thing, the party that is
to do it must at his peril seek out the person to whom it is to be done, if
he be infra regnum Angliae: but if he be not within the kingdom, he is not
bound to seek him, and yet the condition is not broken. And if the thing to be
done be either local, i. such a thing as must be done in or at a place
certain, as the making of a feoffment of land, payment of rent, or the like; in
this case the To pay money.
thing must be done at that very place, and a tender of doing it in that place
is a sufficient performance of the condition; as for examples, If a feoffment
be made, on condition that the feoffee shall pay to the feoffor twenty pound on
Easter day at Dale, and the feoffee tender the twenty pound the same day at
Sale: And albeit the feoffor be at Sale, and he tender the twenty pound to his
person there the same day, yet this is no performance of the condition. And if
a feoffment be made in mortgage, on condition for the payment of money at a
day, and no place is set for the payment thereof; in this case the mortgagor
must seek the mortgagee and tender it to his person at his peril: and tender
of the money upon the land mortgaged, is not a sufficient performance of the
condition. And if a feoffment be made, on condition that the feoffee shall
infeoffe To infeoffe.
the feoffor of white acre in Dale; in this case the feoffment, or the tender
of it must be in Dale, and cannot be elsewhere, and a tender of it there is
sufficient to perform the condition. So if the condition To acknowledge
satisfaction.
be, that the feoffee shall in Easter Term next acknowledge satisfaction upon
a Judgment in the Kings Bench; this must be done there, and cannot be done
elsewhere. So if a feoffment in fee be made of white acre, rendering rent to
the feoffor and his heirs, on condition that if the rent be not paid, the
feoffment to be void, and no place is set for the payment of it; in this case
the feoffee is not To pay rent*
bound to tender his rent any where for the saving of the condition, but upon
the land, and a tender there is sufficient. And if a man make a feoffment in
fee, without any reservation of rent precedent in the deed, on condition that
the feoffee and his heirs shall render a yearly rent of twenty shillings a year
to the feoffor and his heirs, and if they fail, that the feoffor shall reenter;
in this case also it seems the payment or tender must be upon the land. But if
the condition be, that he shall ^ender twenty shillings a year to a stranger,
and his heirs; this is no rent, nor in the nature of a rent, and therefore in
this case the feoffee must tender it to the person of the stranger where he can
find him at the day, or else he does break the condition, and tender upon the
ground is not sufficient. But in these cases if the nature of the thing to be
done be such as will not admit of such a carriage from place to place to seek
out the person of the feoffor etc. there albeit the thing to be done be
corporal or transient, and not a local thing, yet that is to do it shall not
be bound to seek out the person of the other; as for example, If an estate be
made, on condition that the grantee shall To deliver wood or corn.
deliver twenty quarters of wheat, or twenty load of wood to the grantor at
such a time, and no place is set for the doing thereof; in this case the
grantee is not bound to carry the same about to seek the feoffor or grantor, as
he is bound to carry money, but before the day, the grantee is to know of the
grantor where he will appoint to receive it, and there it must be tendered. And
the like law is for the most part in conditions of obligations.

It is best therefore in all these cases, and herein he that is to be
Obligation. A Caveat.
the agent is to take care to have certainty of time and place set down in the
condition for the doing of the thing that is to be done, and the more certain
it is, the better it is for him.

If a lease be made, on condition that the lessee shall pay to the Per Just.
Bridgeman.
lessor all such sums of money as the lessor shall lay out in such a 4. In
respect of other matters. To pay money*
business; in this case the lessor must first tender to the lessee a note of
the charges before the lessee is bound to pay, and until this be done the
condition cannot be broken. And after a note is given also, he shall have some
reasonable time to provide the money. And if he tender him a note of more then
in truth he does lay out, the lessee if he know it, may pay so much as is laid
out, and he may refuse to pay any more.

If lands be granted, upon condition that A shall make an estate To make an
estate.
Co. 5. 22.
of lands at the charges of B; in this case A must do the first act, viz.
notify to B what assurance he will make before B is bound to tender the
charges.

If a feoffment be made, on condition that the feoffee shall give so To deliver
household stuff, or pay money.
Pasche 17. Jac. B. R.
much household stuff to the feoffor, or so much money for it as it shall be
rated at by two indifferent persons to this end to be chosen; it seems in this
case the election of the two men must be by the feoffee: but if the words be by
two persons to be indifferently chosen then the election shall be by both
parties, for in the first case the word Indifferent does go to the praising
not to the persons.

If a feoffement be made of a ground, on condition that the feoffee To cleanse
ditches.
27 H. 8. 1. Plow. Colthirsts case. 21.
shall ^ake the ditch^s, in this case if the feoffee do it once it is a
sufficient performance of the condition. And yet if a man grant a house for
life, on condition that the lessee shall dwell and be resident in the house
during the said term; in this case it is not sufficient To dwell in the house.
that he dwell in it once during the term, but must do so all the term or
else the condition is broken.

If an annuity be granted of ten marks per Annum to a man, on Perk. Sect.
804.
condition, or till he be promoted to a benefice by the grantor, and it is not
said of what value the benefice shall be, in this case it shall be taken for a
benefice of as great value, and of as good an estate as To give goods.
the Annuity is, otherwise the grantee may refuse it, and yet his Annuity shall
continue.

If a feoffment be made on condition that the feoffee shall give all Perk.
Sect. 742.
his goods si quae fuerint, or give al his Pikes in his pond si quae fuerint;
in this case the words shall be taken in the present tense, for the goods and
Pikes that are at the time of the grant. But if a feoffement be o^ condition
that the feoffee shall give all his goods in London si quae fuerint, that did
belong to I S, in this case the words shall be taken in the preterperfect tense.

If one make a lease of the Manor of Dale (wherein is a wood Haward and
Fulchers case. H^^. 3. Car. B. R.
Not to disturb the lessor in taking the wood.
called Dale wood) excepting all the woods and underwoods growing in Dale wood
and all the great trees growing elsewhere, and this is upon condition that if
the lessee shall disturb the lessor to cut and sell the wood and underwood
excepted the lease to be void; in this case it seems the condition shall
extend only to the wood and underwood in Dale wood and not to the trees
elsewhere: but if the words of the condition be [shall disturb etc. to cut
etc. the wood and underwood on the premisses] contra.

If one grant land rendering rent at the Feasts of S. Michaell and Dier 142.
To pay rent.
our Lady day or within a month after, on condition that if it be behind after
the Feasts and da^es limited by the space of eight weeks that the lease shall
be void; in this case the eight weeks shall be accounted from the month which
is the twenty eight day after the Feast.

If the condition be made in the copulative and consist of diverse 12 H. 7. 10.
Co. super Lit. 225. Perk. Sect. 746. Dier* 337. 372*
parts, every part must be observed or the condition will not be performed. But
when it is made in the disjunctive, if any part of it be observed it is a
sufficient performance of the condition. And therefore if a feoffement be made,
on condition to reinfeoffe and pay twenty pound and the feoffee do reinfeoffe
but not pay the twenty pound; in this case the condition is broken. But if the
condition be to reinfeoffe or pay twenty pound and the feoffee do one of them;
it is a good performance of the condition. And when it is made in the
copulative and disjunctive both, it shall be taken in the disjunctive only, as
if a lease be made to A and B his wife, on condition that the said A and B or
any child between them shall so long live; this shall be taken in this sense if
the husband, wife or child shall so long live, so that the lease shall not be
determined by the death of the husband or wife alone. If there be two provisoes
in two several indentures of conveyance of several Manors to A and B that if
the feoffor pay or tender twenty shillings to A and B or the heirs of A that
the Conveyance shall be void, and A die; in this case tender to B is not
sufficient, and it must be made to the heir of A and it must be twenty
shillings for every proviso: but otherwise it is of a collateral act.

If the words of a condition be thus, that upon such a contingent Co. 3. 64.
super Lit. 203, 204. Dier 6. 127. 11 H. 7. 21.
the party shall enter and retain the land until the thing be done etc. in
this case and by these words the estate is not determined as it is by these
words, [that the estate shall be void, or that the grantor shall r^enter, or the
like.] And in these words there is a difference also to be observed, for if the
words be, that upon such a contingent the estate shall cease and be void, and
it be a lease for years to which the condition is annexed, the estate is ipso
facto void without entry or claim and can never be affirmed afterward; but if
the words of the close of the condition be, that the feoffor, lessor, etc.
shall reenter, without any other words, albeit it be in a lease for years yet
the lease is not void until he has made an actual reentry. But in both cases
if the estate to be avoided be an estate in ^ee, or for life, it is only
voidable by the breach of the conditi^^, and must be made void by entry or
claim, and until this be ^one the grantor can make no new estate of the land.
But in the first case before the party shall retain the land and take the
profits of it in the nature of a pledge until the thing be done agreed upon in
the condition and then the other party shall have the land again. See more in
the next questions. And in Obligation Numb. 7. Covenant Numb. 6. 9. When and
how a Condition or Limitation shall be said to be performed. Or not. 1. When
the act is to be done be tween the parties themselves* To make an estate.


The words of a condition may be performed and not the intent, Co. 8. 90. Lit.
Sect. 352. Co. 3. 64. 282 2 H. 4. 11.
and the intent may be performed and not the words; and then for the most part
a condition is performed when the intent and meaning of it is observed. And
therefore if a feoffement be made, on condition that the feoffee or his heirs
shall make an estate to the feoffor and his wi^e in tail before such a day,
and before the day the husband die, and then he make an estate as near it as
he may viz. to the wife for life without impeachment of wast and after to the
heirs of the body of the husband; this is a good performance of the condition.
And if the condition be that the grantee Co. super Lit. 207.
shall make a feoffement of land; and he make a lease of the land first, and
then a release to the lessee and his heirs; this is tantamount and a good
performance of the condition.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that if the feoffor or his Co. super
Lit. 222. Perk. Sect. 802, 803.
heirs pay ten pound by a day the feoffement to be void, and the To pay
money.
feoffor before the day does commit treason and is executed and so dies
without heir, and after before the day the heir is restored, and he at the
day does pay the money; in this case this is a good performance notwithstanding
there was once a disability. So as if heretofore one had made a feoffement, on
condition to reinfeoffe by a day, and before the day the feoffee had entered
into Religion, and then had been dearaigned, and at the day had made the
feoffement; this had been a good performance of the condition.

If a feoffement be made, upon condition that if the feoffee shall Co. 5. 96.
and super Lit. 208. 207.
pay to the feoffor ten pound such a day, that then he shall have By and to
whom money shall be paid upon a cond^tion.
the land to him and his heirs, otherwise that the feoffor shall reenter, or if
it be made on condition that the feoffee shall pay ten pound to the feoffor
such a day; and before the day the feoffee sell the land; in this case the
seller or the buyer either of them may tender the money at the day, and this
will be a good performance of the condition, for he that has interest in the
land on the one side, or in the condition as party or privy on the other side
may tender and perform the condition to save the estate.

If lands be mortgaged, (or which is all one) if a feoffement be Lit. Sect.
534. 537. 15 H. 7. 2. Co. super Lit. 206.
made of lands on condition that if the mortgagor or feoffor pay ten pound to
the feoffee such a day that then the estate shall be void, and before the day
the mortgagor or feoffor die; in this case the heir or executor of the
feoffor, the Ordinary, the Guardian in Chivalry or Socage of the heir of the
feoffor, or any other by either of their commandment precedent or assent
subsequent may pay this money at the day, and payment or tender of it by either
of them at the day is a good performance of the condition. Lit. Bro. Sect. 12*
5.
And so also it seems is the law upon a devise of land to I S paying to
Testament.
I D twenty pound; if I S die his heir or executor may pay the twenty pound,
and this is a good performance of the condition. But in these cases if a
stranger of his own head without any such commandment or agreement pay the
ten pound; this will be no good performance of the condition. And yet perhaps
if the party Lit. Sect. 337
that is to pay it be an Idiot; the payment or tender by any one in his behalf
shall be a good performance of the condition. And if a feoffement be made, on
condition that if the feoffor pay ten pound to the feoffee that the estate
shall be void, and no time is set for the payment of this money, and the feoffor
die before any payment or tender made; in this case his heir cannot tender it
and so perform the condition.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that if the feoffor and Co. super Lit.
207. Bro. Condition 109.
I S pay ten pound such a day the feoffement to be void, and the feoffor die
before the day and I S alone pay it; this is a good performance of the
condition.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that if the feoffor pay to the feoffee
or his heirs ten pound such a day, and before the day Co. super Lit. 210. 5.
96 Dier 181. 101. Co. 6. 69. Lit. Sect. 339.
the feoffee does grant the land away to another; in this case the money may be
paid to the feoffee himself, or if he be dead to his heirs, and this payment
is a good performance of the condition. And if the words of the condition be
[That if he pay to the feoffee, his heirs or assigns etc.] in this case
payment to either of them is a good performance of the condition; so as if in
this case the feoffee make a feoffement over, it is in the election of the
first feoffor to pay the money to the first or second feoffee, and if the first
feoffee die, to pay it to his heir or the second feoffee: But payment to an
executor or administrator in this case is not a good performance. And yet if
the words of the condition be, that if he pay to the feoffee [without words,
heirs, executors etc.] ten pound such a day, in this case the payment may be
made to the executor or adminstrator of the feoffee after his death, and such a
payment is a sufficient performance of the condition: And if the words of the
condition be [that if the feoffor pay to the feoffee, his heirs, executors or
administrators etc.] in this case payment to either of them is a good
performance of the condition. But payment to an assignee in this case is not
good. And if the words be, that if he pay to the feoffee and his heirs etc. in
this case payment to his executors or to his assigns is not a good performance
of the condition. So that in all these cases it seems for the person to whom
payment is to be made the words of the condition are precisely to be pursued.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that if the feoffor shall To tender
money.
Pas. 9 Jac. 5. Sir Richard Lees case.
tender twelve pence to the feoffee such a day the feoffement to be void* and
afterward the feoffee is disseised of the land, and after the feoffor does
tender the twelve pence to the feoffee at the day; this is a good performance
of the condition.

If a feoffement be made to two men, on condition that they To reinfeoffe.
shall reinfeoffee the feoffor, or make a lease to him by a day, and before
Dier 69. 41 E. 3. 25.
the day one of them die, and the survivor does reinfeoffe, or make the lease;
this is a good performance of the condition. And so also it seems the law is
if both the feoffees be living, for by his own acceptance it seems he has
dispensed with the condition and so cannot enter for the breach of it.

If a feoffement be made on condition that the feoffee shall infeoffe Plow. 23.
3 H. 7. 4. 21 H. 6. 10*
the feoffor of the Manor of Dale by such a time, and before the time appointed
the feoffee does grant a rent charge out of the Manor to a stranger, and then
at the time appointed makes a feoffment of the Manor according to the
condition; in this case this is a good performance of the condition. But if in
this case the feoffee before the time appointed grant away to a stranger twenty
acres parcel of the Manor, and then does make a feoffement of the Manor
according to the condition; this is no good performance of the condition. And
if a feoffement be made on condition that the feoffees or lessees in trust of
such land shall grant an Annuity out of it, and some of them only do grant
this Annuity; this is no good performance of the condition.

If there be a feoffement made, upon condition that the feoffee 44 E. 3. 22.
To make a lease.
shall make a lease of land to the feoffor for life, the remainder to I S in
fee, and the feoffee make a lease to the feoffor for life, and after by another
deed does grant the reversion to I S, this is a good performance of the
condition.

If a feoffment be made upon condition that the feoffee shall purchase Perk.
Sect. 807, 808. 21 H. 6. 28. Dier. 15.
lands or tenements to the value of twenty pound per Annum, To purchase lands.
and he purchase a rent common, or any such like thing to that value; this is a
good performance of the condition. But if in this case the feoffee and another
purchase so much land together jointly; this is no good performance of the
condition. So if the feoffee alone purchase lands to the value of twenty pound
per Annum, and there is a rent issuing of it which must be deducted; this is no
good performance. And yet in these cases, if the stranger Jointenant release to
the feoffee all his right in the land, or the grantee of the rent release to
him the rent before the time of the performing of the condition the condition
is well performed in both cases. Tantum valet terra quantum vendi potest. And
if one make a feoffement Perk. Sect. 812.
in fee, on condition that if the feoffee purchase land to the value of twenty
shillings, the feoffement shall be void, and after the feoffee disseise another
man of land to that value: it is said that by this the condition is performed,
Sed quere. And that if he recover so much land in value in an action: that this
is no performance of the condition. Sed quere. For this seems to me a better
performance Payment.
of the condition then the former. To pay money. Tender.


If lands be granted, on condition to pay money, and the money Dier 181. Lit.
Sect. 334, 335. 338. Co. super Lit. 209.
is tendered according to the condition, but either no body is ready to receive
it, or it is refused: this is a good performance of the condition. And after a
man has once refused the money so tendered to him according to the condition,
he has no remedy in law ^o recover it except it be money lent upon a mortgage.
Terms of the law. tit. coin.
And if the payment be made part of it with counterfeit Coin, and the party
accept it and put it up, this is a good payment and consequently a good
performance of the condition. Co. super Lit. 212. Fitz. Bar 343.
And if at the day of payment the parties do account together, and he to whom
the money is to be paid being indebted to the other* that debt by agreement
Acceptance.
is allowed, and the residue is paid and accepted: this is a good performance
of the condition. Co. super Lit. 212.
So if the party that is to receive it accept and take new security by bond or
statute for the money: this is a good performance of the condition. Dier 45.
Co. 5. 96.
And so in most cases, when by a condition a thing is to be done one way, and
to be done to the party to the condition himself and not to a stranger, and he
does accept it another way: this is a good performance of the condition.
Vole^ti non fit injuria. But if the thing to be done be to be to a stranger,
and one that is no party to the condition, and it be done in any other manner,
and he accept thereof: this is no performance of the condition. And so also if
the time of doing the thing be past, as if one make a feoffement to me, on
condition that if he pay me ten pound such a day the feoffement shall be
Perk. Sect. 392.
void, and he does not pay me at the day, but does die, and after by agreement
between his heir and me me does pay me the ten pound, and I receive and
accept it, and thereupon I suffer him to enter and hold the land: in this case
the condition is not performed but I may enter upon him and out him
notwithstanding.

If the mortgagor pay the money according to the condition, and Adjudge Mich.
40. and 41 Eliz. B. R Powel. versus Bartholomew.
after the mortgagee deliver it to the mortgagor as his own money, the
condition is performed and the mortgage discharged notwithstanding.

If a feoffement be made to I S, on condition that if the feoffor pay to the
executors or administrators of I S ten pound the Co. 5. 96. super Lit. 209.
feoffement shall be void, and I S die, and the ten pound is paid to the
executors of I S according to the condition, but it is covinou^^y done. i.
there is a private agreement that the feoffor shall have all, or part of his
money again: this payment in this case is no good performance of the
condition, but that payment that must be a performance of a condition in this
case to fetch lands out of the hands of an heir must be real, full and
effectual.

If a lease be made, on condition that the lessee shall get the To get the good
will of I S.
14 H. 8. 17.
good will of I S and the lessor does come to I S first and ask his good will,
and he deny it him, and after when the lessee does ask it he does grant it
him; in this case the condition is performed. So if the condition be, that he
shall get his good will by such a day, and at the first being desired he
denies it, but afterward and before the day he does grant it. And yet if no
day be set, and he desire his good will and I S denies it and afterward he
does get his good will; it seems this is no performance of the condition.

If there be two things in the copulative to be done by the condition, Perk.
Sect. 746* See before.
both must be done, otherwise the condition will not be performed.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that if the feoffor and I S Co. super
Lit. 219.
pay ten pound at Michaelmas the feoffement shall be void, 2. When the act is
to be done by a stranger, to pay money. 3. When the act is to be done to a
stranger. To make an estate.
and before the day the feoffor die, and I S pay the money; this is a good
performance of the condition. But if the feoffor be living contra.

If a feoffement be made on condition to make an estate to a Plow. 133. Co. 3.
64.
stranger by a day, and before the day he die; in this case if an estate be
made as near the condition as may be it is sufficient.

Tender.
If a feoffement be made to I S on condition that he shall infeoffe Co. super
Lit. 209. 19 H. 6. 67. Perk. Sect. 815, 816. 2 E. 4. 2. 19 H. 6. 67.
I D and his heirs; and I S does tender the feoffement to I D and he does
refuse to take it; this is no performance of the condition in this case. But if
it be to be done to the feoffor himself contra. And so also it is, if the
condition be to make an estate tail, or any lesser estate to a stranger, and
he tender it and the stranger refuse it; this is no good performance of the
condition. And if a feoffement be made, on condition to reinfeoffe the feoffor
and his wife in tail the remainder to W in fee, and he tender it to the wife
only and not to him in remainder; this is no good performance of the condition.

And the same law for the most part is in conditions of obligations. See more
in Obligations at Numb. 9.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that the feoffee shall not Co. super
Lit. 222: Dier 45, 46.
10. What act shall be a breach of a Condition in deed. And when a condition in
deed shall be said to be broken. Or not.
infeoffe I S of the land, and the feoffee does make a feoffment to I S and I
D; this is a breach of the condition. And so also it is if the feoffee make a
feoffement to I D to the intent that he shall alien to I S. Quando aliquid
prohibetur fieri directo prohibetur and per obliquum. And yet if the feoffee in
the case before alien to I D and after he does alien to I S, this is no breach
of the condition. And if the condition be, that the feoffee shall not infeoffe
I S and he die, Not to alien.
and his heir enfeoffe I S, this is no breach of the condition.

If a lease for years be made, on condition that the lessee shall not Dier 45.
65.
assign, or alien, the term, or the land during his life without the license
of the lessor, and the lessee does give it by his will without license; this is
a breach of the condition and forfeiture of the estate. But if he make an
executor of his will only, this is no breach. And if the condition be that the
lessee shall not alien, and he die, and his executor alien, this is no breach
of the condition. And if the condition Per 3. Justices B. R. 3 Jac.
be that the lessee shall not alien but to his children, and the lessee by will
devise it to his executors; it seems this is a breach of the condition. So if
he devise that A his son shall have his term after his wife, and does make A
his son his executor; it seems this is a breach of the condition. But if he
do not make A his executor contra. And in cases of devise albeit the executors
do not assent yet the condition is broken, as in case where a reversion is
granted on condition that the grantee shall not alien it, and he does alien it,
but no atturnement is to this grant; yet it seems this is a breach of the
condition. And if a lease for years be made, on Dier 6.
condition that the lessee or his assigns shall not alien, and the lessee does
make his wife his Executrix, and she does take another husband, and he does
alien it; it seems this is a breach of the condition and a forfeiture of the
estate. But if a lease be made on condition that the lessee shall not alien
without the license of the lessor, and after the lessor die, and the lessee
assign, or the lessee die and his executors or administrators assign; this is
no breach of the condition in either of these cases. So if a lease be made, on
condition that the lessee shall not alien the term during his life, and he
makes an executor, but does not devise it to him; this is no breach of the
condition. And if a lease be Dier 152. Co. 4. 120.
made, on condition that the lessee his executors or assigns shall not alien
the term to any persons without the license of the lessor but to the wife or
one of the children of the lessee, and the lessee die, and his executors alien
to one of the children of the lessee and he alien to a stranger without
license; this is no breach of the condition. And if one make a lease of a house
and Hill. 38. El. Marsh versus Curtis.
land, on condition that the lessee shall not parcel out the land or any part
of it from the house, and the lessee does grant all his term in the house and
part of the land, and does keep the rest, and after does lease that part also;
this is a breach of the condition.

If a lease be made of a house, on condition that the lessee shall Not to
suffer a woman with child in the house.
Co. 8. 92.
not suffer any woman great with child to harbor or lodge in the house six
days after notice given by the lessor, and the lessee do suffer any such
person after notice given, albeit the lessor consent to it; yet the condition
is broken. But if the lessor do nolens volens keep such a woman there against
the mind of the lessee; this is no breach of the condition.

If a lease be made, on condition that if any wast be done Not to do wast.
12 H. 4, 5. Bro. Condition. 40.
the lessor shall reenter; in this case if the house fall by a tempest, this is
no breach of the condition, for this is not wast: but if it be uncovered by
tempest, and the tenant has a convenient time to repair it, and does not, but
does suffer the timber to perish for want of covering; this is a breach of the
condition and the lessor may enter and put out the lessee. Per. Dier and Walsh
Justices. Dier 281.
And if a lease be made, on condition that that lessee shall not do wast, and
he suffer wast to be made in decay of the houses etc. it seems the condition
is broken. Sed quere.

If a lease be made, on condition that if the lessee be minded Not to sell till
the lessor refuse it to any other.
Dier 13.
to sell his estate the lessor shall have the first offer thereof, giving as
much as another will give; in this case if the lessee does not give notice when
he is minded to sell it he does break the condition: but if when he is minded
to sell he does tell the lessor of his purpose and what he is offered for it,
and the lessor does either say he will not have it, or that he will not give so
much for it, or does not accept it, but does delay etc. and then the lessee
does sell it to another: this is no breach of the condition, neither is he
bound to wait upon him in this case.

If a feoffement be made, on condition that the feoffee shall Co. super Lit.
221, 222. Co. 2. 58. Perk. Sect. 80. 803. Lit. Sect. 355. Co. super Lit. 206.
make a feoffement in fee, gift in tail, lease for life, or years To make an
estate.
of the land to the feoffor, or to a stranger by a day; and before the day the
feoffee does disable himself to do it, either by making some estate of the
same thing to some other person in tail, for life, years, in present or
future, or for one year, or by taking a wife whereby she may be entitled to
dower, or by suffering a recovery of the land, or by granting of any rent,
Common, or the like, or by entering into any Statute etc. or by suffering any
Judgment to be had against him, or by doing any other such like act, whereby
he cannot convey the land according to the condition in the same plight,
quality and freedom it was at the time of the conveyance made: in either of
these cases the condition is ipso facto broken. And albeit the land be
afterward discharged and the party again enabled before the day to perform
the condition, yet this will not salve the breach. And so also it is of a
limitation. But when the condition is to be performed of the part of the
feoffor or grantor, there disability before the time will not hurt so as he be
again enabled at the time. And so also it is when the condition is to be
performed of the part of the feoffee, and there is no certain day set for the
performance of the thing, for in this case albeit he be once disabled, yet if
he be afterward again enabled, and do it within the time that the law does
give him to do it; in this case the condition is not broken. And so also it is,
if the feoffee be disseised, and during the disseisin, he do any such act as
before; in this case before his entry this is no breach of the condition, for
till then the charge does not bind the land. And so likewise it is when the
disability does proceed from another cause, as where one does make a feoffement
on condition that the feoffee, shall reinfeoffe before such a day, and before
the day the feoffor disseise the feoffee and keep him out till the day be
past, or one does make a feoffement, on condition the feoffee shall marry B
before such a day, and before the day the feoffor himself does marry her so
that the feoffee cannot perform the condition; in these cases the condition is
not broken.

If one make an estate of lands (held in Capite) on condition Trin. 13 Jac.
Slade versus Tompson. B. R.
To employ the profits to charitable uses.
that he to whom it is made shall employ the profits thereof to diverse
charitable uses, and he die his heir within age, by reason whereof the King
has the land during the minority of the heir, so that the profits cannot be
employed; this is no breach of the condition.

If one make a feoffement of land, on condition to reinfeoffe To reinfeoffe.
Co. 1. in Porters case.
in convenient time, and the feoffee does not so but does make a lease to
another; this is a double breach of the condition. And the same Law is of a
Devise by will in this manner.

If a feoffement be made, upon condition that the feoffee shall To make an
estate.
Perk. Sect. 796. Co. 8. 90: See the parable Mat. 21. 28.
make some estate to the feoffor, or some other by a day, and the feoffee
before the day say to him to whom the estate is to be made, that he will never
make the estate, notwithstanding he does make the estate before the day
according to the condition; in this case it is said the condition is broken.
Sed quere of this, for it seems if he really deny it before, and actually
perform it at the day; that this is a good performance of the condition. As if
a lease be made of a house, on condition that the lessee shall not disturb the
lessor in the taking a way of his goods out of the house, and To suffer one to
take his goods.
when the party does come or send to fetch them the lessee does only forbid
them; this in this case is no breach of the condition, and it was agreed in
this case that words without some deeds, as shutting the door against them,
forcible resistance, or laying of hands upon them, or the like are no breach of
such a condition. And if a lease be made, on condition that the lessor shall be
3 H. 4. 8.
four times a year in the house demised without being ousted by the lessee
and the lessee seeing him coming does shut the doors To suffer one to come
into a house.
or windows against him; this has been thought to be no breach of this
condition.

If a lease be made, on condition that the lessee shall pay yearly Dier 33.
To pay a yearly rent or sum.
to the lessor during the term ten pound; in this case if he fail of
payment once, the condition is broken and estate forfeit. So if one make a
feoffement in fee of land, on condition to pay ten pound yearly to I S; if he
fail once the condition is broken.

If a lease be made of a Manor in which are diverse Copyholders, Not to molest
Copiholders.
Penner versus Glover 37 and 38 El. Mich. B. R. per curiam.
on condition that the lessee shall not molest, vex, or put out any Copiholder
paying his duties and services, in this case if the lessee enter upon, and put
out any one Copiholder, this is a breach of the condition. But if he enter vi
and armis upon a Copiholders tenements, and there beat him only, or the like:
this is no breach of the condition.

If there be a condition to pay rent, and the lessee let part of To pay rent.
Crompt. Jur. 64, 65.
the land to other undertenants, or let all the land to another for part of the
time, and he undertake the rent still, and fail of payment: in this case the
condition is broken and estate forfeit. But if there be any covin and practice
in the case between the first lessor and the lessee, the undertenants may
perhaps have relief in equity. Equity.


If one make a lease for years of land, and then also make a feoffement Co. 8.
90.
in fee of the lands on condition that if the lessee be disturbed Not to
disturb.
bed in his term that he shall have the fee simple, and he is disturbed by the
feoffor or by his means; in this case the condition is broken and the lessee
shall have the fee simple. But if the disturbance be by a stranger and not by
the feoffor or by his means or consent; this is no breach of the condition.

If a lease be made, on condition that the lessee shall not be outlawed, Not
to be outlawed.
Per 2. Justices. H. 7 Jac. B. R.
and he is outlawed without proclamation; it seems this is no breach of the
condition, because the outlawry is not good.

If a condition possible at the time of creation become after impossible Lit.
Sect. 352. Co. 2. 59.
in part by the act of God, and the party do not perform that which is
possible, the condition is broken.

If a man make a lease for years on condition, and the lessee does Co. 8. 92.
not know of it, and after the lessor does by will give the land to the lessee
without condition, and the lessee does such an act as is a breach of the
condition; in this case the condition is not broken, for the lessee must have
notice of the condition ere he can break him.

If a lease be made rendering rent, on condition, that if the rent Doct. and
Stud. 35. 13 H. 4. 17.
To pay rent.
be not paid within twenty days the lessor shall reenter, and the rent is not
paid; in this case the condition is broken, but the lessor cannot enter until
he has made a legal demand, and if he die before he do it, his heir shall
never take advantage of that breach, but it is discharged for ever.

When an act is to be done in time convenient, or otherwise, and the party do
it not by the time appointed by law; the condition is Li. Sect. 353. Plow. 30.
broken.

If one grant an annuity pro consilio impenso and impendendo, and the To give
advise.
grantor require advise, and the grantee refuse or neglect to give it: 21 E. 3.
7. 8 H. 6. 24. Dier 369.
this is a breach of the condition and a forfeiture of the estate. And if the
deed be, that he shall go to such a place to give counsel, and he require him
to go thither and he refuse it, this is a forfeiture of the estate. But if he
refuse to go with him to another place, or give counsel to his adversary
being not required to give counsel to him, this is no breach of the condition
nor forfeiture of his annuity. And if one had heretofore devised his land to be
sold by his executors, Lit. Sect. 383.
and to have been distributed for his soul, and the executors had not sold it
in time convenient, or had taken the profits to their own use: this had been a
breach of the condition. See more in the last foregoing division, and in
Obligation Numb. 10. Covenant Numb. 7. The same law is for the most part of
conditions of obligations. See Obligation Numb. 10.

Every particular estate has a condition in law annexed to it, and Co. 2. 15.
8. 44. super Lit. 233.
11. When a condition in law shall be said to be broken. Or not.
therefore if tenant for life in dower, by the courtesy, or after possibility
of issue extinct, lessee for years, tenant by statute merchant, elegit or the
like make any absolute or conditional estate of the lands they hold in fee
simple, fee tail, or for life and give livery of seisin thereupon Forfeiture.
or levy a fine Sur conusance de droit, or suffer a recovery of the land, or
the like; this is a breach of the condition in law and a forfeiture of their
estate. Also if any such tenant (except tenant in tail after possibility of
issue extinct) do wast in the lands they do so hold; this is a breach of the
condition in law and a forfeiture of their estate in so much as the wast is
committed. But if an Infant Infant. Womencovert.
or feme covert that has such an estate shall make any such estate etc. this
is no breach of the condition in law. And yet if such a person do wast, this
is a breach of the condition in law. And so also if any such person be an
officer and do any thing which is a cause of forfeiture in another; this will
be a forfeiture in him or her also.

If any keeper of a Park without warrant kill any Dear, fell Co. super Lit.
223.
or cut any wood and convert it to his own use, pull down the lodge or any
house within the Park used for hay for the Dear, or the like; this is a
breach of the condition in law. So also if a keeper shall not look to the
game, but the Dear be killed by his default, and damage come to the Lord; by
this also the condition is broken. But the not attending upon such an office
for two or three days if the Lord have no special loss thereby is no cause
of forfeiture.

Offices that are for the Administration of Justice, or of clark ship in any
Court of Record, or concerning the Kings treasure, revenue, Co. super Lit. 234.
account, alnage, auditorship etc. have also conditions in law annexed to them,
and therefore if such officers shall sell their offices or misdemeane
themselves in their offices: by this the condition in law may be broken and
they may forfeit them.

As no man may create or annex a condition to an estate but he 12. Who may
enter for a condition broken. And what persons shall take advantage of a
condition or a limitation. And what not.
Lit. Sect. 347. Plow. 175. Co. 3. 62. 347. 5. 56. Dier 131. Co. super Lit.
214, 215. Doct. and Stud. 93. Perk. Sect. 830, 831. 833, 835. Plow. 488, 489.
that does create the estate it self, so neither can a man give or reserve the
power, title or benefit of reentry and avoidance of an estate upon the breach
of a condition to any other but to him, or them, or at least to one of them
that does make the estate, his or their heirs, executors and administrators
etc. for it is a rule of the common law, That none may take advantage of a
condition but parties and privies in right and representation, as heirs,
executors, etc. of natural persons, and the successors of politic persons:
and that neither Privies nor Assignees in law, as Lords by Escheate, nor in
deed, as grantees of reversions, nor Privies in estate, as he to whom a
remainder is limited, shall take benefit of entry or reentry by force of a
condition. And therefore if a man had made a lease for life reserving rent, on
condition that if the rent be behind the lessor, his heirs and assigns shall
reenter, and after had granted the reversion to a stranger; this grantee should
not by the common law have had benefit by this condition. But if the lessor had
died, his heir or the Guardian in Chivalry or Socage of such an heir if he had
been an Infant and inward might have taken advantage by the condition. And if
one had been possessed of a lease for years, and had granted his term upon
condition and had died; his executors or administrators might have had
advantage of this condition.

And at this day the law is still the same as touching Privies in Co. super
Lit. 202. 12.
blood, for an heir shall take advantage of a condition, though no estate
descend to him from the Ancestor. And therefore if one be seized of land of the
part of his mother, and he make a feoffement in fee of it, on condition, and
die, and the condition is broken; in this case the heir of the part of the
father shall enter, but as soon as he has entered the heir of the part of the
mother shall enter upon him and enjoy the land. And if a man be seized of land
in the right of his wife, and he make a feoffement in fee of it, upon
condition, and die; the heir of the husband shall enter for the condition
broken, but the wife shall have the land. And so also is the law as touching
Privies in right and representation, for Executors and Administrators shall
take advantage of a condition now as heretofore. And so also shall the
Successors of a Deane and Chapter, Bishop, Archdeacon, Parson, Prebend, or any
body Politic or corporate, Ecclesiastical or Temporal; these shall take
advantage of conditions as heretofore they did. So also the law is the same as
touching Privies in law, for they shall no more take advantage of a condition
now then heretofore. But as touching grantees of reversions and Privies in
estate, there is some alteration made of the Law, for by a new law it is
provided, That all persons which Sat. 32 H. 8. cap. 34.
shall have any grant of the King of any reversion etc. of any lands etc. which
pertained to Monasteries etc. as also all other persons being grantees or
assignees etc. to or by any other person or persons, and their heirs,
executors, successors and assigns, shall have like advantage against the
feoffees etc. by entry for not payment of rent, or for doing wast, or for other
forfeiture etc. as the said lessors or grantors themselves ought or might have
had.

And for the true understanding of the sense of this Statute Co. super Lit.
214. Plow. 27.
and the ancient Common law further touching this point, 1. These diversities
must be observed to be taken before the Statute which take place still.

1. Between a condition that does require a reentry, and a limitation Co. 10.
36. F. N. B. 201.
that does ipso facto determine the estate without entry, for albeit a stranger
might not take advantage of the first yet he might take advantage of the last
by the Common law. And therefore if a man at this day make a lease to another
quousque, or until I S come from Rome, or if a man make a lease to a woman
quamdiu casta vixerit, or if a man make a lease to a widow si tamdiu in pura
viduitate viveret, or if a man make a lease to another for one hundred years if
he live so long, and then the lessor does grant the reversion to a stranger; in
all these and such like cases the grantee of the reversion may take advantage
of the* limitation, for after the estate is ended by the limitation he may
enter.

2. Between a condition annexed to a freehold and a condition Co. 3. 64, 65.
Co. super Lit. 214. 11 H. 7. 17. Plow. 136.
annexed to a lease for years, for if before the Statute a man had made a gift
in tail, or lease for life, on condition that if the donee or lessee did not
pay ten pound by such a day the gift or lease should be void or cease; in
this case the grantee of the reversion could not by the common law have taken
advantage of the condition, for it could not be void or cease but by entry
which could not be transferred to another. But if a lease for years had been
made on such a condition; a grantee of the reversion might by the common law
have taken advantage of this condition, for the estate in this case was by the
breach of the condition ipso facto void without entry. But now the grantee of
the reversion shall have advantage of the condition in both these cases.

3. Between a condition in deed and a condition in law, for by Co. super Lit.
214.
the very common law not only the grantee of the reversion but also the Lord by
Escheat, may either of them have advantage of a condition in law for any breach
in his own time.

2. These Resolutions and Judgments upon the Statute must be marked. 1. That
the Statute is general and the grantee of the revesion Co. super Lit. 214. Co.
5. 13.
of every common person as well as the King may take advantage of conditions.
2. That the Statute does extend to grants made to the successor of the King
as well as to the King albeit he only be named in the Statute. 3. That he that
comes to the reversion by fine, feoffement, grant, limitation of use, common
recovery, or bargain and sale, is such a grantee as is within the intendment
of the Statute. 4. That where the Statute does speak of feoffees etc. that it
does not extend to gifts in tail, and therefore if a gift in tail be upon
condition, and after the donor does grant the reversion; this grantee shall
never have any benefit of this condition. 5. That where the Statute does speak
of grantees and assignees of the reversion; that hereby an assignee of part of
the state of the reversion may take advantage of the condition, as if lessee
for life be, and the reversion is granted for life etc. or if lessee for years
be etc. and the reversion is granted for years etc. in these cases the grantees
of the reversion shall have advantage of the conditions.

Davy and Mathews case per. and 2 Justi^es Trin. 1^. 1 Jac. B. R.
So if a lessee for one hundred years make a lease for ten years, rendering
rent, with condition of reentry, and the first lessee does afterward grant his
term and estate to I S; in this case I S is such a grantee and assignee of the
reversion as shall take advantage of the condition. 6. That as well mediate as
immediate grantees. i. the grantees of grantees in infinitum are intended
within Co. 5. 112, 113. Co. super Litt. 214.
this Statute. 7. That a grantee of part of the reversion cannot take advantage
of a condition by this Statute. And therefore is a lease be made of three acres
reserving rent upon condition, and the reversion is granted of two of the three
acres; in this case the Prerogative.
rent shall be apportioned, but the condition is destroyed except it be in the
Kings case. And yet a condition may be apportioned Apportionme^t.
by the act of law, or by the wrong of the lessee. As if a lease be made of two
acres (the one of the nature of Borough English, and the other at the Common
law) upon condition, and the lessor having issue two sons dies; in this case
each of them shall enter for the condition broken. And if the lessee upon
condition make a feoffment of part of the land; this does not destroy the
condition. There is therefore herein a difference between a condition Power of
revocation.
that is compulsory, and a power of revocation that is voluntary: for he that
has such a power may by his own act extinguish it in part, by levying a fine
of part of the land or otherwise, and yet his power may remain for the residue
as in the case of a limitation; but in the case of a condition he cannot do
so. 8. Such grantees as shall have advantage by this Statute, must be complete
grantees; Co. 5. 113, 114. Co. 8. 92.
And therefore grantees of reversions by fine, or deed, must have atturnment
ere they can take advantage of the condition. And yet if a reversion be granted
by fine to one that has no atturnment, and he grant it to another that has an
atturnment; in this case the second grantee shall take advantage of the
condition, albeit the first grantee shall not. And the lessee must have notice
of the grant of the reversion, ere he in reversion can take any advantage of a
condition. And therefore it is, that if the lessor bargain and sell the land by
deed indented and enrolled (in which case there needs no atturnment); or if the
lessor make a feoffment of the land, and so out the lessee, and the lessee
reenter (which is an atturnment in law); the grantee or feoffee in these cases
cannot take advantage of any condition before he has given notice to the
lessee of this grant of the reversion. 9. Such as come in merely by act of law,
or paramount, as the Lord of a Villain, the Lord by Co. super Litt. 214. Pasche
7 Jac. Co. B. per 2 Justices.
escheat, the Lord that does enter for Mortmain, or the like, cannot take
advantage of a condition within this Statute. And hence it seems it is that if
lessee for forty years make a lease for thirty seven years on condition, and
after surrender his estate to his lessor; Co. super Litt. 215. Dier 309. Curia
in Leeks case. Pasche 7 Jac. Co. B.
Albeit the words of the Statute be general, yet grantees and assignces shall
not take benefit of every forfeiture by force of a condition, nor yet of all
conditions, but only of such as are inherent. i. such as are either incident
to the reversion, as for payment of rent, or for the benefit of the State, as
for restraining of wast, for causing of reparations, making of fences, skowring
of ditches, preserving of woods, and the like. And of conditions that are
collateral, such grantees shall not take benefit. And therefore if the
condition be for payment of a sum of money in gross, to restrain alienation,
for the delivery of corn, wood, or the like, the grantee of the reversion of
the land shall not have advantage of it by this Statute, for these remain as
they were before the Statute at the Common law. 11. Such conditions as are on
the part of the lessor, it seems are not within this Statute; And therefore if
one Per Justice Bridgman.
make a lease for years, on condition that if the lessor, his heirs or assigns,
pay ten pound to the lessee at our Lady day, the lease to be void, and the
lessor does grant the reversion to a stranger before the day; it seems the
grantee shall not take advantage of this; but the condition is gone.

If one make a lease for years rendering rent to him and his heirs, Doct. and
St. 35. 13 H. 4. 17.
on condition that if it be not paid within fourteen days, that he and his
heirs shall reenter, and the rent is behind, and the lessor does demand it,
and then die; in this case the heir may enter. But if he die before demand, the
heir cannot make a demand, and so take advantage of that breach of the
condition, which was in the time of his Ancestor.

If a man be possessed of land for twenty years in the right of his Perk. Sect.
834.
wife, and he make a lease of it for ten years rendering rent, with condition of
reentry for default of payment, and after the husband die; in this case the
wife shall have the rent, but it seems she shall not take advantage of the
condition.

If a lease be made to I S, on condition that if such a thing be, Co. 1. 85.
super Litt. 379. Dier 127. 117.
or be not done, that the land shall remain to I D, or that I D shall enter; in
this case I D shall never take advantage of this condition, either by the
Common law or by this Statute.

Regularly where a man will take advantage of a condition, if he 13. Where
entry or claim is needful, to avoid an estate on condition. And where a man
may take advantage of a condition without entry or claim. And where not.
Co. super Litt. 218. 237.
may enter, he must enter, and when he cannot enter, he must make a claim; for
an estate of freehold or inheritance will not cease without entry or claim. And
he that is to have advantage by the condition, may wave his advantage if he
will. And until such entry or claim made, the party that should enter can
make no good estate of the thing to any other. But herein a difference is to be
observed in the penning of a condition, and between a lease for years and a
lease for life or a greater estate: for if a lease for years be made, on
condition that upon such a contingent the estate shall cease, or the lease
shall be void; in this case when the thing does happen, the lease is ipso facto
void without entry or claim. But otherwise it is of a lease for life, albeit
there be the same words in the condition. And if one make a lease for years, on
condition that if such a thing be done, the lessor shall reenter; in this case
an entry is needful to avoid the estate.

If one make a feoffment in fee, gift in tail, or lease for life, on condition
that upon such a contingent the estate shall be void; in this case there must
be an entry made, after the condition is broken to avoid the estate. So if one
bargain and sell his land by deed indented and enrolled, with proviso that if
the bargainor pay etc. then the estate shall cease and be void, and he does pay
the money; in this case the estate is not revested in the bargainor before an
actual reentry is made. And so it is also if lands be devised to a man and his
heirs, on condition that if the devisee do not pay twenty pound at a day, his
estate shall cease and be void; in this case the estate is not void until an
actual reentry be made. And so also it is if a reversion, remainder, advowson,
rent, common, or the like, be devised on such a condition; in these cases there
must be a claim before the estate will be determined. And therefore if a man
grant such a thing to another and his heirs, on condition that if the grantor
pay twenty pound on such a day, the state of the grantee shall cease or be
void, and the grantor does pay the money according to the condition; in this
case the state is not revested in the grantor before a claim made at the Church
in case of an Advowson, and in the other cases upon the land. But in case where
a man cannot make an entry or claim, there the law will not compel him to it.
And therefore if one grant land to another for five years, on condition that if
he pay to the grantor within the two first years forty marks, that then he
shall have the fee, otherwise but for term of five years, and livery of seisin
is made accordingly, and the grantee does not pay this money; in this case after
the two years are past, the freehold shall be in the grantor without entry or
claim, for as this case is, he cannot enter, but he must out the lessee of his
term. So if I grant a rent charge out of my land upon condition; when the
condition is broken, the rent is extinct, and here needs no claim. So if a man
make a feossment of land to me in fee, on condition that I shall pay him twenty
pound such a day etc. and before the day I let the land to him for years, Rent.
rendering rent, and after the condition is broken; in this case he may retain
the land without entry or claim, and the rent is extinct. So if one covenant
to stand seized to the use of himself for life or otherwise, and then after to
the use of others, with a proviso of revocation etc. and after he does revoke
it; in this case all the estates are revested in him without entry or claim.

14. When a condition broken shall make the estate etc. vold ab initio. And when
not. And to what intents the lessor, feoffor, etc. shall be adjudged by his
reentry to be in of his first estate. And to what intents not.
It is generally true that he that does enter for a condition br^ken, Co. 4.
120. Pe^k. Sect. 840. Plow. 186. 482. 14 H. 8. 17.
does make the estate void ab initio, and that he shall be in of his first
estate in the same course and manner as it was when he departed with the
possession, and at the time of the making of the condition. And hence it is,
that if there be any charge or encumbrance on the land, as if lessee of land
upon condition grant a rent charge out of the land, or enter into a Statute or
Recognisance, and the conusee have the land in execution, and this charge is
after the condition is made; in this case when the condition is broken, and the
party does reenter, he shall by relation avoid the rent, statute, and
recognisances, and hold the land freed from them all. And if an estate be to
pass by way of increase, upon condition, or a lease is to be made upon a
condition precedent; when the condition is performed, the party shall hold his
estate free from all after charges and clogs. And if a man enter for breach of
a condition in Co. super Litt. 234. Perk. Sect. 843, 844. Co. super Litt. 233.
law, he shall avoid all charges and acts done after that thing is done which
does produce the forfeiture, but he shall not avoid any thing done before that
time; for he must take the thing as he finds it: as if a house or land belong
to an officer in respect of his office, and he grant a rent out of it for his
life, and then he does forfeit it; in this case the rent shall continue. And if
lessee for life of land grant a rent out of it, and then make a feoffment in
fee of the land; in this case the rent shall continue, and the lessor cannot
avoid. But if lessee for life of land make a feoffment in fee of it, and then
grant a rent out of the land; in this case the lessor shall avoid it. And if a
lessee grant a rent out of his land, and then do wast, and the lessor recover
the land, he cannot avoid this rent, but shall hold the land charged with it.
But if the lessee do wast first, and then he grant a rent charge to a stranger
out of the land, and after the lessor recover the place wasted; in this case he
shall hold the land discharged. And if lessee for life make a lease for years,
and after enter upon the lessee for years, and make a feoffment in fee; this
shall not avoid the lease for years. And if a man make a lease for C^^mpt. Jur.
64, 65.
years, rendering rent with clause of entry for non payment, and the lessee
does make underleases of part of this land, and after the rent is unpaid, and
the lessor does enter; in this case he shall have all the land, and avoid all
the under leases. But if there be any covinous practice in the case, the
undertenants may have remedy Equity.
in Equity. And if a lease be made for life, the remainder in Co. 10. 41.
tail on condition; in this case if the condition be broken, both the estates
be avoided. Et sic de similibus. But this general rule Co. super Litt. 202.
Perk. Sect. 242. 842, 843.
does fail in diverse particulars: as if a man be seized of land in the right
of his wife, and he makes a feoffment in fee by deed indented, upon condition
that the feoffee shall devise the land to the feoffor for life etc. and the
husband dies, and then the condition is broken; in this case the heir of the
husband shall enter, and yet he shall not have the estate of the feoffor, for
this does presently after his entry vanish away. So if a tenant in special
tail has issue, and his wife dies, and tenant in tail makes a feoffment in
fee upon condition, the issue dies, the condition is broken, and then the
feoffor does reenter; in this case he shall have but an estate for life as
tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct. So if a lessee for life or
years make a feoffment in fee on condition, and after does enter for the
condition broken; in this case he shall not be in in the same course, for now
his estate is subject to entry for forfeiture, though he be tenant for life
still. So if a disseisor be of certain land, and he die seized thereof, and his
heir is in by descent, and the disseisee enter upon the heir, and infeoffe a
stranger upon condition, and the heir of the disseisor does enter upon the
feoffee, and the disseisor, does sue a writ of entry sur disseisin, against the
heir of the disseisor, and does recover and has execution, and the feoffee on
condition does reenter, and after the condition is broken; in this case the
feoffor is not in in the same case, for now the disseisor cannot enter upon him
as he might before. And in some cases the feoffor by his reentry shall be in in
his former estate, but not in respect of some collateral qualities: as if
tenant by homage Ancestrell, make a feoffment of the land he does so hold in
fee, on condition, and enters for the condition broken; in this case it shall
never be held in homage Ancestrel again. And so if a copyhold escheat be, and
the Lord make a feoffment in fee upon condition, and enters for the condition
broken; in this case the custom annexed to that land is gone. So if there be
Lord and tenant by fealty and rent, and the Lord is in seisin of the rent, and
grants his Seigniory to another and his heirs on condition, and the tenant
does atturn and pays his rent to the grantee, the condition is broken; the
Lord distraineth for his rent, and rescous is made, in this case the former
seisin shall not enable him to have an assise without new seisin. If there be
Lord and tenant, and the Lord disseise the tenant of the tenancy, and thereof
does enfeoffe a stranger on condition, and after the condition is broken, and
the Lord enter, and the tenant does enter upon him; in this case the Seigniory
is not revived.

If tenant in tail make a feoffment in fee on condition, and dies, and the
issue in tail within age does enter for the condition broken; in this case he
shall be in first as tenant in feesimple, and heir to his father, and then
shall be presently remitted: but if he be of full age he shall not be remitted.

If one make a feoffment of white acre and black acre, on condition etc. and
that he shall enter into black acre only; in this case Co. super Litt. 202,
203.
upon breach of the condition, he shall enter into that part only.

If the words of a condition be, That if such a thing be not done, the feoffor
or lessor shall enter into the land, and take the profits thereof until the
thing be done, or to the like effect; in this case if the feoffor or lessor
enter upon the breach of the condition, he does not avoid the estate, or get
any thing by his entry, but the possession only in the nature of a pledge, or
a distress until the thing be done; And if the condition be for the payment
of the rent, he shall hold the land until he be paid the rent. And if the
words be [That the feoffor etc. shall enter and take the profits, until
thereof he be satisfied, or until he be satisfied or paid the rent] in the
first case as soon as he is paid, either by the receiving of the profits, or
payment of the rent behind, or both together; and in the last case as soon as
he is paid the rent by the feoffee or lessee, the feoffee or lessee may enter
again into the land.

If a condition be possible in his creation, and after become impossible Co.
super Lit. 207. 219. 15 H. 7. 13. Dier 262.
15. When and by what means a condition shall be discharged and extinguished
for ever, or suspended for a time. Or not. 1. By the act of God. Conditions
impossible.
by the act of God, the condition is discharged and gone for ever, and the
estate is absolute. As if a feoffment be made to me, on condition that I shall
reinfeoffe the feoffor before a day, or on condition that I shall appear at
Westminster in the Kings Bench such a day, or on condition that I shall go to
Paris about the affairs of the feoffor before such a day, and before the day
appointed it does happen that I die; in all these cases the condition is
discharged. So if the condition of a feoffment be that if the feoffor or his
heirs pay ten pound to the feoffee such a day, and before the day the feoffor
dies without heir; in this case the condition is gone. And if the condition
become impossible in part only, then it is discharged for so much only.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant does enfeoffe a Perk. Sect. 819.
stranger on condition, and the feoffee die without heir, so that the tenancy
escheat; in this case the condition does continue, and the Lord must hold it
subject to the condition.

Albeit a condition cannot be divided by the act of the parties, Co. super
Litt. 215. Co. 4. 120.
but it will be destroyed, yet it may be divided by the act of law; 2. By the
Act of Law.
and therefore if a lease for years be made of two acres of land (the one of
the nature of Borough English, and the other at the Common Law) on condition,
and the lessor having issue two sons dies; in this case albeit the condition
be divided, yet it is not gone, but does continue still, and each of them may
enter for the condition broken. But if one that has a condition knit unto his
reversion, grant part of his reversion to a stranger; the condition is
destroyed in all, for it cannot be apportioned by the act of the parties, as it
may by the act of the law, or the wrong of the lessee.

A condition may be destroyed in the very creation of it; as if 3. By the Act
of the parties.
Co. 2. 59. the Lord Cromwels case. Dier 309. Co. super Litt. 265. 379. Co. 10.
41.
one devise lands for life with express words of a condition, and not words of
limitation, or words that may be so taken, the remainder over to a stranger; in
this case the stranger cannot enter, neither is the remainder good, nor the
condition effectual. Or it may be discharged by matter ex post facto: as in
the examples following. If one make a feoffment in fee of land upon condition,
and after and before the condition broken, he does make an absolute feoffment,
or levy a fine of all or part of the land to the feoffee, or any other; by this
the condition is gone and discharged for ever. And yet if one grant a rent out
of his land, upon condition, and after make a feoffment of this land, this does
not extinguish the condition. And if a fine in this case be levied in pursuance
of a former agreement; as if one by Indenture bargain and sell his land to
another, and in the Indenture there is a covenant that all other assurances
shall be to the use of the bargainee, according to the first agreement, and the
bargain and sale has a condition annexed that the bargainee shall make a
feoffment of part of the land to the bargainor, and after the bargainor does
levy a fine to the bargainee in corroboration of the first bargain; in this
case the condition is not extinct, but saved by the original agreement. And if
one make a feoffment in fee of land upon condition, and after and before the
condition broken, he does make a lease for years only of the land, or part of
it to the feoffee or any other; by this the condition is suspended for that
time. And if the feoffor after a feoffment made of land upon Co. 2. 59. Perk.
Sect. 819, 820. 163. Litt. Bro. Sect. 212. Co. super Litt. 219.
condition, enter upon all or part of the land and be impleaded, and lose it;
by this the condition is gone for ever. And if he enter and hold the possession
only; by this the condition is suspended during his possession, and if he hold
the possession so long that the feoffee cannot perform the condition; the
condition is discharged for ever. And if one make a feoffment of land upon
condition, and after and before the condition broken, the feoffee does Co. 7.
14. 4. 52. Litt. Bro. Sect. 212. 85, Co. super Litt. 218.
make a feoffment of all or part of the land to the feoffor; by this the
condition is gone for ever. And if the feoffee make a lease for life or years
only of part of the land; by this the condition is suspended for that time.
But if the feoffee make a feoffment in fee, lease for life, or years to a
stranger; this is no extinguishment nor suspension of the condition. And if the
condition be to pay money, or do any such collateral thing; if in this case
the feoffee make a lease to the feoffor, this does not suspend the condition.

If the feoffor or lessor release to the feoffee or lessee all conditions,
Release.
Perk. Sect. 823. Co. 1. 147. See Release and confirmation
or all demands in the land, or confirm the estate of the feoffee without
condition etc. by either of these means the condition is destroyed and gone for
ever.

If one make a lease for life or years of land on condition, and after grant
the reversion of part of this land; hereby the condition Co. 2. 59. Perk. Sect.
163. Co. 4. 119.
is destroyed for ever. And if he make a lease of part of it only; by this the
condition is suspended.

A condition may be extinct or suspended by the intermariage Perk. Sect. 763.
765. 764.
of the parties to the condition; as if a feoffment be made by a woman, on
condition to pay ten pound, or on condition to infeoffe her by a day certain,
and before the day they two do intermary, and the marriage does continue until
after the day; in this case the condition is gone. And if the condition be to
reenter for not payment of rent; the condition shall be suspended and no rent
be paid during the coverture.

If a lease be made for years, on condition that the lessee or his Co. 4. 119.
5. 34. 2. 59. 714. Dier 309.
assigns shall not alien without the license of the lessor, and the lessor
license the lessee alone to alien, or license him to alien a part of the land,
or license him to alien all the land for a time, or if the lease be to three on
such a condition, and the lessor license one of them to alien; in all these
cases the condition is gone for ever.

If one had enfeoffed me, on condition that I should pay him Perk. Sect. 766.
ten pound at Easter, and before the time he had entered into Religion, and
made me his executor, and had not been deraigned; in this case the condition
had been gone for ever.

If I be seized of land in fee, and take a wife, and during the marriage Perk.
Sect. 822.
enfeoffe a stranger on condition and die, and the feoffee endow my wife of her
third part; in this case the condition is not destroyed, and yet the third part
is freed from the condition, but the reversion of that third part is not freed
from the condition. And if she grant her estate again to the feoffee, the
condition is revived. So if there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant make a
feoffement in fee upon condition and the feoffee is attainted of felony etc. so
that the tenancy does escheate; in this case the condition is not gone, but the
tenancy is charged with it.

If a feoffement, or lease be made rendering rent, on condition Co. 3. 64. super
Lit. 211.
for not payment a reentry, and the feoffor, or lessor after the breach of the
condition does distraine or bring an assise for the Rent, or does accept the
rent at another day; hereby the condition is not destroyed but it is discharged
for that time so that the feoffor or lessor cannot take any advantage of that
breach: and if the act to be done by the condition be a collateral act, as not
to alien, or the like, and the condition is broken and the feoffor not having
notice thereof does accept the rent; in this case also and by this means the
condition is not discharged.

If one disseise the feoffee, or the heir of the disseisor, or any other that
has lands by a just title, and thereof enfeoffee a stranger on 4. by the Act
of a stranger.
Lit. Sect. 476, 477. Co. super Lit. 277.
condition, and the land is lawfully recovered from him by him that has the
title; hereby the condition is destroyed for ever. And if a dis seisor make a
feoffement in fee on condition, and after the disseisee does enter upon the
feoffee on condition; this does extinguish the condition. But if the disseisee
release to the feoffee on condition; this Release.
release does not discharge the condition. But if a disseisor make a lease for
life, and the lessee for life make a feoffment in fee on condition, and the
disseisee release to the feoffee of the tenant for life, by this the condition
in law is destroyed. And if the feoffee upon condition Perk. Sect. 823. 821.
make a feoffement over without condition, and the disseisee release to the
second feoffee; by this the condition is destroyed, be the release before the
condition broken or after. And if feoffee on condition make a lease for life,
and the feoffor release to the feoffee on condition or lessee for life all
conditions, or all demands to the land; by this the condition is discharged.
And if the feoffee on condition make a feoffement to another on condition, and
after the first feoffor does enter for breach of the condition; hereby the
second feoffement and the condition also is gone for ever.

If a man seized of land in fee let it to a stranger for years, and Perk. Sect.
820.
one that has no right does out the lessee, and thereof die seized, and his
heir is in by descent, and he does make a feoffement to a stranger upon
condition, upon whom the lessee for years does enter within the term claiming
his term; in this case the lessee shall hold the land discharged of the
condition.

And now we pass to a Covenant being another part of a Deed.

CHAP. VII. Of a Covenant.
A Covenant is the agreement or consent of two or more by Terms of the law.
Plow. 308.
1. Covenant. Quid.
Deed in writing sealed and delivered whereby either or one of the parties does
promise to other that something is done already or shall be done afterward.
And he that makes the covenant is called the covenantor, and he to whom it is
made the covenantee. Covenantor. Covenantee. 2. Quotuplex.


And this is either express, or in deed. i. when the covenant is Terms of the
law. tit. Covenant. Co. 4. 80. 5. 17. F. N. B. 145. 146. Dier 338. 257.
expressed in the deed: As when A by deed does covenant with B to serve him for
a year, and B does covenant with A to pay him ten pound for this service. Or
it is implied or in law, i. when the deed does not express it but the law does
make and supply it. As when one does make a lease for years by the words
[demise or grant] without any express covenant for quiet enjoying; in this
case the law does intend and make such a covenant on the part of the lessor,
which is, that the lessee shall quietly hold and enjoy the thing demised
against all persons at least having title under the lessor and at least during
the lessors life, and (as some think) during the whole term; And hereupon an
action of covenant may be brought against him in the reversion, so that if the
heir that is in by descent put out the termor of his father the termor may
have this action against him. A covenant is also either real, i. that whereby
a man does bind himself to pass a real thing, as lands or tenements: as a
covenant to levy a fine of land, in which case the land it self is to be
recovered, or when it does run in the realty so with the land that he that has
the one has, or is subject to the other, and so a warranty is called a real
covenant. Or it is personal, i. when it does run in the personalty and not
with the land, but some person in particular shall have benefit by it, or be
charged with it: as when a man does covenant to do any personal thing, as
build, or repair a house, serve him, or the like. And these also are some of
them said to be inherent, i. such as are conversant about the land, as that the
thing demised shall be quietly enjoyed, shall be kept in reparations, shall not
be aliened, or if it be to be sold that the lessor shall have the first
refusal, to pay rent, not to cut down timber trees, or do wast, to fence the
copices when they be new cut, to make further assurance, or the like. And some
of them are said to be collateral, i. that are conversant about some
collateral thing that does nothing at all, or not so immediately concern the
thing granted, as to pay a sum of money in gross, to build a house in
another man's ground, to make a feoffment or lease of other land, to give other
security to perform the covenants, or to pay the rent, or that the lessor shall
distrain for the rent in some other land then that which is demised, or the
like; these are collateral covenants. There is also a covenant to stand seized
of land to uses, which is now become a kind of conveyance of land; for which
read Uses at large.

The most frequent use of a covenant is to bind a man to do 3. The use and
operation of it.
Co. 1. 154. Litt. Bro. Sect. 309. 17 H. 8. 16. Plow. 308. F. N. B. 145.
something in futuro, and therefore it is for the most part executory; and if
the covenantor do not perform it, the covenantee may have thereupon for his
relief an action or writ of covenant against the covenantor so often as there
is any breach of the covenant. And this writ of covenant is therefore defined
to be a A writ or action of covenant. Quid.
writ lying where a man is bound by a covenant in a deed and has broken it.
And in this case commonly the party damnified shall recover damages only for
the breach: and if he have a Judgment in an action brought for one breach,
and after the covenantor does break the covenant again; in this case he may
bring a new action, and so for every breach. But a covenant does sometimes Use.
And in case where one does covenant that another shall Lease.
have a piece of land for five years; this is a good lease for five years, for
which see Lease. And in case where one does covenant with another, that if he
pay him ten pound such a day, he shall have all his cattle in Dale, or his
lease for years he has of the Manor of Contract.
Dale; in this case it seems if he pay the money at the time he shall have the
property of the goods, and of the lease for years. It is said therefore that in
some cases upon the writ of covenant the party shall recover the land it self
out of which he has been ejected.

A covenant may be in the affirmative, or in the negative. And it Plow. 330. 27
H. 8. 16.
4. What shall be said a good covenant in deed upon which an Action of
covenant may be had. And what not. 1. In respect of the manner of making it.
may be executed, i. that a thing is done already, or executory, i. that a
thing shall be done hereafter, and these are all good. But if it be of a thing
present, as if I covenant that my horse is yours; this is void. F. N. B. 145 G.
Co. 3. 63. Ewers case. 8 Jac.
And these covenants being made by a deed poll are as good and effectual, as
when they are made by a deed indented, so as the party have the deed to show,
for otherwise a common person cannot have an action of covenant, for it does
not lie upon a verbal agreement, neither can it be grounded without a writing,
except it be by a special custom as in London. Litt. Bro. Sect. 450. Co. 2.
Lord Cromwels case. Dier 57. 150. 21 H. 7. 37. 40 E. 3. 5.
And there needs not in this case formal and orderly words, as Covenant,
Promise, and the like, to make a covenant on which to ground an action of
covenant: for a covenant may be had by any other words, and upon any part of an
agreement in writing, in what words soever it be set down for any thing to be,
or not to be done, the party to or with whom the promise or agreement is made
may have this action upon the breach of the agreement. And therefore if these
words be inserted in a deed amongst other covenants [That the lessee shall
repair, provided always that the lessor shall allow timber: Or that the lessor
shall skowre ditches, provided always that the lessor do carry away the earth;]
these are good covenants on both sides. Adjudge pasch. 14 Jac. B. R. Sir Thomas
Bret versus Cumberlands case.
And if a lease be made of houses by Patent to I S, for twenty one years, and
therein is inserted this clause [And that the said I S and his assigns shall
repair the houses when they shall be decayed;] this is a good covenant. And
so also it is where these or the like words be inserted amongst other covenants
[And that the lessee shall pay ten shillings a year rent, or that the lessee
shall not alien;] these shall be said to be covenants, unless it be in such
cases where there is some other means to enforce the doing of the thing. As if
in case of the rent there be a clause of distress, Bro. Covenant 21. 26. and
Co. and Dier ubi supra.
reentry, or nomine penae. And in all cases regularly where words that do
begin the sentence be conditional, and have the effect of a condition, and
do give another remedy, there they shall not be construed to make a covenant,
as in the cases of condition before. And yet if words of condition, and words
of covenant be coupled together in the same sentence, [as Provided always; and
it is covenanted, or the like;] in such cases the words may be construed to
make a covenant and a condition both.

If a man make a lease for life by Indenture, and therein are inserted Dier
150. Co. 1. 155.
these words [It is provided that if the lessee die within sixty Lease.
years, that then his executors and assigns, shall have the land until the
sixty years be ended, to be accounted from the date of the Inde^ture;] this
albeit it be not a good lease, yet it is a good covenant.

If a man make a lease for years, and warrant it to the lessee, his Bro.
covenant 38. descent 50. 21 H. 7. 32.
heirs, and assigns, during the term, or he that has right to the land,
confirm the estate of the lessee for years with warranty; in these cases
howbeit this be not a warranty; nor in the nature of a warranty, yet it shall
be construed a good covenant in law for the quiet enjoying of the thing.

If the Lord grant to his tenant, that he will not distrain him in Perk. Sect.
69.
such a part of his land for his rent; this shall be taken to be a good
covenant, by this word [grant].

A covenant to do anything that for the substance and matter of it is 2. In
respect of the matter or substance of it.
See West. Symb. in his first part toto. and infra Plow. 308. 302. 27 H. 8. 16.
Dier 13. 324 253. 251. Fitz. Covenant 1.
lawful; or not to do any thing that for the matter of it is unlawful, is
good: as if the grantor covenant that he is seized or possessed of a good
estate of and in the thing he does grant, and has power to grant it. That the
grantee shall quietly enjoy it. That it is and shall be free from encumbrances.
That he will make further assurance if need be. That if the grantee be evicted,
he shall pay no rent. That the grantee shall pay rent. That he shall discharge
all dues, and save and keep harmless the grantor. That he shall not alien the
thing granted; or if he do, that the grantor shall have the first refusal
thereof. That he shall not do wast. That he shall have houseboot, hayboot.
That the grantor or grantee shall repair the old housing, or build new. That
he shall pay and discharge all rents and payments issuing out of the land. That
he shall not fell trees, or if he do, that he shall pay to the grantor so much
in money for every tree. That if he fell any underwood, he shall fence it. That
he shall make an estate of land. That he shall be quit of any suit, service, or
payment. That he shall give sufficient security to I S for an hundred pound he
does owe him; and all these and the like covenants are good. And generally
where a condition for the matter See Condition Number. 7.
of it is good, a covenant comprehending the same matter is good also. But if
the matter required to be, or not to be done by Against Law.
See Conditions against Law, Numb. 7. Dier 6.
the covenant be for the substance thereof unlawful, then is the covenant void
and does not bind: and therefore if one covenant to kill, or rob a man, or the
like; this covenant is void. So if one covenant that he will maintain another
in his suits, or that he will not appear in Inquests, or that he will break the
peace, or that he will forestall corn, or the like; these covenants are void.
So if one be tenant in feesimple of land, and he covenant that he will not
alien it; this covenant is void. So if a man be a tradesman, and he covenant 18
Jac. B. R. Jolliffe versus Broad. Pas. 19 Jac. B. R. Tanner versus Brag.
that he will not use or exercise his trade; this restraint if it be absolute
and continual, it is void; but if it be sub modo only, as that he shall not
use his trade at one time, or in one City or Town only, this covenant may be
good. So if a man be by covenant restrained to sow the land which has been
used to be sowed, and this be either absolutely, or sub modo, i. that if he
sow it he shall pay thus much an acre for it; these covenants have been held
to be void. Sed quaere how the law is now, for it seems the Statute of 39 Eliz.
chapter 2. is discontinued. If A owe money to B, and B owe money to C, and Hill. 20
Jac. Co. B. Maire versus Stapleton.
B does make a letter of Attorney to C, to sue A at his own charge, and B does
covenant with C, that he will not release the debt to A; in this case albeit
this be maintenance in C to sue at his own charge, yet this is a good covenant
and not against law. So also if a Deane Trin. 14 Jac. Co. B. Tailors case.
and Chapter, or the like, covenant to renew a lease contrary to the meaning of
the Statute of 18 Eliz. chapter 11. it seems this is a good covenant. And if the
thing to be done by a covenant be in the nature Impossible.
27 H. 8. 27. 4 H. 7. 4.
of it impossible, the covenant is void. And therefore it is, that if a man
covenant to go to Rome in three days, or the like; the covenant is void. So
if a man covenant to make a feoffment to his wife; this covenant is void. But
if a man covenant to make a good estate of land to her in feesimple, or
otherwise, or to find her maintenance, or to give her so much by the year;
these are good covenants. And generally there where the matter being in a
condition will make See Condition Number. 7.
the condition void because it is against Law, there it being in a covenant
will make the covenant void.

If a lessor covenant with his lessee, that he shall and may have Dier 19. 115
houseboot, hayboot, plowboot, etc. by the assignment of the Bailiffe of the
lessor; this is a good covenant: and yet it seems it does not restrain the
power that the lessee has by the law to take these things without assignement.
But if the lessee do covenant that he will not cut any timber, or fuel,
without the leave, or without the assignement of the lessor; this is a good
covenant and does restrain him, for in this and such like cases the rules is,
Modus and conventio vincunt legem.

If an obligee covenant with the obligor, that he will not sue him Mich. 36, 37
Eliz. Co. B. Adjudge Deaux versus Jefferies. 21 H. 7. 23.
Release.
upon the obligation until Easter following; this is a good covenant, but no
release or suspension of the debt.

Perk. Sect. 69.
If there be Lord and tenant of three acres of land, white acre, and two
others, and the Lord grant to the tenant by deed that he will not distrain in
white acre for his rent or services; this is a good covenant, but does not
determine the Seigniory.

If one man grant a mill within his Manor, and covenant for him and Fitz.
Covenant 5.
his heirs that there shall be no other mill set up within the Manor; it seems
this is a good covenant.

If one make a lease wherein are diverse covenants to be performed Fitz.
Covenant 3.
on the part of the lessee, and after the lessee does covenant, that if any of
the covenants be broken, that the lessor shall enter upon the land demised, and
hold it until the lessee make him amends for the damage done by the breach of
the covenant; it seems this is a good covenant, and that the lessor may take
advantage thereof accordingly.

If a man seized of land in fee, covenant to stand seized of it to uses, Plow.
307, 308. 21 H. 7. 18. 27 H. 8. 16. Finchesley 49.
and no estate does rise by the covenant; yet this may be good by way of
covenant, and give remedy to the covenantee in an action of covenant. But with
this difference. If the covenant be future, as where one does covenant with
another, that in consideration of a marriage, his lands shall descend, remain,
or revert to his son and heir apparent, and to the heirs of his body, on
the body of his wife; in this case the covenantee may have a writ of Covenant
upon the covenant. For if a covenant be present, as that a man and his heirs
shall from henceforth stand and be seized to such and such uses, and the uses
will not arise by the Law in the case; in this case no action of covenant will
lie upon this covenant, for this action will never lie upon any covenant, but
upon such a covenant, as is either to do a thing hereafter, or that a thing is
or has heretofore been done, and not when it is for a thing present, as when
A does covenant with B, that his black horse shall be for ever after the horse
of B; this is no good covenant to give the horse to B, or to give him an action
of covenant for him, but A may keep him still notwithstanding.

If one mortgage upon condition to reenter upon payment of an Agree 8. Car.
hundred pound at a day, and the mortgagee does covenant that he will not take
the profits of the land until default of payment; this is a good covenant, and
the mortgagee therefore may not meddle with the profits until the day of
payment come.

If one make a lease for years of land by the words [Demise or 5. What shall be
said a good covenant in Law, upon which an action of covenant may be had. And
what not.
Co. 4. 80. 5. 17. Trin. 3 Jac. B. R. Styles case. Pas. 7 Jac. B. R.
Winsecombes case.
Grant], and there is not contained in the lease any express covenant for the
quiet enjoying of the land; in this case the Law does supply a covenant for the
quiet enjoying of it against the lessor and all that come in under him by title
during the Term, and upon this the lessee, his executors, administrators, or
assigns, may have an action of covenant if he be disturbed. But where there is
an express covenant in the deed for the quiet enjoying of the land, there the
Law will not make this implied covenant. Expressum facit cessare tacitum. And
therefore herein this is not like to the case, Warranty.
where a man does make a lease for life by the words of Dedi and concessi, or
make a lease for life by other words reserving rent, (in which cases the law
does create a warranty against all men during the life of the lessor) for if in
these cases there be an express warranty in the deed, yet this does not take
away nor qualify the implied warranty, but the Lessee may make use of which of
them he will, if he be ousted or evicted by one that has an elder title.

A covenat in particular (being one part of a deed) is subject Plow. 287. See
in Exposition of Deeds before in toto.
6. How a covenant in deed or law shall be taken and expounded. And how it
shall be performed.
to the general rules of exposition of all parts of deeds in general, as to
be always taken most strongly against the covenantor and most in advantage of
the covenantee. 2. To be taken according to the intent of the parties. 3. Vt
res magis valeat etc. 4. When no time is limited for the doing of the thing, it
shall be done in reasonable time, and the like.

In cases where the covenantees have, or are to have several interests Joint
and several.
or estates, there when the covenant is made to and with the Co. 5. 19. Dier
338. Bro. Covenant 49.
covenantees, and cum quolibet eorum, aut alter^ eorum; in this case these
words make the covenant several: as if one by Indenture demise black acre to
A, and white acre to B, and green acre to C, and covenant with them and either
of them, or covenant with them and every of them, that he is lawful owner of
all these acres; in this case the covenant is several: but if he demise to
them the three acres together, and covenant in this manner; the covenant is
joint and not several. And if A and B do covenant jointly, and severally: in
this case the covenant may be joint, or several, and the covenantors may be
sued either the one way or the other, at the election of the covenantee.

If one make a lease of land to another, and covenant that he F. N. B. 145. 1.
Dier 328. 26 H. 8. 3.
For quiet enjoying.
shall quietly enjoy it without the let of any person whatsoever, or without
the let of any person whatsoever claiming by or under the lessor; in both these
cases the covenant shall be taken to extend Mich. 7 Jac. B. R. accord in
Gambles case.
to such persons as have title, or claim some estate under the lessor: for if
in the first case any person that has no title, and in the second case any
person that shall claim under another and has title, or that shall claim under
the lessor, claim, or enter, or otherwise disturb the lessee; this is held to
be no breach of the covenant. Sed quere of the first case. for herein some
conceive a difference Co. 4. 80. Dier 328. Per Furner at Lent Assise Glouc. 23
Car.
between a covenant in deed, and a covenant in law: and that howsoever the
covenant in law is extended only to evictions by title, yet that the covenant
in deed shall be extended further. And therefore that if A make a lease for
years to B, and does covenant that B shall quietly enjoy it during the term
without the interruption of any person or persons; that if a stranger in this
case that has no right does interrupt B, that he may have an action of
covenant: as when such a promise is by word, an action of the case will lie
upon it.

And if the lessor covenant with his lessee, that he has not done Curia Jervis
versus Peade. Mich. 40. 41 El. B. R.
Action of the case.
any act to prejudice the lease, but that the lessee shall enjoy it against all
persons; in this case these words [against all persons] shall refer to the
first, and be limited and restrained to any acts done by him, and no breach
shall be allowed but in such an act. Co. 5. 17. 22 H. 6. 52. Co. 4. 80. Dier
257.


The covenant in law upon the words Demise or Grant also for the quiet enjoying
of the thing demised, is general against all persons that have title during
the Term, and extends to the heir after the death of the lessor, as against
himself only, and shall charge the Executors or Administrators for any
disturbance in the Executors.
life of the covenantor, but not for any disturbance afterward; he that does
sue therefore upon this covenant, must show that he was molested or evicted by
one that had an elder title.

If one does covenant to enter into bond for the quiet enjoying of Co. 5. 78.
land, and does not say what bond; in this case it shall be taken to be a bond
of so much as the land to be enjoyed is worth.

A warranty in a lease for years shall be taken for a covenant for Fitz.
Covenant 21. ^ee before. 7 E. 4. 6. Bro. Grant. 164.
quiet enjoying.

If one covenant with another to acquit him of all charges issuing out of the
land, and after by Parliament the tenth part of the To free from encumbrances
and charges.
value, not of the issues of all lands are given to the King; in this case it
seems the covenant shall not extend to this. But if the Parliament had given
the tenth part exituu^ terre; the covenant would have extended to this as well
as to rents, commons, and such like things, wherewith the land is charged.

If A covenant with B to make such assurance, or such further assurance Co. 5.
19.
of land as the Counsel learned in the law of B shall advise; To make
assurances of land.
in this case albeit B be learned in the law himself, yet he may not devise
this assurance, but some other learned in the law must advise, otherwise A is
not bound to make it.

And if A covenant with B to make such assurance of land by Co. 5. 19, 20. Dier
361. and per Just. Bridgeman.
a day, as B or his heirs shall devise; in this case B or his heirs must first
devise the assurance before A is bound to do any thing. And therefore if one
sell land for money, and the vendee does covenant to make back to the vendor
and his heirs such assurance of the land as the Counsel of the vendor shall
devise within one year, provided that if the vendee make default in the
assurance, then if he do not pay twenty pound to the vendor, that then the
vendee shall stand seized to the use of him and his heirs, and the vendor
tender no assurance, the twenty pound is not paid: in this case the land is in
the vendee freed from the covenant. And therefore in these and such like cases,
where a man is to make such assurance, as A or his heirs, or their Counsel
shall devise; A or his heirs must take care that in time they have an assurance
reasonably drawn and ready to be sealed, and to tender it to him that is to
seal it, for until then there can be no breach of covenant. But if A be
bound to make a feoffement, lease, or other assurance of land to B by a day; in
this case B need not to demand it or tender the assurance, for A at his peril
must do it, otherwise he does break his covenant. Trin. 20 Jac. B. R. Steed
versus Spike.
And yet if in this case B do get the assurance drawn, and tender it to A, it
seems A is bound to seal it, or otherwise he does break his covenant. Co.
5. 20. 22.
And if the case be so that A is bound to make such assurance to B, by a day,
at the costs of B; in this case A must do the first act, viz. notify to B
what manner of assurance he will make that he may know what money to tender,
and when the money is tendered, A must see that he do make the assurance
accordingly at his peril, and if he fail in either of these the covenant is
broken.

If A be bound to make such assurance to B, as by the Counsel Co. 5. 20.
learned of B, upon request made shall be devised: in this case it is
sufficient if the advice be given to B, and that he do make it known to A, and
it is not needful it be given to A immediately. And if Dier 338. Co. 2. 3.
A covenant with B to make such assurance to B as I S shall devise, and I S
does devise a reasonable deed of bargain and sale, and he tender it to A to
seal; in this case A is bound to seal it presently, and he shall not have time
to advise with his Counsel upon the deed, but if he be illiterate and cannot
read the deed, he may refuse and delay to seal it until he can get some body
to read it, which he must do as soon as he can. And if one be bound by
Experientia.
covenant to make an assurance upon request: the covenantee must request and
tender an assurance also, and he must tender such a one also as is reasonable,
otherwise the covenant will not be broken by the refusull or neglect to do
it: as if one be bound to make a feoffment to A upon request; in this case A
must get a naked deed of feoffment drawn without warranty or covenants, and
tender it. And if the covenant be to make such a lease as the former; in this
case the second lease must not differ from the former, and if it do the party
is not bound to seal it.

If one covenant to levy a fine at the next Assizes for thirteen Curia Hill. 7
Iac. Co. B.
years extunc; this shall be taken from the time of the fine levied, and not
from the time of the covenant.

If one bargain and sell land to me by deed indented, and before Adjudge in Sir
Jo. Brets case.
the inrolment of the deed I do covenant with I S to convey all the land
whereof I am seized, and to do this before such a day, and before the day the
deed is enrolled; in this case my covenant shall not extend to this land
conveyed to me by this bargain and sale.

If A covenant with B, that in consideration of a marriage between Dier 371.
the son of A and sister of B, that he at the costs of his son, and by his
sufficient deed will before Easter day assure land to his son, and B does
covenant that if A do perform this, then he will make him a general
release; in this case albeit A be ready, and the son do not tender the
assurance, and the conveyance is not made, B is not bound to make any release.

If one covenant to keep and leave a house in the same or as Fitz. Covenant 4.
good plight as it was at the time of the making of the lease; To repair the
houses.
in this case the ordinary and natural decay of it is no breach of the
covenant; but the covenantor is here by bound to do his best to keep it in
the same plight, and therefore to keep it covered etc.

If the words of a covenant be [that the lessee shall have thorns Dier 19.
by the assignment of the lessor and necessary fuel also;] it seems For the
having of houseboot etc.
by this that there must be an assignment of the fuel as well as of the
thorns.

If the lessor covenant with his lessee that he shall have sufficient
hedgeboote by assignment of the bailif of the lessor; in this case Dier 19, 20.
and by this the lessee is not restrained from that liberty that the law does
give him, and therefore that he may take without assignment: But if the words
be negative, that he shall not take without assignment, or that he shall take
by assignment, and not otherwise, contra.

If A does covenant with B that where as a marriage is intended Trin. 21 Jac. B.
R. George versus Lane.
to be solemnized between A and C the daughter of B at or before To convey
lands of the value of etc.
the fourteeneth day of August next, and where the said B has paid to the said
A a thousand pound for portion etc. the said A in consideration thereof does
covenant with B that he within one year of the day of the marriage will assure
lands of the value of four hundred pound per Annum; in this case albeit the
marriage be not before that day yet the covenant must be performed.

If one make a lease for years of a Manor, and covenant that the That the
lessee shall make estates.
lessee shall make estates for life or years, and that they shall be good; Per
Justice Bridgman.
in this case it seems this covenant shall not be taken to enable the lessee
to make estates for a longer time then his estate will bear.

If the lessee covenant with the lessor that if the lessee be minded That if
the lessee sell the lessor shall have the first refusal.
Dier 13.
to sell his estate the lessor shall have the first refusal; in this case when
the lessee is minded to sell he need do no more but acquaint the lessor with
his purpose, and know his mind, and if he do not answer him presently he may
sell it to whom he will: And if the covenant be further that the lessor shall
give as much as another will, the lessee must tell him what another does offer
him, and ask him whether he will give so much, and if he refuse or do not
accept it presently the lessee may sell to whom he will.

If one covenant to serve me a year, and I covenant to pay him To do one thing
for another.
Co. super Lit. 204. Dier 371. Mich. 7 Jac. Co. B.
ten pound for it; in this case albeit he do not serve me yet I must pay him
the ten pound. But if I covenant with him to pay him ten pound if he serve
me a year contra, for in this case I am not bound to pay him the money unless
he serve me a year. So if one covenant to make new pales so as he may have the
old, in this case it seems he is not bound to make the new pales unless he
may have the old pales. So if one covenant to pay money for service, counsel,
or the like, or covenant to mary ones daughter, or make an estate, and the
covenant is penned conditionally, and so as one thing is the cause of another,
and it is not set down by mutual and reciprocal covenants; in all these
cases if the cause or condition be not observed the covenant shall not be
performed.

If one make a lease for ten years, and covenant that if the lessee Co. 1.
144.
That the lessee shall have the fee.
pay him ten pound within the ten years that he shall have the sea simple,
and the lessee surrender his estate within the time; in this case if the lessee
pay the money the lessor is bound to make the fee simple to him. But if the
words of the covenant be, that if he pay him ten pound within the term he
shall have fee, and the lessee surrender his term, and then pay the ten
pound; in this case the lessor is not bound to make the fee simple, for it was
not paid within the term.

If one covenant to do a thing to I S, or his assigns, or to I S 27 H. 8. 2.
Assigns.
and his assigns by a day, and before the day I S die; in this case it must be
done to his assigns if he before the day name any assignee, and if he do not,
it must be done to his executor or administrator which is an assignee in law.
See more in Condition Number. 8. Obligation, 7.

If one be seized of land in fee, or possessed of a term of years, Dier 303.
Co. 9. 60.
7. When a Covenant in Deed or Law shall be said to be broken. And when not.
And how.
and he does alien it, and supposing he has a good estate, he does covenant
that he is lawfully seized or possessed, or that he has a good estate, or that
he is able to make such an alienation etc. and in truth he has not, but some
other has an estate in it before; in this case the covenant is broken as soon
as it is made. Adjudge Sir Perall Brocas case. 32. Q.
And if I bargain and sell land by deed indented to B, and before the That the
covenant or is seized of a good estate etc.
deed is enrolled I grant the same land to C, and covenant that I am seized of
a good estate of it in fee, and after the deed is enrolled; in this case the
covenant is broken.

If A let land to B, and covenant that he shall quietly enjoy it Mich. 8 Jac.
Lams case. Dier 328. F. N. B. 145. 26 H. 8. 3. Hill. 39 Eliz. B. R. Corns case.
Fitz. Covenant 26. Bro. Covenant. 40.
without the let of any person whatsoever, and A himself, or any For quiet
enjoying.
other person that has any title to the land by or under him, as if he make a
lease of it, or granta rent out of it to another, or any other person that has
any title to the land albeit it be not by or under A as if A were a disseisor,
and the disseisee, do enter or disturb B; in all these cases the covenant is
broken. And so also is the law deemed to be by some in case of covenant in deed
for quiet enjoying, where a stranger or one that has no title to the land does
enter or disturb B. But otherwise it is in case of covenant in law for quiet
enjoying; for in this case if a stranger that has no title to the land does
enter or disturb the lessee, this is no breach of the covenant in law. And in
all cases where any person has title, the covenant is not broken until some
entry or other actual disturbance be made by him upon his title.

If a man make a lease of land, and after make a feoffement of 20 Jac. Bro.
Covenant 7.
the same land, and the feoffee does disturb the lessee; in this case it has
been said this is a breach of the covenant for quiet enjoying. Sed quere.

If a man purchase land to him and his wife and his heirs in fee, Hill. 20 Jac.
adjudg B. R. Butler versus Lady Swinerton.
and then make a lease for years of it to I S, and covenant for him, his
executors and assigns that the lessee, his executors and assigns shall
quietly hold and enjoy the premises without the let of the lessor, his heirs
or assigns or any other person by or through his or their means, title or
procurement, and after the lessor does die, and his wife does enter and
disturb; in this case and by this means the covenant is broken. And so it is
also, if A purchase Swans case. M. 7 and 8 El.
land of B. To have and to hold to A for life, the remainder to C the son of
A in tail, and after A does make a lease of this land to D for years and does
covenant for the quiet enjoying as in the last case, and then he dies, and
then C does out the lessee; in this case this was held to be no breach of the
covenant. So likewise if A be seized of white acre in fee, and take to wife B,
and Dier 42. 26 H. 8. 3. Fitz. Covenant 6. 26.
then make a lease of it to C with such a covenant as before for the quiet
enjoying, and then A does die, and after B does recover dower; by this the
covenant is broken, and yet if the mother of A recover dower and out the lessee
contra. So also if a tenant in tail does make a lease with such a covenant,
and his issue does disturb the lessee; this is no breach of the covenant. And
yet if the lessor be the cause of the gift in tail, or procure the
disturbance, this may be a breach of the covenant. And so also it is where a
man is seized of land in fee, and he does make a lease with such a covenant,
and afterward he does die, and then his heir is in ward by reason of a
tenure, and hereby the lessee is disturbed; it seems this is no breach of this
covenant.

If one covenant that the wife he is about to mary shall quietly Curia. B. R.
pase. 6. Car. Crowles case.
enjoy all her goods, and that the covenantee shall take it into his
possession, and the husband does only take the goods and keep them in his
possession; this is no breach of the covenant.

If a covenant be for the quiet enjoying against all persons but Adjudge Hill.
38 El. Woodroffe versus Greenwood. Adjudge Mich 2. Car. B. R. Sa^ders case.
Dier 240.
the King and his successors; and the Patentee of the King do disturb; this
is a breach of this covenant.

If two make a lease, and covenant that the lessee shall enjoy the land without
the let of them or any other, and one of them alone does disturb the lessee;
this is a breach of the covenant.

If a lessee grant and assign all the land contained in his lease to A, and
does covenant with him that he has not done any act or thing by which the
grant or assignment might be impaired but that the assignee his executors etc.
may enjoy it against all persons, and before this time the wife of the lessor
had recovered and had execution of a third part of this land for her dower; in
this case this is no breach of the covenant, for the words [but that etc.] do
refer to the former and are not absolute.

If A grant the Bailiwicke of W to B for life, and B assign it Adjudge Rich
versus Row. pasch. ^3 Jac. Co. B.
to C for three years, and after to D, and C does covenant with D that he will
not do or suffer to be done any act during the said three years by which the
grant made by A may be forfeit, but that after the three years ended he may
enjoy it in as ample manner as C did or might have done without any act by C,
and after the three years ended C does execute a Process there, and thereby
incroch upon the office; this is no breach of the covenant.

If A grant land to B and his heirs rendering ten pound rent, Curia Hill. 20
Jac. Co. B. Greenway and Truckfalds case.
To free from charges and encumbrances.
and B does sell the land to C and his heirs and does covenant with C that
from such a day he shall enjoy it discharged of all encumbrances, and before
that day a Common Recovery is had against C in which A is vouched, and this is
to the use of C and his heirs, supposing hereby the rent had been gone which
is not so; in this case the covenant is broken, for this rent is an encumbrance.

If a lease be made of land for years, and the lessee devise it to his Co. 10.
52.
wife durante viduitate, and after to his son, and he in reversion does sell
the fee to the woman during the widowhood, and does covenant that the land is
discharged of all former sales, rights, titles, charges: in this case the
covenant is broken at the first by reason of the possibility of the son.

If A grant white acre to B, and covenant that B shall enjoy it 9 Eliz. Co. B.
against all encumbrances, and C does disturb him in the taking of common
there, and this is a common which is against common right and which he has by
prescription: in this case it seems this is a breach of the covenant. But if
it be of a common that is of common right contra.

If A covenant with B before Easter to make him a good sure Dier 139.
To make estates and assurances.
estate of land discharged of all former bargains, leases and encumbrances
whatsoever, (leases or grants for life or years reserving the ancient rent
during the term only excepted) and A after this and before the estate made
does make a grant of all or part of the land reserving the old rent, it seems
this is no breach of the covenant.

If one make a lease to I S for years, and covenant with him that Co. 5. 21.
upon the Surrender of that lease he will make him a new lease, and the lessor
before I S can make any Surrender does sell away the reversion, or make a lease
to another of the land, and so disable himself, this is ipso facto a breach of
the covenant, without any Surrender made by the lessee which in this case is
not needful. For Lex neminem cogit ad vana and in utilia peragenda. So if one
be seized of land in fee, and covenant to make a feoffement of it to I S by a
day upon request, and the Covenantor before the day does make a feoffement of
it to another, and then does die before any request made to him; in this case
the covenant is broken.

If A covenant with B to make such assurance as B, or as the Counsel learned
of B shall devise, and B tender such an assurance to Dier 338. Co. 2. 3.
A to seal, and A does refuse or delay to seal it; this is a breach of the
covenant.

If A does covenant with B, C, D and E to make them a feoffement Bro. Covenant
3.
such a day, and they come to the land at the time to take it, and A does not
make the feoffement; by this the covenant is broken. And so also if B and C
only or one of them does come to the land, for it may be made to any of them in
the name of the rest. But if none of them come to the land albeit the feoffor
never come there it seems the covenant is not broken.

If A covenant with B before Easter next to assure his house Curia B. R.
to him and K his wife during the life of I S, and A surrender his house to the
use of B and such as K shall name at the request of B; in this case the
covenant is broken, for this is no performance of it.

If one covenant to repair, sustain and amend a house, and the To repair.
Dier 324.
house is burnt by the negligence of the covenantor and not repaired again;
this is a breach of this covenant. And if the lessee covenant for him and his
executors to repair at his own costs (the principal timber not hurt or in
decay for lack of reparations or otherwise in default of the lessee or his
executors only except) and he die, and afterward the house is burnt in default
of the executors; in this case the covenant is broken and the executors may be
charged.

If one covenant to leave a wood in the same plight he finds it, Fitz.
Covenant 29. Co. 5. 15. F. N. B. 145. Co. 1. 98. Perk. Sect. 738. Dier 33.
Plow. 29. 40 E. 3. 5.
and he cut down trees; in this case the covenant is broken presently, for it
is now become impossible to be performed by his own act: But if in this case
some of the trees be blowed down with the wind, or the like, by this the
covenant is not broken, for it is now become impossible to be done by the act
of God, and in this case the covenantor is not bound to supply it. And so
likewise of a covenant to repair houses, or if one covenant to sustain houses
or Sea banks, or covenant to leave them in as good case as one does find them,
and the houses be burnt, or thrown down by tempest, or the like, or the banks
be overthrown by a sudden s^ood, or the like accident; in this case the
covenant is not broken by this accident only; but if the covenantor do not
repair and make up these things again in time convenient the covenant will be
broken. And if houses be let to me for years, and I covenant to leave them in
as good plight as I find them, and I throw down the houses, this is no breach
of the covenant for I may reedifie them, and therefore no action will lie upon
this covenant until the end of the term.

If one covenant to repair a house before a day, and it happen Hill. 8 Jac.
Curia.
the plague is in the honse before and until the day; and thereby it is not
done; in this case the covenant is not broken, for this will excuse, but then
it must be done in convenient time afterward, for otherwise the covenant will
be broken.

If a lessee covenant to do all the reparations of a house demised Dier 198.
at his own costs and charges, and he cut trees upon some of the ground demised
to amend the house; it seems this is a breach of his covenant.

If one covenant to pay money at five several days, and he fail Co. super
Lit. 292.
To pay money.
of payment the first day; by this the covenant is broken.

If one take land sowed or a stock of cattle in lease for years, 40 E. 3. 5.
To leave a stock etc.
and the lessee covenant to leave it in as good plight as he does take it; in
this case he must leave it sowed again, and if any of the cattle die, he must
make up the number, otherwise he does break his covenant.

If a Corporation do covenant not to take Toll, and their Common Not to take
toll.
officer appointed for that purpose does take it; this is a 43 E. 3. 17.
breach of the covenant.

If A covenant with B to build a house by a day, and B does 18 E. 4. 8. Kelw.
34. Trin. 36 El. B. R. Carrell versus Read.
To build a house.
forbid him, and thereupon he does forbear to do it, and does it not; in this
case the covenant is broken, for this will not excuse him: But if he do by any
actual impediment hinder him, or be the cause why the thing is not done, then
the not doing of it is no breach of the covenant. And therefore if a lessee
covenant to cleanse one of the ditches in the land demised, and the lessor enter
upon To clen^e a ditch.
the land it self and keep out the lessee, and he does not cleanse the ditch
by the time; by this the covenant is broken: but if in this case the lessor do
by force keep the lessee out of the ditch or place it self, contra.

If A and B be Jointenants of a shop, and A covenant with Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
Siliard versus Loc.
To have liberty to go in and out of a shop.
B that he and his assigns shall have free ingresse and egresse in and out of
the shop, and A does appoint C his servant to enter as servant to him and to
occupy in common with A and this servant does expel the servant of B; in this
case this is a breach of the covenant.

If A covenant with B that B shall come four times a year 3 H. 4. 8.
into the house of A without being outsted by A and A when he To come into a
house.
does see B coming does shut the doors and windows and does not suffer B to
come in; by this the covenant is not broken.

To mary another Make a feoffment etc. Tender and refusal.
If A covenant with B to mary the daughter of B, make a feoffement, 33 H. 6.
18. Bro. Covenant 3. Fitz. Bar 62.
or do any other act to C (who is a stranger to the covenant) and A does
tender it and offer to do as much as does lie in his power, but the stranger
does refuse it, and thereby it is not done; yet this does not excuse but the
covenant is broken. But if the covenant be to do any such act to the
covenantee himself, and the covenantor tender it and the covenantee refuse it;
by this the covenant is performed.

See more in the last question, and in Obligation Numb. 7, 8, 9. and Mich. 7
Jac. Co. B.
in Condition Numb. 9, 10.

Any one that is party to the deed to whom the covenant is made 8. Who shall or
may have advantage of a covenant in deed or law, and bring a writ of covenant
upon the breach of it. Or not.
may take advantage of the covenant, but not a stranger; for if A covenant with
B to do an act to C who is no party to the deed, and he does it not, B and not
C must sue him upon this breach.

If a lease be made of land to a husband and wife for years, and Co. 5. 17.
Dier 257. 47 E. 3. 12.
the lessor does enter upon the land and put them both out, or the one of them
after the death of the other, in this case both of them whiles they both live,
and the survivor after the death of one of them may have this action of
covenant upon the covenant in law. So if a wardship be granted to a woman by
deed, and she take a husband and die; the husband shall have advantage of this
covenant in law made by the word [grant] if he be disturbed. So if one by the
words [demise or grant] lease land to a woman sole for years, who takes a
husband and dies; in this case if the husband be disturbed he shall take
advantage of this covenant in law.

If a feoffement be made in fee, and the feoffor does covenant Heir.
Dier 338.
to warrant the land, or otherwise to the feoffee and his heirs; in this case
the heir of the feoffee shall take advantage of this. As if A covenant with B
and his heirs to infeoffe B and his heirs of land, and B die before it be
done, in this case his heirs shall take advantage thereof. And if A, B and C
have lands in coparcenery, and they purchase other lands in fee, and they
covenant each to other his heirs and assigns to make such conveyance to the
heir of him that shall die first of a third part as he shall devise, in this
case the heir not the executor shall take advanntage of the covenant.

Executors and Administrators shall take advantage of inherent Executors and
administrators.
Co. 5. 17. F. N. B. 145. H. Dier 112. 271.
covenants, albeit they be not named. And therefore if A covenant to do a
thing to B and do not name his executors or administrators, and it be not
done, it seems the executors or administrators of B may have an action of
covenant for the not doing of it. As if one covenant with I S to pay him money
at Michaelmas and do not say to his executors etc. and he die before the time;
in this case his executor or administrator shall take advantage of this
covenant and may recover the money.

S e Condition Numb. 12. Co. 5. 18. 9 Jac. B. R. Wilborne and Bestwichs case
accord.
Grantees of reversions shall have the like advantage against Assignees o^
Grantees.
Fermors (by action only) for any covenant or agreement contained in their
lease as the lessors their heirs or successors might. And so also shall
lessees against grantees of reversions (recoveries in value except) by the
statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 34 And herein (as in the cases of a condition before)
a difference is taken between covenants that are inherent, and covenants that
are collateral. For the covenants whereof grantees by this statute shall take
advantage are inherent covenants. i. such covenants as do concern the thing
granted and tend to the supportation of it: As where a lessee for life or years
does covenant with his lessor and his heirs to keep the houses demised in good
reparations, or the like, and after the lessor does grant away the reversion of
all Mich. 8 Jac. Pimes case.
or part of the houses to I S; in this case I S shall take advantage for any
breach of the covenant in his time, but not for any breach before the time the
reversion was granted. But if the lessee does covenant with his lessor and his
heirs to pay him a sum of money, or make him a feoffement or the like, and
then the lessor does grant the reversion to I S, in this case I S shall not
take advantage of this covenant: And yet the executors or administrators of the
lessor shall take advantage of this covenant.

Regularly every assignee of the land or thing demised shall take Co. 5. 17.
advantage of inherent covenants, as if a covenant be, to have Estovers to
burn in the house demised, or to have timber to repair, or if the covenant be
that the lessor or lessee shall repair, or the like. And therefore of these
assignees in deed and in law assignees of assignees in infinitum shall take
advantage, and assignees of executors or administrators, Tenants by Statute, or
Elegit, or after a sale upon a Fieri facias, a husband in the right of his
wife; any one of these and any other that shall come lawfully to a term unto
which such a conveant is incident, albeit he be not named yet may he take
advantage of it.

If a lease for years be made to I S by the words [Demise or Co. 4. 80. Dier
257. Fitz. covenant 30.
Grant] and the lessee assign this over to I D; in this case I D may take
advantage of the covenant in law, and bring an action against the lessor if he
be disturbed.

If a lease for years be made of land, and the lessor does covenant Co. 3. 63.
F. N. B. 145.
with the lessee and his assigns to do, or not to do something; in this case
an assignee by word or an assignee by deed may take advantage of this covenant.

If two coparcenours make Partition of land, and the one of them Co. super Lit.
385. Co. 5. 23. 18.
does covenant with the other to acquit her and her heirs of a suit that
issued out of the land, and the covenantee does alien her part to a stranger;
in this case the alienee shall have the same advantage for acquitall of the
land as the covenantee had. So if A be seized of the Manor of B whereof a
chapel is parcel, and a Prior with the consent of his covent had covenanted
with A and his heirs Lords of the Manor to celebrate divine service in the
chapel, and after A had sold the Manor; in this case the vendee or assignee
of the Manor should have had the same advantage of the covenant the vendor had.
But if the Lord had sold the chapel the assignee of the chapel should not
taken advantage of the covenant. And if a covenant be to say divine service in
the chapel of a stranger; in this case the assignee of the Manor in which the
chapel is shall not take advantage of the covenant.

Regularly all those that do seal and deliver the deed and are 9. Who shall
be bound and charged by a covenant. And against whom a writ of covenant does
lie. And where. Or not.
Co. 5. 16. 17, 18.
named and bound by the express words of the covenant, whether the covenant be
collateral or inherent, are bound by the covenant contained in the deed; And
therefore if heirs, executors, administrators or assigns be named in the
covenant, for the most part they are bound by the covenant. And in all cases of
inherent covenants also, where a man does covenant for himself only, and does
not name his executors and administrators or either of them; they are bound and
may be charged by the covenant notwithstanding. Executors, Administrators.
And in some cases the law is so also for collateral covenants. And in most
cases of inherent covenants that tend to the support of the thing granted; (in
respect of which it is presumed the lessor took the less for the land) such
as have the land, albeit they be neither executors nor administrators or either
of them but assignees etc. shall be charged by the covenant though they be not
named, for these covenants are said to run with the land.

If a feoffement, or lease be made to two, or to a man and his Co. super Lit.
231. Dier 13. Bro. covenant 6. Det. 80.
wife, and there are diverse covenants in the deed to be performed on the part
of the feoffees, or lesses, and one of them does not seal, or the wife does,
or does not seal during the coverture, and he, or she that does not seal does
notwithstanding accept of the estate and occupy the lands conveyed or demised;
in these cases as touching all inherent covenants, as for payment of rent, and
the accessaries thereof, as clauses of distress, of reentry, of nomine poene,
reparations, and the like, they are bound by these covenants as much as if they
do seal the deed. So if a lease be made to A for years or life the remainder
to I S in fee, and there is a rent reserved, or there be diverse covenants on
the part of the grantees, and I S does never seal the deed or counter part;
yet if in this case he accept the estate after the death of A he must pay the
rent and perform all the covenants that are inherent. So also if there be
covenants in the Kings Patent to be performed on the part of the Patentee. As
Experientia. Pasc. 14. Jac. B. R. Bret and Cumberlands case.
if there be this clause in the Patent [and that I S (the Patentee) shall
repair the house when it is decayed;] in this case the Patentee is bound by
this covenant, and all such like covenants. But Quere of collateral covenants
in the first cases, for therein it seems the feoffee or lessee is not bound.
And yet it is said, that if an indenture Co. super Lit. 231.
be made between A of the one part and B and C of the other part, and therein
there is a lease made by A to B and C on certain conditions, and B and C are
bound to A by the indenture in twenty pound to perform the conditions and B
only does seal the deed and not C; yet in this case if C accept of the estate
he is bound by the covenants, and one of them cannot be sued without the other
whiles they are both living. Qui sentit commodum sentire debet et onus. Et
transit terra cum onere.

If a man covenant for him and his heirs to do any thing whatsoever; Co. 5.
17. Bro. covenant 38. 32 H. 6. 32. Dier 257. Fit^. covenant. 31.
hereby his heirs are bound. But otherwise except the Heir*
heirs be bound by the deed by express name, an heir shall scarcely be bound
or charged in any case by a deed. And therefore it is that if the lessee for
years be ousted by any other but the heir himself, no action of covenant will
lie against the heir unless there be an express covenant wherein and whereby
the lessor and his heirs are bound. But if he be ousted by the heir himself
it seems an action of covenant will lie against him. And yet if he be ousted
by an elder title from the lessor co^tra, for in this case the heir shall not be
charged.

If a man do covenant for himself only, to pay money, build a 10 H. 7. 10.
Dier 19. 14, Bro. covenant 50 Dier 114.
Executors. Administrators
house, for quiet enjoying, or the like, and he does not say in the covenant
[his executors Descent administrators etc.] yet hereby his executors and
administrators are bound and shall be charged. And yet if a lessee for years
covenant for himself to repair the houses demised, omitting other words; it
seems in this case he is bound to repair only during his life, and the
executors or administrators are not bound. So if a lessor covenant for himself
only to discharge the lessee of all quit rents out of the land; it seems this
covenant is only personal, and shall bind the covenantor only during his life.
But if in these cases these words [during the terme] be added in the covenant,
as if a lessee covenant for himself to repair the houses during the term, or
the lessor covenant for himself to discharge the lessee of all quit rents
during the term; in these cases it seems the executors and administrators
also will be charged after his death.

If a lessee be ousted by one that has title; it seems an action Dier 257.
of covenant will lie for this ouster against the executor or administrator
upon the covenant in law, if he were put out in the life time of the lessor and
not otherwise, for if there be tenant for life the remainder in fee to another,
and the tenant for life by the words [demise or grant] does make a lease for
years and dye, and after he in the remainder does enter and put out the lessee
for years; in this case he cannot upon this covenant in law charge the
executors or administrators of the lessor. But upon an express covenant for
quiet enjoying he may. Assignees or Grantees.


In some cases an assignee shall be charged though he be not named, Co. 5. 16.
and in some cases shall not be charged though he be named, and in some cases
he shall be charged when he is named, as when the covenant does extend to a
thing in esse, parcel of the demise, there the thing to be done is appurtenant
and quodammodo annexed to the thing, and shall bind the assignee though he be
not expressly named, as a covenant to repair etc. But if the covenant be
annexed to a thing not in esse before but de novo to be erected on the thing,
as to set up a new house, or the like; in this case it will not bind the
assignees unless they be named in the covenant. And if the covenant be to do
a thing merely collateral; in that case it will not bind the assignees albeit
they be named expressly. Also when a contract is personal only, and a man does
bind himself and his assigns; his assigns shall not be bound hereby: as if
one demise sheep or other stock of cattle, or any other personal goods for
any time, and the lessee does covenant for him and his assigns at the end of
the term to deliver them in as good plight as they were at the ^ime of the
demise or such a price for them, and the lessee assign them; in this case this
covenant will not bind the assignee: but the executors and administrators of
the first lessee are bound hereby. So if one demise a house and land Executors.
with a stock or sum of money for years, rendering rent, and the lessee does
covenant for him and his assignees to deliver the money at the end of the
term; in this case an assignee shall not be bound by this covenant as the
executors and administrators of the lessee shall.

If a lessee covenant to repair the houses demised or to discharge Co. 5. 17.
Dier 27. Bro. descent 50.
the lessor de omnibus oneribus circa terram, or the like; in these cases and
such like albeit assignees be not named in the covenant, yet assignees and
assignees of assignees in infinitum, and al others that shall come to the land
by the act of law, or by the act of the parties shall be bound and charged by
this covenant.

If a lessee covenant for him and his assigns to build a new house upon the
land demised within seven years, and the lessee assign it Co. 5. 17.
over; in this case the assignee is chargeable. But if a man covenant for him
and his assigns to make a feoffment, obligation, or the like, in this case the
assignee shall not be charged albeit he be named. And if the lessee covenant
for himself, or for himself, his executors and administrators only to build a
new house upon the land demised, and the lessee assign over the land; in this
case the assignee is not bound by this covenant.

If a lease be made rendering rent, and if it be arere that the lessee Thins
case. verse. Cholms ley. Trin. 36 Eliz. C. B.
his executors and assigns shall forfeit three shillings four pence nomine
poenae, and the lessee assign the term; in this case it seems the assignee
shall be charged with the nomine poenae.

And in all the cases before where a covenant is broken, an action Bro.
covenant 32.
of covenant may be brought. But herein note that howsoever in Note.
diverse of the cases before assignees are chargeable upon a covenant, yet the
lessee himself is not hereby discharged, but the lessor or grantee of the
reversion has election to charge which of them Election.
he will. And therefore if a lessee covenant for him and his assigns to
repair, and the lessee assign; in this case the lessor may have his action of
covenant against either of them. And if a lessee covenant Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
Curia Bret versus Cumberla^d.
for him, his executors, administrators and assigns to repair the houses
demised, and he in reversion does grant away his reversion, and the lessee
assig^e his estate; in this case albeit the grantee of the reversion have
accepted the rent of the assignee of the term, yet he may still have an action
of covenant against the executor of the lessee upon this covenant. So if a
Patentee covenant for him and his assigns to repair, and he assign; the King
may have his action against either of them.

If A and B do covenant for themselves jointly without more Co. 5. 23.
words; the covenant is joint and one of them cannot be charged without the
other. But if they covenant for themselves severally the covenant is several
and they may be sued apart. And if they covenant jointly and severally; then
the covenant is joint and several, and they may be sued either way at the
election of the covenantee.

Where the deed it self wherein the covenants are contained, Dier 20. Co. 5.
23.
10. W^^^n a covenant shall be said to be gone and discharged. And when not.
And how.
or the estate on which the covenants as accessory to the principal does
depend, is gone and determined there regularly the covenants are gone also. And
therefore if a lease for life or years be surrendered, whereby the estate is
gone, or a deed become void by rasure or the like, and there be covenants
contained in the deed; by these means the covenants are gone also. But this
surrender does not discharge the breach of covenant which was before the 40 E.
3. 27. Bro. Surrender 47. Covenant 41. Hill. 4 Jac. B. R. Moile. verse. Austin.
surrender. For if a Parson lease his glebe for years, and after resign,
whereby the lease for years does become void; in this case the covenants of the
lease as to the time before the resignation shall be said to be in force still.

Where a covenant is become impossible to be done by the act of God, as where
one does covenant to serve another seven Co. 1* 98. Plow. 286.
years, and he die before the seven years be expired; by this the covenant is
discharged.

Where there is an express covenant in a deed for quiet enjoying, Co. 4. 80.
the employed covenant is gone. Expressum facit cessare tacitum.

By a release of all covenants from the covenantee the covenant 18 E. 4. 8.
Release.
is discharged, so as the release be by deed, for a covenant by deed cannot be
discharged by word. And therefore if A by deed covenant with B to build a house
by a day, and B does wish him to let it alone; this is no discharge of the
covenant.

If the lessor accept the rent of the lessee or his assignee after Pasc. 6.
Car. B. R. Adjudg Bachelors case.
a covenant broken; this does not discharge the breach of the covenant, but the
lessor may sue for it notwithstanding.

And so we come to a Warranty being a special kind of covenant, and therefore
next in order to be spoken to.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Warranty.
A Warranty is a covenant real annexed to lands or tenements Finch. ley 39.
Co. super Lit. 365.
1. Warranty. Quid.
whereby a man and his heirs are bound to warrant the same. Or it is where a
man is bound to warrant the land or hereditament that another has. And he that
does make this warranty is called the warrantor, and he to whom it is made
Warrantor. Warrantee.
the warrantee.

There are two kind of warranties. 1. A warranty in deed, 2. Quotuplex.
Co. 1. 2. super Lit. 365. 4. 81.
or an express warranty, which is when the same is expressed. i. when a fine,
or feoffement by deed is levied or made in fee, or a lease for life is made by
deed, comprehending warranty, or which has an express clause of warranty
contained in it, as when a conusor, feoffor, or lessor does covenant to warrant
the land to the conusee, feoffee, or lessee; whch is in these words. Ego I S
and heredes mei warrantizabimus and imperpetuum defendemus W S and heredibus
suis tenementa predicta contra omnes homines imperpetuum. And by the Statute of
Bigamis Dedi is made an express warranty during the life of feoffor. 2. A
warranty in law, or an implied warranty, which is when it is not expressed by
the party but tacit made and implied by the law, whereof see diverse Examples
infra. The warranty in deed also is either lineall, which Co. super 383, 384.
370. 365.
is thus described. A covenant real annexed to the land by him which either
was owner or might have inherited the land and from whom his heir lineall or
collateral might by possibility have claimed the land as heir from him that
made the warranty. Or else it is collateral, which is thus described. A
warranty made by him that had no right or possibility of right to the land and
is collateral to the title of the land. Also there is a warranty which does
commence by disseisin or wrong, of all which ^ee diverse examples afterward.
And note that all these things here are to be applied to warranties of lands
and concerning freeholds and inheritances, for there is a warranty of goods and
cattells in contracts of which we treat not here.

The fruit and effect of this warranty in deed is, that it does always Co.
super Lit. 265. 372. 365. 384. Co. 4. 121. 10. 97.
conclude and bar the warrantor himself of the land so 3. The fruit and
effect of it, and what use may be made of it.
warranted for ever, so that all his present and future rights that he has or
may have therein are hereby extinct. And therefore if the father be diss^ised,
and the son in his life time release all his right to the land to the
disseisor, and make a warranty of the land in the deed, and then the father
dies, and the right of the land descends to the son; in this case albeit
the release does not bar the son yet the warranty does bar him. And for
the most part also it does conclude and bar the heirs of him that made the
warranty to whom the same warranty does descend to demand the same land against
the warranty, for if it be a lineall warranty, it is a bar of an estate in
fee simple without any Assets. i. without any other land descended to him in
fee simple from the same Ancestor that made the warranty: And with assets it is
a bar of an estate in tail. And if it be a collateral warranty, it is with
or without assets a bar of an estate in fee simple or ^ee tail, and all
possibility of right thereunto; and yet so as it does not pass any estate or
right but only bind the right so long as the warranty is in force, for if the
warranty be avoided the right may be revived. But neither the lineall or
collateral warranty can enlarge an estate. And therefore if a lessor by deed
release to his lessee for Co. super Lit. 389. etc.
life, and warrant the land to him and his heirs; this does not make his
estate greater, neither will it bar titles of entry or action in cases of
Mortmaine, consent to a Ravishor, mortgage, or dower. And therefore if an
Ancestor of the Lord has title to enter upon an Alienation in Mortmaine, and
he release, or make a feoffement with warranty; this warranty will neither
bar him nor his heir. So if a collateral Ancestor will make a warranty
which does after descend upon one that has title of entry upon a condition
broken; this will not bar his entry etc. neither will it bar any right that
shall commence after the warranty made. And the warranty that does commence by
disseisin does not bind or bar any estate with or without Assets.

And in cases where the lineall or collateral warranty is a bar, Co. super
Lit. 265. Co. 10. 98, 99. Dier 42. Co. super Lit. 101.
there if the party be impleaded by him or his heirs that made the warranty,
the party impleaded that is tenant of the land may plead and show forth this
warranty against him, and de mand Judgment whether he contrary to his own
warranty shall be suffered or received to demand the thing warranted; and this
in pleading is called a Rebutter. And if he be impleaded or ^ued by another for
Rebut^er. Quid.
the land, then he to whom the warranty is made or his heirs may vouch. i.
call in the warrantor or his heirs to warrant the land. Voucher. Quid.
And this is an interpleader in the nature of an action brought by the
warrantor against the warrantee, wherein he that does vouch, (called the
voucher) is demandant, and he that is vouched (called Voucher. Vouchee.
the vouchee) is made tenant or defendant to the action, and the vouchor is as
it were out of the suite. And this second tenant the vouchee is called the
tenant by the warranty. And hereupon shall Tenant by the warranty. Quid.
Summons ad warrantizandum. Quid.
issue forth to the Sheriff a writ to summon the vouchee to appear called a
Summons ad warrantizandum. And if the vouchee appear he must plead to the
vouchor, and if he show cause why he should not warrant, that must be tried,
and this showing of cause is called a Counterplea to the voucher: but if he
plead in a voidance of the warranty, it is called a Counterplea to the
warranty. And Counterplea to the voucher. Quid. Connterplea to the warranty.
Quid.
if he cannot gainesay the warranty the stranger shall recover the land
demanded against the vouchor, and he shall recover as much other land against
the vouchee of the lands he has or had at the time of the voucher. And this
recovery of other land is called a recovery in value. And if the vouchee has
at the time of the voucher and recovery no lands descended to him to answer the
warranty Recovery in value. Quid.
but has afterward land happening to him by descent from that Ancestor, then
he may have a resummons and recover the land that does after happen. But if the
Sheriff return upon the summons, that vouchee is summoned and he does make
default, then he shall have a Magnum cape ad valentiam, when if he make default
again the Judgment shall be given against the vouchor, and he shall recover
over in value against the vouchee, and if the vouchee appear and then make
default the vouchor shall have a parvum cape ad valentiam, and then if he make
default Judgment shall be given as before. But if the Sheriff return upon
the summons, he has nothing whereby he may be summoned, then may the vouchor
have a writ called Sequatur sub suo periculo, whereupon shall go an Alias and
Pluries, and if the like return be made the Sequatur sub su^ periculo. Quid.
demandant shall have Judgment against the first tenant, but he cannot recover
in value against the vouchee. And if the case be so the vouchee had a warranty
from some other for the land, he may dearaigne. i. maintain the warranty over
and shall recover Dearaignment del Garranty. Quid.
in value over also against his vouchor in the same manner as before.

Or the warrantee to whom the warranty is made or his heirs may at any time
before they be impleaded for the land if they will F. N. B. 134. Co super Lit.
102.
bring a Warantia Chartae upon the warranty in the deed against ^arrantia
^hartae. Quid.
the warrantor or his heirs, and hereby all the land the heir of the
warrantor has by descent from the Ancestor that made the warranty at the time
of this writ brought shall be bound and charged with the warranty into whose
hands soever it go afterward, so that if the land warranted be after
recovered from the warrantee he shall recover so much land over again of the
other land of the heir of the warrantor or of the warrantor himself if he be
living. And albeit the warrantee or his heirs do recover in this writ yet he
may after upon occasion vouch the warrantor or his heirs notwithstanding. And
herein observe it is good policy if a man suspect any thing to bring this writ
of Warrantia Chartae betimes, because it binds all the land of the warrantor
from the time of the writ brought and not any of his other lands he had before
that time that are now aliened.

The words Dedi and concessi, or Dedi only in a feossement do Co super Lit.
383, 384. Co. 4. 81.
4. What words and clauses in a deed will make a warranty. Or not.
make a warranty when an estate of franketenement or inheritance does pass by
the deed. But the word Concessi only, or Demisi and concessi, do not make such
a warranty. And by force of the Statute of Bigamis chap. 6. Dedi is made an
express warranty during the life of the feoffor.

The word, Warrantizo, or warrant is the only apt and effectual Lit. Sect.
733. Co. 5. 17, 18.
word to make an express warranty or a warranty in deed, and therefore this
word only is used in fines. And the words Defendo, or Acquieto, albeit they be
commonly used in deeds, yet of themselves without the other will not make a
warranty.

If a man by deed does grant to warrant land to I S and his Dier 42. Co. super
Lit. 383.
heirs, and the warrantor does not bind his heirs to the warranty; or does
not warrant to I S and his heirs but to I S only; or does warrant to I S and
his assigns and not to I S and his heirs; or does bind himself and his
heirs to warrant the land, but does not say how long, nor against whom; these
are good warranties, but how they shall be taken see afterward.

A warranty in deed may be annexed to estates of inheritance Co. super Lit.
366. 389.
or freehold, and that not only of corporeal things which pass 5. To what
things a warranty may be annexed and extended. And to what not. And how.
by livery, as houses, lands, and the like, but also of incorporeall things
which lie in grant, as Advowsons, Rents, Commons, Estovers, and the like which
issue out of lands or tenements, and that not only to inheritances in esse but
also to such as are newly created, as a man (some say) may grant a rent etc. de
novo out of land for life, in tail, or in fee, with warranty. So a warranty in
law may extend to a rent newly created, and therefore if such a rent be granted
in exchange for an acre of land; this Exchange and warranty thereunto annexed
is good. But a warranty may not be annexed to an estate or lease for years,
albeit it be a lease of one thousand years, nor to any other chattell, and
therefore in all actions the which less^e for years may have as trespass etc.
a warranty cannot be pleaded in bar.

A warranty may be made upon any kind of conveyance, as upon Co. super Litt.
372. 385. Litt. Sect. 738. 745 706.
fines, feoffements, gifts, etc. also a warranty may be made by and upon
releases and confirmations made to the tenant of the land, albeit he that makes
the release or confirmation has no right to the land, etc. And yet some say,
that by a release or confirmation where there is no estate created, or
transmutation of the possession, a warranty cannot be made to the assignee. But
if A be seized of land in fee, and B does release to him, or does confirm his
estate in fee with warranty to him, his heirs, and assigns; in this case all
men agree this warranty to be good; and so also it seems it is in the case last
before, and that both the party himself, and the assignee may vouch.

A warranty in Law may be good in his creation, albeit it be made 6. What shall
be a good warranty in Law. And how it shall bar and bind.
Co. super Litt. 384. 386.
without deed, for if a man by his last Will and Testament devise lands to
antoher man for life, or in tail rendering rent; to this estate there is a
warranty in Law annexed.

The words Dedi and concessi, or Dedi only in a feoffment, make a Co. super
Litt. 384. F. N. B. 134. Co. 4. 80.
good warranty in Law. But the word Concessi only in fine or feoffment, does
not make a warranty in law. And albeit there be an express warranty in the
deed, yet this does not take away the implied warranty of the Law. And this
warranty in Law by Dedi and Concessi, or by Dedi only, is a general warranty
during the life of the feoffor.

Every partition and exchange implies in it, and has annexed Partition.
Exchange.
Co. super Litt. 102. 384.
to it a special warranty in Law, and how it shall bar and be extended see in
Exchange.

Every tenure by homage Auncestrel, i. where a tenant and his Co. 4. 80.
Ancestors have held land of a Lord, and his Ancestors time out of mind by
homage has a warranty in Law annexed to it, by which the Lord is bound to
warrant it to the tenant and his heirs.

If one make a gift in tail or lease for life of land by deed or without Co.
super Litt. 334.
deed reserving a rent, or of a rent-service by deed; in these cases there is
annexed an implied warranty against the donor or lessor, his heirs and assigns.

When dower is assigned to a woman, there is a warranty in Law included, which
is that the tenant in dower being impleaded, shall Co. super Litt. 384.
vouch and recover in value a third part of the two parts whereof she is
dowable.

And this warranty in Law is of the nature of a lineall warranty, Co. super
Lit. 384.
and shall bind as a lineall warranty only, for it does never bar any
collateral title. And hence it is, that this warranty and assets in some cases
is a good bar, as if tenant in tail exchange for other lands which are
descended to the issue, and he has accepted of them, or if not, that other
lands are descended to him. But if tenant in tail of lands make a gift in tail
or lease for life rendering rent and die; in this case this is no bar. And yet
if other assets in fee simple descend, this warranty in Law and assets is a
good bar.

To every good warranty in deed that must bar and bind these Co. super Litt.
367.
7. What shall be said a good warranty in deed. Or not. And how it shall bar
and bind. Infant.
things are requisite, 1. That the person that does warrant, be a person able,
for if an infant make a feoffment in fee of land, and thereby does bind him
and his heirs to warrant the land; in this case albeit the feoffement be only
voidable, yet the warranty is void. 2. That the warranty be made by deed in
writing, for if a Litt. Sect. 703. Co. super Litt. 386.
man make a feoffement by word, and by word bind him and his heirs to warrant
the land; this is not a good warranty. So if a man give lands to another by his
last Will, and thereby bind him and his heirs to warrant it; this warranty
albeit the Will be in writing is void. 3. That there be some estate to which
the warranty Co. 10. 96. and Super Litt. 384.
is annexed, that may support it, for if one covenant to warrant land to
another and make him no estate, or make him an estate that is not good, and
covenant to warrant the thing granted; in these cases the warranty is void. 4.
That the estate to Co. super Litt. 378. 26 H. 8. 9.
which the warranty is annexed, be such an estate as is able to support it,
and therefore that it be a lease for life at the least, for if one make a lease
for years of land, and bind himself and his heirs to warrant the land; this
is no good warranty, neither will it have the effect of a warranty: but this
may amount to a covenant on which an action of covenant may be brought. 5. That
the wartanty Co. super Litt. 12. Litt. fol. 161 Sect. 735. (...)
descend upon him that is heir of the whole blood by the common Law to him that
made the warranty, and not upon another: for if tenant in tail in Borough
English (where by custom the youngest son is to inherit) discontinue the tail,
and have issue two sons, and the Uncle release to the discontinuee with
warranty and dies; this is no good warranty to bind the son. So if in this
case tenant in tail discontinue the tail with warranty etc. having two
sons, and die seized of other lands in the same Borough in fee simple, to
the value of the lands in tail; the younger son is not barred by this
warranty. So if one give his land Litt. ^o. 161.
to the eldest son, and the heirs males of his body, the remainder to the
second son, etc. and the eldest son does alien with warranty having issue a
daughter and die; this is no good warranty to bar the second son. So if
tenant in tail have issue two daughters by diverse venters and die, and they
enter and a Litt. Sect. 737.
stranger does disseise them, and one of them does release all her right, and
bind her and her heirs to warrant it; in this case the warranty is not good
to bar the sister: but if they had been by one venture contra. So if two
brothers be by demi venters, and Co. super Litt. 387. Litt. Sect. 718.
the eldest does release with warranty to the disseisor of the uncle, and dies
without issue, and the younger dies; this is no good warranty to bar the
younger brother, for a warranty must evermore descend upon him that is heir at
the Common Law to him that made it. 6. That he that is heir do continue to be
so, and Litt. Sect. 745. 746.
that neither the descent of the title nor the warranty be interrupted, for if
one bind him and his heirs to warrant, and after is attainted of treason or
^elony, and die; this warranty does not bind his heir. So if tenant in tail
be disseised, and after release to the disseisor with warranty, and after the
tenant in tail is attainted of felony, and has issue and die; this warranty
will not bind the issue. 7. That the estate of freehold that is to be Co. 10.
96. 97. super Litt. 388. 21 H. 7.
barred be put to a right before or at the time of the warranty made, and that
he to whom the warranty does descend, have then but a right to the land, for a
warranty will not bar any estate of freehold or inheritance in esse in
possession, reversion, or remainder, that is not displaced and put to a right
before or at the time of the warranty made, though after at the time of the
descent of the warranty, the estate of freehold or inheritance be displaced and
divested. And therefore if there be father and son, and the son ^^th a
rent-service, suit to a mill, rentcharge, rent-seck, common of pasture, or
other profit apprender out of land of the father, and the father makes a
feoffment in fee with warranty and dies; this shall not bar the son of the
rent, common, etc. And albeit the son after the feoffement with warranty and
before the death of the father had been disseised, and so being out of
possession the warranty had descended upon him, yet this warranty should not
bind him. So if my collateral Auncestor release to my tenant for life with
warranty and die, and this warranty descend upon me; this shall not bind my
reversion or remainder. But if in the case before the son be disseised of the
rent etc. and affirm himself to be disseised by the bringing of an Assise
(for otherwise he shall not be said to be out of possession of a rent, or the
like) and after the father does release with warranty and die; in this case the
collateral warranty shall bind and bar the son of his rent etc. And if in
the last case my tenant for life be disseised, and my Auncestor does release to
the disseisor with warranty and die; this is a good warranty to bar and bind
me. 8. That Litt. Sect. 734.
the warranty do take effect in the life time of the Auncestor, and that he be
bound by it, for the heir shall never be bound by an express warranty, but
where the Auncestor was bound by the same warranty, and therefore a warranty
made by Will is void. 9. That the heir claim in the same right that the
Auncestor does, Co. super Litt. 370.
for if one be a successor only in case of a corporation, he shall not be
bound by the warranty of a natural Auncestor. 10. That Litt. Sect. 726. Co. 1.
67. 140. super Litt. 380.
the heir that is to be barred by the warranty be of full age at the time of
the fall of the warranty, for if my Auncestor make a feoffment, or a release
with warranty, and at this time I am within age, and after he die, and the
warranty descend upon me within age; this warranty shall not bind me: but if I
become of age after the warranty of my Auncestor, and before his death; in this
case the warranty may bar me. And in the first case it will bar me also,
whiles it is in ^orce; but I may by my entry avoid it. And the same Law is of a
woman covert. And yet if the entry of an infant or a woman covert be not lawful
when the warrantie does descend; in this case the warrantie shall bind them as
well as any other, for such a warrantie cannot be avoided but by entry and
avoiding the estate. And where the husband is within age at the time of the
descent of a warranty to his wife, and the entry of the wife is taken away,
there the warranty shall bind the wife.

If lands be given to A for life, and after to the next heir male Co. 1. 66. 44
Ed. 3. 30. 44 Ass. pl. 35
of A, and the heirs males of the body of that heir male, and A having issue
B, makes a feoffment of the land with warrantie to I S; this is a good
warrantie and a bar to the issue, for a man may be barred of his right by a
warrantie which he could never avoid: as where lessee for life is disseised,
and a collateral Auncestor of the lessor does release to the disseisor with
warrantie and die, and this does descend upon the lessor; by this he is barred.

A warrantie made for life or in tail is good, and shall bind Litt. Sect. 738
Co. super Litt. 387.
for so long only, as if tenant in tail of land let it for life the remainder
to another in fee, and a collateral Auncestor does confirm the estate of the
tenant for life and die, and the tenant in tail has issue; this is a bar to
the issue during the life of the tenant for life. And in this case upon a
voucher the recovery in value shall be put for life only.

If one make a gift in tail and grant to warrant the land given Co. 10. 96.
according to the gift; this warrantie is good no longer then the estate does
last. And no warrantie that a donor can make in this case can bar him of the
land if the donee die without issue, and the estate determine.

And where a warranty does bar it is entire and does extend to Co. 8. 52. super
Litt. 373.
all the land, and to all persons, upon whom it does descend, and is a bar of
all the right that every one of them has in the land, so that if they have all
right jointly or severally, or one only has all the right and the rest none,
he that has the right is barred. And therefore if lands be given to A, and the
heirs of his body and for want of such issue to E his sister and the heirs of
her body, and A does make a feoffment with warrantie, and die without issue
having two sisters E and S; this is a bar to E for the whole albeit the
warranty descend on her and another.

If there be tenant for life, the remainder to his son and heir Co. 5. 79.
apparent in tail, and the father does a feoffement in fee with warrantie and
dies; in this case this is a good warrantie, and will bar the son albeit it be
made of purpose to bar him. But if by agreement and covin between him and A and
B, he make a lease to A who makes a feoffment in fee to B, to whom the father
does release with warrantie, thinking by a collateral warrantie to bar his
son; this is no bar, for this warrantie began by disseisin: And if in the first
case the son does enter in the life time of the father upon the land he does
avoid the warrantie.

If the father be tenant for life, the remainder to the next heir Co. 1. 66.
male of the father, and to the heirs males of the body of such next heir
male, and the father makes a feoffment to I S with warrantie and dies; it
seems this warrantie is a good bar to the heir; and in this case the heir
cannot enter in the life time of his father, for he cannot be heir male unto
his father until his fathers death.

If tenant for life make a feoffement with warrantie, or be disseised, Co.
super Litt. 366. 365. Co. 1. 67. Stat. Glou^. chapter (...) 6. Litt. Sect. 724, 725.
and release with warrantie, and he in reversion being heir to the tenant for
life does not enter, but suffer the lessee for life to die, and thereby the
warrantie to fall and descend upon him; in this case this warrantie generally
is a bar without any assets. But if he that does so alien, etc. be tenant by
the courtesy, this is no bar to the heir without assets in fee simple from
the tenant by the courtesy, and then it is a bar for so much. And if the
heir for want of this assets at the time does recover the land from his
mother, and after assets does descend from the father; in this case the tenant
shall recover the same land of the mother again. And if she that does so
alien, etc. to be tenant for Stat. 11 H. 7. chap. 20. Litt. Sect. 727. Co.
super Litt. 365.
life of the inheritance or purchase of her deceased husband, or given unto her
by any of the Ancestors of her husband, or by any other person seized to the
use of her husband, or of any of his Ancestors; in this case her alienation,
release, or confirmation with warrantie shall not bind the heir whether he
have assets or not. But if a man convey lands to the use of himself Co. 3. 58.
B his wife, and the heirs of his body, and they have issue C, and the father
dies, and C disseiseth his mother, or gets a feoffement from a disseisor,
and then suffers a recovery with a single voucher, and after the wife does
release to the recoverer with warrantie; in this case the warrantie is a bar
to the issue, and not void by the Statute of 11 H. 7.

If the husband that is seized of lands in the right of his wife levy Co. super
Litt. 366. 381. Stat. Glouc. chapter 6. Litt. Sect. 332.
a fine or makes a feoffment in fee with warranty, and the wife dies, and
then the husband dies; this warranty shall not bind the heir of the wife
without assets of other land in fee simple from the father, albeit he be not
tenant by the courtesy, but it is before her death that he does make the
estate and the warranty. But a Fine levied by the husband and wife, in this
case is a good bar to the heir.

If tenant in tail that is in of another estate, i. either by disseisin, Co.
3. 62. 22 Ass. pl. 37. 29 Ass. pl. 34.
Fine.
or by the feoffment of a disseisor, does suffer a common recovery, and a
collateral Auncestor of the tenant in tail does release with warrantie to the
recoverer, and after the recoverer does make a feoffment to uses executed by
the Statute of 27 H. 8. and after the collateral Auncestor dies; in this case
albeit the estate of the land be transferred in the post before the descent of
the warrantie, yet it shall bind. So if he to whom the warrantie is made
suffer a common recovery, and after the Auncestor dies. But if tenant in dower
enfeoffe a villain with warranty, and the Lord of the villain enter into the
land before the descent of the warrantie, and after the woman dies; this
warrantie shall not bind the right of the heir. So if a collateral warrantie
be made to a bastard and his heirs, and living, the Auncestor the Bastard dies
without issue, and the Lord by escheat does enter, and after the Auncestor
dies; this warrantie shall not bind.

A collateral warrantie may descend upon an issue in tail before the right
descend, and yet be good with this difference, that Litt. Sect. 7 H. Co. super
Litt. 388
the right be in esse in some of the Ancestors of the heir at the time of the
descent of the warranty, as if tenant in tail discontinue the tail in fee,
and the discontinuee is disseised, and the brother of the tenant in tail
releaseth all his right etc. to the disseisor with warrantie, and dies without
issue, and the tenant in tail has issue and dies; in this case the issue is
barred. But otherwise it is where the right is not in esse in the heir or any
of his Ancestors at the time of the fall of the warrantie, as if Lord and
tenant be, and the renant make a feoffment in fee with warrantie, and after the
feoffee does purchase the Seigniory, and after the tenant does cease; in this
case the Lord shall have a Cessavit, for a warrantie does never bar any right
that does commence after the warrantie.

If the case be so that if no such warranty had been made by Litt. Sect. 703.
711.
8. What shall be said a lineall warranty. And how such a warranty shall bar.
the father or other Auncestor, the right of the lands or tenements so
warranted, had or might have descended or come from the same Auncestor, and
that from and by him that made the same warranty, such a warrantie is a lineall
warrantie. As if a man be seized in fee of land, and make a feoffment of it to
another, and bind him and his heirs to warrant the land, and has issue and
die, and the warrantie does descend upon the issue; this is a lineall
warrantie, for that if none such had been, Co. super Litt. 371.
the right of the land had descended to him as heir to his father, and he must
have made his descent by him. And if there be grandfather, father and son, and
the grandfather be disseised, and the father release to the disseisor being in
possession with warranty etc. and dies, and after the grandfather dies; this
is a lineall warrantie to the son, and albeit in this case the warrantie
descend before the right, yet it is a good bar. And if there be two brothers,
Litt. Sect. 707.
and the father is disseised, and the eldest brother does release with
warranty, and die without issue, and after the father dies, and the warrantie
does descend to the younger son; this is a lineall warrantie to him. And if
lands be given to A for life, Co. 1. 66, 67.
the remainder to his right heirs, and he does make a feoffment with
warrantie and die; this is but a lineall warrantie. And if two parcenours be,
and the eldest enter into all the land to her own use, and then does make a
feoffment with warrantie and dies without issue; this as to her own part is a
lineall warrantie, but as to her sisters part is a collateral warrantie. And
in every Co. 8. 52. New Terms of the Law, tit. Warrantie.
case where one does demand an estate tail, if any Auncestor of the issue in
tail, whether he had possession of the land or not, has made a warrantie, and
if the issue, that were to bring a writ of Formedon, may or might have by
possibility by some matter that might have been done conveyed to himself a
title by ^orce of the gift by him that made the warrantie; this is a lineall
warrantie. As if a man be seized of land of an estate tail to him and the
heirs of his body begotten, and make a feoffment of it, and bind him and his
heirs to warrant it, and has issue and dies; this warrantie descending upon
the issue is a lineall warrantie. And if lands Litt. Sect. 719.
be given to one and the heirs males of his body, and for want of such issue to
the heirs females of his body, and the donee does make a feoffment with
warrantie, and has issue a son and a daughter and dies; this warrantie is
lineall to the son, and if the son die without issue male, it is a lineall
warrantie from the father to the daughter. But if the brother in his life time
release to the discontinuee etc. with warrantie etc. and after dies without
issue; this is a collateral warranty to the daughter. Litt. Sect. 714.
If lands be given to the husband and wife, and the heirs of their two bodies
engendered, and they have issue, and the husband discontinue and die, and after
the wife does release with warrantie and die; this is a lineall warrantie. And
if lands be given to a Co. super* Litt. 375.
man and a woman unmaried, and the heirs of their two bodies, and they
intermary, and are disseised, and the husband does release with warrantie and
dies, and after the wife dies; this is a lineall warrantie to the issue for
all the land. And if tenant in tail Litt. Sect. 718.
have issue three sons and discontinue, and the middle brother does release
with warrantie, and die without issue, and after the father dies, and after
the elder brother dies without issue, and after the father dies, and after
the elder brother dies without issue, so that the warrantie does descend to
the younger brother; this is a ^neall warrantie to him. And if a father give
land to his eldest son and the heirs males of his body, etc. the remainder to
the second son, etc. if the eldest son alien in fee with warrantie, etc. and
has issue female, and dies without issue male; this is a lineall warrantie to
the second son. And in all these cases of a lineall warrantie if Litt. Sect.
711, 712. Doct. and St. 152, 153. Co. 8. 52.
the right of the estate to be barred be the right of an estate in fee simple,
it is a bar without any assets; for the rule is, That as to him that
demands fee simple by any of his Ancestors, he shall be barred and bound by
a lineall warrantie that does descend upon him, unless he be restrained by
some Statute. But it does not bind the right of an estate in fee tail without
assets, for in that case the rule is, That as to him that demands fee tail
by writ of Formedon in the Descendor, he shall not be barred by a lineall
warrantie, unless he has assets by descent in fee simple of other land from
the same Auncestor that made the warrantie; and then it is a bar for so much
only as does descend to him no more. And yet if the issue in tail do Co.
super Litt. 393.
alien the assets descended and die; in this case the issue of that issue is
not barred by this warrantie and assets. But if the issue to whom the warrantie
does descend, bring his writ of Formedon, and is barred by judgment by reason
of the warrantie and assets; in this case albeit he alien the assets
afterward, yet the estate tail is barred for ever.

If tenant for life do alien in fee with warrantie, or be disseised and Co. 1.
67. 21 H. 7. 10. Litt. Sect. 725.
9. What shall be said a collateral warranty. And how such a warranty shall
bar.
release to the disseisor with warrantie and die, and the warrantie descend on
him in reversion or remainder; this is a collateral warrantie. So if the
lessee for life be disseised, and a collateral Auncestor of him in reversion
release with warrantie and die, and the warrantie descend on him in reversion;
this is a collateral warrantie, for that is collateral which is collateral
to the title of the Litt. Sect. 707. Doct. and St. 152.
land. And if a man seized of lands in fee have issue two sons, and the
father dies, and the younger son does enter, and does alien the land with
warrantie, and die without issue; this is now a collateral warrantie that is
descended on the elder brother. And if a son be disseised of his own land,
and bring an 21 H. 7. 10.
Assise, and after the father does release to the disse^sor with warranty and
dies; this warrantie that does descend to the son is a collateral
warrantie. And if a father disseise his son of the land Litt. Sect. 704.
he has of his own purchase without any intent to alien afterward and to
bar his son, and after he does make a feoffment which warrantie and die
before the entry of his son, so that the warrantie does descend; this is a
collateral warrantie. If there be Litt. Sect. 707.
father and two sons, and the father is disseised, and the younger son does
release wi^h warrantie to the disseisor and die without issue, and then the
father dies; in this case the warrantie now descended is a collateral
warrantie. If a lease be made Co. super Litt. 388.
for life to the father, the remainder to his next heir, and the father is
disseised and does release with warrantie and dies; this is a collateral
warrantie to the heir. And if the husband discontinue the right of his wife,
and an Auncestor collateral to the wife to whom she is heir does release with
warranty and die, and after the husband dies; this is a collateral warranty
and a bar to her. And in every case where a man does demand an estate tail by
a Co. 10. 96. Litt. Sect. 709. Plow. 234. Kelw. 78.
writ of Formedon, if any Auncestor of the issue in tail which has or has not
possession makes a warranty, and the issue that is demandant cannot by any
possibility that may be done convey to him a title by force of the gift from
and by him that made the warranty; this is a collateral warranty, as if tenant
in tail discontinue the tail and die, having issue, and the uncle of the
issue does release with warranty to the discontinuee, and die without issue, so
that the warranty does descend on the issue in tail; this is a collateral
warranty. So if such a discontinuee make a feoffment in fee, or be disseised,
and the uncle release with warranty to the disseisor, or feoffee, and die
without issue, and the warranty does descend on the issue; this is a
collateral warranty. If a tenant in tail have Litt. Sect. 708.
three sons, and discontinue the tail in fee, and the middle brother does
release to the discontinuee with warranty, and after the tenant in tail dies;
this is a collateral warranty to the elder brother. If one have issue three
sons, and gives land to the eldest, Litt. Sect. 716.
and the heirs of his body, and for want of such issue to the middle, and the
heirs of his body, the remainder to the third, and the heirs of his body, and
the eldest does discontinue the tail in fee with warranty, and die without
issue; this is collateral to the middle son. In the same manner it is in
case where the middle son has the same land by force of the same remainder,
because his elder brother made no discontuance but died without issue of his
body, and after the middle brother does make a discontinuance with warranty,
etc. and dies without issue; this is a collateral warranty to the youngest
son. And in this case if any of the sons be disseised, and the father that
made the gift, etc. releaseth to the disseisor all his right with warranty;
this is a collateral warranty to the son upon whom the warranty does descend.
If lands be given to A, and the heirs of his body, and Co. 8. 52. Litt. Sect.
713.
for want of such issue to E, his sister and the heirs of her body, and A does
make a feoffement with warranty, and die without issue, having two sisters E
and S; this is a collateral warranty to E. If lands be given to a man and the
heirs of his body begotten, Litt. Sect. 741.
who takes a wife and has issue a son by her, and the husband does
discontinue the tail in fee and dies, and after the wife does release to the
discontinuee with warranty and dies, and the warranty does descend to the
son; this is collateral to him. If tenant in tail discontinue the tail in
fee, and the discontinuee is disseised, and the brother of the tenant in tail
does release to the disseisor with warranty in fee, and dies without ifsue,
and the tenant in tail has issue and dies; this is collateral as to the
issue. If tenant in tail have issue two daughters, and die, and the elder enter
into all to her own use, and thereof make a feoffment in fee with warranty, and
die without issue, this warranty as to the other sisters part is collateral,
but not as to her own. If Co. super Litt. 373.
the husband and wife, tenants in special tail, have issue a daughter, and the
wife die, and the husband by a second wife have issue another daughter, and
discontinueth in fee and dies, and a collateral Auncestor of the daughters
release to the discontinuee with warranty and dies, and the warranty descend
upon both the daughters; this is a collateral warranty to them. If lands be
given to one and the heirs males of his body, and for want of such issue to the
heirs females of his body, and the father die, and the brother release with
warranty, and die without issue; this is collateral to the daughter. If tenant
in tail make a lease for life, the Litt. Sect. 738.
remainder to another in fee, and a collateral Auncestor does confirm the
estate of tenant for life with warranty and die, and after the tenant in tail
die having issue; this is a good binding collateral warranty during the estate
for life. And in all these and Litt. Sect. 712. Co. super Lit. 374. Co. 10. 96.
Stat. of Glou^. chapter 3. Co. super Litt. 365. Stat. 11 H. 7 chap. 20.
such like cases of a collateral warranty, whether the right be the right of
an estate tail, or the right of an estate in fee simple that is to be barred,
it is a bar without any assets, for in this case the rule is, That a
collateral warranty is a bar to him that demands fee simple, and also to
him that demands fee tail without any other descent of lands in fee simple,
so that the heir on whom the same warranty is descend, can never have the land
so warranted whiles the warranty does continue in force, but is bound thereby,
except it be in some special cases restrained by Act of Parliament, as where
the husband alone during his wives life, or after her death, being tenant by
the courtesy make a feoffement by fine or deed of his wives land, which she
has by descent or purchase, with warranty; this will not bar her heir
without assets of other lands in fee simple descended from the same Auncestor
that made the warranty. Or where a wife after her husbands death shall alone or
with her succeeding husband alien, release, confirm or discontinue with
warranty, the land she holds in dower or in tail of the gift of her former
husband or any of his Ancestors; this warranty is voidable and will not bind
with assets.

If the son purchase land etc. and after let it to his father or any Litt.
Sect. 699, 700, 701 702. Finch 82. Co. super Litt. (...).
10. What shall be said a warranty that does begin by Diss^^sin. And what such
a warranty does work.
other Auncestor for years, or at will, and he by his deed does infeoffe a
stranger, and that with warranty, and after dies, whereby the warranty does
descend upon the heir; this warranty does commence by disseisin. So if tenant
by Elegit, Statute Merchant, Guardian in Chivalry, or Soccage, or because of
Nurture, make a feoffement with warranty, and this warranty does descend on his
heir; this warranty does commence by disseisin. So if one that has no right at
all enter into my land, and make a feoffement to another with warranty. So if
one Coparcenor enter into the whole land, and make a feoffement in fee with
warranty; this warranty as to the one moity does begin ^y disseisin. So if
father and son purchase lands to them jointly etc. and the father alien the
whole to another with warranty etc. and after the father dies; this warranty
as to the one moity does begin by disseisin. But if the purchase be to them
two and the heirs of the son it is otherwise, for if the son enter in the
life time of the father, the warranty is avoided for all, but if he do not
enter, then as to the fathers moity it is a collateral warranty. And if the
purchase be to the father and son and the heirs of the father, and the father
alien with warranty etc. in this case the warranty is good for the whole.

If the father be tenant for life, the remainder to his son and heir Co. 5. 80.
super Litt. 366. 367.
in fee, and the father by covin and consent of purpose to bar the heir by a
collateral warranty makes a lease for years, to the end that the lessee
should make a feoffment in fee that the father may release to the feoffee with
warranty, and all this is done accordingly, and the father dies, and the
warranty does descend to the son; in this case the warranty shall be said to
begin by disseisin. But if the father in this case make a feoffement in fee
with warranty and die; this is a good warranty to bind the son, albeit it be
done of purpose to bar him. So if one brother make a gift in tail to another,
and the uncle does disseise the donee, and infeoffeth another with warranty,
the uncle dies and the warranty descends on the donor, and then the donee
dies without issue; this warranty does begin by disseisin. So if the father
and son, and a third person be jointenants in fee, and the father makes a
feoffment in fee of the whole, with warranty, and dies, and then the son
does; in this case as to the part of the third person, and to the part of the
son, the warranty shall be said to begin by disseisin. But releases at this
day by a tenant for life to a disseisor or any other without covin, albeit it
be to the intent to bar him in reversion shall bar him, for intent without
covin and disseisin shall not avoid a warranty. And examples of warranties that
do begin by disseisin, have these qualities; 1. That for the most part the
disseisin is done immediately to the heir that is bound by the warranty. 2.
The warranty and disseisin are simul and semel. And yet if a man disseise
another with intent to make a feoffment with warranty, albeit the feoffement be
made twenty years after the disseisin, yet it shall be said to be a warranty
that does begin by disseisin. But in all these cases of warranties that do
begin by disseisin, this is the rule, That they are altogether void and
without force as to all others but to the parties themselves that do make
them, and therefore they do not bar or bind any others at all of their right
that have any. And the same Law is of a warranty that does begin by abatement
or intrusion; that is, when an abatement or intrusion is made of purpose to
make a feoffement in fee with warranty. And so also it is where the tenant
dies without heir, and an Auncestor of the Lord does enter before the entry of
the Lord, and make a feoffement in fee with warranty; in this case this shall
not bind the Lord, because it does begin by wrong.

All warranties in general are favorably taken in Law, because 11. How a
warranty shall be taken*
they are part of men's assurances. Every warranty in Law is taken for, and has
the effect of a lineall warranty.

The warrnaty that is made by Dedi and Concessi, or Dedi only in a Co. 4. 81.
5. 17.
feoffement, is and shall be taken for a general warranty against all persons
to the feoffee and his heirs, during the life of the feoffor only, albeit
there be no service reserved by the deed nor heir named: but it shall not
extend to the assignee of the feoffee. And if there be any service reserved on
the deed, then it shall extend against the heir also.

The warranty in Law that is made upon a gift in tail, or lease for Co. 4. 81.
super Litt. 384.
life, rendering rent, is a special warranty against the donor and lessor, and
his heirs and assigns, so that the donee or lessee may vouch the grantor after
the grant of the reversion, or the grantee of the reversion after the
atturnment of the tenant at his election.

The warranty in Law that is made upon an Exchange, is special in Co. 4. 121.
super Litt. 384.
diverse respects, for it extends reciprocally to, and against the heirs of
both parties, and it does extend only to the same land that is given in
exchange and none other; and no use can be made of it but by voucher, for no
Warrantia Cartae does lie upon it. So also the warranty that is made in dower
is taken to extend only to the other two parts of the land.

The warranty in Law that is made upon the tenure of Homage Co. super Litt. 384.
Auncestrel, extends reciprocally to the heirs, and against the heirs of
both parties.

If a feoffement be made of land to three jointly, and the feoffors Co. 5. 59.
do warrant the land to the feoffees, and every of them; this warranty shall
be joint and not several. But if the estate be several, as if one grant white
acre to A, and black acre to B, and grant to warrant the land to them, and
either of them; in this case the warranty shall be several.

If a man of full age, and an infant join in a feoffement with warranty; Co.
super Litt. 367.
this shall be taken for a good warranty as to the whole for him that is of
full age and void for the infant, and not void in part and good in part. Co.
super Litt. 386.


If a man make a feoffment in fee, and bind his heirs but not himself to
warranty; in this case and by this his heirs shall not be bound, and Co. super
Litt. 47. 385. Dier 42. Kelw. 108. Co. 6. 69.
a man bind himself to warrant, and not his heirs by the feoffement; in this
case the feoffor himself is bound to the warranty but not his heirs, for it is
a maxim of Law, That the heir shall never be bound to any express warranty,
but where the Auncestour was bound by the same warranty. If one make a
feoffment to B and his heirs, and thereby does grant to warrant the land, and
does not say to B* and his heirs; yet this warranty shall be taken to extend to
them. But if the feoffor does grant to warrant the land to B, and does not say
to his heirs, this shall not extend to his heirs. And if in this case the
warranty be to B and his assigns, it shall not extend to his heirs, neither
shall the assignees take advantage of it after the death of B. And if the
warranty be to B and his heirs, and not to his assigns also; this shall not
extend to his assigns. If one make a feoffment to A, habendum to him and his
heirs, and bind himself and his heirs to warrant the land in forma praedicta;
in this case the warranty shall extend to the feoffee and his heirs.

If one grant to warrant land to another and his heirs, and does Co. 1. 1.
not say against what persons, this shall be taken for a general warranty
against all men.

If one make an estate and grant to warrant the land, but does not say how
long; this shall be taken for as long as the estate to which the warranty is
knit does last.

If a warranty be made against any special persons, it shall extend Dier 328.
to them and no further, and it shall extend in all cases for and to all
titles, and entries upon title; and it shall not in any such cases extend to
tortious and unlawful entries.

If a man be seized of a rent-seck, issuing out of the Manor of Co. super
Litt. 366.
Dale, and he take a wife, and the husband does release to the terre-tenant,
and warranteth tenementa praedicta and dies; this warranty shall extend to the
rent as well as to the land; and therefore if the wife sue for her thirds of
the rent, the terre-tenant may vouch the heir. And regularly the warranty does
extend to all Co. super Litt. 388, 389.
things issuing out of the land, viz. to warrant it in the same manner and
plight as it was in the hands of the feoffor, and he shall vouch as of lands
discharged. And therefore if grantee of a rent grant it to the tenant of the
land on condition, and the tenant does make a feoffment of the land with
warranty; in this case the warranty shall not extend to the rent, albeit the
feoffment be made of the land discharged of the rent. And if a woman have a
rentcharge in fee, and she does intermary with the tenant of the land, and a
stranger does release to the tenant of the land with warranty; this warranty
shall not extend to bar any action to be brought after the death of the wife
for the rent. But if in this case the tenant make a feoffment in fee with
warranty and dies, the feoffee in a cui in vita brought by the wife shall
vouch as of lands discharged at the time of the warranty made. So if tenant in
tail of a rentcharge purchase the land and make a feoffment with warranty and
the issue bring a Formedon of the rent, the tenant shall not vouch, etc.

All those that are parties to the warranty, i. such as are named Co. super
Litt. 365. 5. 17.
12. Who may take advantage of a warranty. And how. And against whom it may be
taken. Assigns.
in the deed regularly, shall take advantage of the warranty; as if one does
warrant land to another, his heirs and assigns; in this case both the heirs
and the assigns may take advantage of it, and they both may vouch, or ^ebut, or
have a warrantia cartae, so as they come in in privity of estate, for otherwise
the heir or assigns cannot vouch, or have a Warrantia Cartae, and yet he may
rebut notwithstanding in diverse cases. But those that are are not named for the
most part shall not take advantage of the warranty, and therefore if land be
warranted to I S, and not to him and his heirs, or to him and his assigns, or
to him, his heirs and assigns; in these cases neither the heir nor the
assignee may vouch or have a Warrantia Cartae; and yet in some cases where it
is so, the assignee or tenant of the land may rebut.

The warranty annexed to an Exchange, a Partition, by Dedi, Co. super Litt. 384.
and by homage Auncestrell, does always go in Privity, and therefore an
assignee in these cases can take no advantage of it. And yet in the cases of
Exchange, and Dedi, an assignee may rebut. But the assignee of a lessee for
life may take advantage of the warranty in Law annexed to his estate.

If one grant to warrant land to another, his heirs and assigns; in Co. 5. 17.
super Litt. 384, 385.
this case the heirs, or assigns, heir of the assignee, or assignee of the
heirs of the feoffee, or assignees of assignees in infinitum, shall take
advantage of the warranty. And therefore if one infeoffe I S to have and to
hold to him, his heirs and assigns, and warrant the land to him, his heirs
and assigns, and A does infeoffe B and his heirs, and B dies; in this case
the heir of B shall vouch as assignee to A. And if one infeoffe A and B,
Habendum to them and their heirs, and warrant the land to them, their heirs
and assigns, and A die, and B does survive and die, and his heir infeoffe C;
in this case C shall take advantage of this warranty as assignee. If one
infeoffe A with warranty to him, his heirs and assigns, and A does infeoffe B,
and B does reinfeoffe A; in this case neither A or his assigns shall ever take
any advantage of this warranty. And yet if B infeoffe the heir of A, he may
take advantage of the warranty.

If one make a feoffment by deed with warranty to the feoffee, his heirs and
assigns, and the feoffee does make a feoffment over to another by word without
deed; in this case the second feoffee shall have all the advantage of this
warranty, for an assignee by word shall have the same advantage that an
assignee by deed shall have.

If a feoffment be made with warranty to a man and his heirs and assigns, and
he make a gift in tail the remainder in fee, and the donee make a feoffement in
fee; this feoffee shall not vouch as assignee, but he must vouch his donor upon
the warranty in Law; and yet he may rebut.

If lands be given to two brethren in fee simple, with warranty to the eldest
and his heirs, and the eldest die without issue; in this case albeit the other
brother be his heir, yet he shall have no advantage at all by the warranty,
because he comes in above the warranty. But generally all that claim under the
warranty shall take advantage thereof by way of rebutter, albeit they can take
no other advantage by it.

If one make a feoffment to two their heirs and assigns, and one of them does
make a feoffment in fee, this feoffee in this case shall not take advantage as
assignee.

An assignee of part of the land shall take advantage of a warranty, Co. super
Litt. 385.
as if a man make a feoffment of two acres with warranty to him, his heirs and
assigns, and the feoffee does make a feoffment of one acre of it to another; in
this case the second feoffee shall take advantage of the warranty as assignee.
And therefore herein there is a difference between the whole estate in part,
and part of the estate in the whole or in any part, for if a man have a
warranty to him, his heirs and assigns, and he make a lease for life, or gift
in tail; in these cases the lessee or donee shall not take advantage of the
warranty as assigns: but they may vouch the lessor or donor upon the warranty
in Law. But if a lease for life be made the remainder Co. super Litt. 384.
in fee; such a lessee may vouch as assignee upon the first warranty. If the
father have a feoffment made to him and his heirs with warranty, and he make a
feoffment to his son and heir with warranty; in this case the son may take
advantage of the first warranty after his fathers death. If a man infeoffe a
woman with warranty, Co. super Litt. 390.
and they intermary and are impleaded, and upon the default of the husband the
wife is received; in this case she may vouch her husband. Et sic e converso. If
a woman infeoffe a man with warranty, and they intermary and are impleaded; the
husband in this case shall vouch himself and the wife.

He that comes into the land merely by act of Law in the post, as 26 H. 8. 3.
22 Ass. pl. 37. 29 Ass. 34. Co. 3. 62, 63.
the Lord by Escheat, or the like, shall never take advantage of a warranty,
and therefore if tenant in dower infeoffe a villain with warranty, and the Lord
of the villain enter; or a feoffment be to a bastard with warranty, and he
die without issue, and the Lord enter by Escheat; in these cases the Lord shall
never take advantage of these warranties. But otherwise it is where a man comes
to the land by limitation of use or a common recovery, which is by the act of
the party, for if tenant in tail being in of another estate, i. by disseisin,
or feoffement of a disseisor suffer a common recovery, and a collateral
Auncestor of the tenant in tail does realease with warranty to the recoveror,
and after the recoveror does make a feoffment to uses which are executed by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. and after the collateral Auncestor dies; in this case the
terre-tenants may take advantage of the warranty by way of rebutter, albeit the
estate be transferred in the post. So if he to whom the warranty is made,
suffer a common recovery, and after the Auncestor dies; the recoveror may take
advantage of this warranty by way of rebutter, for any man that has the
possession of land, albeit he have no deed to show how he came by the
possession of it, or how he is assignee, may rebut the demandant, and so bar
him and defend his own possession; And therefore the tenant by the courtesy,
donee in tail that is in of another estate, an assignee by force of a warranty
made to a man and his heirs, feoffee of a donee in tail may rebut and bar the
demandant by the warranty.

If one infeoffe another of an acre of ground with warranty, Co. super Litt.
376. 1 Ed. 3. 13. 5 H. 7. 2.
and has issue two sons, and dies seized of another acre of land of the
nature of Borough English; in this case albeit the warranty descend upon the
eldest son only, yet both the sons may be vouched. And so also it is of
heirs in Gavelkind; the eldest shall be vouched as heir to the warranty, and
the rest in respect of the inheritance. And in like sort the heir at the
Common law, and the heir of the part of the mother shall be vouched, or the
heir at the Common law may be vouched alone at the election of the tenant.
And in like sort the heir at the Common law shall be vouched with the heir in
Borough English. And so also a bastard shall be vouched with a mulier. And if
a man die seized of certain lands in ^ee, having issue a son and a daughter
by one venture, and a son by another, and the eldest son enters and dies,
and the land does descend to the sister; in this case the warranty does descend
on the son, and he may be vouched as heir, and the sister also may be vouched
as heir to the land.

If two make a feoffment with warranty, and the one die; the survivor shall not
be charged alone with the warranty, but the heir Co. 3. 14. ^uper Lit. 386. 16
H. 7. 13. 48 Ed. 3. 5.
of him that is dead shall be charged also. And if two be bound to warrant
land, and both of them die; the heirs of both of them ought to be vouched, and
shall be equally charged. And if the heir be vouched in the ward of three
several persons, the one of them only shall not be charged, but they shall be
charged equally.

If a woman an heir of the disseisor, infeoff me with warranty, and after she
is married to the disseisee; in this case I may take advantage of Co. super
Litt. 365.
this warranty against the disseisee, and rebut him upon it if he sue me for
the land. So if the husband and wife sue me for the land of his wife, and I
have a warranty of a collateral Auncestor of the husbands descended to him; in
this case I may make use of this to bar the husband and wife.

A warranty lineall or collateral may be defeated, determined or 13. When a
warranty shall be said to be defeated, determined or avoided. And how. Or not.
Co. super Lit. 392. 393.
avoided in all or in part. And this is sometimes by matter in law, and
sometimes by matter in deed.

If the estate to which the warranty is annexed be gone the warranty annexed
thereunto is gone also. And therefore if an estate Co. 10. 96. 1, 2, 3. 62 Lit.
Sect. 741. Co. super Lit. 392.
tail towhich a waranty is annexed be spent, the warranty is determined. And if
a man make a gift in tail with warranty, and after the donee does make a
feoffment and die without issue; the warranty is gone. So if tenant in tail
discontinue the tail and the discontinuee be disseised, or make a feoffment on
condition, and a collateral auncestor of the issue release to the disseisor or
feoffee on condition, with warranty, and after the discontinuee does enter upon
the disseisor, or on the feoffee for the condition broken; in these cases the
warranty made by the collateral auncestor is gone. So if a Seigniory be
granted with warranty, and the tenan^y escheat so that the Seigniory is
extinct; hereby also the warranty is defeated. So if a collateral Auncestor
heretofore had released with warranty, and then had entered into Religion; this
warranty had bound, but if after he had been dearaigned the warranty had been
defeated.

If the father make a feoffment to his son and heir apparent Co. super Lit.
384. Bro. Garranty 27.
with warranty and die, so that the warranty does descend upon the son;
hereby the warranty is gone. And yet if a feoffment be made to a man and his
heirs, and he dies leaving issue daughters; in this case the warranty shall
be divided and is not determined.

If tenant in tail does make a feoffment to his Uncle, and after Lit. Sect.
743. Co. super Lit. 390. Lit. Sect. 744.
the Uncle does make a feoffment in fee with warranty etc. to another, and
after the feoffee of the Uncle does reinfeoffe again the Uncle, and after the
Uncle does infeoffe a stranger in fee without warranty and dies without issue,
and the tenant in tail dies; hereby the warranty made to the first feoffee is
defeated. So if the Uncle make the warranty to the feoffee, his heirs and
assigns, and take back an estate in ^ee and after does infeoffe another. But
if one make a feoffment with warranty to the feoffee, his heirs and assigns,
and the feoffee does reinfeoffe the feoffor and his wife, or the feoffor and a
stranger; in these cases the warranty is not defeated but does continue still.
So if two do make a feoffment with warranty to one, his heirs and assigns,
and the feoffee does reinfeoffe one of the feoffors; in this case the warranty
is not gone. And ^f in the first case the feoffee make an estate to his Uncle
in tail or for life saving the reversion, or a lease for life the remainder
over etc. in this case the warranty is only suspended.

If one make a feoffment or release with warranty, and after is Co. super Lit.
391.
attained of treason or felony; hereby the warranty is gone; and albeit he do
afterward obtain his Pardon yet the warranty is not revived.

If a feoffment with warranty be made to two or more, and they Co. 6. 12.
being Jointenants do after by deed make Partition; by this the warranty is
determined. So if two Jointenants be, and one of them disseise the other, and
he that is disseised does recover in an assise and has Judgment to hold in
severally; hereby the warranty is determined, Adjudge Hill. 22 Jac. B. R.
Eustace and Sholes case.
So if A and B be Jointenants of white acre for life, and A by fine does grant
to B totum and quicquid habet in tenemeutis* hereby the warranty is gone. But
if a Partition be made by Judgment upon a writ by force of the Statute of 13
H. 8. this does not defeat the warranty fallen to them, but it shall be divided
between them, and they shall all of them take advantage of it.

If one enfeoffe three with warranty to them and their heirs, Co. super Lit.
385.
and one of them release to one of the other two; hereby the warranty is gone
for that part. But if one of them release to the other two; in this case the
warranty is not gone but does continue, and they may vouch upon it.

If one enfeoffe two men and their heirs, and one of them does Co. super Lit.
385.
make a feoffment in fee; hereby the warranty is not determined, but the other
may take advantage of it notwithstanding.

If the party that has the warranty or the estate to which the Co. super Lit.
393. 392. Lit. Sect. 748.
Release.
warranty is annexed release to him that is bound to warrant all warranties, or
all covenants real, or all demands; by either of these releases the warranty
is gone. So also if by a defeasance made Deseasance.
between the parties it be agreed the warranty shall be void, by this
defeasance the warranty may be avoided also. Or if it be so agreed that the
warrantee or his heirs etc. shall not vouch, or have a Warrantia cartae; by
this the warranty is avoided in part.

If tenant in tail does enfeoffe his Uncle which does enfeoffe another Co.
super Lit. 391.
in ^ee with warranty, if in this case the feoffee release the warranty to his
Uncle; hereby the warranty is extinct. But if a gift in tail be made with
warranty, in this case a release made by the tenant in tail of this warranty
will not extinguish it.

If the parties between whom the warranty is intermary, hereby Co. super. Lit.
390.
the warranty is suspended during the coverture in some cases.

If tenant in tail does make a feoffment in fee with warranty, Co. super Lit.
330.
and disseiseth the discontinuee, and dies seized, this does suspend the
warranty.

If two make a feoffment in fee and warrant the land to the Co. super Lit. 393.
feoffee and his heirs, and the feoffee does release the warranty to one of
the feoffors; this does not determine the warranty of the other as to the
moity. So if one does infeoffe two with warranty, and the one of them does
release the warranty; this does not extinguish the warranty for the other
moity, but it does continue still.

A warranty also may lose his force by taking benefit or making use thereof;
for after a man has once taken advantage thereof in some cases he can make no
further use of it: of which read Co. super Lit. 393.

And now having done with Deeds in general and some of the parts thereof in
special, we are in order to come to some special kinds of deeds, wherein we
will first begin with a deed of Feoffment.

CHAP. IX. Of a Feoffment.
FEoffamentum. i. Donatio feodi, strictly and properly is the gift 1.
Feoffment. Quid.
New terms of the law. Co. super Lit. 9. Lit. Sect. 57.
or grant of any honors, castles, manors, messuages, lands, houses, or other
corporal immovable things of like nature which be hereditable to another in
fee simple. i. to him and his heirs for ever by the delivery of seisin and
possession of the things given. And from hence comes the word Infeoffe, for by
this word and the Infeoffe.
words Give, and Grant, (as the most apt words for that purpose) is this kind
of conveyance most commonly made. Hence also it is, that he that makes this
feoffment is called the feoffor, and he to whom it is made the feoffee. Also it
is sometimes but improperly Feoffor* Feoffee.
called a feoffment when an estate of freehold only does pass.

This kind of conveyance albeit it may be made in most cases by 2. Quotuplex*
See West Sym. 1. part. Sect. 235. Co. super Lit. 6.
word without any writing, ^et it is most commonly done by writing, and this
writing is then called a Deed or Charter of feoffment, but hence is the
division of a feoffment by word, or a feoffment by writing. The ancient forms
and examples of these deeds are very brief; and and yet they had these parts
contained in them. 1. The Premises. 2. The Habendum. 3. The Tenendum. 4. The
Reddendum. 5. The Clause of warranty. 6 The In cujus rei testimonium. 7. The
Date. 8. The clause of Hiis testibus. Haec fuit candida illius aetatis ^ides
and simplicitas quae pa^c^lis lineis omnia fidei firmament a posueruut.

Co. super Lit. 49. 9. Co. 1. 111, 112. Plow. 554. 9 H. 7. 24. 39 H. 6. 43. Co*
super Lit. 237. Perk. S^ct. 210. 24 E. 3. 70. Co. 1. 121. Co. 6. 70. Bro. scire
facias. 88. Plow. 423, 424.
And this manner of conveyance, as it is the most ancient kind 3. The nature
and operation of it.
of conveyance, so is it the best and most excellent of all others, and in some
respects does excel the conveyance by ^ine or recovery: for it is of that
nature and efficacy by reason also of the livery of Seisin evermore inseparably
incident to it, that it cleereth all disseisins, abatements, intrusions, and
other wrongful and defeasible titles, and reduces the estate clearly to the
feoffee when the entry of the feoffor is lawful, which neither fine, recovery,
nor bargain and sale by deed indented and enrolled will do when the feoffor
is out of possession. And it passes the present estate of the feoffor, and not
only so but barreth and excludes him of all present and future right and
possibility of right to the thing which is so conveyed, insomuch that if one
have diverse estates all of them pass by his feoffment, and if he have any
interest, rent, common, or the like into or out of the land, it is extinguished
and gone by the feoffment. And further it barreth the feoffor of all
collateral benefits touching the land, as condition, power of revocation,
writs of error, attaint and the like, insomuch that if a man make an estate of
his land upon condition, or with power to revoke it, and after he make a
feoffment of the land; by this he is barred for ever of taking advantage of the
condition or power of revocation. It destroys contingent uses, gives away a
future use inclusively, gives away a Seigniory inclusively, and gives away a
right of action: for both the feoffment and livery of seisin incident thereunto
are much favored in law, and shall be construed most strongly against the
feoffor and in advantage of the feoffee. And besides all this because it is so
solemnly and publicly made it is of all other conveyances most observed and
therefore best remembered and proved.

If the feoffment be made by deed then must the deed be so made, 4. Who may
make or take a feoffment. And what shall be said a good feoffment. Or not. And
what things are requisite thereunto. 1. In respect of the persons thereunto and
the quality of their estate. Men de non sane memory.
written, read, sealed, and delivered as all other deeds that are well made
must be. For which see Deed supra cap. 4. Numb. 5.

And in every good feoffement that is made there must be a See Grant Numb. 4.
Co. super. Lit. 2. 42, 43. Perk. Sect. 182, 183. 185 Bro. Feoffments 2. 7. 8,
9. 17. 39 H. 6. 43. 21 H. 7. 7.
feoffor. i. a person able to grant the thing passed by the feoffment; a
feoffee. i. a person capable of it and able to take it, and a thing grantable,
and it must be granted in that manner as law requires. And for this therefore
observe that whosoever is disabled by the common law to take is disabled also
to make a feoffment, gift, grant, or lease, and many also that have capacity to
take by such conveyances have no ability to grant by them, as men attainted of
treason, felony, or in a Praemunire, aliens borne, the Kings villains, Idiots,
mad men, a man deaf, blind and dumb from his nativity, a feme covert, an
infant, and a man by duresse, for the feoffments, gifts, etc. of such persons
may be avoided. But such persons as have Feme covert. Infant.
committed treason or felony if attainder do not follow, such as are attaint
of heresy, a leper removed by the Kings writ from the Attaint persons.
society of men, bastards, such as are deaf, dumb or blind, that have
understanding and sound memory, albeit they cannot express their intentions
otherwise then by signs, those that are drunken, the villains of a common
person before entry etc. also excommunicate persons, and outlawed persons,
albeit the King take the profits Outlawed persons.
of their lands, all these may make feoffments, gifts, etc. and all these have
capacity to take by such conveyances.

A woman that has a husband alone and by her self without Feme covert.
her husband cannot make a feoffment of her own land, and if she Perk. ^ect.
185, 186.
do so it is void albeit her husband agree to it.

Neither the head alone, nor any one or more of the members of Corporation.
Fitz. faits and feoffments 29. Perk. Sect. 205. 224, 225.
a Corporation aggregate of many alone may make a feoffment of any of the land
belonging to their corporation. But all of them together may make a feoffment:
and if any of them be seized of land in his own right and in his natural
capacity, he may make a a feoffment of this land as another man may do; yea he
may make a feoffment of this land to the same corporation whereof he is a head
or member, and so give and take also in a diverse capacity.

Ecclesiastical persons cannot make feoffments, gifts, etc. of their
Ecclesiastical persons.
ecclesiastical lands for longer time then three lives, or twenty one Co.
super Lit. 43.
years, for all feoffments, gifts, grants and leases by Bishops albeit they be
confirmed by Deane and Chapter, or by any of the Colleges or halls in either
of the Universities or elsewhere, or by Deane or chapters, masters or gardians
of any hospitalls, Parsons, vicars, or any other having spiritual or
ecclesiastical living, are avoidable.

A man cannot make a feoffment to his own wife after the marriage Husband and
wife.
is consummate. But after a contract made, and carnal knowledge Perk. Sect.
194.
had he may make a feoffment to her, and such a feoffment will be good.

One Jointenant cannot make a feoffment of his part of the land Jointenants,
Tenan^s in common.
to his companion, for a man cannot give a possession to him that Perk. Sect.
197. Fitz. faits and feoffments 26.
has it before. And hence it is also that the lessor cannot make a feoffment
to his lessee for life, years, or at will. And yet perhaps a feoffment in this
case if it be in writing may work as a confirmation. But one tenant in common,
or one coparcenor may make a feoffment of his part of the land to his companion.

If a man make a feoffment of another land, it is a disseisin, but Disseisor
and Disseisee.
a good feoffment against all men but the disseisee himself. And if Bro.
feoffment 4. Perk. Sect. 222.
four join in a feoffment of land, and three of them have nothing in the
land, and the fourth has all the estate; this is a good feoffment.

A disseisor cannot make a feoffment of the land to the disseisee, but it will
be void, for the disseisee will be remitted. But a disseisee Perk. Sect. 197.
Co. super Lit. 48, 49.
may make a deed of feoffment and a letter of attorney to enter and give
livery; and if the atturny do so, this will be a good feoffment.

No feoffment, or livery of seisin can be made to the King, for he Fitz. faits
and feoffments 31.
does always give and take by matter of record.

A feoffement may be made at this day of any thing which does Prerogative.
lie in livery, by whatsoever tenure it be held, notwithstanding the 2. In
respect of the matter whereof it is made.
Statute of Magna Carta cap. 32. But in some cases where a man Co. super Lit.
49. 21 H. 7. 7. See infra at Numb. 9. Grant 5.
does alien his land held of the King, he must have the Kings license before
hand to do it, or else he must pay a fine to the King afterward for not
having a license. But of such things whereof no livery of seisin can be made no
feoffment can be made.

One may make a feoffment of a moity, third, fourth, or fifth part Co. super
Lit. 190.
of his Manor or other land, and that by the name of a moity, third, or fourth
part.

A feoffment may be made of an upper chamber over another Co. super Lit. 48.
man's house beneath.

If there be a meadow of one hundred acres which time out of Co. super Lit. 4.
48.
mind has been divided amongst diverse persons, and each person has a
certain number of acres, but in no certain place, the custom being to allot
each person his number one year in one place and another in another alternis
vicibus; in this case either of these persons may make a feoffment of his part
by the name of so many acres lying in such a meadow without any bounding or
describing of it.

If parceners have made partition of their land, that the one Co. super Lit. 4.
48.
shall have it from Easter to Lammas to her and her heirs, and the other shall
have it from Lammas to Easter to her and her heirs, or that the one shall have
it one year and the other the other year alternis vicibus: Or if they have
two Manors descended, and they agree that the one shall have the one Manor one
year, and the other the other Manor the same year, and the next year that he
that had the one shall have the other alternis vicibus for ever; in these cases
the parceners may either of them make a feoffment of this land or Manor.

If there be any lease for life or years in being of that land or Co 2. 32.
Dier 340. 18 Perk. Sect. 221. 21 H. 7. 7. Perk. Sect. 220. 46 E. 3. 2 5. Bro.
Feoffments de terre 68. Co. super Lit. 48. 49. 52.
thing whereof the feoffment is made, and he that has this lease for 3. In
respect of the presence or possession of other persons on the land at the time
of the feoffment made.
life or years, or in his absence his bailife or servant keeping in the house
or land whereof the feoffment is to be made does give leave and agree that
livery of seisin shall be given upon the house or land by the lessor himself
or by his atturny, and for this cause does leave the possession of the house or
land, and thereupon livery of seisin is made; this is a good feoffment and a
good livery of seisin and yet it does not prejudice the estate of the lessee.
And if the lessor make a feoffment of the land to a stranger by assent or
license of the lessee the lessee then being on the la^d; this is a good
feoffment. In like manner as it is, where the lessor does enfeoffe a stranger
to which the termor does agree saving his term. And if the lessor make such an
entry upon the lessee for life or years as to put him out of possession of the
house or land, and then he does make a feoffment and livery of seisin of it, or
if the lessor in the absence of the lessee his wife, servants and children
enter upon the thing in lease and make a feoffment and livery of seisin
thereof; in these cases there is a good feoffment to pass the reversion, for
in these cases when the lessee for life or years does reenter, the law does
adjudge this to be an atturnement in law. But if a lessor will enter upon his
lessee, and against his will (the lessee being still in possession of the land)
Atturnement.
make a feoffment of the land and give livery; this is void and can never take
effect as a feoffment. And therefore if there be a conveyance made of a house
and land thereunto belonging in lease, and the feoffor come into part of the
land without the leave of the lessee, and there make livery of seisin of that
part in the name of all the rest of the land, (the lessee himself, his wife,
child, or servant being then upon any other part of the land, and especially if
they be in the house) this is no good feoffment for any part of the land but
void for the whole. Veynors case Tri^. 7 Jac. B. R.
And yet if the lessee for years make an under-lease of part of the land to
another, and the feoffor does make a feoffment of this part, and give livery of
seisin upon this part, in this case the possession of the first lessee in the
residue will not hurt the feoffment or livery for this part, but it is a good
feoffment. Also if the lessee give the lessor leave to make livery and depart
and Co. super Lit. 48.
leave a servant of the lessee upon the land; in this case it seems his
presence upon the land whiles the livery is made will not hurt. And so if the
lessee leave the possession and leave nothing upon the land but his cattle;
they will not keep his possession nor prejudice the livery of seisin.

If a lease be made of one acre to one, and another acre to another, 21 H. 7.
7. Dier 18.
and the lessor make a feoffment of both these acres, and make livery in one of
them in the name of both acres; this is no good feoffment for the other acre,
for by this livery he is not put out of possession of that acre. So if one make
a feoffment of two Manors the one in possession and the other in lease, and
give livery of seisin of the Manor in possession in the name of both the
Manors; this is no good feoffment for the other Manor, neither will it pass by
this feoffment. So if one make a lease for years of a house, and after make a
feoffment in fee of the house and of a close adjoining, and give livery of
seisin of the house the termors wife and children being then in the house; in
this case this is no good livery neither to pass the house nor the close.

If lessee for life, or years make a feoffment of the land, the lessor Perk.
Sect. 2^2. Dier 362.
being then upon the land and not contradicting it; it seems this For^^i^ure.
is a good feoffment, and that the presence of the lessor upon the land
especially if he do not contradict it will not hinder the virtue of the
feoffment as against the feoffor and all others: but the lessor may enter
afterward for the forfeiture notwithstanding if he please.

If the husband alone make a feoffment of the land, he has in the Perk. Sect.
223.
Husband and wife.
right of his wife, or that he has jointly with his wife, his wife being then
upon the land and disagreeing to it; in this case the feoffment is good against
the feoffor and all others but the wife notwithstanding her presence and
disagreement, but the wife may after his death avoid it.

If one jointenant make a feoffement of the whole land, his companion Perk.
Sect. 220.
Iointenant.
being then upon the land; by this there does pass no more but a moity, and
the feoffement is void as to the moity of his companion, for the feoffment does
not give his moity.

If a man enter into my land by wrong, and make a feoffement Perk. Sect. 219.
of it to a stranger, I being then upon the land; this feoffement is void, for
in this case the Law does adjudge me to be always in, and never out of the
possession.

If the King have any possession of the land by wardship or otherwise,
Prerogative.
Perk. Sect. 219. Bro. Feoffment. 3. 17. 21 H. 7. 7. 2 H. 6. 5. 1 H. 7. 5.
Stamf. prer. Regis 40.
the owner of the land can make no feoffement of it. And therefore if the King
be entitled to land by wardship, or primer seisin after office found after the
death of an Auncestor of one of his tenants; in this case it is said the
feoffement of the heir is void and passes nothing, for the King is still in
possession. And if it be before office found it will be all one, for the office
shall relate to the death of the Auncestor. And yet in these cases the
feoffment is good against the heir himself, and all others besides the King.
If the heir before office found, enter and make a feoffment, and then the King
does pardon the feoffee; in this case the feoffement is good. And yet such a
feoffement after office with a pardon is void. And the like law is if the entry
be before office, and the pardon after the office; for this is void also. But
if a man be outlawed for debt or trespass, and thereupon the Outlawed persons.
King has the profits of the lands; in this case the owner may make a
feoffment of this land notwithstanding.

Diverse persons cannot make a feoffement but it must be by deed, Fitz Faits and
Feoffements 32. See Grant Numb. 4.
4. In respect of the manner of making of it.
as corporations, and such like: Also diverse things cannot be granted by a
feoffement, but the feoffement must be made by deed, for a feoffement cannot be
made of a reversion of land but it must be by Reversion.
deed. But a lease may be made of land to one for life, the remainder to
another in fee, and this may be done without any writing by word only. Also a
feoffment may be made of the moity, third, or 4th Litt. Sect. 60. super Litt.
190.
part of a manor, or of a piece of land without deed. And yet if one be seized
of a manor, whereunto an Advowson is appendant, and he make a feoffment of
three acres parcel of the manor, together with the Advowson to two men,
Habendum the one moity with the Advowson to one of them, and the other moity to
the other; in this case the feoffment cannot be well made unless it by deed.

If a lease be made for five years, on condition that if the lessee pay Litt.
Sect. 250.
to the lessor within the two first years ten pound, then that he shall have
the land to him and his heirs, or otherwise but for five years; in this case
if livery of seisin be made to the less before his entry this is a good
feoffment. Et sic de similibus.

Every feoffment also whether it be made by deed or without Livery of seisia.
deed must be made with livery of seisin, and this livery of seisin must Lit.
Sect. 59. 66. Co. super Lit. 52. Doct. and Stud. 13.
be made according to the rules of livery and seisin herein after laid down,
for this is of the essence of a feoffment, and a feoffment is not accounted
perfect until livery of seisin be made, for until then the feoffee has only
an estate at will in the land, and the feoffor may put him out when he will.
And if either of the parties die before the livery of seisin be made the
feoffment is void, and no warrant of atturny to make livery can be executed
after the Equity.
death of the feoffor or feoffee, neither is there any remedy in this case to
get the assurance to be made perfect but in a Court of Equity. But in case
where there are many feoffees there the death of one or some of them will not
hinder the livery but it may be made to him or them that do survive, we must
see therefore in the next place what this livery of seisin is.

Livery of seisin, or giving of possession is a solemnity or overt 5. Livery of
seisin. Quid.
New terms of the law.
ceremony required by law and used for the passing of lands or tenements
corporal as an evidence or testimonial of the willing departing by him that
makes the livery from the thing whereof livery is made and the willing
acceptance thereof by the other party. And West 2. part Symb. Sect. 251. Co.
super Lit. 48.
this is as ancient as a feoffment, for no feoffment is made without livery of
seisin, albeit livery of seisin be sometimes made upon other conveyances. And
it was first invented as an open and notorious act to this end, and that by
this means the country might take notice how lands do pass from man to man
and who is owner thereof, that such as have title thereunto may know against
whom to bring their actions, and that others may know that have cause of whom
to take leases, and of whom to require wardships etc. And by this means if the
title come in question the Jury can the better tell in whom the right is. And
of this livery of seisin there are two kinds. 1. A livery in deed. 2. A livery
in law called a livery Co. super Lit. 48.
6. Quotuplex.
within view. The livery in deed is when the feoffor, donor etc. by himself or
another takes the ring of the door of the house, or a turfe, or twig of the
land, and delivers the same upon the land unto the feoffee, donee, etc. in
the name of seisin of the house, or seisin of the land. And this is done
sometimes by the parties themselves if they be present, and sometimes in their
absence by their atturnyes or procurators. The livery in law is where the
feoffor says to the feoffee being in view of the land, I give you yonder house
to you and your heirs, go enter into the same and take possession thereof
accordingly, or the like.

Because this manner of conveyance by feoffment is so ancient Bio. estates 4.
Plow. 28. 29.
7. The nature and operation of it.
therefore this ceremony (being inseparably incident to a feoffment) is much
favored in law: And therefore it is expounded and taken strongly against him
that does make it and beneficially for him to whom it is made. And for this
cause it works not only to transmit the present estate but also to bar all
present and future rights and possibilities. If therefore one make a lease for
life to I S the remainder to the right heirs of I D (which I D is then living)
and give livery of seisin according to the deed; in this case albeit he in
remainder be not capable of this remainder, yet by the livery it shall pass
out of the feoffor, and shall be in Abeyance during the life of I S. So if a
feoffment be made to one and heredibus, without the word [Suis,] and livery of
seisin be made of the deed; this livery perhaps may make the estate good.

Livery of seisin is needful and must be had and made in all cases Co. 5. 92.
Lit. Sect. 70. Co. 6. 26. Doct. and Stud. 13. Co. super Lit. 49.
8. Where and in what cases it is requisite. Or not.
where any estate of see simple, fee tail, or for a man's own or another man's
life is made or granted by writing, or word in the country of any lands or
tenements corporal. And so also where one does make a lease of land to another
for years the remainder to a stranger in fee simple, fee tail, or for life; in
these cases livery of seisin must be had and made to the lessee for years or
else nothing will pass to him in remainder; and yet the lease for years will
be good. And so also where a lease for years is made upon condition Co. super
Lit. 216.
that if such a thing happen the lessee shall have the fee simple; in this case
the lessee must have livery of seisin before his entry, otherwise the estate
will not increase. And so also if the King Plow. 214. 2. 9.
make a feoffment of the land he has in the right of the Duchy of Lancaster
that is not within the county Palatine; in this case livery of seisin must be
made as in the case of a Subject. And in all these cases where livery of seisin
is requisite and it is not made, there does pass no estate by the conveyance
but an estate at will at the most.

But livery of seisin is not needful or requisite to be had and Co. 2. 23.
Lit. Sect. 59. Co. super Lit. 49.
made in cases where any estate of see simple, fee tail, or for life is made
or granted of any lands by matter of record, as by the Kings Letters Patents,
Fine, Recovery, Deed indented and enrolled, and the like; nor is it needful
where any such estate is created by way of covenant and raising of use, by way
of Exchange, Indowment ad ostium Ecclesiae, or ex Assensu patris; nor is it
needful where any such estate is passed or granted by way of Surrender,
devise, release, or confirmation, or by way of increase or executory grant, as
when the fee simple is granted to the lessee for life or years in possession;
neither is it requisite or can be made where any incorporeall hereditaments, as
reversions, rents, commons, or the like are granted in fee simple, fee tail,
or for life: for in some of these cases there is an atturnement to be made that
does supply a livery. Neither is it requisite in some cases where an estate of
freehold is made of a corporal thing, as if a house or land belong to an
office, and the office be granted by deed; in this case the house or land does
pass as incident thereunto. So if a house or chamber belong to a corody; in
this case by the grant of the corody the house or chamber passes without any
livery of seisin. Neither is it requisite upon a lease for years, for if a man
make a lease for one thousand years; this lease is perfect by the delivery of
the deed without any livery of seisin. Neither is it needful where one does
grant to me and my heirs all the trees growing Co. 8. 137 11. 49.
on his ground; for these will pass without any livery of seisin at all.

Livery of seisin may and must be made either by the party himself Perk. Sect.
184. Co. super Lit. 48, 49. 52.
that makes the estate, or if it be a livery in deed, it may in his 9. How it
may and must be made. And what shall be said a good livery of seisin. Or not.
absence be made by his attorney sufficiently authorized by writing. And he
that may make an estate, to the perfection whereof livery is requisite, may
himself and in his own right make livery thereupon: and in the right of
another, and as attorney to another so 1. In respect of the persons that make
it, and to whom it is made, and the quality of their estate. Woman covert
Infant.
diverse that cannot make any estate may notwithstanding make livery of seisin.
And therefore the husband albeit he may not make a feoffment in fee, or lease
for life, etc. of land to his wife, yet he may as an attorney make livery of
seisin to her upon a conveyance made by another. And so also may the wife upon
a conveyance made to the husband or her. And so also Monks, Infants, Aliens,
and such like persons disabled to make feoffments etc. may notwithstanding make
livery of seisin as atturneys upon conveyances made to others. And so likewise
may he in remainder in fee make livery to the lessee for years. Et sic de
similibus. And this livery of Co. super Lit. 48. 49.
seisin may and must be made to the party himself that takes the estate, or
in his absence to his attorney or procurator sufficiently authorized: and in
this case any one may be an attorney to take that may be an attorney to give
livery. If a feoffment be made to Dier 35. Co. super Lit. 49. 359. Co. 5. 95.
diverse by deed and livery of seisin is made to one or some of them; this is a
good livery to execute the estate to them all. But if a feoffment be made to
diverse without deed, and livery of seisin is made to one or some of them in the
name of all the rest; in this case the feoffment is good to execute the estate
in him or them to whom the livery is made and voidas to the rest. If a lease
for years be made Co. super Lit. 217.
to A and B without deed, the remainder to D in fee, and livery of seisin is
made to A or B; in this case this is a good livery to make the remainder to
pass to D. But if a lease be made for years to A, the remainder to the right
heirs of I S in fee I S being then living, and livery of seisin is given to A,
this remainder is void, for nemo est here is v^ve^tis. One Jointenant cannot make
livery of seisin Perk. 40. 10 E. 4. 3.
to his companion as a tenant in common may. And a lessor cannot make livery of
seisin to his lessee for life or years. See before Number. 4.

In all cases where this ceremony is requisite, whether it be done Co. super
Lit. 52.
2. In respect of the time when it is made.
by the parties themselves in person or their deputies it must be done and
made, 1. in the life time of the feoffor, donor, or lessor, and in the life
time of the feoffee, donee, or lessee; for if either of them die it cannot be
done afterward, neither can a warrant of attorney be be made to deliver seisin
after the death of the feoffor etc. But if there be more feoffees, donees, or
lessees, then one; in such cases albeit all of them die but one the livery of
seisin may be made to that one that does survive, and it will be good to him to
execute the estate in all the land. And so it is if there be a warrant of
attorney made by a Corporation aggregate, as a Mayor and Communalty, Deane and
Chapter, or the like, to give livery of seisin, in this case the death of the
Mayor, etc. will not determine the authority, and therefore in that case the
livery of seisin may be made after his death. 2. If it be a lease for years
with a remainder over in fee, the livery must be made to the lessee for years
before his entry or at the time Co super Lit. 49. 216. Perk. Sect. 205.
when he does enter for that purpose, for afterward it cannot be made. Quod
semel meum est amplius meum esse non potest. Quere also whether the law be not
so in all other cases, and let men take A caveat.
heed they do not (as commonly they do) enter into the land before they have
livery of seisin made thereof unto them. And yet it seems the livery of seisin
is good when it is made afterward, by Co. 2. 55. 3. It must not be made before
the estate begin, for Co. super. Lit. 217.
if a lease be made for years to begin at Michaelmas with a remainder over, and
the livery of seisin is made before Michaelmas; this livery of seisin is void,
for if a livery work at all it must work presently, and so it cannot in this
case because it is before the estate does begin.

If an estate be made of diverse pieces of land in diverse villages in Co. super
Lit. 48. Perk. Sect. 227. 228. Doct. and Stud. 3. Lit. Sect. 61. 418. Perk.
Sect. 226. Fitz. feoffments and Faits, 111.
the same county; in this case the making of livery of seisin of and 3. In
respect of the place or thing wherein it is made.
in any part thereof in the name of all the rest, or of one parcel according
to the deed, albeit he does not say in the name of etc. suffices for all, if
all the pieces be in the grantors possession and out of lease. But if the
pieces of land lie in diverse counties, or in the same county, and they be in
lease, or out of the possession of the feoffor contra, for in that case the
making of livery in one part in the name of all the rest is not sufficient for
the rest, for in this case it is requisite that livery of seisin be made upon
and in some of the lands in both counties, and upon every parcel of land that
is out of possession, or at least in some parcel of the land in the occupation
of every several tenant. And yet if one part of a Manor be in one county, and
theother part in another county in view of that part; in this case it seems
livery of seisin in the one part in the one county in view of the other part in
the other county is good and suffices for all. So if the seite of a Manor lie
in one county, and the rest of the Manor in another county; in this case the
making of livery in the site of the Manor is sufficient for the whole Manor.
If a feoffment be made of the Manor of Dale in Sale, the which Manor Perk.
Sect. 228.
does extend in Dale and Sale, and livery of seisin is made accordingly in Dale
only and not in Sale also; by this feoffment there does pass no more of the
Manor but that which is in Dale only. If I 9 H. 7. 25. per Frowick.
be seized of one acre in fee, and of another acre for life, and I make a
feoffment of both acres, and make livery of seisin in that acre whereof I am
seized in fee in the name of both acres; in this case it seems this suffices
to pass both the acres. But if I be seized of one acre in fee, and possessed
of another acre for years, and I make a feoffment of both acres and livery of
seisin in that acre only whereof I am seized in fee in the name of both the
acres contra, for this is as If I make a feoffment of land whereof I am seized
and of other land whereof I am not seized etc. If I be seized of two acres
Fitz. Faits and Feoffments. 2.
of land, and let one of them for years, and then make an estate of both of
them to another, and make livery of seisin in that I have in possession in the
name of both the acres; this will not serve to pass the other acre, but livery
must be made in that acre also. And accordingly it was agreed in a case in the
Kings Bench Hill. 38 Eliz. which was, that a man was seized in fee of a Manor
and Mountague versus Jefferies.
other lands called Groves, and he made a feoffment of it (Groves being then in
lease for years) and a letter of atturny to give livery and the atturny made
livery of the Manor in the name of the rest, the lessee being still in
possession of Groves; in this case it was agreed that this was no good
feoffment for Groves.

When a feoffment is made of a house and land, the livery of See infra.
seisin is most aptly to be made of and in the house in the name of the rest,
and at the door of the house etc. And when a feoffment is made of a Rectory or
Parsonage; the livery of seisin may be made in the Parsonage house, or if there
be no house, it may be made upon the Glebe, or if there be neither, it may be
made at the ring of the Church door.

In the making of every livery of seisin it is requisite that all persons 4. In
respect of the presence or possession of others.
See before Numb. 4.
that have any lawful estate and possession in the thing whereof livery is to
be made, as lessees for life, years, and such like join in the making thereof
or be removed thence, for every livery ought to bring an immediate possession
to the feoffee, donee, etc.

If lessee for years make a feoffment and a warrant of atturny to Dier 362.
give livery of seisin, and the atturny make livery of seisin the lessor being
present upon the land and not contradicting it; it seems this is a good livery
of seisin.

The presence of the feoffor, donor, etc. upon the land after he Bro feoffments
24.
has delivered seisin to the feoffee, donee, etc. albeit he stay upon the land
a while and do not depart and leave the feoffee etc. in possession will not
hurt the livery. See more supra Numb. 4.

Livery of seisin may be made of any corporal thing, as Manors, Co. super Lit.
49.
5. In respect of the matter whereof it is to be made.
houses, lands, meadows, pastures, woods, chambers, or the like. And these
things therefore are said to lie in livery. But of incorporall things, as
rents, advowsons, commons, estovers, and such like things livery cannot be
made. And these things therefore are said to lie in grant and not in livery.
And therefore when a livery is made of these nil operatur. See more above Numb.
4.

To every good livery of seisin is requisite either such an act as the Co 9.
137. super Lit. 49.
6. In respect of the manner and order of making it. And how livery of seisin
is to be made.
law does adjudge to be a livery, or apt words that do amount unto it, for a
livery may be good by words without any act or deed at all. But it cannot be
good by an act or deed without any words at all: howbeit that livery that has
an act or ceremony in it is the best because it takes the deepest impression
in the witnesses.

The most usual formal and orderly manner of making of livery West. Symb. 1.
part. Sect. 251. Perk. Sect. 209. 210. Co. super Lit. 48.
of seisin is thus, that the feoffor, donor, etc. and the feoffee, donee, etc.
if they be present, or in their absence their atturneys or servants that have
authority do come to the door, backside or garden if it be a house, if not,
then to some part of the land where seisin is to be delivered, and there in the
presence of many good witnesses do show the cause of their meeting, openly and
plainly, do read the deed or declare the contents thereof and of the letter of
atturny if there be any. And then the feoffor, etc. or his atturny (if it be a
house) do take the ring, latch or haspe of the door (all the people, men,
women and children being out of the house,) or (if it be of a piece of ground)
do take a clod of the ground or a bough or twig of a tree or bush growing
thereupon; and (all the people being out of the ground) the same ring etc.
clod, bough etc. with the deed do deliver to the feoffee, donee, etc. or to
his atturny: and in the delivery hereof do use these or some such like words.
viz. I deliver these to you in the name of seisin of all the lands and
tenements contained in this deed To have and to hold according to the form and
effect of the same deed. Or, I deliver you seisin and possession of this house
or ground in the name of all the lands contained in the deed according to the
form and effect of the deed. And then if it be a house the feoffee, etc. does
enter in first alone and shut to the door, and then he does open it and let in
others. And if the feoffment, gift, or lease be made without deed, then they
do and must withal express the very estate it self which the feoffee,
donee, or lessee is to have: as for example, the feoffor, donor, or lessor must
come to the house or land which is to be granted and where livery of seisin is
to be made and there must by apt words grant the house or land to him that is
to have it in fee simple, or in tail, or for life, (as the agreement is) and
in seisin thereof must deliver him the ring of the door, or a turfe or twig of
the land. And if the feoffment etc. be made by writing then it is wisdom to
indorse and set down on the back of the same how, when, and where the same is
made, and the names of the witnesses thereunto. But a livery of seisin that is
not so exactly made may be good notwithstanding. And therefore if the feoffor,
donor, etc. or his atturny Co. 9. 137. Fitz. feoffments and faits. 111.
take any thing else that comes from off the land, as a stone, or the like, and
therewithal does make the livery of seisin; or if he take a turfe, or twig
from off another man's ground and not from the same whereof possession is to be
given, and deliver that upon the ground in the name of seisin; Or if he take a
piece of silver or gold, or a rod, stick or the like, and deliver this upon the
land in the name of seisin; all these are good deliveries of seisin and
possession. So Co. 6. 26. 41 E. 3. 17.
if the feoffor etc. be at the door of the house, or by the land, or in the
house, or upon the land, and after he has delivered the deed he say to the
feoffee, donee, etc. [Here I deliver you seisin and possession of this house or
land in the name of seisin and possession of all the lands and tenements
contained in the deed.] Or [have and enjoy this house or land according to the
deed.] Or [enter into this land or house and God give you joy of it.] Or [I am
content you shall enjoy this land;] in all these cases there is a good livery
of seisin. Et sic de similibus.

If I being seized of a house in fee make a feoffment of it and of Bro.
feoffment 28.
diverse lands to a man then present with me in the same house, and there
deliver him the deed in the name of seisin of all the lands contained in the
deed; in this case this is a good delivery of the deed, and a good livery of
seisin also, albeit I continue in possession of the house still and go not out
of it. And if I be Lord of a Manor, and Perk. Sect. 211, 212.
lying sick within some part of the Manor I make a feoffment of the Manor,
and deliver the deed to the feoffee saying to him, I will that you take seisin
presently; and thereupon command all my tenants of the manner to atturne to
him, and they do so; this is a good livery of seisin. So if I make a deed, and
after I have read it, Perk. Sect. 215. Co 6. 26.
being upon the land I deliver it to the feoffee, donee, etc. and say, Here I
deliver you this charter as my deed in the name of seisin of all the lands
therein contained, or the like; this is a good delivery of the deed and of
seisin. But if I do only seal and deliver the deed upon or in view of the
land without saying or doing any more; this will not amount to a livery of
seisin. Cromwals case Adjudged in the exchequer 15 Eliz.
And therefore if a man make a feoffment with a letter of atturny to give
livery of seisin, and then he deliver the deed upon the land; this is no good
making of livery of seisin. And so also if there be no letter of atturny.

If I be seized of a house in fee, and being in the house say to Co. 6. 26.
I S, Here I S. I demise you this house for term of my life; this will not
amount to a livery of seisin; and therefore it is no good lease until livery
of seisin be made, but it is a good beginning of a lease.

If the father infeoffe his son of land, and the son suffer Perk. Sect. 216.
his father to enjoy it, and after the son does come to the Parish Church
where the land does lie, and there in the audience of the parishioners uses
these words to his father, [Father you have given me such and such lands (and
does name them) as freely as you gave them to me I give them to you again;]
this is no good livery of seisin neither does any estate pass hereby. So if
one being upon his Hill. 37 Eliz. B. R. Callards case.
land say to I S, [I S stand forth, I do here reserving an estate to me for
mine own life give this land to thee and thy heirs for ever;] this is no good
livery of seisin, neither does any estate pass thereby. So if one make a
charter of feoffment to me and make no livery of seisin thereupon, and after I
make a feoffment of the land Fitz. Fait. and feoffments.
to I S and the feoffor hearing and having notice of it says [I do willingly
agree to it and am contented that I S shall have it,] or I do agree to the
feoffment, or the like; in this case this does not make the feoffment that was
made to me good.

If diverse parcells of land be conveyed and livery of seisin is made Co. super
Lit. 48. Fitz. Estoppell. 177.
in one; or there be diverse feoffees, and livery of seisin is made to one of
them according to the deed, without using any more words; this is good. But the
best form and order of making of livery in this case is to add these words,
[in the name of all the rest etc.]

If the feoffor, donor, etc. deliver the deed in sight or view of Co. 9. 137.
6. 26. super Lit. 48. 253.
the land, and use these or any such like words, [I will that you Livery in
law, or within the view.
shall enter into the land and have it according to the deed;] Or, [take and
enjoy the land according to the deed;] Or, [I deliver you this deed in the name
of seisin;] Or, [enter you into the land and take seisin of it;] Or [take the
land and God give you joy of it;] Or, (if the estate be made without deed) [I
give you yonder land to you and your heirs and go and enter into the same and
take possession thereof accordingly;] Or [enter into the land and enjoy it in
fee simple to you and your heirs, or for your life etc.] in all these cases
the estate and the livery is good albeit the feoffor etc. stand in one county
and the land in view be in another county. But in all these cases of livery
within the view, 1. It must 1] New terms of the Law. Co. super Lit. 48. Dier
18. 2] 18 H. 6. 16.
be made by the person himself that does make the estate, for it cannot be
made by his atturny. 2. There must be a relation to to the land, for if the
feoflor do deliver the deed only to the feoffee in sight of the land; this is
not a good livery within the view. 3. The parties must stand within view of the
land, for if the feoffor etc. being out of the sight of the land say to the
feoffee 3] Co. super Lit. 48.
etc. Go and enter and take seisin of the land and God send you joy of it;
this is no good livery of seisin. 4. There must be some body capable of a
freehold to take by the livery, for if it be made to a lessee for years the
remainder to the right heirs of I S and I S is then living, it is void. 5. The
feoffee etc. must enter presently, 5] Co. 1. 156. Perk. Sect. 214. Fitz. faits
and feoffments. 47.
for if either the feoffor, donor etc. or feoffee, donee etc. die before entry;
the livery cannot be made good. And yet if the party dare not enter for fear,
in this case if he claim it only, and do not enter it is sufficient.

Livery of seisin in deed may be made or taken by the deputies or 10. Where
livery of seisin made or taken by an atturny shall be good. And where not. And
what warrant is sufficient.
Co. super Lit. 52. Celw. 51. Co. 9. 76. terms of the law. tit. Livery.
atturnyes of the parties, and this livery by them is as good as that livery of
seisin which is made by the parties themselves; and that also as it seems
albeit the parties themselves be upon the land at the time of the making
thereof if they do not contradict it. But in the making of this livery care
must be had, 1. That there be a deed of feoffment, for otherwise a letter of
atturny to deliver possession avails nothing. 2. That there be a good
authority in writing, which may be either in the deed of feoffment it self,
The opinion therefore in Co. super Lit. 52. 6. as to this point is held not to
be law.
whether it be Poll, or Indented, and that albeit the atturny be not party to
it, or else by a single deed besides the feoffment etc. 3. That the atturny do
pursue his authority at least in the substance and effect of it. 4. That the
atturny do it in the name of the feoffor, donor, etc. who does give the
authority. 5. That it be done in the life time of the parties. But a livery in
law may not be made by an atturny. And therefore if a letter of atturny be to
deliver seisin generally and the atturny by virtue thereof deliver seisin in
view; this livery of seisin is void.

If an Infant, or woman covert make a feoffment and letter of atturny Bro.
Feoffments. 25. Ass. pl. 4. Perk. Sect. 23.
Infant. Woman covert.
to make livery, and the atturny do so; this is void, for they are not able to
give such an authority. And if a man whiles he is of sound memory make a
feoffment with a letter of atturny to give livery and after he become
paralytique and so dumb, but by signs he does declare himself to be willing
to have livery of seisin made, and it is made; this is a good livery of seisin.
But if a letter of atturny be made to deliver seisin of certain land by one
that is de non De non sane memoris.
sane memory, and the deed of feoffment was made whiles he was of sound
memory, and afterward he does come to his memory again, and then the livery is
made upon the first warrant without any new assent etc. in this case the livery
is not good.

That for the most part which for the manner and order of making it is a good
livery of seisin if it be made and taken by the parties Dier 283.
themselves is good being made and taken by their atturnies or deputies that
have a good authority and do well pursue it. And therefore if the conveyance be
made of diverse lands, and they lie in one county, and a warrant of atturny is
made to give livery generally, and the atturny does make it in one part of the
land in the name of all the rest; this is a good livery. Et sic de similibus.

If a man be seized of black acre, and white acre, and he make a Co. super
Litt. 52.
deed of feoffment of both these acres, and a letter of Attorney to enter into
both these acres, and to deliver seisin of both of them according to the form
and effect of the deed, and he does enter into black acre and deliver seisin
secundum formam cartae; in this case the livery of seisin is good, albeit he
do not enter into both the acres, nor into one acre in the name of both. And
if the feoffment be made to two or more, and the warrant of Attorney is to
make livery to them both, and the Attorney does make livery of seisin to one of
the feoffees secundum formam and effectum cartae; in this case the livery is
good to both, and yet he that is absent may wave the livery.

And yet if a man be disseised of black acre and white, and a warrant Co. super
Litt. 52. 258 Perk. Sect. 187, 188, 189
of Attorney is made to one to enter into both these acres, and to make livery,
and the Attorney does enter into one acre only, and make livery of seisin
there secundum formam cartae; in this case the livery of seisin is void for
all, for in this case he does less then his authority. So if a man make a
letter of Attorney to deliver seisin to I S upon condition, and the Attorney
does deliver seisin absolutely; this livery of seisin is void. And so in all
such like cases where the Attorney does less then the authority and
commandment, all that he does is void. But for the most part where the
Attorney does that which he is authorized to do, and more also, it is good for
so much as is warranted, and void for the rest. And therefore if the letter of
Attorney be to give livery of Perk. Sect. 109. Co. super Lit. 258.
seisin to I S, and the Attorney give it to I S and W S; this livery is good to
I S and void to W S. So if the letter of Attorney be to give livery of seisin
of white acre only, and he make livery of white acre and black acre also; this
livery is good for white acre, and void for black acre. So if the letter of
Attorney be absolute, and the Attorney give livery upon condition; some hold
this to be good, and the condition to be void.

If a letter of Attorney be made to two jointly to make or take Co. super Litt.
49.
livery of seisin, and one of them alone does it without the other; this is a
void livery. But otherwise it is when it is made to two jointly or severally,
for there one of them alone may do it.

If a letter of Attorney be to make livery of seisin after the death of another
man, and the Attorney does make livery of seisin during that man's life; this
livery is void. Litt. Sect. 359. Co. super Litt. 48. 122. Fitz. Estoppel 177. 7
Ed. 4. 25. Co. super Litt. 49. Fitz. feoffments and faits 23.


Livery of seisin is sometimes made single, and without any relation to the
deed whereby the estate upon which the livery is made is 11. How it shall
enure, and be taken, and construed.
created at all: and sometimes and most commonly it is made with reference to
the deed in these or such like words [secundum formam cartae]. In the first
case the estate is oftentimes made upon the livery; and then there may be one
estate contained in the deed, and another made by the livery, also there may
pass more land by the livery then is in the deed, and by this means when there
is a fault in the deed, so that the land will not pass by the deed, it may
perhaps pass by the livery: but in this case then there must be apt words used
in the making of the livery to create the estate also, as well as to give the
possession. But where the livery of feisin is made with relation to the deed,
there it must take effect according to the deed or not at all, for these words
secundum formam cartae, are to be understood according to the quantity and
quality of the effectual estate contained in the deed. And therefore if one
make a deed of feoffment to another, and in the deed there is contained no
condition at all, and when the feoffor does make livery he does make livery
upon condition; or if the deed contain an estate to him and his heirs, and he
makes livery of an estate in tail or for life; in these cases there does
pass nothing by the deed. And yet if there be apt words used to create such an
estate at the time of the livery made; such an estate may be made by the livery
without the deed, and then the deed shall be void. But if in these cases the
feoffor say when he does make livery on condition in tail, or for life,
secundum formam cartae; in this case there is a good feoffment made according
to the deed, and the additionall words are void. So if a man make a lease for
years, and make livery secundum formam cartae; this is but a lease for years
still. And if A give land to B To have and to hold after the death of A to B,
and his heirs; this is a void deed, and therefore if the livery of seisin be
made secundum formam cartae, the livery of seisin is void also. But if when he
does give livery of seisin, he give it to him and his heirs without these
words secundum formam etc. or if in the making of livery he say, Here I deliver
you seisin of this land, To have and to hold to you and your heirs for ever, or
the like; this may make a fee simple. And so if one make a deed of feoffment of
two acres, and after make livery of feisin of four acres; in this case if there
be words in the livery of seisin sufficient to make a new estate, the other
two acres may pass also.

If A by deed give land to B, to have and to hold after the death Co. 2. 55. 5.
94. and Greenewoods case, B. R. Mich. 17 Jac.
of A to B and his heirs; this is a void deed, and therefore if upon this deed
livery of seisin be made before the day by the party himself, or at, or after
the day by his Attorney secundum formam and effectum cartae; the livery is void
also, for it cannot enter so. And yet if a lease be made for life to begin in
futuro, and at, or after the day come the lessor himself in person does make
livery of seisin secundum formam cartae; in this case the lease perhaps may
become good by this livery of seisin.

If an agreement be between two that the one shall enfeoff the other Co. super
Litt. 222.
upon condition for surety of money, and afterward livery of seisin is made
generally without any such condition; in this case it is said by some the
estate shall be on condition still.

If there be a fault in the deed, as by the mis-naming of the feoffor Perk.
Sect. 42.
etc. feoffee etc. or the like, and afterward the feoffor etc. does himself
in person make livery of seisin upon this deed to the feoffee etc. by this the
fault of the deed may be helped and cured.

If one make a feoffment to himself and another, and give livery Perk. Sect.
204. 203. 7 H. 7. 9.
of seisin to the other; this is a good feoffment and shall enure to the other
wholly, and he shall take the whole by the feoffment and the livery. And so if
the livery be made to one that is capable, and to another that is not capable;
he that is capable shall take the whole, and the other shall have nothing. So
if a feoffment be made to two, and one of them die before the livery is made,
and after the livery is made to the survivor; in this case the livery shall
enure to the survivor only, and he shall have all the estate thereby. So if a
feoffment be made without deed to a Corporation and to I S, and livery is made
to I S alone; in this case I S shall have the whole and the Corporation nothing
at all.

If a feoffment be made to four, and livery of seisin is made to one, Dier 35.
10 E. 4. 1. Co. 5. 95.
two or three of them; this shall enure to them all. But if the feoffment be
without deed, it shall enure to him wholly to whom the livery is made. And if
one of them give warrant to the rest to take livery for him, and they do so;
this shall enure to them wholly, and not to him at all for any part.

If the tenant make a feoffment to his Lord and another, and give 10 E. 4. 12.
livery of seisin to the other; this shall enure wholly to the other until the
Lord agree to it, and then to them both.

If one make a deed of feoffment of one acre of land to A and his Co. super
Litt. 21.
heirs, and another deed of the same land to A and his heirs of his body, and
deliver seisin according to the form and effect of both deeds; in this case it
shall enure by moities, i. he shall have an estate tail, and the fee simple
expectant in the moity, and a fee simple in the other moity.

If two several deeds of feoffment be made to two several persons of one and
the same thing; he that can get the seisin first shall have it. Rem domino vel
non domino, vendente duobus, In jure est potior traditione prior.

If lessee for life make a feoffment, and a letter of Attorney to the lessor to
make livery, and he does make livery accordingly; in this case Co. super Litt.
52.
this shall not enure to bar him of his entry upon the feoffee for the
forfeiture of his lessee. But if lessee for years make a feoffment in fee, and
such a letter of Attorney to the lessor, and he do deliver seisin accordingly;
this livery shall bind him, for it shall be said as in his own right, because
the lessee had no freehold whereof to make livery.

If a lessor make a deed of feoffment, and a letter of Attorney to Co. super
Litt. 52.
the lessee for years to give livery, and he does it accordingly; this shall
not be construed to extinguish or hurt his term. See more in Exposition of
Deeds, supra chapter 5.

And so we come to another kind of Deed of Common Assurance called a Bargain
and Sale.

CHAP. X. Of a Bargain and Sale.
THis word does signify the transferring of the property of a Terms of the
Law, Plow. 301. Co. 2. 35.
thing from one to another upon valuable consideration. And 1. Bargain and
Sale. Quid.
herein only it does differ from a Gift; that this may be without any
consideration or cause at all, and that has always some meritorious cause
moving it, and cannot be without it. This word also is sometimes applied to the
assurance or conveyance whereby this is done and made, which is called a deed
of Bargain and Sale, for this may be done by writing or without writing.

And sometimes this is and may be of lands, tenements, and hereditaments, Terms
of the Law, Plow. 301. Co. 2. 35.
2. Quotuplex.
and to this the term is most properly applied. And then it is said to be,
where a recompense is given by both parties to the bargain. As where one does
bargain and sell his land to another for money; in this case the land is a
recompense to the one for the money, and the money to the other for the land.
And this now also is become one of the common assurances of the kingdom, Per
Chapter Just. Hide. 3 C. 1. Co. 2. 54.
so that such an assurance may now be averred to be fraudulent within the
Statute of 27 Eliz. as well as any other assurance, a rent may be reserved upon
it, or a condition made by it, as well as by any other kind of assurance. And
sometimes this is and may be of moveable things, as trees, corn, grass, oxen,
kine, household stuff, and the like: the property whereof is and may be altered
by this kind of conveyance, as well as by gift, or grant. And this kind of
bargain and sale is that which is commonly called a Contract: Terms of the Law.
Agreement.
which largely taken, is an agreement between two or more concerning something
to be done, whereby both parties are bound each to other, or one is bound to
the other. But strictly it is the buying and selling of some personal goods
whereby the property is altered. And in both these cases he that does sell is
called the bargainor, and he to whom the sale is made is called the bargainee.
Bargainor, Bargainee.


The effect of this is to transfer the property, and this it will as Co. 8. 94.
5. 113. 3. 62.
effectually do as any other kind of conveyance whatsoever. And 3. The effect
of it.
therefore the bargainee of a reversion howsoever he may not have benefit of a
condition upon the demand of a rent without giving notice of the bargain and
sale to the lessee. And howsoever if A conusee by a fine of a reversion before
atturnment of the tenant bargain and sell the reversion to B, that B cannot
distraine for this rent until he can get an atturnment of the tenant; yet the
bargainee shall have benefit of a condition as an assignee within the Statute of
32 H. S. And it seems he may vouch by force of a warranty annexed to the estate
of the land, because he is in partly in the per, and partly in the post.

All things for the most part that are grantable by any other way See West
Symb. tit. Bargain and Sale.
4. Of what things a bargain and sale may be. Or not.
from one man to another are grantable, and may be transferred by way of
bargain and sale from one to another. And therefore lands, rents, advowsons,
commons, tithes, profits of Courts, and the like, may be granted by way of
bargain and sale in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years. And all manner of
goods and chattels, as leases for years, wardships, cattle, corn,
housholdstuffe, wood, trees, merchandises, and the like, are grantable by way
of bargain and sale. But it seems Estovers, and such like things de novo, and
that 6 Jac. B. R. Adjudged. 21 H. 6. 43. per Yelverton.
have not essence before are not grantable by way of bargain and sale, as they
are by way of grant or lease, and therefore that a bargain and sale of such
things is void.

If any estate of freehold or inheritance be made of land by way 5. What shall
be said a good bargain and sale. And what things are requisite to make such a
bargain and sale. Or not. Of lands.
of bargain and sale, the same must be made by a writing or deed Stat. 27 H. 8.
chapter 16.
indented, and cannot be made by word of mouth only, as a lease for years,
whether it be created de novo, or be in esse before, may be. But lands in
London by a special Proviso within the Statute may be bargained and sold by
word of mouth without any writing. 2. The very words Bargain and Sell, are not
necessary to a good bargain and sale, for words equivalent will suffice to make
land Co. 8. 94. 7. 40. 2. 36.
pass by way of bargain and sale. And therefore if a man seized of land in fee
do by deed indented, and by the words alien, or grant, sell them to another; or
if such a man covenant to stand seized of his land to the use of another, and
these deeds are made in consideration of money, and the deeds be after
enrolled; these will amount to good bargains and sales. And if a man by a deed
indented and enrolled in consideration of ten pound paid to him by the words,
demise and grant, pass his lands to another for twenty years; this is a good
bargain and sale. 3. There must be some good consideration Co. 1. 176.
given, or at least said to be given for the land. And therefore if A (for
diverse good considerations) Ward versus Lambert Pasche 37 Eliz.
or (in consideration that the bargainee is bound for the bargainor, and for
diverse other good causes) 41 El. Adjudged.
or (for diverse great and valuable considerations) bargain and sell his land
by deed indented and enrolled to B and his heirs; nihil operatur. But if in
these cases in truth there be money or other good consideration given, albeit
it be not expressed upon the deed, Dier 169.
the bargainee may aver it, and being proved the bargain will be Averment.
good. And if the deed make mention of money paid, as in consideration of an
hundred pound or the like, and in truth no money is paid, yet the bargain and
sale is good. And no averment will lie against this which is expressly affirmed
by the deed. And if the deed Dier 90.
mention and say (for a certain sum of money) or (for a certain competent sum
of money), these are good considerations. 4. There needs no livery of seisin or
atturnment in this case. And therefore Co. 7. 40. 8. 94.
if one bargain and sell a reversion by deed indented and enrolled for good
consideration; the reversion will pass without any atturnment of the tenant.
And if it be only a lease for years of a reversion that is granted, there
needs no atturnment nor inrolment. And in case of a bargain and sale the
bargainee is in actual possession before any entry, so that the lessee may
atturn to the grant of the reversion, as has been ruled in Mittons case, Mich.
18 Jac. in Cur'Ward. by the two Chief Justices and the whole Court. And yet I
think he has not such a possession as to bring any possessory action for
trespass, or the like, until an actual entry: for where the Statute of 27 H.
8. of uses provides, that the actual possession shall be adjudged according to
the use, yet it ought to have a circumstance Co 5. 112.
which is requisite by the common law, viz. an actual entry in deed. But there
must be an inrolment of the deed in case Stat. 27 H. 8. chapter 16. Pl. 307.
where any freehold does pass, for it is provided, That no lands Inrolment.
Where necessary. And how it must be done.
(except in some Corporations only) shall pass from one to another by any deed
whereby any estate of inheritance or freehold shall be made or take effect in
any person or persons to be made by reason only of any bargain and sale
thereof, except the same be made and done by writing indented, sealed and
enrolled in one of the four Courts [the Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or
Exchequer], or else within the same County or Counties where the lands so
bargained and sold, do lie before the Custos Rotulorum, and two Justices of
the Peace, and the Clerk of the Peace of the same County or Counties, or two of
them at the least, whereof the Clerk of the Peace to be one. And the same
inrolment to be within six months next after the same writing or deed is
dated. And this Statute was made in the same Parliament wherein the law of
transferring of uses into possession was made, to the end that men's lands might
not suddenly and privately pass upon payment of a little money in an alehouse,
or the like. And herein these things must be observed, 1. The inrolment upon
such a deed as to make this estate to pass, must be in parchment, for an
inrolment in paper is not good. 2. The deed enrolled must be indented, for if
it be but poll, the estate will not pass. 3. It must be enrolled within six
months of the purchase or sale. Co. 5. 1.
And this account must be, 1. From the date, and not from the time of the
delivery of the deed. 2. After twenty eight days to the month 2] Dier 218.
Adjudge Franklin and Garters case Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. 4] Dier 218.
and no more. 3. The day of the date to be taken exclusive, and for none of the
days of the six months. And yet if a deed be enrolled the same day it bears
date, it is good. 4. If it be enrolled any part of the last day of the six
months, it is sufficient. And thus the deed may be enrolled within the six
months, albeit either of the parties die within the time. And if the deed be
not thus enrolled, Ruled in the Court of Wards. Co. 11. 48.
it is of no force at all. So that if one bargain and sell his land to me, and
the trees upon it; in this case albeit the trees might have been sold alone by
deed without inrolment, yet now being not enrolled, because the sale is not
good for the land, it shall not be good for the trees also. And no subsequent
act will help in this case, for if one by words of bargain and sell, only
without any other words in the deed grant a reversion, and the deed be not
enrolled, and after the tenant does atturn; hereby nothing does pass, neither
shall it enure as a confirmation. But yet this must be noted that in some cases
where a deed will not enure by way of bargain and sale for some of the causes
aforesaid it may enure to some other purposes. A bargain and sale may be made
of goods, Experientia.
Of goods and cattels.
and cattels, without any such solemnity as before, for it may be by word as
well as by writing, with or without any words of bargain and sell as well as by
those words, by a deed poll, as well as by a deed indented, and that without
any inrolment at all, and without any delivery of any part of the things sold,
or of any piece of money (as the manner is) in the name of seisin. But in this
case also Plow. 308.
some respect is to be had unto the cause and consideration of the bargain, as
well as in the case of the bargain and sale of lands. For howsoever perhaps in
the case of a grant or bargain, and sale of goods or cattels by deed in
writing, the consideration is not material. And that if a man do by his deed
under his hand and seal bargain and sell timber, trees, or any other thing
without any consideration at all, the same may pass well enough; yet if the
contract Dier 29, 30. 14 H. 8. 19. 9 H. 7. 21. 21 H. 7. 6. 10 H. 7. 6. Plow.
432.
be by word, or by writing sealed and not delivered, if there be no
consideration, or no good consideration of it, it is of no effect at al. And
therefore if a man by word of mouth sell to me his horse, or any other thing,
and I give him or promise him nothing for it; this is void and will not alter
the property of the thing sold. But if one sell me a horse, or any other thing
for money, or any other valuable consideration, and the same thing is to be
delivered to me at a day certain, and by our agreement a day is set for the
payment of the money, or all, or part of the money is paid in hand, or I give
earnest money (albeit it be but a penny) to the seller, or I take the thing
bought by agreement into my possession where no money is paid, earnest given,
or day set for the payment; in all these cases there is a good bargain and sale
of the thing to alter the property thereof; and in the first case I may have
an action for the thing, and the seller for his money; in the second case I may
sue for and recover the thing bought; in the third I may sue for the thing
bought, and the seller for the residue of the money; in the fourth case where
earnest is given we may have reciprocal remedies one against another; and in
the last case the seller may sue for his money. If A sell cloth to B for ten
shillings, and B takes away the cloth against the will of A; in this case A
shall have an action of trespass against B. And if A sell cloth to B for ten
shillings in his election to make it a bargain or not, and if he will he may
keep his cloth until the other pay him, and if A say nothing, but does suffer
B to take it away; he may make it a bargain if he will, and bring an action of
debt for his money. If I offer money for a thing in a Market or Fair, and the
seller agree to take my offer, and whiles I am telling the money as fast as I
can he does sell the thing to another: Or when I have bought it we agree that
he shall keep it until I can go home to my house to fetch the money; in both
these cases, especially in the first the bargains are good, so as the seller
may not sell them afterward to another, and upon the payment and tender and
refusal of the money agreed upon, I may take or recover the things.

If one do bargain and sell his land to me for money, To have 6. How a bargain
and sale shall be taken.
Co. 1. 87. super Litt. 10. Dier 169.
and to hold to me generally, and does not say to me and my heirs; by this I
have but an estate for life and no more.

If one in consideration of ten pound paid by me does bargain Of lands.
Dier 155.
and sell his land to me and my heirs To have and to hold to me to the use of
the bargainor for life, the remainder in tail to me, the remainder to the right
heirs of the bargainor; this Habendum in this case is void, and I and my heirs
shall have the land for ever.

If one in consideration of ten pound sell me land for the term Co. 6. 33.
of twenty years, and does not say when this term shall begin; in this case it
shall begin presently. See more in Exposition of Deeds, chap. 5. in toto.

If one sell me any thing by the tod, pound, bushel, yard, or ell; Kelw. 87.
Plow. 140. 41.
it shall be accounted me assured, and reckoned according to the Of goods
custom of the country and place, and not according to the statutes or the
measures of other countries.

If one sell me twenty barrels of ale, or ten pottles, or cups of Plow. 86. 27
H. 8. 27. Brob. Contract. 4.
wine; by these bargains I shall not have the barrels, pottles, or cups, with
the ale or the wine. But if one sell me a hogshead, or a firkin of wine, it
seems by this bargain I shall have the hogshead and firkin with the wine.

If one sell me all his trees in such a wood, and that I shall not 27 Ass. 29.
cut them until Michaelmas, and in the interim hawks do breed in the trees;
it seems in this case that the vendor shall have them, and that I may not
meddle with them. And yet see Co. 11. 58. which seems to be to the contrary.

The inrolment of a deed of bargain and sale, when it is done within 7. How and
to what purposes a deed of bargain and sale of lands and the inrolment
thereupon shall relate. And how and to what purposes not.
Co. 4. 71. Bro. fait Inrol. 9.
the six months shall to most purposes relate to the time of the delivery or
of the date of the deed. And it is given as a rule, That it shall have relation
to the time of the delivery of the deed, viz. to avoid all mean estates and
charges made to a stranger by the bargainor after the delivery of the deed
before the inrolment, but not to divest any estate lawfully settled in the
interim in the bargainee himself. And therefore if one bargain and sell his
land by deed indented to one, and after before the deed is enrolled, he enter
into a statute, or grant a rentcharge out of this land, or make a lease of the
land to another, and then the deed is enrolled within the time; in this case
the relation shall avoid all the mean charges and estates. And if A bargain and
sell his land by deed indented to B, and afterward does sell the same land by
deed indented to C, and the deed made to C is first enrolled, and then the deed
made to B is enrolled also within the six months; in this case B shall have the
land, and the relation of his inrolment shall make the inrolment of the other
deed void. So if A levy a fine Dier 218.
of the land to C, yet B shall have the land. But if the first deed Curia M. 3
Jac. B. R.
made to B, be not enrolled within the six months, and the deed to C be
enrolled within the six months contra.

If A bargain and sell land to B, and after levy a fine to B of the Co. 4. 71.
same land, and after within the six months the deed is enrolled; in this
case B shall take by the fine and not by the bargain and sale.

If one jointenant alien all his lands in Dale to A, and before the Bro. fait
Inroll. 9.
inrolment the other jointenant die, and after the deed is enrolled; in this
case but a moity and not the whole land does pass.

If A bargain and sell his land to B, and after this A does become So held 4.
Car. B. R.
Bankrupt, and the Commissioners sell the land to C, and (...).
after the deed is enrolled within six months; in this case B and not C the
purchasor shall have the land.

If A bargain and sell his land held in capite to B in fee, and B dies Pasche
15. Jac.
Ward.
before inrolment, and then the deed is enrolled; in this case the heir of B
shall be inward. And so was it held by all the Justices in Sir Walter Earls
case, Pasch. 15 Iac. Curia Ward. And yet in this case the wife of the bargainee
shall not have dower, as was held Contrarium tent. per Just. Berkley, Hill. 11
Cat.
Dower.
by Anderson Chief Justice, and Justice Walmsley 3 Iac. Co. B. and again in Sir
Robert Barkers case, 6 Iac. And if one bargain and sell (...).
his land to I S, and after this the rent incur, and then the deed is enrolled;
the bargainee and not the bargainor shall have the rent. Per Curiam B. R. Hill.
11 Car.

If A bargain and sell his land to B in fee, and then mary C and 22 Eliz.
die, and C is endowed, and after the deed is enrolled; in this case the dower
of the woman shall be taken away by relation, as was held in Baron Frevils
case, 22 Eliz. Co. B.

If A bargain and sell land to B and C in fee, and B release to C Release.
3 Jac. Co. B.
before the inrolment; this release is void.

If A disseisor bargain and sell the land disseised to B in fee, and So held in
Mockets case 10 El.
the disseisee does release to the bargainor, and after the deed is enrolled;
in this case this release shall avail B.

If A bargain and sell his land to B, and B before inrolment does bargain and
sell the land to C; the first deed is enrolled, and then the second deed is
enrolled; in this case the last bargain and sale is void, and shall not be made
good by relation, as was held by the Court 6 Jac.
in Sir Robert Barkers case.

If a lease be made rendering rent on condition to reenter for not So was it
held in Sir Christopher Hattons case.
payment, and the lessor bargain and sell the reversion by deed indented, and
after the deed made the rent is arere, and then the deed is enrolled; in this
case it shall not relate to give a reentry for the condition broken.

If A bargain and sell land to B in tail, and B before inrolment of So has it
been adjudged.
the deed does make a lease according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. and after the
deed is enrolled; this is a good lease.

And now we come to a Gift.

CHAP. XI. Of a Gift.
THis word importing no more, then the transferring of the property of a thing
from one to another, is of larger extent then Gift. Quid.
a feoffement, which is always applied to an immovable thing; for this is
often applied to moveable things also, as trees, cattle, household stuff etc.
the property whereof is, and may be altered as well by gift, as by sale or
grant. And in this sense a gift is sometimes by the act of the party, as when
one man does give a thing to another. And this is, or may be either by word or
by writing. And sometimes it is by act of Law, as when a woman is married to a
husband, or one is made Executor to another; in these cases by the marriage
only, and taking of the Executorship the Law gives all the goods of the woman
to the husband, and of the Testator to his Executor. So where one does take my
goods as a trespasser, and I recover damages for them upon a suit in Law; in
this case the Law does give him the property of the goods, because he has
paid for them. But this word Gift is sometimes taken more strictly, and applied
to a conveyance or passing of an estate of lands or tenements to another in
tail, wherein this word Dedi is most commonly used. And then he which does so
give the land is called the donor, and he to whom it is given the donee. And
this for the most part is by deed though it may be otherwise. Donor. Donee.
And for these deeds of gift of immovable or moveable things, see Deed and
Grant in toto, wherein all the learning touching this matter is involved. And
so we pass to a Grant.

CHAP. XII. Of a Grant.
THis word taken largely is, where any thing is granted or passed Grant. Quid.
from one to another. And in this sense it does comprehend Co. super Litt. 172.
9. Finchesley 29.
feoffements, bargains and sales, gifts, leases, charges, and the like, for he
that does give, or sell, does grant also. And thus it is sometimes in writing
or by deed, and sometimes it is by word without But the word being taken more
strictly and properly, it is the grant, conveyance, or gift by writing of such
an incorporeall thing as lies in grant, and not in livery, and cannot be given
or granted by word only without deed. Or it is the grant of such persons as
cannot pass any thing from them but by deed, as the King, bodies corporate
etc. And this albeit it may be made by other words, yet it is most commonly
made by this word [grant] as being most proper to this purpose. Know therefore
that amongst Co. super Litt. 49.
hereditaments, some are such as are said to lie in livery, i. such as whereof
livery of seisin may be made, as Manors, houses, lands etc. And some are such
as do not lie in livery, i. whereof no livery of seisin can, nor need to be
made, but they pass by the delivery of the deed without any more, and of this
sort are rents, reversions, services, advowsons in gross, and the like, which
things cannot pass from man to man without deed or matter of record, which is
of a higher nature then a deed. And he that makes this grant is called the
grantor, and he to whom it Grantor, Grantee.
is made is called the grantee.

It is taken here in the largest sense as that which does comprehend 2.
Quotuplex.
both. And so some grants are of the land or soil it self: and some are of
some profit to be taken out of or from the soil, as rent, common etc. And some
are of goods and chattels, and some are of other things, as authorities,
elections etc. And they are made sometimes by matter of record, and sometimes
by deed or writing in the country, and sometimes by word without either. Some
grants also tend to charge the grantor with something he was not charged with
before, and some to pass something out of him to the grantee, and some tend to
discharge the grantee of something wherewith he was charged or chargeable
before, and whereof he is now hereby discharged.

Regularly these things are requisite in every good grant or 3. Things
necessarily requisite to every good grant.
Co. 11. 73. Plow. 555.
gift. 1. That there be a grantor, donor etc. and that he be a person able to
grant, and not disabled by any legal or natural impediment. 2. That there be
a grantee, donee etc. and that he be a Perk. Sect. 1.
person capable of the thing granted, and not disabled to receive it. 3. That
there be a thing granted, and that the thing be such a thing as is grantable.
4. That it be granted in that order and manner that Law requires: as where the
thing is not grantable without deed, that it be done by deed. And if it be by
deed, that the deed have apt words to describe and set forth the person of the
grantor, and grantee, and thing granted etc. and that all necessary
circumstances, as sealing, and delivery, and livery of seisin, and atturnment
where it is needful be observed. 5. That there be an agreement to, and
acceptance of the grant or thing granted by him to whom it is made, and for
default in either of these particulars a grant may be void. In acquirendo rerum
dominio scilicet quod donationes non valent licet sint inceptae nisi sint
perfectae. But if grants Bro. Grant 89.
be very ancient and the things granted have been enjoyed according to the
grant ever since the making of it; in this case the grant may be good
notwithstanding some legal defect in some of these particulars.

Corporations as Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Communalty, and 4. What shall be
said a good and sufficient grant, gift, or sale. Or not. 1. For the manner of
it. And what may be granted without deed. Or not. And how. Rents, Services etc.
Perk. Sect. 64. 4 H. 7. 17. Plow. 150. 16 H. 7. 3. Litt. Sect. 60.
such like regularly can neither grant lands, goods, or chattels, but it must
be by deed. But the grantees of such persons, and all other common persons may
grant or give any thing which does lie in livery, as manors, houses, lands, and
such like things in fee simple, fee tail, for life, for years, or at will, by
word without deed. And if a lease be made of any such thing for life or years,
with a remainder over in fee simple, fee tail, or for life; it is good, albeit
the same be done by word without any deed in writing.

Such things as are said to lie in grant and not in livery, generally Co. super
Litt. 49. Dier 139. Perk. Sect. 61. 60. 63. Bro. Grant 59.
cannot be granted or given, had or taken without deed unless it be in some
special cases. And therefore rents and services, and such like things which
are in gross, and not incident to some other thing may not be granted without
a deed. And therefore if a rentcharge be granted unto me for years, I may not
grant this rent over without deed. And if there be Lord and tenant of errable
land by fealty, and the service of yielding the tenth sheaf of corn before it
be sowed; the Lord cannot grant this service for years without deed. But if a
rent, or any service be parcel of, or incident to a manor or any other thing
which is grantable without deed; in this case by the grant of the principal by
word this thing may pass as belonging thereunto without any deed. Also rents
or services may be granted upon a partition by one coparcenor to another
without deed.

A reversion cannot be granted in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or Perk.
Sect. 61. Dier 174 Plow. 433. Bro. Grant 104.
years without deed unless it be in casewhere it is parcel of a manor.
Reversion or Remainder.
But a reversion may be granted upon a partition by one coparcenor to another
without any deed. And the same law is of a remainder. And therefore if one make
a lease for life or years to one, the remainder in fee simple, fee tail, or
for life, to another without deed, howsoever this be a good remainder in the
first creation without deed, yet this remainder cannot be granted over without
deed.

A Parsonage or Rectory, albeit it consist of nothing but Tithes, 15 H. 7. 8.
16 H. 7. 3. 19 H. 8. 12. 21 H. 6. 43.
Advowson, Tithes etc.
and the like, besides the Church and Churchyard, and it has no house nor
glebe belonging to it, yet may be granted without deed in fee simple, for life,
or years: and then the tithes and offerings will pass as incident. But the
tithes alone, or a portion of tithes, oblations, mortuaries, or obventions are
not grantable by themselves without deed. And therefore a lease paroll of
tithes, albeit All this was agreed 36 El. B. R.
it be but for years is not good. And if the Parson agree with one of his
Parishioners, that he shall have his own tithes; this is not a good grant of
the tithes, neither may it be pleaded or used so; but perhaps by way of
agreement a Parishioner may retain his tithes. And if a lessee for years of
tithes will grant it over to another at will only, it cannot be done without
deed, as was held by Baron Denham, 2 Car. at Sarum Assizes. And yet it is held
that a Parson Mich. 8 Jac. Dr. Longworths case.
may grant his tithes from year to year to him that is to pay them without any
deed, but this is by way of retainer. But this grant or agreement must be made
to and with the party himself that is to pay the tithe, and not with another:
neither can this interest be assigned or a stranger take advantage of it, as
has been agreed in the case of Hawks and Brafield, Pasch. 3 Jac. B. R.

An Advowson in gross cannot be granted without deed; yea 21 Ed. 3. 38. 11 H.
4. 3. Dier 29. 10. Co. 1. 1.
the grantee of the grantee of an Advowson is to show both the deeds. But an
Advowson is grantable upon a partition between coparcenors without deed. And an
Advowson incident to a manor, or piece of land is grantable with the manor or
land without any deed. The next avoidance to a Church is not grantable without
Plow. 150. 9 Ed. 4. 47.
deed.

Common of Pasture, of estovers, turbary, fishing, etc. cannot be Perk. Sect.
61.
granted in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years, unless it be in case
Common of pasture etc.
of partition, or of appendancy as incident to some corporal thing without
deed. And therefore if a man grant by word of mouth to me Common for twenty
beasts in his manor; this is not good. Neither if it be granted to me by deed
may I grant this over to another without deed. But if a man have Common of
pasture appendant or appurtenant to his land; in this case he may grant his
land with the Common appendant by word only without any deed. Franchises, as
Fairs, Markets, Courts, Warrens, and the like, Franchises, and such like things.
15 H. 7. 8.
or the profits thereof are not grantable without deed. But it seems a Hundred
is grantable without deed, for that is liberum tenementum. The profits of a
Mill, County, Ferry, Corody, or the like, are not grantable without deed.

Things in action, as a right or title of action that does only depend 6 H. 7.
9. Dier 91. 126. Doct. and St. 16.
in action, and things of that nature, as rights and titles of Things in
action, and such like things.
entry to any real or personal thing are not grantable at all, but by way of
release to the tenant of the land etc. by which means it may be extinguished:
but this may not be neither without deed. And therefore if a man take my goods
as a trespassor, or I deliver him my goods to keep, and after I will give these
goods to him; I cannot do this without deed.

An election, condition, covenant, assent, license, or liberty, Dier 281.
cannot be created and annexed to an estate of inheritance or freehold without
deed.

A privilege to hold land for life without impeachment of wast, Offices.
Co. 9. 9.
is not grantable without deed. Offices for the most part are not grantable
without deed. And yet some inferior offices, as Stewardships, Bailiwicks, and
the like are, for such officers a Lord of a Manor may retain by word without
deed.

Most chattels real and personal, may be given and granted without Perk.
Sect. 57. 60. Bro. Done i. Dier 370. 5 H. 7. 35, 36. Plow. 150.
deed. And therefore if a man by word of mouth grant, give, or Chattels.
sell me his lease for years, the wardship of body and land, or the wardship of
land that he has by reason of a tenure by Knights service, or by grant from
the King, or grant or sell me the trees standing upon his ground, the corn
growing upon his land, his horse, sword, plate, or other household stuff; this
is a good grant or gift. But the wardship of the body of an heir only, cannot
be granted without deed. So a next presentation cannot be granted without deed.

If one grant his reversion of land to one, and by the same deed What by the
same deed.
Plow. 540.
grants a rent out of the same land to another, and delivers the deed to
both of them at one time; this is good, and shall enure first as a grant of the
rent to one, and then as a grant of the reversion to the other.

If one convey land to another, and the grantee by the same Dier 6.
deed does grant a rent or common to the grantor out of the same land conveyed;
this is as good as if it were by another deed. Dedi and Concessi be the most
apt words for all kind of grants, yet Co. super Litt.
By what words of grant.
it may be by other words, and the grant as good as by those words.

The best way in grants is to grant by words of present time in 35 H. 6. 11.
the present tense as well as in the preterperfect tense. But a grant by words
of the preterperfect tense only, as by Dedi and concessi only without words of
the present tense is good.

Touching this part two things are requisite: 1. That the grantor 2. In respect
of the person of the grantor etc. and the naming of him. And who may be a
grantor. And how.
See Feoffement ca. 9. Numb. 4.
be a person able. 2. That if the grant be by deed, that he be sufficiently
described and set forth either by his proper names or else by some other matter
of distinction. Note therefore that whosoever Perk. Sect. 3.
may be a feoffor, may be a grantor. And any natural, politic, or corporate
body (not prohibited by law, as Monk, Friar, woman covert, infant, and such
like) may be a grantor, donor etc. And the grants of such persons will be good.

An alien may, and is able to grant or give any thing that he is Alien.
capable of to have or take by grant or gift.

A person attainted of treason or felony may give or grant his land; Perk.
Sect. 26. See chapter 2. Numb. 6.
Person attaint or outlawed.
and this is good against all others besides the King, and the Lord of whom his
land is held. And he may grant or give his goods to relieve himself in prison,
and this will be good against all others, and the King and Lord also. A person
outlawed in a personal action may give or grant his goods or chattels, and the
gift or grant will be good against all others but the King.

The Queen may without the agreement of the King make grants, Co. super Litt.
3. Per. Sect. 8. 20. 41. See chapter 2. Numb. 6.
Woman covert.
gifts etc. of her lands or goods, but another woman that has a husbands
cannot give, or grant her lands or goods without her husbands consent, unless
it be in some special cases. And albeit she do recite by the deed that she
is sole and not covert, yet this will not help. And if the case be so that by
agreement between her and her husband there be a certain portion of her
husbands lands or goods allotted unto her to dispose of, and manage at her
pleasure, yet she alone without her husband can make no good grant or gift of
any part of these lands or goods. But if she grant any thing by fine, and the
husband do not avoid it during the coverture; this grant will bind her after
his death. And if she make a gift or grant of her husbands goods, it is thought
this is not good until her husband agree to it.

An infant cannot make any gift or grant etc. that is good but in 9 H. 7. 24.
26 H. 8. 2. Perk. Sect. 12, 13, 14. 19. 7 H. 4. 5 See cha. 2. Number. 6.
special cases, for if he makes any grant or gift that takes effect by the
delivery of the deed only, as if he grant a rentcharge out of his land, or
make a feoffement with a letter of Attorney to give livery of seisin, or give
or sell his horse, and the buyer or donee take him himself; these are void ab
initio. And if the grant, or gift take effect by the delivery of his own hand,
as if he make a feoffment and give livery of seisin himself, or sell a horse
and deliver him with his own hands; this is voidable by the Infant himself,
or others that shall have his right etc. But if an Infant grant any thing by
fine; this must be avoided during his minority or else it cannot be avoided at
all.

All grants that are made by Duresse, are voidable by the parties Perk. Sect.
16.
themselves that make it or others that have their estates etc. But Duresse.
if it be done by fine, it is good and unavoidable.

All gifts, grants, etc. made by deed in the country by those that Non sane
memsrie.
Co. 123. 124. See cap. 2. Numb. 6.
are de non sane memory are good against themselves but voidable by those that
are their heirs, executors, or have their estate. But if it be by fine it is
good and unavoidable.

A man that is borne dumb, or dumb and deaf if he have understanding Perk.
Sect. 25.
may by delivery of the deed and making of signs make a good grant, gift, etc.
But a man that is borne deaf, dumb and blind cannot.

A Bastard may give or grant as well as any other man after he Bastord.
has gotten a name by reputation. Perk. Sect. 26.


A Parson may grant any thing belonging to his Parsonage for Parson.
See Lease.
no longer time then for his own life, and therein likewise but during his
residency, albeit he have the consent of the Patron and ordinary.

Neither the head without the members of a Corporation, nor the Corporation.
members without the head, as Dean without the Chapter, or Chapter Perk. Sect.
31, 32, 33.
without the Deane, may give or grant any of the lands belonging to their
Corporation.

One executor or Administrator may give or sell any of the Executors.
goods of the deceased, and this is good to bind all the rest. See Execuors.


What Grants Ecclesiastaicall persons may make of their Ecclesiastical lands,
husbands of the lands of their wives and tenants in tail of their lands
intailed. See in Lease.

The name of the persons in Grants is set down only to distinguish Co. 6. 63.
super Lit. 3.
persons and to make the person intended certain: and therefore Misnaming.
howsoever it be best and most safe to describe the person by his true and
proper name of Baptism, and also by his Surname, and if it be a Corporation by
the true name whereby the Corporation is made, yet mistakes in this case
unless they be very gross will not make void the grant. Nihil facit error
nominis cum de corpore constat. And therefore if one that is a Bastard has
gotten a name by reputation in the place where he does live, or another man
has gotten another name by common esteem then his own right name, or is
usually called by another name then his true name in the place where he lives,
in these cases they may grant by this name and the grant is good. And if a man
be baptized by one name and after Perk. Sect. 41. Co. super Lit. 5.
be confirmed by another; some have said he may grant by either of these names.
Sed Quere. And if John at Style grant by the name Perk. Sect. 89. Co. super
Lit. 3.
of William at Style; this grant is good. Et sic de similibus. Fitz. grant 67.
Perk. Sect. 42.
And these grants are good especially when there is some other addition to make
it more certain, as when a Duke, Marquess, Earl, or Bishop grant by their
names of honor or dignity, and grant without any name or with a false name of
baptism, as when the Duke of Suffolk by the name of the Duke of Suffolk,
without any more words, or by the name of William Duke of Suffolk, when his
name is John, or the Bishop of Norwich grant so; these are good grants, because
there is but one such Duke and one such Bishop within the kingdom. So if a
Deane and Chapter, Mayor and Communalty grant by the name of their Corporation
without any addition of Christian or Surname; it is good. And especially then
also are these Perk. Sect. 40.
grants good when the true name does appear in some other part of the deed. As
when John at Style recites by his deed that his name is John at Style, and by
the same deed does grant by the name of Thomas at Style. Or Alice at Style
reciting by her deed that she is a feme covert when in truth she is sole. But
if an ordinary man 3 H. 6 26. Perk. Sect. 38. 42.
grant by his Surname only without any name of baptism, or by his name of
baptism without any surname at all; in these and such like cases for the most
part the grant will be void for incertainty unless there be some other matter
in the deed to help it, or some matter done ex post facto to supply it; for in
some cases where the thing granted does lie in livery such a mistake or
incertainty in the grant may be helped by the livery of seisin upon the deed
afterward. And so also it is in the names of Corporations, for if the variance
Co. 6. 65. 10. 122. 11. 19. Dier 150. Co. 10. 124.
and mistake by omission or alteration be only in some small matter so as it is
literal and verbal only the grant will not be hurt by it. But if the mistake
or omission be in the substance of the name; the grant may be void by it. And
therefore if Decanus and Capitulum ecclesiae cathed sanctae and individ. Trin.
Caerlil. grant by the name of Decanus ecclesiae cathed. sanctae Trin. in
Caerlil. and totum capitulum ecclesiae predict: this is good: Et sic de
similibus: for if the sense does still remain either expressly or by necessary
implication, and the description be such as does import a sufficient and
certain demonstration of the true name of the Corporation according to the
foundation thereof, it suffices. But if any of the substance or essence of the
name be omitted contra. And therefore if a Corporation incorporate by the name
of Prepositi and collegiiregalis coll. beat Mariae de Eaton juxta Windsor
grant by the name of Prep, and sociorum Colleg. regalis dc Eaton etc. leaving
out Collegium et beatae Mariae; this grant is void.

3 In respect of the grantee and the naming of him. And who may de a grantee
etc. And how.
Touching this part three things are requisite. 1. That the Co. super. Lit. 2.
3. Perk. Sect. 43. See in feoffment. cap. 9. Numb. 4.
grantee be a person capable. i. that he be a person in being at the time of
the grant made and not disabled by any legal impediment to take by the grant.
2. That if the grant be by deed the grantee be sufficiently named or at the
least set forth and distinguished by some circumstantiall matter, and that he
be so named or described as that he may be capable by that name whereby he is
set forth. 3. That he himself and not a stranger do take by the same grant.
Note therefore that all natural and politic or corporate bodies that are not
disabled by law may be grantees. And all persons that may be grantors may be
grantees: And some others that cannot grant or give yet may take or receive.
And a grant made to one, two, three, or twenty such persons is good. A grant of
land or rent in possession to the right heirs of I S, I S Co. 1. 101. Perk.
Sect. 52. 54. Co. 2. 31.
being then living is void, for there is nor can be any such person in rerum
natura, for no man can be an heir to another that is living. But such a grant
to one in remainder is good if so be that I S die before the the particular
estate end and before the remainder happen. So if a grant be to him or her that
shall be the first child of I S, and he have no child at the time of the grant,
this is void. So if a grant be made to the wife or child of I S when there is
none such, it is void. As if a grant be to I S, and to his first borne son,
or to I S and her that shall be his wife, and he has at the time of the grant
neither wife nor son; in these cases the grant is void as to the wife and
son, and I S shall have all by the grant.

An alien may be a grantee; but if any thing be granted unto him Co. super Lit.
2.
whereof he is incapable, as any estate of lands in fee simple, for life, Allen
or years, he cannot hold it, but the King will have it from him. Prerogative.
Persons attain^.


A person attainted of treason or felony before or after attainder Co. super
Lit. 2. Perk. Sect. 48.
may be a grantee, but he cannot hold the thing granted, for if the King or
Lord will he may have it from him. So also persons outlawed in personal
actions may be grantees of lands, or goods but the King will have the profits
of the lands and property of the goods.

A woman covert may be a grantee; but her husband may by Perk. Sect. 43. Co.
super Lit. 2.
his disagreement a void the grant. And yet if he do not avoid it Woman cover.
in his life time the grant will be good: and he that will have the grant to be
void must show that the husband did disagree to it.

An Infant may be a grantee, for this is presumed to be for his advantage.
Perk. Sect. 4 Co. super Lit. 2.
Infant.
And yet at his full age he may agree to it and perfect it or disagree to it
and avoid it without any cause showed.

A man de non sane memory may be a grantee as well as any other Men denon sane
memori.
Co. Idem.
man, and it seems these grants cannot be afterward avoided. But such men may
not be grantees of offices of trust and such like things.

A Bastard, persons deformed having humane shape, leapers, and Co. Idem.
such like may be grantees of lands or goods etc. as other men Bastard.
may be.

An Hermaphrodite may be a grantee according to the most prevailing Co. Idem.
Sex. Herrmaphrodite.


A clerk convict, and a man imprisoned may be a grantee as well Co. super Lit.
3. Perk. Sect. 48. 51.
Clerk convict. Villain.
as any other. And so also may a villain of the King or of a common person,
but he cannot retain the thing granted, for the King or Lord may have it from
him if he will. But Monks, Friars, and such like persons cannot be grantees,
for they are utterly disabled.

Regularly it is requisite that the grantee be named by his names Co. super
Lit. 3.
Misnaming or not naming.
of Baptism and Surname, and so it is most safe, and special heed must be
taken to the name of Baptism, for that a man cannot have two or more names of
Baptism as he may of Sirnames. And yet in some cases though the name be
mistaken the grant is good. Bro. Nosme. 9.
As if a grant be to I S, and Em his wife and her name is Emelin, Bro.
Confirmation. 30.
or a grant is made to Afred Fitzjames by the name of Etheldred Fitzjames; Co.
6. 65. 27 E. 3. 85.
or a grant be to Robert Earl of Penbrooke where his name is Henry; or to
George Bishop of Norwich where his name is John; Co. supu Lit. 3.
or a grant be to a Mayor and Communalty, or a Deane and Chapter, and Mayor or
Deane is not named by his proper name; Dier 119
or a grant be to I S wife of W S where she is sole; all these and such like
grants are good, for in this case the rule does hold utile per inutile non
vitiatur. Co. super Lit. 3.
And if one be baptized by one name and after confirmed by another; yet a grant
to him by his first is good. And so also some think of a grant to him by his
second name. Sed Quere of this. Also when a Bastard has gotten a name by
reputation, a grant may be made to him by that name and it is good.

If a grant be made to W. at Style by the name of W. at Gappe; 9 E. 4. 43.
Fitz. Grant. 23.
this is a good grant notwithstanding this mistake.

But where a grant does intend to describe the person of the Co. super Lit. 3.
Perk. Sect. 54. Bro. Grant. 65. Done 17. Dier 337. Perk. Sect. 55, 56. Bro.
Don. 31 Grant. 172. Done 50. Fitz. Donet. Perk. Sect. 55. 52.
grantee by his proper name and does omit or mistake his christian name or
surname; in this case for the most part the grant is void unless there be some
special matter to help it as in the cases before. And yet if the grant do not
intend to describe the grantee by his known name, but by some other matter,
there it may be good by a Incertainty.
certain description of the person without either surname or name of Baptism.
And therefore a grant to the wife of I S, or primogenito filio, or to the
second son, or to the youngest son, or Seniori puero, or omnibus filiis, or
filiabus I S, or omnibus liberis I S, or omnibus exitibus I S, or to the right
heirs of I S, or to the next of blood of I S; in these cases grants made to
these persons in these words are good, for the person is certainly enough
described. And if a lease be made to I S for life, the remainder to him that
shall come first to Paul's such a day, or to him that I S shall name in three
days; if in these cases any one do come to Paul's that day, or be named by I S
within three days and the particular estate does so long continue; this is a
good grant of the remainder. Id certum est quod certum reddi potest. But if a
grant be made in these words, viz. To four of the parishoners of Dale; or Deo
and ecclesiae de D; or to two of the sons of I S and he has many sons; or
to I S, or W S in the disjunctive; these and such like Grants as these are
utterly void for incertainty. And if a gift or grant of goods be to the
parishioners of Dale in these words; it seems this is good; but if a grant or
gift of land be made to them by these words, it seems this is void. And so
also it is of a grant of goods to the Churchwardens of a parish, this is held
to be good, but otherwise it is of a grant of land to them. Abastard is capable
by that name whereby he is usually called, and therefore a grant to him by that
name is good. And a right heir, or one that shall be the first issue of I S
that has no child, is capable of a remainder by that name, but of land in
possession he is not capable by that name. And a bastard as the reputed son
of I S may take by a grant to I S and his issue. A Bishop may take by the name
of a Bishop without any other name. But if a grant be made to the parishioners
or inhabitants of Dale, or probis hominibus de Dale, or to the commoners of
such a wast or to the Lord and his tenants bond and free; these are not good
grants; for albeit these persons are capable yet are they not capable by these
names.

If there be two grantees and one of them do take by the deed it Doct. and
Stud. 94. Co. 1. 15. super Lit. 231. New terms of the law. 251, 252. 5 E. 3 17.
Co. super Lit. 21.
is sufficient, but if the grant be to one that is no party to the deed and not
to the grantee himself; in this case albeit the grantee and he to whom the
grant is made be capable and never so well described by their names yet is the
grant void, for no grant can be made but to him that is party to the deed
except it be by way of remainder. And therefore if a man make a lease for term
of life, and after the lessor grant to a stranger that the tenant for life
shall have the land to him and his heirs; this Grant is void. Et sic de
similibus. And yet it seems in some cases if one of the grantees be party to
the deed that another Grantee that is no party to the deed may take with him.
And therefore the case was. Robert gave the reversion of lands which Agnes his
wife did hold for her life to Stephan de la Moore, Habendum postmortem dictae
Agnetis in liberum maritagium cum Johanna filia ejnsdem Roberti; in this case
it was adjudged that albeit Joane were not named before the Habendum yet that
she should take in tail with her husband.

Touching this point these things are requisite. 1. That the 4. In respect of
matter touching the thing granted, charged etc.
thing whereof the grant is made be grantable, and that both in respect of the
nature of the thing it self, and also of his estate that does grant it, for in
some cases albeit the thing for the quality of it be grantable yet in respect
of the estate and property that the owner has in it, it is not grantable. 2.
That if it be by deed it be sufficiently distinguished and named.

Amongst things that are grantable some are grantable de novo and in their
first creation, but not transmissible nor assignable afterward. 1. In respect
of the nature of the ^^ing granted. And what things are grantable over or
chargeable. Or not. 1. In respect of the nature of the thing it self.
And some are grantable at first in their original creation and assignable
over afterward from man to man in infinitum.

All things that may be granted by fine and whereof a fine may See Fine Numb.
6. part. 3. See in exposition of the terms of Grants supra cap. 5. Numb. 15.
Bro. Done 10.
be levied may be granted over from man to man.

All the things that are before observed to be grantable by or without deed are
grantable over from man to man. And therefore all corporal and immovable
things that lie in livery, as Manors, mesuages, cottages, lands, meadows,
pastures, woods and the like are grantable in fee simple, for life, or years at
first and assignable over again at the pleasure of the grantee. Also trees,
and emblements are grantable. And a man may grant the vesture or herbage. i.
the grass of his ground and not the ground it self. And a man that is seized
in fee of a house may give or sell the timber, stone etc. of the house, and the
donee or grantee may take it after the death of the donor. Also all
incorporeall things that lie in grant, as rents, Perk. Sect. 103. Bro. grant 3.
3 H. 6. 20. 9 H. 6. 12. Perk. Sect. 91. 87. 101. Fitz. grant 145. Co. super
Lit. 144.
Rents, Services.
services and the like are grantable over in fee simple, for life, or years,
and therefore rents or services reserved upon any estate and rents granted out
of lands are grantable over in infinitum. And if a man have a rent reserved on
a particular estate he may grant over parcel of it. But a rent or Service
suspended cannot be granted. Neither can a man grant a rent issuing out of a
rent. If a rent be granted to me I may grant it over to a stranger before I be
seized of it; and this grant is void. But an Annuity it seems is not grantable
over after the first creation of it. And yet if an Annuity be granted to I S
and his assigns pro consilio; it seems this Annuity is grantable over.
Advowsons are grantable in fee simple, for life, Stat. 32. H. 8 cap. 7. Perk.
Sect. 90.
Advowsons etc.
or years, from man to man in infinitum. Also the presentation to a Church
before the Church is void is grantable; but when the Church is void that Turn
is not grantable, for it is then in the nature of a thing in action. Also
Rectories, and tithes, and portions of tithes, and pensions are grantable from
man to man in infinitum.

Reversions and Remainders are grantable from man to man in fee Perk. Sect. 73.
88. 87.
simple, fee tail, for life or years. And if I have a tenant for life of three
Reversions and Remainders.
houses; I may grant the reversion of two of them. And if I have the reversion
of three houses and four acres of land; I may grant the reversion of two houses
and of two acres of land. And if tenant in tail be of an acre of land the
remainder to his right heirs, he may grant over this remainder by it self;
and yet it is such a thing as the tenant in tail himself may bar by a
common recovery. But if a grant be of land to I S for years the remainder to
the right heirs I D, and I D is living; this remainder is not grantable so
long as I D does live. Commons, of pasture, of turbary, of fishing, of
estovers, are grantable Perk. Sect. 103.
Common.
in fee, for life or years, from man to man in infinitum. Per 2. Judges against
one Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
And yet if a common in gross and without number be granted to a man and his
heirs; it seems this is not grantable over to another man. But if common for
a certain number of beasts be so granted, it seems the law is otherwise, and
that this is grantable over in case where the first grant is to the grantee
only, and not the grantee and his assigns.

Offices are grantable at first; but the great Judicial offices of Offices.
Perk. Sect. 101.
the kingdom, as the offices of the Lord Keeper, Chief Justices, or Chief
Baron, or of other of the Justices or Barons, and such like are not grantable
over to others, neither may they be executed by deputies. But the Sheriffs
office albeit it be not grantable over yet may it be executed by deputy. Per
Lord Keeper and 2. Chief Just. M. 5 Car. in cancellaria.
The reversion of an office is Prerogative.
not grantable by a Subject as it is by the King, yet a Subject may grant an
office Habendum after the death of the present officer; and this is good. Co.
super Lit. 233. Perk. Sect. 101.
The inferior offices also that are offices of trust, especially if they
concern the person of the grantor, howsoever they are grantable at first yet
are they not grantable over by the officer to any other unless they be granted
to them and their assigns, and of this sort are the offices of Steward,
Bailife, Receiver, Sewer, Chamberlain, Carver, and the like, neither may these
be executed by deputy but where the grant is so.

Licenses, and authorities are grantable at first for the lives of the
Licenses, Authorities, etc.
12 E. 7. 25. 13 H 7. 13.
parties or for years. But the grantees of them cannot assign them over. And
therefore if power be given to me to make an award or livery of seisin; I may
not grant over this power to another. And if license be granted me to walk in
another man's garden, or to go through another man's ground; I may not give or
grant this to another.

A bare possibility of an interest which is incertaine is not grantable. Co. 4.
66. 5. 24. Dier 244. Co 10. 51.
And therefore if one have a term of years in land, and by Possibilities.
his will devise it to I S for his life, and afterward to me for the residue
of the years; or devise it to I S if he live so long as the term shall last,
and if he die before the term end the remainder to me; in these cases so long
as I S does live I cannot grant over this possibility. So if a lease be made to
me and my wife for life, the remainder to the survivour of us; I may not grant
this remainder over to another man. But such a possibility being coupled with
some present interest is grantable over. And therefore if A have four houses
in execution upon a Statute, and by course of time it will endure thirteen
years, and after two of the houses are evicted by Elegit for fifteen years; in
this case he that has this execution upon the Statute may assign over his
interest in these two houses, for after the execution by the Elegit is
satisfied A shall have the two houses again until he be satisfied. The Lord
cannot grant the Perk. Sect. 90.
wardship of the heir of his tenant whiles the tenant is living.

Those things that are inseparably incident to others are not 1 E. 4. 10
grantable without the thing to which they are so incident and belonging.
Incidents.
And therefore a Court Baron which is evermore incident Perk. Sect. 104. 5 H.
7. 7.
to a Manor is not grantable without the Manor it self: common appendant to
land is not grantable without the land it self to which it does belong: and
common of estovers appendant to a house is not grantable without the house it
self to which it does belong.

A rent, service, or other thing whiles it is wholly in suspense is Suspended
things.
not grantable. And therefore if the Lord disseise the tenant, or 16 H. 7. 4.
Co. super Lit. 314. Bro. Grant 173. Perk. Sect. 88, 89.
the tenant enfeoffe the Lord upon condition; the Lord cannot grant over the
Seigniory during this suspension. But if one have a rent in fee out of my land,
and he purchase the same land for life or years; in this case it seems the
rent is grantable even whiles the estate of the land does continue. So if the
tenant make a lease for years or life of the tenancy to the Lord; in this case
the Lord may grant the Seigniory notwithstanding. And yet if the tenant make a
lease to another man for life, and the Lord grant the Seigniory to this tenant
for life in fee; in this case it seems the grantee of the seigniory cannot
grant it over because it was never in esse.

Franchises, as views of Frank pledge, Perquisites of Courts, Leets, Conusance
of Pleas, Faires, Markets, goods of felons, waifes, estrayes, Franchises.
Hundreds, Ferries, or Passages, Warrens, and the like are grantable over from
man to man in fee, for life or years, in infinitum.

Things in action, and things of that nature, as causes of suit, Co. 5. 24. 10.
48. Co. super Lit. 214. Dier 244. Perk. Sect. 86, 87. 85, Bro. Done, 27. 24.
48. Co. 6, 50.
Things in action.
rights and titles of entry are not grantable over to strangers but in special
cases. And therefore if a man have disseised me of my land or taken away my
goods; I may not grant over this land or these goods until I have seisin of
them again. Neither can I grant the Suit which the law does give to me for my
relief in the cases to another man. So if I make a feoffment to another man on
condition that if I do such a thing I shall have the land again; in this case
I may not before or after the time of performance of the condition grant over
the condition to another. But all these things I may release to the parties
themselves, for it is a maxim in law, that every right title, or interest in
presenti or in futuro by the joint act of all them that may claim any such
right, title or interest may be barred or extinguished. And in some cases a
grantee of a reversion may take advantage of a condition annexed to an estate
for See condition. Co. super 232. Perk. Sect. 86.
life or years. If a man owe me money on an obligation, or the like; I cannot
grant this debt to another: but I may grant a letter of attorney to another man
to sue for it and receive it, or I may grant the writing it self to another,
and he may cancel it or give it to the obligor. Dier 283.
A presentation to a Church after the Church is become void is not grantable,
for it is in the nature of a thing in action. Perk. Sect. 92. Fitz. Done 3. 7.
And if a man take my goods from me, or from another man in whose hands they
are, or I buy goods of another man and suffer them in his possession and a
stranger takes them from him; it seems in these cases I may give the goods to
the trespassor, because the property of them is still in me.

Trusts and confidences which are personal things for the most Personal
things.
part are not grantable over to others. And hence it is also that offices Perk.
Sect. 99. Plow. 379.
of trust and confidence are not grantable over but in some special cases
where they are granted to a man and his assigns; or where they are granted to
a man and his heirs. And hence it is also that a Wardship by reason of a term
in socage, which by the law is Plow. 293.
given to the next of kin is not grantable over to any other person by the
Guardian in Socage.

Some things are so entire that they cannot be severed by grant. Entire things.
Fitz. Grant 19. 76.
And therefore if a man hold three acres of land of me by twelve pence rent,
and I grant the services of the third acre; this is void, and he shall have all
or none, for I cannot sever the tenure. But if a man hold land of me by homage,
fealty, escuage, and a certain rent; in this case I may grant the rent and keep
the Seigniory.

A villain is grantable for life, or years; and if the villain during the
estate of the grantee purchase land in fee, the grantee shall have Villains.
Perk. Sect. 94.
it for ever as a Perquisite albeit he have but an estate for life in the
villain it self.

All chattells real and personal regularly are grantable from man Chattells
real and personal.
to man in infinitum, as leases for years be they present or future, Dier 58.
Plow. 142. 147. Perk. Sect. 91. Dier 305. Perk. Sect. 90.
wardships of tenants in Capite, or by Knights service, trees, oxen, horses,
plate, housholdstuffe, and the like. Also trees, grass and corn growing and
standing upon the ground, fruit upon the trees, wool upon the sheeps back is
grantable.

If a man sell me ten load of wood in his wood to be taken by his Distress.
assignment; or sell me three acres of wood toward the north side of Co. 5. 24.
the wood; by this grant in these words I have such an interest as is grantable
over. If I make a lease by deed of a house to another, and Fitz. Bar 280.
therein it is agreed between us, that if the rent be not paid me by such a
time I shall enter into the house and take and sell the goods there as mine own
to pay the rent; it seems this is a good grant of the goods and that I may do
according to the agreement. And if one that does hold land of me grant to me by
deed indented that I shall distraine for my service in all his land, this is a
good grant. Fitz. Grant 6.


A man may give or grant money, as if I deliver one money on condition Money.
that if he assure me of such land he shall have it, otherwise that Fitz. Done
11.
he shall redeliver it to me again, in this case if he make the assurance he
shall have the money, if not I may have an account for it.

Such things as are ferae naturae as Conies, Hares, Dear, and such Ferae nature
Bro. Done 34.
like are not grantable at all.

A Parson of a Church may grant his tithes for years, and yet they Tithes.
Perk. Sect. 90.
are not in him.

A man may give or grant his deeds. i. the parchment, paper and wax Deeds.
to another at his pleasure, and the grantee may keep or cancel them. Co.
super Lit. 232. Trin. 38 El. B. R. 25 H. 8. 5. 1 H. 7. Doves case.
And therefore if a man have an obligation he may give or grant it away and so
sever the debt and it. So tenant in fee simple may give or grant away the deeds
of his land, and the executor in the first case, and the heir in the last case
has no remedy. But a tenant in tail of land cannot give or grant any of the
deeds belonging to the land intailed no more then the land it self. One may
give or grant Apparel.
apparel, and it is said if one make apparel for another, and put it 1 H. 4.
31. Fitz. Bar 179.
upon him to use and wear; this is a gift or grant of the apparel it self.

If one grant to another all the wool of his sheep for seven years; Perk Sect.
90.
Wool.
this is a good grant.

If one being a Parson give to another all the wool he shall have Fitz. Grant
40.
for tithe the next year; this is a good grant.

If one grant to another his horse or his cow in the disjunctive; Bro. Done 19.
Incertainty.
this is a good grant not withstanding this incertainty, and the donee shall
have election and by that make the grant good.

Any estate that a man has in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years 2.
Inrespect of the estate, property and possession of the grantor.
in any lands etc. or any rent, or profit apprender out of the same is
grantable from man to man in infinitum. And he that has any such estate of any
lands may charge it with any rent or profit to be taken out of it as long as
the estate of the land does last. But an estate at will is not grantable over.
And if an estate be made to a man and his heirs without the word Assigns, yet
he may assign it at his pleasure, for Assigns is included within Heirs.

An Interesse termini. i. a lease for years to commence in futuro is 22 E. 4.
37. Perk. Sect. 91.
grantable before the term does begin, whether it be a lease of the land it
self or any rent or other profit out of it.

The interest or estate that a man has by extent is assignable Co. 4. 64.
from man to man at pleasure.

The reversion upon an estate tail is grantable. And yet the tenant Co. 6. S.
Geo. Cursons case Co. 1. Altonwoods case.
in tail in possession by the suffering of a common recovery may bar him in
reversion of any fruit of it.

If an estate be made of land upon condition, as if A make a feoffment Co. 1.
147. 10. 48, 49. Lit. chap. Confirmation.
to B on condition that if A pay twenty pound he shall have the land again: in
this case A and B together may at any time before the performance of the
condition join together and grant this land, or charge it with any rent, etc.
and this will be good, for it is a maxim in law, Fee simple land may be
charged one way or other. And in this case B may grant over his estate alone,
but it will be subject to the condition. And if B grant a rent out of the land
to a stranger, and after the condition is performed and the feoffor enter; in
this case he shall avoid the rent. But in this case A cannot grant, Co. 1. 147.
for he has nothing but a possibility. If one enfeoffe diverse to the use of
his son and heir upon condition and before the time of performance of the
condition the father and son join to grant or charge the land, this is a
good grant or charge.

If the tenant in tail and he that is next in remainder in fee join Co. super
Lit. 45. Co. 10. 48, 49
in the grant of a rent charge in fee, and after the tenant in tail does die
without issue; in this case this is a good grant and charge against him in
remainder. And if A does bargain and sell land to B by indenture and before
inrolment they do join to grant a rent charge to C by deed; in this case this
is a good charge and grant whether there be any inrolment or not. And so if
donor and donee in tail grant a rent charge out of the land, and then the
donee die without issue; in this case the grant is good to bind the donor.

If land be granted to two men and to the heirs of their two bodies Co. super
Lit. 182.
begotten; in this case albeit they have several inheritances after their
death, yet neither of them can grant away his estate after his life, for they
are divided only in supposition of law.

One coparcener of a seigniory may grant his part to a stranger. Perk. Sect.
73. Perk. Sect. 103.


If two Jointenants be of a plow land, and one of them does grant to a stranger
common of pasture for beasts without number to be taken in the same land; this
is void.

If two Jointenants be of a reversion, and one of them grant the whole,
Iointenants.
Perk. Sect. 80. Perk. Sect. 65. Dier 12. 33.
this is void for a moity. If a man grant, or charge that which is none of his,
and that wherein he has no property it being in the grantee or a stranger; the
grant is void. And therefore if a man grant a rent charge out of the Manor of
Dale, or grant a reversion of land, and in truth the grantor has nothing in
the Manor of Dale, or in the land; in this case the grant is void. And albeit
the granter do afterward purchase the Manor, or the land, yet this will not
make the grant good. But if the grant be by fine, or by indenture, there in
some cases it shall be good by way of estoppell. And in this case Estoppell.
albeit the party recite that it is his own yet this will not mend the cases.
And therefore if a man recite that he has a rent of ten pound a year, and
then grant five pound a year parcel of it; in this case if he have no such
rent the grant is void.

A Shepherd, Bailif, or Parker cannot give or grant away the Servant.
Bro. Done 56. 4.
goods of his master without authority. And yet it seems the servant of a
Taverner or Mercer may give or grant his masters Wine or Wares. And if a wife
give or grant the goods of her husband; Husband and Wife.
this is a good gift or grant until the husband disagree to it, and by his
agreement it is made good for ever.

If a man have a lease for years of land, and make a lease for life Plow. 524.
525.
of it, or charge it for longer time then the lease for years does last; in
this the grant is good for so long as the lease for years does last and no
longer. But if he make a lease for life and give livery of seisin he does
forfeit his estate.

Regularly a man cannot grant, or charge that which is not in Co. super Lit.
214. Perk. Sect. 65. 86.
his own possession albe it he have a right to it: And therefore if a man be
disseised of his land, and before he has entered into or recovered the land he
does grant or give the land or his right to the land to a stranger, or grant a
rent charge out of the land to a stranger; in these cases the grants are not
good. And yet such grants by fine may be good by way of estopell. And by a
release also the right may be extinct. But if one that has a reversion upon an
stoppell.
estate for life, and he grant a rent issuing out of this land; in this Perk.
Sect. 92. 98. Co. super Lit. 46.
case the grant is good, and the charge shall fasten upon the land after the
estate of the tenant for life is ended. And if a man grant common, or rent,
notwithstanding that a stranger take the rent or use the common at the time of
the grant, yet this grant is good, for a man cannot be out of possession of
these things but at his pleasure. Hill. 18 Jac. B. R. per. 2 Justices.
And if a lease for years be made to me, I may grant away my estate before my
entry. And if the lease be to begin at a day to come; I may assign over my
interest before the day come, for in this case the interest is in me from the
time of making of the lease. Perk. Sect. 92, 93. Fitz. Done 3. Bro. Done 13.
Dier 90. 30. Co. 4. 62, 63. Dier 305. 20 H. 6. 22. Perk. Sect. 59. Co. 11. 50.
Also I may give or sell my goods that I have not in possession, and therefore
if a man take my goods out of mine or another man's possession; I may afterward
give or grant these goods to him or another man, and this grant or gift is good.

A lessor cannot give or grant the trees growing on the ground Tenant for life.
Trees.
of his lessee for life, or years without the license of the lessee, except
they be first cut down by the lessee or some other, for then he may. And if
there be lessee for life, and the lessor give the trees growing on the ground,
and after the lessee for life dies; in this case the donee cannot take them,
for that at the time of the gift a property of them was in the lessee. But if a
tenant in fee simple give or grant the houses standing, or trees growing on the
ground he has in his possession; in this case the grantee or donee may take
them after the death of the grantor, and that albeit they be not cut or taken
down before his death. And yet if the tenant in tail give or grant the trees
growing upon his intailed land, and Tenant in tail.
the donor die before the trees be cut; in this case the donee or grantee
cannot cut them afterward. Howbeit if such a tenant in tail give or grant his
emblements of corn growing on the Emblements.
ground; the donee may cut and take them after the death of the tenant in
tail. And if the tenant in tail give or grant his trees, and die before they
be cut, and afterward before the issue in tail enter into the land the donee
or grantee cut them and take them away, in this case the issue in tail can
bring no action of trespass against the donee or grantee for the trees. But
perhaps if the trees be not removed off the ground he may take them.

If two coparceners be of an advowson, and the one does present, Presentation.
Dier 35. 15 H. 7.
and then he does grant the next presentation; this is a good grant, but by
this grant does pass the next he has to grant, for his companion must have
the next. So if one be seized in fee of an advowson, and he has a wife, and he
grant the third presentation; this is a good grant, but it shall be taken for
the third he may grant, which is the fourth, for the wife is to have the third
for her dower.

If a man have granted a thing once he cannot afterward grant 3. In respect of
a former grant of the same thing.
it again. And therefore if a man give or grant me a horse first by word Perk.
Sect. Dier 35. 350. Lit. Bro. Sect. 298. Perk. Sect. 102.
of mouth, and after grant him to me by deed; this second grant is void, and
therefore if there be any fault in this grant in writing it is not material.
And if a man grant to me common of pasture without number in his ground, and
after make the like grant to another; this second grant is void as to me,
albeit it be good against the grantor. And if one grant the next presentation
to a Church after the death of the present Incumbent, and after grant the same
to another; or make a lease of land to one for ten years, and after make a
lease of the same land to another for the same ten years; or give a horse to
one and after give the same horse to another; in all these cases the second
grant is void. But if the first grant or gift be only of part of the thing
granted afterward, or of part of the time only, the second grant will be good
for the overplus. And therefore if one be seized of a Manor and demise ten
acres of the demesne to ten years, and after demise the whole Manor to
another for twenty years; this is a good grant for the overplus of the Manor
besides the ten acres, presently, and for the whole Manor for the last ten
years. So if the second grant be to begin after the first is determined; it
is good. And if the second be such as may be satisfied and not impeach the
former, both shall stand good. And therefore if one that has an Advowson grant
the next Presentation to one, and after he does grant the next Presentation to
another, and does not say [after the death of the Incumbent;] in this case the
second grant is good, and the grantee thereby shall have the second avoidance
after the death of the present Incumbent.

By the grant of an acre of land or of any other thing by the 4. In respect of
naming or description of the thing granted. Milnaming or Misrecitall.
Co. 4. 122. Perk. Sect. 114. 116. Co. 10. 106. 107. 11. 47. a] Plo. 190. b]
Co. super Lit. 46. See also Co. 2. in Lanes case which does seem to warrant
this opinion also. Dier the grant is good in a common persons case Bro. Grant.
name whereby it is called the reversion of that thing if the grantor have no
more but a reversion will pass and this mistake will not hurt. But it is not
so e converso. a And yet some have said, if one grant a thing in possession by
the name of the reversion of the thing this is good to pass the possession.
Quod non est lex. b For if one make a lease for years and before the lessee
enter the lessor grant the land by the name of the reversion or the land; this
grant is void. If If one make a lease for life of the demesnes of a Manor
rendering rent, and after he does grant the Manor by the name of the Manor; this
is a good grant for the reversion of the demesnes as well as for the residue of
the Manor. But if one grant common by the name of the reversion of the common,
it seems this is not good. And yet if one have common and grant it for life,
and during that estate he does grant the common by the name of totam illam
Communiam suam etc. some do hold this grant to be good.

Any thing may be granted by the name whereby it is and has Co. 6. 65. 45 E.
3. 6. Bro. grant. 7. Perk. Sect. 116.
been usually called of latter times within nine or ten years or thereabouts
albeit it be an improper name, and not the ancient name of the thing but a name
newly gotten. And so a Manor may pass by the name of a mesuage or farm, or a
farm or Manor by the name of a mesuage if it be so usually called and reputed.
So the great houses in London called Exceter and Dorset houses may be granted
by those names. And if a man grant that which in deed is a pasture ground by
the name of a wood; Or granr that which in 14 H. 8. 1. 27 H. 6. 2.
deed is a wood by the name of a pasture ground, and the things are called by
those names; these are good grants of those things. And if one grant by the
name of a great field that which in deed is but a little close but it is
usually called by the name of a great field: this is a good grant of this
thing. So if one grant by the name of a plow land that which in truth is but an
acre of land, or grant by the name of a Manor that which is but a plow land;
these grants are good. And so as it seems it is e converso. But if a man grant
a house, or a mesuage; by this grant an acre of land will not pass.

By the grant of services, a rent reserved upon an estate tail Co. super Lit.
150. Mic. 7 Jac. Curia. B. R.
will pass.

If a man make a lease of one house to another for years, and the lessee divide
it and make two houses of it, and after the lessor does grant the reversion of
it by the name of one house; this is a good grant to pass it. And if one lease
three houses to three several men at several times, and they divide them into
twenty nine tenements and households in them all; and the first lessor does
grant them by the name of three mesuages: this is a good grant to pass them
all. But if he grant by the name of fifteen mesuages or tenements only: it
seems this is good for no more but for fifteen of the subdivided tenements.

If one recite that he has a rent charge issuing out of black acre Perk.
Sect. 72.
and white acre, and then grant the same rent, and in truth it does issue out
of black acre only: or if he do recite that it does issue out of one acre
when in truth it does issue out of both: in both these cases the grant is good
notwithstanding these mistakes.

If one be Patron of the Church of S. Peter and Paul in D, and Bro. Grant. 12.
he grant the next Presentation of the Church of S. Peter, or of the Church of
S. Paul: these are void grants to pass the Presentation.

Perk. Sect. 79. Per Chapter Justice Hutton and Yelverton Co. B. Mic. 3. Car. in
the case of Edward Crew.
If one grant a rent out of white acre by the name of a rent out of black
acre, this grant is void as to charge white acre.

If one have a Manor called Steeple Lavington, and he grant it by the name of
west Lavington alias Steeple Lavington by the [alias] especially if the grant
say [lying in Lavington] and the Manor of Steeple Lavington does lie in that
parish, and the grantor has no other land there.

If one grant all his lands which he has in D in this manner, [All my lands in
D which I had of the grant of I S;] this is a Mic. 2 Jac. in Brownes case
agreed.
good grant of all his lands in D albeit he had them not of the grant of I S
but of the grant of another. But if the words be [all my lands which I had by
the grant of I S in D;] in this case the grant is not good to carry any other
lands in D but such as he had of the grant of I S. So if one grant in this
manner [all my Manor Plow. 169. 395. And so was the opinion of Chapter Justice
Popham 2 Jac. B. R.
of Sale in Dale which I had by descent] and in truth he had it not by descent
but by purchase; this is a good grant of the Manor. So if one grant all his
lands in Dale, and say no more; this is a good grant to pass all his lands
there. But if one grant in this manner [all my lands in Dale which I had by
descent from my father,] and in truth I had them not by descent but by
purchase, this grant is void and will not pass those lands. So if I grant in
this manner Dier 87.
[all my lands that I had by the attainder of I S] and in truth I had no land
by that means: this grant is void. And if I grant after this manner [all my
lands in B in the tenure of D which I had of the gift of I S] and in truth it
does lie in B and is in the Mic. 2 Jac. Adjudge Brownes case.
tenure of D but it was not purchased of I S; this is a good grant to pass the
land.

If a parish lie in two Counties, viz. Berk. and Wilts, and one Dier 299. Co.
3. 10.
grant in this manner [all his close called Callis in the parish of Hurst in
the county of Berk.] and in truth the close does lie in the county of Wilts;
this is a good grant to pass the close. But if one grant in this manner [All
his houses in the parish of S. Buttolphes extra Algate late in the tenure of R]
where in truth he has no houses there, but he has some houses in S.
Buttolphes extra Aldersgate; this is a void grant. And yet if the grant be in
this manner, [All that my house in the occupation of I S in S. Andrews parish]
whereas in truth it is in the parish of K. but in the occupation of I S; it
seems this grant is good to pass the house. But if it be thus [All that my
house in S. Andrews parish in Holborne in the occupation of I S] and in truth
it is in another parish but in his occupation: this grant is not good to pass
the house.

If one grant in this manner [my Manor of Dale which appears by office found
to be of the value of ten pound per Annum] and Hill. 2 Jac. B. R. per Tanfield.
in truth in the office it is found at twenty pound per Annum; this grant is
good notwithstanding this misprision.

If one grant in this manner [all my Manor of W late parcel of Pase. 7 Jac. B.
R. Co. 2. 32.
the possession of the Abbot of S and late in the possession of K] and in truth
it was never in the possession of K, this grant is good notwithstanding. But if
the grant be thus [omnia illa terras etc. in tenura I S jacen. in W nuper
prioratui de S spectan.] and in truth the land does lie in S and not in W; this
is no good grant to pass the lands in S. And if the lands do lie in W but are
in the tenure of I D and not in the tenure of I S; the grant is void to pass
the lands in the occupation of I S.

If one purchase land of I S in T and have no other land there, Dier 376. Bro.
Grant 92.
and he grant his land in T late the land of R S, or late the land of S and
mistake or omit the christian name; this grant is good notwithstanding this
mistake. And so also it is where there is a blanke left for the christian name.
And if in this case he grant all his land in T and say no more, this is a good
grant to pass the land. And if one grant [all his lands in D called N which
were the lands of I S,] this is a good grant to pass the lands called N though
they were never the lands of I S. But if the grant be [of all his lands in D
which were the lands of I S] by this none but those lands that were the lands
of I S will pass.

If one grant in this manner [all my meadow in D containing Dier 80.
ten acres] whereas in truth his meadow there does contain twenty acres, it
seems this is a good grant for the whole twenty acres. So if one grant thus
[All those forty seven acres of land by the Slight whereof fifteen lie in D,
twenty in E and twenty five in F] and in truth all of them do lie in F and
none of them in D or E: this is a good grant to carry the whole forty seven
acres.

If one grant twenty load of wood and say in his grant [of which Bro. Grant 69.
twenty load of wood he had sixteen load by the grant of his father I S] and
in truth I S did not grant any wood to him at all, or did not grant unto him
sixteen load only: this is a good grant of the twenty load of wood
notwithstanding this false recital.

If one grant his Manor of D and does not say in what town or Bro. Grant 53. 7
H. 4. 41.
towns it does lie, this is a good grant. But it is best to say in what towns
the Manor does lie, for if it lie in diverse places (as it may) and any of the
places into which it goes be omitted and the rest are set down; no part of
the Manor lying in the town that is not expressed will pass.

If one grant a Manor and that which in truth is but one Manor Co. 1. 46.
by the name of the Manor of A and B; this is a good grant of the Manor. And so
also it is if it be two Manors, as if a man be seized of the Manors of Ryton
and Condor in the county of Salop, and he grant in this manner [totum illud
Manerium de Ryton and Condor cum pertinen. in Com. Salopiae;] this is a good
grant of both the Manors. Otherwise it is in case of the King. Prerogative.


If one have a farm of land, meadow, etc. by lease called Curia. Co. B. Pasc.
9 Jac. Inter Plat. and Sleep. Bro. Grant 53.
Hodges lying within the parishes of S. Stephen and S. Peter in S. Albons, and
he reciting the said lease grant to C his term and interest in the house,
lands, etc. called Hodges in the parish of S. Peter and S. Albons; this grant
is good only for so much as does lie in the parish of S. Peter and not for that
which does lie in S. Stephens. But if he grant the farm and does not say in
what parish it does lie; this is a good grant of the whole farm. As in the
case before of a Manor that does lie in diverse parishes. And if in the case
here the farm lie within the parish of S. Peter only; the grant is good for
the whole farm. If one recite that whereas he has such lands by forfeiture,
or whereas such a one has an estate of his land, or whereas the grantee has
paid him ten pound or done him such service, or the like, and these things
are not true, and afterward he does grant the land by apt words; this mistake
in these cases will not hurt the grant. But otherwise it is in case of the King
in some of these cases. Prerogative.


If one have a Manor in which he has Parkes and Fishponds, and he grant the
Manor for life except the game and fish, and after Co. 11. 50.
grant the reversion of the Manor; this is a good grant of the game and fish
also.

If a grant be of [Centum libratas terrae, or 50 libratas terrae, or Co. super
Lit. 5.
of Centum solidat terre] it seems these are good grants, and that hereby does
pass land of that value, and so of more or less.

If a grant be of an acre of land covered with water, this is a Co. super Lit.
4.
good grant,

If a grant be of a certain portion of land or tithes, or of the Dier 84. 34
E. 3.
fourth part of land or tithes, and there be a sufficient certainty in the
description of it, this grant is good. And therefore if the grant be of the
fourth part of the tithes, and of the offerings of the Church of S. Peter, this
is a good grant.

If one seized of an Advowson in fee grant to I S that as often as Bro. Grant.
101. 121.
the Church is void he shall name the Clarke to the grantor, and he shall
present him to the Ordinary; this is a good grant of the Advowson.

A reversion may be granted by the name of a remainder, or a Dier 46. Plow. in
Hill. and Granges case.
remainder by the name of a reversion, and such a grant is good. As if one
grant land to I S, the reversion to I D: this is a good grant of the remainder.

If one make a lease of land to husband and wife for their lives, Fitz. Grant.
63.
and after grant the reversion of this by the name of the reversion of the land
which the wife does hold for life: this grant is void. So if one grant to two
for life, and after grant the reversion of one of them, this is void.

A Fulling or grist mill may be granted by the name of a mill only. 21 Ass. pl.
23


If one grant in this manner [All that his mesuage etc. And all Ince^ainty.
the lands, meadows and pastures thereunto belonging:) this is 27 H. 6. 2.
Plow. 164. Bro. Lease 55.
a good grant and certain enough to pass all the lands, meadows and pastures
usually occupied therewith.

If the Lord grant his Manor by the name of [his Manor with the Fitz. Grant 68.
Perk. Sect. 68.
reversion of all his tenants:] or by the name of [the reversion of all his
tenants bond and free which hold for life or years] and do not name them by
their particular names; these grants are good in these cases and certain
enough.

If one grant land, and say not in what parish or county or village Bro. Grant
53. Co. 9. 47.
it does lie; yet if there be any other matter to describe it; it seems the
grant is good enough, and it may be averred where it lies. But if there be no
circumstantiall matter in the grant to denote and decipher out where it does
lie; it seems the grant is void for incertainty. And therefore if one grant
his Manor of Dale; or his lands in the occupation of I S; or his lands that
descended to I S; or his lands that did belong to the priory of S, or the like;
these are good grants and certain enough. Id certum est quod certum reddi
potest.

If there be tenant for life of three houses and four acres of land, Perk.
Sect. 73.
and he in reversion grant the reversion of two houses and of two acres of this
land; this is a good grant and has sufficient certainty in it.

If a grant be uncertain altogether and have not sufficient certainty Perk.
Sect. 67.
in it, and cannot be made certain by some matter ex post facto, it is void. And
therefore if there be Lord and tenant of three acres of land by fealty and
twelve pence rent, and the Lord grant [the services of the third acre] to a
stranger; this grant is merely void. So if Perk. Sect. 68, 69.
husband and wife hold an acre of land jointly of I S for their lives and I S
grant the reversion of the acre of land which the husband alone does hold for
his life; this grant is void. So if there be Lord and three Jointenants, and
the Lord grant the services of one of them to a stranger; this grant is void.
So if one have twenty tenants 9 H. 6. 12.
that do pay him twelve pence a piece rent, and he grant five shillings yearly
out of these rents, and does not say of which tenants, this grant is void for
incertainty. So if conusance of pleas 44 E. 3. 17. Bro. Grant 52.
be granted and it is not said before whom; this is utterly void. So if one
have two tenants, and does grant the reversion of one of them, and does not say
which; this is void for incertainty. So if Dier 91.
one grant estovers to another, and say not what nor how; this is void. So if
one grant me so many of his trees, or of his horses as may be reasonably
spared; this grant is void. And yet if one grant me so many of his trees as I S
shall think fit, it seems this grant is good. And if one grant me one hundred
load of wood to be taken Co. 5. 24.
by the assignement of the grantor, or to be taken by the assignment of I S;
these are good grants. So if one grant me three acres of wood toward the North
side of the wood; this is a good grant and certain enough.

If one grant to one of the children of I S and I S has more Bro. Done 31.
then one, and he does not describe which he does intend; this grant is void
for incertainty.

If one grant to me a rent or a robe; twenty shillings or forty shillings; or
common of pasture or rent; in the disjunctive which 9 E. 4. 36. Perk. Sect. 74.
is at first very incertaine; yet this grant may become good, for if I make my
election, or he pay the rent, or perform the grant in either part; the grant
is now become good. So if one be seized of Perk. Sect. 76.
two acres of land, and he does lease them for life, the remainder of one of
them, and does not say of which to I S; in this case if I S make his election
which acre he will have, the grant of the remainder to him will be good. So it
is when a man has six horses in his stable, and he does grant me one of his
horses but does not say which of them; in this case I may choose which I will
have, and in these cases when I have made my election and not before the grant
is good. And if in these cases the grantee do not make his election during his
life it seems the grant will never be good. If one be seized Bro. Grant. 77.
of land and lease it for years rendering ten shillings rent, and after he
does grant a rent of ten shillings out of this land to a stranger; in this
case albeit there be some incetainty in the grant yet this is a good grant of a
rent of ten shillings, but it shall be taken a grant of a new and not of the
old rent, and therefore shall not take effect until the particular estate be
ended.

See more to this point in Deeds and their Exposition chap. 5. Numb. 15. and
Fine chap. 2. Numb. 7.

In some cases albeit there be in a Grant a good grantor, and a 5. In respect
of matter in some other parts of the Grant. 1. In the commencement of the
estate:
good grantee, and a thing granted, and all these are duly and certainly
described, yet the grant may be void for some fault in some other thing
touching the grant: as, 1. In the commencement of the estate. For if a man be
possessed of a term of years, albeit it Bro. Grant. 154. Co. 1. 155. Plow.
520.
be one hundred years or upwards, and grant to another all the residue of this
term of years that shall be to come at the time of his death; this grant is
void for incertainty. And yet if a man possessed of such a term in land, grant
the land to another To have and to hold to him after the death of the grantor
for fifty years, or for two hundred years; these are good grants, and in the
first case the grantee shall have fifty years if there be so many to come of
the term of one hundred years at the death of the grantor, and in the last
case the grantee shall have the land for the whole one hundred years or so many
of them as are to come at the death of the grantor. So if one grant any thing
that does lie in livery or in grant, and that is in esse at the time of the
grant in fee simple, fee tail, or for Dier 58. Co. 5. 1.
life, and the estate is to begin at a day to come: this for the most is void:
howbeit in some cases the livery of seisin will help it. But Incertainty.
Pase. 7 Jac. De^^s case.
a lease for years to begin in futuro is good enough. And if a lease be made to
one for years, or for years determinable upon lives, and after a lease is
made to another of the same thing To have and to hold from the end of the
former lease, this is a good lease and the commencement certain enough. So if
a lease be made of land to one for life, and after the reversion thereof is
granted to another for life cum post mortem vel alio modo vacare contigerit;
this is good. So if a lease be made to one for twenty years if he live so long,
and Craddocks case. Pasc. 7 Jac. Co. B.
after a lease is made to another Habendum after the end of the term granted to
the lessee, for twenty years to be accounted from the date of the deed last
made, this is a good grant for 20. years after the first lease ended, and the
words [to be accounted etc.] shall be rejected. And if one grant a rent to me,
Habendum from the time of Co. 9.
my full age for my life, and I am of full age at the time of the grant, this
grant is good for my life. If a woman sole have a lease for years Plow. 192.
Co. 6. 36.
and take a husband, and then he in reversion grant the land to another
Habendum after the term granted to the husband etc. where in truth it was
never granted to the husband but by an act of law, viz. the marriage, yet this
is a good lease. 2. In the limitation 2. In the limitation of the estate. Or in
the Habendum of the Grant.
22 H. 6. 15. Plow. 28.
of the estate. For if a grant be to two and heredibus, without Suis, this is
void for incertainty. And yet a grant to one and heredibus, is good. And if a
man grant two acres To have and to Perk. Sect. 75. 77. Plow. 152.
hold the one in fee simple and the other in fee tail, or the one in fee
simple and the other for life, and does not set down which in fee simple etc.
in certain, yet this grant is good, and the grantee has the election. And yet
if one grant two acres to two men Habendum Incertainty.
the one to the one and the other to the other, and say not which either of
them shall have, this is void for incertainty. And if one have a reversion of
land after a lease for years, and grant the land Co. 10. 107. Plow. 147.
Habendum the reversion, or grant the reversion Habendum the land, this is good.

In some cases a grant or gift may be void at least to some persons and
purposes when there are none of the defects aforesaid in it, as 6. In respect
of the end or ground of the Grant.
when it is made upon a corrupt contract, or to the end to defraud creditors of
their debts, or purchasors of their lands bought, or the like, whereof see
before in Deed chap. 4. Numb. 5.

And in some cases albeit there be no other fault in the grant, yet 21 H. 7. 5.
Co. super Lit.
7. In respect of omission of some ceremony etc.
it may become void for want of some other matter that ought to be done, as
inrolment, livery of seisin, atturnement, etc. for where these things are
requisite the grant is not good until it be had, neither for that thing which
will not pass without that ceremony nor yet for that which otherwise would
pass by the deed. And therefore if a feoffment be made of a Manor to which an
Advowson is appendant, and no livery is made so that the Manor does not pass;
the Advowson will not pass neither. Where a grant may be void by the refusal
or waiver of the grantee, See before in Deed Number. 6. chap. 4.

If one make a feoffement with warranty, and after the feoffee 7H. 6. 43. 21 H.
7. 23. Perk. Sect. 69. Bro. Grant 175. Kelw. 88.
does grant to the feoffor that neither he nor his heirs shall vouch 5. What
shall be said a good grant in the nature of a release or discharge. Or not.
the warrantor or his heirs upon the warranty; this is a good discharge of the
benefit of voucher, and does bar the feoffee of it. And yet he may bring a
Warrantia Cartae still. So if one grant to me a rentcharge, and afterward I
grant to him that he shall not be sued for this rent; this is a good grant to
bar me of bringing an annuity for the rent. And yet I may distrain for the rent
still. And so e converso if I grant to the grantor he shall not be distrained
for the rent, by this I am barred of a distress, but not of bringing an
annuity for the rent. So if the Lord does grant to his tenant holding by
knights service, that his heirs shall not be in ward etc. or a man does grant
to his debtor that he will not sue him for the debt at all, or until such a
time; or one grant to his lessee for life or years that he shall not be
impeached for wast; all these are good discharges, and may be pleaded by way of
bar to avoid circuity of action.

And now because Atturnment as has been showed is necessary in some cases to
the perfection of some conveyances and grants of things lie in grant and not in
livery, we must therefore here ere we can go further, as a necessary appendix
to Grant, add the learning of Atturnment which follows next in order.

CHAP. XIII. An Atturnment.
AN Atturnment is the agreement of the tenant to the grant of Co. super Litt.
309. Terms of the Law. Plow. 25. Litt. Sect. 551.
the Seigniory, or of a rent, or the agreement of the donee 1. Quid.
in tail, or tenant for life, or years, to a grant of a reversion or of a
remainder made to another. As where the Lord, or one that has a rent out of
land does grant over his Seigniory, or his rent to another, or one that has a
reversion or a remainder after an estate for life or years does sell or give
the same away to another; in these cases the tenant of the land must have
notice of this sale or gift, and of the alteration of the party to whom he must
attend in his services, and he must give his consent to the same gift or grant,
or else generally the same is not good. And this yielding of consent is called
an Atturnment. And it is either actual, or verbal, or actual and verbal
both. 2. Quotuplex.


That which is actual, is either implied and in Law, or expressed and in Fait.
Of all which there are diverse examples hereafter following.

The end, effector fruit of this agreement is to perfect a grant and Lit. Sect.
551. Co. super Lit. 302. Lit. Bro. Sect. 267. 129. 379 39 H 6. 24. Co. super
Lit. 323. 315. Lit. Sect. 608.
3. The effect of it.
to make a good conveyance of an estate, for where this is needful no rent nor
reversion will pass without it, neither can the grantee of the Seigniory, rent
or reversion bring any action of wast for wast done in the land, nor distraine
for any rent or service upon the land before this is done. But this is but a
bare assent and therefore it shall not nor will enure or work to pass any
interest, to make a bad grant good, to enfranchise a villain, nor to give a
man a tenancy by disseisin, intrusion, or abatement, neither shall it work by
way of estoppell. And therefore if a man gain a rent issuing out of land by
cohersion of distress or otherwise, and the tenant of the land atturne to him;
this will not amend his estate. But otherwise a grant and the atturnement of
the tenant do as effectually pass the freehold and inheritance of the
reversion of land as a feoffment and livery of seisin of land does pass the
possession of land.

In most cases where the grantee has means to compel the tenant to atturne
there the atturnement of the tenant is at least to Lit. Sect. 579, 580, 581.
Co. 6. 68. Co. super Lit. 309. 314. 320.
4. Where and in what cases the atturnment of the tenant is necessary. Or not.
And how. And to what intents.
some purposes needful, for howsoever it be true that if a seigniory, rent,
services, reversion, or remainder be granted by fine, in this case the rent,
seigniory, etc. does pass, so as the grantee may enter for a forfeiture upon
the alienation of the tenant being tenant for life, years, by statute, or
elegit, or upon an escheate of the tenant, or seize a ward or heriot if it
happen before any atturnment be made: And if the reversion of a lease for years
be granted by fine, and the lessee be ousted and the lessor disseised, the
conusee may have an assise: and therefore as to all these purposes the
atturnment of the tenant is not needful. But the grantee, his heir, or
assignee, cannot distraine the tenant for rent, or bring any action that does
lie in privity between him and the tenant, as wast upon a wast done by the
tenant, writ of entry ad communem legem, or in casu proviso, or in consimili
casu upon the alienation of the tenant, escheate upon the dying of the tenant
without heirs, or ward upon the death of the tenant his heir within age, or
writ of customs and services, until he have the atturnement of the tenant:
and therefore as to all these purposes the atturnement of the tenant is
necessary. And hence it is that the conusee of a fine has means appointed him
by the law to compel the tenant to atturne, for in case where the Lord does
grant his seigniory to another and the tenant will not atturn, the conusee
before the fine be engrossed may have a writ called a Per que servitla and
thereby compel him to atturne. And in case Old. N. B. 170. Co. super Lit. 252.
where a man does grant a rent to another and the tenant of the Per que
servitia.
land out of which the rent does issue will not atturne, the conusee of the
rent may have a writ called a Quem redditum reddit and thereby compel him to
atturne. And in case where a man does I them.
Quem redditum reddit.
grant a reversion or a remainder of his tenant for life to another and the
tenant will not atturne, the conusee of the reversion or remainder may have a
writ called a Quid Juris clamat and thereby Idem. Co. super Lit. 310.
compel the tenant for life to atturne. Co. super Lit. 321.
And if the conusee of the Quid Iuris clamat.
fine die in these cases before he have the atturnment of the tenant, his heir
albeit he come to the thing descended by act of law, yet shall be in no better
case then his auncestor was. And if the conusee Co. 6. 68. Lit. Sect. 584. 583.
of a fine by which he has a reversion granted to him before he has gotten
the atturnment of the tenant bargain and sell the reversion by deed indented
and enrolled; the bargainee shall be in no better case then the bargainor was.
And if a reversion be granted by fine, and the conusee before atturnement enter
and make a feoffment, and the lessee reenter; in this case the feoffee cannot
distraine for the rent. And yet if there be Lord, mesne and tenant, and the
mesne grant the services of his tenant by fine to another in fee, and after the
grantee die without heir, and by this means the services of the mesne
escheate; in this case the Lord may distraine for them without any atturnement
of the tenant.

In these following cases atturnement in law or in deed is absolutely and to
all intents necessary, viz. a] Co. 2. 66. Lit. Sect. 551. 567. 571. Co. super
Lit. 316.
Where one does make a lease for life, or years to one, and after does grant
the reversion or remainder after the same lease ended to another by deed in fee
simple, fee tail, for life, or years; in this case the lessee for life, or
years must atturne. Lit. Sect. 551. Co. super Lit. 315. Perk. Sect. 636.
So where the Lord does grant his seigniory or the services of his tenant by
deed in fee simple, or otherwise in fee tail, for life, or years to a
stranger; in this case the tenant must atturne. Co. 6 68. Doct. and Stud. 35.
Lit. Sect. 553.
So where the Lord of a Manor does make a feoffment of his Manor; in this case
the services of the tenants will not pass without their atturnement. Co super
Lit. 312. Lit. Sect. 572.
So if another man have a rent service, rent charge, or rent seck, issuing out
of my land, and he does grant this rent to a stranger; in this case I must
atturn to this grant to the stranger. And if in these cases the tenant do not
atturn the grant of the reversion etc. is merely void.

If a reversion be granted after an estate of a tenant by Statute Co. super
Lit. 315.
Merchant, Staple, or Elegit, or after an estate that any one has until debts
be paid, or the like; in these cases these tenants must atturn, or this grant
will not be good.

If one make a lease for years of land rendering rent, and after he Co. 2. 35.
Lit. Bro. Sect. 298. Dier 307. Co. super Lit. 312. Lit. Bro. Sect. 151. 379.
Bro. Attur. 59. Dier 26. Lit. Bro. 349.
does grant the reversion to another for years, to begin after the death of the
grantor; in this case it is needful that the lessee for years in possession
do atturn to make this grant good. But if one make a lease of his land to one
for ten years, and after make a lease of it to another, To have and to hold
from the end of the said term of ten years for the term of twenty years, in
this case it seems it is not needful that the first lessee do atturne but
that the grant is good enough without it. If one make a lease to another for
twenty years, and he make a lease over to a third for ten years rendering a
rent, and then does grant the reversion to a stranger; in this case it is
needful that the lessee for ten years do atturne: but if the lease for
ten years be made without any reservation of rent contra. For it is a rule,
That where there is no tenure, attendancy, remainder, rent, or service to be
paid or done there atturnment is not necessary. And hence it is, that where one
does grant common of pasture appendant or appurtenant, or estovers out of land,
that there needs no atturnment of the tenant to make this grant good. And if a
rent or common be granted to one for life, and after the reversion of it be
granted to another; that in this case there need no atturnment to make this
second grant good. And so it was agreed in M. 37. 38 Eliz. B. R.
And if one make a lease to one for ten years, and then make a lease to
another for twenty years; in this case the second lease is good for the ten
years to come after the first ten years ended, without any atturnment of the
first lessee.

If a Lord exchange the services of his tenant with another for Perk. Sect.
249. 259.
land; in this case the atturnment of the tenant by whom the service is to be
done is necessary to perfect this Exchange.

If there be Lord and tenant in fee simple, and the tenant does Lit. Sect. 562.
make a lease to another man of the tenancy for life, and the Lord does grant
the Seigniory to the tenant for life in fee; in this case the tenant in
reversion must atturne to the tenant for life upon this grant of the reversion,
or the grant is not good.

If I be seized of a reversion after an estate for years, and I grant Hill. 8
Jac.
it to the use of my self for life, and after to the use of another and his
heirs in fee, and after I grant my reversion for life to another; in this case
it is needful that the tenant for years atturn to this grant.

If a lease be made to I S for his life, and afterward another Dier 118.
lease is made of the same land to I D for his life; in this case it seems that
I S must atturn to this second grant, or that the grant will not be good.

An estate of a Seigniory cannot be gained by a disseisin, abatement, Lit.
Sect. 587.
or intrusion without an atturnment. And therefore if one disseise another of a
Manor which is part in demesne and part in services, the services are not
gained until the tenants atturn.

In all cases for the most part where there is no means provided Co. 6. 68.
Lit. Sect. 580. 583. 586. Co. super Lit. 321. 314.
by law to compel the tenant to atturn, there their atturnment in law or in
deed is not necessary unless there be some special default in the grantee.
Quod remedio destituitur ipsa re valet si culpa absit. And therefore an
atturnment is not necessary in these cases following. viz. F. N. B. 121. M.
Where one does grant a rent, reversion, remainder, service, or seigniory to
another by way of devise by a last will and testament, or by Letters Patents
from the King, or where such things are granted by matter of record from a
subject to the King. Co 6. 68. super Lit. 321. 2. 35.
So when the thing granted does pass by way of use and does vest by force of
the statute of uses. As if one that is seized of land in fee does make a lease
of it for life or years to I S and after levieth a fine, or does covenant to
stand seized of the reversion of this land (or of the land it self which is
all one) to the use of another, or does bargain and sell the reversion in fee,
or for years; in these cases the tenant need not to atturne: Agreed in the
Court of Wards Hill. 18 Jac.
But if A grant a reversion to B to the use of C and the deed is not enrolled
or the use arise not upon consideration of blood etc. in this case if the
tenant do not atturne the reversion will not pass. Calvin's case. Pasch. 7
Jac. B. R.
If one by a common recovery suffered grant a reversion to the use of himself,
his wife, or children; in this case there needsno atturnment of the tenant by
the Statute of 7 H. 8. chap. 4. Lit. Sect. 583. 5 H. 7. 18, 19 Co. super Lit.
321.
So where one does come to any such thing by title or seigniory paramount, as
by escheate, surrender, or forfeiture; or by descent, in all these cases and
the rest before the atturnment of the tenant is to no purpose, neither to pass
the thing as to the estate, nor to make a privity to distraine or bring action
of debt. And therefore if there be Lord, mesne, and tenant, and the mesne grant
the services of his tenant by fine to another in fee and after the grantee
dies without heir; in this case the services of the mesnalty shall come to
the Lord paramount and he may distraine for them or bring any action that lies
in privity for them without any atturnment. So if lessee for life of a Manor
surrender his estate to the lessor; there needs no atturnment of the tenants
of the Manor to make this estate to pass. So if the reversion of a tenant for
life be granted to another in fee, and the grantee die without heir so that
the reversion escheate; in this case the Lord may distraine or bring any action
of wast etc. without any atturnment. So if a reversion descend to an heir from
his auncestor; in this case it will vest in the heir without atturnment, and
atturnment in this case is not necessary. So if the conusee Co. super Lit. 321.
of a Statute Merchant extend a seigniory or rent for debt, the seigniory or
rent shall be vested in him without any atturnment of the tenant.

If a Copiholder in fee make a lease for years by license of the Lord rendering
rent, and after surrender the reversion to the Per 3 Justi. Trin. 4 Jac. B. R.
use of I S; in this case it seems an atturnment of the tenant is not
needful, but I S shall have the rent without any atturnment.

If one grant the reversion of Copihold lands for life, or years, Curia M. 37
and 38 Eliz. B. R. Co. 2. 35. super Lit. 311.
or grant the seigniory of Copihold lands of inheritance; in these cases there
needs no atturnment of the tenants to make the grants good. And so also is the
law for an estate at will by the common law.

If a lease be made to one for life, the remainder to another in Lit. Sect. 578.
tail, the remainder over to the right heirs of the tenant for life, and the
tenant for life does grant his remainder in fee; in this case there needs no
atturnment of the tenant in tail, but the remainder will pass by the deed
presently without any atturnment at all.

If one lease for life the remainder for life, and after the lessor Lit. Sect.
575.
release all his right in the land to him in remainder for life; in this case
there needs no atturnment of the lessee for life to perfect this release.

If two Jointenants or more make a lease for life rendering rent, Lit. Sect. 574.
and one of them does release the rent to the other; in this case there needs
no atturnment to make the rent to pass.

In all cases where the grant is in the personalty there Agreed in Curnocks
case. M. 3 Jac. Co. B.
needs no atturnment. And therefore in grants of annuities which do charge the
person of the grantor only and not his land, there needs no atturnment. And in
all cases where there is an atturnment in law there needs no atturnment in deed.

If there be Lord, mesne, and tenant, and the Lord grant the fee Lit. Sect. 555.
of the Seigniory; in this case the mesne and not the tenant must 3. By whom
anatturnment may and must be made, Or not.
atturne.

If one make a lease for life, and then grant the reversion for life, Co. super
Lit. 319.
and the lessee atturne, and after the Lord grant the seigniory; in this case
it seems the grantee and not the first lessee for life must atturne.

If there be Lord and tenant and the tenant make a gift in tail, Lit. Sect.
554. 556. Co. super Lit. 311.
or lease for life of the land, and after the Lord grant the services to a
stranger; in this case the tenant for himself and not the tenant in tail, or
for life must atturn: For it is a maxim in law That no man shall atturne to
any grant of any seigniory, rent service, reversion, or remainder but he that
is immediately privy to the grantor. But to the grant of a rent seck or rent
charge issuing out of such land as before, the under-tenant in tail, or for
life and not immediate tenant himself must atturne.

If there be tenant for life the remainder in fee, and the Lord Lit. Sect. 556.
grant the services to a stranger; in this case the tenant for life and not him
in remainder must atturne.

If there be tenant for life the remainder in tail, and he in the Idem.
reversion after their estates does grant his reversion to a stranger; in this
case if either of them need to atturne it must be the tenant for life.

If a woman that has a husband be to atturne, the husband Co. super Lit. 312.
Lit. Sect. 558.
may and must do it for her, and the atturnment of the husband Husband and
wife.
for the wife, whether it be expressed or implied, will bind the wife.

If one make a lease for years of land the remainder for life; Lit. Sect. 571.
Co. super Lit. 316. 317.
and after the lessor does grant the reversion; in this case the tenant for
life or years either of them may atturne.

If a rent charge be issuing out of land, and the tenant be disseised of the
land; in this case the disseisor must atturne. But in case of Co. super Lit.
312.
the grant of a rent service the disseisee may atturne if he will, for the
privity is between the Lord and the disseisee only.

If a man make a lease for life to I S of land, and after grant Co. super Lit.
312.
a rent charge out of it to I D, and after he grant over this rent to another;
in this case the lessor and not I S must atturne.

The tenant in dower after she has assigned over her estate and Co. super
Lit. 316. 8 E. 4. 10.
not the assignee must atturne to the grant of the reversion. And yet some hold
that the assignee also may atturne. The same law is also of the tenant by the
courtesy: but it is not so in other cases, for if the reversion of lessee for
life be granted, and lessee for life assign over his estate, the assignee and
not the lessee must atturne.

If lessee for life assign over his estate upon condition, and then Co. super
Lit. 316.
the reversion is granted; in this case the assignee and not the lessee for
life must atturne.

If a tenant in fee simple that ought to atturne to a grant of a Co. super Lit.
315. Perk. Sect. 231.
Seigniory or rent die before he make an atturnment, his heir must atturne,
and an atturnment made by him is good. So if he grant away his land before he
make his atturnment, his grantee may atturne, and an atturnment made by him
will be good enough.

If a Lord of a Manor make a lease of his Manor for life or years, Co. super
Lit. 311.
and the freeholders and others do atturne to the lessee, and after he grant
away the reversion of the Manor to a stranger; in this case the lessee for life
or years must atturne, and this will bind all the freeholders.

If there be Lord and tenant by homage, fealty and rent, and Co. super. Lit.
311.
the tenant is disseised, and then the Lord grants the rent to another; in
this case the disseisor and not the disseisee must atturn, but if he grant the
whole Seigniory the disseisee may atturne.

A voluntary Atturnment where it is needful may be made by Infant.
Co. super Lit. 315.
an infant, or one that is deaf and dumb (who may do it by signs). But one
that is non compos mentis cannot make an Atturnment. Non compos mentis.


The Atturnment must always be made to the grantee of the reversion, 6. To whom
an atturnment may and must be made. Or not.
Co. super Lit. 310. 312. 20 H. 6. 7.
rent etc. according to the grant whether the Atturnment be express or implied
But if diverse do take by the grant, the atturnment may be made to one of them,
and this shall avail the rest, as if a reversion or a rent be granted to two or
more, and the tenant atturn to one of them, this is good to vest and settle the
thing granted in them all according to the grant. And if a lease be made by
deed of a reversion to A for life, the remainder in fee to B, and the tenant
atturn to A; this is a good atturnment to settle the remainder in B. But if the
tenant atturn to B, during the life of A, this is not good for A; howbeit if
the tenant for life die before the atturnment be made, in this case the
atturnment may be made, and this shall be sufficient to perfect the grant of
the remainder to B.

If I grant a reversion to one man, and before the atturnment of Co 6. 68. 11
H. 7. 12.
the tenant had to perfect the grant, he does sell this reversion to a third
man; in this case the tenant may atturn to the second grantee, and this will
make the grant good to him. But if the atturnment be made to both the grantees,
it is void for incertainty.

An atturnment may as well be made to cestuy que use of a reversion, as to the
grantee of the reversion himself. And it seems it Co. super Lit. 310.
must be made to him, and not to the grantee of the reversion. For Hardings
case.
it was agreed in the Court of Wards, Hill. 18 Iac. That if a reversion be
granted to B to the use of C, that the atturnemnt must be made to C, and not
to B who is but an instrument.

In all cases regularly where atturnment is necessary, it must Co. 1. 151.
super Lit. 310. Lit. Sect. 551. Perk. Sect. 263. 231. Co. super Lit. 315. 2. 35.
7. When and at what time the atturnment must be made.
be made in the life time of the parties Grantor and Grantee, or Exchangor or
Exchangee, for if either of them die before the atturnment be made the grant or
exchange is void. And therefore if a Manor be granted and livery of seisin be
given upon the demesnes thereof, and one of the tenants die before atturnment
be made by him, his tenement will not pass and the grant as to that part will
be void, for in this case all the tenants but tenants at will must atturne. And
albeit the grant of the reversion be to begin at a day to come and after the
death of either of the parties, yet must the atturnment be made in the life
time of the parties or otherwise the grant will not be good. And yet an
atturnment may be made after the death of the tenant by his heir, and after
the Conveyance of the tenant by his assignee.

If a lease be made of a reversion to begin at a day to come; Co. 2. 35.
in this case the atturnment may be made before or after the day so it be made
in the life time of the parties.

If one grant his reversion of white acre or black acre, and Co. super Lit. 310.
the tenant atturne to the grant before the grantee have made his election
which acre he will have, this is a good atturnment.

If a man grant his reversion by deed to one, and after and before the tenant
do atturne he levy a fine or make a feoffment Co. super Lit. 309. 310. 8. 82.
4. 61. Kelw. 163.
of the land to another; in this case it seems the atturnment after comes too
late; but if the fine or feoffement be but of part of the land granted before
in reversion; in this case the first grant after atturnment shall be good for
the residue. And if a woman sole grant a reversion, and after the before
atturnemnt she mary with a stranger, and after the tenant atturne; in this
case the atturnment comes too late, for the marriage is a countermand of it. And
if a reversion of an estate for life or years be granted, and the grantor
before atturnment does confirm the estate of the tenant for life or years and
so change the estate, and after the tenant atturne, in this case the atturnment
comes too late.

To the making of a good atturnment where it is needful diverse 8. The manner
of making an atturnment. And what shall be said a good atturnment. Or not.
Co. super Lit. 309, 310. 315. Lit. Sect. 551. Plow. 344.
things are required. 1. It must be made by the person that ought to make it.
2. It must be made to the person that ought to take it. 3. It must be made in
time convenient. 4. If it be an express atturnment the tenant must first have
notice of the grant of the reversion, rent, etc. to which he must atturne; but
otherwise it is of an atturnment in law, for there notice in all cases is not
necessary. 5. And it must be done in that manner the law does prescribe. Notice.
And for this it is to be known that it may be made by words or by deeds and
without any writing, or by deed or writing (and this is the safest way to do
it.) And any words written or spoken by the tenant that do import an assent
and agreement to the grant of the reversion, rent, etc. in such manner as the
same is made after notice given to him of the grant whether it be in the
presence or the absence of the grantee of the reversion, rent, etc. will make a
good atturnment in deed. And therefore if the tenant after knowledge of the
grant use these words following or any others to the like effect to the
grantee, viz. I do atturne, or turn tenant to you according to the grant; or,
I become your tenant; or, I agree to the grant; or, I am well content with the
grant; or, God send you joy of it; these are good express atturnments. And if
the tenant Lit. Sect. 563. 551. 513. Co. super Lit. 315. 49 E. 3. 15.
after knowledge of the grant pay, do, or deliver all, or any part of the
rent, or service, before, or at the time when the same is due, to the grantee,
or give a penny, or farthing, an ox, or a knife or any such like thing, or any
other valuable thing, in the name of atturnment, or in the name of seisin of
the rent; this is a good express atturnment, and that atturnment which is made
by words and deed or sign both is the best, for that does leave a more deep
impression in the mind of the witnesses. But if one have a rent charge issuing
out of my land, and he grant it to a stranger; and I give him an ox to put him
in possession of the rent; it seems this is no good atturnment.

If a man grant his reversion of my living to I S and his Baylife M. 2 Car. in
the Court of Wards. Co. super Lit. 310.
that does use to gather his rents says to me that I S has bought it and I
must hereafter pay my rent to him, and I tell him I am glad of it; this is a
good atturnment. And that albeit it be in the absence of I S. Curia B. R. Hill.
11 Car. B. R. Hiltons case.
And it is not material whether the stranger know of the grant or not, so the
tenant know of it. And an atturnment made to the Lords Steward in the Court in
the absence of the Lord is a good atturnment. For it is sufficient if the
tenant have notice, that he atturne to the grant in the presence of any
whomsoever. Tenant for life was, the remainder in tail, he in the remainder
granted his remainder, the tenant for life having notice of the grant says to
a stranger in his absence, That is the party, I am well pleased that the grant
is made to him; it was adjudged to be good.

If a reversion be granted to one for life, and after the same reversion Co.
super Lit. 310. 11 H. 7. 12.
be granted to him for years, and the tenant atturne to both the grants at
once; this atturnement is void for incertainty. So if one grant his seigniory
to I S Bishop of London and his heirs by one deed, and grant the same to I S
Bishop of London and his successors by another deed and the tenant atturn to
both grants at once; this atturnment is void for incertainty. So if a reversion
be granted to two several persons by several deeds, and the tenant atturne to
both the grants at one time; this atturnment is void for incertainty, and
neither of the grants are perfected by the atturnment in these cases. The
implied atturnment which also does amount to an express atturnment is made
diverse manner of ways. For if the tenant after notice of the grant of the
reversion pay his rent to the 14 H. 8. 15. 34 H. 6. 41.
grantee, or surrender his estate to the grantee, or pray in aid of the
grantee, or accept a grant of the reversion or remainder from him that has it,
this is a good atturnment in law. But if the tenant Co. super Lit. 312.
after the grant of the reversion, not having notice of the grant pay his rent
to the grantee as a receiver, Bailife, etc. this is no good atturnment. Calvin's
case. Adjudged Pase. 7 Jac. B. R. Co. super Lit. 309. Co. 2. 67. Dier 302.
And therefore if the Bailife of a Manor shall purchase the Manor or the
reversion of one of the tenements and the tenant not knowing of this purchase
pay his rent to him as he was wont to do, this is no good atturnment in law.
So if a man seized of a seigniory levy a fine of it, and then takes back an
estate in fee, and the tenant having no notice of all this does pay his rent to
the conusor as he was wont to do; this is no good atturnment in law to perfect
either of these grants.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant let the land to a woman Lit. Sect.
558. 560. etc.
for life the remainder in fee, and the woman does take a husband, after the
Lord does grant the services to the husband in fee, in this case this
acceptance of the deed by him that ought to aturn is a good atturnment in law.
So if in this case the tenant lease to a man for life the remainder over and
the Lord grant the services to the tenant for life, and he accept thereof; this
is a good atturnemnt in law.

If the Lord by deed grant his seigniory to the tenant of the land Co. super
Lit. 313.
and to a stranger, and the tenant does accept of this deed; this is a good
atturnment in law to extinguish a moity and to vest the other moity in the
other grantee. So if one make a lease to I S for life, and after confirm his
estate, the remainder over to I D and Co. super Lit. 313. Lit. Sect. 573.
the lessee for life does accept of the deed of this confirmation and grant;
this is a good atturnment in law and does vest the remainder in I D.

If there be Lord and tenant and the tenant take a wife, and after the Lord
does grant the services to the wife and her heirs, and the Lit. Sect. 559.
husband does accept of the deed of this grant; this is a good atturnment in
law.

If the conusee of a fine of services sue a Scire facias to have execution Lit.
Sect. 564.
of the services, and has Judgment to recover; this is a good atturnment in
law.

If a woman grant a reversion to a man in fee, and after mary Co. super Lit.
310.
with the grantee, this is a good atturnment in law to perfect this grant made
to the husband.

If a Lord grant his seigniory, and there be twenty manner of services, Lit.
Sect. 563.
and the tenant with what intent soever it be, pay or perform in deed any
parcel of the services to the grantee; this is a good atturnment in law for
all the services.

If I be seized of land in fee, and make a lease for life or years of it, or
it be extended by a Statute or Elegit, and then I make a feoffment Lit. Sect.
576, 577. Co. super Lit. 319. Dier 212. Co. 6. 68. 5 113.
of this land and give livery of seisin upon it, and so put out the tenant, and
after the tenant (or one of the tenants, if there be many) reenter; this is a
good atturnment in law. And so also it seems is the law if the lessee for life
recover in an assise. But if a man make a lease for life, and then the lessor
grant the reversion for life, and the lessee atturne, and after the lessor
enter and make a feoffment in fee, and so disseise the lessee for life, and
then the lessee reenter; this is no good atturnment in law by the grantee for
life. And if the conusee of a reversion by fine disseise the lessee for life
and make a feoffment in fee, and the lessee reenter, this is no good atturnment
in law to the feoffee to enable him to distraine etc.

If one grant the reversion of a lease of a term of years, and before Hill. 8
Jac.
any atturnment made, the lessee for years does grant his term to the grantee
of the reversion; in this case this is no good atturnment in law to make the
reversion to pass.

If one have land and a rent issuing out of other land both in one county, and
he grant both by deed, and give livery of seisin of the Perk. Sect. 231.
land in the name both of the land and of the rent; this is no good atturnment
in law to make the grant of the rent good.

If lessee for life or years, subscribe his name as a witness to the So was
it held in Bro. kenbury and Martials case. 5 Eliz.
sealing and delivery of the grant of the reversion made by the lessor to a
stranger; this is no good atturnment in law, for he may do this and not have
notice: But if he have notice of the grant and then put his hand to it; this is
an atturnment, Curia B. R. H. 11. Car.

If a reversion be granted of two acres, or for forty years, or if Co. 2. 68.
super Litt. 297. 314. 309. Lit. sect. 564.
Atturnement to part of the grant good for the whole.
services be granted, and the tenant does atturn for one acre, or for part of
the forty years, or for part of the services, this shall extend to all, and is
a good atturnment for both the acres, all the forty years, and all the
services. And that albeit the tenant say expressly it shall be good but for a
part and not for the whole. And so also it is of an atturnment in law. And
therefore if the grantee by fine of services sue a Scire facias to have
execution of any part of the services, and have judgment to recover any part,
or a lessee of three acres surrender one of them to the grantee of the
reversion of all the three acres; this is a good atturnment for the whole. But
if one atturn for part of the land, or for part of the services in case of the
grant of a reversion of land, or the grant of services, and have no notice of
the grant of any more, this atturnment is not good for any part, but void for
all.

If a seigniory, reversion, or the like, be granted to two or more, Co. super
Lit. 297. 2. 68. 67.
Atturnment to one good to others.
and the tenant after notice thereof does atturn to one of them; this is a good
atturnment to perfect the grant to both or all of them. But if one die before
atturnment, and the tenant atturne to the survivor or survivors; this shall not
avail the heir of him that is dead, but it is good to perfect the grant to
the survivor or survivors, to whom it is made.

If a reversion be granted to husband and wife, and the tenant Calvin's case
Pasc. 7 Jac. B. R. Co. 2. 68.
atturne to the wife in the absence of the husband; this is a good atturnment
to perfect the grant to them both. But if a reversion be granted to two men,
and the tenant have notice only of a grant made to one of them, and he atturn
to him only; this atturnment is void, and not good to perfect the grant to
either of them.

If two jointenants be for life, or years, and the reversion of their Co. 2.
66, 67. Litt. Sect. 566.
Atturnment by one good for others.
estate is granted to a stranger, and one of them atturn to the grant of the
reversion; this is a good atturnment for both of them. The like law is for
tenants in common. But if A, B, C and D, be lessees 6 Car. in the Lord Brooks
case in the Court of Wards.
for years, and C and D be outlawed, so as they forfeit their parts to the
King, and the King become tenant in common with A and B, and after the
reversion is granted to a stranger, and A, B, C and D atturn; this is no good
atturnment to perfect the grant of the reversion, for C and D cannot atturn,
and the atturnment of A and B for the King and themselves is not good.

Atturnment made by the husband is good for the wife: whereof see before at
Numb. 5. 9. Who shall be compelled to atturn. Or not. And where.


In all cases for the most part where atturnment is needful, the Co. 6. 68. 9.
84. super Litt. 315.
tenant whether he be tenant in fee simple, for life, years, by Statute,
Elegit, or as executor until debts be paid, shall be compelled to atturn. And
albeit the tenant be an infant, and come to the land by purchase or descent,
yet may he be compelled to atturn, but then in this case his atturnment shall
not prejudice him, for when he is of full age he may disclaim or say he does
hold by less services.

If there be tenant in tail of a reversion, and he grant this over to Co. super
Litt. 316. 318.
a stranger; in this case the tenant in possession may be compelled to atturne.
But if the reversion upon the estate of the tenant in tail, or upon the estate
of the tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct be granted, such a
tenant may may not be compelled to atturn; and yet such a tenant may atturn
gratis if he will. And the assignee of the estate of such a tenant in tail
after possibility etc. is compellable to atturn. And if one make a gift in
tail, the remainder in fee, and the Seigniory, or a rent charge issuing out of
the land, is granted in see by fine; in this case the tenant in tail may be
compelled to atturn.

In all cases for the most part where atturnment is not needful, there Co. 6.
68. super Litt. 318.
is no means to compel the tenant to atturn. And therefore the tenant cannot
be compelled to atturn to him that comes to a reversion or remainder by
escheat, forfeiture etc.

If one grant his reversion of land in Mortmain without a license, Co. super
Litt. 318. 3. 86.
the tenant may not be compelled to atturn until there be a license had from
the King.

Also it is a general rule, that when the grant by fine is defeasible, Co.
super Lit. 318. 3. 86.
there the tenant shall not be compelled to atturne. As if an infant levy a
fine, this is defeasible by writ of Error during his minority, and therefore
the tenant shall not be compelled to atturn. So if the land be holden in
ancient demesne, and he in the reversion levieth a fine of the reversion at the
Common Law; the tenant shall not be compelled to atturn, because the estate
that passes is reversable by a writ of deceit.

If the grant be absolute, and the atturnment be on condition; 10. How an
atturnment shall enure and be taken.
Co. super Litt. 309. 310. 297. See before.
yet this shall enure according to the grant. So if the atturnment be but to
part of the things, or part of the time granted; this shall enure to perfect
the grant for all. So if the atturnment be made but to one of the grantees, it
shall enure to the rest. So if the atturnment be made to the particular tenant,
it shall enure to him in the remainder to perfect his estate also.

If the estate of the tenant be with a privilege annexed, as without Co. super
Lit. 320.
impeachment of wast, or the like, and the tenant atturn generally without any
saving of his privilege, if the atturnment be gratis and voluntary, whether
it be an atturnement in law or in deed; this shall not enure to extinguish his
privilege: but if the atturnment be made by the compulsion of a writ in this
manner, and without this saving, he has lost his privilege for ever.

If a reversion etc. be granted to two several men one after another, Co.
super Lit. 310.
and he that has the latter grant get the atturnment of the tenant to his
grant before the other; in this case this shall enure to perfect the latter,
and the first grant now cannot be made good.

If a reversion be granted to a man and woman unmaried, and before atturnment
made they entermary, and then the tenant atturn; Co. super Lit. 310.
in this case they shall have the estate by moities.

An atturnment as to the party grantor shall have relation to the Co. super
Lit. 310.
11. How an atturnment shall relate.
time of the grant to make the thing to pass out of the grantor ab initio,
albeit it be made many years after the grant, and therefore all acts done by
him after the time of the grant, and before the atturnment to the prejudice of
his own grant, as granting of rents, entering into Statutes, or the like, are
void, as to the land to charge it: and hence it is that if a reversion be
granted to an alien, and before the atturnment of the tenant he is made
denizen; in this case the King upon office found shall have the land, and yet
it shall not so relate as to make the tenants chargeable to the grantee for any
mean arrearages, or for any wast in the lands from the time of the grant to the
time of the atturnment. But in respect of a stanger it shall not relate at all.
And therefore if two deeds be of a reversion at several times, and he whose
deed was made last gets atturnment first, the reversion does pass to him, and
though the other get atturnment afterward, yet this will not help him by
relation, and albeit the former grant of the reversion be in fee, and the
latter for life only, yet the law will be allone in both case.

And now having done with this we come to a Lease.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Lease.
A Lease does properly signify a demise or letting of lands, rentcommon, 1.
Quid.
Terms of the Law. Co. super Lit. 43. 45. Justice Dodridge Treatise called The
use of the Law. Bro. Leases 60. 437. Plow. 421. 432. Dier 125.
or any hereditament unto another for a lesser time then he that does let it
has in it. (For when a lessee for life or years does grant over all his estate
or time unto another, this is more properly called an Assignment then a Lease.)
And this albeit it may be made and done by other words, yet it is most commonly
Assignement.
and aptly made by the words Demise, Grant, and Let. And in this case he that
lets is called the Lessor, and he to whom it is let Lessor. Lessee.
the Lessee. This word also is sometimes although improperly applied to the
estate, i. the title, time or interest the lessee has to the thing demised,
and then it is rather referred to the thing taken or had, and the interest of
the taker therein: but in this place it is applied rather to the manner or
means of attaining or coming to the thing letten. And in this sense it is
sometimes made and done by record, as fine, recovery etc. and sometimes and
most frequently 2. Quotuplex.
by writing called a Lease by Indenture, albeit it may be made also by deed
poll. And sometimes also it is (as it may be of land, or any such like thing
grantable without deed for life or never so many years) by word of mouth
without any writing, and then it is called a Lease-paroll. And hence comes the
division of a Lease-paroll, and a Lease in writing. And all these ways it may
be made either for life, i. for the life of the lessee, or another, or both: or
for years, i. for a certain number of years, as ten, an hundred, a thousand, or
ten thousand years, months, weeks, or days, as the lessor and lessee do
agree. And then the estate is properly called a Term of years: for Term of
years.
this word Term does not only signify the limits and limitation of time, but
also the estate and interest that does pass for that time: These Leases also
for years do some of them commence in presenti, and some in futuro, at a day
to come: and the Lease that is to begin in futuro, is called an interesse
termini, or future interest. Interesse termini, or Future interest.
Or at will, i. when a Lease is made of land to be held at the will and
pleasure of the lessor, or at the will and pleasure of the lessor and lessee
together: and such a lease may be made by word of mouth as well as the former.

Regularly these things must concur to the making of every See Grant Numb. 4.
Co. 6. 36. 34, 35. 1. 154, 155. Co. super Litt. 45, 46. Plow. 273. 523.
good lease. 1. As in other grants, so in this there must be a lessor, 3.
Things necessarily required in every good lease.
and he must be a person able, and not restrained to make that lease. 2. There
must be a lessee, and he must be capable of the thing demised, and not disabled
to receive it. 3. There must be a thing demised, and such a thing as is
demisable. 4. If the thing demised be not grantable without a deed, or the
party demising not able to grant without deed, the lease must be made by deed.
And if so, then there must be a sufficient description and setting forth of the
person of the lessor, lessee, and the thing leased, and all necessary
circumstances, as sealing, delivery etc. required in other grants must be
observed. 5. If it be a lease for years it must have a certain commencement,
at least then when it comes to take effect in interest or possession, and a
certain determination either by an express enumeration of years, or by
reference to a certainty that is expressed, or by reducing it to a certainty upon
some contingent precedent by matter ex post facto, and then the contingent must
happen before the death of the lessor or lessee. 6. There must be all needful
ceremonies, as livery of seisin, atturnment, and the like, in cases where they
are requisite. 7. There must be an acceptance of the thing demised, and the
estate by the lessee. But whether any rent be reserved upon a lease for life,
years, or at will, or not, is not material, except only in the cases of leases
made by tenant in tail, husband and wife, and Ecclesiastical persons. Of which
see infra.

For the ability and capacity of the lessors and lessees, and what 4. What
shall be said a good and a sufficient lease for life or years. Or not.
shall be said a good lease or not, in respect of the ability of the lessor,
and the capacity of the lessee, and the description of their persons, the
nature and description of the thing demised, and what mis-recitall, or
misnosmer will hurt, or not. See Grant Number. 1. In respect of the persons of the
lessor, and the lessee, the thing leased, and the estate, property, or
poslession of the lessor therein.
4. and infra Numb. 5. 6, 7.

Leases for life, or years, or at will may be made of any thing corporal Bro.
Leases 23.
or incorporall, that lies in livery or grant. Also leases for years may be
made of any goods or chattels. See for this Grant Numb. 4.

A man seized of an estate in fee simple in his own right of any Co. 7. 11. 1.
44. Plow. 524.
lands or tenements, may by deed or writing in the country, or without writing
by word of mouth make a lease of it for what lives or years he will. And he
that is seized of an estate in tail of any lands or tenements, may make any
lease out of it for his own life, but not longer unless it be by fine or
recovery, or it be such a lease as is warranted by the Statute of 32. H. 8.
(whereof see more infra). And he that is seized of lands or tenements of any
estate for his own or another life may make what lease for years he will of
it, and it will be good as long as the lease for life does last. And he that
is possessed of lands or tenements for years may make a lease of it for all or
part of the years, and these are good leases. The tenant for life or years may
also assign over all their estates if they please. And if such tenants make
leases for longer time, as if lessee for years make a lease for life; it seems
by this the land will pass for life, if the term of years last so long. But if
he give livery of seisin upon it (as he must to make the lease for life good)
this is a forfeiture of the estate for years. Forfeiture. Infant.


If an infant be seized of land in see simple, and he make a lease 9 H. 7. 24.
18 Ed. 4. 2. Plow. 545.
for years of it rendering no rent; this lease is void. But if there be a rent
reserved upon the lease, then the lease is but voidable, and may by the
acceptante of the rent by the infant after his full age be Acceptance.
made good.

Jointenants, tenants in common, and parcenours may make leases Litt. cap.
tenant in common, F. N. B. 62. G.
Iointenants. Tenants in common.
for life or years of their own parts, and purparties at their pleasures, and
these leases will bind their companions. And one coparcenour, or tenant in
common may make a lease of his part to his companion if he will.

If a feoffment be made upon condition, and before the time of performance of
the condition, the feoffor and feoffee do join to make a lease for life or
years of the land; this is a good lease.

A man that has an estate in land to him and his wife and his Bro. Leases 58.
heirs, may make what lease he will of the land, and this will be good against
all men but his wife only, and that for her time.

If there be lessor in fee, and lessee for ten years; in this case they Co. 10.
49.
two may join together and make a lease for lives, or for any term of years;
and this is good.

A disseisee cannot make a lease of that land whereof he is disseised Plow. 133.
until he make his entry or recover the possession of the land again. So
neither can a woman that has recovered the third part Bro. Scire facias 36.
of her husbands land in a writ of dower, make any lease of it before she be in
possession by execution. And yet if a lease be made Co. super Lit. 46.
to me for years, I may make a lease of part, or an assignement of all the term
before I have made my entry into the land demised. So if the father die, and
the son make a lease to a stranger of the land Plow. 137. 142.
descended to him before his entry; this is a good lease: but if a stranger had
entered and abated into the land, and then the son had made the lease contra.

In some cases also such persons as are not seized in see simple etc. Co. 5. 5.
Dier 357. Co. 62. 8. 70. 1. 175. See in Leases made by tenant in tail infra.
nor able to derive such estates for life or years out of their own estates,
By special power or proviso to make leases.
may lawfully notwithstanding make such leases for life etc. And this is
sometimes by some special Act of Parliament enabling them so to do. And hence
it is also that a tenant in tail may make leases for three lives or twenty one
years. And sometimes it is by some special power or authority that is given or
reserved by and to the party himself that had the sea simple in him, or given
to some other to do it in his name, and leases thus made may be good. And
therefore if any Act of Parliament enable a tenant in tail, or a tenant for
life to make leases for three lives, or twenty one years, leases that are so
made in pursuit of that authority, are good. And if a man be seized of land in
fee, and convey it to the use of himself for life, or in tail with diverse
remainders over with a proviso that it shall be lawful for him or any such
tenant in tail to make leases for twenty one years; in this case he or they may
make such leases and they will be good. But in both these cases care must be
had to pursue the authority strictly, i. that the leases made be according to
the power and direction given by the statute or proviso, for if it differ and
vary ever so little from the sense and meaning of the same; the lease will not
be good. And therefore in the case before of a power to make leases for twenty
one years, if the party make more leases for twenty one years at one time then
one, they are all void but the first, because it is against the intent of the
parties, though it be not against the words. And so if the power be to make
leases for three lives; he cannot by this make a lease for ninety nine years
if three lives so long live. But if the power be thus, Provided etc. that he
may make any lease in possession or reversion, so as it do not exceed the
number of three lives or twenty one years; in this case a lease may be made for
ninety nine years if three lives live so long. But where uses are raised by way
of covenant, and in the deed there is a proviso that the covenant or for diverse
good considerations may make leases for years; in this case this power is void,
and therefore no lease can be made hereupon: neither will any averment help in
this case. And if a man have a Averment.
letter of Attorney, or other authority to make leases for another, and do
make them accordingly; such leases are good. But herein also caution must be
had of three things: 1. That the authority be Co. 9. 76.
good. 2. That he that is the Deputy or Attorney do pursue the authority
strictly. 3. That he do it in the name of his master, and not in his own name.

A lease made for a thousand days, months, or weeks, is as good Co. 6. 72. 14
H. 8. 13.
2. In respect of the manner of the agreement, and the words whereby the same
is set down. And what words will make an estate for life or years.
for so long as it endures as a lease for an hundred or a thousand years. So a
lease for half a year, or a whole year is good. So if Plow. 422.
a lease be made from day to day, or from week to week for four years; this
is a good lease for four years, Et sic de similibus. So if Plow. 272. Bro.
Leases 49.
one make a lease for ten years, and so from ten years to ten years, during an
hundred years, or until an hundred years are incurred; this is a good lease
for an hundred years. So if one make a lease from Dier 24.
three years to three years, during the life of I S; in this case if livery of
seisin be not given, this is a good lease for six years, but if livery Livery
of seisin.
be given, it is a good lease for the life of I S. And if a lease be made from
my death until Anno Domini 1650; this is a good lease.

If I say to I S being in my house [Here I S, I demise to you my Co. 6. 26.
Livery of seisin.
house and land so long as I live;] this is a good lease for life to him if
livery of seisin be made. Et sic de similibus.

If one make me a lease of land until an hundred pound be paid me, 21 Ass. pl.
Livery of seisin.
and make livery of seisin upon it; this is a good lease for life determinable
upon the payment of the hundred pound. But if no livery be made it is no good
lease.

If one make a lease to me for my life, and for four, ten, or twenty Bro Leases
27. 51.
Executors.
years after; this is a good lease for life first if livery of seisin be
made, and then a good lease for years for so many years as are agreed upon
afterward, which my executors shall have. And if no livery of seisin be made;
yet it seems it is a good lease for so many years after my death.

If an Indenture of lease be made between A of the one part, and Co. 1. 153.
Dier 253.
B, C, and D of the other part, and therein A does demise land to B, To have
and to hold to him for eighty years, if B shall live so long, and if he die, or
alien the premises within the term, then that his estate shall cease, and then
the lessor does grant the land to C for so many years of the said term as shall
be then to come after the death or alienation of B, if he live so long; in this
case this is a good lease to B for so many years as he shall live of the eighty
years, but the lease to C after is not good, for the term is ended by the
death of B, but if the words of the second demise be To have and to hold during
the residue of the eighty years, and not during the residue of the term; in
this case the second demise is good to C also.

If one make me a lease for sixty years if I live so long, provided Co. 1. 155.
Dier. 150. 253.
that if I die within the term, that my executors shall have it during the
residue of the sixty years; in this case this is a good lease for the sixty
years determinable upon my death, but not a good lease for the residue of the
sixty years after my death. And yet it may amount to a good covenant for that
time.

If A covenant to levy a fine to B and his heirs, provided that if he Evans
case, Trin. 5. Jac. B. R.
pay B and his heirs ten pound at the end of thirteen years, that then Covenant.
the fine shall be to the use of A and his heirs, and A does covenant with B by
the same deed, that B his heirs, executors, and assigns, shall quietly hold
the premises from Michaelmas next for thirteen years and yearly from
thenceforth for every if the ten pound be not paid according to the intent; in
this case this covenant does not make a good lease for the thirteen years, and
it is but a covenant. Covenant.


If one make a lease for a certain number of years, and it is further Plow.
272. Lit. Sect.
agreed that upon some contingent the lessee shall have the sea simple, and
livery of seisin is given hereupon; in this case the lease for years does
continue good for the time agreed upon.

A lease for years cannot by the agreement of the parties be made Co. 2. 24.
10. 87.
to the heirs of the lessee, nor intailed to the heirs of his body. And
therefore if a lease be made to I S and his heirs, or to I S and the heirs
male of his body, yet the executors of I S, and not his heirs Executors.
shall have it, and the executors may sell the term.

If two agree by word that one of them shall have such a piece of Per Justice
Jones at the Assizes at Glouc.
land for twenty years; this is a good and perfect lease that is made by this
agreement, albeit they do agree to have a writing made of it afterward, for
in this case the writing is but the confirmation of it. But if the agreement be
that such a writing shall be made, or that a lease shall be made of such a
thing between them and put in writing, so that the agreement has reference to
the writing, and implies an intent not to perfect the agreement till the
writing be made; in this case the lease is not a perfect lease until the
writing be made.

Albeit the most usual and proper making of a Lease is by the Co. super Lit.
5. F. N. B. 270. e. Br. Leases 71
words, Demise, grant, and to ferme let, and with an Habendum for life or
years, yet a Lease may be made by other words, for whatsoever word will amount
to a Grant will amount to a Lease. And therefore a Lease may be made by the
word, Give, Betake, or the like. The word Locavit also is a good word. And the
use in the Exchequer is to make Leases by the word Committimus, which is a good
word to make a lease. Bro. Leases 60.
And if A do but grant and covenant with B that B shall enjoy such a piece of
land for 20. years; this is a good lease for twenty years. Mic. 9 Ja. B. R.
Curia.
So if A promise to B to suffer him to enjoy such a piece of land for twenty
years; this is a good lease for twenty years. 5 H. 7. 1.
So if A license B to enjoy such a piece of land for twenty years; this is a
good lease for twenty years. And therefore it is the common course, if a man
make a feoffment in fee, or other estate upon condition that if such Agreed by
all the Judges Mic. 20 Jac. et per Just. Bridgman. And 8 Car. B. R.
a thing be, or be not done at such a time, that the feoffor, etc. shall
reenter, to the end that in this case the feoffor, etc. may have the land and
continue in possession until that time, to make a Covenant that he shall hold
and take the profits of the land until that time; and this Covenant in this
case will make a good lease for that time, if the incertainty of the time
(whereunto care must be had) do not make it void. And therefore if A bargain
and sell his land to B on condition to reenter if he pay him an hundred pound,
and B does covenant with A that he will not take the profits until default of
payment, or that A shall take the profits until Covenan^.
default of payment; in this case howbeit this may be a good Covenant yet it is
no good Lease. And if the Mortgagee covenant with the Mortgagor that he will
not take the profits of the land until the day of payment of the money; in
this case albeit the time be certain, yet this is no good Lease but a Covenant
only. If one give a Bond for the quiet holding of a Close for three years; it
seems this is no lease in Law. See the opinion of the Parliament for Bonds and
Covenants both Stat. 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

A Lease for years may begin at a day to come, as at Michaelmas Co. 5. 1. sup.
Lit. 48. Plow. 156. 197.
3. In respect of the Commencement, and continuance and end of the term or
estate. Incertaintie.
next, or three or ten years after, or after the death of the lessor or of I
S, and it is as good as where it does begin presently. But a lease for life of
any thing whatsoever whether it lie in Livery, or in Grant if it be in esse
before, cannot begin at a day to come. And therefore if a lease be made
Habendum, from Michaelmas next, or from the day of the making of it, or after
the death of the lessor, or after the death of I S to the lessee for life; this
lease is not good: but in case of a lease of land made thus, it is sometimes
helped by the Livery of seisin. For which see Livery of Seisin chap. 9. Number.
11. But all leases for years whether they begin in presenti, or in futuro, Co.
sup. Lit. 45. Co. 1. 155
must be certain, that is, they must have a certain beginning, and certain
ending, and so the continuance of the term must be certain, otherwise they are
not good. And yet if the years be certain when the lease is to take effect in
interest or possession it is sufficient, for until that time it may depend
upon an incertainty, viz. upon a possible contingent precedent before it begin
in possession or interest, or upon a limitation or condition subsequent: but in
case when it is to be reduced to a certainty upon a contingent precedent, the
contingent must happen in the lives of the parties. And albeit there appear no
certainty of years in the lease, yet if by reference to a certainty it may be
made certain it is sufficient. Id certum est quod certum reddi potest. As for
examples, if A seized of lands in fee grant to B, that when B shall pay to A
twenty Co. super Lit. 45. Plow. 83. 524. Co. 6. 35. 1. 155.
shillings, that from thenceforth he shall hold the land for twenty one years,
and after B does pay the twenty shillings; in this case B shall have a good
lease for twenty one years from thenceforth. And if A grant to B, that if his
tenant for life shall die, that B shall have the land for ten years; this is a
good lease. And if one make a lease for years after the death of C, if C die
within ten years; this is a good lease if C die within the ten years, otherwise
not. But if A be seized of land in fee, and lease it to B for ten years, and it
is Plow. 270.
agreed between them that B shall pay to A an hundred pound at the end of the
said ten years, and that if he do so and shall pay the said hundred pound, and
an hundred pound at the end of every ten years, that then the said B shall have
a perpetual demise and grant of the premises from ten years to ten years
continually following extra memoriam hominum etc. in this case this albeit it
be a good lease for the first ten years, yet it is void for all the rest for
incertainty. And if a lease be made to begin from the Nativity of Hill. 16 Jac.
in the Ex. chequer.
Christ, and he does not say which Nativity, as next etc. it is void for
incertainty. And yet if a lease for years be made of land in lease Plow. 192.
523.
for life To have and to hold from the death of the tenant for life; this is a
good lease: So if it be To have and to hold from Michaelmas next after the
death of the tenant for life, or from Michaelmas next after the determination
of the estate of the tenant for life; these are good leases. So if there be a
former lease in being for life Co. 6. 36.
or years, and another lease for years is made of the land To have and to hold
from the end of the former estate by surrender, forfeiture, or otherwise for
twenty years; or to have and to hold from the surrender, forfeiture, or other
determination of the former lease if there be any, and if there be none for
twenty years; these and such like leases are good, and this commencement is
certain enough. And if one make a lease to begin after the death of I S, and to
continue Plow. 523. and 17 Jac. B. R. Agree.
until Michaelmas, which shall be in Anno Domini 1650. this is a good lease.

If a man have a lease of land for an hundred years, and he make a Lit. Bro.
Sect. 437. Bro. Grant 154. Co. 1. ^ 155. Plow. 520, 521. See Exposition of
Deeds.
lease of this land to another To have and to hold to him for 40 years to begin
after his death; this is a good lease for the whole forty years, if there shall
be so many of the hundred years to come at the time of the death of the lessor.
But if the lessor grant the land to another To have and to hold to him for and
during all the residue of the term of an hundred years that shall be to come at
the time of the death of the grantor; this is void for incertainty. And yet if
in this case he grant withal all his estate, or all his term, or all his
interest in the premises of the deed, and then say To have and to hold the
land etc. to the grantee for all the residue of the term of an hundred years
that shall be to come at the time of his death; by this the whole estate and
interest of the grantor into the land does pass presently by these words in
the premises of the deed. And if in this case the lessee for an hundred years
make a lease of the land to have and to hold after his death for an hundred
years; this will be a good lease for as many of the first hundred years as
shall be to come at the time of his death.

If A make a lease to B for ninety years to begin after the death Per Justice
Bridgeman.
of A, on condition to be avoided upon the doing of diverse acts by others, and
afterward makes another lease of the land Habendum after the determination or
redemption of the former lease; it seems this is a good lease and certain
enough. But if a lease be made to A Co. 4. 153. Dier 253.
for eighty years if he live so long, and if he die within the said term or
alien the premises, that then his estate shall cease, and then he does further
by the same deed grant and let the premises for so many years as shall then
remain unexpired after the death of A, or alienation to B for the residue of
the said term of eighty years if he shall live so long; in this case the lease
to B is void, for after the death of A the term is at end, but if he say for
the residue of the eighty years, it is otherwise.

If A does make a lease of land to B, for so many years as B has Plow. 273.
523. 522. F. N. B. 6. N. 14 H. 8. 11. Co. 6. 35.
in the Manor of Dale, and B has then a lease for ten years of the Manor of
Dale; in this case this is a good lease for ten years. But if A make a lease of
land to B for so many years as the land B has in execution shall be in
execution; this lease is void for incertainty. And if a lease be made during
the minority of I S, or until I S shall come to the age of twenty one years,
these are good leases; and if I S die before he come to his full age, the lease
is ended. But if a lease be made to another until a child that is now in its
mothers belly shall come to the age of twenty one years; this lease is not good.
And if a lease be made for so many years as I S shall name; in this case if I S
do name a certain number of years in the life time of the party lessor, this is
a good lease. But if a lease be made for so many years, as the executor of the
lessor, or of the lessee shall name; this lease is void.

If a man make a lease for twenty one years, if I S live so long, or Co. super
Li^ 45. Plow. 27.
if the coveroure between I S and D S shall so long continue, or if I S shall
continue to be Parson of Dale so long; these and such like leases are good. But
if A make a lease to B for so many years as A and B, or either of them shall
live, not naming any certain number of years; this cannot be a good lease for
years. So if the Parson of Dale make a lease of his glebe for so many years as
he shall be Parson there; this is not certain, neither can it be made so by any
means. And yet if a Parson shall make a lease from three years to three years
so long as he shall be Parson; this is a good lease for six years if he
continue Parson so long, and for the residue void for incertainty. So if I make
another a lease of land until he be promoted to a Benefice; this is no good
lease for years, but void for incertainty.

If I have a rentcharge of twenty pound per annum, and let it to Co. 6. 35. 14
H. 8. 10. Plow. 274.
another until he have levied an hundred pound; this is a good lease for five
years. But if I have a piece of land of the value of twenty pound per annum,
and I make a lease of it to another until he shall levy out of the profits
thereof an hundred pound; this is no good lease for years but void for
incertainty.

But here note in all these cases of uncertain leases made with such Note.
limitations as aforesaid, as until such a thing be done, or so long Plow. 27.
Co. 6. 35.
as such a thing continue etc. that if livery of seisin be made upon them, they
may be good leases for life determinable on these contingents, albeit they be
no good leases for years.

And in some special cases a lease may be good notwithstanding Co. super Lit.
46. 10 Ed. 3. 26.
some incertainty in the continuance of it, for a lease may cease for a time
and revive again, as if tenant in tail make a lease for years reserving twenty
shillings, and after take a wife and die without issue; in this case as to him
in reversion the lease is merely void, but if he indow the wife of the tenant
in tail of the land as to the wife it is revived again. So if tenant in tail
make a lease for years rendering rent, and die without issue, his wife enceint
with a son, and he in reversion enter, in this case as against him the lease
is void, but after the son is born the lease is good again if it be within
the Statute. So if tenant in fee simple take a wife, and then make a lease for
years and dies, the wife is endowed; in this case she shall avoid the lease,
but after her decease the lease shall be in force again.

If a lease be made for life or years to A, and after the lessor does 4 In
respect of another lease then in being of the same thing.
Plow. 433. ^ 421. 273. Co. 1. 155. Bro. Leases 73. 10. Plow. 521. Co. 4. 58.
make a lease for years by word or in writing to B; regularly this concurrent
lease to B is a good lease at least for so many years of the second lease as
shall be to come after the first lease is determined according to the
agreement, as if the first lease to A be for twenty years, and the second lease
to B be for thirty years, and both begin at one time; in this case the second
lease is good for the last ten years. And yet the reversion will not pass
without the atturnment of the tenant, and therefore if any rent be reserved on
the first lease, the second lessee shall not have it until the first lessee
does atturn. But if the second lease be for the same or for a less time, as if
the first lease be for twenty years, and the second lease be for twenty or for
ten years to begin at the same time; these second leases are for the most part
void. And yet herein a difference Dier 58. 356 Plow. 421. 422. Co. 1. 155.
is taken between leases made by matter of record and by writing, and leases
that are made by word of mouth: for if the second lease be made by fine, deed
indented, or poll, albeit it be but for the same or for a lesser time, and
albeit it be a lease of the land it self, and not of the reversion, yet it will
pass the rent reserved upon the first lease if the first lessee atturn, and so
also it will do without atturnment where atturnment is not needful. But if the
second lease be made by word of mouth it is otherwise, for a reversion and a
rent in this case will not pass without deed, and therefore a grant by word
does not pass them. And if the second lease be by fine or deed indented, then
also it will Estoppel.
work by way of Estoppel both against the lessor and against the lessee, so
that if the first lease happen by any means, as by surrender or otherwise, to
determine before it be run out, then the second lessee shall have it; and if
there be any rent reserved upon the second lease, the lessee must pay it from
the time of the making of the lease. And therefore if one make a lease of Dier
112. Plow. 432.
land to A for ten years, and after make a lease to B of the same land from
Michaelmas next for ten years, and before Michaelmas the first lessee does
purchase the fee simple, so that now by this means his term is drowned; in this
case the second lease shall begin at Michaelmas. So if one make a lease to A
for twenty years, and A make a lease of the land to B for two years rendering
Co. 4. 53.
rent, and after A makes a lease for the rest of his time to C by deed; this
lease if the lessee for two years do atturn, is a good lease of the rent and
reversion; and so it is also without Atturnment, if there be any consideration
given for it, for then it is also a good lease for all the rest of the term
after the two years. So if one make a lease to A for twenty years, if he Co. 1.
155. Plow. 432. 434. Hill. 6 Jac. Adjudge Finch versus Vaughan.
live so long rendering rent, and after he does make a lease to B by Indenture
for eighty years to begin presently, or grant the reversion to begin at a day
past, or the like; in all these cases if the first lessee atturne the rent will
pass, but if not it will be a good lease for the land for so many of the
years as shall be to come after the first lease ended. But if the second
lease be by paroll without a deed, the reversion as a reversion will not
pass, and the grant will be void if there be nothing else to help it. And in
cases where the second Dier 112.
lease is void, albeit the first lessee surrender his estate, or his estate end
by a condition; yet the second lease is not hereby made good. But if the second
lease for years after another Co. 2. 35, 36.
lease for life or years be made for money, so as it may be said to pass by way
of bargain and sale; this may help the matter, for in this case albeit it be by
word only, it may pass the reversion and the rent also: but in most cases it
is good for the remainder of the term after the first lease ended. And if the
second lease be to begin after the end of the former lease; in this case the
former lease is no impediment at all to the validity of the latter lease, but
the latter lease is good notwithstanding.

Any person whatsoever of full age that has any estate of inheritance Stat. 32
H. 8. cap. 28. Co. super Lit. 44.
in fee tail in his own right of any lands, tenements, or 5. What Leases or
other acts may be made or done by a tenant in tail. And what leases made by
such a tenant shall be good to bind the issue, or him in remainder, or others
after the death of the tenant in tail. And how they shall bind.
hereditaments, may at this day without fine or recovery make leases of such
lands for lives or years, and such leases shall be good so as these conditions
and incidents following be therein observed and kept.

1. Such leases must be by deed indented, and not by deed poll or by paroll.

2. They must be made to begin from the day of the making thereof, Co. 5, 6.
Dier 246.
or from the making thereof. And therefore a lease made to begin from Michaelmas
which shall be three years after for twenty one years, or a lease made to begin
after the death of the tenant in tail for twenty one years is not good. But if
a lease be made for twenty years to begin at Michaelmas next; it seems this is
a good lease.

3. If there be an old lease in being of the land, the same must Co. 5. 2.
be surrendered, or expired and ended within a year of the time of the making of
the new lease; and this surrender must be absolute and not conditional, also
it must be real, and not illusory, or in show only. For factum non dicitur
quod non perseverat.

4. There must not be a double or concurrent lease in being at Co. 5. ^.
one time, as if a lease for years be made according to the statute; he in the
reversion cannot afterward expulse the lessee and make a lease for life or
lives, or another lease for years according to the Statute, nor e converso. But
if a lease for years be made to one, and Sparks case Trin. 4 Jac. B. R.
afterward a lease for life is made to another, and a letter of Attorney is
made to give livery of seisin upon the lease for life, and before the livery
made the first lease is surrendered; in this case the second lease is good.

5. These leases must not exceed three lives, or twenty one years Co. 5, 6.
Dier 246.
from the time of the making of them. And therefore if tenant in tail make a
lease for twenty two or for forty years, or for four lives; this lease is void,
and that not only for the overplus of time more then three lives or twenty one
years, but for that time of three lives or twenty one years also. And it has
been resolved, that if tenant in tail make a lease for ninety nine years
determinable upon three lives; that this is not a good lease. But if a lease be
made Co. 1.
by a tenant in tail for a lesser time, as for two lives, or for twenty years,
this is a good lease. And if a lease be made for four lives, and it happen that
one of the lives die before the tenant in tail die; yet this accident will not
make the lease good, but it remains voidable notwithstanding.

6. These leases must be of lands, tenements, or hereditaments manurable Co. 5.
3.
or corporal, which are necessary to be letten, and whereout a rent by law may
be issuing and reserved. And therefore if a tenant in tail make a lease of such
a thing as does lie in grant, as an Advowson, Fair, Market, Franchise, or the
like, out of which a rent cannot be reserved, especially if it be a lease for
life; this lease is Tallentines case, Pasch. 3 Jac. B. R. Co. 11. 60.
void, and that albeit the thing have been anciently and accustomably letten.
And a grant of a rentcharge therefore out of such lands is void. Trin. 2 Ja.
B. R. Adjudg Doddingtons case.
And if tenant in tail make a lease for three lives of a portion of tithes
rendering rent; this lease is unquestionably void. And so also it seems it is if
it be a lease for twenty one years.

7. They must be of such lands, or tenements, which have been most commonly
letten to farm, or occupied by the Farmors thereof by the Co. 6. 37. Dier 271.
space of twenty years next before the lease made, so as if it have been letten
for eleven years at one or several times within twenty years before the new
lease made it is sufficient. And albeit the letting have been by copy of Court
roll only, yet such a letting in fee. for life, or years, is a sufficient
letting, and so also is a letting at will by the Common Law. But these lettings
to farm must be made by such as are seized of an estate of inheritance, for if
it have been only by Guardian in Chivalry, tenant by the courtesy, in dower, or
the like; this will not serve to be a letting within the intent of the statute.

8. There must be reserved upon such leases yearly during the Co. 5. 8. 6. 6.
37.
same leases due and payable to the lessor and his heirs to whom the reversion
shall appertain so much yearly farm or rent, or more as has been most
accustomably yielded or paid for the lands etc. within twenty years next before
such lease made. And therefore if the rent be reserved but for part of the time
of the new lease, this lease is void. And if the tenant in tail have twenty
acres of land that have been accustomably letten, and he make a lease of these
twenty acres, and of one acre more which has not been accustomably letten,
reserving the usual yearly rent, and so much more as to exceed the value of
the other acre; this is not a good lease by the Statute. So if the tenant in
tail of two farms, the one at twenty pound rent, the other at ten pound rent,
and he make a lease of both these farms together, at thirty pound rent; this is
not a good lease within the Statute. But if besides the Co. 6. 37, 38. Trin. 3
Jac. B. R. Adjudg
annual rent there have been formerly reserved things not annual, as
hariots, fines, or other profit upon the death of the Farmors, or profit out of
another soil, as pasturage for a colt etc. Adjudg Tr. 18 Jac. B. R.
if upon the new lease the yearly rent be reserved, albeit these collateral
reservations be omitted, yet these leases are good. And so Co. 5. 6.
also if there be more rent reserved upon the new lease then the rent that has
been anciently paid, the lease is good notwithstanding. And yet if tenant in
tail of land let a part of it that has been accustomably letten, and reserve
the rent pro rata, or more then after the rate; this is not a good lease. And
yet if two coparcenours Co. 5. 5. And yet Co. super Lit. 44. b. is contra.
have twenty acres of land of equal value between them in tail, and these have
been usually letten, and they make partition of these land, so as each of them
has ten acres; in this case they may make leases of their several parts
reserving the half of the accustomable rent. And if upon the old lease the rent
were payable at four Trin. 3. Jac. B. R. Co^^wals case. Co. 5. 5.
days in the year, and by the new lease it is reserved to be paid at one day;
this is not a good lease. But if the rent upon the old lease be payable in
gold, and the new rent be payable in silver; it seems the lease is not good.
And if a tenant in tail be of a Manor Co. 5. 6.
that has been usually demised for ten pound rent, and after a tenancy
escheat, and then he does make a lease of the Manor rendering ten pound rent by
the year; in this case this is a good lease, but if the lessor purchase a
tenancy, then it seems otherwise.

9. Such leases must not be without impeachment of wast. And therefore if
tenant in tail make a lease of his land intailed without impeachment of wast;
this lease is void. And if a lease be Wast.
Co. 6. 37. and Meers case Adjudge.
made for life, the remainder for life etc. this is not a good lease, for in
this case during the remainders, the tenant for life cannot be punished for
wast done. But if such a tenant of land make a lease of it to I S for the lives
of three others; this is a good lease, albeit it may afterward become an
occupancy.

10. Such leases must not be against any special Act of Parliament. Stat. 11
H. 7. 20. Co. 3. 51.
And therefore if a woman that is tenant in tail of the gift of her deceased
husband or any of his Ancestors whiles she is sole, or after with another
husband make any such lease warranted by this Statute; yet this lease is not
good.

11. They must have all due ceremonies and circumstances for the perfection of
them, as other such like leases have, as livery of seism, and the like, where
they are needful. And then only when Co. 7. 7. 8. 34. Dier 7. 8. The twomans
Lawyer ^73. Plow. 435.
leases have these conditions, and are made according to these provisions, are
they said to be within this statute of 32 H. 8. and such only as do bind the
tenant in tail himself, and the iss^e in tail, for otherwise if it be not
warranted by this statute, albeit it will bind the tenant in tail himself that
made it, yet it will not bind his issue, but as to him it will be void, or
voidable at the least^ for if tenant in tail of land make a lease of it for an
hundred years without any rent reserved thereupon; this lease as to the issue
in tail is void: but if he make a lease of his land for an hundred years Plow.
436
rendering rent, and have issue and die; in this case the lease is only
Acceptance.
voidable by the issue at his pleasure, and therefore if the issue accept the
rent after the death of the tenant in tail; by this means the lease is affirmed
and become good. But howsoever the lease be made it will not bind him that
comes in of a remainder over, nor him that is the donor. And therefore if a
tenant in tail make a lease warranted by the statute, and after die without
issue, so that the land does remain over to another, or revert to the donor; in
these cases neither he in the remainder, nor the donor shall be bound by this
lease, for as to them the lease is void. And yet by a common recovery the
tenant in tail may make leases of, or lay charges upon the land to bind the
donor and him in remainder also. But otherwise it is of a fine, for if tenant
in tail make a lease for years by fine, this will not bar the donor, not the
remainder in any case where it is in a stranger. And yet if the remainder be in
the tenant in tail himself, and he make a lease for years by deed according to
the Statute or by fine; this lease is good and shall bind his own remainder.

The husband may at this day without fine or recovery make leases 6. What
leases or other acts may be made or done by the husband with the lands he has
in fee simple, or fee tail in the right of his wife, or jointly with her. And
what leases made by him of such lands are good. Or not. And how.
Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 28. Co. super Litt. 44.
of the lands, tenements, or hereditaments, whereof he has any estate of
inheritance in fee simple, or fee tail in the right of his wife, or jointly
with his wife made before or after the coverture, so as there be in such leases
observed the eleven conditions or limitations before required in the leases
made by tenant in tail, and so that the wise do join in the same deed, and be
made party thereunto, and do seal and deliver the same deed her self in
person. For if a man and his wife make a letter of Attorney to another to
Pasch. 7 Jac. B. R.
deliver the lease upon the land; this lease is not a good lease from the wife
warranted by the statute. And yet then as in other like cases of leases not
warranted by this statute it is a good lease against the husband. And when the
lease is such a lease as is warranted by the statute, it does bind the husband
and wife both, and the heirs of the wife; but if it be an estate tail, it does
not bind the donor nor him in remainder.

If the husband and wife at the Common Law had joined in a 26 H. 8. 2.
lease of her land without rendering of rent; this lease had been void as
against the wife, and so is the law still.

If the husband at the Common Law had been seized of land in 26 H. 82. Co. 2.
77.
the right of his wife, and he had made a lease for years rendering rent and
died; this lease had been void, and so is the law still.

If the husband and wife at the Common law had made a lease Dier 92.
by word rendering rent; this lease had been void as against the wife; and so is
the law still.

The husband and wife together may by fine, or recovery, make Stat. 32 H. 8.
chapter 28. See the woman's lawyer 163.
what leases they will of her land, or charge it for what time they will; and
such leases and charges will be good against the husband and wife both and
their heirs also. But if the husband alone do levy any fine of his wives
land, and thereby make any estate whatsoever; this will not bind the wife after
her husbands death but she may avoid it. And if the husband and wife make a
lease of her land rendering rent to them and the heirs of the wife (as in such
leases it ought to be;) in this case the husband cannot by fine or otherwise
grant or discharge this rent longer then during coverture unless the wife join
in the fine, but the rent shall descend, remain or revert in such sort and
manner as the land should have done.

Bishops with the confirmation of the Deane and Chapter, Parsons Co. super Lit.
44. Co. 5. 14. 11. 66.
or Vicars with the consent of their Patrons and Ordinaries, 7. What leases or
other acts Bishops or other spiritual or ecclesiastical persons may make or
do with the lands they have in the right of their churches or houses. And what
leases made by such persons will bind their successors and others, Or not.
Archdeacons, Prebends, and such as are in the nature of Prebends, as
Precentors, Chaunters, Treasurers, Chancellors, and such like, also Masters and
governors and Fellows of any Colleges or houses, (by what name soever
called) Deanes and Chapters, Masters or Gardians of any Hospital and their
brethren, or any other body politic, spiritual and ecclesiastical
(Concurrentibus hiis quae in jure requiruntur) might by the ancient common law
have made leases for lives or years, or any other estates of their spiritual
or ecclesiastical living for any time without stint or limitation. And at this
day the Bishops, and the rest of the said Spiritual Stat. 32 H. 8. chapter 28. 13
El. chapter 10 1 Jac. chap. 3. 1 El. chapter 19. 14 El chapter 11. 18 El. chapter 10. 20.
persons, except Parsons and Vicars, may make leases of their spiritual
livings for three lives, or twenty one years, and such leases will be good both
against themselves and their successors. But such persons may not make leases
or estates for any longer time then for three lives or twenty one years, and if
they do albeit it be by fine or recovery, or it be confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter etc. yet it is void as against the successor. Neither will the leases
made by such persons for three lives or twenty one years be good, unless they
have certain conditions and properties required in them. These things therefore
are necessarily required to be observed in the making of such leases: 1. That
they have the effect of all the qualities or properties before mentioned and
required by the Statute of 32 H. 8. Co. super Litt. 44. Co. 11. 66. 5. 3. 15.
in the lease made by the tenant in tail, and be made after that pattern, viz.
That they be by deed indented. 2. That they do begin from the time of the
making of them. 3. and 4. That the old lease be surrendered, and there be not a
concurrent lease (save in case of a Bishop). And therefore if any such person
make a lease for 21 years to one, and then make a lease for three lives to
another; this second lease is void. And yet if a Bishop make a lease for 21
years to one man, and then within a year after make another lease to another
for 21 years to begin from the making of it, this so as it be confirmed by Dean
and Chapter is resolved to be a good lease. 5. That they do not exceed three
lives or twenty one years, but they may be for a less time. 6. That they be
of lands or tenements manurable or corporal. 7. That they be made of lands
that have been commonly let to farm by the space of 20 years before. 8. That
there be reserved upon them the ancient and accustomed rent payable to the
lessor and his successors during the time. 9. That they be not made without
impeachment of wast. 10. That there be livery of seisin upon them etc. where it
is requisite. 11. If the lease be made according Co. 11. 66. 5. 3.
to the exception of the Statute of 1 Eliz. and 13 Eliz. and not warrated by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. as in the case of a concurrent lease, and it be made by
a Bishop or any sole Corporation, it must be confirmed by the Deanes and
Chapters or others that have interest. And if a Parson or Vicar make a lease,
it is not good but during the Parson or Vicars residence according to the
Statute of 13 Eliz. chap. 20. and in this case there needs no confirmation at
all. 12. Some of the leases that are made by the Colleges and houses of the
University etc. must have some rent corn reserved Stat. 18 El. cap. 20.
upon them. Co. 5. 15. 11 66. 10. 58. Dier 370. And most of these points were
agreed by Justice Jones and Just. Whitlock at Lent Assizes at Gloc. 6 Car.
But Bishops, Deanes, Parsons and such like spiritual persons cannot grant the
next advowsons of Churches, neither can they grant rents out of their
spiritual livings but the same charges will be void after their death. And if
a Bishop suffer an annuity to be recovered against him by a pretense of title
of prescription on a Judgment after a verdict or confession, or a Parson in
such a case pray in aid of the Patron and so suffer an annuity to be
recovered; this will not bind the successor. And yet a Bishop, or any such
spiritual person may grant ancient offices of trust of necessity or
convenience, as the offices of Chancellor, Register, Steward, Bailife, or the
like, with the ancient fees incident thereunto for the life or lives of the
grantees, and such grants are good, albeit they be made by the Bishops of the
new erected Bishoprics, and that there be not in them the conditions and
properties required in the leases before mentioned, so as they be confirmed by
the Deane and Chapter. But they may not grant any new office nor yet add any
new fee to the old offices. And therefore if a Bishop grant an annuity pro
consilio impenso and impendendo where none was before; this will not bind the
successor. And yet if there be an old fee, and there is a new fee added to it;
in this case it seems it is good for the old fee albeit it be void for the new
fee. Neither may they grant their offices otherwise then they have been
granted. And therefore where the ancient grants of the office have been to one;
it cannot be now granted to two. And where the ancient grants have been to two
jointly, they may not be now granted in remainder one after another. Neither
may the grants of these offices be longer then for the life or lives of the
grantees. And in case where the grant is void, the confirmation of the Deane
and Chapter will not make it good.

But here note that albeit in all these cases of leases and grants Co. super
Lit. 45. 329. 3. 59. 10. 59. 11 73. 78. 5. 5.
not warranted by the Statutes aforesaid the Statutes say the leases Note.
shall be void, yet this is to be understood as against the successors and not
against the lessors themselves, for the leases are good so long as the lessors
live, or at least so long as they continue in the place. And therefore if such
a lease be made by a Deane and Chapter or other Corporation aggregate; it is
good as against the Deane or other head of the Corporation, so long as he does
continue in his place. And if a Bishop make any lease or other grant not
warranted by the Statute of 1 Eliz. or a Deane and Chapter, Master and Fellows
of a College or the like make leases not warranted by the Statute of 13 Eliz.
cap. 10. these leases are good against themselves albeit they are void against
their successors. So as if a private Act of Parliament does entaile land upon a
man, and appoint him what estates he shall make, and that if he make any other
estates they shall be void; in this case they shall not be void as to the
tenant in tail himself that does make them.

Leases of Benefices with cure are no longer good then the Parson Stat. 13 El.
cap. 20.
is resident.

Leases made by Colleges must have reserved upon them the third part of the
rent in Corn. See the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 20.

If one make a lease to another during the will and pleasure of 8. What shall
be said a good lease at will. Or not.
Co. super Lit. 55. 56. 270. 14 H. 8. 12.
him that lets, or him that takes, or both (for so in effect is every lease
at will;) this is a good lease at will. So if one make a feoffment in fee, or
lease for life, etc. and do not make livery of seisin and so perfect the
estate; the feoffee or lessee has only an estate at will. But if a bargain
and sale be made of land, and the same is void, or a Corporation grant land,
and the grant is void; by this there is no lease at will made.

Leases for lives or years are of three natures, some be good in 9. Where a
lease for life or years shall be void ipso facto by the death of the lessor or
by other means. Or not, but voidable by entry etc. And how.
Co. super Lit. 45. 3. 59. 65. 7, 8.
law, some be voidable by entry, and some void without entry. And of such as be
good in law, some be good at the common law, as leases made by tenant in fee
simple notwithstanding they be for longer time then three lives or twenty one
years; some by act of Parliament, as leases made by tenant in tail, leases
made by a Bishop seized in fee in the right of his Church alone without the
Chapter, leases made by a man seized in fee simple or fee tail of land, in the
right of his wife together with his wife, for twenty one years, or three lives
according to the Statutes. And of such leases as be void also, some are void at
the common law, and that sometimes in presenti, as in the cases before of
leases for years that have no certainty in them, or leases for lives made
without livery of seisin, and the like. And some are void in futuro, as if a
tenant in tail make a lease for years warranted or not warranted by the
Statute, and after die without issue; this lease is void as to him in reversion
or remainder: Cessante statu primitivo cessat derivativus. So if a Prebend,
Parson, or Vicar make a lease for years not warranted by the Statutes; this is
void by the death of the lessor, and the successor need not make any entry or
claim to avoid it. So if a tenant for life make a lease for years and after
die; in this case the lease for years is void. And therefore in all these and
such like cases no acceptance of rent after will affirm such leases. But
Acceptance.
otherwise it is in cases of leases for years made by Bishops albeit they be
confirmed by Deane and Chapter; and of leases made by Deanes and Chapters, or
tenants in tail as to their successors and issues when the leases are not
warranted by the Statutes: And otherwise it is also in the case of leases for
life made by these or any of the former lessors, for in all cases of leases for
life it must be avoided by entry etc. and therefore such leases are not void
but voidable. viz. The leases of Bishops and Deanes after their death by their
successors and that by the Statute law, and the leases of tenants in tail by
their issues after their death, and that by the common law. And in these and
such like cases the acceptance of the Acceptance.
rent by the issue or successor will make good the lease at least for their
time.

If a lease be made for years on condition that upon such a contingent Co. 3.
65.
it shall be void; in this case so soon as the thing does happen the lease is
void ipso facto without any reentry etc. But if a lease for life be made on
such a condition; in this case the lessor must enter etc, before the lease will
be void.

CHAP. XV. Of a Feoffment, Gift, Grant, and Lease.
A Feoffment, Grant or Lease in writing may become void by 1. Where and bv what
means a feoffment, gift, grant or lease and the estate thereby made being good
at first becomes void by matter ex post facto, and may be avoided. Or not. And
how.
rasure, interlining, and the like, as has been showed before in Deed, supra.
And a feoffment, grant, or lease and the estate thereby made may become void by
forfeiture, or upon a breach of a condition, or by a limitation. For which See
Condition and Uses. Also Co. 3. 26, 27. 5. 119. Doct. and Stud. 119. Perk.
Sect. 44. 45. Fitz. Done 4, 5. Bro. Done 29. 30. 59.
they may become void by disagreement or refusal: And this may be either by
the disagreement of the party himself to whom it is made, or by the
disagreement of another: Of the party himself, for no estate can be made to a
man of any thing in see simple, for life, or otherwise against his will: And
therefore by his disagreement or refusal of it the estate it self and the
deed whereby it is conveyed may become void. By the disagreement of another, as
the husband in case of a feoffment etc. made to his wife may by disagreement
avoid it. And for the first of these the law is thus, That all such acts that
give estates directly or by way of use are good at first, and the thing granted
when the deed of grant is delivered to his use shall vest in the grantee before
he has notice of the grant or agree to accept of the thing granted, so that if
lands be limited to a man by way of use, or granted immediately by feoffment,
gift, grant, or lease, or goods or chattels be given or granted to a man; in
these cases the things granted shall be said to be in the grantee and the grant
good before notice and agreement until disagreement. And before agreement the
grantee may waive it, and so avoid the estate and the deed also whereby the
estate is made. And if it be but a lease for years that is made; he may waive
and avoid that by word of mouth in the country as well as a gift of goods, or
an obligation delivered to his use. But if it be an estate of free hold that is
made by feoffment etc; it seems he cannot waive and avoid that but in a Court
of Record.

When the cause of a grant fails and the thing granted is executory, Co.
super Lit. 204. Plow. 134. 15 E. 4. 4. Dier 76. 9 E. 4. 20.
the grant is become void. As if one grant an annuity for an acre of land, for
tithes, or for counsel; in this case pro is conditional, and therefore if the
land be evicted by an elder title, or the grantee disturbed in the tithes, or
he refuse to give counsel, the annuity is determined. But if a feoffment, or
lease for life or years be made of an acre of land pro una acra etc. as in the
case before; albeit the acre be evicted etc. yet the grant in this case of the
acre of land is good. And if one grant an annuity for counsel, if the grantee
will not give counsel, the grant is not of force. So if one grant to make new
pales in a place for the old pales; if in this case he cannot have the old
pales it seems the grant shall not bind him to make new pales. So if one grant
a rent for a way; stop the way and the rent shall be stopped.

If one that has a lease for life or years of a Manor to which an advowson is
appendant grant the next avoidance that shall happen Co. 8. 144, 145.
during the lease, or grant a rent out of the Manor, and then surrender the
Manor so that his estate is gone, in this case notwithstanding the grant of the
next avoidance, and of the rent does continue good, and the grantee shall enjoy
it according to the grant as long as the estate that is surrendered should have
had continuance.

If the heir of the Kings tenant enter and make a lease before livery sued,
and after an intrusion is found against him; by this it seems the lease is
avoided. So if tenant in tail make a lease warranted by the Statute, and after
dies without issue; by this the lease H. 7.
is determined.

If a tenant in tail make a feoffment to his heir within age, and Co. super
Lit. 349.
he after he is of full age make a lease for years of the land, and after the
tenant in tail dies and the heir is remitted; the lease in this case is not
avoided.

If an annuity be granted to one until he be advanced to a benefice Plow. 272.
15 H. 7. 1.
by the grantor, and the grantor die, and the heir or executor of the grant or
tender a benefice; it seems this will not determine the grant.

If A be lessee for years of an advowson, and grant the next avoidance Co. 8.
145, 7. 39.
to B if it shall happen to become void during the term, and A does surrender
the term to C who has the inheritance, and the Church become void before the
end of the term; in this case the grant is good to B and he shall have the
next avoidance, for a man cannot derogate from his own grant. So if A be
lessee for years, and he grant a rent charge to a stranger, and after surrender
his term to the lessor; in this case albeit the term be extinct yet the rent
does continue and the stranger shall have it duing the term. So if A have a
rent charge out of the land of B and acknowledge a Statute to C and then
release the rent to B; in this case albeit the rent be gone as to A and B, yet
it is in esse as to the conusee and he may extend it.

If a man be seized of a great wood and grant to I S six hundred Co. 5. 24.
coards of wood out of the same wood to be taken by the assignement of A; in
this case if A will not upon request assign where the wood shall be taken, yet
the deed will not lose his effect, but I S may take it without assignment.

If A be lessee for life on condition to have see, and he make a Co. 7. 14.
lease to B for years and after he perform the condition and so his estate
for life is turned into a fee simple; in this case the lease for years is good
still notwithstanding: but otherwise it is in case of the King.

If A tenant in tail enfeoffe B on condition to the use of A in Co. 1. 147.
148. 11 H. 7. 21.
fee, and A had granted a rent charge or acknowledged a Statute, which by the
Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 5. was extended, and after A had performed the
condition; in this case albeit the estate had been changed yet the interest of
the grantee or conusee had continued.

If A be tenant for life, the remainder to B in tail, the remainder 5 E. 4. 2.
Pethouse and Cranes case. Mic. 36. 37 El. Co. B.
to A in fee, and A does grant a rent charge or acknowledge a Statute and die;
in this case and hereby the grant is not become void, but if B die without
issue the heir of A shall be charged.

If a corody be granted for a service to be done, the omission of Davis Rep. 1.
the service does determine the corody.

If one grant lands with his daughter in frank marriage, or goods 20 E. 4. ult.
Dier 13. 126.
with his daughter in marriage, and after the marriage is dissolved and they are
divorced; in this case the grant is now become of no force: Cessante causa
cessat effectus.

If one man grant to another an office of charge only to which there is no
benefit or fee incident; in this case he may avoid and 2. Where a man may avoid
his own grant. Or not. And when.
Bro. Grant 103.
determine his own grant at his pleasure without any cause given. But if there
be any fee or profit incident to the office then he may not avoid the grant of
it or put out the officer without some cause of forfeiture: and if he do the
grantee may have an assise. And yet in this case also he may put him out of the
office albeit he may not deprive him of the fee or profit incident thereunto.

If one grant a Ward to another to mary, or for his service; it Bro. Grant.
seems he may not afterward avoid this grant. But if one grant him to another
for instruction or education, contra.

If one make a lease for years of his land rendering rent, and after grant the
rent to I S and the termor atturne, and after the lessor Bro. Grant 128.
accept of a surrender of the estate of the termor; yet this does not avoid the
grant of the rent but the same shall continue still.

If a disseisor grant a rent, common, or other profit apprender out of the
land, and after the disseisee does enter and enfeoffe him Lit. Sect. 477.
of the land; in this case the rent is avoided and the common is gone. But if
the disseisee release to the disseisor; in this case he shall not avoid his
own grant.

An Infant, and other disabled may impeach and avoid their own grants in diverse
cases, which see before in Grant.

A deed of feoffment etc. in some cases is helped, and a fault 3. Where and by
what means a feoffment, gift, grant, or lease or the estate thereby made being
void or voidable at the first may become good by matter ex post facto. Or not.
therein cured by the making of livery of seisin. For which see Feoffment and
Lease. But an atturnment will not help the grant of a reversion etc. for it is
a maxim in law, That atturnment cannot make a void grant good.

If a tenant in tail make a lease for life or years of land and this lease is
voidable, and after the tenant in tail does suffer a common Co. 1. Capels
case. Dier 373. Co. 1. 48. 76.
recovery of the land to whomsoever it be; by this the lease is affirmed and
made good during the term as well against the issues and heirs by the entaile
as against him in reversion or remainder: And so it is of a charge of a rent
upon the land. And if tenant in tail make a lease of the land or charge it,
and after levy a fine of the land to a stranger, by this the lease or charge is
become good against the issue in tail also.

If a tenant in tail make a lease for forty years rendering rent So held in
the Exchequer Hill. 16. Jae.
and die, and his issue does lease to another by indenture for twenty one
years rendering rent to begin after the expiration, forfeiture or surrender of
the first lease; it is said this does affirm the first lease. Sod quere.

Acceptance of rent reserved on a lease for life or years which is voidable
only and not void, may make the lease good.

A feoffment, gift, etc. that is made by duresse or manasse, and Bro.
Defeasance. 17.
therefore voidable may by another deed of defeasance afterward made between
the same parties become good.

Also grants, leases, and the estates thereby made that are not good may be
made good and perfected by release or confirmation. For which see Release and
Confirmation.

A feoffment may be good against some persons and void against Co. super Lit.
46. 7. 8
others, but cannot cease and revive and be good and void at several 4. Where
and when a feoffment, gift, grant or lease may begood for one time and void for
another, and good against one person but void against another, and good in part
and void in part. Or not.
times, as a lease for years, or a grant of rent etc. may in many cases, for a
grant may be suspended, and a lease for years may cease and revive again, as
if tenant in tail make a lease for years rendering twenty shillings rent, and
after takes a wife and dies without issue, and he in reversion or remainder
endoweth his wife (as he may;) in this case the lease as against the woman is
revived albeit it be void as to him in reversion or remainder. So if tenant in
tail make a lease for years and die without issue his wife enceint with a
son, and he in reversion enter, and after the son (being heir to the
entaile) is borne; in this case the lease which was before avoided by him in
reversion if it be such a lease as is warranted by the Statute is good against
the issue in tail, and therefore is revived again. So if the King make a gift
in tail to W to hold by Knights service, and W does make a lease to A for
thirty years reserving rent, and then W dies his son and heir of full age;
in this case as to the King this lease is void, but after livery sued out the
lessee may enter again, and if the issue accept the rent the lease is
affirmed. So if tenant in tail make a lease not warranted by the Statute and
die, and his heir is in ward; in this case the Guardian in the behalf of the
heir may avoid the lease during the wardship, but afterward the heir may
affirm it again if he accept of the rent. So if tenant in see simple take a
wife, and then make a lease for years and dies, and the wife is endowed, she
shall avoid the lease for her estate, but after her death the lease will be in
force again. But if the Patron grant the next avoidance, and after the Parson,
Patron and Ordinary before the Statutes had made a lease of the Glebe for
years, and after the Parson had died, and the grantee of the next avoidance had
presented a Clerk to the Church who had been admitted, instituted and
inducted, and had died within the term, and the Patron had presented a new
Clerk to the Church who had been admitted, instituted and inducted; in this
case the lease had not revived again. No more then if a feme covert levy a
fine alone, and the husband does enter and avoid the fine, the estate shall
revive against the wife after his death, for it is avoided as to her also as
well as to the husband by his entry. See more in Deed supra cap. 4. Numb. 7.

Where a feoffment, gift, grant, or lease is voidable, in some cases it may be
avoided by the party himself that made it and not 5. Who may avoid a
feoffment, gift, grant or lease, that is voidable. Or not. And how.
Co. super Lit. 45. Co. 7. 8. Dier 337. 239.
by others albeit they be privies as heirs, executors, or administrators, and
in some cases it is voidable by others and not by the party himself, and in
some cases it is voidable by the party himself and by others. And in some
cases it is avoidable only at some times, and in some cases it is avoidable at
all times: as for examples, an Infant if he grant by fine must avoid it during
his minority if he live to be of full age, otherwise he himself or any other
shall never Infant.
avoid it. But if he grant by deed, this may be avoided at any time by
himself, his heirs, executors, or administrators, or his Guardian in his right
as the case is. But a Lord by escheate cannot avoid a voidable estate made by
his tenant being an Infant, And if a woman Woman covert.
covert do any such act by deed; it may be avoided by her husband during the
coverture, or her self after the coverture, or her heirs etc. that are
privies after her death. And if a man de non sane De nonsane memory.
Co. super Lit. 7. 8.
memory do any such act it may not be avoided by himself that is the party
denying it, but it may be avoided by his heirs etc. that are privies. And if
tenant in tail make a voidable lease not warranted by the Statute; he may not
avoid it himself, but his issue Tenant in tail.
may. And if he be in ward by reason of a tenure in Capite or Knight service,
the guardian of the issue during his time may avoid it. And if a Corporation
spiritual sole or aggregate make leases not warranted Corporations.
by the Statutes, they may not avoid it themselves, but their successors after
their death, translation, or other remotion may avoid it; or if a Bishop make
such a voidable lease, the King when the Bishopric does come into his hands
may avoid it.

And now we pass to another sort of Assurances that are for some special
purposes and in some special cases only wherein we shall first begin with an
Exchange.

CHAP. XVI. Of an Exchange.
AN Exchange is the mutual grant of equal interests the one in 1. Exchange or
Eschange. Quid.
exchange for the other. Or it is, where a man is seized or possessed Terms of
the law tit. Exchange Finches ley 27.
of land in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years, or is possessed of
goods, and another is seized or possessed of other lands or possessed of other
goods in the like manner, and they do exchange their lands or goods the one
for the other. And in this there is a doble grant, for each of them does grant
that which is his to the other.

This manner of conveyance (which heretofore was very frequent) is sometimes
made by word without any writing: and sometimes * Co. super Lit. 50. Perk.
Sect. 253.
it is made by deed or in writing: and which way soever it be made it must be
made by this word Exchange, which is a word so appropriated to this thing as
the word Frankmariage is to a gift in Frankmariage, neither of which can be
made or described by any circumlocution.

The fruit and effect of an exchange is, that it does give the interest Co. 4.
121. 15 E. 4. 3. 9 E. 4. 21. Bro. Eschange in toto. Fitz. Eschange in toto.
and after the property of the things exchanged to either party 2. The effect
and fruit of it.
according to the agreement. And if the exchange be of lands or tenements of
any estate of Inheritance or freehold whether it be by word or deed, it has a
condition and a warranty in law incident and annexed to it as a thing made by
the word Exchange and tacit implied in every grant of exchange: A condition,
to give a reentry upon all the land given in exchange if he be put out of all
or part Condition.
of the land taken in exchange, and a warranty, to enable him to vouch and to
recover over in value so much of his own land again Warranty.
given in exchange as shall be recovered from him of the land taken in exchange
if he be sued for it: So that upon every exchange either party if he be put out
of or lose by action the land he takes in exchange has a double remedy
against the other, and yet this remedy does go only in the privity and shall
not go to an assignee: As if Assignee.
A exchange land with B and B be put out of all or part of the land upon a
title paramount by a recovery in a real action or otherwise, in this case B
may either enter upon his own land again which he gave in exchange, or else
if it be in an action brought he may vouch A upon the warranty in law, and
shall recover as much in value against him of the land he gave as he has lost
of the land he took in exchange. But if B alien his land taken in exchange to
C and C be put out of all or part of the land upon a title paramount, C in this
case can neither enter upon the land given to A in exchange upon the condition
in law, nor vouch A to warranty and recover over in value upon the warranty in
law. And yet A in this case shall have the like remedy against C the alienee
upon the condition and warranty both as he had against B. But if A himself
implead C for the land he gave to B in exchange, C may make use of this
warranty in law by way of Rebutter against A. And in all these cases where one
of the parties is put out of all or part of the Rebutter.
land or out of part of the estate by entry, and the other party enter upon the
others land upon the condition in law, he may enter upon the whole land and
avoid the whole exchange: but if he be impleaded for a part only or for the
whole, and a part only be recovered from him; in this case he shall recover so
much in value of the other land only as he has lost and no more: As if an
exchange be of three acres for three acres, and after one of the parties is put
out of one of the acres by the entry of a stranger; in this case he may enter
upon the whole three acres he had given in exchange and so avoid the whole
exchange if he will. And if A and B be Jointenants for life and the fee simple
to the heirs of A and A exchange this land with C in fee, and then die, and B
enter and avoid the exchange for his life (as he may) in this case C may avoid
the whole exchange and enter upon his own three acres again. So if he in
reversion disseise his tenant for life, and then exchange the land, and after
the tenant for life enter; in this case the other party may defeat the whole
exchange. But in this case of an exchange of three acres for three acres, if
one of the acres were gained by disseisin, and the disseisee bring an action
and does recover it against the disseisor, in this case if he vouch over the
other party to the exchange, he shall recover so much in value only of the
three acres he gave in exchange as the acre he has lost and no more.

To the perfection of an exchange and to make things to pass 3. How an
exchange must be made. And what shall be said a good excha^ge Or not.
See Grant Numb. 4.
by this kind of conveyance these things are requisite. 1. That the persons or
parties thereunto be able to give and take, and not disabled by any special
impediment. And for this it must be known that such persons as may be grantors
and grantees may make exchanges, and such persons as are disabled to grant are
disabled to 1. In respect of the parties thereunto and their estates.
make exchanges.

An exchange made between the King and a subject is good albeit Co. super Lit.
51.
the King hold his land in one capacity and the subject in another.

An exchange made between an Infant and another is not void Infant.
Idem.
but voidable only, for the Infant at his full age may affirm or avoid it at
his election.

An exchange made between a tenant in tail and another is not Tenant in tail
Bro. Eschange 9. Perk. Sect. 279.
void but voidable, for it is good against himself during his life, and his
issue at his full age may affirm or avoid it at his election.

An exchange made between a man de non sane memory and another Bro. Eschange 9.
De non sane memory.
is not void but voidable, for it is good against him, but his heir may avoid
or affirm it at his election.

A man that does hold land in fee simple, fee tail, or for life in Bro. idem.
Perk. Sect. 279.
the right of his wife, may exchange this land, and the exchange will Husband
in right of his wife.
be good as long as he and his wife does live. And he with his wife may
exchange it for longer time and the exchange is good against him, but his wife
after his death may affirm or avoid it if she will.

One Parson or Vicar may exchange his Church or Benefice with Parson.
Perk. Sect. 288.
another, and this exchange is good.

The disseisor and disseisee may join together and exchange the Perk. Sect.
280. 273.
land whereof the disseisin was made with a stranger for other land: but if it
be made out of the land and before the entry of the disseisee it shall not bind
the disseisee, for he may avoid it. And a disseisor cannot exchange the land he
has gotten by disseisin with the disseisee for other land, for this exchange
is void, unless it be by Indenture, or fine, that it may work by way of
estoppell.

The lessor and lessee may join together and exchange the land Surrender.
Perk. Sect. 279.
leased for other land, and this is good; for it shall be said to be the
surrender of the lessee to the lessor, and the exchange of the lessor; and
therefore the lessee (as it seems) shall have nothing to do with the land
taken in exchange. Sed quere of that.

Jointenants for life the fee to one of them may exchange their Iointenants.
Terants in common.
land with a stranger for other land to hold in the same nature, and Perk.
Sect. 277. 281.
the exchange is good. But Jointenants, tenants in common, and coparceners
cannot exchange the lands they do so hold one with another before they have
made partition.

If A and B be Jointenants for life the fee to A and A exchange Perk. Sect. 277.
the whole land with another for other land, this is good only for his moity as
some have said: But it seems notwithstanding it is good for the whole until it
be avoided by the other Jointenant.

The second thing required in a good exchange is, that the things Perk. Sect.
263. 261, 262. 266. 258. Lit. Sect. 62. Co. super Lit. 51, 52.
2. In respect of the matter whereof it is made or the nature of the thing
exchanged. And of what things and estates an exchange may be made.
exchanged be such as whereof an exchange may be made. And for this it must be
known that an exchange may be made of things of the same nature, as of a
temporal thing for a temporal thing, a spiritual thing for a spiritual, as
a house for a house, land for land, a Manor for a Manor, a Church for a Church,
rent for rent, common for common, a horse for a horse, one piece of plate for
another or the like: or it may be made of things of a diverse nature, as of a
temporal thing for a spiritual, as of a house for land or rent, a chamber in
a house for common, or for a reversion, seigniory, or advowson, of land or rent
for a right of land or release of right, of an advowson for land, of a rent for
a way, of a horse for a piece of plate, of a gown for a horse, or the like.
And exchanges made of these things albeit the things exchanged do lie in
diverse counties are good. Also a seigniory by homage and fealty or the like
which is not valuable Perk. Sect. 259, 260. 258.
may be exchanged for land, rent, or any other such like thing. So may a
seigniory by divine service. But a seigniory in frankalmoigne cannot be
exchanged with any but the tenant of the land that does hold by the tenure. And
houses, manors, lands, rents, commons, seigniories, reversions, and the like
may be exchanged in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years. So that an
exchange may be of an Inheritance for an Inheritance, of a franktenement for a
franktenemant, and of chattells real for chattells real.

If one grant white acre in exchange for black acre lying within Perk. Sect.
244. Idem. 263, 3 E. 4. 10. 9 E. 4. 21. 9 E. 4. 21. Perk. Sect. 262.
the same or in two counties, this is a good exchange. So if I grant a rent
charge issuing out of my land in exchange to I S for an acre of his land etc.
this is a good exchange. So if I have a rent issuing out of the land of I S and
I grant this to I K in exchange for land or other rent; this exchange is good
when the tenant has atturned to the grant of the rent. So if one have a rent
out of my land in fee, and I have the land in fee and I grant the land in
exchange for the rent, it seems this is a good exchange. But if one grant me a
Manor or land, and I in exchange for the same Manor or land grant unto him a
rent de novo issuing out the same land or Manor, this cannot take effect as an
Exchange. So if one release his Estovers that he has in Perk. Sect. 266.
Fitz. Eschange 16.
such a Wood, and deliver the Release in Exchange for land given to him in
exchange for the same release; this is a good exchange. Perk. Sect. 271.
If there be a disseisor and disseisee, and the disseisee release his right to
the disseisor in exchange for other land; this is a good exchange. Idem. 282.
So if the disseisor of an acre of land enfeoffe a stranger of the same acre of
land, and the feoffee give to the disseisee an acre of land in fee in exchange
for a release of all his right in the acre of land of which he was disseised;
this is a good exchange. Idem Sect. 271.
But if the disseisee grant his right to a stranger that has nothing in the
land in exchange for an acre of land; this exchange is not good, neither shall
the stranger take any thing by this grant. Perk. Sect. 260.
If there be Lord and tenant by fealty and 12 d. rent, and the Lord exchange
the seigniory with the tenant for the tenancy, or e converso, by deed indented;
this is held by some to be a good exchange. Perk. Sect. 267.
If I have a rent issuing out of the land of I S and I grant or release the
same rent to I S in exchange for other land; this is a good exchange. So if I
release the same rent unto him in exchange for a way over his ground; this is a
good exchange. Perk. Sect. 268, 269.
If I be seized of lands to which I S has a right of action, and I give to him
other land for a release of his right; this is a good exchange. And the same
law is of an exchange of land and an advowson by deed indented for a release of
right in another advowson to an usurper when his Incumbent has been in
possession of the Church six months. Perk. Sect. 257.
If two Parsons of a Church make an exchange of their benefices by words of
exchange, and each of them resign his benefice into the hands of the Bishop to
the same intent, and the Patrons present accordingly and the Presentations are
per viam permutationis; this is a good exchange. Perk. Sect. 264, 265.
If three acres of land with an advowson appendant be given in exchange by T K
to I S for a chamber to be assigned by the said I S at the election of T K and
he assign two chambers, and T K choose and enter upon one, and I S enter upon
the land; this exchange is good notwithstanding the incertainty. So if I S give
his Manor of A to T K in exchange for his Manor of B or for his Manor of C and
he enter upon one of these Manors, and T K enter upon the Manor of A; this
exchange is good. Out of all which these things by the way may be observed. 1.
That the things exchanged need not to be in esse at the time of Co. super Lit.
50. Perk. Sect. 265.
exchange made, for a man may grant a rent de novo out of his land in exchange
for a Manor. And yet if I grant to another the Manor of A for the Manor of B
which he is to have after his fathers death by descent, it seems this exchange
is void. 2. There needs no transmutation of possession, for a release of rent,
estovers, or right of land for land is good. 3. The things exchanged need not
to be of one nature so as they concern lands or tenements, for land may be
exchanged for rent, common, or any other inheritance which does concern lands
or tenements, or spiritual for temporal things, as tithes; a tenure by divine
service for land or a temporal seigniory. But annuities and such like things
which charge the person only and do not concern lands or tenements, or goods
and chattels, cannot be exchanged for land.

The third thing required in a good exchange is, that it be made Perk. Sect.
244. Co. super Lit. 51, 52. Lit. Sect. 62. Co. 9. 14. Perk Sect. 247, 248, 249,
250. 246.
in that manner and order that law does require: wherein these 3. In respect of
the manner of the making of the exchange. And where it shall be good without
deed or ^ot.
things are to be known. 1. That if all or part of the things whereof the
exchange is made do lie in several counties: or if all or part of the things
whereof the exchange is be such as lie in grant and not in livery, albeit it be
in the same county: in these cases the exchange must be made by deed indented
in writing. But where the exchange is of lands, and of lands lying in the same
county, albeit it be of any estate of inheritance or free hold, yet it may be
by word of mouth without writing. And so also may it be when the things
exchanged do lie in diverse counties, when the exchange is made only for a
term of years. And therefore if an exchange be made between I S and T K of
lands lying in one and the same county in fee, or for life, it may be by word
of mouth: but if all or part of the lands of I S lie in one county, and all or
part of the lands of T K do lie in another county, the exchange must be made
by deed indented. If an exchange be made of rent for land, and the land out of
which the rent is issuing and the land given in exchange for it do both lie in
one county; this exchange cannot be good without deed. So if an exchange be
made of the reversion of an acre of land for three shillings of rent issuing
out of another acre of land, and both acres are in one county; this exchange
must be made by deed indented or it will not be good. So if an exchange be made
of an acre of land and a rent out of another acre for another acre of land and
common for three beasts, and all is in one and the same county, this exchange
must be by deed indented, or it will not be good. But if I be seized of a Manor
to which I have common appendant or appurtenant, and T K is seized of another
Manor to which he has a villain regardant, and both the Manors are in one
county, an exchange may be made of these Manors by word of mouth without
writing, and the common and villain will pass as incidents well enough. And
yet if I S has an office whereunto land does belong and T K has rent issuing
out of the land of a stranger and all the land is in one county and the office
is to be used and occupied in the same county; if these things be exchanged it
must be by deed indented. 2. The word [Eschange] or [Exchange] Co. super Lit.
50, 51, Perk. Sect. 252, 253. 9 E. 4. 21. Fitz. Exchange. 13.
must be had and used between the parties in the making of the exchange. As I
grant to you white acre To have and to hold to you and your heirs in exchange
for black acre. And in consideration hereof you grant to me and my heirs
black acre in exchange for white acre, for this word is so individually
requisite as it cannot be supplied by any other word, neither will any averment
that it was in exchange help in this case. And therefore if A by deed indented
give to B an acre of land in fee simple, or for life, and by the same deed B
does give to A another acre of land in the same manner, this cannot enure as an
exchange; And therefore if no livery of seisin so as it may take effect by way
of Grant, it is utterly void. Livery of seisin.
But by this means lands may be granted from one to another, for there needs
no livery of seisin. So if an exchange be made by words between two of lands
in one county, and before their entry Indentures are made between them of the
same lands without words of exchange, and no livery of seisin is made; this
shall not pass by way of exchange. And yet it has been held by some that
Permutatio, or some other word of like effect may supply this word exchange. 3.
That if any rent, reversion, seigniory, or the like Perk. Sect. 259. 263. 289.
276.
be granted by either party, that then the tenant do atturne to the grant, for
that atturnment is requisite in this case. And yet in Atturnment.
the case of the grant of land in possession in exchange no livery of seisin is
needful. Neither is it needful that either party to the exchange come to the
thing given to him in exchange by the same Livery of seisin.
mean and manner of assurance: for if lessee for life of one acre give another
acre to his lessor in tail in exchange for a release from him of that acre, To
have and to hold in tail in like manner, this is a good exchange.

An exchange may be made to take effect in futuro as well as in Perk. Sect. 265.
presenti, for if an exchange be made between me and T K that after the Feast
of Easter T K shall have my Manor of Dale in exchange for his Manor of Sale,
this is a good exchange.

If an exchange be made in writing of land, and it does limit and express no
estate that either party shall have in the thing exchanged, 19 H. 6. 27. Perk.
Sect. 275.
yet this is a good exchange. But if an estate for life be limited expressly
to one, and no express estate is limited to the other; this is not a good
exchange, as shall be showed in the next place.

The fourth thing required in a good exchange is equality of Fitz. Exchange 15.
Lit. Sect. 64, 65. Co. super Lit. 50, 51. Perk. Sect. 276.
estate, viz. that either party have the like kind of estate of the 4 In
respect of the quality or equality of the estates or interests exchanged.
thing exchanged, so that if one have an estate in fee simple the other have so
likewise, and so for other estates. For if the one grant that the other shall
have his land in fee simple for the land which he has of the other in fee
tail: or that the one shall have in the one land fee tail, and the other in
the other land but for term of life: or that the one shall have in the one
land fee tail general, and the other in the other land fee tail special: or
that the one shall have in the one land for life, and the other in the other
land but for years; these exchanges are void and cannot take effect as
exchanges. Perk. Sect. 283.
And therefore if the Lord release to his tenant his services in tail in
exchange for other lands given to the Lord in exchange in tail also; this
exchange is void, for by this release made by the Lord the services are gone
for ever. Perk. Sect. 275. Finches ley 27.
So if tenant for his own life exchange with him that is tenant for life of
another; this is not a good exchange. (And by the same reason it should seem
if lessee for twenty years of his land exchange with another for other land
for forty years, that this should not be a good exchange.) Perk. Sect. 276.
But if lessee for life be of an acre of land and he give another acre of land
to his lessor in fee tail in exchange for a release of all his right in the
acre that he holds for term of his life, To hold to him and the heirs of
his body engendered; this is a good exchange. Co. 11. 80.
Or if tenant for his own life exchange with him that is tenant in tail after
possibility of issue extinct; this exchange is good. Perk. Sect. 275. 19 H. 6.
27.
And yet if an estate for life be expressed to the one party upon the exchange,
and no estate is expressed to the other party; it is said that this exchange is
not good, and yet where no estate is expressed the party shall have an estate
for his own life.

But in these cases it is not necessary that the parties to the Co. super Lit.
51. Perk. Sect. 289. Lit. Sect. 65. Perk. Sect. 280, 281.
Husband and wife. Tenant in tail.
exchange be seized of an equal estate at the time of the exchange made, for
if tenant in tail or husband in right of his wife exchange their land in fee
simple with another for lands he has in fee simple; this is a good exchange
until it be avoided by the issue or the wife. Idem.
Neither is it necessary that both estates be in possession, for one may grant
an acre in possession in exchange for an acre in reversion, and this exchange
is good. Idem.
Neither is it necessary that there be an equality in the value or quantity of
the lands exchanged, for if the land of one of the parties be worth one hundred
pound and the land of the other but ten pound, or the land of one of the
parties be one hundred acres and the land of the other but ten acres, if the
estates given be equal, the exchange is good. Idem.
Neither is equality in the quality or manner of the estates requisite. For if
two Jointenants be in fee of an acre of land and they grant that acre to
another in exchange for other lands To have and to hold a moity to one of them
and his heirs, and a moity to the other and his heirs, which is an estate in
common: or two men give lands in exchange to A and his heirs for lands from A
to them two and their heirs, albeit the one party has a joint estate and the
other a sole estate, yet the exchange is good. The like law is if the land of
one of the parties be of a defeasible title and the land of the other of an
undefeasible title, this exchange is good till it be avoided.

The fifth and last thing required in a good exchange is, that there Co. super
Lit. 50, 51. Co. 1. 98. 105. Perk. Sect. 284. 286. 292. 289.
be an execution and perfection of the exchange by entry or claim 5. In
respect of the execution of it.
in the life time of the parties, viz. That both the parties to the same
exchange do enter into the things taken in exchange, if they be such things as
they may enter into, for until the exchange be executed by entry, or the like,
the parties thereunto have no freehold in deed or in law in the things
exchanged, albeit the same things do lie in one County: And if either of the
parties die before he enter into the lands by him taken in exchange; hereby the
whole exchange is become void, if his heir will; but if one of the parties
enter, he shall not first begin to avoid the exchange. But if the parties enter
at any time during their lives it is sufficient, unless the possession be
before divested by an elder title, as by entry for a condition broken, entry by
a disseisee or his heir, or the like, and not revested again before the entry.
As if an exchange be had between two of land, and before their entry by force
of the exchange they are, or one of them is disseised of the land exchanged,
and the disseisor die seized thereof, and then they enter according to the
exchange, and put out the heir of the disseisor, this shall not be said to be
an execution of the exchange, but if the disseisee have recovered the same land
against the heir of the disseisor by writ of entry, and have execution, then he
may execute the exchange by entry. And in case where a reversion, rent, or
seigniory is granted in exchange, it must be perfected and executed by the
atturnment of the tenant in the life time of the parties, otherwise the
exchange is not good; but in this case after atturnment is made, it seems the
exchange is perfect without any entry or claim.

If two Parsons exchange their Churches, and resign them into Perk. Sect. 257.
the Bishops hands, this is not a perfect exchange until they be inducted; and
therefore if either of them die before they be both inducted, the exchange is
void.

Where a deed shall take effect as an exchange, there must be all Perk. Sect.
255, 256. Fitz. Exchange 14. Perk. Sect. 272.
the conditions before mentioned in the case. And yet note that 4. When a deed
shall take effect as an exchange. Or not.
where one thing is granted for another in the nature of an exchange, and for
some of the causes aforesaid, the things cannot pass by way of exchange, there
they may pass notwithstanding by way of grant, and the deed may take effect to
other purposes, albeit it may not enure and take effect as an exchange. And
therefore if two be seized of several acres of land, and the one of them by
deed does give his acre to the other, and the other his acre to him without any
word of exchange, and each of them does make livery of seisin to the other; in
this case albeit the acres will not pass by way of exchange, yet will they
pass by way of grant. And in this case if no livery of seisin be made, either
of them shall hold the lands granted at will only. And in like manner it is if
two agree to exchange land, and after each of them levy a fine or make a
feoffment of the land to other; by this the land will pass each to other, but
not by way of exchange. So if A and B his wife, and C and D his wife agree to
exchange lands, and A and B enter into the land they are to have in exchange,
and then they do make a feoffment of their own land unto C and his father, and
not to C and D his wife; this shall not enure as an exchange, and therefore C
and D may enter upon their own land again, but the feoffment is good. And if
one assign a woman her dower in exchange for land; this shall not take effect
as an exchange, but it shall enure to be a good assignment of dower.

If two do exchange land by deed, and limit no estates, this shall 19 H. 6.
27. Perk. Sect. 275.
5. How an Exchange shall be construed and taken.
be taken for estates for life, and the exchange is good; but if an express
estate be limited to one, and no express estate to the other, it is said this
is not good, and that construction of law will not help it.

If an exchange be made between two men of two acres of land Perk. Sect. 251.
by deed, and in the Habendum, it is set down that each of them shall have the
acres given in exchange with diverse other acres not expressed in the premises,
this addition shall be taken as surplusage, and the exchange shall be good for
the two acres. See more in Exposition of Deeds.

If after an exchange is made before or after the parties enter, all, Perk.
Sect. 286. Co. 4. 122. Perk. Sect. 299. Bro. Exchange 12.
6. Where an Exchange shall be determined, or the nature of it changed by
matter ex post facto. And how. And where not.
or part of the land given to either party be recovered from him upon an elder
title, as by an entry upon a condition broken, alienation in Mortmain, or upon
a disseisin, in these cases if that party enter again upon his own land which
he gave in exchange (as he may) hereby the whole exchange is determined. But
if after the exchange is perfect, one of the parties do enter upon the land he
does give in exchange, this does not make void the exchange, neither may the
other party hereupon enter upon the land he does give in exchange, but he may
have an assise, or an action of Trespass against the other. And yet if an
exchange of a common for a way, Perk. Sect. 299.
or a rent, or the like, if the one party deny the common, it has been said
the other party may deny the way or the rent. Sed quaere.

If an exchange be made of fee between two of a Manor, whereof Bro. Exchange 8.
Perk. Sect. 297.
the one half is in tail, and the other half is in fee simple, and the tenant
in tail that made the exchange die, and his issue disagree to it, so that the
exchange of the tailed land is become void; this does determine the whole
exchange, for when an exchange becomes void in part, it becomes void in all,
and until it be avoided it is good for all. As if one be seized of white acre,
and he exchange white acre and black acre (which is none of his) with another
for two other acres, this shall continue for a good exchange, and not be
avoided until he that has right to black acre does evict him that has it in
exchange.

If an exchange be made by tenant in tail, and his issue after his Co. 4. 122.
Perk. Sect. 296. 294. 290. 298.
death waive the possession of all or part of the land taken in exchange, and
disagree to the exchange, hereby the whole exchange is determined. So if the
wife after the husbands death, the infant at his full age, or the heir of him
that is de non sane memory disagree to the exchange of the husband, the
infant, or him that is de non sane memory; hereby the whole exchange is
determined, and no subsequent agreement can make it good again.

If two do make an exchange by word of mouth, and after before 15 E. 4. 3.
either of them enter, they make Indentures of the lands exchanged, and grant
the same from one to another; it seems hereby the nature of the exchange is
changed, and the exchange determined.

The parties themselves, and all privies and strangers for the most Perk. Sect.
285. Co. 1. 105. Dier 285. Perk. Sect. 290. 294. 298. Co. 1. 98.
part may take advantage of such exchanges as are void for the defects 7. Who
may take advantage of a void or voidable Exchange. Or not. And when. Infant.
before named: But when the exchange is only voidable, contra. And therefore
when an exchange is made by an infant; the infant himself at his full age, or
his heir, and none other may avoid it. And when an exchange is made by a tenant
in tail, the issue in tail after the death of his auncestor, and none other may
Tenant in tail.
avoid it. And when an exchange is made by the husband, or husband and wife of
the wives land, the wife after the husbands death, Husband and wife. Home de
non sane memory.
or heir of the wife after her death, and none other may avoid it. And when an
exchange is made by a man of nonsane memory, his heir after his death and none
other may avoid it. But in all these cases of infant, tenant in tail, woman
covert, and a man de nonsane memory, and where lands are recovered by an elder
title, the other party may not enter and avoid the exchange until the infant,
issue in tail, woman, or heir of him that is de nonsane memory, or him that
does lose the land by an elder title, does first enter.

If an infant exchange lands, and after at his full age occupy the 8. Where an
Exchange voidable at first does become good by matter ex post facto. Or not.
lands taken in exchange for his own lands; hereby the exchange is Co. super
Lit. 51. 12 H. 4. 11. Perk. Sect. 290. 294. Fitz Eschange 13. Perk. Sect. 291.
279. 293. 298.
made good. So if tenant in tail exchange his intailed lands with another, and
after his death the issue occupy the lands taken in exchange by his auncestor;
hereby the exchange is made good for the life of the issue in tail. So if the
husband and wife exchange the lands of the wife for other land, and she after
her husbands death Tenant in tail, Husband and wife.
agree to it, and enter into and agree to the lands taken in exchange; hereby
the exchange is made good: but if the husband alone make an exchange of his
wives land, and she after his death agree to this, and enter into the land; it
seems this will not make the exchange good. And if a man seized of land in
right of his wife in fee thereof infeoff a stranger, and take an estate back
again to him and his wife, and a third person in fee, and they three join in
exchange of the same land in fee for other lands to a stranger in fee, and the
exchange is executed, and the husband dies, and she does occupy the land taken
in exchange with the other third person; hereby the exchange is made good. If a
man de nonsane memory make an exchange, and his heir after his death enter
into the land taken by his auncestor in exchange, and agree to the exchange;
hereby the exchange is made good. And in all these cases when the exchange is
once by agreement made good, it can never by any subsequent disagreement be
afterward made void.

And now from hence we come to a Surrender, a special way or means for the
giving or transferring of something to another, that has already some interest
into the same thing.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Surrender.
A Surrender properly taken is the yielding or delivering up of Co. super Lit.
337.
1. Surrender, Quid.
lands or tenements and the estate a man has therein unto another that has a
higher and greater estate in the same lands or tenements. But it is sometimes
improperly applied to other things. He that does surrender is called the
surrendror, and he to whom it Surrendror. Surrendree.
is made is called the surrendree.

And there be three kinds of surrender, viz. A surrender properly 2. Quotuplex.
Co. super Lit. 337, 338 Co. 6. 69. Plow. 106, 107. West Symb. 1. part. lib. 2.
chap. 460.
taken at the Common law. 2. A surrender by custom of lands holden by custom
or of customary estates, whereof we speak not here. 3. A surrender improperly
taken, as of a deed, or grant of a rentcharge, of a patent, and of lands in
fee simple to the King. The surrender properly taken is of two sorts: 1.
Express or in deed, which is when it is done by apt words, and the express
agreement of the parties. 2. In law or implied, which is when it is wrought by
consequent and operation of law, or when the law does interpret or enure
something done to another intent to make a surrender of it. And in the first
case it is sometimes by word only, and sometimes by writing. And when it is by
writing, it is said to be an instrument testifying by apt words that the
particular tenant of the lands or tenements for life or years does consent and
agree that he which has the next and immediate remainder or reversion thereof
shall also have the particular estate of the same in possession, and that he
yields the same unto him.

The fruit and effect of a surrender is, that it does pass the estate Co.
super Lit. 338. Co. 1. 96. Bro. surrender 47. Perk Sect. 591.
3. The effect of i^.
of the surrendror to the surrendree, and that hereupon the estate of the
surrendror is drowned and extinct in the estate of the surrendree; And yet not
so but that to some purposes it shall be said to have continuance still. And
therefore if tenant for life grant a rentcharge, and after does surrender his
land; in this case the rentcharge shall continue notwithstanding the
surrender. So if lessee for life make a lease for years rendering rent, and the
lessee for life surrender his estate; in this case albeit the primitive estate
Extinguishment.
for life be yielded up, yet the derivative estate for years shall continue
notwithstanding, but the surrendree shall not have the rent reserved upon the
lease for years. So if lessee for life or years break a covenant with his
lessor, and after surrender his estate to him, his Covenant.
breach of covenant is not hereby salved, for the lessor may have an action of
covenant still notwithstanding the surrender. And if one seized of land grant a
rent out of it in fee, and this rent is extended Co. 8. 145. 2. 39. Bro. Sur.
42.
on a statute or granted for less time to another, and then the grantee does
surrender the deed of the grant of the rent to the tenant of the land; in this
case the rent shall continue as to him that has execution and the grantee. And
if one make a lease for years rendering rent, and the lessee surrender his
estate to the lessor; hereby the rent is extinct: but if the lessor grant the
rent to a stranger before the surrender contra. And if one lease for years, and
the lessee let parcel of his term to his lessor rendering rent, and after the
lessee surrender his whole estate; in this case it seems the rent is determined.

If lessee for life or years take a new lease of him in reversion of 14 H. 8.
15. Plow. 194. Dier 28. Co. 10. 67.
the same thing in particular contained in the former lease for life 4. What
shall be said a surrender in law of lands. And by what means an estate shall be
surrendered in law. Or not. By acceptance and taking of a new estate.
or years; this is a surrender in law of the first lease. As if lessee for his
own or another life in possession or reversion take a new lease for years; Or
a lessee for forty years take a new lease for fifty years; the first lease in
both these cases is surrendered. And this rule holds, albeit the second lease
be for a less time the^ the first, as if lessee Perk. Sect. 617. Co. 5. 11.
for life accept a lease for years, or lessee for twenty years accept a lease
for two years. And albeit the second lease be voidable, as being Fitz.
Surrender 3. Co. super Lit. 218. 37 H. 6. 17.
made upon condition, as if lessee for twenty years take a new lease for twenty
years upon condition that if such a thing happen the second lease shall be
void, and the thing do after happen; in this case both these leases are become
void: As where the lessor does grant the reversion to the lessee upon
condition, and after the condition is broken. Or if the second lease be made by
tenant in tail, Dier 140, 141.
or the like: as if a man make a lease for years of land, and then make a
feoffment to another of the land, and then take back an estate to him and his
wife of the land, and then make a new lease to the lessee for ten years; this
is a surrender in law of the first lease: But if the second lease be merely
void, then it is otherwise. And therefore if the lessor do by words of
covenant only promise to Dier 272.
his lessee that he shall have a new lease, and do never actually make him;
this is no surrender in law, Dier 178. 177. Co 5. 54. 55. Kelw. 70.
And this rule as it seems holds also, albeit the second lease be to the
lessee and a stranger, or to the lessee and his wife: and albeit the second
lease be by Dier 140. 141. 1.
word only, and the first lease be by deed, if so be that the thing granted by
the lease be such a thing as may pass by word without writing; and albeit the
second lease be in another right, as if the Dier 178.
husband have a lease for years in the right of his wife, and then take a new
lease to himself in his own name: and albeit the first Pasc. 40 El. Co. super
Lit. 338. Co. 6. 69. 10. 53. 67. 5. 11. Dier 280.
lease be to begin presently, and the second be to begin at a day to come, or e
converso: Dier 93. 112.
and albeit there be a mean estate between, as if land be let to A for years,
and after let to B for years, to begin after the first term, and the assignee
of A does take a new lease: So if one demise land for ten years to one, and
after demise it for ten years to another, to begin at Michaelmas, and after the
first lessee accept a new lease. For in all these cases there is a surrender in
law of the first leases. And if there be two lesses for life, or Dier 46. Co.
2. 60.
years, and one of them take a new lease for years, this is a surrender of his
moity; whereby it does appear that a surrender in law Co. 6. 69. 10. 67.
may be made of some estates which cannot be surrendered by a surrender in fait;
for fortior est dispositio legis quam hominis. And hence it is that a
corporation aggregate may make a surrender in law without deed, although it
cannot make an express surrender without deed. But if the lessee do only
license the lessor to make a feoffment, and to give livery of seisin: or do
give livery of seisin for Perk. Sect. 608. Bro. Surrender 48. Trin. 5 Jac.
him as his Attorney. or do license him to enter into the land and no more,
neither of these things shall be said to be a surrender in law. So if the
second lease be made of another, and not of the same thing whereof the first
lease is made, as where the first lease is of the land, and the second is made
of a rent or other profit to be Co. 6. 69.
taken out of the land, or the first is of a Manor, and the second of Adjudged.
the Bayliwick or Stewardship of the Manor, or the first is of a Park, and the
second is of the Keepership of the Park; in these cases there is no surrender
of the first lease. Also if the second lease be not a good lease, perhaps it
shall not be construed a surrender. See Co. 2. Lanes case 17.

But if the first lease be of the land it self, and the second lease is Trin.
5. Jac. Sir Jo. Chamberlain. case. See Dier 200.
of the vesture of the same land, this is held to be a surrender of the first
lease. Co. 5. 11.
So if the second lease be not to begin until the first lease end, the taking
of this second lease is no surrender of the first lease. So it has been said
if one make a lease of black acre in Dale, and the lessee accept a second lease
of all the lands of the lessor in Dale in general words, and the lessor that
does make the lease have diverse other lands there besides this acre, that this
is no surrender of the first lease. Sed quere of this, for others do much doubt
Per Curiam B. R. 9. Jac.
it. So if one enter into land, and make a lease for the trial of the title
only, and after the lessor (he and the lessee being both out of possession)
make another lease of the same thing to the lessee; it seems this is no
surrender of the first lease: but if the lessor enter before he make the lease
contra. To make a good surrender in deed of See Perk. in his chap. of Surrender
in toto. Bro. Surrender in toto. Fitz. Surrender in toto. Co. super Lit. 338.
lands, and to make them to pass by such a surrender, these things 5. What
shall be said a surrender in deed of lands. And when they shall be said to
pass by such a surrender, Or not, 1. In respect of the person between whom it
is made, and their estate and possession.
are first of all required. 1. That the surrendror be a person able to grant
and make, and the surrendree a person capable and able to take and receive a
surrender, and that they both have such estates as are capable of a surrender.
And for this purpose, 1. That the surrendror have an estate in possession of
the thing surrendered at the time of the surrender made, and not a bare right
thereunto only. 2. That the surrender be to him that has the next immediate
estate in remainder or reversion, and that there be no intervenient estate
coming between. 3. That there be a privity of estate between the surrendror and
the surrendree. 4. That the surrendree have a higher and greater estate in the
thing surrendered, then the surrendror has, so that the estate of the
surrendror may be drowned therein. 5. That he have the estate in his own right,
and not in the right of his wife etc. 6. And that he be sole seized of this
estate in remainder or reversion, and not in jointenancy. As for examples,
infants, women covert, mad and lunatic men, and all such like persons, as are
disabled to grant, are disabled to make a surrender, and none but such as may
grant their land may surrender their land. A Corporation aggregate of many
cannot make an express surrender without a deed, but it may make such a
surrender Co. 10. 67.
by deed. And such persons as are disabled to take by a grant are disabled to
take by a surrender, and such as may be grantees, may be surrendrees; and
therefore a surrender made to an infant is good. If the husband have a lease or
estate for years in the right Husband and wife.
of his wife, he alone, or he and his wife together may surrender Perk. Sect.
613. 612. Bro. surrender 44.
this; but if the husband have an estate for life in the right of his wife,
being tenant in dower or otherwise, and he alone, or he and she together
surrender this; this surrender is good only during the life of the husband,
except it be made by fine. One 21 H. 7. 25.
execut or may surrender an estate or lease for years which the executors
Executors. Tenant in common.
have in the right of their testator. If there be two tenants in common, and
one of them have the particular estate, and the other Perk. sect. 586, 587.
Fitz. sur. 2.
the fee simple; as where an estate is limited to two and the heirs of one of
them, and he that has the estate for life does alien his part to a stranger;
in this case the alienee may surrender to the other jointenant: So if there be
three jointenants for life, and the fee simple is limited to the heirs of one
of them; and one of the jointenants for life does release to the other, and he
to whom this Iointenant.
release is made does surrender to him that has the fee simple; this is a good
surrender of a third part. But otherwise one jointenant cannot surrender to
another jointenant, albeit he be tenant for life which does make, and he tenant
in fee simple, that does take the Perk. Sect. 584. Co. super Lit. 338 Per sect.
600 Bro. sur. 4.
surrender. A lessee for life or years, may surrender to him that is next in
remainder in fee simple, or fee tail, or to him in reversion in fee, and this
is a good surrender, and a surrender as it seems may be made to the grantee of
the reversion before atturnment, so as atturnment be afterward made. And in
case of the surrender of Dier 251. 358. 280.
an estate for life there needs no livery of seisin as in case of the grant
Livery of seisin.
of an estate for life. A lessee for years of a term to begin at a day Perk.
Sect. 601, 602. 4 H. 7. 10. Co. 6. 69.
to come cannot surrender it by an actual surrender before the day the term
begin, as he may by a surrender in law. Perk. Sect. 600, 601, 602, 603.
If lessee for life be disseised, or lessee for years be ousted, and before his
entry or the getting of the possession again, he surrender his estate to him in
reversion; this surrender is void. So if a woman that has title of dower
surrender it to him in reversion before she has recovered it; this surrender
is void. And yet if lessee for years after his term is begun and before his
entry, when no body does keep from him the profits, do surrender his estate;
it seems this is a good surrender; but if another enter before him, and keep
him out, it seems otherwise. If there be lessee for years, the remainder for
life, the remainder or reversion in fee, and the lessee for years be outsted,
and he that Perk. Sect. 605. Dier 251.
outsted him die seized, and then the lessee for years enter, and then the
tenant for life surrender to him in remainder or reversion in fee; this is not
a good surrender, for there is in this case but a bare right of remainder for
life and in fee; but if the lessee for years had not been ousted, it had been a
good surrender. If there be lessee for years, the remainder for life, the
remainder in fee; the lessee for years may surrender to the lessee for life,
and so may the tenant for life to him in remainder or reversion in fee, but if
there be tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in fee; in this
case the second tenant for life cannot surrender to him in remainder in fee. If
a lease Perk. Sect. 588.
be made for life or years to A, the remainder for life to B, the remainder in
fee tail to C, and the first tenant for life or years does surrender to C, or
to the lessor, B being the next in remainder for life being then living; this
is not a good surrender, neither can it take effect as a surrender in respect
of the intervenient estate. And so some say the law is if the middle remainder
be but for years only: as if a lease be made for years, the remainder for
years, and the first termor surrender his interest to the lessor; this is no
good surrender. Sed quere. For it should seem that a future iuterest will Dier
112. Plow. 190. Dier 93. Plow. 432, 433.
no more hinder an actual surrender of the first lessee, then a surrender in
law. And so also it seems the law is for a concurrent lease, which for the
latter part of it is in the nature of a future interest. But if in this case it
fall out the middle remainder be void; as where a lease is made to A for life,
or years, the remainder to a monk (who is a person incapable) for life or
years, the remainder to I S in fee; in this case A the first tenant may
surrender to him in remainder in fee, and the surrender is good. If lessee for
20 years make a Perk. Sect. 604. 14 H. 7. 3. Plow. 541. Bro. Sur. 16.
lease for 5 years, and the lessee for 5 years enter, and after the lessee for
20 years surrender to him in reversion or remainder; this is a good surrender.
So also if the two lessees join in the surrender. So also if the first lessee
surrender first, and the lessee for 5 years surrender after. But if the lessee
for five years surrender to him in the reversion or the remainder before the
surrender of the lessee for 20 years; this cannot take effect as a surrender
for two causes: 1. Because there is a remnant of the term as an intervenient
estate to hinder the drowning of the term. 2. Because there wants a privity
between the lessee for five years, and him in reversion. If tenant Bro. sur. 9.
Fitz. sur. 10.
in fee simple surrender to the Lord Paramount of whom the land is held; this
can never take effect as a surrender, unless it be in a special case where
the Lord has cause to have a Cessavit. So if tenant in tail surrender to him
in remainder or reversion in Perk. Sect. 590. Perk. Sect. 589. Co. super Lit.
42. 3. 61. Perk. Sect. 590.
fee simple; this cannot take effect as a surrender. So if lessee for life
surrender to him in remainder for years: or tenant for the life of B surrender
to him that has an estate for the life of C, these are void surrenders, for
the estates of them to whom they are made, are not capable of such surrenders,
for they are not greater then the estates of the surrendrors, and therefore not
able to drown the estates surrendered. And yet if lessee for the life of
another, or for his own life surrender his estate to him in remainder that is
tenant for his own life; this is a good surrender, for an estate for a man's own
life is greater in judgment of law, then an estate for another man's life. And
hence it is that if a lease be made to two for their lives, the remainder to a
third person for his own life, and one of the first tenants for life surrender
his estate unto him in remainder for life; this is a good surrender for a
moity. If lessee Co. 2. 66.
for life or years surrender to him in remainder or reversion that has no
good estate in the remainder or reversion, as where the remainder or reversion
is granted by word only, or being granted by deed there is no atturnment of the
tenant to the grant, or the the like; this surrender is not good. And yet if
tenant in tail Co. super Lit. 338.
make a lease for life whereby he gains a new reversion (but defeasible) and
the tenant for life does surrender to the tenant in tail; this shall be a good
surrender. So if a woman inheritrix have a husband, and they have issue a
son, and the husband dies, and she take another husband, and he lets the
land for life, and the wife dies, and the tenant for life does surrender his
estate to the second husband; this is a good surrender to most purposes.

If a feme sole be seized of land in fee, and she make a lease thereof Perk.
Sect. 622.
to a stranger for life, and then take a husband, and the lessee surrender to
the husband; this is no good surrender, neither can it enure so, because he to
whom it is made has not the reversion in his own but in his wives right.

It is further also required in every good surrender, that if it be Bro. sur.
2. 8. Fitz. Partition 5. Perk. Sect. 583.
2. In respect of the place where it is made. And where the surrender of lands
in one County may be good for the lands that do lie in another County. Or not.
3. In respect of the matter or thing. And of what things a surrender may be
made. Or not.
made by word and without deed, that then it be made in the same County where
the land to be surrendered does lie, but by writing a man may make a surrender
of lands that do lie in any other County, and in what place soever it does
lie. And a surrender may be by word or writing of lands lying within the same
County in any place out of the land. And therefore if tenant for life surrender
to him in reversion in any place out of the land within the same County, and
the surrendree agree to it, the freehold is in him presently. 3. That it be
made of such things, of which a surrender Bro. surrend. in toto. Per. chap.
Sur. in toto. Co. 5. 11. super Lit. 338.
may be made. For surrenders may not be made of estates in fee simple, or fee
tail, nor yet of rights or titles only of estates for life or years, nor yet
of part of an estate for life or years, as if a man have a lease for ten years,
he cannot surrender the last seven years, and keep to himself the three years.
But otherwise one may surrender any kind of estate for life, as by dower, by
the courtesy, or as tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct, or for
years, or years determinable upon lives, and that of any mesuages, houses,
lands, commons, rents, or the like, that are grantable from one to another, and
such surrenders are good. 4. That there be Perk. Sect. 607, 608, 609. Dier 251.
Bro. sur. 1. 35. 37. 17. 21 H. 7. 7.
4. In respect of the manner. And how and by what words a surrender may be
made. And where it may be made without deed, and upon condition. Or not.
words, or words and deeds sufficient to make the mind of the surrendror to
appear that he is willing and desirous to part with and yield up the thing
surrendered into the hands of the surrendree. And herein it is to be known that
albeit the words Surrender, Give, or Yield up, be the most significant and
proper words whereby to make a surrender, yet any other words, especially if it
be in the surrender of a lease for years, that do testify and declare the will
and assent of him that is the particular tenant that he in the remainder or
reversion shall have the estate of the tenant, be sufficient to pass the
estate by way of surrender. And therefore if lessee for life or years do by
word or writing say, That he will hold the land no longer, and wish him in
reversion or remainder therefore to enter: Or that it is his desire that he
shall enter into the land, and have it and his estate therein: Or that he is
content that he shall have his estate, or have his lease; such, or any such
like declaration as this made to him in reversion or remainder, will be a good
surrender. So if Hill. 37 El. B. R. Sleigh and Batemans case.
lessee for years deliver his Indenture to a stranger, to deliver it and all
his estate up to him in reversion, and do appoint the stranger to deliver and
surrender it to him in reversion, and he do so, and he in reversion accept
thereof; this is a good surrender; but otherwise it is of an estate for life.
So if the particular tenant do by the words Give, Grant, or Confirm, pass his
estate to him in reversion, and he do enter and agree to it; this is a good
surrender: And by all these surrenders the estates will pass by way of
surrender, except it be in some special cases where the intent of the parties
does plainly appear to be that the estate shall not pass by way of surrender.
But if a lessee for life or years do only go from the house or land, and
carry away his goods and cattle, and so waive the possession for a time,
either because the lessor shall not distrain them for rent behind, or the like,
and thereupon the lessor does enter and enjoy it; this is no surrender, neither
is this a good yielding up of his estate. And in such a manner and by such
words as before, any thing that may be Perk. Sect. 581, 582. 583. Fitz. sur. 1.
Co. super Lit. 338.
granted by word without writing, may be surrendered by word without writing,
so as it be made within the same County where the thing surrendered does lie.
And this holds true albeit the estate to be surrendered were created by deed:
But such things, as commons, rents, advowsons, reversions, remainders, and the
like, that cannot be granted without deed cannot be surrendered without deed.
And therefore if a lease be made for life, the remainder for life by word of
mouth without any writing; he in the remainder for life cannot surrender his
remainder for life without deed. So where one has a rent, advowson, or the
like, as tenant in dower, or by the courtesy; this cannot be surrendered Dier
251. Bro. Sur. 16.
without deed. And in case where there is any special matter to be contained
in the surrender, as reservation of rent, condition, or the like, there for the
most part it must be by deed; or it will not be good. And therefore if tenant
for life declare himself by word of mouth to be contented and agreed that he in
the reversion shall have the land and his estate therein, rendering ten
shillings a years rent; or paying such a sum of money, or upon condition that
if he survive the lessor he shall have it again Perk. Sect. 624. 623. Co. super
218.
etc. this is no good surrender. And a surrender may be made also upon a
condition precedent or subsequent, as if it be with reservation of rent that if
it be not paid it shall be void; but if it be an estate for life that is so
surrendered, it seems it must be made by writing indented, and so likewise it
should seem the law is of the surrender of a lease for years upon a condition,
or however it is most safe so to do. 5. That the surrendree do agree to, and
Perk. Sect. 608. Lit. Bro. 163.
accept of it, for until then the surrender is not perfect, but if the 5. In
respect of the agreement of him to whom the surrender is made. And what
agreement is necessary. Agreement. Trespass.
surrendree do once agree to it, he cannot after disagree, for his first
agreement does perfect the surrender. But the actual entry of the surrendree
into the land is not necessary. And therefore if tenant for life or years
surrender to him in reversion out of the land, and he agree to it, he has the
land in him presently. And yet he may not bring any action of Trespass against
any man for any Trespass done upon, the land until he have made his entry.

But here note, that in the cases before where things may not Perk. Sect. 588,
589.
pass by way of surrender, either because of an intervenient estate, or the
like; if there be sufficient words in the deed, it may avail to other purposes,
and may enure and pass the thing by way of grant; but then if it be an estate
for life that is intended to be surrendered, there must be livery of seisin
made upon the deed. And wherefore if there be lessee for years, the remainder
for life or years, the remainder in fee, and the lessee for years in possession
does surrender and grant all his estate to him in remainder in fee; howsoever
this deed cannot enure as a surrender, yet it shall enure as a good grant of
the estate of the lessee for years unto him in remainder in fee.

A surrender in general shall be taken most strongly against the Perk. Sect.
610, 611.
6. How a surrender shall be construed and taken.
surrendror, and most beneficially for the surrendree. And therefore if I hold
of the lease of A one acre for life, and another acre for years, and I
surrender to A all my lands, or all my lands I hold of his lease; by this
surrender both the acres are surrendered. But if the surrender be of all the
lands I have or hold for life, or of all the lands I have or hold for years of
the lease of A, contra. And if I hold one acre for life of the lease of the
father of I S, and I hold another acre for life or years of the lease of I S
himself, and I surrender to I S all the land I hold of his lease; by this the
land that I had by the lease of his father does not pass. A surrender to Perk.
Sect. 615. Bro. Sur. 54. Co, super Lit. 192.
one jointenant shall be construed to enure to them all. But if tenant for life
or years grant his estate to one of the jointenants in reversion, it seems this
shall not enure as a surrender to them all, but as a grant to him alone.

If the lessor make, and the lessee take a new lease upon condition, Co. super
Lit. 218.
this surrender in law is absolute, and albeit the condition be broken, yet the
first lease is gone. But if the lessee surrender or grant his estate to the
lessor upon condition; this condition if it be broken may revest the estate.

See more in the next question, and in Exposition of Deeds.

If any kind of tenant for life of land infeoft him in remainder or Bro. sur.
3. 5. Perk. sect. 616. 620. 623. Co. super Lit. 42. Bro. Sur. 49.
7. Where a feoffment, lease, grant, or other act made, or do^e by the tenant
for life or years, shall be a surrender or not. And how it shall enure or be
co^strued and taken. 1. When it is made to him in reversion or remainder.
reversion of the land, or grant his estate to him in remainder or reversion;
this shall enure as a surrender. And if lessee for years before his term do
begin, make a feoffment to him in reversion or remainder, or grant his estate
to him; this shall enure as a surrender. And if lessee for life grant his
estate to him in reversion, the remainder in fee to another; this shall enure
as a surrender, and this remainder is void. But if such a tenant for life make
a lease to him in remainder or reversion for the term of the life of him in
remainder or reversion; this shall not enure as a surrender because it does not
give the whole estate, but it shall enure by way of grant. So if lessee for
life make a lease to him in remainder in tail for term of the life of him in
remainder; this shall not enure as a surrender, but as a grant, and shall end
with the life of the grantee. If lessee for forty years make a lease for thirty
seven Pasch. 7 Jac. B. R.
years on condition, and after grant his estate to him in reversion, and the
second lessee atturn; this shall enure as a surrender. If there be tenant for
life, the remainder in tail to a stranger, and Perk. sect. 6^^.
the remainder in tail to another stranger, the remainder in fee to the tenant
for life, and the tenant for life does make a feoffment to the first tenant in
tail; this shall enure as a surrender of the estate for life, and as a grant of
the reversion in fee also. If tenant Co. super: Lit. 42.
for life being a woman take a husband, and then her husband and she by deed
indented make a lease to him in reversion for the life of the husband; this
shall not enure as a surrender, but as a grant. If there be tenant for his own
life, the remainder to I S for his life, Bro surrender 17.
and the first tenant for life surrender to him in remainder for the life of
him in remainder; it seems this shall enure as a surrender, and is no
forfeiture; but if he grant it to him for the life of a stranger, and make
livery of seisin, this is a forfeiture. If lessee for Forfeiture.
Perk. sect. 615.
life, the reversion being in jointenants, grant the land to one or all of the
jointenants for twenty years; this shall not enure as a surrender, but as a
grant, for there remains an interest in the lessee still as a mean estate. If
lessee for years make him in reversion or Bro. surrender 52.
remainder his executor; this shall not enure as a surrender, albeit it do
give him the whole estate. If lands be given to the husband Bro. surr. 36
and wife, the remainder to I S, and the husband discontinue in fee, and take
back an estate to him and his wife, the remainder to W N, and die, and the wife
claim in by the second estate, and surrender to W N; this shall not enure as a
surrender, but as a grant. If lessee for life or years grant his estate to him
in remainder or Bro. surr. 11. Co. 2. 61. 3. 61.
reversion and a stranger; this shall enure as a surrender of the one 2. When
it is done or made to him and a stranger.
half to him in reversion, and as a grant of the other moity to the stranger.
And yet it is said, that if lessee for life of land grant his estate Perk.
sect. 619.
to him in the reversion and two others, that hereby they have a joint estate,
and the survivor shall have the whole. If lessee for Co. super Lit. 335.
life make a lease for his own life to the lessor, the remainder to the lessor
and a stranger in fee; this shall enure as a surrender of the one moity, and a
forfeiture of the other moity. If tenant for life Forfeiture.
Perk. sect. 622. Bro. Sur. 20. 34. 23.
surrender to the husband of a woman tenant in tail or in fee; this shall enure
as a grant, not as a surrender. And so also it seems is the law when the
surrender is to the husband and wife. And if B Bro. sur. 46.
be tenant for life, the remainder to C in tail, the remainder to D in tail,
and B infeoff C and S his wife in fee; this shall not enure as a surrender, but
it is a forfeiture: so that if C die without issue, D may enter. If there be
lessee for life, the reversion to two coparcenours, Perk. Sect. 623. 21. H. 7.
40.
and one of them take a husband, and the lessee does grant his estate to her
and her husband; this shall not enure as a surrender, but as a grant. And yet
if tenant for life do grant his Bro. sur. 34.
estate to the husband and wife, she having the reversion if she be an infant
and within age at this time; it seems this shall enure as a surrender, not as a
grant. If tenant for life, or years, and he in Plow. 140. Dier 358.
3. When it is done with him in reversion or remainder.
reversion or remainder by word without deed join in a feoffment; it shall be
said the surrender of the estate for life or years to him in the reversion, and
the feoffment of him in reversion. But if he in reversion infeoff the tenant
for life without any deed; this shall enure first as a surrender of the lease
for life, and then as a feoffment. See more in Deed: Numb.

If I have a rent in fee, for life, or years, issuing out of another man's 14 H.
7. 2. Perk. Sect. 591. 585. 606. 590. 596. 598.
8. Where a deed or rent may be surrendered. And how such a surrender shall
enure or be taken.
Manor, or other lands, I may surrender it, for if I deliver the deed of the
grant of the rent to be cancelled unto any one that has any estate of the
Manor or land in fee simple, for life, or years, in possession or remainder,
either solely by himself, or jointly with others, this is a good surrender, and
hereby the rent is extinct and gone. But one that is tenant in tail of a rent
cannot surrender it, neither will the delivering up of the deed in this case
determine the rent. And if one be seized of land out of which a rent is issuing
in fee, and Perk. Sect. 594.
is disseised, and during the disseisin the grantee of the rent surrender his
rent, and give up his deed; it seems this does not extinguish the rent, yet
has the grantee no remedy for his rent when he has delivered up his deed. And
yet if one be seized of land in fee out of Perk. Sect. 595.
which a rent is issuing in fee, and he die without heir, so that the land
escheat, and before the Lord enter upon his escheat, he that has the rent does
surrender the deed of the rent to the Lord; it seems this is a good surrender
to extinguish the rent. And if the Perk. Sect. 597.
grantee of a rentcharge in fee grant the same to him in fee that is seized of
the land in fee; this shall enure to extinguish the rent; but if he grant it to
one that has only an estate for life contra.

And now by this time it is high time we come to Confirmations and Releases,
which serve to enlarge and amend the estate and interest that a man has in a
thing already.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Confirmation.
A Confirmation is the conveyance of an estate or right that one 1.
Confirmation. Quid.
Terms of the law. Co. super Lit. 295.
has into lands or tenements to another that has the possession thereof, or
some estate therein whereby avoidable estate is made sure, and unavoidable, or
whereby a particular estate is increased and enlarged. And this albeit it may
be made by other words, as by Dedi or Concessi, which are general words, and
serve to make a grant, feoffment, lease, release etc. yet it is most commonly
and properly made by these words Confirmasse, Ratificasse and approbasse, which
do signify ratum and firmum facere and supplere omnem defectum. And he that
makes the confirmation is sometimes Confirmor. Confirmee. 2. Quotuplex.
called the confirmor, and he to whom it is made the confirmee.

There are two kinds of confirmations, viz. a confirmation implied Co. super
Lit. 295. Plow. 140. Lit. Sect. 515. Co. 9. 142.
or in law, which is when the law by construction makes a confirmation of a
deed made to another purpose, and a confirmation express or in deed, which is
when the act done or deed made is intended for a confirmation. And both these
are always in writing. The latter is properly called a deed or instrument of
confirmation, and is made after this manner, Noveritis universi etc. me A de B
ratificasse, approbasse and confirmasse C de D statum and possessionem quos
habeo de and in uno Mesuagio etc. cum pertinen. in F etc. A confirmation is
also distinguished by his effects, for sometimes it does tend and serve to
confirm and make good a wrongful and defeasible estate, or to make a
conditional estate absolute. And then it is said to be confirmatio perficiens.
And sometimes it does tend and serve to increase and enlarge a rightful
estate, and so to pass an interest. And then it is called confirmatio
crescens. And sometimes it does tend and serve to diminish and abridge the
services whereby the tenant does hold. And then it is called confirmatio
diminuens.

The nature and work of this where it does find a foundation to 3. The nature
and operation of it in general.
Co. 146, 147 Dier 109. 7 H. 6. 7. Lit. Sect. 539. Co. 9. 142.
work upon is, either to increase and enlarge the estate of him to whom it is
made from a lesser to a greater, and to give him some new interest he had not
before, or to corroborate and perfect the estate that was imperfect before, or
to change the quality of it from an estate upon condition to an absolute estate
or otherwise, for this a confirmation will do. In some cases also it will
extinguish rights and titles of entry. But it will not make an estate good that
is merely void; nor add, nor take from an estate a descendible quality, and
make a man capable of it that is incapable in himself, or e contra. In some
cases also it will lessen and diminish rents or services. But it cannot ne will
change the nature of the service into some other kind of service, nor increase
it into a greater service.

If a Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, Prebend, or the like, make any Co. super Lit.
300, 301. Co. 10. 62. 5. 3. Dier 145. 273. 349. 338. 339. 61.
4. Where the confirmation of some persons is needful to perfect the grant of
others. Or not. And how it may i^ done.
lease of the land they have in the right of their Bishopric, Deanery,
Archdeanery, or Prebendship not warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. and within
the other Statutes; it seems this lease must be confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter by their common seal, and if there be two Chapters it must be confirmed
by them both, or otherwise it is not good. But if the lease be such a lease as
is warranted by the Statutes, the Bishop may make it without the confirmation
of the King, the Patron, and Founder of Bishoprics, or the Dean and Chapter.
And so also it seems of the rest. And a Corporation aggregate as Dean and
Chapter, Master and Fellows, and the like, may grant without any confirmation
of the Founder, and this grant will be good. If a Bishop etc. grant an ancient
office belonging Co. 10. 62.
to his Bishopric, albeit it be but for the life of the grantee, yet it must
be confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, otherwise it is not good. If a Parson or
Vicar had made any lease for longer time Dier 52. stat. 13 El. chapter 2^.
then his own life, it must have been confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary. But
at this day albeit it be confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, yet the lease is
good for no longer then during the Parsons ordinary residencie, except it be
impropried.

If tenant for life grant a rentcharge to I S and his heirs; in this Co. 1.
147.
case he in reversion must confirm it, otherwise the grant of the rent will be
good for no longer then the life of the tenant for life.

Where a man has an interest in any lands, tenements, rents, commons, Co. 8.
167. Dier 277.
felons goods, or the like, by grant of any of the Kings of the Realm, he need
not have the confirmation of any or of every succeeding King. Also it seems
grants of Fairs, Markets, Warrens, Dier 327. Lit. Bro. 203. Kelw. ^45. 188.
and the like, made by one King, will be good in law against his successors
without any confirmation. But all such as have any judicial or ministerial
offices, commissions and authorities derived from the King, must have the
confirmation of every succeeding King, otherwise they may lose them.

5. What confirmations may be made. And what shall be said a good express or
implied confirmation. Or not. And by what words it may be made. 1. To confirm
or alter the quality of the estate of him ^o whom it is made.
In every good confirmation tending to confirm an estate or alter the quality
of it, these things must concur: 1. There must be a good confirmor, and a good
confirmee, and a thing to be confirmed as in other grants, and the deed must
be well sealed etc. 2. There must be a precedent rightful or wrongful estate
in him to whom the confirmation is made in his own or in another right, or at
least he must have the possession of the thing whereof the confirmation is to
be made that may be as a foundation for the confirmation to work upon. As if
feoffee on condition make a feoffment Co. 1. 146. 9. 142. 7 H. 6. 7.
over, and the feoffor confirm his estate to him to whom the second feoffment
is made and his heirs; this is a good confirmation to make his estate absolute.
And if lessee for life make a feoffment in fee, or Lit. sect. 516.
lease for years, and the first lessor confirm this second estate; it seems
this is a good confirmation. And if one disseise me of land, Co. 9. 142. 6. 15.
Perk. sect. 86. Lit. sect. 518. 521. 11 H. 7. 29. 28.
I may after confirm the estate of the disseisor, or of his heir if he be dead,
or of his feoffee if he have aliened it, and this will make his estate good for
ever: And if the disseisor make a lease for life, or years of it; I may confirm
the estate of the lessee, and this will make it good for the time. Co. 1. 144.
Lit. sect. 527. 529. 11 H. 7. 28. Co. super Lit. 300. Lit. sect. 547. 11 H. 7.
28.
And if one make a lease for life absolute, or a feoffment in fee, or lease for
life on condition, or be disseised of land, and the lessee for life, feoffee,
or disseisor does grant a rent out of the land in fee, and the lessor, feoffor,
or disseisee does confirm the estate of the grantee; this does make good the
grant for ever. And so also if the heir of a disseisor that is in by descent
grant a rentcharge, and the disseisee confirms it; this is a good
confirmation. And if an Infant make a lease for 20 years, and the lessee does
make a lease to another for all or part of the time, and Infant.
the infant at his full age does confirm this second lease; this is a good
confirmation, and does perfect the lease, for it is a rule, That which I may
defeat by my entry, I may confirm by my deed. But if there Co. super Lit. 295.
301 Dier 263.
be no precedent estate on which the confirmation may work, or the estate be
such an estate as is merely void; then is the confirmation void, and cannot
take effect as a confirmation: as for example, If a man assign dower to a woman
that has nothing to do with it, or a Court that has not power does make
leases by commission, or an estate that was upon condition is avoided by entry,
or a lessee surrender, or a disseisee enter upon a disseisor, and afterward he
that has the rightful estate confirm their estates so defeated and gone;
these confirmations are void: Debile fundamentum fallit opus. And a
confirmation to him that has nothing in the land is void. And hence it is that
if one confirm all his estate that he has granted to another, when in truth he
has granted none at all; this is void. And so also it is if there be an estate
and no possession: as if a disseisor make a lease for years to begin at
Michaelmas, and before 4 H. 7. 10.
the day the disseisee does confirm the estate of the lessee for years; it is
said this is not a good confirmation, sed quaere. 3. The Dier 109.
confirmor must have such an estate and property in the thing whereof the
confirmation is made as he may be thereby enabled to confirm the estate of the
confirmee, as the lessors, feoffors, and disseisees in the cases before have,
otherwise the confirmation is void. And therefore if the heir of the disseisee
during the life of the disseisee 29 H. 6. 62.
confirm to the disseisor; this is no good confirmation to perfect his estate,
albeit the disseisee die and the right of the land descend to his heir
afterward. So if lands be given to A and B his wife and the Co. 9. 138.
heirs of their bodies issuing, the remainder in fee to A, and A levy a fine
with Proclamations and die, and she within five years does enter and claim,
and after the conusee does confirm the estate made by the first gift to the
wife To have and to hold according to the same; this confirmation is to no
purpose. So if lessee for life make a lease for thirty years, and after he in
reversion and the Co. super Lit. 296.
lessee for life lease for sixty years; in this case he cannot confirm the
lease for thirty years because he has granted it before for sixty years. And
hence it is also that the confirmation by one Jointenant Jointenants.
Fitz Confirmation 15. Lit. Sect. 523. Dier 263.
of the estate of his companion works nothing, for their estates are equal,
and each has interest in the whole land. And yet if one Jointenant confirm
the whole land to his companion To have and to hold the land to him and his
heirs; this shall amount to a Grant, and so will be good to pass his moity.
And hence Lit. Sect. 543. Co. super Lit. 308.
it is also, that if a man grant a rent charge out of his land to another for
life, and then confirm his estate without any clause of distress (for by a
clause of distress a grant of a new rent may be made) To have and to hold to
him in fee simple, or fee tail; that this is void, for the confirmor has no
reversion of the rent in him. 4. The precedent estate must continue until the
confirmation come, as in all the cases of voidable estates made the
confirmation must be before the estates be made void by entry etc. or otherwise
the confirmation will be void. And therefore if lessee for life or years
surrender, or the disseisee enter upon the disseisor, and after the lessor or
the disseisee confirm the estate of the lessee or disseisor; this confirmation
comes too late. 5. The estate precedent and Co. 5. 15. Lit. Sect. 607.
that which is to be confirmed must be lawful and not prohibited by any act of
Parliament. And therefore if a spiritual person, as Prebend, or the like make
a lease not warranted by the Statutes; the confirmation of the Deane and
Chapter will not help nor amend it. And if tenant in tail make avoidable
lease, and after confir^ it himself; this is voidable still. 6. There must be
apt words of confirmation in the deed or Instrument. And herein note Lit. Sect.
531. 532. 10 E. 4. 3. Co. super Lit. 295. Dier 116. Co. 1. 147. 5. 15.
that albeit the words Confirmavi, ratificasse and approbasse be the most
significant and proper words to make this conveyance, yet such as are made by
other general words may make a good confirmation. And therefore it is agreed,
that a deed made by the words Dedi, Concessi, or Demisi, may make a good
confirmation. And therefore that if the disteisee, coparcener, or lessor make a
deed of the land by the word Dedi, or Concessi to the disseisor, other
coparcener, or lessee for life, and deliver the deed; this is a good
confirmation without livery of seisin. Also if a feoffment be made to A Livery
of seism.
to the use of B and his heirs upon condition, and before the condition broken
the feoffor and B do join in the grant of a rent charge, and after the
condition is broken; in this case the law does interpret this a good grant from
B and a good confirmation of the feoffor without any words of confirmation. So
if tenant for life do grant a rent to him in reversion, and he by deed does
grant it to another and his heirs in fee; in this case the law does construe
this a good grant and a confirmation also. And in these cases Lit. Sect. 519.
Co. super Lit. 296.
of confirmations of estates, if it be by the disseisee to the disseisor, it is
good without any words of heirs, as if the disseisee confirm the estate of
the disseisor, or confirm the land unto him, and say not To him and his
heirs; this is an effectual confirmation to him and his heirs for ever. And
if a lessee for life or a disseisor make a lease for life, or years, etc. and
he in the reversion, or the disseisee confirm their estates, and not the land,
and without any Habendum or limitation of estate; this is good for so long as
the estates do continue. But it is most safe always to express the estate. i.
to say Co. 1. 147.
To have and to hold the land to him and his heirs, or for life etc. as the
agreement is. If lessee for life grant a rent to one and his heirs out of the
land, and the lessor does confirm the estate, or this rent charge, this does
make the estate of the rent sure. And so also if he do confirm the rent, and
say To have and to hold to him and his heirs; this is a good confirmation. But
if he confirm the rent, To have and to hold to him in fee, without naming his
heirs, hereby his estate is not bettered.

If the lessor confirm the estate of his lessee for life with this Co. 9. 139.
F. N. B. 136. Co. 8. 76. Dier 10.
clause, To hold without impeachment of wast; this is a good confirmation to
change the quality of the estate so far as to make it dispunishable of wast.
So if the Lord paramount confirm the estate of 2. To enlarge the estate of him
to whom it is made.
the mesne with clause of acquitall. And so if lessee for years, or for
another life be without impeachment of wast, and the lessor confirm to him
for his own life, and omit that clause; hereby this privilege is gone and the
estate is become punishable for the wast.

This kind of confirmation Crescens must have all the qualities of the former:
and there must be also in this case a privity between Co. 9. 142. super Lit.
305. Dier 145. 290. Co. 6. 15. Lit. Sect. 533. 532. 523. Dier 263.
the confirmor and the confirmee. And then it may enlarge the estate of him to
whom it is made, as from the estate at will to an estate for years, or to a
greater estate; from an estate for years to an estate for life, or to a
greater estate; from an estate for life to an estate in tail, or in fee; and
from an estate tail to an estate in fee; and these confirmations are good. But
in all these kind of confirmations care must be had of the manner of penning
them, and that in every such deed there be a limitation of the estate. i. That
these words be inserted To have and to hold the tenements etc. to him and his
heirs, or to him and the heirs of his body, or to him for term of life, or
years, as the agreement is; for if lessee for life make a lease for years,
and then lessee for life and he in reversion confirm the land To have and to
hold to him for life, or to him and his heirs; these words will make the
estate to increase. But if the confirmation be made to the lessee for life or
for years of Lit. Sect. 524. 545. Plow. 540.
his term or estate and not of the land. As when he does confirm his estate
To have and to hold his estate to him and his heirs, this does not increase
the estate. And yet if he confirm the land To have and to hold the land to him
and his heirs; this will increase the estate. Et sic de similibus.

If the husband have an estate of land for life or years in the Co. super Lit.
299. plow. 160. Lit. Sect. 525. Fitz. Confirmation 7. 17.
right of his wife, or to them both for life, and a confirmation to him alone,
of his estate, or of the land To have and to hold the land to him and his
heirs; this is a good conveyance of the fee simple to him after the death of
his wife. And if I let land to a woman sole for the term of her life, who
takes a husband, and after I do confirm the estate of the husband and wife
To have and to hold for term of their two lives; this is good, but it shall
enure only to enlarge his estate for term of his life it he survive his wife.
But if one lease to another for life, and after confirm the estate of the
lessee to him and his wife for term of their two lives; this is void as to the
wife.

If one grant a rentcharge out of his land for life, and after the Lit. Sect.
548, 549.
grantor confirm the estate of the grantee in the rent without any clause of
distress To have and to hold to him in fee simple or fee tail; this
confirmation is not effectual to enlarge the estate. But if a man be seized of
an old rentcharge or rent-service, and grant the same first for life, and
after confirm the estate of the grantee in fee simple, or fee tail; this is
good and will enlarge the estate accordingly.

If tenant for life grant a rent out of the land to one and his heirs Co. 1.
147.
during the life of the lessee for life, and after the lessor confirm the rent
to the grantee and his heirs; it seems the estate is not hereby enlarged, but
when the tenant for life does die the rent shall cease.

This kind of confirmation may be made by the same words as Co. super Lit. 301.
Fitz. Confirmotion 23.
the former, viz. by the words, Give Grant, or Demise. But neither of these may
be made by the words, Surrender, Release, Exchange, or the like, for these are
peculiar words destined to a special end being proper and peculiar manner of
conveyances. And yet if I that am a lessor do say to my lessee for years by my
deed, I will that you shall hold the land for your life; this is a good
confirmation to increase the estate by this word volo only. So if I grant to my
lessee for years, that he shall hold the land for term of his life; this
without any other words is a good confirmation.

By a confirmation the Lord may confirm the estate of his tenant Co. 9. 142.
Lit. Sect. 538.
which holds by Knights service to hold in Socage, or to hold for 3. To
diminish or a bridge the services, etc.
a less rent, or to hold at common law where before he did hold in ancient
demesne, and such a confirmation is good. But such a confirmation as is to hold
by new services, as a rose for money, or the like, is not good for that
purpose. And in this case there must be also a privity. And therefore if there
be Lord mesne and tenant, and the Lord confirm the estate of the tenant to
hold by less services; this is void. And if the Lord confirm to his tenant
after he is disseised before his entry, to hold by less services; this is void.

A confirmation may be by apt words in case of a lease for years for part of
the time, but in case of a free hold it cannot be so. And 6. Where a
confirmation may be good for part of the estate or for part of the thing. Or
not.
Co. 5. 81, 82. Lit. Sect. 5 19. Co. super Lit. ^97. Lit. Sect. 520.
so also it may extend to part of the thing before in estate. And therefore if
a disseisor, tenant in tail, husband of the land he has in the right of his
wife, or lessee for life make a lease for years, and the disseisee, issue in
tail, wife, or less or make a confirmation of all the land for part of the
time, or of part of the land for all the time; this confirmation is good. But
if any such person make a lease for life, gift in tail, etc. the disseisee
cannot confirm part of the estate but he must confirm all. And therefore if
he confirm his estate for one hour, it is a confirmation of the whole estate.
And so also if he confirm the land to the disseisor himself but one hour,
one week, one year, or for his life, etc. this is a good confirmation of the
estate for ever. And if it be a lease for years that is confirmed care must be
had to the manner of the confirmation, for if the confirmation be of the estate
or the term for one hour; this is a good confirmation for the whole time: and
therefore the confirmation must be had of the land To have and to hold for part
of the term; and being so made it may be good for that time only and no longer.

If I make a feoffment on condition and before the condition broken 11 H. 7.
29. Co. 1. 146. 9. 142.
7. The force and virtue of it. And how it shall enure and be construed and
taken.
I confirm the estate of the feoffee absolutely; this will not extinguish the
condition. And yet if the condition be broken first so as my entry is lawful;
in this case the confirmation will extinguish the condition. And if the feoffee
make a feoffment over absolutely to another, and I confirm the estate of the
second feoffee whether it be before or after the condition broken; by this the
condition is discharged.

If the Lord confirm the estate of his tenant in the tenements, or one that
has a rent, common, or profit out of land confirm to Lit. Sect. 535. 536. 537.
the terretenant his estate; in these cases notwithstanding this confirmation
the signiory, rent, common, etc. do continue, and this shall not enure to
extinguish it.

If the disseisee and a stranger disseise the heir of the disseisor, Co. super
Lit. 298.
and the disseisee confirm the estate of his companion; this shall not enure
to extinguish the suspended right of the disseisee, but when the heir of the
disseisor shall reenter it shall be revived. And if the grantee of a rent
charge and a stranger disseise the tenant of the land, and the grantee confirm
the estate of his companion^ this shall not enure to the rent suspended to
extinguish it, but after the reentry of the tenant the rent shall be revived.

If a man hold his land of me by Knights service, rent, suit of court Co. super
Lit. 305.
etc. and I confirm his estate to hold of me by Knights service only for all
manner of services and demands; in this case albeit this do abridge the
service yet it shall not be construed to take away wardship, relief, aid to
mary my daughter and make my son Knight and the like.

If I have an estate in land for my life, and he in the reversion does See
before.
confirm the estate to me and my wife for the term of our lives; this shall
enure only as a confirmation of my estate and not so as to give any estate to
my wife. But if I have a lease for life or years in right of my wife, and he
in the reversion do confirm the estate to me and my wife To have and to hold
to us for our lives; this shall enure not only to confirm the estate but also
to create an estate to me after my wives death: And in the case of a lease for
years it makes our estate joint, but in the case of a lease for life I shall
take by way of enlargement of estate for my life after my wives death. And if
in this case the confirmation be to me and my wife To have and to hold the land
to us two and our heirs; this shall enure to us in fee simple as Jointenants.
If land be let to husband Co. super Lit. 299.
and wife To have and to hold the one moity to the husband for his life and the
other moity to the wife for her life, and the lessor confirm to them both
their estate in the land To have and to hold to them and their heirs; in this
case as to the one moity it does enure only to the husband and his heirs, but
as to the other moity they shall be Jointenants. And yet if such a lease for
life be made to two men by several moities, and the lessor confirm their
estates in the land To have and to hold to them and their heirs; by this they
are tenants in common of the inheritance.

If the disseisee confirm the estate of the disseisor To have and to Lit.
Sect. 419.
hold to him and his heirs of his body engendered, or To have and to hold to
him for term of his life; this shall enure to him as a fee simple and shall
confirm his estate for ever.

If my disseisor make a lease for life the remainder over in fee, and Co. super
Lit. 298. 297.
I confirm the estate of the tenant for life; this shall not enure to, nor
avail him in remainder. And if the disseisor make a gift in tail the remainder
to the right heirs of the tenant in tail, and the disseisee confirm the
estate of the tenant in tail; this shall not extend to the fee simple, no more
then if the disseisor make a gift in tail the remainder for life the remainder
to the right heirs of the tenant in tail, and the disseisee confirm the
estate of the tenant in tail; for this shall extend only to the estate tail,
and not to the remainder for life or in fee. But if the disseisee in the first
case confirm the estate of him in the remainder; this shall enure to and
avail the tenant for life. And so if a disseisor make a lease for life and
keep the reversion, and after the disseisee does confirm to the disseisor;
this shall enure to the tenant for life. And so if a disseisor make a lease for
life to A and B and the disseisee confirm the estate of A; this shall enure to
B and make his estate good also in the other moity. And so if there be two
disseisors and the disseisee confirm the estate of one of them without saying
more; this shall enure to them both. But if the confirmation be of the land To
have and to hold the land to one; in this case it may enure to him alone. So if
a disseisor enfeoffe A and B and the heirs of B and the disseisee confirm the
estate of B, albeit it be but for his life; yet this shall enure to both and to
the whole fee simple.

If a lease be made for life to A the remainder to B for life, and the lessor
confirm their estates in the land To have and to hold to Co. super Lit. 299.
them and their heirs; this shall enure as to the one moity to A in fee after
the death of B, and as to the other moity in fee to B after the death of A.

If lands be given to two men and the heirs of their two bodies Co. Idem.
begotten and the donor does confirm their estates in the land To have and to
hold the land to them two and their heirs; it seems this shall enure to them
as a joint estate for their lives and after for several Inheritances.

If the lessee for life, or the disseisor does make an absolute lease Lit.
Sect. 516. 521. 519, 520. 541. Co. 579.
for years, and he in the reversion or the disseisee does confirm the estate
of the lessee for years; this makes the lease good for all the time. So if the
disseisor makes a lease for life, and the disseisee does confirm the estate of
the lessee for life; this makes the estate good for the life. And if he in
reversion confirm the estate of the termor but one hour; this does make it
good for all the term. And if an estate for life or in fee be confirmed but
for one hour; it is a good confirmation for all the estate. And if the
disseisee confirm the estate of the disseisor To have and to hold for one
hour, year, or for life, or in tail; this is a good confirmation for ever
and makes his estate unavoidable. And yet if the disseisee confirm the land
Habendum the land for life, or in tail, etc. contra.

If a voidable lease be made for forty years, and the lessor confirm ^ier 52.
339 Co. 5. 81.
the term for twenty years; this is a good confirmation of the whole term.
But if he confirm the land for twenty years, it No^e.
may be good for that tine only and no longer; wherein as in diverse other cases
before observe that the very words whereby the confirmation is made are much to
be heeded, for Parols font plea.

If tenant in tail or for life of land lets it for years, and after Lit.
Sect. 606, 607. 610.
confirm the land to the lessee for years To have and to hold to the lessee
and his heirs for ever; by this the lessee has only an estate for term of
the life of the tenant in tail or for life, and therein his lease for years
is extinct.

If tenant for life does grant a rent to another and his heirs during Co. 1.
147. super Li. 301.
the life of the tenant for life, and the lessor confirm to the grantee and
his heirs; this shall be construed to be an estate for life only and no
enlargement of the estate. But if tenant for life grant a rentcharge in fee,
and the lessor confirm it; this shall be construed to be a confirmation of the
fee simple.

See more in Exposition of Deeds cap. 5. in toto. And more also in the chapter
of Release, whereunto we are now come in the next place.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Release.
A Release is the giving or discharging of the right or action Terms of the
law. West Symb. lib. 2. Sect. 466.
1. Release. Quid.
which a man has or may have or claim against another man or that which is
his. Or it is the conveyance of a man's interest or right which he has unto a
thing to another that has the possession thereof or some estate therein. And
this albeit it may be made by other words, as Dedi, Concessi, or Renunciasse,
or such like, yet it is most commonly and properly made by these words
Remisisse, Relaxasse, and quietum clamasse, all which are much to one purpose.
He that Relessor, Relessee.
makes the release is sometimes called the relessor, and he to whom it is made
the relessee.

There are two kinds of releases like unto those of confirmation, Co. super
Lit. 264. 265.
2. Quotuplex.
viz. a release express or in deed, and that is a purposed release, when the
act done or deed made is intended a release. And this is always done by
writing. And then it is defined by some to be an Instrument whereby estates,
rights, titles, actions, and other things be sometimes extinguished, sometimes
transferred, sometimes abridged, and sometimes enlarged, which is after this
manner. Noverint etc. me A de Bremisisse, relaxasse and omnino de me [vel
prome] and hered. meis quietum clamasse C de D totum jus, titulum and clameum
que habui, habeo vel quovismodo in futuro habere potero de and in unto mesuagio
cum pertin in F etc. And a release implied or in law, and that is when the law
by intendment and construction and by way of consequent does make a release of
an act done to another purpose. And this is sometimes by writing, and sometimes
without writing. These releases also are sometimes of a bare and naked right,
and sometimes of a right accompanied with some estate or interest. And
sometimes they are of actions real or in lands or tenements, and sometimes of
actions personal of or in goods or chattells, and sometimes of actions mixed
partly in the realty and partly in the personalty.

A release is much of the nature of a confirmation, for in most 3. The nature
and operation of it in general.
Co. super Lit. 193. 273. 277. Co. 1. 147. Lit. Sect. 606. 459. 465, 466. 446.
things they agree and produce the like effects. This therefore is said
sometimes to enure by way of mitter le estate. i. by way of giving or
transferring or enlargement of an estate or interest, and so does give some new
interest or estate to him to whom it is made. And sometimes it is said to enure
by way of mitter le droit only. i. by way of giving, transferring and
discharging of a right title or entry unto him to whom it is made. And so it
does sometimes perfect an estate that was imperfect and defeasible before, and
enure by way of entry and feoffement. And sometimes also it does enure to make
a conditional estate absolute. And sometimes also it does work and enure by
way of extinguishment or discharge: And then also sometimes it does enure by
way of discharge or extinguishment as against all persons, and so as that
whereof all persons may take advantage. And sometimes it does enure only as a
discharge against some persons only, and as to or against other persons by way
of Mitter le droit. And some of these in deed enure by way of extinguishment,
for that he to whom the release is made cannot have the thing released. And
some of them have some quality of such releases and are said to enure by way of
extinguishment, but in truth do not, for that he to whom the release is made
may receive and take the thing released. And in some cases also a release like
a confirmation does enure by way of abridgement. But a man cannot bar
himself hereby of a right that shall come to him hereafter. And therefore it
is held that these words used in releases [quae quovismodo in futuro habere
potero] are to no purpose.

Lands, tenements and hereditaments themselves may be given 4. What things may
be released. Or not. And how.
and transferred by way of release, and all rights and titles to Co. 10. 48.
super Lit. 268. 269. 266.
lands may be given, barred and discharged by release, and so also may rights
and titles to goods and chatte^ls. Also all actions, real, personal and mixed,
may be given, discharged or extinct by release; for howsoever rights and titles
of entry cannot be granted by act of the party, nor any action may be granted
from one man to another by act of the law or the party, yet all these may be
released to the terretenant. And a right to a free hold or Inheritance,
seigniory or rent in presenti or futuro may be released five manner of ways,
and the first three ways without any privity at all. 1. To the tenant of the
free hold in deed or in law. 2. To him in the remainder. 3. To him in
reversion. The other two ways in respect of privity without any estate or
right, as by demandant to vouchee, donor to dones after the donee has
discontinued.

Also conditions annexed to estates, powers of revocation of Bro. Release in
toto.
uses, warranties, covenants, tenures, services, rents, commons, and other
profits to be taken out of lands may be discharged, extinguished and determined
by release to the tenant of the land etc.

Also possibilities of land etc. if they be near and common Co. 10. 47. 51,
52, 5. 7^. 71. super Lit. 265. Lit. Sect. 446. Co. 1. 111. 111. Dier 57. Co. 1.
113. 174.
possibilities albeit they be not grantable over to another person, yet may
they be released to him that has the present estate of the land. And therefore
if a man possessed of a term devise it to A for life, the remainder to B and
his heirs males during the term; in this case albeit B may not grant his
interest over yet he may release it to A. And if A devise to B twenty pound
when he comes to the age of twenty four years, and die; in this case B after
he is of the age of twenty one years may release this legacy. So a covenant to
do a future act may be released before it be broken. And it seems also the
conusee of a Statute or recognisance may release to a feoffee of part of the
land and so bar himself of execution of that land. And if I grant to I S
that if he do such a thing he shall have an annuity of twenty pound for his
life; in this case it seems I S may release this before the condition be
performed. And if I make a feoffment to I S to diverse uses with power to revoke
it; I may release this power to one that has an estate of free hold in
possession, reversion or remainder in the land. And yet if I make a feoffment
to I S with proviso that if B revoke that the uses shall cease; in this case B
cannot release this power. And a remote possibility that is altogether
incertaine cannot be released. And therefore if the son of the disseisee
release to the disseisor in the life time of his father; this release is void.
And so if the conusee of a Statute release his right to the land of the conusor
before execution; this release is void. And so if a plaintiff release to a
Bail in the Kings Bench before Judgment given, this release is void.

So if one promise to pay me ten pound upon the surrender Adjudge Tr. 14.
Jac. B. R.
of my land to him, and that if he shall sell it for above fifty pound that
then he shall pay me ten pound more, and I release this to him before he do
sell it and before I do surrender; im this case this does not release the
second promise because it is not releasable.

Also debts, legacies, and other duties may be released and See in^^
discharged thereby before or after they become due. And therefore a rent or
annuity may be released before the day of payment. And so also may a debt due
by obligation: Judgments, Executions, Recognisances, and the like, by apt
words be discharged by release.

If the charge or duty grow by record the discharge and release 5. How and
after what manner these things may be released.
thereof must be by record also. And if it grow by writing the discharge and
release must be by writing also. Nihil est magis rationi consentaneum quam
eodem modo quodque dissolvere quo constatum est. And therefore a duty growing
by a verbal agreement may in some cases be released by word without writing.
But regularly lands and tenements cannot be given, nor rights and titles to
lands, and actions be discharged by release without a deed in writing.

A release that does enure by way of mitter le estate, mitter le Condition.
Defeasance.
Co. super Lit. 274, Perk. Sect. 718. Lit. 467. Co. 1. 111. 21 H. 7. 24.
droit, or extinguishment, may be made upon condition or with a defeasance, so
as the condition or defeasance be contained in the release or delivered at the
same time with it, for no defeasance made after can avoid the force of a
release made before. And yet a release may be delivered as an escrow, and so
the force of it may be suspended for a time. But a release of a condition may
not be made upon a condition. Nor may a release of a chattell be upon a
condition subsequent, but it may be upon a condition precedent. Curia. B. R.
Hill. 9 Car. Barkley and Perkes case. Dier 307. 21 H. 7. 24. Co. super Lit. 274.
Lit. Sect. 467.
And therefore if a man release a debt to another upon condition that the
relessor may have such a debt owing from a third person to the relessee; this
is a good condition.

A release of all actions may be made until a time past, as until the first
of May last, or until the day of the date of the release; and this will
discharge all actions till then and none after. But a release cannot be made of
a right or action for a part of an estate or for a time only, as for one year,
or until Michaelmas next, or the like, for a release of such a thing for one
day or for one hour is a release of it for ever. And yet a man may release his
right in a part of the land. And therefore if a man be disseised of two acres,
he may release his right in one of them and enter into the other acre. Also a
release in the nature of an acquitance may Adjudged Barkley and Perkes case.
Hill. 9 Car. B. R.
be of part of a debt. And therefore if one be bound in an obligation of four
hundred pound to pay two hundred pound at Michaelmas, and at Christmas after
the obligee by his deed releaseth three hundred ninty pound parcel of the said
four hundred pound; this is a good release for so much and no more.

6. What releases may be made of lands or tenements. And what shall be said a
good release in deed. Or not. And by what words it may be made. 1. When it does
enure by way of enlargement or passing of an estate. 1. In respect of the
estate of the relessor.
In every good release in deed howsoever it enure these things are requisite.
1. That there be a good relessor, and a good relessee, and a thing to be
released. 2. That the deed be well sealed, delivered etc. And if it tend and
enure by way of enlargement of estate, then these things are further required
to make the release good. 1. He that does make the release must have such an
estate in himself as out of which such an estate may be Dier 251.
derived and granted to the relessee as is intended by the release. as if he
have the reversion in fee of lands, he may release to a tenant for years and
thereby increase his estate to an estate for life or in tail, or he may pass
his whole fee simple by the release. But if there be lessee for years rendering
rent, and the reversion is Per Justice Jones 5 Car. Dier idem.
granted for life the remainder over in fee, and the grantee of the reversion
release all his right to him in remainder, and then he in the remainder grant
the reversion, and the tenant for life release to the grantee also; in this
case it seems both these releases are void and cannot enure as releases,
howbeit it may be if they have words of surrender in them they may enure as
surrenders. So if there be lessee for years, the remainder in tail, the
remainder Adjudge Trin. 5 Jac. B. R. Butlers case.
Surrender.
in fee, and the lessee for years being a woman does mary with him in the
remainder in fee, and he in remainder in tail release to him in remainder in
fee; this is a void release. So if tenant for life release to him in remainder
in fee or in tail; it seems this is void and cannot enure as a release. So if
there be tenant for life, Lit. Sect. 598. Plow. 556. Co. super Lit. 345.
the remainder in tail, the remainder in fee, and he in remainder in fee
release to the tenant for life; this will not increase his estate. And if the
tenant in tail in this case release to the tenant for life, his estate shall
be no longer increased hereby then for the life of the tenant in tail. 2. He
to whom the release is made Co. super Lit. 270. 273. 265.
2. In respect of the estate of him to whom the release is made.
must have some estate in possession in deed or in law, or in reversion in
deed, in his own or another right of the lands whereof the release is made to
be as a foundation for the release to stand upon; for a release which must
enure to enlarge an estate cannot work without a possession joined with an
estate. And therefore the relessee must be lessee for life, years, or tenant by
Statute merchant, staple, elegit, or as guardian in chivalry that does hold the
land over for the value, or at least he must be tenant at will. And therefore
if a man let his land to another for term of years Lit. Sect. 459. Plow 423.
Dier 4. 15. H. 7. 14.
to begin presently, and after the lessor or his heir does release to the
lessee (after his entry and being in possession) all his right in the land;
this is good to enlarge the estate according to the time set down in the
release. but if the release be before the term begin, or after the term begin
and before the lessee have entered; (howsoever if any rent be reserved on the
lease it may enure and be good to extinguish that rent) yet it is not good to
enlarge the estate. And yet if a tenant for 20. years in possession make a
lease to B for 10. years, and B enter and he in the reversion release to the
first lessee for years; this is a good release to enlarge the estate. So if a
man make a lease for years the remainder for life or years and the first lessee
does enter; in this case a release to him in remainder is good to enlarge the
estate. So if I grant the reversion of my tenant for life to another for life,
and after release to him and his heirs; this is a good release to enlarge the
estate.

So if a man make a lease for life or years to a feme sole, and Co. super Lit.
273.
she take a husband, and he in the reversion release to the husband and his
heirs; this is a good release to enlarge the estate according to the words of
the release. But if the case be so that a man had an estate in possession of
land, and he be now out of the possession of it, and have but a right only to
it; or if he have a possession only and no estate; or if he have neither estate
nor possession; in these cases a release made to such a one will not avail to
enlarge his estate.

And therefore if a man make a lease for life the remainder for Co super Lit.
270.
life, and the first lessee dies, and the lessor release to him in remainder
for life, before his entry; this is a good release to enlarge his estate, for
he has an estate of free hold in law capable of enlargement by release before
entry. But if there be lessee for life, the remainder Lit. Sect. 451.
for life, the remainder in tail, the remainder in fee, and the lessee for life
is disseised, and during the possession of the disseisor he that has right
does release to one of them in the remainder; this is void. So if lands be
given in tail or leased for life, and the donee Lit. Sect. 455, 456.
or lessee is disseised, and during the possession of the disseisor the donor
or lessor does release all his right to the donee or lessee; this is void and
will not enlarge his estate, howbeit if there be any rent reserved on the
estate it will extinguish the rent. So if the tenant Co. super Lit. 273.
by the courtesy grant over his estate, and after he in reversion does release
to the tenant by the courtesy; in this case his release is void and will not
enlarge his estate. So if an Infant make a lease for life, and the lessee
grants the estate over with warranty, and the Infant at full age does bring a
Dum fuit infra aetatem, and the tenant does vouch the grantor, who does enter
into the warranty, and the demandant being the Infant does release to him and
his heirs; this will not enlarge his estate, for in truth he had no estate
before, and that which is not cannot be enlarged. And if lessee Dier 251.
for life or years, release to him in remainder or reversion; this cannot be
good as a release, howbeit if there be apt words it may amount to a Surrender.
Co. super Lit. 271. Lit. Sect. 461.
And if a man have only an occupation of land as tenant at sufferance, as when
a lessee for years does hold over his term, or the like; no release to him
can work any enlargement of estate, for albeit he have a possession yet has
he no estate, and besides in this case there is no privity: which is the third
thing required in these releases. For as in all Co. super Lit. 296. Lit. Sect.
461.
these releases that enure by way of increase or passing an estate, 3. In
respect of privity.
there must be some estate in the relessor and the relessee, so there must be
some privity in estate between them at the time of the release made, for an
estate without privity is not sufficient. And therefore it must be, between
donor and donee, lessor and lessee, and the like as in the cases before,
between him in reversion and the lessee for life or years, tenant by Statute
Merchant or Staple or by Elegit or Guardian in Chivalry that keeps the land
for the value. And if tenant for life lease for years, and he in the reversion
and Plow. 541.
the tenant for life do join together and release to the lessee for years;
this is a good release to enlarge the estate. So if he Co. super Lit. 273.
in reversion release to the husband that has an estate in the right of his
wife only for life or years; this is a good release. Dier 4. Co. 3. 22.
So if lessee for years make a lease of the land but for part of the term,
the privity continues still, and therefore a release to him is good to enlarge
the estate. But if he assign over all the term then the privity is gone, and
therefore a release made to him afterward is void: And then a release made to
the assignee of the term is good to enlarge the estate. And if a disseisor
make a lease for life or Plow. 540. 14 H. 7. 4. Lit. Sect. 518.
years, and after he and the disseisee join together to make a release to the
lessee for life or years; this is a good release to enlarge the estate. But if
the disseisor in this case make a lease for life or years, and the disseisee
or he that has right release to the tenant for life or years; in this case
the release is void for want of privity. And if there be lessee for years the
remainder for life, and Co. super Lit. 273.
he in reversion release to the lessee for years or him in remainder for life
and his heirs all his right; this is a good release to work an enlargement of
estate. So if one make a lease for life, and grant the reversion for life, and
then the lessor does release to the grantee of the reversion and his heirs;
this is a good release to enlarge the estate of the grantee, and here is
privity enough. If A be Bro. Release 71.
tenant for life, the remainder to B in tail, the remainder to C for life, the
remainder to A in fee, and A die, and his heir does release all his right to B
being in possession; this is a good release and gives the fee simple.

But if A make a lease to B for life, and the lessee makes a lease Co. super
Lit. 273. Lit. Sect. 516.
for years, and after A in the life time of the tenant for life makes a
release to the lessee for years; this release is void and will not enlarge his
estate for want of privity. So if a man make a lease for twenty years, and the
lessee make a lease for ten years, and the first lessor does release to the
second lessee and his heirs; this release is void. So also if the donee in
tail make a lease for his own life, and the donor release to the lessee and
his heirs; this release is void. So also if the donee in tail make a lease
for his own life, and after the donor release to the donee and his heirs; it
seems this is not a good release. Also one Jointenant or coparcener may Bro.
Release 77. Perk. Sect. 84.
release to another and thereby transfer all his estate and give the whole
interest unto his companion; and this is a good release to pass all his or her
part of the land. And if there be three Jointenants in fee and they make a
lease for life, and after two of them release all their right in the land to
the third; this is a good release. So if one make a lease for life to another,
and after the grant the reversion to seven and the tenant for life does atturn,
and after four of the seven release all their right to the other three and
after one of the three release to the other two; these are good releases. So if
a lease for years be made to two, to begin at a day to come, a release by one
of them to the other is good to give all the term and all the land to the
relessee. But it seems one tenant in common 1^ E. 4. 3.
cannot release to another tenant in common.

The fourth thing that is required in such a release is sufficient 4. In
respect of the words ^^ whereby it is made.
4^ Co. super Lit. 273. 264. 301.
words in law not only to make a release, (which is required in all releases)
but also to raise and create a new estate. For this therefore know that all
releases (of what kind soever) are commonly made by these words, Remisisse,
Relaxasse, and quietum clamasse, as being the most ancient and significant
words for this purpose. And a among these the word Release is the most
effectual word, as that which does include the other two, and as that which is
the proper and peculiar word for this kind of conveyance. But there are other 9
H. 6. 35. Dier 116. Lit. Sect. 544. Co. super Lit. 264. Dier 307. Co. 9. 52.
words also by which a release may be made, as Renunciare, Acquietare, etc. And
therefore it is held that if one have common in another land, and he by deed
release it to him thus: Renuntio Communiam meam etc. this is a good release.
And if the lessor do but grant to his lessee for life that he shall be
discharged of the rent; this is a good release of the rent. And it is a rule,
That by what words a debt or duty may be created, by words of a contrary
signification it may be released. And therefore if one do knowledge himself
to be satisfied and discharged a debt, this is a good release of the debt. And
for words to raise the estate it is usual and most Co. super Lit. 273. Lit.
Sect. 465. 468, 469.
safe to specify in the deed what estate he to whom the release is made shall
have; and in most cases this is needful: for it is generally true, That when a
release does enure by way of enlargment of estate no inheritance in fee simple
or fee tail can pass without apt words of inheritance. And therefore if I
make a lease of land to another for his life, and after I release to him all my
right without more saying in the release; hereby his estate is not enlarged.
But if I release to him and his heirs; by this he has a fee simple. And if I
release to him and the heirs of his body; by this he has an estate tail. But
where a release works by way of mitter le estate there in some cases there
needs not any words of inheritance, as in cases where releases are made between
Jointenants or coparceners, as where a joint estate is made to the husband and
wife and a third person and their heirs, and the third person does release all
his right to the husband alone, or to the wife alone. So if there be three
Jointenants, and one of them does release to one of the other two; in all these
and such like cases there needs not any limitation of the estate, for the
release is good without it.

In every good release in deed that does tend and enure to give Lit. Sect. 466
Co. super Lit. 265. Co. 5. 70, 71. 1. 112. 8. 132.
3. When it does enure by way of passing and extinguishment of a right or title
only. 1. In respect of the estate of the relessor.
discharge or extinguish any right or title of lands it is also further
requisite,

1. That he that does make it has at the time of the release made some right
or title to release. As where one does disseise me of land, and I release to
him all my right in the land; this is a good release. So if one disseise my
tenant for life, and I (being the next in remainder or reversion in fee) do
release to him that did make the disseisin; this is a good release. So if the
husband make a lease for life, and then take a wife and dies, and the wife
release her dower to him in reversion; this is a good release. And so also if
after the marriage a man make a lease for life the remainder in fee, and she
release all her right to him in remainder in fee or to him in reversion; this
is a good release and will bar her for ever.

And therefore if the Relessor have only a possibility of a right, Lit. Sect.
446. Co. 10. 47. 42. super Lit. 265.
or a right happen to come to him after the release; this is not sufficient to
make the release good. And therefore if the father be disseised, and the son
before his fathers death release all his right to the disseisor, and after the
father dies, so that the right does descend; this is no good release to bar
the Relessor of his right. So if there be grandfather, father and son, and the
father disseise the grandfather, and make a feoffement, and the son release in
the life time of his father, and after the father and grandfather die; this
release in this case will not bar him. So if a lease Co. 10. 57.
be made for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I S, and the lessee is
disseised, and the eldest son of I S living, his father does release to the
disseisor; this release is void. So if the conusee of a statute etc. do
release to the conusor all his right in the land; this is void Co. 5. 70.
and he may sue execution after notwithstanding. Or if the Relessor Co. super
Lit. 265.
have only a power, this is not sufficient to make the release good. And
therefore if a man by his will devise that his executors shall sell his land,
and dies, and the executors release all their right and title in the land to
the heirs; this release is void.

2. In all cases of a release of a bare right of a freehold in lands 2. In
respect of the estate of him to whom the release is made.
or tenements, he to whom the release is made must at the time of Co. super
Lit. 267.
the making thereof in any case have the freehold in deed or in law in
possession or some state in remainder or reversion in deed (and not in right
only) in fee simple, fee tail, or for life of the lands whereof the release is
made; for rights of entry, and actions, and the like, are not to be transferred
to strangers, but are thus to be released, and such releases are good. As if
the disseisee release to the disseisor himself who has the freehold in deed,
or to the heir of the disseisor before his entry, who has the freehold in law,
or to the lessee for life of the disseisor; these releases are good. So if a
disseisor make a lease to A and his heirs during the life of B, and A die, and
the disseisee release to his heir before his entry; this is a good release. So
if a fine sur conusance de droit come ceo etc. or sur conusance de droit only
(which is a Co. super Lit. 266. 275. Lit. sect. 448. 1 H 6. 4. Dier 302.
feoffment on record) be levied, or if tenant for life by agreement of him in
the reversion surrender to him in the reversion, or if a man do bargain and
sell his land by deed indented and enrolled, or uses are raised by covenant on
good considerations; in all these cases the conusee, him in reversion,
bargainee, and cestuy que use, have a freehold in law in them before entry. And
therefore a release to them of the right of the land by him that has it is
good, and will bar the Relessor. But otherwise it is in cases of Exchange,
Partition, or upon Livery within the view, for in these cases no release is
good until an actual entry made, for till then they have neither freehold in
right nor law. So if a disseisor make a gift Lit. Sect. 449
in tail, or lease for life or years of the land, and keep the reversion, and
then the disseisee or his heir release to the disseisor all his right; this is
a good release to bar his right for ever. So if Co. super Lit. 260. Lit. Sect.
455, 456.
the heir of the disseisor be disseised, and the first disseisee do after
release to him all his right; this is a good release to bar him. So if a donee
in tail discontinue in fee, and the donor release to the discontinuee and die;
this is a good release against the donor. So if the donee in tail be disseised,
and after the donor release to the donee all his right: this is good, but in
this case nothing of Extinguishment.
the reversion will pass by the release, for the donee had then nothing but a
right. But if any rent be reserved on the estate tail, the rent is gone by the
release. So if a lease be made to one for life rendering rent, and the lessee is
disseised, and the lessor release to the lessee and his heirs all his right; in
this case albeit the rent be extinct, yet nothing of the right of the reversion
does pass. And yet if a woman that has right of dower release to the guardian
in Chivalry: this is a good release, and her right or title of dower is gone.
But if a disseisor make a lease for years, and the disseisee release to the
lessee for years; this release is void because he has no freehold. But if he
make a lease for life, and the disseisee release to the lessee for life; this
is a good release. So also a release to the disseisor after the lease for years
made is good. And Co. super Lit. 265.
if lessee for years be ousted, and he in the reversion disseised, and the
disseisor make a lease for years, and the first lessee release to him; this is
a good release. Also in some cases a release made to Lit. Sect. 448, 449, 450,
451. Co. 8. 151.
one that has neither freehold in deed, nor freehold in law, is good when he
has an estate in reversion or remainder, as in the case before, where a
release is made by the disseisee to the disseisor after he has made an estate
for life. So if the demandant in a real action release to the tenant that
comes in by receipt upon a prayer of aid or voucher upon a warranty; this is
good. And yet if it be before the receipt, or entry into the warranty, or it be
by any other besides the demandant, it is void. So if the tenant in a real
action alien hanging the precipe quod reddat against him, and after alienation
the plaintiff release all his right in the land to him, this is a good release.
So if a disseisor make a lease for life, the remainder to another for life, the
remainder to a third in tail, the remainder to a fourth in fee, and the
disseisee release to either of them in remainder; this is a good release. But
if in this case tenant for life be disseised, and after he that has right (the
possession being in the disseisor) does release to either of them in remainder;
this is a void release. But in all the cases of a release of a bare Co. super
Lit. 275. Lit. Sect. 470, 471. Co. 10. 48.
3. In respect of privity.
right to him that has an estate of a freehold in deed or in law, generally
there needs no privity to make the release good: as in the cases before of a
release made to the tenant for life of the disseisor, and them that follow. For
if tenant for life make a lease to another for life of the lessee, the
remainder over in fee, and the first lessor release al his right to him to whom
the tenant made the lease for life; this is a good release and a perpetual
bar, albeit the release be not to him and his heirs. And so it is in case of a
reversion.

If lessee for years be ousted, and he in the reversion disseised, and the
disseisor make a lease for years, and the lessee that is ousted does release to
the lessee of the disseisor; this is a good release. And yet if the disseisee
do release to the lessee for years of the disseisor; this is void.

If lessee for a thousand years be ousted by the lessor, and he make a lease
for two years, and the lessee for a thousand years release unto him; this is a
good release. But if a lessor disseise his lessee for life, and make a lease
for a thousand years, and the lessee for life release to this lessee of a
thousand years; this release is void.

If one be disseised, and after another does disseise him, and the Co. super
Lit. 277. Lit. Sect. 473. 470, 471, 478.
disseisee release to the last disseisor; this is a good release. So if A
disseise B who infeoffeth C with warranty, who infeoffeth D with warranty, and
E disseiseth D to whom B the first disseisee releaseth; this is a good release,
and does defeat all the mean estates and warranties. So if my disseisor lease
for life, and the lessee for life alien in fee, and I release to the alienee
all my right etc. this is a good release and will bar me of my entry: but if my
entry be gone, as if I lease for life, and my lessee be disseised, and that
disseisor is disseised, and I release to the second disseisor; in this case the
first disseisor may enter upon the second. So if my disseisor in the case
aforesaid make a lease for life, and the lessee for life makes a feoffment to
two, and I release to one of the feoffees; this is a good release and will bar
me and my disseisor also. So if tenant for life let the land to another for the
life of the lessee, the remainder to another in fee, and the lessor release to
his tenant for life; this is a good release.

If one that has a son within age be disseised and die, and the disseisor die
seized, and the land descend to his heir, and a stranger abate, to whom the son
when he comes of age does release; this is a good release. So if one be
disseised by an infant which does alien in fee; and the alienee die seized, and
his heir enters, the disseisor being within age, and the disseisee release to
the heir of the alienee; this is a good release. But where an inheritance or 9
H. 6. 43.
an estate for life is released to one that is but tenant for years, the
release is not good without privity. And therefore if tenant for Co. 10. 48.
life or in fee release to the lessee for years of his disseisor; this is not
good. But the release of a term of years to the lessee for years of him that
does eject him is good enough without privity, as in the case before.

But here note that in cases of a void release of a right to an inheritance Co.
super Lit. 265.
Warranty.
or freehold, where there is a warranty contained in the deed, the warranty may
be good, and be used by way of rebutter, albeit the release be void. As if the
son of the disseisee release with warranty in the life time of his father, or
there be grandfather, father and son, and the father disseise the grandfather,
and make a lease with warranty and die; in both these cases albeit the son be
not barred by the release, yet he is barred by the warranty.

4. Such words as will make a good release in the cases of releases Co. super
Lit. sect. 467.
4. In respect of the words whereby it is made.
that enure by way of enlargement of estate will make a good release in these
cases. And note that this kind of release is good without any limitation or
specifying of the estate, for by a release of all a man's right without saying
To have and to hold to him and his heirs etc. in all the cases before, he that
makes the release is barred of his right for ever, for if I be seized of an
estate in fee by wrong, and he that has right release to me all his right,
albeit it be but for one hour, yet this is a good release for ever.

7. What Releases may be made of other things. And what shall be said a good
Release in Deed of such things. Or not. And by what words. Of a seigniory,
rent-service, common, or the like.
If there be Lord and tenant, and the Lord release to the tenant Lit. sect.
480. Co. super Lit. 280. 305. Perk. sect. 70.
all his right that he has in the seigniory, or all his right that he has in
the land etc, this is a good release to extinguish the seigniory. And in this
case there needs no words of inheritance or limitation, for by release of all
the right in the seigniory; the same is extinct for ever, without saying [to
him and his heirs]. And yet in this case the Lord may by apt words release his
seigniory to the tenant only in tail, or for life, and it shall be good so
long. But if a Lord grant to his tenant that he shall do his suit to another
Manor of the Lords, or that the tenant shall give him yearly twelve pence for
his suit; this grant will not extinguish and determine the services or tenure.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant be disseised, and Lit. sect. 457.
Co. 10. 48. super Lit. 268.
after the Lord release all his right etc. to the tenant; by this release the
service or seigniory is extinct, for albeit a right regularly cannot be
released to him that has but a bare right, yet a seigniory may be released and
extinct to him that has but a bare right in the land. But if the tenant make a
feoffment in fee, and then the Lord release all his right etc. to the tenant;
this is not good to extinguish the seigniory or services, but it will discharge
all the arrearages.

If a rentcharge, common of pasture, or any other profit apprender Lit. sect.
480. 536, 537. Co. super Lit. 305. Lit. sect. 455, 456. Co. super Lit. 273.
be issuing out of my land, and he that has it does release it to me; this is
a good release and will extinguish it. But if I be disseised of the land, and
have but a right at the time of the release made: the release is not good, as
it is in the case of a rent-service and a seigniory. But if lands be given to
me in tail, or for life rendering rent, and I be disseised, and after the donor
release to me all his right in the land; this is a good release and shall
extinguish the rent. So if in this case where I am tenant in tail and I make a
feoffment in fee rendering rent, and after I release to the feoffee; this is a
good release and hereby the rent is extinct. And if two coparceners be of a
rent, and one of them take the terretenant to husband, and after either of them
release; these releases will be good.

If one disseise me of land, and then grant a rentcharge out of Lit. sect.
527. Co. super Lit. 300.
the land, and I reciting the same grant release to the grantee; this release
it seems is good, and will bar me so as after my reentry I shall not be able to
avoid it.

If two have the grant of the next advowson or avoidance of a Co. super Lit.
270.
Of an Advowson etc.
Church; before it be void one of them may release to the other, but afterward
they cannot.

If A make a feoffment in fee, gift in tail, lease for life or years to Co. 1.
112. Perk. sect. 823. 764.
Of a Condition.
B on condition that upon such a contingent it shall be void; in this case A
may before the condition broken release all his right in the land, or release
the condition to B; and this will be good to make the estate absolute and to
discharge the condition. So if a feoffee on condition make a gift in tail or
lease for life, and after the feoffor release to the donee or lessee; this is a
good release to discharge the condition. So if a copyholder surrender to the
use of anothrr on condition, and this is presented to be without condition, and
after the surrendror does release to him to whose use the surrender was made
all his right etc. this is a good release and does extinguish the condition.
But if a disseisor make a feoffment on condition, and the disseisee release to
the feoffee on condition; howsoever this does bar the right of the disseisee,
yet it does not discharge the condition.

Where a power or authority is such that does respect the benefit Co. 1. 112,
113 173, 174.
Of a power of revocation.
of the relessor, as in the usual cases of power of revocation of uses, when
the feoffor etc. has power to alter, change, determine or revoke the uses
being intended for his benefit, and he release to any one that has a freehold
in possession, reversion, or remainder, by the former limitation: this is a
good release and does extinguish the power and make the estates that were
before defeasible absolute, and it does seclude him from any power of
alteration or revocation. But if the power be collateral, or to the use of a
stranger, and nothing to the benefit of him that makes the release: as if A
make a feoffment to B to diverse uses, provided that B shall revoke the uses,
and B release to any one of them that has a use, this does not extinguish the
power, as in case where the power is given to A, and A does release it.

If a feoffment be made with warranty, and the feoffee release Of a warranty.
the warranty; this does extinct it. And so it is of other warranties. But if
tenant in tail release the warranty annexed to his estate tail, this does not
extinguish this warranty.

Any man may release any debt or duty due to himself. Also Of debts and other
duties personal.
Bro. Release 88. 21 H. 7. 29. Co. 5. 27.
a man may discharge or release any thing due, or any wrong done to his wife
before or after the marriage. And therefore if a trespass were done, or a
promise were made to my wife before 1. In respect of the persons.
the marriage; I may at any time during the marriage release this. So if any
wrong be done, or obligation, statute, or promise Husband and wife.
made to her alone, or to her and me together at any time during the marriage; I
alone may release and discharge this. And if my wife be an executrix to any
other man, I may release any debt or duty due to the testator.

And if a legacy be given to a woman sole to be paid at Michaelmas Per chapter
Justice B. R. Mich. 17 Ja.
next, and I mary with her, and I release the legacy before the day: it seems
by this the legacy is gone.

An infant executor may release a debt duly paid unto him of Infant.
Co. 5. 27.
the testators debt. But if he release that which he does not receive, it is a
void release. And regularly the release of an infant is void.

An executor before probate of the Will may release a debt or Co. 5. 27. 9. 39.
2. In respect of the time.
duty due to the testator; and this release is good to bar him.

A future or contingent promise may be released and discharged Trin. 14 Ja. in
Eltons case.
before the contingent happen. A debt on an obligation, or rent may also be
released before the day of payment as well as after, but not by the same words.
And therefore if one promise to I S that upon the surrender of I S he will pay
him an hundred and ten pound, and after the promise and before the surrender he
release this debt; this does discharge the debt. But if the promise be that if
the surrendree shall sell the land, and shall have five hundred pound, that
then he shall pay to the surrendror an hundred pound more, and the surrendror
before sale release this sum; this is no discharge of it. And yet a release of
the promise is a discharge of it. And if A promise to me that if Hill. 16 Jac.
B. R. Briscoe versus Heirs.
I S do not pay to me an hundred pound 1 Octobris, that he does owe me, that
A will pay me the hundred pound 1o Novembris, and I 10o Septembris release to
him this debt, or all actions and demands; in this case this release is not
good to discharge this promise. But by a release of the promise, the same is
discharged.

If a man release to another all actions, and do not say further Of actions.
Bro. Release 29.
which he has against him; this is as good a release as if these words were
inserted. Quod necessario subintelligitur non deest.

And all these releases must be made by apt words, and such as Co. 9. 53.
law shall judge sufficient for that purpose.

And in all these cases care must be had there be no mistake, Bro. Release 56.
58.
for mistakes will make releases and confirmations void as well as other
grants. And therefore if A make a release to B in this manner: Noveritis etc.
me A de B remisisse etc. B omnes actiones quas idem B habet versus A, whereas
it should be quas idem A habet versus B; this release is void.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the Lord purchase the tenancy; 8. What shall
be said a Release in law. Or not. And how.
Co. super Lit. 264.
by this means the services are released and extinct in law. And if the Lord
disseise his tenant, and make a feoffment in fee by deed or without deed; this
is a release in law of the seigniory. Of a seigniory. Of a right to land.


If a disseisee disseise the heir of the disseisor, and make a feoffment Co.
idem.
with or without a deed; this is a release in fee in law of the right. And if
he make a lease for life, this is a release in law of the right so long as the
lease does last.

If a creditor, as an obligee, or the like, make a debtor, as the Of a right of
action.
Co. super Lit. 264. 8 E. 4. 3. 21 E. 4. 2.
obligor etc. his executor; by this means the action is released by act of law,
and yet the duty remains still, for the executor may Executor.
retain so much of the goods of the testator. And if the creditor be a woman,
and she mary with the debtor; by this the debt is released in law. And if there
be two obligees or debtees, and one of them being a woman, is married to the
obligor; this is a release in law of the debt, albeit the creditor be an infant.

But if there be a woman executrix to the debtee, and she take M. 30 and 31 El.
B. R. Adjudge. Co. 8. 136.
the debtor to husband; this is no release in law.

And if an obligor be made administrator of the goods and chattels of the
obligee; this is no release in law.

Where diverse join in any suit or action to recover any personal Co. 6. 25. 5.
22. Bro. Release 84. 94. stat. 23 H. 8. chapter 3.
9. The force and virtue of it. And how it shall enure and be construed and
taken.
thing of which they are to have the joint benefit or interest when the law
does not compel them to join, there the release of one of them shall bar all
the rest. And therefore if two men join in an action of debt, trespassel, or
the like, and one of them alone 1. In respect of the persons. And where a
release made by one shall bind another. And where not. And where a release
made to one shall enure to others. Or not.
does release to the defendant; this is a bar to the other plaintiffs also.
So if a statute or an obligation be made to two or more, and one of them
release it to the conusor or obligor; this is a discharge of the whole duty,
and a bar to the rest, so that they can make no use of the statute or
obligation. But if diverse be charged in any action, and they for the discharge
of themselves only join in a suit or action, where also they can do no
otherwise being compelled by law to join; in this case the release of one of
them shall not hurt the others. And therefore if diverse join in a writ of
Error, Attaint, or Audita querela, and one of them release to the defendant in
the writ; this will not bar the rest of their remedy, but they may go on in
their suit notwithstanding.

If there be two or more executors, and one of them alone release 1^ H. 7. 4.
Executors.
a debt or duty to the testator before judgment had in a suit had by all the
executors against the debtor, this will bar all the rest. But otherwise it
seems it is after judgment had.

If a writ of ward be brought by two, and one of them release; Co. super Lit.
205.
this shall not bar his companion, but shall enure to his benefit, for hereby
he shall have the whole ward.

A release made to the tenant in tail, or for life of the right Lit. Sect. 452.
470. Co. super Lit. 275. 290. 267, 268. Co. 8. 351.
to the land, shall avail and enure to him that has a reversion or remainder
in deed. And so e converso. A release made to him that has a remainder or
reversion will avail and enure to the benefit of him that has the estate tail
for life, or years precedent. As if a disseisor make a lease for life, and the
disseisee release to the tenant for life; this shall enure to the disseisor. So
if he or a tenant for life make a lease for life, the remainder for life, the
remainder in tail, the remainder in fee, and the disseisee or first lessor does
release all his right to any one of them in remainder; this shall enure unto,
and benefit all the rest. And if the husband make a lease of his wives land to
one for life, the remainder to another in fee, and the wife after his death
does release all her right in the land to him in remainder; this shall enure to
the lessee for life.

If a disseisor make a lease for life, and the disseisee release all Co. super
Lit. 275.
his right to the tenant for life; this shall enure to the benefit of the
disseisor. But if the disseisee release no more to the tenant for life but all
actions; this release will not benefit him in remainder or reversion after the
death of the tenant for life.

If a disseisor make a feoffment to two in fee, and the disseisee Lit. Sect.
472.
release to one of the feoffees; this shall enure to both.

If tenant in tail be disseised by two, and he release to one of Co. super Lit.
276.
them; this shall enure to both. But if the Kings tenant be disseised by two,
and he release to one of them; this shall not enure to the other. So if two
jointenants make a lease for life, and then disseise the tenant for life, and
he release to one of them; in this case his companion shall have no benefit by
it.

If tenant in fee simple be disseised by two, or two do abate or Lit. Sect.
472. 522.
intrude, and he does release to one of them; the other shall have no benefit
by this. But if tenant for life do after a disseisin done to him release to
one of the disseisors; this shall enure to both.

And if two disseisors be, and they make a lease for life or Co. super Lit. 276.
years, and after the disseisee does release to one of the disseisors, this
shall enure to them both, and to the benefit of the lessee for life also.

And if lessee for years be ousted, and he in reversion disseised, and the
lessee release to the disseisor; the term of years is hereby extinct, and the
disseisee may take advantage of it and enter presently.

But if two jointenants in fee be disseised by two disseisors, and one of the
disseisees release to one of the disseisors all his right; this shall enure to
the other, for this extends but to a moity.

If a release be made by a woman of her dower to the guardian Co. super Lit.
266.
in Chivalry; this shall enure to the heir, and he may take advantage of it.

If tenant for life be disseised by two, and he in the reversion and the tenant
for life join in a release to one of the disseisors; Co. super Lit. 276.
this shall not enure to the other. But if they do severally release their
several rights, their several releases shall enure to both the disseisors.

If mortgagee upon condition after the condition broken be Co. idem.
disseised by two, and the mortgagor that has the title of entry does release
to the one disseisor; this shall enure to both. And like law is for an entry
for mortmain, or a consent to ravishment etc.

If there be Lord and two jointenants, and the Lord release to Co. super Lit.
269.
one of them; this shall avail his companion.

If tenant in fee simple make a feoffment in fee, and after the Lord release to
the feoffor, this shall not enure to the feoffee to extinguish the seigniory.
But if he release to the feoffee, this shall enure to the feoffor to extinguish
the seigniory.

If there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant make a lease for Co. super Lit.
279.
life, the remainder in fee, and the Lord release to the tenant for life; the
rent is hereby wholly extinguished, and he in remainder shall take advantage of
it, as when the heir of a disseisor is disseised, and the disseisor makes a
lease for life, the remainder in fee, and the first disseisee does release to
the tenant for life; this shall enure by way of extinguishment to him in
remainder, viz. to the lessee for life first, and after to him in remainder.

If two tenants in common of land grant a rent of forty shillings Co. super
Lit. 267.
out of it, and the grantee release to one of them; this shall not enure to the
other. But if one be tenant for life of lands the reversion in fee to another,
and they join in the grant of a rent out of the lands, and the grantee release
either to the tenant for life, or to him in reversion; this shall enure to the
other and extinct the whole rent.

If two men gain an advowson by usurpation, and the right Co. super Lit. 276.
Patron release to one of them; this release shall enure to them both.

If two be bound jointly and severally in any obligation, or Co. 5. 59. super
Lit. 232. Lit. Sect. 376.
other especialty, and the obligee etc. release to one of them; this shall
enure to discharge the other also, if it be a good release as to him that makes
it. But otherwise it is in case of a release made by the King.

And if two do a trespass to another together, and he to whom Prerogative.
it is made does release it to one of them; this shall enure to discharge the
other.

If husband and wife, and I S purchase to them and the heirs To husband and
wife.
Dier 319. Co. super Lit. 273. 276. 14 H. 8. 6.
of the husband, and after I S release all his right in the land to the
husband; the wife shall have no benefit by this, but it shall enure to the
husband alone.

And if there be two women joint disseiseresses, and the one take a husband,
and the disseisee release to the other; in this case the husband and wife shall
take no benefit by this. And if the disseisee release to the husband; this
shall enure to him and his wife and the other woman.

And if one that has a rent out of my wives land release it to me and my
heirs; this shall enure by way of extinguishment, and my wife will have
advantage of it. And yet if the words be [grant and release] the rent to the
husband and his heirs; in this case the husband may take as a grant if he will.

But here note in all these cases of releases, when one man Co. super Lit. 232.
Note.
will take advantage of a release made to another, he must have the release to
show and plead.

If I be disseised, and I release to the disseisor all actions I Co. 10. 51.
22 H. 6. 1.
have or may have against him; this is but personal, and shall not be
expounded to bar my heir after my death of his remedy, neither will it bar me
of my remedy against his heir after his death.

So if I deliver goods to another, and afterward I release to him all actions,
and then he die; by this I am not barred so, but I may sue his executors.

See more in Confirmation, chap. 18. Numb. 7.

A release of all actions without any more words, is better Co. 8. 153. 5. 28.
70. Kelw. 113, Co. super Lit. 286. 290. 292. 289. Lit. sect. 492. 505, 506.
512, 513. Bro. stat. 39.
2. In respect of the thing released. Of all actions.
then a release of all actions real only, or a release of all actions
personal only, for by a release of actions, or a release of all manner of
actions, without more words, are released and discharged, all real, personal
and mixed actions then depending, and all causes of suit for any real or
personal thing: as Appeals for the death of an ancestor, conspiracies, suits
by Scire facias to have execution of a Judgment, detinue for charters.

And if two conspire to indite me, and I release to them all actions, and after
they go on with their conspiracy; by this release I am barred to do any thing
against them. By this release also of all actions, a debt due to be paid upon a
statute or an obligation at a day to come, albeit the release be before the day
is discharged, and by this also the statute it self if it be at any time before
execution is discharged.

And if one be to pay forty pound at four days, and some of the days are past,
and some to come, and the debtee make such a release; by this the whole debt is
discharged.

Also in a Scire facias upon a Fine or a Judgment, this release is a good plea
in bar.

But this release of all actions will not discharge Executions, or bar a man of
taking out of Executions, except it be where it must be done by Scire facias.
Neither will it discharge or bar a man of suits by Audita Querela, or writ of
Error to reverse an erroneous judgment, neither will it discharge covenants
before they be broken, nor will it discharge any thing for which the relessor
had no cause of action at the time of the release made, as if a woman have
title of dower, and do release all actions to him that has the reversion of
the land after an estate for life; or a man is by an award to pay me ten pound
at a day to come, and before the time I make such a release; or I make a lease
rendering rent, or an annuity is granted to me, and before the rent-day, I make
the lessee or the grantor such a release; in these cases, and by a release in
these words without more, the dower, debt, rent, or annuity, is not discharged.

And if a man have two remedies or means to come by land, Lit. sect. 496, 497.
as action and entry, or by goods, as action and seizure, or the like; in this
case by a release of all actions he does not bar himself of the other remedy.
Et sic e converso.

And if a man does covenant to build an house, or make an estate, and before
the covenant broken the covenantee does release unto him all actions; by this
the covenant it self is not discharged. And yet after the covenant is broken,
this release will Co. super Lit. 292.
discharge the action of covenant given upon that breach.

By a release of all a man's right into any lands or tenements Of all right.
Co. 8. 151. Plow. 484. 6 H. 7. 8. Co. 3. 29. 6. 1. super Lit. 345.
without more words is released and discharged all manner of rights of action
and entry the relessor has to, in or against the land, for there is jus
recuperandi, prosequendi, intrandi, habendi, retinendi, percipiendi,
possidendi, and all these rights, whether they accrue by fine, feoffment,
descent, or otherwise, are extinct and discharged, so that if the relessee have
gotten into the land of the relessor by wrong, by this release the wrong is
discharged, and the relessee is in the land by good title.

Also by this release are discharged and released all titles of dower, and
titles of entry upon a condition or alienation in mortmain.

And if a woman have title of dower after an estate for life, and make such a
release to him in reversion, this does bar her. By such a release also from
the Lord to the tenant the services are extinct.

But this release will not bar a man of a possibility of a right Co. 10. 47.
super Lit. 289.
that he has at the time of the release, or of a right that shall descend to
him afterward. And therefore if the conusee of a statute before Execution
release all his right into the land to the terretenant; or the heir of the
disseisee in the lifetime of his father do release to to the disseisor all
his right; these releases do not bar them. Nor will this release bar a man of
an Audita Querela, and such like things. And yet if the tenant in a real
action after the demandant has recovered the land, release to him all his
right in the land; this does bar him of a writ of Error for any error in the
proceeding in that suit.

And if there be Lord and tenant by fealty and rent, and the Co. super Lit.
150. Dier 157.
Lord by his deed reciting the tenure does release all his right in the land
saving his said rent; by this release the right of the seigniory, save only of
the seigniory of the rent and fealty, is extinct. And if the Lord release to
his tenant all his right to the land and seigniory, salvo sibi dominio suo etc.
hereby the services only, not the tenure is extinct.

And if one have a rentcharge out of my land, and make such Perk. Sect. 644.
a release of all his right to the land to me that am the terretenant without
exception of the rent; hereby the rent is extinct and gone for ever.

By a release of all a man's title into lands or tenements without Kelw. 484. 6,
7, 8. Co. super Lit. 265. 345.
more words is released and discharged as much as is released Of all title.
by the release of all a man's right, and both these releases have the like
operation: for howsoever title strictly and properly is where a man has
lawful cause of entry into lands whereof another is seized, for which he can
have no action, yet it is commonly taken more largely, and does include a right
also. And Titulus est justa causa possidendi quod nostrum est.

By a release of all entries or rights of entry a man has into Co. 8. 15^^.
Or entry or right of entry.
lands, without more words a man is barred of all right or power of entry into
those lands upon any right whatsoever. And if a man have no other means to come
by the land but by an entry, and he has released that by these words; he is
barred for ever, But if one have a double remedy, viz. a right of entry, and an
action to recover his right by, and then release all entries; by this he is not
barred of his action.

By a release of all actions real without more words, are discharged Of
actions real.
Lit. sect. 492, 493. 495. Co. 8. 151. Lit. sect. 115. 500. Co. super Lit. 288,
289.
all real and mixed actions then depending, and all causes of real and mixed
actions not depending. And therefore all causes of suing of assizes, writs of
Entry, Quare Impedit, actions of wast, and the like, which the party has at
the time of the release made, are hereby discharged. But this release will not
bar him that does make it of any causes of action that shall arise and accrue
afterward. Neither will it bar him of an appeal of death or robbery, writ of
Error, or any such like thing. Nor of any thing which a release of all actions
will not bar. And yet when land is to be restored or recovered by judgment in
a writ of Error; this release is a bar to the writ of Error. So if a judgment
be given upon a false verdict in a real action, a release of all actions real
is a bar in an attaint.

By a release of all actions personal, without more words are Of actions
personal.
Bro. Release 47. Co. super Lit. 285. 9 H. 6. 57. Lit. Sect. 502.
discharged all personal actions then depending, and all causes of personal
actions wherein a personal thing only is to be recovered, and therefore hereby
are discharged all causes of suing out of actions of debt, trespass, detinue,
or the like. Also all mixed actions, as actions of wast, Quare Impedit, an
assise of novel disseisin, writ of annuity, appeal of maihme, and the like.

And if debt etc. or damages be recovered in a personal action Co. super Lit.
289.
by false verdict, and the defendant brings awrit of attaint; or if a writ of
Audita Querela be brought by the defendant in the former action to discharge
him of execution; by this release the defendant in both cases is barred of his
suit.

Also when by a writ of Error the plaintiff shall recover or Co. super Lit.
288. Lit. Sect. 503.
be restored to any personal thing only, as debt, damage, or the like: as if
the plaintiff in a personal action recover any debt etc. or damages, and be
outlawed after judgment; in this case in a writ of Error brought by the
defendant upon the principal judgment, this release will bar him. But where
by a writ of Error the plaintiff shall not be restored to any personal or
real thing, this release is no bar: as if a man be outlawed in an action
personal by process upon the original, and bring a writ of Error, and then
release; this is no bar to him.

If a man by wrong take or find my goods, or they be delivered Lit. Sect. 497,
498. 500.
to him, and I release to him all actions personal; notwithstanding this
release, I may in this case take my goods again, albeit I be barred of my
action by this release. Neither is this release a bar in an appeal of robbery
or death. Neither will it bar in any case where a release of all actions will
not bar. Neither is it any bar to an action of debt brought for an Co. super
Lit. 292. 285
annuity granted for a term of years for any arrearages that shall grow due
after the release. Nor for any rent of sum of nomine pene, when the release is
before the same day, or nomine pene happen. Neither is it a bar in such real
actions wherein damages are recoverable only by the statute, and not by the
common law, as in a writ of dower, entry, sur disseisin in le per Mordancester,
Aile etc.

By a release of all debts without more words, are discharged Of debts.
Co. super Lit. 76. 291. Fitz. Audita Querela. 3.
and released all debts then owing from the relessee to the relessor upon
especialties, or otherwise, all debts due also upon statutes. And therefore if
the conusor himself, or his land, be in execution for the debt, and he has
such a release, he must be discharged: and so he cannot be upon a release of
all actions.

By a release of all duties without more words is a relessor Of duties.
Co. 8. 153. and super Lit. 291.
barred, and the relessee discharged of all actions, judgments, and
executions, also of all obligations. And if the body of a man be in execution,
and the plaintiff make him such a release; hereby he shall be discharged of
execution, because the duty it self is discharged. And if there be rent or
services behind to the Lord from his tenant, and the Lord make such a release
to his tenant; by this it seems the arrearages are released.

This word is of somewhat a more large extent then actions, Co. 8. 154. 157. 5.
70. super Lit. 291.
Of Suits.
for by a release of all suits without more words is released and discharged as
much as by a release of all actions. And hereby also are discharged al
executions in the case of a subject. But in the case of Prerogative.
the King it does not release executions. And this does not release a covenant
before it be broken.

By a release of all quarrels without more words, all actions Co. super Lit.
292. 8. 157. 5. 70.
Of Debates, quarrels, controversies.
real and personal, and all causes of such actions are released and
discharged. So likewise by the release of all controversies, or by the release
of all debates. But this will not bar the relessor of any causes of suit that
shall arise after, and was not at the time of the release: as the breach of a
covenant which shall be after, albeit the covenant be before, is not discharged
hereby.

By a release of all covenants without more words all covenants Of Covenants.
Co. 1. 112. 10. 51. super Lit. 292.
then broken and all that shall be after broken that were then made and in
being are discharged. Qui destruit medium destruit finem.

And therefore if a lessee do covenant to leave a house leased Adjudge Hill 4
Jac. B. R. Hancocks case.
to him at the end of the term as it was at the beginning of the term, and
the lessor before the end of the term release to the lessee all covenants;
this does discharge the covenant. But this release does discharge nothing else
but covenants.

By a release of all Statutes from the conusee to the terre-tenant Of Statutes.
Co. 10. 47.
without more words the Statute is discharged. And yet if he release all his
right in the land of the conusor; this will not discharge the land of execution.

By a release of all errors and writs of error, all errors and Co. 2. 16 Lit.
Sect. 503.
Of Errors.
writs of error and that before they be brought are extinct and discharged. And
if a man be outlawed in a personal action by process upon original, and make
such a release; this will bar him.

By a release of all warranties or covenants real, all warranties Lit. Sect.
148.
Of Warranties.
then made and being are for ever discharged.

By a release of all legacies without more words, a man does Co. 10. 51. Dier
56. Co. super Lit. 76.
Of Legacies.
bar himself of all the legacies given him in presenti or futuro, so that if
he be to have a legacy at 24. years old and at 21. years of age he release to
the executor al legacies or this legacy in particular; this is a bar to him
of this legacy for ever. And yet a release of all demands in this case is no
discharge of this legacy.

By a release of rent the rent is extinct and discharged whether Co. super Lit.
292.
Of Rent.
the day of payment be come or not. But a release of all actions will not
discharge a rent before the day of payment come.

By a release of all promises or Assumpsits without more Of promises.
Adjud. Hill. 16 Jac. B. R. Briscoe verse. Heirs. Co. 10. 51.
words, a man may bar himself of a contingent or future thing that by other
words could not be released, as if a man promise to me that if I S do not pay
me one hundred pound the tenth of March next that he will pay it me the
twentieth of that month and before the time I release to him all actions and
demands; this will not discharge the promise. But if I release to him all
promises, this will bar me. Et sic de similibus.

By a release of all Judgments without more words is he Lit. Sect. 507. Co 8.
151. super Lit. 290.
that makes it barred of the effect, of any Judgment he has Of Judgments Of
Executions
against the relessee, for if execution be not taken out he is now barred of
it. And if the relessee, or his land etc. be in execution he and it shall be
discharged thereof by Audita Querela. And by a release of all executions
without more words, a man is barred of taking or having out of any execution
upon any Judgment either before Scire facias or after. But if after execution
be made by Capias ad Stat. Elegit, or fieri facias the Audita Querela
plaintiff release to the defendant all executions, he cannot plead such a
release but he must have an Audita Querela, and that he may have to discharge
him of execution.

By a release of all appeals, are discharged all appeals of Co. super Lit.
287, 288.
felony, of death, of robbery, of rape, of burning, of larceny Of Appeals.
depending, and all causes not yet moved also.

By this release of all advantages, it seems actions of debt upon Of Advantages
account are discharged. Co. 8. 150.


By a release of all conspiracies, all conspiracies past are discharged, Kelw,
113.
Of Conspiracies.
and such also as are only begun and shall be prosecuted and perfected after
the release are likewise hereby discharged.

By a release of all forgeries before publication the forgery is Of Forgeries.
Co. 10. 48.
discharged but not the publication, and therefore the relessor may take his
remedy for that notwithstanding.

A release of all demands is the best release of all, and this Of Demands or
Cl^im^s.
Co. super Lit. 291. Co. 8. 54. Lit. Sect. 501, 509, 510.
word is the most effectual word of all, and does in deed include and
comprehend within it most of all the releases before. By a release therefore of
all demands without more words are released all rights and titles to land,
warranties, conditions annexed to estates before they be broken or performed
and after they be broken. Also by this release are released and discharged all
Statutes, Obligations, Contracts, Recognisances, Covenants, Rents, Commons, and
the like. Also all manner of actions real and personal, Appeals, Debts,
duties. Also all manner of Judgments, Executions. Also all Annuities, and
Arrearages of Annuities and Rents. And therefore if a man have a title of entry
by force of a condition etc. or a right of entry into any lands; by such a
release the right and title is gone. And if a man have a rent-service,
rentcharge, estovers, or other profit to be taken out of the land; by such a
release to the tenant of the land it is discharged and extinct.

And therefore if a termor for years grant the land by indenture to A rendering
rent, and at the end of the first year Adjudg. B. R. pasc. 17 Jac. Wottons
case.
he release to the grantee all demands; the rent is hereby extinct during all
the time. And a release of all claims it seems is much of the same nature.

But by a release of all demands or of all claims is not released Co. 5. 70.
any such thing as whereof a release cannot be made, as a mere possibility, or
the like.

Neither will this release discharge a covenant or promise that Hill. 4 Jac. B.
R. Hancocks case adjudge.
is future and contingent before it be in being. Nor a covenant before it is
broken: and therefore if the lessee of a house covenant to leave it as well in
the end of his term as it was in the beginning of his term, and before the
end of the term the lessor release to the lessee all demands; this is no bar
to an action brought for a breach of the covenant afterward.

And if a man in consideration of a sum of money given to Hill. 6 Jac. B. R.
Belcher and Hudsons case.
him by a woman sole assume to her that if she mary one M that he will pay to
her after the death of M one hundred pound by the year if she survive him,
and she mary him, and the husband release all demands and then die; this is no
bar to the duty. So if one promise a woman that if she will mary him that he
will leave her worth one hundred pound if she do survive him, and before the
marriage she release to him all actions and demands; this does not discharge
the promise.

And note that all these words are of the same force when they are joined with
other words as when they are alone. Note.


If two tenants in common of land grant a rentcharge of Co. super Lit. 267.
forty shillings out of it to one in fee, and the grantee release to one of
them; this shall extinguish but twenty shillings, for that the grant in
judgment of law is several.

If one have several causes of action against two, and make a joint release to
them; this shall be taken to be a release of all 19 H. 6. 4.
joint and several causes of action.

So if an executor have some cause of action for himself, and Bro. Release 31.
29.
some for his testator, and he release all Actions, indefinitly; this release
does discharge both sorts of actions.

If the tenancy be given to the Lord and a stranger, and to the heirs of the
stranger, and the Lord release to his companion Co. super Lit. 280.
all his right in the land; this shall enure not only to pass his estate in
the tenancy but also to extinguish his right in the Seigniory.

If there be Lord and tenant of two acres, and the Lord release all his right
in one of them to the tenant; hereby the Perk. Sect. 71. Bro. Release 85. 9 E.
3.
services are extinct for both. So if one have a rent charge out of twenty
acres, and release all his right in one acre; hereby all the rent is extinct.
And yet if A lease white acre to B for life rendering rent, and afterward does
release part of the rent; this is good only for such part.

If I be seized of land in fee and I make a lease of it to one for life, and
after I release all my right in the land for the life Bro. Release 65.
of the tenant for life, so as neither I nor my heirs shall have claim or
challenge any thing or right in that land for the life of the tenant for life;
by this release nothing is extinct or discharged but the causes of action of
wast that were then, and notany cause that shall happen afterward. Dier. 307.


If a Statute be entered into the twentyeth of April, and the conusee by a
release dated the ninteeneth of April (meaning to except this Statute) does
release all debts and demands till the making of the release; by this release
the Statute is discharged. But if the words had been to the day of the date of
Per Justice ^odridge Trin. 14 Jac.
the release, contra.

If a promise be of two parts, and he to whom it is made does release one part;
it seems this is a release of both. ^o. 9. 53.


If A 1^. Ian. enter into an obligation of forty pound to B and B 13o. July
make a deed thus, It is agreed between B on the one part and A on the other
part that upon good considerations B does acknowledge himself fully satisfied
and discharged of all bonds, debts or demands whatsoever from the beginning of
the world to this day by the said A, and that he the said B is to deliver all
such bonds as he has yet undelivered to A except one bond of forty pound yet
unforfeit which is for the payment of etc. which was the obligation before; in
this case it was adjudged a good release and discharge of all Lit. Sect. 467.
470. Co. super. Lit. 273. 264. 280. Kelw. 88. Co. super Lit. 9.
the bonds excepting that one, and that this exception shall go to all the
premises.

A release of a right, or an action cannot be for a time but 3. In respect of
the time or estate.
it will be for ever. And therefore if a release be made to any one that has a
fee simple by wrong by him that has the right for one hour, one year, for
life, or years; this is a good release for ever.

And if the disseisee release all his right in the land to the disseisor
without naming his heirs or setting down any time how long the relessee shall
have the land or the right of the disseisee therein; this is a good release for
ever and does make the estate of the disseisor good for ever, and so does make
a good estate in fee simple without these words [his heirs etc.] And if the
disseisor or his heir make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, and the
disseisee release all his right to the donee or lessee for life To have and to
hold for life only; this is a good release of his right for ever.

But if the disseisee do disseise the heir of the disseisor, and make a lease
for life (which is a release in law;) by this the right is released during that
time only. So if one Jointenant or parcener release to the other all his right
in the land, without the words [heires] or any more word; this release does
give to his companion his whole interest forever. And when the Lord, or grantee
of a rent release to the tenant, or terre-tenant generally; by these releases a
fee simple is transferred without any words of heirs etc. And yet the Lord may
release his Seigniory to his tenant, to hold to him in tail or for life, and
this shall be taken and enjoyed accordingly. But if the Lord does release the
Seigniory to his tenant without any words of heirs put in the deed, the same
is extinct. Lit. Sect. 545, 546. 465. Plow. 556. Dier 263.


And if I let land to a man for term of years, and after I release to him all
my right which I have in the land, without using any other words in the deed;
or release to him To have and to hold for his life; in both these cases he has
an estate for his life only.

And if I lease land to a man for his own life, and after release to him To
have and to hold for his own life; hereby he has but an estate for his own
life.

But if I make a lease to him for another life, and after release to him
Habendum to him for his own life; by this he has an estate for his own life.

But if I be seized of land in fee simple and let it to another for life or
years, and then release all my right to him To have and to hold to him and his
heirs, hereby he has the fee simple. And if I release all my right to him To
have and to hold to him and the heirs of his body, hereby he has an estate
tail.

And if one be seized in fee of a rent service or charge and Lit. Sect. 549.
grant it first for life, and then release it to the grantee To hold to him and
his heirs, or to him and the heirs of his body; this shall enure to an
enlargement according to the agreement.

But if one grant a rentcharge out of his land de novo, and after release to
the grantee all his right in the rent To have and to hold to him in fee simple
or fee tail; this does not enlarge the estate.

And if tenant in tail, or for life make a lease for years, Lit. Sect. 606.
610. 24 E. 3. 28.
and after by deed does release all his right to the lessee for years in
possession, to hold to him and his heirs for ever; this will not make the
estate of the lessee good for longer time then the life of the relessor.

If one make a lease for ten years the remainder for Co. super Lit. 273.
twenty years to another, and he in remainder release all his right to the
lessee for ten years; in this case the relessee has an estate for thirty
years and no less, for one lease for years cannot drown in another.

If I let land to a woman sole for her life, or for years, Lit. Sect. 526. Co.
super Lit. 299. 300.
and she take a husband, and after I release to them two to hold for their
lives; this shall enure no further then the intent, and in the first case he
shall hold jointly with his wife, but in her right whiles she does live, and
after for his own life if he survive, and in the last case they shall have the
freehold jointly.

If there be Lord and tenant by fealty and rent, and the Co. super Lit. 280.
Lord grants the Seigniory for years, and the tenant atturneth, and the Lord
releaseth his Seigniory to the tenant for years and to the tenant of the land
generally; by this the Seigniory is extinct for ever, and the estate of the
lessee also. But if the release be to them and their heirs; then the lessee
shall have the inheritance of the one moity, and the other is extinct.

It is a discharge in writing of a sum of money or other 10. Acquitance, Quid.
Terms of the law.
duty which ought to be paid or done, As if one be bound to pay money on an
obligation, or rent reserved upon a lease, or the like, and the party to whom
the money or duty should be paid or done upon the receipt thereof or upon some
other agreement between them makes a writing under his hand witnessing that
he is paid or otherwise contented and therefore does acquit and discharge him
of the same, The which is such a discharge and bar in the law that he cannot
demand and recover the same again contrary thereunto if the acquitance be
showed.

The obligor is not bound to pay money upon a single bond 22 E. 4. 6. 41 E. 3.
25. 1 H. 7. 15. 22 E. 4. 6. Bro debt 43. Oblig. 10.
11. Where a man is not bound to pay money without he has an acquitance.
unless the obligee will make to him an acquitance or release. Nor is he bound
to pay it before he has the acquitance. And in this case the obligor may
compel the obligee to make him an acquitance. And so also it is in case of a
Statute Merchant, one is not bound to pay the money thereupon before he has
the acquitance or release of the plaintiff. But otherwise it is in case of an
obligation with a condition, for there a man may aver payment.

And because Statutes, Recognisances and Obligations are often used and tend to
the strengthening of the Common Assurances of the kingdom, we may not in any
wise pass them over, but must take some surveigh of them. And first of a
Statute.

CAP. XX. Of a Statute.
A Statute is a Bond or Obligation of Record: But this word is 1 Statute. Quid.
Terms of the Law, Stat. de Mercatoribus. Acton Burnell. 11 Ed. 1.
sometimes used in another sense, viz. for a Decree made in Parliament called
an Act of Parliament.

And of these Obligations, there are three kinds: 1. A Statute 2 Qu^tuplex.
Statute Mechant. Quid.
Merchant: 2. A Statute Staple: 3. A Recognisance. The Statute Merchant, is a
Bond acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the Statute Merchant and Mayor,
and chief Warden of the City of London, or two Merchants of the said City for
that purpose assigned, or before the Mayor, chief Warden or Master of other
Cities, as York, Bristow, or the like; or the Bailisse of any Borough, or
Village, or other sufficient men for that purpose appointed and Authorized,
Sealed with the seal of the Debtor or Recognisor, and of the King which is of
two pieces; the greater whereof is kept by the Mayor or chief Warden, and the
lessor by the said Clerk: And the form of it is thus; Novertis etc. me A B
teneri C D in Centum libris solvend. eidem ad Festum S. Mich. proxim. Et nisi
fecero, concedo quod currat super me and haeredes meos districtio and paena in
Statuto domini Regis edito apud Westin. Dat. etc. And this albeit at first it
was ordained and used for Merchants only, yet at this day, it is and may be
used and given by any others, and is become one of the common Assurances of the
Kingdom.

The Staple does signify this or that Town or City, whither the 27 Ed. 3.
Stat. 2 cap. 1 ^^3 etc.
Merchants by common order and commandment do carry their Statute Staple,
Quid.
commodities, as Wool and the like to utter by the great. And the 27 Ed. 3.
Stat cap. 9. 22 H. etc. ^. Coo. super Lit. 289. 15 H. 7. 16.
Statute Staple is either properly or improperly so called: That which is
properly so called, is defined to be a Bond of Record acknowledged before the
Mayor of the Staple in the presence of one or two Constables of the same
Staple, and is sealed with the Seal of the Staple, and sometimes also with the
Seal of the party, the which it seems is not necessary. And this is founded
upon the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. cap. 9. and was invented, and is used only ^or
Merchants and Merchandises of the same Staple: This is of the same nature the
Statute Merchant is. That which is improperly so called, is also called a
Recognisance, which is also a Bond of Record Recognisin. ^. Quid.
testifying that the Recognisor does owe to the Recognisee a sum of money.
And of these there are diverse kinds; for three is one Recognisance founded upon
the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 6. The form whereof is this, Noveritis etc. me A
B teneri C D in Centum libris solvend. eidem ad Festum S. Mich. proxim. Et si
defecero in solutione debi. praedict. volo and concedo quod tunc currat super
me haeredes and executores meos poena in Statuto Stapulae debit. pro
Marchandisis in eadem emptis recuperand. ordinat. and provis. Dat. etc. And
this is always to be acknowledged before the chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, or of the Common Pleas in the Term time, or in their absence out of
Term before the Mayor of the Staple at Westminster, and the Recorder of the
City of London for the time being. And it is to be sealed with the Seal of the
Conusor, and with the Seal of the King appointed for that purpose, and with
the Seal of the chief Justice, Mayor, and Recorder before whom it is
acknowledged; and they before whom it is taken do subscribe their names to it:
And this was ordained, and may be, and is used by Merchants, or any other
whomsoever for payment of debts, or assurance of other things: And this also is
of the same nature the Statute Merchant is: And both this, and the two former,
are much of the nature of judgments had upon Suits in the Courts of Kings Coo.
8. 153.
Bench and Common Pleas, and therefore they are called Pocket Pocket Judgments.
judgments.

There are also diverse other kinds of Recognisances that are See Statute. 33 H.
8. c. 22 39. 3 H. 7. c. 1 10 H. 6. c. 1 Dyer 315. 307. F N B. 251. f. 132 c.
133. a. 68. a.
taken by and acknowledged before the Lord Keeper, Master of the Wards, Master
of the Rolls, Master of the Chancery, Justices of the one Bench or of the
other, (some of which are called Bailes) Barons of the Excheker, Judges in
their Circuits, Bail.
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and others; some whereof are by the Common
Law, and some by certain Statutes. And amongst these, some are without Seal,
and recorded only, and some are sealed and recorded also: And some of them are
in a sum certain, as the Recognisances taken in the Common Pleas for Bail
are, and some of them are incertaine, as those Recognisances, that are taken
for Bail in the Kings Bench, which are after this manner, Si Judicium redditum
etc. tunc volo and concodo, That the debt recovered against the defendant shall
be levied of my goods and chattels etc. And these also are much of the nature
of the former kind of Recognisances. And all Prerogative.
Obligations made to the King are of the nature, and have the force of a
Recognisance.

Statutes and Recognisances are sometimes single, without any Defeasance; and
sometimes they are double: i. e. With a Defeasance or Condition, upon the
performance whereof the same are to be avoided.

The Debtor, or he that does enter into the Statute or Recognisance, Conusor.
Co. ^^e.
is called the Recognisor, or Conusor, and the Debree, or he to whom it is
made, is called the Recognisee or Conusee.

To make a good Statute or Obligation of Record, the 3. What shall be said a
good Statute or Recognisance, and what not. First, in respect of the persons
before whom it is acknowledged.
form prescribed must be pursued: 1. In respect of the persons Dyer 35. Litt.
Broo. Sect. 484, 511 F. N. B. 267 a.
before whom: And therefore, the Statute Merchant or Staple, or the
Recognisance founded upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. may not be acknowledged
before any others besides the persons appointed by the Statutes. Neither may
any other Recognisance be acknowledged before any, but such as either have
power ex Officio, and by their Offices to take them, or have special
Commission so to do: And therefore a Recognisance Dyer 220
taken by a Constable is void. If a Recognisance be made to the Lord Keeper
and two others, and it be acknowledged before himself, this is void as to
him: 2. In respect Secondly, in respect of the manner of making it.
of the manner of making and acknowledging of it: And therefore, if the
substantial form appointed by the Statutes be not observed, it will be void.
If therefore, a Statute Merchant be not Hollingworth versus Ascughe Pasche. 35
El. Co. B. Adiudge.
sealed with the Seal of the D^btor, and there be not a Seal of two pieces
annexed to it, this is no good Statute, neither can it take effect as a
Statute; howbeit in this case, if it be delivered by the party, it may take
effect as an Obligation: But if Obligation.
the variance from the Statutes be only in some circumstance, this will not
hurt a Statute or a Recognisance. And therefore it is held, That albeit there
be no time set for the payment of the money in the Statute, yet the Statute is
good, for then it is due presently. And albeit, the Statute be written Perk. 3.
Justices Co. B. Trin. 22 Iac.
with another hand, and not with the hand of the Clerk of the Statutes or the
like, yet is the Statute good enough. And if a Statute Staple be not sealed
with the Seal of the party that does acknowledge it; yet it seems it is good
enough, for the Statute does not require it; but a Recognisance within the
Statute of 23 H. 8. cannot be good, except the Seal of the party be to it,
for so are the words of the Statute.

If a Recognisance or a Statute be to pay money at several Coo. 8. 153.
days, it is good enough, and if the Conusor fail one day, Execution may be
sued of the whole Statute.

Every Statute Staple or Merchant, not brought to the Clerk of the
Recognisances within four Months next after Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 4.
the acknowledging, to enter a true Copy thereof, shall be void, against all
persons, their Heirs, Successors, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
only, which for good consideration shall after the acknowledging of the same
Statute, purchase the Land or any part liable thereunto, or any Rent, Lease, or
profit out of it.

The proceedings upon a Statute or Recognisance, to have Fitz. Account. 97.
Execution in toto. Broo. Statute in toto Stat. Act^^ Bartel de Mercatoribu^^ ^7
Ed. 3. c. 9. F. N. Br. 130, 131, 132 Dyer 1^0. 15 H. 7. 15. Coo. 4. 69. 7 H. 7.
12. Plow. 61, 62, 82. Coo. super Lit. 290. Stat. 2; H. 8. c. 6. 5 H. 4. c. 12.
2 R. 3. 7. 14 Ed. 3. ^. Lit. Broo. Sect. 194. 123. 226. Dyer 299. Coo. 5. 87.
4, 82, 59, 66 Stat. 1 ^il. 6. c. 10. ^i^ch. 116.
the fruit and effect thereof, is not like to the proceedings in other 4. All
the proceedings upon a Statute or Recognisance; and the manner and order of
Execution thereupon.
cases of Suits upon Obligations and the like, to reduce them to judgment, but
as they are in their own nature much like to the nature of a judgment, so is
the proceeding and execution thereupon, much like to the proceeding and
execution upon a Judgment: And therefore the Conusee may if he please, bring
an Action of debt upon a Statute and wave all other proceeding, or otherwise,
if he like not this course, he [or if he be dead, his Executor or
Administrator, and if his Executor be dead, the Executor of his Executor] may
as soon as the same is forfeit, have present Execution of it after this manner:
He must bring his Statute to the Mayor and Clerk or other Officer, before whom
it was acknowledged, and there if they find the Record of it, and the day to
be past for the payment of the money, they are to apprehend and imprison the
body of the Conusor if he be a lay-person and can be found within their
jurisdiction; and if he cannot be found there, they are to certify the Record
into the Chancery, which also if they refuse to do, they may be compelled unto
by a Certiorare: Certiorare.
And if that Certificate be faulty, or execution be not done upon it by reason
of the death of the Conusee or otherwise, the Conusee or his Executor, or
Administrator, may have another Certificate: And thereupon, in case of the
Statute Merchant, he shall have a Writ of Capias out of the Chancery, directed
to the Sheriff of the County where the Conusor lives, to apprehend and
imprison him (if he be not a Clergy man) and this is to be returned in the
Common Pleas, or Kings Bench. And when the Conusor is taken, he shall have time
for a quarter of a year to make his agreement with the Conusee, and to sell his
lands or goods to satisfy the Conusee: And for that purpose, he may sell his
lands or goods, albeit he be in prison, and his fail is good and lawful: And
if in that time, he do not satisfy the Conusee, or if upon the Capias, the
Sheriff return Capias.
a non est inventus, then by another Writ [or by diverse Writs, if the lands or
goods lie in diverse Counties] called an Extendi Facias. And in the case of a
Statute Staple, presently after the Certificate into the Chancery, the Conusee
shall have a Writ to take his body and extend his lands and goods returnable in
Chancery: And this Extendi Facias. Quid.
Writ is a Commission directed to the Sheriff of the County where the lands and
goods lie for the valuing of the same, whereby all the lands, goods, and
chattels of the Conusor shall be apprised and valued at a reasonable rate by a
Jury of sworn men, charged by the Sheriff for that purpose; which Inquisition
so taken is to be returned by the Sheriff, and thereupon the lands, goods, and
chattels are to be taken into the Sheriffs hands, and by him to be delivered to
the Conusee (which the Sheriff may do if he will without any Writ) to hold
unto the Conusee until he be satisfied his debt and damages. And if the
Sheriff refuse so to do, the Conusee shall have a Writ out of the Chancery
called a Liberate, to compel him to deliver to Literate. Quid
the Conusee the lands, goods, and chattels, so found by Inquisition, and taken
into his hands upon the Extent, which the Sheriff need not to return: Adiuge
Butler ver^i^ Walli, pa^. ^^. Eliz. B. R.
Or the Conusee may enter upon the land himself, and take the goods out of the
Sheriffs hand; and this act of the Sheriff and Jury upon this Writ is called
an Extent: And if the Jurors of Apprai^ors upon the Extendi facias, overvalve
the lands or Extend. Qu^.
goods in favor to the Debtor, the Conusee has no remedy but by motion in
that Court where the Writ is returnable at the return day, or at least the same
Term wherein the Writ is returnable, to desire that the Appraisors may take
the lands or goods at the rate they have valued them, in the same manner as the
Conusee is to have them. But if the Conusee accept of the lands and goods from
the Sheriff, or suffer the Term to pass wherein the Writ is returnable, he is
too late, and has no remedy at all. And if the Appraisors do undervalue the
lands or goods in favor to the Debree, it seems the Conusor has no remedy at
all, for he may at any time pay all or the residue of the debt and damages
unlevied, and have his land again if he please. And in case where the
Inquisition or Extent taken and made, is insufficient, as if part of the land
only be extended in the name of all the lands, or it is found the Conusor dyed
seized of land, and it is not said of what estate, or the like, the Conusee
shall have a new Extent, and this is called a Re-extent; and this he may have,
Re-extend.
albeit the lands or goods be delivered to the Conusee by a Liberate, if the
Conusee have not entered upon and accepted it but if he once accept it, he can
never after have a Re-extent: And when the Conusee is in possession of lands by
such an Extent as before, then is he Tenant by Statute; and after the Conusee
is once settled in peace in the lands extended, he shall hold it until he be
satisfied his debt, and Tenant by Statute.
his reasonable costs and damages for travel, suit, delay, and expense. But it
seems the time shall not run out nor be said to begin until the entry of
the Conusee into the land; for if the land be extended and remain seven years
without a Liberate made, yet he may have a Liberate at the end of the seven
years, And as soon as the Conusee shall be satisfied his debt and damage by
the goods and chattels of the Conusor, and by the ordinary and certain or
extraordinary and casual profits of the land, the Conusor shall have his land
again: And for that purpose, if the Conusee refuse to give him an account, and
to yield up his land to him the Conusor, howbeit he may not enter, yet may
compel the Corusee thereunto Venire facias ad Con^^ d^^, Quid.
by a Writ called a venire faecias ad computa^^m. in the nature of a Scire
facias, by which the Conusor shall call the Conusee his Executors of
A^minstrators to account, and if upon the account, it shall appear he is
satisfied, the Conusor shall have his land again; and if it appear he is
oversatisfied, he shall answer the overplus to the Conusor. But the Conusor
may not enter upon the Conusee until he has brought this Writ, and made it
thereupon to appear that the Conusee is satisfied. And if in case the Conusee
be dead, his Executor or Administrator may have execution of the Statute
without Executor.
any Scire Facias upon the showing of the Statute and the Testament in
Chancery. And if the Sheriff return that the Conusor is dead, the execution
shall be made of his lands only in the hands of his Heir or the Purchasor; but
if the Heir be under age, the Execution cannot be Age.
done until he be of full age: And if the Conusor die in prison, the Execution
shall be of his lands, goods, and chattels: And if the Jailer Escape.
that has him in prison suffer him to escape, he must answer the debt; And if
it fall out that the Conusee, his Executor, or Administrator be ousted, or
disturbed of his Execution by the Conusor himself, or any other during the
time of the Extent, he may relieve himself against the disturber by Assise, or
other Action, as another in the like case may do: And if he be rightfully
ousted or disturbed by one that has better right, as by one that has a former
Statute or the like, or by the act of God, as by fire, water, or the like, in
these cases the Conusee shall hold the land over after the time of his extent
until he be satisfied. But when it is through his own neglect only that he is
unsatisfied, as where the lands are delivered to him by the Liberate, and he
after his entry into them make a conditional surrender of them; as if lands
of the value of 10 l. by the year, be delivered to him in execution for 40l.
and he within four years make a conditional Surrender of them to the
Conusor, and after he enter for the condition broken, in this case he shall not
hold the land over the four years, for he must take the profits upon his
Extent presently; The proceeding in Execution of the Statute Staple, and the
Recognisance founded upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. is after the same manner
throughout as the proceeding in Execution of the Statute Merchant is, with
these differences only. That upon 15 H. 7. 16. F. N. B. 130. 131.
the Execution of the Statute Merchant, there does issue forth a Capias against
the body before any Execution be to be made of the lands, or goods, and
chattels, and the lands and goods cannot be extended until a quarter of a
year be past after the body is taken, or the Sheriff have returned a non est
inventus; but upon the Execution of the Statute Staple and the Recognisance,
the body, goods, and lands may be taken together at the first; this therefore
is a more speedy remedy then the former. Also upon a Statute Merchant, one may
have an Action of debt; but otherwise upon a Statute Staple; and the Capias
upon the Statute Merchant may be returnable in the Kings Bench, or
Commonplace, but the writ of Execution upon the other is to be returned in
the Chancery.

The proceeding upon the other sort of Recognisances are after another manner;
for upon Recognisances at the common Law, if Dyer 36^. 315. Kelw. 100. West. 2
chap. 18. Broo. execution 129. Coo. 3. 11. 15. H. 7. 16. Kitch. 117.
the money be not paid at the day, the Conusee his Executor or Administrator is
to bring a Scire facias against the Conusor, or if he be dead against his
heirs when they be of full age; or if the lands the Conusor had at the time of
entering into the Recognisance, be sold against the purchasers of these lands
which the Conusor had at any time after the Recognisance entered into, to warn
them to come into that Court whence the Scire facias comes, and to show cause
why execution should not be done upon the said Recognisance; and if the party
or parties cannot be found to be warned, or being warned do not appear at the
time, or appearing show no cause why the debt should not be levied, then the
Conusee shall Elegit.
have execution of a Moity of his lands by Elegit, or if the Conusor be living,
of all his goods by Levari or Fieri facias at his election, Levari facias.
but he cannot have execution of his body unless he bring an Action of debt
upon the Recognisance, or it be by course of the Fieri facias.
Court, as it is in the King's Bench upon a Bail, in which case a Capias does
lie. Capias.


The proceeding against the Sureties in Statutes shall be as the Sureties.
Stat de Mercatoribus.
proceeding against the Principal; but in case where there are movables of
the Principal to satisfy the debt, the Surety (as it seems) shall not be
charged.

When a man does enter into a Statute or Recognisance, the land 5. What things
are subject and liable to execution upon a Statute or Recognisance. And when,
and how; And what not.
Plow. 72. Coo. 10. ^0. 51. Bro. St. Merchant.
of the Conusor is not the debtor, but the body; and the land is liable only in
respect that it was in the hands of the Conusor at the time of acknowledging of
the Statute, or after; and the land is not charged with the debt, but
chargeably only at the election of the Conusee; but the person is charged, and
the land is chargable in respect of the person, and not the person in respect
of the land. And therefore albeit the Conusor alien his land to another, yet he
remains debtor still, and his body and his goods shall be taken in execution:
and yet when execution is sued upon the land, the land is charged and become
debtor also. First, in respect of the nature and quality of the things
themselves.


The body of the Conusor himself, but not the body of his heir, (...) de
Me^catoribus. Coo. 3. 12. Plow. 72. Coo. 2. 59 Littl. Sect. 358. Dyer 205.
Broo. Stat. Merchant 44. Dyer 7. Co. super Littl. 374.
executor, or administrator is liable to execution and may be taken, albeit
there be lands, goods, and chattels to satisfy the debt; and all the demesne
and copyhold lands, tenements, and hereditaments corporeal and incorporeall of
the Conusor that are grantable over, as his Manors, Mesuages, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Rents, Commons, Tithes, Advowsons, and the like: also all his
goods and chattels, as leases for years, wardships, emblements, cattle,
household stuff, and the like, are liable to execution upon a Statue. Dyer 373
And therefore if a man make a lease for life, or years, and after enter into
a Statute, or Recognisance; this reversion cum acciderit shall be subject to
execution, and the Con^sor cannot (as it seems) by any sale thereof prevent
it. And yet the contrary has been held for law. Litt. Bro^. Sect. 227 Doct.
and Sr. 53. B^o. St. Marcha. 41. Dyer 205.
And if one make a feoffment in see, or lease for life, reserving a rent, this
rent is extendable and the Conusee may distraine for it. So if the lessee for
life make a lease for years rendering a rent, and then the lessee for life
enter into a Statute; this rent is subject to execution, 1 Har^ingtons case
pasche ^. lac. B. R.
and it seems the Conusee may bring an Action of debt against the lessee for
years for it. Coo. 7. 3^
And albeit the rent become extinct by the purchase of the Conusor or
otherwise, yet as to the Conusee it shall be said to be in esse and subject to
execution still. And therefore if a rent be granted unto me for my life after
the death of my wise, and after I do acknowledge a Statute, and then my wise
die, and then I release the rent to the terre-tenant; this rent shall be liable
to execution. But Annuities, Offices in Dyer 7. Co. super Littl. 374. Doct. and
St. 53. Coo. 2. 59. 1. 62.
trust, Seigniories in Franckalmoigne, Homage, Fealty, Rights, Things in
action, and such like things are not liable to execution upon Statutes or
Recognisances. Also a remainder in tail, or in see after an estate tail in
possession, is not liable to execution in these cases, except it happen to come
into the possession of the Conusor.

The lands, tenements and hereditaments that are Copihold, albeit Stat. de
Mercatoribus Dyer 299. Plow. 82. Coo. 7. 39. 3 12. Broo. Recognisance 7. Co. 1.
62. 13 H. 7. 22. Broo, Stat. Mar^c
the Conusor have the fee simple of them, yet are subject to Second, in respect
of the estate, property and possession of the conusor in the things.
execution, only for the life of the Conusor; but his demesne lands wherein he
has an estate in fee-simple, are liable to execution for ever if need require.

The lands the Conusor has in jointenancy with another, are subject to
execution during the life of the Conusor and no longer; for after his death the
surviving jointenant shall have all; but if the Conusor survive his companion,
then all the land shall be subject to execution: and the lands the Conusor
has as tenant in tail, are liable to execution only during the life of him
being the tenant in tail; for afterward they shall go to his issue in tail.
And yet if the tenant in tail after he has entered into a Statute, suffer a
recovery of the land intailed, in this case the land shall be subject to
execution as if it were fee-simple land. And the lands the Conusor has in the
right of his wife, shall be charged and subject to execution only during the
lives of the husband and wife together, and no longer.

If a feoffment be made in condition to make an estate to another by a day of
the same land, and before the day the feoffee enter Littl. Sect. 3^8.
into a Statute or a recognisance; this land shall be subject unto execution
until the feoffor reenter, for the breach of the condition.

If one be disseised of land, and then enter into a Statute; this Coo. 2. ^9.
land shall not be subject to execution: and yet if the Conusor do after
recover the land by entry or action, it shall be liable to execution.

The goods and chattels whereof the Conusor is solely possessed, Stat. de
Mer^^t r. bus Co. 3. 11. 12. ^l^^. 52^. Coo. c. ^^1 5. 92. Dyer 6^.
and possessed in his own right; and the goods and chattels of which he is
jointly possessed with another; and the goods and chattels he has in the right
of his wife, are liable to execution. But the goods or chattels that he or his
wife has as Executor or Executrix to another, or as pledged only, it seems are
not subject to execution. And if the Conusor deliver goods to another to
deliver over to I S; these goods before they be delivered over are liable to
execution. And if he have leases for years in the right of his wife, and die
before execution be done, it seems these leases are liable to execution. Sed
quaere. But if the Conusor have goods in his custody of another man's, or have
goods he has distrained in the nature of a distress, these are not liable to
execution.

All the lands, tenements and hereditaments which the Conusor had at the time
of the Statute or Recognisance entered into or at 3. In respect of the time.
Coo. 3. 12. Stat. de Mer catoribu^.
any time after, into whose hands by what means soever the same are betide and
come at the time of execution, are subject and liable to the execution. But the
lands the Conusor had and did put away before the time of the Statute or
Recognisance entered into, are not liable to execution. And all the goods and
chattels the Conusor has and are found in his hands at the time when the
execution is to be made by the Extendi facias, are liable to the execution. But
the goods and chattels he had and did Bonafide do away before the time of
execution done, are not liable to the execution.

And of all these things before subject to execution, the Conusee may take all
or part at his pleasure. And therefore if the Conusor 4. In respect of the
quantity.
(...). St^^ ^^. 4. 2. 25. P^^. 72. S^^ (...).
have sold his lands to diverse persons, or have sold some of his lands to
diverse persons, or to one man, and keep the rest in his hands, or it descend to
his heir; the Conusee may sue execution upon the lands in either of their
hands at his election; so that if the Cognisee after the Statute entered into
and before execution purchase part of the land of the cognisor, he may
notwithstanding have execution upon the residue in the hands of the Conusor, or
in the hands of his heir; and yet so that in some of these cases his execution
may be afterward avoided, and he he compelled to sue execution again.

The Cognisee upon other Recognisances shall have the same Weston. 2. chap. 13.
Plow. 72. Coo. 3. 12. Dyer 30^. Kelw. 100.
things in execution as a man shall have after a judgment in a Suite in the
Kings Bench or Common Pleas by Fieri facias, or Levari facias, all his goods
and chattels, and by Elegit the Moity of his lands, and all his chattels,
besides the Cattle of his plow and implements of husbandry. But in these cases
he cannot take the body of the Conusor in execution, unless it be upon a new
Suite, or in case of bail in the King's Bench.

Howsoever by the Common Law after a full and perfect execution had by extent
returned and of record, there shall never be any Stat. 32. H 8. chap. 5
^ Where a man shall have a Reextent or ^ new execution, And where not.
reextent, yet by a special Act of Parliament it is provided, That if after
lands etc. be had in execution upon a just or lawful title wherewith all the
said lands etc. were liable tied or bound at such time as they were delivered
or taken in execution, they shall be taken or recovered away from him before he
has received his full debt and damages; in this case after a Scire facias had
against the Conusor his heirs, executors, administrators, or purchasors, he (or
his executors or administrators if he be dead) shall have a new execution to
levy the residue of the debt and damages then unsatisfied. Wherein these
things are to be observed, 1. In case where the Coo. 4. 66. 82. Plow. 61 15. H.
7. 15 Coo. super Litt. 99. Kitch. 116.
Conusee is unlawfully and wrongfully disturbed either by the Conusor or by a
stranger in the taking of the profits of the land delivered to him in
execution; there he may and must bring his action and recover damages, and
these damages shall go toward his satisfaction; for in this case and for this
disturbance he shall not hold the land a day the longer. And where he is
hindered by his own neglect or act in the taking of the profits of the land, as
where his debt is 40l. and he has 10l, a year delivered to him by which be
may satisfy himself in four years, and within the time he make a
conditional surrender to the Conusor, and enter for the condition broken; in
this case he shall not hold the land over, neither shall he have any Reextent.
And where the let or disturbance is such as wherein the Conusee has remedy
given him by the Common Law to hold the land over after the disturbance
removed; in this case he shall have no new execution nor reextent within this
Statute; for where the Conusee has remedy in praesenti for part, or in futuro
for all or part, this Statute extends not to it. And therefore where the
Conusee is hindered in the taking of the profits of land by the act of God, as
by fire, overflowing of water or the like; or the act of the party Conusor, or
any by or under him, as when one is bound to A in a Statute of 100l. and after
to B in a Statute of 200l. and B extends the land first, and then A extends
the land and takes it away from B, or when the Guardian in Chivalry does put
out the Conusee by reason of the Wardship of the Heir of the Conusor, or the
wife of the Conusor does claim her dower and put out the Conusee, or one
disseise his lessee for life, or out his lessee for years, and then acknowledge
a Stature, and after execution is sued against him and then the land is
delivered to the Conusee and after the lessee for life or years does enter; in
all these cases because by the Common law the Conusee may hold over the land
after the time given him by the extent and after the impediments removed,
until he be satisfied his debt and damages therefore, he shall have no aid of
this Statute by Reextent; for he is then only to be relieved by this Statute
when as he is evicted and disturbed and is wholly and clearly without any
remedy at the Common Law. 2. Where the Statute says [untill he etc. or his
assigns shall fully and wholly have levied the whole debt and damages] if he
has assigned several parcels to several assigns, yet all they shall have
the land but until the whole debt be paid. 3. Where the words be [for the
which the said lands etc. were delivered in execution] If A disseisor convey
the lands to the King who grants the same over to A and his heirs to hold by
Fealty and 20l. rent, and after grants the Seigniory to B, B acknowledges a
Statute, and execution is sued of the Seigniory, A dies without heir, and the
Conusee enters and is evicted by the disseisee; in this case he shall have the
aid of this Statute; but the Perquisite of a Villain being evicted is out of
the Statute. 4. Where the words be [delivered and taken in execution] yet if
after the Liberate the Conusee enter (as he may) so as the land is never
delivered, yet it is within the remedy of this Statute. 5. Albeit the Statute
speak only of the recoveror, obligee, etc. and not of their executors,
administrators, or assigns, yet the Statute shall extend to them, 6. Where the
Statute speaks of a Scire facias out of the same Court etc. if the record be
removed into another Court and there affirmed, he may have a Scire facias out
of that Court. 7. Where the Statute gives a Scire facias against such person
and persons etc. that were parties to the first execution, their heirs
executors or assigns etc. this must not be taken so generally as the letter is;
for if the first execution were had against a purchasor etc. so as nothing in
his hands were liable but the land recovered, if this land be evicted from the
tenant by execution, no Scire facias shall go against him, his executors etc.
but if he has other lands subject to execution, then a Scire facias lies
against him or his assigns, but not against his Executor; neither in that case
can he have a Scire 7. Where and by what means a Statute or Recognisance, and
the execution thereof shall be discharged, ^n^ ponded, or avoided ^^l or i^
part and where not
facias upon this Statute against the first debtor or recognisor, but if there
be several assigns of several parcels of lands subject to the execution, one
Scire facias will lie against all the assigns.

A Statute or recognisance and the execution thereupon may be discharged diverse
ways as by defeasance, release, payment of the money, Dyer 297. 315. Co. 6. 13
20. Ass. Pl. 7. See Defeasance.
debt, and damages, or the residue thereof unlevied, delivery up of the
Statute, purchase of part of the land by the cognisee, or the like. And
therefore if there be a defeasance to the Statute or recognisance, and it be to
pay money at a day, or to perform some other thing, and the money be paid, or
the thing done accordingly, this is is a discharge of the Statute. And
therefore if such a Statute or recognisance be afterward sued against the
Conu^or, he may be By defeasance.
^elieved by an Audita Querela. And if A bind himself to B by a Statute of
20l. and B sue execution, and the lands of A are delivered to him in execution
until he levy the money, and after B does make a defeasance to A by Indenture,
that if A pay 10l. by a day certain, that then the Statute or Recognisance
shall be void; if this be done accordingly, the Statute and the execution
thereupon is defeated and discharged. And if the Cognisee before By R^lease.
Coo. (...) Litt. (...) 47. 50. 51. super L^^l. 265. Broo. St. Merchant 2^ See
Relea^^.
execution or after, release to the Cognisor the Statute or Recognisance, or
the debt; this is a perpetual discharge of the Statute and the execution
thereupon. But if the Conusee before execution release to the Conusor all his
right in or to the land; this will not discharge the whole execution; for if he
may not sue execution of the land afterward (as it seems he may this
notwithstanding) y^^^e may sue execution of his body and goods. But such a
release after execution made of the land, will no doubt discharge the land. and
yet if a Conusee release all his right in the land to the Feoffee of the
cognisor of a parcel of the land, it seems this will discharge the land of
execution, albeit it be before the execution sued that this release is made.
And so it is said it was resolved Mich. 26. 27. Eliz. If the cognisee assign
the Statute or Barrow. and Graies case 38. Eli^.
Recognisance to the Cognisor or to the terre-tenant by way of discharge of the
debt or land; it seems this is a good release and discharge of it in law. And
if the Cognisee purchase any part By purchase or surrender of the land.
of the land of the Cognisor after the Statute or Recognisance Plow. ye. ^ N.
104. lit. Broo. Sect. 293. 11. M. 7 4. Brandit^ Que^la. 48 Seat Merchant 42.
Coo. ^eyre ^itt. 150. 25. A^s. Pl. 7. Broo. Stat. Merchant 25. Littl. (...) 25.
entered into; this is no discharge of the Statute or the Recognisance, but the
Cognisee may have execution notwithstanding of the lands that are left in the
hands of the Cognisor or of his body, or goods, or all. But if the Cognisee
purchase parcel of the lands, and a stranger another parcel; in this case the
lands that are purchased by the stranger shall be discharged of execution. And
if the Cognisee after execution sued purchase any part of the and, or the
Fee-simple of all or part of it does desc^nd to him; by this the whole
execution is discharged. And if the Cognisee purchase all the lands of the
Cognisor; by this the execution as to the land is suspended, but this is no
discharge as to the body and goods of the conusor, for they are subject to
execution still. And if the conusee reinfeoffe the conusor again, the
execution may be revived again against the lands of the conusor, so that they
will be subject to execution again whether they do conti^^e in his lands or
be sold away to others. So also if the Conusee enfeoffe a stranger after he
does purchase the land, and the stranger does enfeoffe the Conusor; in this
case also the Execution is revived, and the lands shall now be subject
thereunto as they were before.

If a Leassee for life make a Lease for years rendering a rent, and Harringtone
case. ^asche 19. Iac. B. R.
after enter into a Statute to I S, and then enter into another Statute to I D,
and after he does grant his estate to I S; by this the Execution of the
Statute made to I S is suspended, and therefore during the suspention, it
seems I D albeit he be after in time, may sue and have he Rent in execution.

If the Conusor after he has entered into a Statute or Recognisance, 8. Where
the Conusor, or his heir, or an alience, or purchaser shall have contribution
upon a Statute or Recognisance or not.
does convey away his land to diverse persons, and then the Conusee Plow. 72.
Coo. 3. 12, 6, 13.
sue Execution of the Statute upon the lands of one or some of them and not of
all; in this case he or they whose lands is, or are taken in Execution may by
an Audita Querela or Scire Facias, have contribution from the rest, wherein
these differences must be observed: That one Purchasor shall have Contribution
from another: And therefore if the Conusor sell some lands to I S, and other
lands to I D, and the Conusee sue Execution only of the lands of I S: I S shall
have contribution against I D. And the Feoffee of the Purchasor, the Feoffee of
the Heir of the Conusor, the Feoffee of the Feoffee, and another Feoffee shall
have contribution of the Heir of the Conusor: But the Conusor himself shall
not have contribution from a Purchasor; and therefore, if he sell part of his
lands, and keep part in his hands, and the Conusee sue Execution only of the
lands in the hands of the Conusor or his H^ires; in this case, neither he nor
his Heirs shall have any contribution from the Purchasors; and one Heir shall
have contribution from another And therefore, if one be seized of two Acres,
the one in Bur^ow English, the other of other Land, and he enter into a Statute
and die, and he has but two daugh^^s, and the Execution is sued upon the land
of one them; she shall have contribution from the other So where some land does
descend to the H^ire of the part of the Father, and some to the Heir of the
part of the Mother.

If one be seized of lands in Fee in the County of A, and B, and enter into a
Statute or Recognisance, and the Conusor die, and then the Conusee die also,
and his Executor does ^u^ Execution of the lands in B only, and has Execution,
and after the Heir does sell these lands; in this case the Vendee shall have no
contribution. So also it seems the Law is, if the H^i^e sell the land to
diverse, and one of the Purchasors appear to the Seire Facias, and the Judgment
is given against him, and he afterward sell the land, his Vendee shall have no
contribution: And in all these cases where it is said the one Purchasor shall
have contribut on, it is not intended that the rest shall give or allow him any
thing by way of contribution, but that the party whose lands are extended, may
by Audita Querela or Seire Facias, as the case requires, defeat the Execution,
and thereby shall be restored to all the mean profits, and force the Conusee
to sue his Execution upon all the land, that the land of every one of the
Terre-tenants may be equally extended.

And so we fall from an Obligation by matter of Record, to an Obligation by
matter of Fait which is no Record.

CAP. XXI. Of an Obligation.
AN Obligation is a Deed in writing whereby one man does bind 1. Obligation.
Quid. Obligor. Obligee.
Finches ley. 49.
himself to another to pay a sum of money or do some other thing. And he
that makes this Deed is called the Obligor, and he to whom it is made is called
the Obligee.

And it is sometimes Simple, or Single, which is when it is to pay 2. Quotuplex.
Coo. super Litt. 172.
a sum of money or do some other thing, and when it is without any Defesance
or Condition in or annexed to it, which also is sometimes with a penalty called
a penal Bill, and sometimes without a penalty. And this is that which is most
properly called an Obligation, and sometimes also it is called a single Bill,
or single Bond. And sometimes it is double or Conditional, which is when it is
attended upon and accompanied with a Condition. And then it is said to be a
Bond containing a penalty with condition to pay money, or do or suffer some
act or thing, etc. And this Condition is some times called a Defeasance, and
then especially when it is (as sometimes it is) in another Deed or Instrument;
for most commonly it is inserted into the same Deed wherein the Obligation
being the other part of it is contained. And then also it is either subscribed
under the Obligation, or included within the body of it, or indorsed upon the
back of it. And quacunque via if the condition be performed the penalty is
saved; if not, the penalty is forfeit.

a Broo. Obligat. 67. ^0.
An Obligation may be made upon parchment or paper, and in loose 3. What shall
be said a good Obligation in his original creation, or not.
parchment or paper, Trin. 49. Eliz. B. R.
or in a piece of paper or parchment sowed in a book, and either way it is
good. But if it be made on a Tally, piece of wood, or any other thing but paper
or parchment, albeit it be sealed and delivered, yet it is void. Coo. super
Lit. 229. Fitz Obligat. 9.
And it may be made in the first or in the third person (notwithstanding the
Statute of 38. Ed. 3. c. 4. which First, for the manner and form of it; and
what words are sufficient to make an Obligation.
does intend only Obligations made beyond the Sea.) And therefore an Obligation
so made, as Memorandum quod A de B debet C de D 10l. In ou us etc. is good.

Albeit the best manner and form of an Obligation, is that which is Dyer 21.
22. 23. Coo. 9. 53. 37 H. 6. 9. 22 Ed. 4. 22. ^elw. 34. a ^ Ed. 4. 39. ^3 H. 7.
6.
most usual, as, Noveritis me A de B teneri and firmiter obligari C de D in
20l. legalis etc. Solvend. eidem C autsuo cert. Atturnat, executoribus aut
administratoribus suis. Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciendum
obligo me haeredes executores and adminstratores meo^ firmiter perprasentes
etc. yet any words in a writing sealed and deliverd whereby a man does prove
and declare himself to have another man's money or to be indebted to him, will
make a good Obligation; And therefore if a man by Deed say but this, Memorandum
that I A of B do owe to C of D 20l. to be paid at Easter next. Or memorandum,
that I A of B have had of C of D 20l. of which there is 10l. behind, [or of
which I owe him 10l.] Or memorandum, that I A of B have received of C of D 20l.
to be repaid him again. Or memorandum, that I A of B do grant to owe [or to
pay] C of D 20l. Or memorandum, that I A of B do promise to pay C of D 20l. Or
memorandum, that I A of B will pay to C of D 20l. Or memorandum, that I A of B
have had 20l. of the money of C of D. Or memorandum, that I A of B have
borrowed of C of D 20l. Or memorandum, that I A of B do bind my self to C of
D that he shall receive of me 20l. all these and such like are good
Obligations. So if one say Broo. Obligation 56.
memorandum, that I A of B bind my self to C of D that he shall receive 20l.
by the hands of I S when K does come to his house, and at Michaelmas then next
following 5l. this is a good Obligation, and the words [by the hands of I D]
are void. Broo. Ob^gation 1^.
So if one bind himself thus. Memorandum, that I A of B owe to C of D 20l. for
payment of which I bind my self and my goods; this is a good Obligation and
will bind the person but not his goods. Broo. O^l. 52. Dyer ^.
So if one by Deed, covenant or promise to do a thing and then uses these
words, Ad quam quidem promissionem perimplendam obligo me in 20l. this is a
good Obligation for 20l. Broo. Obl. 4^.
So if one bind himself thus: Broo. Obl. 79.
Memorandum, that I A of B am bound to C of D to deliver him 20 quarters of
corn by a day, Ad quod performandum obligome, without more words; this is a
good Obligation. So if one bind himself thus: Memorandum, that I A of B bind
my self to pay C of D 10l. at Easter, and if I fail to pay it them, I do
grant to pay him 20l. this is a good Obligation for the 20l. if he fail to pay
the 10l. ^oxalls case 9. Iac. B. R.
And some say he may recover both the 20l. and the 10l. So if one bind himself
thus: Fox versus Wright. ^^n. 40. Eliz. B. R.
Memorandum, that in consideration of a Bill of 50l. wherein I S is bound for
me to I D for payment of 20l. I do bind my self in 20l. to the said I S to
save him harmless from all Actions of the same; this is a good Obligation; and
if I D ^ue I S, the Bill is forseit. Or if one bind himself thus: Be it known
etc. Adjudged P^^t and Woolwards case, M^^. ^9 H. in the Excheker C^^ber.
that I A of B do owe unto C of D the sum of 1^l. to be paid at the Feast of
etc. together with six pounds which I owe him upon Bills and Recognisances
subscribed with my hand; this is a good Bill, but it is good for no more ^ut
the 14l. and not for the 6l. for the words do only import the time of payment
of the 6l.

If one make a Writing in the form of a Statute which the party Trin. 17 El. B.
R. Fitz. Account. 79
does seal and afterward legally deliver, but it is not sealed by the Kings
and the Majors Seal according to the Statute, albeit this be not a good
Statute, yet it may be a good Obligation.

I^ one bind himself to pay money or do any other thing, and Perk. Sect. 158.
Fitz. Oblig. 1.
afterward does add this clause in the Deed, Et ad majorem hujus rei
securitatem inveni A de B and C de D fidejussores, quorum unusquisque Obligat
se in toto and in solid. and these two do also seal and deliver the Deed; it
seems this is a good Obligation to bind them, albeit there be no other words in
the Deed.

If an Obligation be made to I D to the use of I S, this is a good Obligation
for I S in equity, and some have said he may release it; Broo. Obl. 72. Cro^p.
Ier. 63.
but this is much to be doubted; for it is certain I S cannot sue the Obligor
in his own name, but when he has cause of Suit he may compel I D in Chancery
to sue the Obligor.

If A of B bind himself to C of D to pay 20l. and say not when; yet Brook. Obl.
47. 14. H. 8. 29. 21 Ed. 3. ^^. 4. Ed. 4. 29.
the Obligation is good, and the money is due presently. So if the Obligation be
Solvendum nunquam, or solvendum at Doomsday, the Obligations are good, and the
solvendum void, and the money is due presently. So if A of B bind himself to C
of D in 20l. Solvendum A de B [where it should be solvendum C de D,] the
Obligation is good, and and the solvendum void.

If the Obligation be made thus, [Obligome etc.] leaving out these Dyer 13.
Broo. Oblig. 25. 68.
words following [haeredes executores and administratores;] this is a good
Obligation, and the Executors and Administrators, but not the Heir, are bound
by it. And if it be made thus, [solvendum to the Obligee and successoribus
suis] and not [executoribus etc.] this is a good Obligation, and the Executors
and Administrators; and not the Successors, except it be in case of a
Corporation, shall take advantage of it.

An Obligation may be good, albeit it contain false or incongruous Latin or
English, or Latin be put for English, or e contra^ if the intent Coo. 10. 233
Fitz. Obl. 12 2 H. 4. 14.
of the parties may sufficiently appear: And therefore if one be bound by the
name of Johannes for I^hannem; or one bind himself in octogenta, for octoginta
libris; or in septungentis for septuagintis libris; in wiginti for viginti
libris; in sewteene for seaventeene pounds; in quinquegentis for quingentis
libris; Adjudged Vernons case M. 13. Iac. Co. 1.
in septuagessimo for septuaginta libris; G^^ies case 5. Iac. B. R. Mich. 10.
Car. B. R. Adjudged
sexingentis for sexcentris libris; in quinquagessimis, or quinque decies, for
quinquaginta libris; in octogenta for octoginta libris; or in viginti livers,
for viginti libris; in vigiati nobilibus for 20 nobles; Fitz. h^gh. ^res.
Bridges 3. and 4. Eh. Co. P.
or in octigenta libris, for octogintalibris; or quinginta libris for
quinquaginta libris, or the like; these mi^prisions will not hurt the
Obligations, for they are good notwithstanding But if one by the Obligation
bind himself in in Paris case M. 4. Iac. B. R.
quinqueagentis libris, or in quinqeagentis libris, or in quinagentis libris,
or in segintis libris; these Obligations are void; for in these cases the
meaning if so uncertain, that it cannot be discerned, and no Averment will
serve to supply it in this case. Trin. 21. Iac. Nowels case.
So if an Obligation be dated 23 die Aprilie, in stead of Aprilis; this is a
good Obligation; and this mistake will not hurt.

And if an Obligation have not date, or a false and impossible date, or have
but half the date as the year of our Lord only; or Coo. 2. 5. See at Fait.
Numb. 5.
if it want these words In cujus rei etc. or the like, if it be sealed and
delivered, it is a good Obligation.

A single Obligation may be to pay money, or to do any other Coo. 10. 110 See
fait or Deed, Number. 51.
Secondly, for the matter and substance of it.
thing that is lawful and possible, and such Obligations are good. But if the
Obligation be to bind a man to do a thing unlawful or impossible, it is v^yd:
And therefore if one bind himself in an Obligation to kill a man burn a house,
maintain a Suit; or the like, it is void. So if the Obligation be made for
maintenance or to that end, or if it be made pursuant to, and in execution of
an usurious contract, or the like, it is void. So if an Obligation be made
against See more infra.
the Statute of 23. H. ^. it is void. So if one bind himself in an Obligation
and the matter thereof is altogether uncertain, or insensible, it is void; but
if there be any reasonable certainty in it, it is good enough. So if one bind
himself to go to Rome in three days under pain of ^ol. this is void.

The condition of an Obligation may be either in the same, or in Plow. 141. 2^
H. 6. 51. Fitz Bar 157.
4. What shall be said a good condition of an Obligation, or not. First, for
the manner and frame of it.
another Deed, and it may be indorsed of the back of the Obligation, subscribed
under it, or contained within it; but the best way to make it, is the usual
way, viz. The condition of this Obligation is such etc. and yet if it be
otherwise, it may be good; for if an Obligation be made from A to B and on the
back of the same these words are indorsed [That whereas the within bounden A is
bound to B in 20 l. yet B. wills and grants that if A pay to B 10l. at
Easter, that then the Obligation shall be void;] it seems this is a good
condition. So if in the close of an Obligation of 20 l. these words be added:
[That if A (the Obligor) pay 10l. to B (the Obligee) at Broo. Obli. 89. Fitz.
Bar 265.
Easter, that the Obligation shall be void;] this is a good condition. So if an
Obligation be made from A to B of 20l. and these words are subscribed: [Now
therefore if the Obligor pay 5 l. quarterly for Pasche 8. Iac. B. Simpsons case
21 H. 6. 51. 26 H. 8. 9.
four years, then it is agreed that the Obligation shall be void;] this is a
good condition. So if a single Obligation be made from A to B of 20l. and after
the Obligation is made, B does by another Deed grant that if A pay him 10l. at
Easter, the Obligation shall be void; this is a good condition or Defeasance.
But if A do bind himself in an Obligation to B of 20 l. and after B does bind
himself in another Obligation to A to perform the Covenants of an Indenture,
and in this second Obligation, there is a Proviso that B shall not sue upon the
first Obligation till such a time; this is not a good condition.

If A be bound to B in 20l. with condition that if B do not bring 26 H. 8. 8.
A a horse before Easter, that the Obligation shall be void; this a good
condition; and if the Obligee will have advantage of it, he must perform the
thing; Et sic de similibus. So if A be bound in an Obligation to B in 20l. with
condition that if B shall bring 20 load Bro. Count. 69.
of wood to the house of A, what A shall pay him the 20l. or that A shall pay
him 20l. when B shall bring him 20 load of wood to his house; these are good
conditions, and the thing must be done before the money is to be paid.

If the condition of an Obligation be, That if A (the Obligor) do not pay to B
(the Obligee) 10 l. that the Obligation shall be Broo. Oblig. 42.
void; this is a good condition; but it shall be taken according to the words,
and therefore the Obligor is not to pay it; And if he be sued, he may plead
performance of the condition in the not paying of it.

If these words be omitted in the close of the condition [That Curia B. R.
Pasche 90. Ia. Tr^eman and Parrams case.
then the Obligation to be void;] the condition is void, but it does not hurt
the Obligation, for that remains single: But if the next words, viz. [Or else
shall stand in force] be omitted, the condition is never the worse; for as the
addition of them does nothing add to, so the omission of them does nothing
detract from the strength of the Obligation.

The condition of an Obligation, may be to do any law full or possible thing,
as to pay money, deliver goods or Cattle, acknowledge a Secondly for matter
and substance of it.
See in West. Symb.
Statute, enter into an Obligation, make a Release, make an estate, surrender
an estate, make reparations, for quiet enjoying, to save harmless, to defend a
title, to perform Covenants, to abide an Award, to perform a Will, to give so
much land or money in legacy, to purchase lands, to appear in a Court, to
marry another, not to sue, not to meddle with an Executorship, not to revoke a
Letter of Attorney, not to be Surety, not to play at cards or dice, or any such
like thing; and such a condition is good. So also it seems a condition, that a
man shall not sell his goods, is good: But when the matter or thing to be done
by the condition is unlawful or impossible, Pasche 8. Ia. Co. B.
or the condition it self is repugnant, insensible, or incertaine, the
condition is void. and in some cases the Obligation also. And herein these
differences are to be observed.

1. When the thing enjoined, or restrained to be, or not to be done by the
condition, is such a thing in his own nature, as the commission Coo. 10. 101 11.
53. super Litt. 206. Dyer. 304. Plow. 64. Fitz. Obligation, 13 See before in
Condition and in Covenant.
or omission thereof, is malum in se, there not only the Condition, but the
whole Obligation also is void ab initio: And therefore if one Against Law.
be bound in an Obligation with condition that he shall kill a man, burn a
house, do any other Felony, commit any Trespass, maintain any Suit
unlawfully; or (being an Officer) that he shall take Fees by extortion, or that
he (being a Sheriff etc.) shall let a Prisoner escape, or that he shall save
the Obligee harmless against an unlawful Deed, or that he shall not save his
land, or that he (being a Tradesman) shall not use his Trade, (and yet it
seems a condition, that a man shall not use his Trade in o^e place, or at one
time, or if he do that, he shall pay so much by the year unto another, is not
a condition against Law,) or that a man (being an Officer and an Officer pro
bono publico) shall not exercise his Office, or the like; this condition is
void, and makes the Obligation and so the whole Deed void. But when the thing
to be, or not to be done by the condition, is such a thing as the omission or
commission thereof in its nature is not malum in se; but only against some
maxim of Law, as that a man shall make a Feoffment to his own wise, or is but
malum prohibitum only, as that a man shall erect a Cottage contrary to the
Statute of 31 Eliz. or is repugnant to the state, as that a Feoffee of Land
shall not alien it, or take the profits of it, or that a Tenant in Tail shall
not suffer a Recovery of his Land, or the like; in these cases the conditions
only are void, and the Obligations remain single and without a condition. And
yet perhaps if the Obligors be sued upon these Obligations they may have
relief in equity. Equity.


2. When the matter or thing to be done by the Condition, is such a Perk. Sect.
735. Coo. super Litt. 207. Fitz. Oblig. 17. 27 H. 8. 29. 21. Ed. 4. 54. 42. Ed.
3. 6.
thing as in its nature is impossible to be done at the time of the making
Impossible.
of the Obligation, there the Obligation is good, and the Condition only is
void. And therefore if I be bound in an Obligation with Condition, that I shall
stand to the Award of certain persons etc. provided that the Award be made
before the tenth day of May next, and provided that I have warning 15 days
before the 10th of May, and this Obligation is made the 9th day of May; this is
a void Condition: And so if I be bound in an Obligation with condition, that I
will go to Rome within three days, or that I will make an estate of white
acre in Dale worth 10l. per annum, when revera it is worth but 5l. per annum,
or that I will be nonsuit in such an Action, or assure such a piece of
ground, when in truth there is no such Action, or piece of ground; this
condition is void, and the Obligation remains single and good. So if the
condition be, That Hill. 17. Iac. B. F.
whereas A had a judgment against B the Obligor for 20l. and the Obligee has
acknowledged satisfaction, if therefore the Obligor shall before such a day get
a Warrant from A, whereby the Obligee may be saved harmless for the same
acknowledgement, That then etc. this condition is void, and as it seems, the
Obligation also, for that it is not only impossible, but against Law also. But
when the thing to be done by the condition, is a thing possible at the time of
the making of the Obligation, and after by matter ex post facto by the Act of
God, the Act of the Law, or the Act of the Obligee, it is become impossible; in
this case the Obligation and the Condition both are become void: And therefore
if a man be bound with a condition, that he shall appear the next Term in such
a Court, and before the day the Obligor dies; hereby the Obligation is saved.
So if A be bound to B, that I S shall marry Jane G by such a day, and before
the day, B himself marry with Jane G, hereby the Obligation is discharged, 21
Ed. 4. 53.
and B shall never take advantage of it.

3. When the Condition of an Obligation is so insensible and incertaine, that
the meaning cannot be known, there the Condition Insensible. Incertaine.
only is void, and the Obligation good: As if an Obligation be made by A to B
with condition, that A shall keep B without damage against I S for 10l. in
which the Obligee is bound to the Obligor; this Condition is void, and the
Obligation single. Pasche 9. Iac. B. R.
So if the Condition be, That A shall pay his part of the sums of money, that
shall be levied for the trying of the Customs of M; unless the word [levied]
be used for taxed in that Country, the Condition is insensible and void. So if
A be bound to B with Condition to save him harmless, and say not for what, or
against whom; this Condition is void and the Obligation single: But if any
sense or certainty may be made of it, the Obligation and Condition shall be
both good.

4. When the Condition of an Obligation in the matter of it is repugnant 2 H.
6. 44. 21. H. 7. 24. 30.
to the Obligation it self, there the condition is void, Repugnant.
and the obligation good: And therefore if the condition of an obligation be,
that the Obligee shall not have benefit by the obligation, or that he shall not
sue for the money in the obligation, or the like; this condition is void, and
the obligation single: And yet this by a Deseasance made after the obligation
may be See Defeasance.
done.

5. When the thing to be done, by the condition is to be done 10 H. 6. 14. 21.
Ed. 4. 10. ^T ^n. 7. I^. B. R.
beyond the Sea, it has been held that the condition is void, and Not t^^able.
the obligation single, because the thing was not triable here. But it seems
the Law is otherwise now, and that the matter is triable here and the condition
good. And in all other cases where a Deed in general is void for Misnosmer,
disability, or otherwise, there an Fitz. Oblig. 2. 11.
obligaition is void.

All Bonds with conditions for the enjoying of spiritual livings contrary to
the Statute of 13 Eliz. Chap. 20. are void by the Statute of 14 Eliz. chap. 11.

If any Ladies or Gentlewomen be drawn by slattery, of threatening to enter
into any Obligation simple or conditional, to pay any money not truly due,
they may be relieved by a course in the Chancery, for which, see the Statute of
31 H. 6. chap. 39.

No Sheriff or his Officers shall take any Obligation, by color 5. When an
Obligation shall be void, for that it is made to another, and 1. 0^ to the
Sheriff, or to the Sheriff in another manner then is appointed by the Stat. of
23. H. 6. chapter 10.
Stat. 23. H. ^. chap. 10.
of their offices of any person in their ward, but only to themselves, and in
the name of their office, with condition with sureties sufficient, that the
Prisoner shall appear at the day in the Writ. And all others taken in any other
form shall be void. And persons that are in his ward, by Execution,
Condemnation, Captas utlagatum, Excommunication, Surety of the Peace, or some
other special case, being sent for by a Justice for Felony or the like, may
not be bailed: and others that are arrested on a Capias for Debt, or an
Indictment, or otherwise by Writ, Bill, or Warrant that are mainpemable, must
be bailed. For the better understanding of which Statute, these things must be
observed; That such Obligations as differ and vary from the some of this
Statute in words and circumstances only are good, notwithstanding this Statute.
a Villars case M. 9. Iac. B. R.
And therefore if a Prisoner make an Obligation with a condition to appear and
answer in a plea of debt, and say no more, nor do set down the cause of the
debt, this is a good Obligation. And if the Sheriff take an Obligation with
one surtie only, or with two Coo. 10. 101
sureties that are insufficient, or with two sureties of another County; this
is a good Obligation. So if the debt for which the party is arrested be 300l.
and the Sheriff take an Obligation of 100l. for his appearance; this is a good
Obligation, for in these cases it is left to his discretion, and it does
concern him only. So if the Villars case.
condition of the Obligation be for appearance Mense pasche, omitting proxime
futurum, yet is is a good Obligation. So if the Dyer 364.
party be arrested by an Attachment out of the Star Chamber upon a contempt,
and the condition of the Obligation is, that if the Obligee shall appear, and
then, and there shall answer a contempt by him committed against the King and
his council, this is a good Obligation. And if the party that does make the
Obligation be not in the Sheriffs custody, albeit the Obligation be made in
any other manner essentially differing from the form prescribed in the
Statute, if it be not against the common Law, it is a good Obligation. And
therefore if when a Capias utlagatum be delivered to the Sheriff against a
man, the Sheriff take Bond of him for his fees, and his travail; this Bond if
it be not within this Statute, Antleys case Hill. 7. Iac. Co. B.
yet it is against the common Law, and therefore void, because it is by color
of Extortion. But where the Obligation, whether it be single, or double, made
by a prisoner, does essentially differ by addition, alteration, or diminution
from the form prescribed in the Statute, there the Condition and Obligation
both are void. And therefore if such a Prisoner make an Obligation to any other
besides Coo. 10 103
the Sheriff, albeit he to whom it be made be called Sheriff, or if he make
an Obligation to the Sheriff himself, and not by the name of his office; or if
he make an Obligation to him by the name of his office, and does not rightly
name him, Nowels case Trin. 21. Iac. Cu^^.
as if he make it to I S vicecomiti in Comitatu praedicto, whereas it should be
de Comitatupraedicto; all these Obligations are void by this Statute. And if
the Sheriff take an Obligation of a prisoner for his appearance, in case where
he is not bailable by the Statute, and so let him go free; or i^ he take an
obligation of a prisoner that is bailable for his ap^earance, and does insert
other things into the condition, as to pay money for meat, drink, or fees, or
the like; or if he deliver a man in execution, and take bond of him to save him
harmless, or to be a true prisoner; all these and such like obligations as
these are void by this Statute. If a man be a prisoner in Ludgate upon a Capias
utlagatum, and the Jailer take an obligation of him with two Dyer 118. 119.
sureties, with condition to save him harmless, and to discharge his fees,
and to yield his body at all times upon Summons etc. this is a void obligation,
as well against the sureties, as against the principal. If the under Marshall
of the Kings Bench take an obligation of one in execution and a stranger with
condition to save him harmless of allescapes, and so suffer the prisoner to
go at large, this is a Dyer 324.
void obligation. If the Sacriffe of Bedford having a prisoner by force of an
execution, let him go at large, and take an obligation of Plow. 61. 62.
him, with condition that he shall keep the Sheriff without damage against the
King and the Plantiffe, and be at all times at the commandment of the Sheriff
as a true Prisoner, and appear before the Justices of the King at Westminster
etc. this is a void obligation.

If a man be a prisoner to the Sheriff for suspicion of Felony, and ^it.
Oblig. 1.
after a writ comes to him to have all his prisoners at a certain day before
the Justices of Goal delivery of the same County, and thereupon the Prisoner
does make a single obligation to the Sheriff to appear before the Justices the
day of the writ; this is a void obligation, because it is single and not with
condition. And if the Sheriff ba^le not one bailable by a single obligation,
it seems this is a void obligation.

A single obligation is always taken most in advantage of the ob. 6 How a
single Obligation shall be taken.
ligee and against the obligor, but it is otherwise of the condition of an
obligation, for this is always taken most in advantage of the obligor, and
against the obligee. 10. H. 7. 1. 16.


If two, three, or more bind themselves in an obligation thus, Obligamus Joint
and several.
nos and say no more, the obligation is and shall be taken to be Dyer 19. 310
Coo. 5. 119. 9 53. old N. B. 62. Broo. Iointemancy 4. 16. Dec. 69.
joint only, and not several; but if it be thus, Obligamus nos and utrumque
nostrum; or obligamus nos and unumquemque nostrum; or obligamus nos and
quemlibet nostrum; or obligamus nos and alterum nostrum; in all these cases the
obligation is both joint, and several, so as in these cases the obligee may
sue all the obligors together, or all of them apart at his pleasure, but it
seems he may not sue some of them and spare the rest, but he must sue them
altogether, or all apart by several Precipes, and in this case he may have
several judgments and several executions against the obligors and take all
their bodies in execution but he shall have satisfaction but once, or from one
of them only, for after he has been satisfied by one, the rest shall be
discharged. But in the first case where the obligation is joint and not
several, the obligee must sue all the obligors together, for he cannot sue one
alone with effect without the rest, unless it be in some special cases, as
where one of the obligors alone does seal the Deed, or where all of them do
seal, but one of them is an Infant, a woman covert, a monk, or the like, or
where one of them is dead, for in these cases one or some of them may be
charged without the rest. But otherwise the Plantiffe cannot proceed in his
suit against one, or some of them without the rest, except the defendant give
him advantage, for howsoever the Suit be well begun, for when one or some of
them alone is, or are sued, Hill. 39. Eli. B. R. adjudged.
it shall not be intended that the rest are living, until it be showed by the
other party, yet the defendant is not bound to answer, unless the rest be used
also; and therefore in this case he or they that is or are sued alone, are thus
to take advantage of it. Viz. to show the matter to the Court, and to plead in
abatement of the writ; for if he appear and show it not, but plead non est
factum, or the like to the obligation, the Jury must find against him, and he
will be charged with the whole debt. And so also if one appear, and the other
make default and is outlawed, it seems he that does appear must answer all.

Executors and Administrators shall be bound by the obligation of Dyer 14. 271
Executors.
the obligor, albeit they be not named: but the heir of the obligor shall not
be bound by the obligation, unless he be named in the obligation, Heir.
viz. obligo me, haredes etc.

If an obligation be made to one and his heirs, or to one and his successors;
the Executors and Administrators, not the heir, or successor, See before.
shall take advantage of it.

If one bind himself in an obligation of 200l. to A and B. Dyer 350.
solvend. 100l. to A and 100 to B. and A die, it seems the executors of A
shall not have 100l. but that B shall have the whole 200l. sed quaere.

If one bind himself by obligation to I S to pay him an 100l. when K does come
to his house, and at Michaelmas then next following For the time of payment.
Broo. Obli^ 5^.
100l. more; Michaelmas then next following shall be taken for next following
the making of the obligation, and not next following the coming of K to his
house.

If one bind himself to pay money upon a single obligation, and Dyer 128. pec.
3. Justices Trin. 22. Iac. Co. B.
does not say when; in this case it must be paid presently.

If one bind himself by obligation to pay money at Michaelm^s, and does not say
which Michaelmas; this shall be taken for Michaelmas next after the date of the
obligation; And so also it shall be taken in Curiain the Marches of Wale^ Trin.
8. Car.
the condition of an obligation.

If one bind himself to pay 20l. in the year of our Lord which shall be 1599.
in and upon the thirteenth of October next ensuing 7 How an Obligation with a
Condition, or the Condition of an Obligation shall be taken. And how it must
and ought to be performed.
A^^ee M. 9. 1a. B. R.
the date of the obligation; this shall be taken to be due the 13 Hill 37. Eli.
B. R. Sha^ plu^ vers^^ Hauckington.
of October 1599 and not next after the obligation. See more infra.

The condition of an obligation when it is doubtful, is always taken most
favorably for the obligor in whose advantage it is made, and most against the
obligee, yet so as an equal and reasonable construction be made according to
the minds of the parties, albeit the Dyer 14. 52.
words sound to a contrary understanding.

If something be by a condition to be done, and it is set down indefinitly, and
not set down who shall do it, if the obligee has more skill First in respect
of the persons that are to do the thing.
Perk. Sect. 785.
to do the thing then the obligor, it shall be done by him; otherwise it shall
be done by the obligor: as if a Tailor be bound to me in an obligation with
condition, that if I bring him three yards of cloth which shall be measured and
shaped, and if he make me a Cloak of it etc. and it is not said by whom it
shall be shaped, this must be done by the Tailor.

If the condition of an obligation be to pay money, or do any Secondly in
respect of the time when the thing is to be done.
Coo. super Litt. 208. 2. 79. 80. 9. Ed. 4. 22. 9. H. 7. 16.
other transitory act to the obligee himself, and no time is set for the doing
thereof, but a place only; this regularly must be done in convenient time, and
that without request. So also in case where the thing to be done is in its
nature local, but yet such a thing as may be done in the absence of the
obligee, and without his con^urrence, as to acknowledge satisfaction on a
Judgment, make a lease for years or the like, it must be done in convenient
time and that without request. So also in case where the thing to be done is
local, and the concurrence of both parties necessary thereunto, yet when it is
to be done to a stranger and not to the obligee, as if the condition be that
the obligor shall make a Feoffement to I S, it must be done in convenient time
without request. But where the thing to be done is local, and the concurrence
of both parties necessary thereunto, and the act is to be done by the obligor
himself, or by a stranger to the obligee himself, as where the condition is
that the obligor, or a stranger, shall infeoffe the obligee; in this case the
obligor, or the stranger shall have time to do it during his life, unless the
obligee do hasten it by request, and if he request it sooner, then it must be
done in convenient time after request made. And yet if the thing to be done, be
to be done wholly by the obligor, or a stranger, and does nothing concern the
obligee, as where the condition is that the obligor shall go to Rome, or that
I S shall preach at Paul's cross, or the like; in the first case it may be done
at any time during the life of the obligor, and in the last case it may be
done at any time during the life of I S; and request in this case shall not
hasten it.

If an obligation be with condition to grant a rent, or an annuity Coo. 2. 80.
super Lit. ^08.
to the obligee during his life, to be paid at Easter, and no time is set for
the doing of it; this rent must be granted before Easter next after the
obligation, or else the obligation will be forfeit. And if the condition be to
grant an Advowson, and no time is set for the doing thereof; it must be done
before the Church become void, or otherwise the obligation shall be forfeit.

If the condition be to do a thing upon a day in the year, and there be two
days of that name in the year; in this case it seems it must Dyer 77.
be done that day that is furthest of from the time of the making of the
obligation, especially if that day be the more notorious of the two days.

If the condition be to pay 10l. the eleventh of May next following Adiudg. M.
20. Iac. B. R. Prescots case.
and the obligation is dated the 5th of May; in this case the money must be
paid the 11th day of the same Month of May, and not of the next Month of May.

If the condition be to stand to the award of I S, and I S award 22 Ed. 4. 25.
money to be paid, but set no time for the payment of it; this must be paid in
convenient time, else the obligation shall be forfeit.

If one be bound to me in an obligation with condition, that if I enfeoffe
Perk. Sect. 797, 799.
him of White acre, he will pay me 10l. but does not say when; this must be
done as soon as I make him the feoffement. So if one be bound to me that if the
goods I have delivered to B shall be lost, that C shall satisfy me for them,
and does not say when; this shall be presently after the loosing.

If the condition be to pay I S money when he shall come to M. 2. Iac. B. R.
Crausdenet Morses case.
the age of 21 years; in this case it must be paid the very day I S does come
to his full age, and payment after is not a sufficient performance of the
condition.

If the condition be to come at a day to such a place to do a thing, 39 Eli. B.
R. Fitz. Bar 92.
and the thing cannot be done without the concurrence of the other party; in
this case the obligor must stay for the very last instant of the day for his
coming; and it seems also he must stay at the place all the day long.

If the condition be to pay a rent at Mich. or within 20 days Adiudg. pas^ 39
Eli.
after, the obligation is not forfeit before the 20 days be past.

If one be to do a thing on a day certain, he may do it any part Eroo.
Condition 145. Dyer 17. 7. Ed. 4. 3.
of the day whiles the light does last: And if the condition be to do a thing
by, or before a day, it may be done the last instant of the day before, and it
is sufficient.

If the condition of an obligation be to pay money, or do any Perk. Sect. 780,
781. 7 Ed. 4. 4. 22 Ed. 4. 25. Lit. Sect. 340 341.
like transitory act to the Obligee on a day certain, but no place is 3. In
respect of the place where the thing is to be done.
set down where it shall be done; in this case it must be done to the person of
the Obligee wheresoever he be; and for this purpose, the Obligor must at his
peril seek out the Obligee, if he be intra quatuor maenia, otherwise the
obligation is forfeit; but if the Obligee be not within the Kingdom at the time
when the thing is to be done, he is not bound to seek him, so neither is the
obligation forfeit for not doing of the thing. So if one grant an Annuity to
another, and does not set down where it shall be paid, and gives a Bond with
condition for the payment thereof; in this case it must be done to the person
of the Obligee where ever he be: And the like Law is as it seems, where the
thing to be done by the condition, is to be done by or to a stranger: But when
the thing the party is bound by the condition to do is local, he is not bound
to go any further or to any other place, but to the place it self: And
therefore if the condition be to make a Feoffment of a piece of Land, the party
that is bound to do it, is not bound to go to any other place, but to the
piece of land to do it: And if a man make a Feoffment in Fee, or Lease for
life or years of land, rendering rent generally, and gives an obligation with
condition for the payment of the rent, the Feoffee, or Leassee, is not bound to
go to any place from the land to seek the Feoffor or Leassor to pay him this
rent.

If the condition be, to deliver 20 quarters of corn such a day to Perk. Sect.
785.
the Obligee, and no place is set down where it shall be delivered; in this
case it is sufficient, if the Obligor when the corn is ready, do give notice
thereof to the Obligee, and to wish him to appoint a place whereunto the Obligor
may bring it, and if he refuse to appoint a place, it is at his own peril; or
the Obligor may bring the corn to the house of the Obligee (and this is the
safest way) and if the Obligee refuse it, the condition is performed, and the
obligation is discharged.

If the condition be, to perform all the Covenants in an Indenture; ^oo. 4.
80. Dyer 257.
4. In respect of the thing it self to be done.
this shall be taken as well for the Covenants in Law as for the Covenants in
Deed.

If a Lease be made of a Manor excepting a Close, and the Plow. 67.
Leassee make an obligation to the Leassor with condition, that the To perform
Covenants.
Leassee shall perform omnia and singula in scripto praedicto contenta; by this
the Close shall be taken to be within the condition, so that if the Leassee
disturb the Leassor in the Close excepted, this shall be a of breach the
condition.

If the condition be, to makea Feoffment to the Obligee of Land; To make a
Feoffment, Lease etc.
See Covenant. Number. 6
in this case the Feoffment may be made with, or without writing, and if it be
made by writing, it may be made without any warranty or Covenants, and this
will be a sufficient performance of the condition.

If the condition be, That the Obligor shall make a Lease to the Coo. 6. 33.
Obligee for 20 years, and it is not set down when the Lease shall begin, it
shall begin presently.

If the condition be, That the Obligor shall do any act upon request Dyer 228.
that the counsel of the Obligee shall think reasonable, as To make a Release,
or other assurance.
for example shall do any act etc. for the releasing of an obligation, wherein
the Obligee is bound to the Obligor, and the Obligee by advise of Counsel
devises and requesteth a release of all demands to the Obligee, and to I S; in
this case the Obligor may refuse to seal it, albeit it ^e devised by the
counsel of the Obligee, because it is unreasonable, for it must be a
reasonable act that the Obligor by this condition is bound to do.

If the condition be to pay 10l. at Michaelmas next, and 10l. To pay money or
rent.
Adiudg. ^il. 39 Eli. Co. B.
yearly after, until I S he made Knight, in this case albeit I S be made
Knight before Michaelmas, yet the first 10l. at Michaelmas must be paid.

If the condition be thus, That if the Obligor shall for ever Adiudge M. 18.
Iac. B. R
pay yearly to the Obligee etc. 10l. at the two usual Feasts by equal
portions, or if his heirs shall at any time hereafter pay 100l. at Harbert
versus Rochsey.
one payment to the Obligee, that then the Obligation to be void; in this case
albeit the Obligor has election, which of these two things to do; yet because
the intent is apparent that one of these things should be done, if therefore
the 100l. be not paid before the first Feast, the 10l. must be paid yearly.

If the condition of an obligation from A to B be thus; That Dyer 421 43.
To warrant land and for quiet enjoying.
whereas A has sold to B certain Meadow in Dale, that the said A shall
warrant the same against Lord and King and all others, if the said B shall
peaceably enjoy it to him, and his heirs of the Lord of the Manor of M, by
the services due after the custom etc. in this case the substance of this
being for quiet enjoying, it shall be extended that way, and albeit it be not
said what he shall warrant, yet it shall be taken the Land in question, and the
warranty shall be construed to last only for the life of B, and not to extend
to any new titles after the Covenant, especially such as are by the act and
default of the Obligee himself, as if he commit a forfeiture and the Lord
enter, or the like.

If the condition be, That the Obligor shall sufficiently prove Perk. Sect.
791. 10. Ed. 4 11.
To prove a thing.
such a thing; this shall be taken for proof by enquest and accordingly it
must be done: But if the condition be that it shall be done by such a time, or
before such persons as when or where such Golds case in Harberts Rep. 127.
proof cannot be had, then it is otherwise. Where the word [proofe] is put
generally, it shall be understood of proof by Justice; but when the parties
agree upon another form of proof, that shall prevail against that which is
but instruction of Law.

If one be bound in an obligation with condition to suffer his wife Curia Trin.
7. Iac. Co. B.
To suffer his wife to make a Will.
to give to her kinsfolks, children, or others portions of his goods to the
value of 100l. and that he will perform it, and she give part to one and part
to another; in this case the husband must perform it accordingly: But if the
condition be to suffer her to give to A and B 100l. and that he will perform
it, and she give 100l. to A, he is not bound to perform this.

If the condition be, That he shall perform his wives Will, so it Adiudge.
Hill. 7. Iac. B. R
do not exceed 20l. and she make a Will and devise 100l. in this case he is
not bound to perform the Will for the 20.

If the condition of an Obligation be, That the Obligor shall infeoffe 5. In
respect of the manner and order of of doing the thing and other matters.
Kelw.
the Obligee, and such others as he shall name by a day; in this case the
Obligee must do the first act, viz. name the others; otherwise the Obligor
does not forfeit his obligation by the not doing of i^ But if the condition be
to infeoffe me, or such others as I shall name before such a day; in this case
if I do not name others, it seems he must enfeoffe me before the day at his
peril.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall make such an estate Coo. 5. 25. 7
Ed. 4. 13 Perk. Sect. 775.
of Land as I S shall advise, I S must first advise, and this must be made
known unto the Obligor ere he is bound to do any thing, and if he never
advise, he is never bound to do any thing; for it is in this case, as if one
be bound to stand to the award of I S, and I S never make any, or make a void
award which is all one.

If the condition be, to make such a discharge in such a Court Coo. 5. 23
as the Obligee or his counsel shall advise; in this case the Obligee must do
the first act, viz. advise and give notice of the advice to the Obligor before
he is bound to do the thing. But if the condition be to make such a discharge
in such a Court such a day, as the Judge of that Court shall advise, in this
case the Obligor must at his peril procure the Judge to advise a discharge,
and it must be done that very day or the obligation will be forfeit.

If the condition be, to pay 20 l. to the Obligee when he does Per. Just.
Nichols, M. 13 la Co. B.
come to London; in this case, the Obligee must do the first act, viz. make
known to the Obligor when he does first come to London, for otherwise, it
seems the Obligor is not bound to pay the money.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall levy a fine to the Obligee Coo.
5. 127 Dyer 371.
before such a day, the Obligee must do the first act, viz. sue out the Writ
of Covenant.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall deliver 20 Clothes ^1 Ed. 4. 52
to the Obligee such a day, the Obligee paying for every cloth immediately
after the delivery 20 l. in this case the clothes must be^ delivered, albeit
the Obligee refuse to pay the money; but if [immediately after] be left out, it
seems the Obligor is not bound to deliver the cloth unless the Obligee first
pay the money.

If the condition be, that the Obligor and his heirs shall at any Coo. 2. 3, 4
Dyer 337.
time upon request made, do any act etc. that the Obligee shall require etc.
and the Obligee tender a Release or other Deed to seal; in this case, if the
Obligor, or his heir that is to seal the Deed, be an illiterate man, he may
refuse to seal it, until he can get some body to read it unto him, but he may
not refuse or delay to sca^e it until he can have a Lawyers advise upon it,
but he will forfeit his Obliligation.

If the condition be, to do any thing upon request, the Obligor Perk. Sect.
773. Coo. 5. 21.
until request made is not bound to do any thing toward it, neither can he
forfeit his obligation till them. And yet if in this case, the Obligor disable
himself to do the thing he has undertaken to do upon request before the
request made the obligation may be so feit without any request made.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall within a certain 14 H. 8.
time surrender such land of his for an Annuity, of so much as they shall agree
upon, and they agree upon 10l. per annum; in this case the Obligor is not bound
to make the surrender until the Annuity be made and tendered unto him.

If the condition be, to deliver to the Obligee an obligation Hill. 37. Eli.
Co. B. Greeinghams case adiudg.
wherein the Obligee is bound etc. or to seal and deliver to the Obligee such
a Release of it as shall be devised by the counsel of the Obligee before
Michaelmas, and the counsel do not advise any Release before Michaelmas; in
this case the Obligor is discharged of the obligation, for the Obligee is to
do the first act.

If A be bound to B, in an obligation with condition that A and Trin. 4. Iac.
B. R.
his wife shall levy a fine of land to C and D and their heirs, and at their
costs and charges; this shall be construed to be at the costs of the Obligor,
and not at the costs of the Conusees, but if the word [and] be omitted, perhaps
it may be of otherwise.

If the condition be thus, That if the wife die before Michaelmas Dyer. 17.
without issue of her body then living, that the obligation shall be void; in
this case [then living] shall relate ad proximum antecedens, and not to the
death of the wise, and therefore if she has issue and die, and after before
Michaelmas the issue dies also, the obligation is void.

If the condition be, that if the Obligor shall waste the goods of the Obligee
(his master) and this waste within three Months after Golds case, M. 13. I^
due proof of it, either by confession or otherwise be notified to the
Obligor, that the Obligor shall satisfy the Obligee for it, and the Obligor
do confess the waste under his hand and seal; in this case, it seems this
proof though it be extrajudiciall is sufficient.

When the condition of an obligation is to do two things by a Coo. 5 22 super
Lit. 207. Dyer 262. 15 H. 2. 4. H. 7. 4.
day, and at the time of making of the obligation both of them are Conditions
Impossible.
possible, but after and before the time when the same is to be done, one of
the things is become impossible by the act of God, or by the sole act and
laches of the Obligee himself; in this case the Obligor is not bound to do
the other thing that is possible, but is discharged of the whole obligation.
But if at the time of the making of the obligation one of the things is, and
the other of the things is not possible to be done, he must perform that which
is possible. And if in the first case one of the things become impossible
afterward by the act of the Obligor, or a stranger, the Obligor must see that
he do the other thing at his peril. And when the condition of an obligation
is to do one single thing which afterward before the time when it is to be
done does become impossible to be done in all or in part, the obligation is
wholly discharged; and yet if it be possible to be done in any part, it shall
be performed as near to the condition as may be.

If the condition be, to do one of two things, as to make a feoffment to me,
or pay me 20l. in this case, if the obligor do either 21 Ed. 3. 29
of them, it is sufficient. But if the condition be in the copulative, as to
enfeoffe me and pay me 20l. in this case, the doing of one of them will not
suffice, but he must do both.

If the condition be, to pay to A B and C 30 l. a piece within a week after they
come to 18 years of age, or within 40 days after Per. Justice. Dodridge M. 2.
Car. B. R.
their days of marriage after notice given thereof, which shall first happen;
in this case, this notice must go to both the parties, so that notice must be
given when they are 18 years of age; otherwise, and until notice given, it
seems the obligor is not bound to pay the money. See more in Condition Numb.
8. and Covenant Numb. 6.

The matter of a condition of an obligation is sometimes affirmative 8. When
the Condition of an Obligation shall be said to be performed and the Obligation
saved, or not.
and compulsory, and does consist of something to be done, and sometimes it is
negative and restrictive, and does consist of something not to be done; the not
doing in the first case, and doing in the latter case causes the obligation to
be forfeit; and the doing in the first case, and not doing in the latter,
saves the obligation.

If one be bound in an obligation to me, with condition to enfeoffe To make a
feoffment.
Coo. super Lit. 207. plo ^. 7^ 17 Ed. 4. 3.
me of land, and the obligo^ do first make a Lease to me of it, and afterward
he does make a Release of it to me and my heirs; this is a good performance of
the condition.

If a condition be to make me a feoffment of land, and he tender me a
feoffment, and I refuse it; by this the condition is performed. So Tender and
Refusal.
Perk. Sect. 784. Fitz. Bar 82. Perk. Sect. 758. 15 Ed. 4. 5.
if the condition be, to make a feoffment to my use, and when it is is made I
refuse it; this is a good performance of the condition. But if a man bind
himself in an obligation to me, with condition to make feoffment to a
stranger, and he tender the feoffment to the stranger, and he does refuse it;
this is no good performance of the condition, but the obligation is forfeit. If
the condition be, to enfeoffe me and my wife, and he tender it to me, and I
refuse it; it seems this is a good performance.

If one bind himself in an obligation to me, with condition to 3 H. 7. 4. 4 H.
7. 4. Perk. Sect. 757.
make me a feoffment of the Manor of Dale by a day, and he before the day,
grant a rentcharge out of the same Manor to a stranger, and afterward and
before the day also, he does make me a feoffment of the land; this is a good
performance of the condition, and the grant of the rent no breach thereof. But
if the obligor sell away part of the Manor before, or make a feoffment to me
but of a moity or a third part of the Manor; this is no good performance of
the condition. And if in this case, the obligor before the day take a wife, and
before the day make his feoffment according to the condition, but the marriage
does continue until after the day; in this case, it seems the condition is
broken.

If the condition be, that the obligor shall enfeoffe me of the Manor
Acceptance
Perk. Sect. 749. 759. Dyer 1. Perk. Sect. 751. 9. H 7. 1^. 3 H 7. 4, 27. H. 8.
1. 14. H. 8. 15. 10. H. 7. 14.
of Dale, and he make a feoffment of the Manor of Sale, and I accept thereof;
it seems this is no performance of the condition, and that my acceptance in
this case will not help. So if the condition be to make me a feoffment of land,
and he give me money, a horse, or the like in recompense of this, and I accept
thereof; this is no good performance of the condition: And the like Law is in
all cases where the condition is to do any collateral thing, as to account,
build a house, enter into a Recognisance, or the like, and the obligor does
give, and the obligee accept some other thing in liew thereof: And so also it
is where the condition is to make a feoffment to a stranger, and the obligor
give, and the stranger take another thing in liew thereof: But if the condition
be to enfeoffe me of land such a day, and he make, and I take the feoffment
before the day; this is a good performance of the condition.

If the condition be to enfeoffe me or my heirs in the disjunctive, 14 H. 8.
15. Coo. 5. 112.
and the obligor enfeoffe me and my heirs; this is a good performance of the
condition; for it is impossible to enfeoffe my heirs whiles I live, and when
two things are to be done by a condition, whereof the one is possible at the
time of making the obligation, and the other is not; in this case it is
sufficient if he do the thing which is possible.

If the condition be, to make me a feoffment, or pay me 20 l. if the 21 Ed. 3.
9.
obligor do either of them, it is sufficient. But if the condition be to
infeoffe me, and pay me 20 l. in this case the obligor must do both, or the
condition will not be performed, Et sic de similibus.

If the condition be, that the obligor shall make me a sufficient Perk. Sect.
^^6. Kelw. 9^.
To make an Estate.
estate of land by the advice of W and S, and they advise an insufficient
estate, and the obligor do make the estate according to that advise; this is a
good performance of the condition: But if the condition be that the obligor
shall make a good and sure estate, and he by advise of counsel make an estate
that is not good and sure; this is no good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that the obligor shall make me an estate of Fitz. Bar.
55.
land, and make the estate to another by my appointment; it seems this is no
performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that the obligor or his feoffees in trust shall Trin. 17.
^a. B. K.
make an estate to the obligee such a day, and the feoffees do it without the
consent of the obligor; this is no performance of the condition.

If the condition be, to make further assurance, and the obligor Pasche 8. ^a.
Co. P.
To make further assurance.
make further assurance upon condition, without the agreement of the other
party; this is no good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, to save me harmless from an Annuity wherewith To save
harmless.
37 H. 6. 18. Perk. Sect. 792.
my land is charged, and the obligor does pay the same yearly, and get me an
Acquittance for the same from the party; this is a good performance of the
condition. But if the condition be to discharge me of such an Annuity; in this
case, payment and procuring me a Release, is no good performance of the
condition.

If the condition be, that the Feoffees or Leassees of the Obligor To grant a
rent, or to procure a rent to be granted.
of such land which they have in trust shall grant me a rentcharge, Pe^^.
Sect. 790. Fitz. Bar 7.
or release their right to me before such a day, and there be three Feoffees,
or Leassees, and two of them only do grant this rent, or make this Release;
this is no good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall purchase and procure Dyer 15.
to me and my heirs a rent of 5 l. per annum, and a stranger has such a rent
out of my land, and he does get him to release this to me; this is a good
performance of the condition: And if one be bound Fitz. Bar, 77.
with condition to grant me the rent and farm of such a Mill before
Michaelmasse, to be had and perceived until I be paid 10 l. and before that
time he lease the Mill to me at a rent, and then suffer me to detain so much
of the rent; it seems this is a good performance of the condition.

If the condition be to deliver me a horse, and the Obligor tender To deliver a
horse.
the horse unto me, and I refuse him; hereby the condition is performed; Coo.
super Lit. 207.
and so in all such like cases where the Obligor is to do Tender and Refusal.
any collateral thing, as stand to an award, or the like; if the Obligor offer
to do it, and the Obligee refuse, the condition is performed, and the
Obligation discharged forever.

If the condition be, to pay money at a day certain, and the To pay money
Obligor pay a little before night, time enough for the receiver to Dyer 17.
super Lit. 202. Broo. Condition 145.
see to number his money by day light; this is a good performance of the
condition. And if the condition be to pay money by, or before a day; payment
the last instant of the day before is a sufficient performance of the condition.

If the condition be, to pay me a sum of money at a day certain, Perk. Sect.
748. 34 H. 6. 17. 21 Ed. 3. 13 Coo. 5. 117. 9. 79. Broo. Oblig. 64.
Acceptance.
and the Obligor pay me less money before the day, or all the money before or
at the day, or give me something else before, or at the day of payment in liew
thereof, or pay me all the money or a lesser sum at the day appointed, but in
another place, and not the place mentioned in the condition, and I accept
thereof; in all these cases the condition is well performed. But if a stranger
to the condition do so, and I accept thereof; this is no good performance of
the condition as has been Trin. 36 Eliz.
adjudged. And if the Obligor pay less then the whole money at the day of
payment, and the Obligee accept thereof; this is no good performance of the
condition: Adiudge 17 Eli.
And if the thing to be done be a collateral thing, as to account, or the
like, and the Obligor give unto the Obligee money, or a horse in liew thereof,
and the Obligee accept it; this is no good performance of the condition. And if
the Obligor pay the money to the Obligee after the day of payment; this is no
performance of the condition, but the Obligation is forfeit, and the money paid
shall go in part toward the forfeiture: And yet in this case the Defendant at
this day being sued upon this obligation, does usually adventure to plead
conditions performed, and give this special matter in evidence to the Jury,
who for the most part does find against the Obligee. And yet if the condition
be, to pay me money at a day Dyer 18.
certain, or to pay another money at a day certain, and the Obligor pay me or
the stranger at several times before the day, and I, or the stranger accept
thereof; this is a good performance of the condition. But if the Obligee do
only promise to accept of a horse for his money at the time of payment, and
when the time of 18 Ed. ^^
Tender and Refusal.
payment comes, and a tender of the horse is made to him, he does refuse him;
this tender is not a sufficient performance of the condition.

If the condition be, to pay money at a day and place certain, Coo. super Lit.
208. 209. 27 H. 8. 10. Perk. Sect. 784.
and the Obligor tender it a^ the time and place, and the Obligee is not ready
to receive it; or being ready, does refuse to receive it; this is a good
performance of the condition to save the forfeiture of the obligation: And yet
if the Obligor be afterward sued for this money, he must say in his pleading,
that he is still ready to pay it, and he must tender it in Court. But if one be
bound by a single obligation to pay money, and after at the same or some other
time, he has a Defeasance from the Obligee, that upon payment of a lesser
sum the obligation shall be void; and the Obligee refuse the money when the
same is tendered at the time when by the Defeasance it is to be paid; in this
case the Obligor is not bound to tender the money in Court, neither has the
Obligee any remedy for it.

If the condition be, to pay me money at a day and place certain, and the
Obligor does tender it to me the same day in another 41 Ed. 3. 25.
place, this is no performance of the condition, and therefore in that case I
may refuse it.

If the condition be, to pay money between two days; payment of the money upon
either of those days is not a good performance Dyer 17.
of the condition, but the payment must be between the two days.

If the condition be, to pay me money at a day certain, and Perk. Sect. 748.
27 H. ^. 6. Fitz. Bar. 43.
I bid the Obligor pay the money to one that I do owe so much more unto, or I
bid him lay out the money for me, or I bid him keep it for such a debt I owe
unto him, and he do so, and I accept hereo; it seems this is a good
performance of the condition.

If the condition be to pay me money, and I appoint another to receive it, and
the Obligor pay it unto him; this is a good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that a stranger shall pay to the Obligee 10 l. Acceptance.
Coo. super Lit. 10 8. 20^. Dyer 5^.
and the Obligee accept a horse for it, this is a good performance of the
condition. But if the condition be that one stranger shall pay to another
stranger 10 l. and the one does give, and the other take a horse in Lieu of
this; this is no good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, to pay me 20 l. of lawful English money, New Terms of
the Law, ^it. Coin.
and the Obligor pay me in Spanish or in any other money current in this Realm;
this is a good performance of the condition. Per Just. Bridgman and Curia in
the Marches of W les 8.
But payment in farthings is no good payment. Terms of the Law, Idem.
If the condition be, to pay me 20 l. and the Obligor pay me some of the 20 l.
in counterfeit pieces, which I not perceiving at the time, do put up and
accept, but after upon a review I do perceive some of them to be naught, and
thereupon I do send it back to him again, in this case it seems the condition
is well performed, and therefore the sending back of the money again will not
cause a breach afterward.

If the condition be, that I shall stand to the award of I S, and To stand to ^
Award.
22 Ed. 4. 2.
he does award me to pay 20 l. to W S by a day, and at the day I do tender
him the 20 l. but he does refuse it; in this case I have sufficiently performed
the condition, and the obligation is saved.

If the condition be, that I shall stand to the award of I S, and he 22 Ed. 4.
25.
award that I shall enter a Retrax it in a Suit depending between me and the
other party, and I do not so, but am Nonsuite, or do discontinue my Suit; this
is no good performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall come such a day to To show a
Release.
22 Ed. 4. 42.
such a place and show me a Release, and he does come to the place the latter
part of the day, and does stay there until the light of the day be gone, ready
to show his Release, but I come not thither; this is a good performance of the
condition.

If one make a Lease of land to me, and bind himself in an For quiet ^n^
joying.
Dyer 255. 17 Ed. 4. 3.
obligation with condition to suffer me quietly to enjoy the land without the
let of him or any other; in this case if he himself, nor any other by his
incitement do disturb me, the condition is performed; and if a stranger that
has title, do enter without his procurement or occasion, this is no breach of
the condition.

If the condition be, to appear in the Kings Bench such a day, to To appear.
Perk. Sect. 760. 758. 2 Ed. 4. 3.
answer I S, and at the day the Obligor does appear, but the Plaintiff is
estoined so that the defendant cannot answer him, or the Suit is discontinued
by the Demise of the King before the day of appearance; in these cases the
condition is performed and the obligation saved. But if the Obligor in this
case when ^e does appear, does not cause his appearance to be entered of
Record, the obligation is forseit.

If the condition be to appear coram domino Rege, and the 8 H. 4. 6.
Obligor appear before the Kings Person; this is no performance of the
condition. And if the condition be, to appear coram Iusticiariis Domini Regis,
and the Obligor appear before them out of Court; this is no performance of the
condition.

If the condition be, that a stranger shall make an obligation to Coo. super
Lut. 208, 209. 10 H. 6. 16. 27 H. 8. 1.
To make a ^ond.
the Obligee, and the stranger tender it, and the Obligee refuse it; this is a
good performance of the condition: But if the condition be, that the Obligor
shall make an obligation to a stranger, and the Obligor tender it, and the
stranger refuse it; this is no performance of the condition.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall marry the daughter Perk. Sect.
756. 4 H. 7. 3.
To marry a woman.
of the Obligee by a day, and he does tender himself, and she does refuse; in
this case the obligation is forfeit, notwithstanding this tender and refusal.

If the condition be, to deliver the key of a house, and the quiet Dyer 219.
To leave a Possession.
possession to I S, to the use of the Obligee, and the Obligor (the house being
rid, and every one out of the house, and the door locked) does deliver the key
to I S; it seems this is no good performance of the condition, but that I S,
or the Obligee, or his deputy ought to come and receive the possession. See
more in Condition at Numb. 9. and Covenant 6.

If an Obligation that is single, be not performed, as when it is Coo. 8. 153.
super Litt. 292. FN B. 267.
^. When a single Obligation shall be said to be broken and forseit, or not,
to pay money at a day, and the money is not paid, the obligation is broken.
But if a man be bound by an obligation to pay money at several days, the
obligation is not forseit, nor can be sued until all the days be past. And
yet if the condition of an obligation be to pay money at several days, and
the Obligor do fail to pay the money the first day; in this case the Obligee
may sue for the money due by the obligation presently.

If one be bound to pay money at a day certain by a single obligation Broo.
Oblig. 62. Fait. 105. Fitz. verdict. 13.
or Bill, and the Obligor tender the money at the day to the Obligee, so as he
will give him his Bill or a Release for the money, and the Obligee refuse so to
do, and thereupon he does refuse to pay the money; in this case the obligation
is not forseit; for in this case the Obligor is not bound to pay the money,
unless the Obligee will give up his Bill or give him a Release. But otherwise
it is in case where one is bound to pay money by the condition of an
obligation; for there the Obligor must pay the money at his peril, albeit the
Obligee refuse to deliver up the obligation or to give a Release.

If one be bound to pay money on a single Bill at a day, and the Obligor tender
the money at the day to the Obligee, and he refuse it; in this case, it seems
he has now remedy for his money; Sed Quaere.

In all causes when the condition is not performed or broken, 10. When the
condition of an Obligation shall be said to be broken and the Obligation
forfeit, or not.
the obligation is forfeit, and till then it cannot be forfeit: And Broo.
Oblig. 17.
therefore, if one be bound in an obligation, with condition to pay me 10. l.
a^ Easter, before the day come, the obligation cannot be forseit; but if it
be not paid at he day, the obligation is forseit: And yet if the Obligee
himself be the cause of the breach of the 4 H. 7 4.
condition, or the thing to be done by the condition, is now become impossible
by the act of God, the obligation is now become without penalty: As if in the
old days I had been bound in an obligation to an Abbot, that A should infeoffe
him before Christmasse, if A enter To make a Feoffment.
into Religion, my Bond had been presently forfeited: But otherwise it had been
if A had been professed under the obedience of the Obligee himself.

If the condition be to make a Feoffment of land to me such a Perk. Sect. 8.
769.
day, and he be not upon the land ready to make the Feoffment, albeit I come
not there to receive it, yet the condition is broken.

If the condition be that when the Obligor shall come to his 21 Ed. 3. 29.
Cook. 5. 112.
Aunt, he will enfeoffe the Obligee, or the heirs of his body, in this case he
must do it as soon as he does come to her, and the Obligee shall request the
Feoffment, or the obligation is forfeit.

If the condition be to enfeoffe me of a Manor by a day, and before the day
the Obligor does make a Feoffment of it to another, 21 El. 4. 5.
hereby the condition is broken, and the Obligation forfeit, and though the
Obligor repurchase it again before the day, and then make the Feoffment, yet
this will not cure the breach.

If the condition be, to enfeoffe B and C, and one of them die 4 H. 7. 4.
before the time be past wherein it should be done; in this case he must
enfeoffe the survivor of them, or the condition is broken.

If the condition be, that if the Obligor before Michaelmasse To make a Lease.
Dyer 347.
make a Lease to the Obligee for thirty one years, if A will assent, and if
he will not assent then for twenty one years, That then etc. if A do not
assent, and the Lease for twenty one years be not made before Michaelmasse, the
obligation is forfeit.

If the condition be that the Obligor shall make me an estate To make an Estate.
7 H. 6. 24.
upon request, and he tender me an estate before I request it, and afterward I
do request it, and he does refuse it; in this case the condition is broken,
and the obligation forfeit.

If the condition be that the Obligor shall make me a good estate Pasche 8. Co.
B. ^a.
of land (being Copi-hold land) and he does surrender it absolutely, and the
Homage when they present it, do present it conditionally; this is no breach of
the condition.

If the condition be, to make a good estate of land in Fee-simple 4 H. 7. 4.
Kel.
to A (a woman) before such a time, and before such time the Obligor takes A
to wise, and the day pass, and no estate is made; in this case the condition
is broken, and the obligation forfeit. But if the obligation be made to the
woman her self, then it is dispensed with by the inter-marriage.

If the condition be, that the Obligor and his son shall do all Coo. 2. 3.
Dver 337.
such acts for the better assuring of land, as the Obligee or his To make
further assurance.
Counsel shall devise, and the Obligee devise and tender a Release to the
Obligor and his son to seal, and they delay and refuse to seal it until
they can show it to their Counsel to be advised upon it; this is a breach of
the condition; but if they be illitterate and refuse to seal it until they
can get it read; this is no breach of the condition.

If the condition be, that the Obligor shall save the Obligee harmless from
such a debt, for which the Obligee is surety for Dyer 186. 187. 18 Ed. 4. 27.
28. Coo. 5. 24. Old book of Entry 12.
To save harm^esse.
the Obligor, and the Obligee comes at the time, and to the place when and
where the money, for which he is engaged, is to be paid, and finding no body
ready to pay the money, he does pay it himself to save the forfeiture of the
obligation; hereby the condition to save harmless is broken, and the
obligation forfeit. And therefore much more if the obligee be sued, arrested,
outlawed, or taken in Execution for the debt of the principal: So also if the
Obligee be put in fear of arrest for the debt of the Principal, and
therefore dare not go about his business; by this the condition is broken.
But if the Obligee be sued unjustly, either because he is sued before the money
is due, or otherwise, or if the Bond in which he is bound, be against Law and
void, and he suffer himself to be unjustly vexed thereupon, and does not take
advantage of it, it seems this is no breach of the condition of the Bond to
save harmless.

If a Bailiffe distrain beasts on a withernam, and afterward redeliver 2 H. 4.
9.
them to the party of whom he had them, and a take Bond from him with condition
to save him harmless from him for whom the beasts were taken, and after he
does bring a detinue against the Bailiffe for the beasts; in this case the
condition is not broken; for this action will not lie in this case.

If the condition be to pay money to me at a day and place certain, Kelw. ^0.
and the money is not tendered at the time and place, albeit To pay money.
there be no body ready to receive it, if it be tendered, yet the condition is
broken.

If the condition be to pay money to meat a day and place, and Broo. Oblig. 9.
the obligor in his going to the place is robbed of the money so as he cannot
pay him; in this case notwithstanding the condition is broken, and the
obligation forfeit, and this will not excuse it.

If the condition be to pay money to me at a day and place, and I seeing him
going to the place to pay the money, do wish him Kelw. 60.
to forbear, and thereupon he does so, and does not pay it; in this case the
obligation is forfeit, and this will not excuse. But if I do violently and
actually detain and hinder him, so that he cannot pay it, this will excuse
him.

If the condition be to pay me the rent reserved on such a lease, To pay Rent.
Hill 4. Iac. Molmenx case.
at the times limited by the lease, and it be not accordingly; hereby the
condition is broken, a beit I do never demand the rent.

If the condition be to pay me the rent reserved on such a lease, Broo. Oblig.
and I enter upon all or part of the land demised, so as the rent is suspended
so long as I keep the possession, in this case the nonpayment of the rent
during the time of the suspension of the rent, is no breach of the condition.

If the condition be that I shall enjoy land without the interruption Dyer 30.
For quiet ^^joying.
of any person whatsoever, and afterward I do forfeit it my self by
non-paiment of rent, or the like; this is no breach of the condition.

If the condition be, that the obligor shall suffer the obligee to Dyer 255.
17. Ed. 4. 3.
enjoy lands etc. and that without the let of him etc. or any other person or
persons etc. and one that has an elder title does enter; th^s is no breach of
the condition. But if he procure this entry and disturbance, this is a breach
of the condition.

If the condition be that B and others shall quietly enjoy land, Kelw. 60.
and A the obligor and B the obligee does disturb the others; it seems by
this disturbance the condition is broken.

If the conditinn be that the obligor shall not disturb me in the Coo. 9. 51.
keeping of my Courts, and he keep the Courts and take the Fees himself; this
is a breach of the condition.

If one make a feoffment of land, and make me an obligation with Coo. super
Lut. 3^4.
condition to desend the land for 12 years etc. and I am entered by a stranger,
but never impleaded; in this case the condition is broken.

If the condition be to stand to the award of I S, and the obligor Coo. 4. 61.
8. 23.
To stand to an Award.
does afterward counter maund the submission made to I S; this is a breach of
the condition. Factum non dicitur quod non perseverat.

If the condition be that I shall have license to carry wood seven Coo. 8. 8.
83. 18. Ed. 4. 20.
years, and the obligor does give me a license for seven To give a license.
years, and then does revoke it again; this is a breach of the condition,

If the condition be, that I S shall give me license to go over 1. ^ Ed. 4. 23.
his ground, and I S does so, but another does interrupt me; this is no breach
of the condition. And yer if the condition be that I shall have license to
goover that ground, there perhaps ssuch an interruption may be a breach of the
condition.

If an obligation be made to me with condition to appear ^n Fitz. Bar^^. 60.
such a Court such a day, and at the day he is kept in prison at my To appear.
suite so as he cannot appear; in this case his not appearance is no breach of
the condition, for his imprisonment shall excuse him. But if his imprisonment
be for Felony, or any other such like cause of his own, contra.

If the condition be, to appear in such a Court such a day, and Dyer 25.
before the day a Supersedeas does come to the Sheriff; yet if the obligor do
not appear, the obligation is forfeit.

If the condition be, that the obligor shall ride with I S to Dover Perk. Sect.
such a day, and I S does not go thither that day, in this case To ride to
Dover.
it seems the condition is broken, and that he must procure I S to go thither
and ride with him at his peril.

If I make a lease for years, and the lessee does enter into an Per Just.
Nichol, M. 13. ^a.
Not to alien.
obligation with condition that he shall not alien the land demised without my
license, and I die, and then he does alien it; it seems this is a breach of
the condition.

If the condition be that I S shall serve me in all my honest and Perk. Sect.
772. 6 ^d. 4. 2.
To serve.
lawful commands, or that I S shall be a good and honest servant to me one
year; in the first case if I command him nothing, the condition is not broken,
albeit he never tender his service: but in the last case it seems he is to
tender his service to me, or otherwise the condition will be broken. But if I
refuse his service when it is tendered, or he die within the time, the
obligation is discharged. And yet if he depa^t away within the time, the
condition is broken.

If the condition be that A shall marry B by a day, and before 4 (...). 7.
(...) Perk. 7^^.
To marry a woman.
the day the obligor himself does marry her: in this case the condition is
broken. But if the obligee marry* her before the day, the obligation is
discharged.

If the condition be, to perform the covenant^ and paiments of a Deed, and the
deed does contain a feoffment, and this is on condition Briscoes case ^^in.
(...) Ia. c B. (...),
To perform covenants.
that if the feoffor pay such a sum of money he shall reenter, and he does
not pay it; in this case this non-paiment is no breach of the condition. But if
A let land by Indenture to B for years rendering rent, and B does bind himself
in an obligation Ad^udged Griffin and Scots case 5. Iac. B. R,
with condition to perform all the covenants contained in the Indenture, and
the rent is unpaid; this is a breach of the condition, and cause of forfeiture
of the obligation,

If the condition be for the sa^e keeping of prisoners, and one Curia Trin* 37.
Eliz.
To keep Prisone^^.
does escape that is in execution, and in prison under color of an execution,
or the like, but in truth and in judgment of law is no prisoner; this escape
is no breach of the condition. See more in ^ondition at Numb. 10.

If the condition of an obligation consist of two parts in the disjunctive, or
be to do one of two things before, or at a day certain, 11. By wha^ means and
when an Obligation good in his original creation, does or may become void, be
discharged or gone by matter ex post facto, Or not*
^oo. super L^^t. 207.
and both the things are possible at the time of the making of the obligation,
and before the time of performance one of the things is become impossible to be
done by the act of God, or by the act of the obligee himself; in this case the
obligation is discharged for ever. And therefore if the condition be, That if
the obligor shall sell away his wives land, if then he shall either in his Coo.
5. 12. 25 H. 7. 2.
life time purchase to his wife and her heirs and assigns land of as good
right and value as the money by him received, or had by or upon the said sale
shall amount unto, or else do and shall leave unto her the said I as Executrix
by legacy or otherwise as much money as shall be by him received upon such
sale, That then etc. and the obligor does sell his wives land, and then his
wife does die before him so that he cannot leave her the money; in this case
the obligation is discharged, and the husband is not bound to purchase land to
her and her heirs. So if the condition be, that if I S do not prove the
suggestion of a Bill depending in the Court of requests before the utas of
Hillary, that then he shall pay 20l, Dyer 262. 15 H 7. 4. 4 H. 7. 4. Agree 9.
Iac. (...) Bathurst case.
etc. and I S die before the utas; hereby the obligation is discharged for
ever, and he is not bound to pay the 20l. So if the condition be that if the
obligor appear in the Kings Bench in Eastern Term, or pay 20l. to the obligee
at Michaelmas, and the obligor die before Easter Term; hereby the obligation
is discharged; but if he do not appear in Easter Term and outlive the Term,
and die after, then it seems the 20l. must be paid at Michaelmas, or the
obligation is forfeit. So if the condition be that the obligor shall marry A
before Easter, or pay 20l. to the obligee at Michaelmas, and A die, or become
madd before Easter, or the obligee marry A himself, and the marriage does
continue between them until Easter be past; in all these cases the obligation
is discharged for ever. But when the thing is become impossible by the act or
laches of the obligor, the law is otherwise. And therefore if the condition be,
that A shall marry with B before Easter, or that the obligor shall pay unto the
obligee 20l. at Michaelmas, and the obligor himself marry with B, and the
marriage does continue until after Easter; hereby the obligation is not
discharged. So if the condition be to deliver up an obligation before Easter,
or give a release at Michaelmas, and the obligor does loose the oblgation, or
the obligation is burnt; hereby the obligation is not discharged, for if he
does not make the release at Michaelmas, he does forfeit the obligation.

If the condition of an obligation consist of one part only, or be 8 Ed. 4. 22.
Coo. 5. 22. Perk Sect. 7^9. 767. ^4. H. 74. 22, Ed. (...)
to do one thing at a time certain, and that thing at the time of the
obligation ma^e is possible to be done, but afterward and before the ^ime when
it is to be per^ormed it does become impossible by the act of God, or the act
of the obligee; in this case also the obligation is gone and discharged for
ever. And therefore if the condition be to appear in person such a day in such
a Court, and before the day the obligor die, or at the day the water does arise
so high that he cannot travail to the place without peril of life; in these
cases the obligation is discharged. So if the condition be, that A shall marry
B before Easter, and before the time A or B die, or become madd, or the obligee
marry B, and the marriage does continue until after the day; in all these
cases the obligation is discharged. But if the thing become impossible by the
act of the obligor, contra. And therefore if the condition be, that the obligor
shall appear such a day, and before, and at the day he is imprisoned through
some default of his own so that he cannot appear, this will not excuse him, So
held in the Exchequer 3. Cur.
no more then in case where he is so sick that he cannot appear without
peril of his life. So if the condition be that B shall marry C before Easter,
and the obligor himself marry her, and the marriage does continue until after
the time; in this case the obligation is forfeit. (...) Co. B H^^ 7. E^rz.
So if the condition give the obligor time all his life time to do the thing,
the obligation is not discharged by his death, but in this case he must do it
during his life time at his peril.

If the condition be that the obligor shall deliver to the obligee Ad^^^^^^ 37.
(...) Co. B. (...) versus ^wie.
an obligation or such a release as the counsel o^ the obligee sha^^ devise
before Michaelmas, and the counsel of the obligee dev^^ no release before
Michaelmas; hereby the obligation is gone for ever.

If the obligation depend upon, or be necessary to some other B^oo. Oblig.
(...). 88. 2^. 4. H. 7. 6.
deed, and that deed become void, in this case the obligation is become void
also; as if the condition of the obligation be to per^orm the Covenants of an
Indenture, and afterward the covenants be discharged or become void; by this
means the obligation is discharged and gone for ever. And if one make a lease
for years rendering rent, and the lessee enter into an obligation with
condition to pay the rent to the lesson, and after it ^all out so that the
lessee is evicted out of the land by an elder title, whereby the rent in law is
gone; in this case and by this means the obligation is discharged and gone
also. Bu^ if the eviction be but of a part of the land, contra.

If an obligation be made to me, and delivered ^s I S to my Coo. 5. 119.
use, and when it is tendered to me, I do refuse it and disagree to it; hereby
it is become void, and cannot afterward be made good again. So if an
obligation be made to my wife, and I disagree to it; hereby it is become void.

By a Release made from the Obligee to the Obligor, or to one ^^t. Ba^^. 37
of the Obligors if there be more then one, the obligation may be discharged.
And therefore, if an Obligation be made to me with condition to pay money, and
I by my Deed release it, or acknowledge my self satisfied the debt, albeit I
receive none of it, or that I receive but part of it in full satisfaction of
the debt, by this the obligation is discharged for ever.

If the Obligee make the Obligor, or one of the Obligors, or B^oo. Oblig. 61.
Coo. 8. 136. 8 Ed. (...). 3, 21 Ed. 4. 2. 11 H. 7. 4.
all the Obligors, his Executor, or his Executors; hereby the obligation is
discharged for ever. But the granting of Letters of Administration to one, or
more of the Obligors, is no discharge of the obligation. And if the Obligor
make the Obligee his Executor, this is no discharge of the obligation.

If the Obligee be a woman, and take the Obligor to husband, Broo. Oblig. 61.
hereby the obligation is discharged.

If the condition be to enfeoffe K. S (a woman) before such a Fitz. Bar. 133.
time, and before the day the Obligor, does marry the woman; this does not
discharge the obligation.

If the condition be to serve me seven years, and within the time Dyer 329.
I license him to depart, it seems that hereby the obligation is discharged:
And yet if the condition be to stand to an Award, and it is awarded that one of
the parties shall pay 5 l. a year for seven years toward the education of I
S, and I S die within the seven years, the obligation is not discharged by his
death, but the money must be paid during the time notwithstanding.

If the condition be to do two things, or stand upon diverse Dyer 371.
points; and the Obligee supposing the breach of one of them does sue the
Obligor, and the issue being joined upon that point, it is sound against the
Plaintiff, and he is barred; hereby the whole obligation is discharged; and so
long as that Judgment is in force, he can never sue the obligation upon any
other point within the condition.

If the condition be to satisfy me for goods I have delivered to I S Pit^.
Bar. 64.
if they be lost, and afterward they be lost, and I sue I S, and have him in
Execution for them; by this the obligation is not discharged; but perhaps when
I have satisfaction of I S being in Execution for the goods, the obligation may
be gone.

And in all other Cases by which a Deed in general may become void by matter
ex post facto, as by Rasure or the like, an obligation may become void.

CAP. XXII. Of a Defeasance.
THis in a large sense does sometimes signify a condition annexed D^feasan^e,
Q^id.
to an estate, and sometimes the condition of an obligation made with, and
annexed to the Obligation at the time of making thereof: But it is more
peculiarly and properly applied to such conditional instruments as are made in
Defeasance and avoidance of Statutes and Reconisances at the time of en^ring
into the same Statutes or Recognisances, and to such conditional Instruments
as are made in Defeasance of Statutes, Obligations, and the like, after the
time of the same Statutes entered into, and Obligations etc. made: And it is
therefore thus defined.

A Deseasance is a condition relating to a D^ed, as to an Obligation,
Recognisance, Statute, or the like, which being per^ormed by the Obligor or
Recognisor, the Act is disabled and made void, as if it had never been done;
which differs from a condition only in this, that this is always made at the
same time, and annexed to, or inserted in the same Deed, but that is always
made in a Deed by it self, and for the most part made after the Deed whereunto
it has relation.

There is no Inheritance Executory, as Rents, Annuities, Conditions, 2. Where
and in what cases a De^easance may be; and what things may be defeated and
avoided thereby; and where, and what not.
Warranties, Covenants, and such like, but may by a Defeasance made Coo. super
^itt. 236, 237 1. 111, 113. Plow. 137. 193. 21 11. 7. 23. B^oo. De^easance in
toto.
with the mutual consent of all those which were parties to the creation
thereof at the same, or at any time after, be annulled, discharged and
defeated. And so is the Law of Statutes, Recognisances, Obligations, and the
like; yet so, as in all these cases regularly, the Defeasance must be made
cod^m modo as the thing to be defeated was and is created, viz. if the one be
by Deed, the other must be so also; for it is a rule, that in all cases when
any Executory thing is created by a Deed, that the same thing by the consent of
all persons which were parties to the creation of it, may be by their Deed
defeated and annulled, and therefore that Wanranties, Recognisances, Rents,
Charges, Annuities, Covenants, Leases for years, Uses at Common Law, and such
like, may by a Defeasance made with the mutual consent of all those that were
parties to the creation of it by Deed, be discharged and avoided. Nihil ^st tam
conveniens naturali aquitati quam quod unumquodque dissolv^ ^o ligamine quo
ligatur. And therefore by such a Defeasance, not only the Covenant which does
create a power of Revocation, but the power it self created, may be utterly
defeated and avoided: But estates of Inheritance, and other estates in Tail or
for life, executed by Livery etc. cannot be avoided by Defeasance made after
the time of their creation and first making. And yet by anoother Deed of
Defeasance made at the same time, a Peoffment, Release, Lease for life, or
other executed thing, may be avoided as well as if it were by condition within
the same Deed; as if a Dissesee release to the Disseisor; this Release cannot
be defeated by an Indenture of Defeasance made afterward, but it may be
defeated by an Indenture of Defeasance made at the same time. Quae in
continenti fiunt in esse videntur.

To make a good Defeasance, these things are requisite: 1. That 3. What shall
be said a good Defeasance, and what not.
Coo. 1. 113.
the Defeasance be made ^odem modo, as the thing to be defeated is created;
for if the Obligee by word only discharge the Obligor, or grant not to sue him;
this will not defeat the obligation; it must be by Deed, therefore as the
former was. Broo. Deseas. 12. Fit^. Bar. 95.
But whether the For the manner of it.
Deed of Defeasance be indented or poll is not material: 2. Plow. 393.
That if it do recite the Statute or the obligation (as for the most part it
does) that it be done truly; for if a Defeasance be made of a Statute or an
obligation which is recited to be made the 10th day of May, whereas in truth it
bears date the first day of May; this Defeasance is void. 3. 14 H. 8. 10.
Bro. Estrang al fait. 10.
That it be made between the same persons that were parties to the first Deed
etc. And therefore, if A be bound in an obligation to B in 20 l. and B make a
Defeasance to C, that if C pay him 20 l. the obligation made by A shall be
void; this is no good Defeasance, because it is not made between the same
parties. Broo. tit. Defeasance 3.
And yet if a Statute be made to the husband and wife, and the husband alone
join in the making of a Defeasance, this is a good Defeasance. 4. Broo.
De^^^sance 5.
That it be made after the making of the Recognisance, Obligation etc, and not
before; for if A grant to B, that if B will be bound to him in 20 l. by
obligation, that the obligation shall be void, and after B does bind himself
to A in an obligation of 20 l. this Defeasance is not good because it is before
the obligation. Dyer 315.
And yet if the date of the Defeasance be before the date of the Recognisance
etc. and it be delivered after, it is good enough. 5. That it be For the matter
of it.
made of a thing deseasible; Plow. 137. Broo. Defeasance, 1.
for if a Disseisee release his right to the Terre-tenant, and after there is a
Defeasance made between them, that if the Relessor shall pay 20 l. to the
Relessee, the Release shall be void; this is a void Defeasance. Broo.
Defeasance, 6. 9 ^oo. super L^tt. 236.
And yet a Release may be avoided by a condition or Defeasance made at the time
of making of a Release as well as a Feoffment.

If the Defensance of a Recognisance, Obligation, etc. be, that if See West.
Symb. ^^o^. Defeasance ^n toto.
the Cognisor, or Obligor etc. pay a sum of money, or do not disturb the
execution of the Will of I S, or do make a Lease for years to I S, or the like;
these are good Defeasances. As if the Grantee of a Rentcharge grant to his
Grantor, that if he shall pay him 20 l, such a day, the grant of the rent shall
be void. Albeit the condition of an obligation, that is repugnant to the
obligation it self, is void, ^o H. 7. 24. 21 H. 7. 32. Fitz Bar, ^1.
and the obligation ^ingle, yet it is otherwise in case of a Defeasance made
after the obligation, for this is good, notwithstanding it be repugnant. And
therefore if the Obligee after the obligation made, grant by Deed to the
Obligor, that the obligation shall be void, or that he will not sue the
obligation at all, or that he will not sue the obligation until such a time,
or that the obligation shall be discharged; these Defeasances are good to
avoid the obligation.

If the Feoffee with warranty, grant that neither he nor his Broo. Defea. 4. 7.
(...) 6. 43. 21 H. 7. 23. Perk. Sect. 69.
heirs shall take benefit of the warranty of the Feoffor or his heirs; this is
a good Defeasance of the warrantie: And if he grant not to vouch, this will
discharge the voucher: And if he grant not to bring a warrantia Cartae, this
will bar him of that remedy. In like manner it is, if the Grantee of a rent*
charge grant to the Grantor, that he will not take any benefit by the Grant,
this is a total discharge; and if he grant he will not bring an Annuity, this
is a discharge of the person; and if he grant that he will not distraine the
land for the rent, this is a discharge of the land.

If one make a Lease for life by Deed, and after by another Deed Broo. De^eas.
11. Condition, 120.
does grant to his Leassee, that he shall not be impeached for waste; this is a
good discharge: And if the Leassee afterward grant by Deed to the Leassor,
that if he shall bring an Action of waste against the Leassee, that he will not
make use, nor take advantage of the Deed of discharge; this is a good discharge
of the discharge. So that hereby it seems a Defeasance may be of a
Defeasance, and one Defeasance after another, and Agree. Pasche. 8. and Ia. Co.
B.
regularly the last shall stand. And therefore, if a Lease for years be made on
condition to pay 20 l. at Easter, and the Lease to be void, and before Easter
the Leassor and Leassee agree, that if the Leassor pay it at Easter following,
the Per Inst. Bridgman.
Lease shall be void, and before that time they make the like agreement for
another year; it seems these be good Defeasances, and that the last shall
stand.

If the Defeasance after Execution made upon a Statute be thus, Broo. Defeas. 7.
that if the Conusor pay so much money, the Statute shall be void; it seems by
this the Statute and Execution thereupon is void; howbeit, it is best to add
these words in the Defeasance [and the Execution thereupon.]

And now being coming toward an end, we come to the last Assurance of a man's
life, or that Assurance kind of that men do commonly make when they are near
and toward the end of their life, viz. a Testament.

CAP. XXIII. Of a Testament.
A Testament is the full and complete declaration of a man's mind or last Will
of that he would have to be done after his death: 1. Testament. Quid.
Terms of the Law, Lit. Broo. Sect. 300. Coo. super Lit. 111. Swinb. of Wills
24.
It is in Latin Testamentum, i. Testatio mentis, the witness of a man's mind;
and to devise by Testament, is to speak by a man's Will what his mind is to
have done after his death: And this is sometimes called a Will, or last Will;
for these words are Synonima, and are as it seems promiscuously used in our
Law: Howsoever by the Civil Law, it is then only said to be a Testament when
there is an Executor made and named in it; and when there is none, Codic^^.
Quid.
but a Codicill only; for a Codicill is the same that a Testament is, but that
it is without an Executor; and a man can make but one Testament that shall take
effect, but he may make as many Codicills as he Will. And by the Common Law
where Lands or Tenements are devised in writing, albeit there be no Executor
named, yet there it is properly called a last Will, and where it does concern
Chattels only, a Testament. He that does make the Testament Testator, ^^testate.
is called the Testator: And when a man dies without Will, he is said to die
intestate.

Of Testaments there be two sorts, namely a Testament in writing Quotupl^x.
Perk. Sect. 476. Coo. super Lit. ^11.
or a written Testament, which is, where the mind of the Testator in his life
time, by himself or some other, by his appointment, is put in writing. And a
Testament by word or without writing, which is, where a man is sick, and for
fear least death or want of memory, or speech, should surprise him, that he
should be prevented if he stayed the writing of his Testament, desires his
neighbors and friends to bear witness of his last Will, and then declares
the same presently by words before them: And this is called a Nuncupative, or
Nuncupatorie Testament: And this being after his Nuncupative.
death proved by Witnesses, and put in writing by the Ordinary, is of a great
force for any other thing but land, as when at the first in the life of the
Testator it is put in writing. A Codicill also is in writing, or by word as a
Testament is: The Civilians have other divisions of Wills and Testaments, as
solemn and unsolemn, privileged and unpriviledged, whereof the Common Law
makes no mention.

The parts of every complete Testament whereof it does consist, (...). The
(...) of it.
Terms of the Law. tit. Devise. Coo. super ^^tt. 211. Swinb. lib. 1. c. 7.
are two: 1. The making of Devises, or giving of Legacies: 2. The making and
Ordination of an Executor; for a Testament can be no more without, then a
Codocill can be with an Executor.

A Devise or Legacy is where a man in his Testament does give Devise or Legacy
Quid.
any thing to another; the first of these terms is properly applied to the
gift of lands, and the last to the gift of goods or chattels: and therefore a
Devise strictly is said to be where a man in his Testament does give his lands
to another after his decease; and a Legacy is said to be where a man in his
Testament does give any chattell to another to have after the death of the
Testator; but the word is promiscuous^y applied to the one and to the other.
And he that gives by such a Will is called the Devisor, and he to whom the
thing Devisor, Devisee, or Legatee.
is given, the Devisee or Legatee.

And a devise is sometimes simple and without condition, as Dyer 317. 7^. Coo.
super Littl. 217. Swinb. 132. 134. 136
where I give my land to another and his heirs, or I give 20l. to Quotuplex.
another, without more words. And sometimes it is with a condition, which is
when there is a quality added to the devise or legacy, whereby the effect of it
is suspended or hindered, and it is thereby made to depend on some future event.
And this condition in this case may be made almost by any words; as if I give
to one Conditional Devise.
my land if he pay 20l. to my daughter, or so as he pay 20l. to my daughter, or
paying 20l. to my daughter, or I give one 20l. if he marry my daughter, or when
he shall marry my daughter, or I give my wife 20l. a year whiles she shall
live unmarried, or I give to him, or to whomsoever shall marry my daughter 20l.
or the like; in all these cases the devise is conditional. The first kind of
devise is called by the Civilians a simple assignation, and the latter a
conditional assignation.

An Executor in a large sense s taken for any one that is appointed New Terms
of the law. Coo. 8. 135. Plow. 288. Coo. super ^ittl. 209. Coo. 9. 40.
to have the disposition and ordering of the goods and chattels of a man that
is dead. And so there are three kinds of Executors: Executor Quid.
the first is a lege constitutus, who is therefore called legitimus, and such a
one is the Ordinary of the Diocese who has ordinary Jurisdiction in matters
Ecclesiastical: the second is a Testatore constitutus, Ordinary.
who is therefore called Testamentarius, and he is strictly and properly
called an Executor, and is defined to be one appointed by a man's last Will and
Testament to have the disposing and administration of all or part of a man's
goods and chattels, and to perform a man's last Will and Testament according to
the contents thereof: the third is ab Episcopo constitutus, who is therefore
said to be Dativus. And such a one is an Administrator, who is defined to be
one that has the goods* and chattels of a man dying Administrator.
intestate committed to his charge by the Ordinary for want of an Executor. And
his power, benefit, and charge is in all things equal to the power, benefit,
and charge of an Executor.

The Executor and Administrator also is sometimes universal or total, (...).
one that has the power and disposition of the whole Dyer 4. Br^* Executor 155.
Coo. 6. 19.
Quotuplex.
personal estate committed to him. And sometimes he is particular or partial,
i. one that has the power and disposition of some part of the estate, or of
all the estate for a time only committed to him. And sometimes he is absolute
i. such a one that has an absolute power of the estate, as Executor or
Administrator, and sometimes he is conditional i. one that has a limited and
conditional Coo. super (...). 209. St. 81. E^. (...) c. 11. Coo, 9. 40 8. 135.
power of the estate only. And in both cases he shall be Represent the person
of the Testator.
charged and chargable for so much as is committed to him as the testator or
intestate himself: for this cause the Executor is said to represent the person
of the Testator; for as to the estate committed to his trust he may charge
others, and be charged himself, sue and be sued, as the Testator himself
might. And the estate he has by his Executorship is said to be in him to the
use of the Testator and in his right: and that he does in the disposition of
his estate is said to be in the right and to the use of the Testator also; And
the Administrator has the same power and property over and in the goods and
chattels, the same remedy by Suit, and so far forth shall be charged as the
Executor; for they differ not in nature, but in name only. And yet the
Administrator is but the Ordinaries deputy, and he may revoke the
Administration, or call the Administrator to an account. Swinb. 12. D^er 143.
Coo. super Littl. 112. Litt. Sect. 168. Coo. (...). ^1.


A Testament is of that nature that it does much differ from 3. The nature and
effect of a Testament, and of a Codicill.
other acts and deeds that men do and execute in their life times: for albeit
it be made, sealed and published in never so solemn a manner, yet it has no
life nor virtue in it until the testators death; for it is a Maxim in law,
Omne Testamentum morte consummatun^ est, Et voluntas ambulatoria usque a^
extremum vitae exitum; it is therefore resembled until death to the
interlocutory sentence, and after death to the definitive sentence of a Judge.
And hence it is said, Sed legum servandafides, suprema voluntas Quod mandat
fieriqu: jubet parere necesse est. (...). (...). (...). Sect. 30^.
And for this cause a man may alter, or make void his will at his pleasure, and
he may make as many new Wills and Testaments as he will, and there is no means
under the Sun to bar a man of this liberty. Lin. Sect. 168. Perk. Sect. ^7^.
And the latter Testament does always revoke and overthrow the former; but
otherwise it is of a codicill; Sw^^b. 13. 14.
for a man may make as many of these as he will, and make no Testament at all;
Broo. Testament 20.
or if he make a Testament he may afterward make as many codici^s as he will,
and one of them will not overthrow the other; for in the first case they must
be all annexed to the letters of administration, and the Administrator must
perform them, and in the latter case they must be all annexed to the Testament,
and the Executor must take care to perform them. Plow. 343 ^44.
A Testament therefore is said to have three degrees. 1. An Inception, which is
the making of it. 2. A Progression, which is the publication of it. 3. A
Consummation, which is the death of the testator. Coo. super Litt. 112.
In Grants therefore, the first is of greatest force, but in Testaments the
last is of greatest force. But when a Testament is perfect by the death of the
party, it does as effectually give and transfer estates and alter the
property of lands and goods, as acts executed by deed in the life time of the
parties; (...) for hereby discents of lands are prevented, and a man may make
estates in Fee-simple, ^^itt. Sect. 1^7. 168.
Fee-taile, for life, or years, of lands, tenements, rents, reversions or
services as effectually as by deed; and these estates also will be good without
any Livery of Seisin, or Attournement. And hereby also rents, and power to
distraine for them may be reserved: conditions created and annexed to e^^ates,
or things devised. (...) And therefore they that take by devises of lands, are
said to take (...) Perk. Sec^ 505.
in the nature purchasors. (...) And if therefore a tenant in tail make a
Feoffment to the use of himself in Fee, and after devise the same (...) Dyer
221.
land to his wife in fee, and die; the son is not remitted, though the Father
die seized: for the devise does prevent the descent.

To the making of every good Testament; these things are requisite. Coo. 6. 23.
4. What shall ^e said a good and a sufficient Testament Or not.
1. That the Testator be a person able to make a Testament, and not disabled
for any special cause, either in respect of his person, mind or condition, or
in respect of the thing whereof the Testament is to be made. And for this it
must be known: S^^t. 32. and 34 H. 8. c. 5. Coo* 4. 51. Broo. Testament 13.
That a woman that has a husband, cannot make a Testament of her land First,
in respect of the person that does make it, and the thing whereof it is made.
And what Persons may make a Testament, And of what things, or not, And how.
or goods, except it be in some special cases; for of her lands she can make
no Testament with, or without her husbands consent: (...) H. 7. 14. Perk. Sect.
^0^. Fitz. Executor (...).
of the goods and chattels she has as Executrix, to any other she may make an
Executor without her husbands consent; for if she do not so, the Administration
of them must be granted to the next of kin to the deceased Testator, and shall
not go to the husband, Plow. 526. Fitz. Executor 109.
but of them she can make no devise with or without her husbands leave, for
they are not devisable; and if she do devise them, the devise is void. And of
the things due to the wife whereof she was not possessed during the marriage,
as things in action, and the like, it seems she may make her Testament, at
least she may make her husband Executor, 12 H. (...). 24. 18 Ed. 4. 11. Perk.
sect. 501. Fit. Executor 5. 28. 109. Broo Testament (...).
of her Paraphonalia, viz. A Fame Covert.
her necessary wearing apparel, being that which is fit for one of her rank:
some say she may make a Testament without her husbands leave, others doubt of
this, howbeit all agree that she and not his Executor shall have this after
her husbands death, and that the husband cannot give it away from her. And of
the goods and chattels her husband has, either by her or otherwise, she may
not make a Testament without the license and consent of her husband first had
so to do. But with his leave and consent she may make a Testament of his goods,
and make him her Executor if she will. And it is said also, that if she do
make a Testament of his goods (in truth without his leave and consent) and he
after her death suffer the Will to be proved, and deliver the goods
accordingly; in this case the Testament is good. And yet if the husband give
his wife leave to make a Testament of his goods, and she do so, he may revoke
the same at any time in her life time, or after her death before the Will be
proved. But a woman after contract with any man, may before the marriage make a
Testament as well as any other, and is not at all disabled hereby.

An Infant until he be of the age of 21 years can make no An Infant.
Testament of his lands by the Statutes of 32. and 34. H. 8 But S^ar. 32. Ed.
34. H. 8. cap. 5. Perk. Sect. 503. ^04. Br. Custom ^0. Sw^^. ^7, 38.
by special custom in some places where land is devisable by custom, he may
devise it sooner. And of his goods and chattels, if he be a boy, he may make a
Testament at fourteen years of age and not before: and if a maid, at twelve
years of age and not before; and then they may do it without, and against the
consent of their Tutor, Father, or Guardian, Coo. super. Litt. 89,
And yet some say an Infant cannot make a Testament of his goods and chattels
until he he be eighteen years of age. Perk. Sect. 503. 504. 24. Swinb. 37.
40.
A madd or lunatic person during the time of his insanity of mind cannot make
a Testament of A Lunaticke person.
lands or goods; but such a one as has his lucida interva^la, clear or calm
intermissions, may during the time of such quietness and freedom of mind make
his Testament, and it will be good. So also an Idiote, i. such a one as cannot
number twenty, or tell An Idiot.
what age he is, or the like, cannot make a Testament, or, dispose of his lands
or goods; and albeit he do make a wise, reasonable, and Swinb. 39. 40.
sensible Testament, yet is the Testament void. But such a one as is of a mean
understanding only, that has grossum caput, and is of the middle sort between
a wise man and a fool, is not prohibited to make a Testament. So also an old
man that by reason of his great age is childish again, or so forgetful that
he does forget An old man.
Swinb. 42.
his own name, cannot make a Testament; for a Testament made by such a one is
void. So also it seems a drunken man, that is so excessively drunk, that he is
deprived of the use of reason and understanding, during that time may not make
a Testament; for it is requisite when the Testator does make his will, that he
be of sound and perfect memory, Coo. 6. 23. Hill 3. Car. per the Lord keeper in
the Chancery.
i. e. that he have a reasonable memory and understanding to dispose of his
estate with reason. Swinb. 53.
A man that is both deaf and dumb, and that is so by nature, cannot make A
deaf and dumb man.
a Testament. But a man that is so by accident, may by writing or signs make a
Testament. And so may a man that is deaf or dumb by nature or accident. And so
also may a man that is blind. (...). B. R. 7. Iac.
An alien borne cannot make a Testament of lands or goods. An alien.
A man that is entered into Religion, cannot make a Testament. Stat. 5. and 6
Ed. 6. c. 11. Swinb. 54.
A Traitor attainted from the time of the Treason committed can make A Traitor.
no Testament of his lands or goods; for they are all forfeit to the King; but
after the time he has a pardon from the King for his offense, he may make a
Testament of his lands or goods as another man. A man that is attainted or
convict of Felony cannot make a Testament of his lands or goods, for they are
forfeit; but if a man Pre^^gativa Regis. Plow. 258* 259.
A Felon.
be only indicted, and die before Attainder, his Testament is good for his
lands and goods both. And if he be indicted and will not answer upon his
arraignment, but stands mute etc. in this case his lands are not forfeit, and
therefore it seems he may make a Testament of them. And if a man kill
himself, his Testament as to his goods and chattels is void, but as to his
lands is good. Plow. 261.
A ^elo de se.


A man that is outlawed in a personal action cannot make a Testament of his
goods and chattels so long as the outlawry does continne Fitz. Dec. 16.
An outlawed person.
in force; but of his lands he may make a Testament. The head, or any of the
members of a corporation may not make a Testament Fitz. Testament. 1.
A Corporation.
of the lands or goods they have in ^ommon, for they shall go in succession. A
Villain cannot make a Testament of his lands A Villain.
or goods after the Lord has seized them. But here note, that howsoever the
Testaments of Traitors, Aliens, Felons, Outlawed persons, and Villains, be
void as to the King, or Lord that has right to the lands or goods by
forfeiture or otherwise, yet it seems the Testament is good against the
Testator himself, and all others but such persons only. And here note further
also, By the civil law Swinb. 155* etc. See the Stat. 32. and 34 H. 8. Perk.
Sect. 496.
also the Testaments of diverse others, as Excommunicate persons, Heretics,
Usurers, Incestuous persons, Sodomites, Libellers, and the like, are void. But
by our law, the Testaments of such persons, at least as to their lands, are
good by the Statutes that do enable men to devise their lands. But all other
persons whatsoever, male or female, old or young, lay or spiritual, rich or
poor, at any time before their death whiles they are able to speak so
distinctly, or write so plainly as another may understand them, and understand
that they understand themselves, may make Testaments of their lands, goods, and
chattels, and that albeit they have sworn to the contrary: and none are
restrained of this liberty, but such as are before named. See more infra at
Numb. 7. Swin. 9. 131. 324. 325.
See more infra to this matter.

The second thing required to the making of a good Testament, is, Secondly, in
respect of the mind* of him that does make ^t.
that he that does make it have at the time of the making of it, Animum
testandi, (...). a mind to dispose, a firm resolution and advised
determination to make a Testament; otherwise the Testament will be void; for it
is the mind not the words of the Testator that does give life to the Testament,
for if a man rashly, unadvisedly, incidently, jestingly, or boastingly, and not
seriously write or say that such a one shall be his Executor, or have all his
goods, or that he will give to such a one such a thing; this is no Testament,
nor to be regarded. And the mind of the Testator herein is to be discovered
by circumstances; for if at the time he be sick, or set himself seriously to
make his Testament, or require witnesses to bear witness of it, it shall be
deemed in earnest; but if it be by way of discourse only, or of somewhat ^e
would do hereafter, or the like, it shall be taken for nothing.

The third thing required in a good Testament, is, that the mind of the
Testator in the making of it be free, and not moved by Thirdly, in respect of
the occasion or motive of it,
Swinb. 283. 284. 285. 286.
fear, fraud, or flattery, for when a Testator is moved to make his Testament
by fear, or circu^vented by fraud, or overcome by some immoderate flattery;
the sam^ is void, or at least voidable by exception. And therefore if a man by
occasion of some present fear, or violence, or threatening of future evils do at
the same time, or afterward by the same motive make a Testament: this
Testament is void, not only as to him that put him so in fear, but as to all
others, albeit the testator confirm it with an arch. But if the cause of fear
be some vain matter, or being weighty is removed, and the testator does
afterward when the ^ea^e is past, confirm the Testament; in this case perhaps
the Testament may be^ good. And if a man by occasion of some fraud or deceit
be moved to make a Testament, if the deceit be such as may move a prudent man
or woman, and if it be evil also the Testament is void, or voidable at the
least; but if the deceit be light and small, or if it be to a good end, as
where a man is about to give all his estate to some lewd person from his wife
and children, and they persuade the Testator that the lewd fellow is dead, or
the like, and thereby procure him to give his estate to them; this is a good
Testament. And one may by honest intercessions, and modest persuasions procure
another to make himself or a stranger Executor to him, or the like, and this
will not hurt the Testament. Also a man may use fair and flattering speeches to
move the Testator to make his Testament, and to give his estate unto himself,
or some friend of his, ex^^pt it be in case where the ^latterer does first
beat or ^hreaten him, or put him in fear, or to his ^lattery joineth fraud and
deceit, or the Testator is a person of weak judgment, or under the danger or
government of the ^latterer, as when the Physician shall persuade his Patient
under his hands to make his Testament, and give his estate to himself; or the
wife attending on her husband in his sickness shall neglect him, and
continually provoke him to give her all, or where the perswader is importunate
and will have no denial, or when there is another Testament made before; for in
all these cases the Testament will be in danger to be avoided. And if I be much
privi^ to another man's mind, and he tell me often in his health how he does
intend to settle his estate, and he being sick, I do of mine own head draw a
Will according to his mind before declared to me, and bring it to him, and ask
him whether this shall be his Will or no, and he does consider of it, and then
deliver it back to me, and say yea; this is a good Testament: But if otherwise,
some friends of a sick man of their own heads, shall make a Will and bring it
to a man in extremity of sickness, and read it to him, and ask him whether
this shall be his Will, and he say yea, yea: Or if a man be in great extremity,
and his friends press him much, and so wrest words from him, especially if it
be in advantage of them, or some friends of theirs; in these cases the
Testaments are very suspi^ious.

But as touching these two last things, Qu^re how they shall avail in the Wills
of land which are not regulated so much by the Civil Law.

The fourth thing required in the making of a good Testament, is, Swinb. 112.
Broo. Test. 20.
Fourthly, in respect of the manner and form of the disposition.
that that form and order that the Law prescribes be observed in the the
disposition. And therefore 1. that there be an Executor named in all Testaments
of goods and chattels, and that that Executor named be capable of the
Executorship; for this is said to be the head and foundation of the Testament;
for if there be never so many First, naming of an Execu^or.
Legacies given, and no Executor made, this disposition is but a a Codicill,
and cannot properly be called a Testament; for in this case the party dead, is
said to die intestate, and the Administration of his goods must be granted to
the Widow, or next of kin; whereas on the other side, if an Executor be
appointed, albeit there be no Legacy given, yet this disposition is, and is
properly said, to be a Testament: 2. If the Testament be of lands or Tenements,
it must be Secondly, if it be of lands, it must be in writing.
in writing, and it must be committed to writing at the time of the Stat. 32.
and 34 (...). 8. Perk. Sect. 476, 47^. Dyer 72. Plow. 345. Coo. 4. 60. Dyer 53.
making thereof: And it is not sufficient, that it be put in writing after the
death of the Testator, being first made by word of mouth only, for then it is
but Nuncupative still. But if the Testament be first made by word of mouth,
and be afterward written, and then brought to the Testator, and he approve it
for his Testament: Or if the Testator, when he does declare his mind, does
appoint that the same shall be written, and thereupon the same is written
accordingly in the life time of the Testator; these are good Testaments of
land, and as good as if they be written at the first. If therefore one be very
sick, and another come to him, and ask him whether his wife shall have his
land, and he say yea, and a Clerk being present does put this in writing
without any precedent commandment or subsequent allowance of the sick man;
this is no good Testament of the land. So if one declare his whole mind before
Witnesses, and send for a Notary to write it, and die before he come, and he
write it after his death; this is no good Testament for his lands, but a good
Nuncupative Will for his goods and chattels, except he declare his mind to be
that it shall not be his Will unless it be put in writing, for then perhaps
it may not be a good Will, for his goods and chattels. So if ^he that does
write the Will cannot hear Ad^udged* Trin. 10. (...).
the party speak, and another that stands by the sick man does tell him what he
does say; in this case if there be none others pr^sent to prove that he
reported the very words of the sick man; this will be no good Testament of the
Land. But if a Notary take direction from the sick man for his Will, and after
go away and write it, and then does bring it again and read it to the
Testator and he approve it: Or if it be written from his mouth by the Notary
according to his mind, and his mind were to have it written, albeit it be not
showed or read to him afterward; these are good Testaments. So if the Notary
do only take certain rude no^^s or directions from the sick man which he does
agree unto, and they be afterward written fair in his life time, and not
showed to him again, or not written fair until after his death; these are
good Testaments of lands. If a sick man bid the Notary make a Testa^ant of his
lands, but does not tell him how, and the Notary make a devise of it after his
own mind; this is no good Testament; and yet if it be after read unto, and
approved by the Testator, it may be good. And so if a Testament be found
written in the Testators house, and not known by whom, and it be read unto, and
approved by the Testator; this is now a good Testament in writing for lands and
Thirdly, use^ and lands by custom, and chattels devisable without writing.
goods: 3. Uses of lands before the Statute of uses, might, and lands and
tenements devisable by Custom, and goods and chattels may be disposed by word
without writing, and such Testaments of such things so made are good: 4. It is
not material in what matter Swinb. part. 4. Sect. 25. 26.
or ^^uffe, whether in paper or parchment, no^ in what language, whether
Fourthly, the matter or hand wherein and, whereby it is written.
in Latin, French, or any other tongue, nor in what hand, or letters, whether
in Secretary hand, Roman hand, or Court hand, or in any other hand a Testament
be written, so it be fair and legible that it may be read and understood:
Neither is it material whether the same be written at large, or by notes, or
characters usual or unusual, as xxs for twenty shillings, or when the figure
(2) is used in stead of the letter A, if it be usual in the Testators writing,
or the like; for the Testament is good notwithstanding. So also i^ some words
be omitted, or sentences improper used, when the intent and meaning is
apparent, as where a man says [I make my wi^e of my this my last Will and
Testament] leaving out the word [Executrix,* yet the Testament is good, and
this shall be understood: But if it be so done as it cannot be read, or by
reading the mind of the Testator cannot be known, then is the Testament void
and of no force. In like manner as a Nuncupative Will is, when the words
spoken, are so ambiguous, obscure, and uncertain, that thereby the meaning of
the Testator cannot be known nor understood. 5. Where Fifthly, ^ealing and
subscribing the Testators name no^ needful.
Perk. 476, 477.
writing is needful (as in the case of disposition of land it is) there
^ealing of the Testament, or subscribing of the Testators name is not
necessary. And therefore if a man by himself or another, do make a Testament
of his land, and do not put his Seal or name to it, if he agree to it, this
is a sufficient Testament: 6. If whiles the Testator is making his Will, and
whiles he intends Swinb. 6. ^it. Broo. Sect. 300. Swinb, part. 7. Sect. 10.
Coo. (...). ^1.
Sixthly, interruption in the making of the Will.
to proceed further at that time either by adding, diminishing, or altering he
be suddenly stricken with sickness or insanity of mind whereby he cannot
proceed, but gives it over in the midst and so he die; it seems in this case
the whole Will is void. And yet if a man begin his Will, and make perfect
Devises to one, and then of himself give over until another time: or if a man
make a perfect Devise to one, and then die before he can make any Devise to any
others; it seems these are good Testaments for as much as is done. And
therefore it is said if one command another to make his Will and by it to
devise White Acre to I S and his heirs, and Black Acre to I N and his heirs,
and he write the Devise to I S and his hei^s, and the Testator die before he
can write the Devise to I N and his heirs; this is a good Devise to I S, but a
void Devise to I N and his heirs. But if a man bid the Notary write a ^evise
of his land to I S upon condition* and the Notary write the Devi^e to I S, but
the Testator dies before he can write the condition; in this case the whole
Devise is void. But a man may if he Swinb. 13^
please, make a Testament of part of his goods, and die ^ntestate for the rest,
and that disposition he does make is good for so much. 7. The last thing
required to the perfection of a Testament, is, that it be Seventhly, in
respect of the proof of it; and what shall be said a sufficient proof of a
Testament, or not.
proved; for if it be never so well made, and be in truth the Testament of the
Testator, yet if it cannot be by proof made to appear so, it is but a void
Testament and of no force at all. And therefore herein these things are to be
known: 1. That a Nuncupative Testament Swinb. pa^^, 7. Sect. 13. part. (...).
(...) 2^.
must be proved by two Witnesses at the least, and those must be such as are
without exception: 2. A written Testament when it is written with the Testators
own hand, does prove and approve it self, and therefore need not the help of
Witnesses to prove it. And for this cause if (...) man's Testament be ^ound
written fair and perfect with his own hand after his death, albeit it be no^
subscribed with his name, sealed with his Seal, or have any Witnesses to it,
if it be known or can be proved to be his hand, it is held to be a good
Testament and a sufficient proof of it self; but if it be sealed with the
Seal, and subscribed with the name of the Testator, and can be proved by
Witnesses, it is the more authentic. And when it is found amongst the choice
evidences of the Testator, or fast locked up in a safe place, it is the more
esteemed; for if it be written in another hand, and the Testators hand and
Seal or one of them no^ to it, albeit it be ^ound in such a place as before,
yet some proof will be expected of it further by Witnesses in that case. And i^
a writing be found under the Testators own hand, yet if it be but a scribled
writing written Copie-wise, with a great distance between every line without
any date, in strange characters, with many interlinings, and lying amongst his
void papers or the like; this will not be esteemed a sufficient testament nor
a good proof of it; but it shall be accounted rather a draught or image of the
Testators Will for a direction to him after to make his Will by: And yet if it
can be proved that the Testator did declare himself that this should be his
Will; this will be a good Testament and a good proof of it. 3. If it be
proved the Testator said his Testament was in such a Schedule in the hands of I
S, and I S produce a writing deposing (...) to be the same; it seems this is a
sufficient proof; but if he say withal it is written with his own hand, then
it seems some other proof, as by comparing hands, or the like, that it is his
hand, wherein it is written, will be expected. 4. If the Witnesses will prove,
the writing produced to be the last Will of the Testator, or that he said, it
was, or it should be his last Will, or that it is the same writing that was
showed unto them, and whereunto they are Witnesses, albeit they never heard it
read, or set their hands to it, it is a sufficient proof. 5. All persons male
and female, rich and poor, Witness competent to (...) a Testament.
are esteemed competent Witnesses to prove a Will, save only such Swinb. part.
4. Sect 21.
as are infamous, as per^u^ed persons, and the like; and such as want
understanding and judgment, as children, infants, and the like; and such as
are presumed to bear affection, as kindred, tenants, servants, and the like. A
Lega^ee is reputed a competent Witness to prove any other part of the Will but
his own Legacy, or to prove any thing against himself touching his own Legacy,
but not otherwise. And therefore, where there be but two Witnesses of a Will,
wherein either of them has somewhat bequeathed unto himself; this Will cannot
be sufficiently proved for those Legacies; but for the rest of the Will it may
be sufficiently proved. 6. Where there is no question nor oppo^^tion moved or
had about, or against a Testament, there the Oath of the Executor alone is
esteemed a sufficient proof of it* and in that case regularly no other proof
is required. And where more proof is necessary, as in the cases before, it is
in the discretion o^ the Ordinary, what proof to admit and allow: And those
Witnesses for number, nature, and quality; or that other proof that he ^oth
deem and accept for sufficient, is sufficient; and the Testament so proved by
such Witnesses, or other proof is sufficiently proved* And of this question,
see more inf^a at Numb. 7.

A Testament sufficient and good in his c^^a^ion and beginning, (...). Where,
(...) how a Testament good in his ^eginning, may become void by (...), o^ not.
Coo. 4. 61. (...). Sect. (...). Plow. ^^4. (...). Swinb. (...). 7. Sect. 14,
(...). Perk. Sect. 4^^. Coo. (...). (...), (...), 8^, 8^.
may ^^terwards become void by diverse means, as 1. By Countermaund or
Revocation, and this is sometimes by the party himself that made it, and
sometimes it is by another: And sometimes it is express, and sometimes it is
employed; for it is a rule* That any Act or thing done, or words spoken by the
Testator after the Testament made, that does after or cross all or part of his
Testamen^ made before, is a Revocation of it, or of that part thereof that is
so crossed and altered. And therefore if a Feme Covert make a Testament, and
after take a husband; by this the Testament is revoked. And if a man make a
Testament of land, and after make a Feoffment of the same land, which Feoffment
is not good for some defect in the Livery of Seisin or otherwise, so that the
Feoffor dies seized of the land notwithstanding; hereby the Testament as to
this land is revoked. So if a man make a latter Testament, and therein by
express words does revoke the former Testament; or if a man by any writing, or
by word of mouth ( D^e^ 31^. 34. Eliz. B. R. Buttons case.
for one may by word of mouth revoke a Will in writing, albeit it be of land)
do expressly revoke a former Testament that he has made, and make no new
Testament (for so a man may do and die intestate if he will;) or if a man make
a latter Testament, and make no mention of the former Testament; all these are
Countermaunds of the former Testament. And the latter Testament does always
revoke the former, and that albeit the Executor of the latter do refuse the
Executorship, or die during the life of the Testator, or after his death; and
albeit the King be made Executor of the former; and albeit the former be a
written, and the latter but a Nuncupative Testament; and this holds true in a
Testament of lands, as well as in a Testament of goods and chattels; but
otherwise it is e converso; for however a man may by word avoid a Will made in
writing that is good; yet a man cannot by word make good, and affirm a Will
made in writing that is void: And therefore, if a man devise his land in
writing to I S and his heirs, and I S die before the Devisor, and after the
Devisor say by word, That the heirs of I S shall have the land, as I S should
have had it if he had lived; this verbal declaration will not affirm the
disposition. Also the latter Testament does infringe the former, albeit there
be no mention made in the latter of revoking of the former; and albeit there
be twenty Witnesses of the former and but two or none of the latter; and
albeit in the former, the Executor be appointed simply and without condition,
and in the latter, he be appointed conditionally, and the same condition be
also broken, so that the condition be of something then to come at the time
when the condition was made: but if the Executor of the latter Testament be
made upon some condition then present or past, the condition not existing, the
former Testament is not revoked; and albeit the former Testament be made
irrevocable, i. e. That the Testator say, I make this my last Will and
Testament irrevocable; and albeit the Testator has sworn not to revoke the
former, the Oath being also revoked together with the Testament; and albeit the
Testator enter into an Obligation with condition not to revoke it, but then in
this ^ase he does forfeit his Obligation. But the latter Testament does not
revoke the former Condition.
in these cases following; i. e. when the latter is imperfect in respect of
Will; i. e. when the Testator dies whiles he is making of it, and before he
can finish it, or when it is ve^emently suspected that the Testator was
compelled to make the latter by fear or violence, or induced to make it by
fraud and deceit, or when the former was made by the Testator whiles he was in
his good and perfect mind and memory, and the latter is made by him when he is
inops mentis, or when the latter is made by the persuasion* and for the benefit
of certain persons, when the Testator is in extremity of sickness, unless it
appear plainly to be the express Will of the Testator to revoke the former,
or unless the Testator himself did dictate the latter, or in case the latter
be in favor of the children of the Testator or others who are to have the
Administration of his goods if he die intestate. 2. When the Testator does make
two Testaments, a former and a latter, both being written, and afterward lying
sick upon his death bed, they are both presented unto him, and he is desired to
deliver to one of the standers by, which of them he will have to stand for his
last Will, and he deliver the former. 3. When the latter does agree in all
points with the former, for then both of them are as one in diverse writings. 4.
When in the latter Testament there is no Executor named, for then it is but a
Codicill or addition to the former. 5. When the latter is made upon some sudden
discontent against the Executor of the former Testament, and afterward he and
the Executor are reconciled again; in these and such like cases, the latter
Testament is no Revocation of the former. Lit. Broo. 55.
If the husband license his wife to make a Testament, and after her death, he
forbid the Probate, this is a Countermaund of of the Testament. But note here,
that Revocations in general are not favored in Law, and therefore he that
will a void a former Will by Revocation, must see he prove it well. 2. Swinb.
(...). 7. part. sect. ^6.
A good Secondly, by cancelling o^ it.
Testament may become void by cancelling or other destruction of it, as, where
the Testator himself, or some other by his commandment does cut, or tear it
in p^eces, deface it, or cast it into the fire; by this means the Testament is
made void, except it be in case where the Testator does it unadvisedly, or it
be done by some other without his consent, or by some casualty, or when he does
willingly pull away the Seals, and then he does afterward s^ale it again, or
where the whole Testament is not cancelled or defaced, but some or the chief
part thereof, as the naming of the Executor, or the like; for it is good still
for the residue, or where there be several papers, or writings, of one, ten,
or each of them, containing the whole Testament, the cancelling or defacing of
some of them does not hurt the Testament, unless it can be proved that the
Testators mind were to avoid it all, or where the Testament is lost in the life
time of the Testator, or after; for in this case so much as can be proved by
Thirdly, by ^^teration of the estate o^ the Testa^^^^
Witnesses is still in force. (...) A good Testament may become void by Swinb.
part. (...). Sect. 17.
alteration of the estate of the Testator; as when a man after the time of
making the Testament, and before his death is convicted or condemned of some
great crime for the which the Law depriveth him of the making of a Testament,
as Treason, Felony, or the like. And yet if the crime be pardoned and purged
before his death, the Testament may be good enough. And if a man of sane and
perfect ^^o 4. 62.
memory make his Testament, and after become inopsmentis, as ^very man for the
most part is before his death; this does not hurt the Testament. 4. A good
Testament may become void by an intention Fourthly, by intention to al^^^ it.
only to after it when the Testator is hindered in his intention Swinb. part.
7. sect. 18.
that it cannot take effect: And therefore, if when the Testator intends to
alter his Testament, or to make a new one, he be by fear or fraud forbidden or
letten, that he dare not or cannot alter it, or the Notary or Witnesses dare
not, or may not be suffered to come to him, as when a wife or some other that
is to have benefit by the former Will, under pretense that she has a charge
from the Physician that none shall come at him, or under pretense that he is
asleep or the like, will not suffer any body to come at him; or when the Notary
and Witnesses are all present, and they make such a noise or quarrelling, that
they hinder the effect of hi^ intent; or when the Testator is kept from doing
it by importunate requests and flattering persuasions; in all these cases, and
by these means the former Testament may become void. But if it appear the
Testator has no purpose to alter the Testament when he is let as as
aforesaid; the fear is a vain fear, the Testator is prohibited at another
time, and not the time when he does intend to alter the Testament, but he has
sundry opportunities after that time to do it, and does it not, or he is drawn
only by the fair speeches of a wife or friend, or by the weeping, or other
trouble arising from the grief of the Legatary or Executor for the Testators
sickness only he is disturbed; in these cases perhaps it may not be void. And
where it is void by the prohibition of a Legatary only, it is void for so much
as does concern him only, and not for the rest of the Testament. 5. A good
Testament may become void by making Swinb. pa^^. 7. ^ect. 11. Perk. Sect. 479.
another of the same date; for if two Testaments be found after the Fifthly, by
making another of the some date.
death of the Testator, and it cannot be discerned or proved which was made
former or latter; the one of them does overthrow the other, and both of them
are become void, except they be both to the same purpose, or one of them be
made in favor to wife and children etc. and the other to strangers. And yet in
the first case also the Testator by declaration of his mind, which of them he
will have to take effect, may make either of them good. 6. A good Sixthly, by
the declaration of the Testator.
Testament may be made void by the declaration of the Testators mind, as if a
man have two Testaments lying by him, the one made after the other, and they
are both showed or delivered to the Testator when he lies sick, and he by
word or sign declare that he will have the former to stand; this declaration
does revoke the latter, and affirm the former. And where a man would revoke a
Will for any of these causes, he must presently after the death of the Testator
put in a Cave^t or exception in that Court where the Will is to be proved, and
thereupon proceed to question it, or by a prohibition in some cases he may stay
the Probate in the Spiritual Court. See more infra at Numb. 12.

If a woman covert without the leave of her husband make a 6. Where a Testament
void voidable in his Inception. may become good by some matter or accident ex
post ^acto. And where not.
Perk. Sect. 501. Coo. (...). 99. 2. 55.
Testament of her husbands goods, and the husband does after her death connive
at the Probate, and deliver the goods accordingly, hereby the Testament of the
wife is become good; but if an Infant or mad man make a Testament in the time
of his Infancy, or madness, and after the Infant or mad man become of full
age, or sober, before his death; it seems these Testaments are void. And yet
if the Infant at his full age, or the mad man when he is sober make a
publication of this Testament, it may perhaps be good.

If a man make a former and a latter Will, and by this latter the former is
revoked, and after the Testator declare himself that the Perk Sect. 479. Coo.
(...). 61. Plow. ^44.
former shall stand; by this the former that was void before, is now become
good again^. And yet if a man make a Will that is void, and it be proved after
his death; this Probate will not make it good, but it does remain void as it
was before.

If a Feme sole make a Will, and then take a husband whereby the Will is
countermanded, and so become void; if her husband die, so that she become sole
again: this accident will not make the Will good again, but it does remain
void still; but perhaps by a new publication after she does become sole, it
may become good again. See more infra at Numb. 11.

To the making of a good and sufficient Devise, these things are 7. What shall
be said a good and sufficient Devise or Legacy, or not.
^ee before at Numb. 4.
requsiite. 1. That there be a devisor, and that he be a person able to devise,
and that both in respect of the condition of his own person and of the thing
whereof the Devise is made. 2. That there be a Devisee, and that he be a
Person capable and able to receive the thing devised, either at the time when
the Devise is made, or at least when the Devise is to take effect. 3. That the
Devisor have at the time of the devise made animum tostandi, i. a mind to make
a devise. 4. That the Will of the Devisor be free, and not drawn or coacted by
fraud, slattery, fear, or the like. 5. That the Devise be made in due manner
and form. 6. That the thing devised be a thing devisable. 7. That it be
devised First, in respect of matter touching the Devisor, and who may be a
Dev^^^r.
upon lawful terms and conditions. 8. That there be words sufficient Perk.
Sect. 40^. See before at Numb. 4. and after at Numb. 17.
to make his mind known. 9. That it be proved after the death of the Devisor.
10. And if it be a Devise of land, it is further required that the Devisor be
solely seized of the land* and not jointly seized with another; and that he be
seized of an e^^ate in ^ees^mple: and that the Devise be in writing. And for
the first of these it is to be known, that whosoever may make a Testament, may
make a devise of the same thing of which he may make a Testament. Et sic e
converso. And whosoever is disabled to make a T^stament, is disabled to devise
by such a Testament. And therefore In^ants may not devise their lands until
they be 21 years of age, nor their goods and chattels until they be 14 years
of age (or as some say until they be 18 yea^es of age.) Coo. super Litt. 110.
4. 61. ^^oo. Devise 32.
Women that have husbands, cannot devise their lands to their own husbands, or
others, either by or without their husbands consent, albeit there be a custom
to enable them thereunto; but all such devises are void. Perk. Sect 496.
And Spiritual persons as Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Secondly,
in respect of the matter touching the Devisee. And who may be a Devisee. And by
what name.
Prebends, Persons, Vicars, or any member of a Corporation may not devise the
lands or goods they have in the right of their churches and Corporations. And
for the second thing, this is to be known 1. that regularly whosoever may be a
Grantee, may be a Perk. Sect. 50^. 510. Swinb. 212. see infra a^ Numb. 18,
Devisee or Lega^ee. And therefore a Devise made to any person or persons, male
or female, children or strangers, bondmen or freemen, Lay men or clerks,
debtors or creditors, Infants or men of full age, women sole or covert,
Colleges, Universities, Corporations, or the like, are good. But it is said,
that if any Legacy be given to an Heretic, Apostate, Traitor, Felon,
Excommunicate person, Outlawed person, Bastard, unlawful College Libelier,
Sodomite, Usurer, Recusant convict, it is void by the Civil Law, except it be
in some special cases. And yet it seems a Devise of lands to any such person
is good within the Statute of Wills. D^er 303. 304. B. R. Curia. Mic. 13. (...).
A Devise to an Infant in the womb of its mother, at the time of the death of
the Testator is void. New Terms of the Law ^it. Devise. See infra Numb. 11.
And yet if a man devise to such an Infant, and he happen to be borne before
the death of the Testator, it seems in this case the Devise is good; for it is
a rule, 9. Ia. B. R.
That the Devisee must be capable of the thing devised at the time of the death
of the Devisor; if it be then to take effect in possession, or if it be a
remainder, he must be capable of it at the time when the remainder shall
happen, or otherwise the Devise is void. Litt. sect. 168. Litt. Broo. sect* 55.
And a man may devise his lands, goods, or chattels, to his own wife, as well
as to any other. 2. But he that may be thus a Devisee, and is capable of a
thing devised, must be certainly named and described; ^ncertainty.
for if a Devise be to a person altogether incertaine, the Devise is altogether
void. M. 19. I^. Curia. B. R. Crumpe versus Body.
And therefore if I give my land to my best friend, or to my best friends,
these are void Devises. So if I give my land to a Vicar, and say not to what
Vicar; this Devise is void, and no averment will help in this case. Coo. 6. 68.
Swinb. 293. 29^. 295. 296.
If one have two Averment.
sons of one name called I S, and he devise to his son I S without any
distinction; it seems this Devise is void for uncertainty; but in this case
perhaps an averment which son is meant, may help. So if one give to I S 20l.
and there be two or more of that name; this Devise is void except it may be
proved by some thing which of them he meant* So if one say in his Testament, I
give to one of the world 10l. ^his Devise is void for incertainty. So if one
give him 10l, whose name is written in a Schedule in the custody of such a man;
and in truth there is no such Schedule in the custody of such a man to be
found; or if there be no name written therein; it seems these Legacies are
void for incertainty. So if a man give a Legacy to a man incertaine, and no
such man is to be found, and the meaning of the Testator cannot be known; this
Devise is void. And yet if a man by his Will say thus, I devise to him that
shall marry my daughter; this is a good Devise; and he that does marry my
daughter in my life time, or after my death shall have it. And if a man devise
any thing ad pias causas, as to the Church, or to the Poor, not expressing
what Church or Poor; this perhaps may be a a good Devise. So if a man give
20l. to his kindred; it is said this is a good Devise, and that a reasonable
exposition shall be made of it as near the intent of the Testator as may be:
viz. that those in the next degree shall have it first, and then those in the
next degree to that shall have it afterward; and if it be a Devise to the
kindred of another man, that they shall have it equally. (Sed quaere of this
Devise, for it seems altogether uncertain.) So if a man give to I S, or I D
20l. this is held Swinb. part 7. sect. 9.
to be a good Devise, albeit it be somewhat incertaine, and the disjunctiue
shall be taken for a copulative, and so I S and I D shall take both by this
Devise; but if in this case one of them be nearer of kin then the other, then
it is said he shall have it for his life, an^ the other afterward. And if one
devise 20l. to A or B, which of them I S will appoint; this is a good Devise,
and he that I S shall appoint shall have it. And if one devise to I S and his
children; this is a good Devise and certain enough, and hereby he and Plow.
345. Coo. 1. 105. 155. Perk. sect. 508.
his children shall take the thing devised together. 3. And as the person to
whom the Devise is made, must be capable, and certainly described and named, so
must he be capable by that name by which the Devise is made to him, or
otherwise the Devise is void. And therefore if a Devise be to the heirs of I
S, I S being living; this Devise is void. And yet if ^ands or goods be devised
to the Executors of I S, and I S die before the Testator and make Executors;
this is a good Devise to the Executors. And if a man devise his land to I S for
life, the remainder to the next of kin, Fitz. Devise 27. Plo. 523. Perk. sect.
509. 510. ^^oo. Corporation. 55.
[or next of blood] of I S; this is a good Devise of the remainder* And i^ a
man devise goods to the Pari^^ioners of the Parish of S, to the use of the
Church; this is a good Devise, and the Churchwardens may recover it. And if a
man devise Eccle^^^ sanct^ Andre^ dre^ de Holborne; it seems this is a good
Devise to the Person of that Church. And if a man devise to the City of London,
University of Oxford, or to Queens College in Oxford, these are good Devises.
But if one devise to the Cominalty of a Guyld that is not inco^porate, as to
two of the middle men of the Guyld of the ^raternity of whiteacres in London,
or the like; this devise is void. 4. And if the person be capable, wel-named,
and capable by that name, if his name be truly set down, yet if his name be
not so, Dyer. 4. Perk. sect. 50^. Swinb* 289. 290.
(...).
but mistaken, the Devise is void. And therefore if one intending to give 20l.
to I S, devise to I N 20l. this devise is void both to I S and I N, except the
person be certainly denoted and described by some other circumstance, as to I N
the son of I S my Lanlord, or the like. So if one devise to the Abbot of S.
Peter, when the foundation is the Abbot of S. Paul; this Devise is void. And if
one devise to a Corporation, and there be none of that name at the time of the
Devise, nor during the life of the Testator, this Devise is void, and so also
it seems the Law is, if there be a College made after of that name. But if
one devise a thing to Plow* 344.
the wife of I S, and before the Devisor die, I S dye, and she take another
husband, and is called by another name; yet this Devise is good. So if one give
a Legacy to I S Deane of Paul's, and the Chapter there and their Successors, and
after before the death of the Devisor I S dye, and another is made Deane; yet
this Devise is good notwithstanding this mistake. For the third and fourth
thing required in a good Devise, see before at Numb. 4. Part. 2. 3. And for the
fifth thing, it is to be known, 1. Coo. supe^ Litt. ^11. Plow. 345. Swinb.
part 1. sect. 12*
That lands and tenements devisable by custom, may be devised by Fifthly, in
re^p^ct of matter t^u^hing the manner and form of the Devise. And how a Devise
may be made.
a Nuncupative Will without any writing for any time whatsoever, as Uses at the
Common Law that are now within the Statute might have been. Also those Uses
that remain at the Common Law, and are not within the Statute, may be devised
by word without any writing. But no estate can be made of lands by Devise upon
the Statute, except the Devise be in writing; and so a man may devise his land,
albeit he make no Executor; for an Executor has nothing to do with the
Freehold of land. Also goods and Plow. 345. Swinb. part. 1. Sect. 1^. Dyer 140.
chattels, leases for years of Lands, Wards, Villains, and the like may be
devised by word without any writing at all. And yet it seems questionable
whether a Lease for years of a Rent, Common, or such like thing, be devisable
by word without writing. 2. Swinb. part* 4. sect. 4. Plow. 23. Littl. Broo.
sect. 316. Dye^ 23.
The form of words in a Devise is not at all regarded; and therefore if one
say, I give, institute, desire, appoint, or will, that I S shall have my land,
or that I S shall have 20l. or let I S have my land or 20l. all these Devises
are as good as if he say, I devise to I S my land or 20l. And therefore if one
at this day since the Statute of Uses devise that his Feoffees of the land
shall be seized of the land to the use of I S and his heirs, or to the use of
I S and the heirs of his body; or if such a man devise that his Feo^fees shall
make an estate of the land to I S and his heirs, or to him and the heirs of
his body; this is a good Devise of the land in Fee-simple, or Fee-taile. (...).
c. 9. ^ac. New man's case.
And if a man make a Feoffment of his land to the use of his last Will, and
then devise that his Feoffees shall be seized to the use of I S; this is a good
Devise of the land per intentionem. Plow. 54^. Coo. 4. 66. 8. 95.
And if I devise that I S shall have, hold, and occupy my land for his life;
this is a good Devise of the land for his life. Dye^ (...). 33. 128. Coo. 1.
83. 6. 42. Dyer 4. 33.
If a man have a Lease for years of land and he devise his Lease, or his
Term, or his Ferme, or the profits or occupation of the land; by either of
these Devises his whole lease and all his interest in the land is given as well
as by any other form of words. 3. A man may devise lands, tenements, or
hereditaments in possession in Fee, for life or years; or he may devise it in
reversion, viz. to one for life, the remainder to another in Fee, or in tail,
or in any other sort, as a man may grant it by his Deed, and such Devises are
good. But if the Fee-simple of land be devised to one, the remainder cannot be
devised to another, albeit the first Devise be but conditional. And therefore
if land be devised to I S and his heirs, and if he dye without heirs, that it
shall remain to I N and his heirs; this is a void remainder to I N. So if a
man devise his land to I S in Fee, ita quod solvat I N 20l. and if he fail,
that it shall remain to I N and his heirs, this remainder to I N is void; for
if I S fail of payment, I N shall not enter and have the land, but the heir
of the Devisor. And yet perhaps a rent may be devised after this manner.
Howbeit if another man have a Rentcharge of 20l. a year issuing out of my
land for Dyer ^39. ^4.
20. years; and he devise this unto me until I have levied 100l. by way of
retainer, the remainder to I S; this remainder is not good. 4. A Devise may be
of lands, goods, or chattels simply and absolutely or conditionally; the simple
Devise also may be in praesenti, Condition.
P^^w. (...). Pe^k. Sect. ^63. See (...) 8. 95
or in futuro. And therefore as a Devise to one and his heirs in praesenti, is
good, so a Devise to one and his heirs after the death of I S is good. If I
devise land to I S and his heirs on condition, as so as, or ita quod, he pay
10l. to W S, or paying to W S 10l. or ad solvendum 10l. to I S; the Devise in
all these cases is a good conditional Devise; and if the condition be not
performed or broken, the estate is ended, and the heir may take advantage of
it. And therefore if lands be so given to the heir, the condition is idle,
because none can enter but him. And if I devise that if I S pay my Executors
20l. that he shall have White acre to him and his heirs for ever, or for life
etc. this is a good Devise, and after the contingent shall take effect
accordingly, and in this case and such like the heir of the Devisor must keep
the land until the contingent do happen. In like manner as if it be a
chattell, the Executor shall keep the thing until the condition be performed,
and after a condition broken h^ shall take advantage of it. 5. A Devise may be
also with a limitation, as in the cases before; Limitation.
and as, where one gives land to another, and his heirs so long as I S shall
have heirs of his body; or where one does devise his land to A his son and
his heirs for ever, paying to B his brother 20 l. when he shall come of age,
and then that he shall enter and have it to him and his heirs, and if he die
without heirs of his body, the said B then living, then that B and his heirs
shall have it in the same manner: And these and such like Devises are good. 6.
A man that is seized of land in Fee, may devise that his Executors Coo. super
Lit. 112. 11^ 236.
shall sell it; or may devise it to his Ex^cutors to sell, or Devise it to his
Executors, and that they shall sell it; and these Devises are good. 7. A Devise
may be of a rent, or of land reserving Dyer 348. 100. 8. 84. 85.
Clause of Distress.
a rent, with clause of Distress, As if a man Devise land to I S, paying 10 l.
by the year to his wife, and if it be unpaid, ^arrantiae.
that she shall distraine for it; this is a good Devise: But a Warranty cannot
be made by a Will. And yet if a man devise land to Coo. super Litt. 38^.
another for life, or in Tail, reserving a rent; in this case the heirs of
the Devisor shall be bound to the Warranty in Law, and the Devisee shall take
advantage of it. 8. A man may devise his land Plow. 523. 540. Dye^. 357. Coo.
8. 94. 83
to one, and devise a rent out of the same land to another, and these Devises
are good. So a man may devise his land to one in Fee, and after devise the same
land to another for life or years; and these are good Devises, and may stand
together. So also if a man in the forepart of his Will by general words,
devise all his lands to one in Fee, and in the latter part of his Will, devise
some special part of it to another in Fee; these Devises are good and shall
stand together, as for example, if one have a Farm, and in the first part of
his Will, give this Farm to one, and in the latter part of his Will give one
Close (a part of this Farm to another) or a man devise all his land in B (which
is in the County of Glou^.) to A his daughter, and the latter part of his Will
devises all his land in the County of Glou^. in the possession of I S to his
son, and part of the land in B. is in the possession of I S, and in
Gloucestershire; these are good Devises and shall stand together. 38 Bliz. Co.
B. Agreed diverse times.
But otherwise, it is when the general clause does come last, as where one
does give his land to A his daughter, and in the latter part of his Will, does
give all his land in Hartfordshire in the possession of I S to W, and the land
given to A, is in Hartfordshire, and in the possession of I S; in this case the
Devises will not stand together, for the first Devise is void; and so also it
is where both the Devises are particular, as, where first in a man's Will, he
does give White Acre to A and his heirs, and after in his Will he does give
White Acre to B and his heirs; in this case the first Devise to A is void. Dyer
in his Lecture, 1. and per Inst. Dodr.
And yet in this last case, some have held the Devises shall be good, and that
A and B shall be Joint-tenants Ideo Quaere. Trin. 9. Ia. B R.
If one devise all his land to I S and his heirs excepting 20 l. for seven
years, which he wills shall be employed for his children; this is a good
Devise of this sum of 20 l. a year. 9. And a man may devise his land for so
many years as I S shall name, and after* appoint that his Plow. ^23. 546.
son shall have it during the minority of his son, and both these Devises
may stand together: And therefore, if A be possessed of the Manor of D for
years, and he devises all his Term to his eldest son if he live so long,
and if he die before he have any issue of his body, then to his younger son
in the same manner, but withal, he does appoint that his wife shall have the
occupation of the land until his eldest son be 21 years of age; these
Devises shall stand together, and the wife shall enjoy the Manor, for that
time by this Devise. 10. A man may devise a term of years by way of remainder;
as for example, a man that is possessed of a term of Coo. 8. 95. Plow. 519.
546. 516. 539. Dyer 277.
years, of land, may devise it to I S for life, the remainder to I D; or to I S
for life, and that it shall after remain to I D, or to I S; for so many years
as he shall live, and after to I D, or in any such like manner, these are good
Devises both to the first, and to him in remainder also by way of Executory
Devise, though not by way of remainder, and in this case the first Devisee
cannot hinder the second Devisee of the remnant of the term. But a man cannot
by Deed Grant.
in his life time grant his term in this manner: Coo. 10. 8^. ^7. pas^^. 17.
^ac. B. R. child. vers^s Baily.
Nor if a man be possessed of a term can he entaile it by his Will: And
therefore, if a man possessed of his term of years of land Devise his term or
his land to I S and his heirs, or to I S and the heirs of his body, or to I S,
and his issues, the remainder to I D; this remainder is void, and it is a good
devise of the whole term to I S, and his Executors. 37 (...). 6. 30. (...).
Broo. Sect. 388. 3^4. 209.
Also a chattell personal may (as it seems) be devised to one for life, and
afterward to another, but yet so as the one must have the property only, and
the first but the occupation only, as if one devise that I D shall have the
occupation of his plate for his life, and after that it shall remain to I S;
this is a good Devise of the plate to I S. But if the thing it self be devised
to the first of them; then the Devise to the second is void, for the gift of a
chattell personal for one hour is the gift of it for ever. And so it did
seem in the Lady Daves case. Hill. 9. Car. B. R. 11. A Legacy of goods or
chattels may be given Swinb. part. 4. Sect. ^7.
to, or until a certain time, or from, or after a time certain or
incertaine; as for five years, or from, or until the marriage of A or the
like; and these Dispositions are good. 12. A man may Plow. 524.
devise his land for so many years as I S shall name, and if I S do name a
certain number of years in the life time of the Devisor, this will be a good
Devise. But if one devise his land for so many years as his Executor shall
name, it seems this Devise is not good. 6. As touching the sixth thing
required in a good Devise, these things are to be known. 1. That Lands,
Tenements, Dyer 371. Coo. 8. 83. 6. 16. super Litt. 111. Perk. Sect. 496. 500.
497. 538. Lit. Sect. 167. Dyer 155. old N. (...).
Sixthly, in respect of matte^ touching the thing devised, and what may be
devised, and by what name.
and Heriditaments for the nature and quality of them are devisable as well as
other things. And therefore by the custom of some places, lands in possession,
reversion, or remainder, are devisable in Fee for life, or years; and a man
that has a Lease for years of land, may devise the land at his pleasure
during his term. But by the ancient Common Law in favor to heirs, the lands
that a man had in Fee* simple were not devisable by Testament, except only in
Devise of lands and te^^ements.
some special places by the custom of the place, as Gavelkind-lands in Kent,
and lands within certain Borrow-Townes, as London, Oxford etc. and by the
custom of those places such lands are devisable: And in some places the
custom is, that they may devise their purchased lands only; and in other
places, that they may devise their lands descended also: And in some places the
custom is that they may devise for life only, and in other places, that they
may devise in Fee-simple and Fee-taile also. And in all these places where such
customs are, they may devise their lands now as they might have done before
the Statute; for the Statute has not destroyed their custom. And therefore at
this day they that have such lands in such places, have their election eitheir
to devise according to the power the custom does give them, or according to
the power the Statute does give them, and in the first case the Devise is good
against the heir for the whole; and in the last case, it is good against him
for two parts in three only. Also by the Perk. Sect. 496. 528. 538.
Common Law, the Uses of lands were devisable, as goods, and chattels were as
the pleasure of him that had them. But otherwise, and in other cases, lands and
tenements, might not be devised and disposed by Will, until 32 H. 8. at which
time the owners of lands, tenements, rents, etc. were by Act of Parliament
enabled to devise and Stat. 32. H. 8 c 1. 34 H. 8. c. 5.
dispose their lands as follows: He that has any land in possession,
reversion, or remainder by Socage Tenure, and has no land held in Capite or by
Knights Service, may devise all his land, or any rent, Common, or other profit
apprender out of it to any person in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, for life or years,
at his pleasure. He that has any such land held of the King in Capite by
Knights Service, or by Knights Service* and not in Chief, or held of any
common person by Knights Service, may devise two parts thereof in three, to be
divided, or any rent, etc. out of those two parts at his pleasure, and no more;
for the third part must descend to the heir and come to satisfy the Lord his
duties; and therefore the Devise of the whole land in this case is void for the
third part. He that has any such land held by Knights Service in Capite, and
other lands held by Socage Tenure may devise two parts of the whole, and no
more, or any rent etc. out of it at his pleasure. He that does hold land of the
King by Knights Service only, and not in Capite; or if a mean Lord by Knights
Service, and has also other lands held by Socage Tenu^e, may devise two parts
in three of all the land held by Knights Service or any rent etc. out of it,
and all his Socage land at his pleasure. So that now by these Statutes, a man
that has lands in Fee-simple, may devise them in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, for
life, or years absolutely, or conditional at his pleasure. And therefore if
one devise his land to one for life, the remainder in Fee, or Fee-taile to
another; or devise his land to B, the remainder to the next heir male of B, and
the heirs males of the body of such heir male or the like; these are good
Devises. But for the more full understanding of these things, it it to be known
in the next place. 2. That this Statute does not enable men to devise land that
are See the Statute, Coo. super Litt. 111. Perk. Sect. 544. Lut. Sect. 287.
Dve^, 210. old, N B 89. Perk, Sect. 500, 539, 540. 496, 497, 498.
disabled by Law in respect of their persons or minds, as Infants, women
Covert, men de non sane memory, or the like; nor such as are disabled in
respect either of the nature of their land, as Copi-holders (for Copi-hold-land
is not devisable) or of the estate they have in the land, as Tenants in Tail,
or pur autervie, or Ioynt-tenants; for these can no more devise the land they
do so hold, then they could before the Statute. But such as are seized of land
in Common, or Coparcenery, may devise their land as well as those that are sole
s^ised. And if two be Ioint-tenants for life, the Fee-simple to one of them; he
that has the Fee-simple, may devise his Fee-simple after the death of his
companion. Neither does this Statute enable those that are seized of lands in
Fee, in the right of their houses and Churches to devise the same lands: And
therefore, Bishops, Deanes, Persons, Vicars, Masters, of Hospitals, or the
like; can no more devise the lands belonging to their Bishoprics etc. then
they could before the Statute, but the lands they are seized of in their own
right, they may devise like other men. 3. Heridiments that are not of any
yearly value, are some of them devisable, (...). 10. 81. (...). 32. super
(...). 111.
and some not; for if the King grant to one and his heirs bona and catalla
felonum and fugitivorum vel ut lagatorum, Fines, and Amercements within such a
Manner or Village; in this case, the owner can neither devise these things to
another, as part of the two parts, nor leave them to descend for a third part.
And yet if one have a Manor unto which a Leet, Waife, Estray^, or the like; is
appendant or appurtenant; there by the Devise of the Manor with the
appurtenances, these things may pass as incident to the Manor: But if a man
have a Hundred, with the goods of Felons, Out-lawes, Fines, Amercements,
Retornabrevium, and other such casual Heriditaments within the same Hundred,
and these have been usually let to Farm for a rent; in this case, these things
may be devised or left to descend for a third part. 4. Such incertaine
Franchises as before that are Heriditaments of no yearly value, albeit Coo. 10.
8^. 82. super Litt. 111. Coo. 3. 35. 30. 34.
they are not devisable, yet may rest^aine the devise of a man's lands and
tenements, and make it void for a third part, if they be held in Capit^, for if
it is not requisite, that the thing held by the Tenur^ in Capite be deviseable;
and such things as may not be left to descend to the Lord for a third part,
and to satisfy him, his duties, may notwithstanding be devisable, or restrain
the Devise of other lands and tenements, and make it void for a third part* And
therefore, a Reversion upon an estate ta^le, which is dry and fruitless, if it
be holden of the King by Knights Service in Capit^ will hinder the Devise of
the third part of a man's lands and tenements: Also an estate tail of lands
held in Capite may restrain the Devise of a third part of other lands. And
therefore, if such lands be conveyed to one and the heirs of his body, the
remainder to another, and he have other lands in Socage; if he have any issue,
he can devise but two parts of his Socage land. And where the Statute speaks of
a remainder, it is to be intended of such a remainder only, as may draw Ward
and marriage by the Common Law, and this is that remainder only, that does
hinder a Devise. And therefore if A be seized of lands in Socage Tenure; and B
be seized of lands in Fee, held in Capite by Knights Service, and B make a
Lease for life or gift in Tail to C, the remainder to A in Tail or in Fee; in
this case, A during the estate for life or in Tail, may devise all his Socage
land, notwithstanding this remainder. But if a man make a Lease for life or
years, and after grant the reversion for life, or in Tail, the remainder in
Fee, and after the Grantee for life dies, or Donee in Tail dies without
issue, in this case, this remainder which now is in point of reversion, will
restrain the Devise of other lands, and make it void for a third part. 5. In
all Coo. 10, 81. 11, 24. 3. ^0, 34, 35. supe^ L^^t. ^^1. Dyer 158.
cases where a man is restrained to devise any part of his lands held in
Socage, h^ must have lands held in Capite at the same time, and therefore the
time of having of lands to devise, and holding of other lands in Capite, and
disposing of the lands to be devised, must concur. And therefore, if a man be
seized of an Acre of land in Fee, held of the King in Chief by Knights
Service, and of other two Acres in Fee held in Socage, and enfeoffee his
younger son of the Acre held in Capite, and of one of the other Acres, or
convey it to the use of his wife, or for the payment of his debts etc. and
after purchase land held in Socage; in this case, he may devise all the new
purchased land held in Socage without restraint. So if a man be seized of
lands held by Knights Service in Capite in possession, reversion, or remainder,
and of lands held in Socage, and by his Will in writing, does devise all the
said lands, and after the land held in Capite* is recovered from him, or
aliened by him bona ^ide; in these cases the Devise is good for all the land
held in Socage: And hence it is, That if the King grant land to one in Fee Farm
to hold in Socage at a rent, and after grant this rent to another and his
heirs, to hold in Capite, and the Grantee of the rent does grant it to him
that has the land; in this case, because the rent is extinct, and he cannot be
said to hold lands in Capite, this shall not restrain the Devise of any of his
lands. And yet if a man hold some lands by Knights Service in Capite, and other
lands in Socage, and be disseised of the lands held in Capite; he cannot
devise all his Socage land, but the Devise will be void for a third part, for
he is said to have that land still, whereof he has the right. And albeit the
Statute say [that he that has lands held of the King in Capite, and other
lands in Socage, may give two parts for the advancement of his wife, payment of
his debts, preferment of his children] whereby he is restrained to devise any
more. And therefore, if by act, executed in his life time, he convey two parts
to any such uses or intents, he cannot devise any more by his Will, but the
residue must descend, yet this also is to be intended of the land he has at
the same time. For if a man be seized of land held in Socage of the yearly
value of 20l. per annum, and he has not any* land held in Capite by Knights
Service, and he make his Will in writing, and by it, devise his Socage land to
one in Fee, and then purchase land of the value of 20 s. per annum held in
Capite, and die; this will make the Devise void for a part of the land that is
held in Socage: But if a man seized of land in Fee of Socage Tenure, assure it
to the use of his wife for her ^ointure, and after purchase lands held in
Capite by Knights Service; he may devise two parts in three of all this Capite
land, and the King shall not have any thing out of, or for the Socage land: If
a man seized of lands, part of which are Coo. 3. ^4. (...). ^4.
held in Capite, and part in Socage make a Feoffment of the lands held in
Capite, (being two parts in three of the whole) to the use of him and his wife
for life, with diverse remainders over; in this case, he may not devise any of
the Socage land. And if a man have no Socage land but Capite land, and convey
it away i^ Fee-simple, keeping no Reversion to any such use, and after purchase
Socage land; he may devise all the Socage land newly purchased. 6. As Coo. 3.
32.
the Testator enabled to devise by this Statute without restraint, is, and must
be one that has the land he does devise at the time of the Devise made, and no
other land then to be an impediment to his Devise, so he must have a sole
estate as well in the land he does leave to descend to the heir, as in the land
he does Devise: And therefore, if lands held in Capite be conveyed to a man and
his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies; and this man has other lands
whereof he is sole seized held of the King in Capite by Knights Service; in
this case he may not devise two parts of the whole, supposing this may suffice
for the Kings third part, for he may devise but two parts of the residue; i. e.
of that whereof he is sole seized either at the time of making of the Will, or
at the least at the time of the death of the Testator. 7. The estate of the
land that is held, must continue after Coo. 10. 8^.
the death of the Tenant, otherwise it will be no restraint. And therefore, if
Tenant in Tail be to him and the heirs males of his body, the remainder in Fee
to another of Lands held by Knights Service in Capite; and he is seized of
other lands in Socage in Fee, and by his Will in writing devise all the Socage
land and die without issue male; in this case, the Devise is good for all the
Socage land. And so also it is where the estate the Ancestor had of the land
held is defeated by condition. 8. That which a man cannot dispose by any act in
his life time, shall not be taken for any such Manors etc. Coo. (...). 32.
whereof a man may devise two parts by authority of this Statute at his death:
And therefore in the case of an indevided estate of lands between husband and
wife, where the husband can make no disposition for longer time then during the
Coverture; these lands are not to be esteemed, such as are to be accounted
amongst the lands; whereof two parts in three are devisable. 9. The Tenure by
Coo. 10. 84. 3. 34.
Knights Service must continue after the death of the Devisor, otherwise the
land so held, will be no restraint. And therefore, if the King grant land to
one and his heirs, to hold during his life by Knights Service in Capite, and
after in Socage, or to hold during his life in Socage, and after by Knights
Service; in these cases, the Grantee may devise all his land, notwithstanding
the Tenure of this land. 10. The King or other Lord must have a full and clear
Coo. 3. 32. 31. super L. (...). 111. 10. 8^.
yearly value of the third part left to descend to him, and the value is to be
esteemed as it is, and does happen to be at the time of the death of the
Testator, for the King, or other Lord must have the like and equal benefit for
his third part, as the Devisee has for the two parts without diminution or
substraction; when therefore a man will have his Devise good for the resid^^ he
must take care that the third part be so left, for if the third part be not
valuable, or be charged with any rent etc. or be upon any incertainty, as if it
be upon a possibillity only, as where a man and his wife be seized of a joint
estate Tail made during the Coverture, and he Devise other lands to her on
condition, that she shall wave her estate made during the Coverture, and so
intend that that part of his land shall be left for the Kings part; this Devise
will not be good for the residue, and albei^ the wife do wave the estate after
the husbands death, yet this will not help the matter or make the Devise good
for that part for which it was void before: But it is not material by what
Tenure the third part discending be held: For it is holden by the better
opi^ion. That if a man be seized of 20 l. land held of the King in Capite, and
10 l. land held of a Subject by Socage, and he devise all the Capite land to a
stranger; that this is a good Devise for the whole, and that the King shall be
satisfied by the Socage land. And if it be of the value of the third part,
albeit it be but of an estate Tail whereof the Ancestor was seized, or it be
new purchased land, yet it is sufficient: And therefore, if some lands be given
to a man, and the heirs of his body of the value of 10 l. per annum, and he be
seized of other lands in Fee-simple to the value of 20 l. per annum and all, or
part of these are held in Capite by Knights Service; in this case he may devise
the lands in Fee-simple, and leave the entailed land to descend for a third
part: And if a man be seized of such land, and convey it to the uses within the
Statute or any of them, and after purchase new land and leave that to descend,
this is sufficient. 11. The third part that is left to descend to satisfy the
King or other Coo. 3. 34.
Lord must descend immediately, and he must not stay for it. And therefore, if
a man be seized of three Acres of land held by Knights Service in Capite, and
make a Lease of one Acre for life, and after devise the other two Acres; this
Devise is not good for the whole two Acres, but for two parts in three thereof
only; and albeit the Tenant for life die afterward, yet this will not help the
matter. But if the Devisor leave a full third part immediately to descend in
Fee-simple or in Fee-taile, he may devise the other* two parts at his pleasure.
And if he do not leave a third part to the full, it must be made up and
supplied out of the other two parts, which in case of the King is done by
Commission out of the Court of Wards, and in case of a Subject by Commission
out of the Chancery. 12. As the Coo. super Litt. 111. 9. ^33. 3. 32. 30.
third part left to descend, must be of as good value as either of the other
two parts is at the time of the death of the Testator, or otherwise the Devise
of all the residue will not be good, so must it be taken out of the lands of
the Testator indifferently: And therefore, if a man be seized in Fee of land
held in Chief by Knights Service, and make a Feoffment of the one half of it
to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of one he does intend to
marry, and after to the use of another in remainder, or to any other such like
uses within the Statute, and after he does marry the same woman, and after he
devises the other moity to his wife, children, or any other; in this case,
albeit the wives estate have precedence, yet the King shall have his third part
out of both the moities equally. So if one be seized of Gavelkind land held in
Capite, and his son being dead, devise part of it to one of his
grandchildren, and part of it to another, and part to a third Tail; in this
case, the Kings third part shall come out of all the three parts equally, and
accordingly the Devise will be void for so much to every one of them. So if one
hold three several Manors of three several Lords, he cannot devise two of
these Manors leaving a three to descend, but he may devise two parts of every
of the third Manors, and a third part of each Manor must descend to each
Lord, for there must be an equallity in these things. For further illustration
of which things, the examples following are to be heeded. W B, being seized of
the Manor of Thoby in Capite, Coo. 3. ^ut. ler and Bake^s c^se.
and of lands in Fobbing held in Socage in Fee, and he and his wife being
seized of the Manor of Hinton held in Capite to them and the hei^es of their
two bodies begotten by an estate made to them during the Coverture for the
jointure of the wise, the reversion to W in Fee, and Thoby does amount to the
value of two parts, and Hinton and Fobbing to a third part, and W B by his Will
in writing, does devise Thoby to his wife for life, upon condition that she
shall not take her former Jointure, with diverse remainders over and die, and
she refused her former Jointure in Hinton; in this case it was adjudged that
the Devise was not good for the whole Manor of Thoby, and that the Manor of
Hinton was not a sufficient third part to descend. L L being seized of the
Manor of Affaland, Coo. 10. 78. I ^onard Leoveis case, Coo. 11. 24.
Hea^ton, Rillaton, P^ngelley, Willesworthy, and Trivesquite (the last only
held in Capite) in Fee, and having issue Thomas his eldest son, William,
Humfry, and Richard, younger sons, which Richard had issue Leonard, makes a
Feoffment of these Manors to diverse uses, viz. of the Manors of R, P, W, and
A, to the use of the Feoffor for life, and after to the use of such person as
he should appoint by his last Will, and after to the use of W his second son
in Tail, and after to his other sons in Tail, and after to the use of the
Feoffor and his w^fe in Tail, and after to the use of the Feoffor and his
heirs for for ever. And of the Manor of H to such like uses, and of the Manor
of T also to such like uses, and the same uses were with power of Revocation:
And after the Feoffor purchased eight Acres of other land held in Socage, and
after did revoke the uses of the Manors of R, P, W, and A, and after devised
some of the said Manors (excepting some pieces) and the said eight Acres of
land to his eldest son and the heirs males of his body for 500 years on
certain conditions, and if he die without issue, that it shall go to William
etc. and afterward he dyed seized of the said eight Acres of land, and the
lands devised by the Will at the time of the death of the ^estator were of the
yearly value of 24 l. 14 s. 10 d. per annum, and non ultra, and the lands
whereof the Feoffment was made, and not revoked were at the time of the death
of the Testator of the value of 55 l. 6 s. 8 d. in this ca^e, it was adjudged
that the Devise of the eight Acres newly purchased was void at least for a
third part, and restrained by the reversion in Fee expectant upon the estate
Tail made to the younger son of the Manor held in Capite. And it was
resolved, That if a man be seized of three Acres of equal yearly value, one of
them held of the King by Knights Service in Capite, and have issue two sons,
and give the Acre so held; and another of the Acres to his younger son,
whereby he has so executed his power by the Statute, that he cannot devise
by his Will any part of the third Acre; and after he purchase three Acres of
equal value held in Socage; that in this case because he has the reversion in
Fee upon the estate Tail made to the younger son, he can devise no more but
two parts of the said land so newly purchased. But if the reversion be gone
before the purchase, he may devise the whole; Coo. 6. 16. super Litt. 111.
but if a man be seized of lands in Fee, part of which are held of the King in
Capte by Knights Service, and he convey two parts of it unto any of his sons,
or to the use of his wi^e for life, or in Tail; in this case, albeit he may
not devise any part of the residue, yet he may by his Will devise the reversion
of the two parts. And in case, where he has not conveyed the full two parts,
he may devise so much as to make up that he has conveyed full two parts: And
it was further resolved in the same Leonard Love^s case. That whereas the
Statute says, All persons etc. having etc. of any Manors etc. in possession,
reversion, or remainder etc. and the Feoffor L L in the case before had a
remainder in Tail expectant upon the estates in Tail limited to the sons;
that this remainder was not within the Statute, nor would have restrained the
Devise, but for the reversion in Fee afterward. A B, being seized in Fee of
the Manor of Gracediu held in Capite, and of the value 30 l. per annum, and of
the Manor of Normanton held in Capite of the Coo. 11. 23. Henry Harpurs case.
value of 18 l. per annum, in consideration of a marriage with M did covenant
to stand seized of the Manor of G, to the use of himself and the heirs males
of his body, on the body of the said M, and after to the use of W B his
brother, and the heirs males of his body, and after to the use of another
brother in Tail, and after to the use of his own right heirs, and of the
Manor of N to the use of himself and M he is to marry, and the heirs of his
body, and after the remainders as before of the other Manor, and after the
marriage is had, and A B does purchase other lands held in Socage of the value
of 3 l. per annum, and then devised the same new purchased lands; in this case,
it was adjudged that the Devise was void for a third part of the Socage land,
in respect of the reversion dependant upon the estate tail, and yet that it
was a good Devise for two parts of the new purchased land, albeit he had
executed his power and given more then two parts to the use of his wi^e. And in
these cases where a man has land held in Capite, and other land, Coo. 10. 83.
and he convey the land held in Capite to any of the Uses within the Statute,
as to his yo^^ger children or the like, or convey it with power of revocation
only, so that he has power of the land still, and after he purchase land held
in Socage; in this case it seems he may devise all the land newly purchased,
as if the land were conveyed without any such power of revocation. A being
seized of land in fee Coo. 6. 17. Sir Edwards case.
held of the King in Capite, made a Feoffment of two parts of it to the use o^
his wi^e, for her life, for her Jointure, and after made a Feoffment of the
third part to the use of such person and persons, and of such estate and
estates as he shall limit and appoint by his last Will and Testament in
writing, and afterward he did by his last Will in writing devise this third
part to one in Fee; in this case it was resolved that the Devise was good for
the whole third part. And yet if a man make a Feoffment in Fee of land held in
Capite to the use of his last will, albeit the devise of the land be with
reference to the Feoffment, yet it is void for a third part* E B being seized
of 6 Manors, the one in Fee, and the rest in Tail with the Coo. 10. 81. Tr.
34. Eliz. Bedin^ields case.
reversion expectant to him and his heirs and has issue T B, diverse of which
Manors are held of the King in Capite by Knights service, and every of them of
equal yearly value, by his last Will in writing did devise all the said
Manors to diverse persons and their heirs for payment of his debts and
advancement of his children, and then died, and the estate in tail that
descended to his issue was more then a third part of all; in this case it was
resolved that the Devise was good for two parts of the reversions, and for the
entire Manor in Possession, and not void for a third part of the Manor in
Possession, and for all the reversions in Fee. A man being seized in Fee of
Gavelkind land in Kent, part whereof is held of Coo. Rep. Stamf. Per. 8.
the King in Capite, and part of Common persons in Socage has issue A, who
has issue B C and D, and A devises some of these lands to B, and some to C,
and some to D his Grandchildren in tail; in this case the Devise is void for
a third* part of the whole, as well for the land held in Socage as the land held
in Capite. And yet if in this case no Will be made, the King shall have but a
third part of that which does descend to the eldest son the heir at the
Common Law, and not the third part of that which does descend to the younger
sons by custom. And if lands devisable by custom come into the Kings hands,
and he grant them to hold of him in Capite, and the Patentee devise them to the
use of his wife, children, or for payment of his debts etc. in this case the
Devise is void for a third part: And here note, that in all the cases before
where a man is restrained to devise a third part of his land if he devise the
whole, the Devise is good notwithstanding for so much as he has power to
devise. And as touching the thing devised is further to be known. 13. That a
man must have right to, and possession of the land he devises, or else the
Devise is not good. Plow. 485.
Devise of a right to Land, or of Land that is another man's.
And therefore i^ a Disseisor devise the land he has gotten by Disseisin; this
Devise as to the Disseisee is void. And if a man be disseised of his land, so
that he has nothing but a right thereof left, and then he devise this right,
or devise the land, this Devise is void. And if one contract for land, and pay
his money for it, but Nevils case.
has no assurance of the land, and he devise this land to another; this cannot
be a good Devise of the land, but perhaps the Devisee may in a Court of equity
compel him that has received the money to assure and settle the land
according to the Devise. And if Plow 344. Fitz. Devise 7.
one devise another man's land, this Devise is void; but if he after the Devise
made purchase this land, now is the Devise good. If a man bargain and sell
land to me on condition to reenter, if he pay Adjudged Pow^ly and Blakemans
case.
me 10l. and I covenant that I will not take the profits until default of
payment, and he make a Lease of 6 years of it to another, and after break the
condition; in this case I may devise this land, and the devise will be good.
14. A Seigniory, Rent, or the like Perk. Sect. 538. Litt. Sect. 585. 586. Dyer
253. 140. 5. 52. F. N. B. 121. Coo. super Litt. 111. 8. 83. 3. 33.
thing is devisable as land is, and will pass without the Attu nement Devise
of Rent, Co^^mon, Seign^ory or the like.
of the Tenant. The like Law is of a reversion also. And a man may devise a
Rent de novo issuing out of land, or a Rent issuing out of land that is in ^sse
before. And therefore if a man make a Lease for life or years rendering Rent,
the Lessor may devise this Rent. So if if a Rent be granted to one and his
heirs, the Grantee may devise this rent. So a man that is seized of land in
Fee may devise any rent out of it at his pleasure. And therefore if a man that
holds his land by Knights service in Chei^e by his Will devise any Rent
Common, or other profit out of it; this devise is good, and that albeit the
Rent or Profit does amount to the value of the whole land; as if one have 3
Acres of land worth 3s. by the year, and he devise 3s. Rent out of it; this is
a good devise of the whole Rent; but in this case the Rent shall issue out of
two parts of the land, and a third part shall be free and not charged with it,
but he may charge 2 parts in 3 parts of such land at his pleasure. And so also
it is if a man have lands holden by Knights service, and not in Capite, and
other lands in Socage, he may charge two parts of the Knights service land, and
all his Socage land at his pleasure. And if a man have lands held in Socage,
and no lands held in Capite, or by Knights service, he may devise what rent he
will out of it. But a man cannot devise a Rent, Common, or any such like thing
out of another man's land that is none of his own, nor out of that he has nor.
And therefore if one devise 10l. out of his Manor of Dale, when in truth he
has no such Manor, this Devise is void. If a rent be granted to me for the
life of I S; it Oye^ 253.
seems I may not devise this rent, but that the Terre-tenant shall Occupant.
hold it as an Occupant. 15. Where a man is seized of a house in Fee, and may
devise the house it self, there it seems he may devise Devise of houses,
doo^es, glass, wainscot etc.
Coo. 4. 63. Perk. Sect. 512. 518. Coo. 11. Rich. Li^ords case. ^^lw. 88.
the doors, windows, wainscot, or the like Incidents of the house. And where
a man may devise the land it self, it seems he may devise the trees or
grass growing upon the land* Quando licet ^d quod majus, videtur and licere id
quod minus. But where the land it self is not devisable, there such things
incident or annexed to, or growing, or being upon it, are not devisable. And
therefore the tenant in tail, for life, or years of land may not devise the
houses, or windows, doors, or wainscot of houses, or trees, or grass being
or growing thereupon, but this devise is void. 16. Where a man Perk. Sect. 500.
Dyer.
Devise of a Use.
has a Use that is not executed by the Statute of Uses, but remains at the
Common Law, he may devise it as he may any other thing; And therefore if one be
possessed of a Term of years, and grant it over to another to the use of the
Grantor, he may dispose this use See Uses.
by his Will, for it is in the nature of a Chattell. But if a man have such a
Use in jointenancy he cannot devise it. 17. All manner of Swinb. part. 3. Sect.
5. Perk. Sect, 511. 525,
goods and chattels real and personal may be devised by Testament. Devise of
goods and chattels.
And therefore Leases for years of lands, Grants for years of Rent, Common, or
the like, Wardships of the bodies and lands of heirs of Tenants by tenure in
Capite and by Knights Service, Cattle, as oxen sheep, horses etc. gold,
silver, money, plate, household stuff, as beds, pots, panns, platters, etc.
corn, wool, and implements of husbandry may be devised by Will; and not only
those a man has at the time of the Devise, but those a man is to have or may
have afterward. And therefore it is held a man may give his corn that shall
grow in such a ground the next year after his death, or the wool or lambs his
flock of sheep shall yield the next year after his death; and that these
Devises are good; but if in this case there shall be no such corn growing in
that ground, or any lambs or wool arising out of his ^lock that year the
Legacy is fruitless. And yet if the Testator devise to I S 20 quarters of
corn, or 20 lambs, and both will that the same shall be paid out of his corn
that shall grow, or out of his ^lock the next year, and there be not so much
corn, or not so many lambs, or not any at all growing or arising, yet this is
a good Devise, and the things must be paid. In like manner if a man give to I S
a horse, or a yoke of oxen, in this case albeit the Testator have neither horse
nor yoke of oxen, yet the Devise is good and must be performed. 18. Things in
action, as debts, and the like, albeit they be not grantable by deed in the
life time of the party, yet are (...) of debts, and things in action,
possibilities, and incertainties.
they devisable by Will. And therefore if the Testator does by his Will give
any debt due to him on an obligation, or on a contract, or the like; this
Devise is good. And the thing devised may be had thus, the Testator may if he
will make the Legatury Executor as to that debt, or if he do not, the Legatary
may sue the Executor in the Spiritual Court, or in some Court of equity, and
thereby compel the Executor either to recover it himself, and so to pay it to
the Legatary, or to give the Legatary power to sue for and recover it himself
in the Executors name. But if it be such a cause of action, as is altogether
uncertain, as where a man may have an action against another, for taking away
his goods, or to compel him to make an account, or the like; this is such a
cause of action as is not deviseable. And yet possibilities and incertainties
are in diverse cases devisable. Perk. Sect. 527. Litt. B100. Sect. 437. Dyer
272. Plow. 520.
And therefore if one have money to be paid him on a Mortgage, he may devise
this money when it comes; as if I en^eosse a stranger of land, upon condition
that if he do not pay me 20l. such a day, that I may reenter, in this case I
may devise this 20l. if it be paid, and the Devise is good, albeit it be made
before the day of payment come. Child's case 17. Ia. B. R.
And if a man be possessed of a Term of years, and devise all the residue of
that Term of years that shall be to come at the time of his death; this
Devise is good, and yet such a Grant by deed is void. Grant.
* But a mere possibility, and a thing altogether uncertain is no more
devisable by will, then it is grantable by deed. 19. Emblements, i. e. the
Devise of Emblements.
Perk. Sect. 520. 521. etc. See in grant^
corn that is sown and growing upon a man's ground at the time of his death,
and which himself should have reaped if he had lived to the harvest (as in
most cases he shall where he does sow it) are devisable. And therefore if a
man have land in Fee simple, Fee tail, for life, or years, and sow it with
corn; he may devise the corn at his death to whom he please. And yet if
Lessee for years sow his land so little while before his Term expire that it
cannot be ^ipe before the end of the Term, and he die, it seems he cannot
devise this corn, for if he had lived he could not have reaped it after the
end of the Term. 20. Obligations, Counterpanes of Leases, and Perk. Sect. 527.
such like things also are devisable; but in this case the Devisee cannot
Devise of Obligations, Counterpanes of Lease^, etc.
sue upon the Obligation in his own name, nor enter for the condition broken
upon the Lease if there he cause, but he may cancel, give, sell, or deliver up
the Obligation, or Counterpane to the Obligor, or Lessee. And finally
whatsoever shall come to the Executor See in^^^ in Numb.
after the death of the Testator in the right of his Executorship, may be
devised by the last Will and Testament of the Testator. 21. Devise of^ the
things a man has in Iointure wi^h another.
Perk. Sect. 52. Litt. Sect. 287. Doct. and St. 167.
The goods and chattels that a man has jointly with another are not devisable.
And therefore if there be two Iointenants of goods or chattels, as where such
things are given to two, or two do buy such things together, and one of them
devise his part of the things to a stranger; this Devise is void. Insomuch that
if in this case the Testator make the other Ioyntenant his Executor, the Will
as to this is void, and he shall not be charged as Executor for those goods,
but he shall have them altogether by right of survivorship. 22. The Devise of
the things a man has in anoth^^s right.
Plow. 525. B100, Administrator 7. (...). Adm. (...).
goods and chattels that a man has in another right are not devisable; and
therefore an Executor or Administrator cannot devise the goods and chattels he
has as Executor or Administrator, for such a Devise is void. Howbeit the
Executor may appoint an Executor of the goods of the first Testator, which the
Administrator cannot do; And of the profits that do arise by the goods and
chattels the Executor or administrator has during the time of his
Administration, he may make disposition. The goods and chattels belonging to
Colleges, and Hospitals may not be devised by the Testaments of the Masters or
governors thereof, no^ the goods and chattels belonging Doct. and St. lib. 2.
c. 39. Perk. Sect. 4^6. 49^. 49^
to other Corporations by the Mayors, Bayliffes, or Heads thereof. * And the
goods and chattels that Churchwardens have in the right of the Church are not
devisable. Perk. Sect. 560. Doct, and ^t. c. 7.
All the chattels real that a man Husband and wife.
has in the right of his wife by her means, and all the Obligations that are
made to her alone before, or during the time of the Coverture, and the chattels
real or personal that his wife has as Executrix to any other, are not
devisable by the Testament of the husband. But all the chattels personal that
a man has by his wife which she has in her own right, and the debts due upon
Obligations made to the husband and wife both during the Coverture, are
devisable by the Testament of the husband. 23. Such things as are annexed, and
incident Devise of things that are incident and annexed to some other thing.
to a Freehold or inheritance, so that it cannot be severed from Perk. Sect.
526. Relw. 88. See before.
it by him that has the property of them, as wainscot, and glass to houses,
and the like, are not devisable; but in such cases where the thing it self to
which it is annexed is devisable. 24. The goods and chattels that are another
man's, are not devisable, and therefore Plow. Granthams case C^o. super Litt.
185. Coo. super Litt. 308,
Devise of things that are not the Devisors, or belong not unto his Executor.
if a man give another man's horse, it is is a void Devise. So if one devise the
things that by special custom of some places, as the heir loomes do belong
to the heir, this Devise is void, for it is not devisable from him. 25. If a
Bishop have a Ward belonging to his Trin. 13. Ia. Curia. B. R.
Bishopric fallen* he may devise it; but if a Church of his become void in his
life time, he cannot devise the Presentation. If a Parson of a Church have the
Advowson in Fee, and he devise that his Executors Devise of a Pre^entation to a
Church.
two or three of them shall present at the next avoydance; this is a good
Devise. 26. All these things before that are devisable, Swinb. part. 7. c. 5.
Plow. 525. Perk. Sect. 500.
when they are devised must be named, and devised either by their proper name,
or otherwise described by some other matter whereby Mistake or error in the
(...) devised.
the mind of the Testator may be known and discerned; for if he err and
mistaken in the name or substance of the thing devised, or it be so incertainly
devised and described that it cannot be perceived what he intends, the Devise
is void. And therefore if one devise a piece of ground by the name of a
Mesuage, except it be so called, the Devise is void. And yet by the Devise of
the use, profit, or occupation of land, the land it self is well devised; and
by the Devise of land it self, the reversion thereof may be devised. But if
one intending to devise a horse does devise an ox: or meaning to give gold,
does give apparel; these Legacies are void, unless his meaning may appear by
some circumstance to be otherwise; as if a man have but one horse, and he be
called Arundell, and he devise his horse Bucephall; this Legacy is good enough.
And if a man give all his many in such a Chest, when in truth there is no money
in that Chest, or give to another the 10l. which I S does owe him, when in
truth I S does not owe any such money; this Devise is void. And yet if the
Devise be thus, viz. I give ^o A B 10l. and I will that the same be paid of
the money I have in such a Chest, or of the money which such a man does owe me;
in this case the Devise is good, albeit the^^ ^e not any money in the Chest or
owing: And if one give 10l. remaining in such a Chest, whereas in truth there
is but 5 l. in the Chest; in this case the Legacy is good for the 5 l. But
error and mistake in the quantity and quality of the thing devised, when the
same for the substance of it is certain, does not hurt: And therefore, if the
Testator meaning to give the fourth part of his goods, give the one half; or
meaning to give but 50 l. give 100 l. or e converso, meaning to give a greater,
does give a less quantity or sum; in these cases, the Legacy is good, and the
Lega^ary shall have as much as the T^stator did mean. If a man give his white
horse, when in truth he has but one horse and that is black; this is a good
Devise of this horse: And if the thing devised be under such general words
that Incertainty in the thing Devised.
Swinb. part. 7 cap. ^0.
the mind of the Testator cannot be known by it, the Devise is void: And
therefore, if the Testator say, I do bequeath something, or I bequeath a
substance, or I bequeath a body, or I bequeath, or the like; these Devises are
void for incertainty: So if he say, I do give lands, or I do give goods;
these Devises are void: And yet if the Testator give a horse, an ox, a gold
chain, or the like indefinitely; in these cases, the Devise is good, albeit he
have no such thing. But if one devise thus, I give lead, money, wheat, oil, or
the like; and say, not how much or what quanitity; this Legacy is void for
incertainty, or at least the Executor may deliver what quantity thereof he
will, and this shall satisfy the Legacy. 7. As Seventhly, in respect of the
Tenures and conditions, causes and ends of the Devise.
Swinb. 2^9.
touching the terms of a Devise, it must be known, That if one devise any thing
to wicked ends or upon wicked conditions, as to the end, that the Devisee shall
kill a man, or because he has killed a man, or the like; these Devises are
void in like manner as it is when the cause or motive is false, as because one
is my Cousin, or has lent me money, I devise to him 20 l. and he is not my
Cousin, or did not lend me money; these Devises are void. And as touching the
rest of the properties of a good Devise, see them before Coo. 3. 36.
in the properties of a good Testament: And here by the way, A Caveat for
making of Testaments*
be advised if thou have land to settle* rather to do it by act executed by
advice of learned Counse^l in thy life and health-time, and therein add such
conditions and provisoes of revocation and otherwise as thou will; or if thou will do it by Will, then do it in thy perfect memory and by learned advice:
Let the Will be indented and of two parts, and leave one part with a friend
that it be not suppressed after thy death; Let there be credible Witnesses to
the publication thereof, and let their names be subscribed to it: Let the whole
Will be written with one hand, and in one piece of paper or parchment for fear
of alteration, addition, or diminution: Let the hand and seal of the Devisor
be set to it: And if it be in several parts, let his hand and Seal and the
hands of the Witnesses be to every part: If there be any rasing or
enter-lining: let there be a Memorandum of it. And if thou make any revocation
of thy Will, do it by good advise and by writing; Vox audita perit, Litera
scripta manet.

The general rules for the Exposition of Wills are these, That they Plow. 540.
Coo. supe^ Litt. 322*
8. The Exposition of Testaments and Devises, and how they shall be construed
and taken. Devises of Land. First, in respect of the person that is to take by
the Devise; and what, when, and how he shall ^o take by the Devise.
must have a favorable and benign interpretation; and as near to the mind
and intent of the Testator as may be: and yet so withal, as his intent may
stand with the rules of Law, and be not repugnant thereunto. It is said to be
therefore a maxim of Law, Quod ultima voluntas testatoris perimplenda est
secundum veram intentionem suam, according to these Verses:

Sed legum servanda fides, suprema voluntas

Quod mandat fierique jub^t parere necesse est.

If a Devise be made of land to I S, and the heirs males of his Terms of the
Law. tit. Devise. Coo. super. Litt. 25. Plow. 414.
body; by this Devise the sons and not the daughters of I S shall have the
land. And if a Devise be made of land to I S, and the heirs Females of his
body; by this Devise the daughters and not the sons of I S shall have the
land. And yet it has been said in these cases, that if in the first case, the
Devisee have issue a daughter, who has issue a son; or in the last case,
has issue a son who has issue a daughter* that this son and daughter
shall take by this Devise in these cases; but it seems the Law is otherwise.

If a Devise be made of land to I S and his heirs males, by this 27 H. 8.
(...).
Grant.
Devise I S has an estate Tail; but otherwise it is of such a limitation by
Deed; for if one by Deed give land to another and his heirs males; by this the
Donee has a Fee-simple, and his heirs general shall have it.

If a Devise be of land to I S, and to the eldest heirs females of Coo. supe^
Litt. 27.
his body; by this Devise all his daughters and not one of them only shall take
it: So if one devise Gavelkind-land to a man and his eldest heirs; this does
not alter the custom, but by this all the sons shall take.

If a man devise his land to his wife for life, the remainder to ^^tz. (...) 2.
his son and the heirs males of his body engendered, and for default of such
issue the remainder to his next heir male, and the heirs males of the body of
that heir male, and after his son die without issue (living his wife) and
the Devisor has issue a daughter who has issue a son; in this case and by
this Devise it seems the daughter and not her son shall have the land and
that in Fee-simple.

If a man devise his land to his wife for life, and after to his own Trin. 9.
^ac. A^^^dged Curte^s case
right heirs males, and he has issue three daughters, and after his death one
of them has a son; in this case, and by this Devise the next collateral
heir male of the Devisor, and not the son of the daughter shall have the
land.

If a man have issue two sons and a daughter, and devise his D^er 122.
land to his wife for ten years, the remainder to his younger son and his
heirs, and if either of the said two sons die without issue of their bodies,
the remainder to the daughter and her heirs, and the younger son die in the
life time of the father, and after the father die; in this case and by this
Devise the daughter has a good remainder, but it seems the elder son has
first an estate Tail by the intent of the Devisor.

If a man devise some land to A his eldest daughter and her D^e^. 330.
heirs, and if she die without issue, to T his youngest daughter and her
heirs, and if she die within 16 years, that A shall have her part to her and
her heirs, and if A marry such a one, that T shall have her part to her and her
heirs; and if T die having no issue, that all her part shall go to M and E his
Ne^ces; and if A die without issue, that T shall have her part to her and her
heirs, and T after the 16 years, does die without issue; in this case the
Neeces M and E, and not A shall have her part that is dead.

If land be devised to A for life, the remainder to a Monk for Perk. Sect.
5^6. ^67.
life, the remainder to I S in Fee; by this Devise he in the remainder in Fee,
shall take presently after the first estate for life ended; and if the Devise
be to a Monk for life, the remainder to I S in Fee; by this I S shall take
presently.

If a man devise his land to a wom^n and her brother, and the Dyer 326.
heirs of either of their two bodies, and for default of issue of the said
woman and her brother, the remainder to the right heirs of the Devisor, and
after the death o^ the Devisor, the brother dies without issue, and the sister
has issue and dies; in this case and by this Devise, her issue shall have a
moity and no more of the land.

If one devise two parts of his Land to his four younger sons Dyer 304.
in Tail, and that if the Infant in the womb of his wife be a son, that he
shall have the fifth part as co-heire with the four, and if his five sons die
without issue, that the two parts shall revert, and then the Devisor dies, and
after a son is born, and after he and three of the other sons die; in this
case and by this Devise, the Infant shall not take any thing, because he is
incapable, and the two parts shall not revert to the heir until the five sons
be dead without issue.

If one devise the Manor of Dale to the eldest son of I S in Adjudged. Co.
B. M. 36. 37 Eliz. Brownes case.
Fee, and the Manor of Sale to I D for life, the remainder to such of the
children of I S, as shall be then living, and shall have the Manor of Dale,
and the eldest son of I S, after the Testators death does sell the Manor of
Dale, and after I D dies; in this case and by this Devise none of the children
of I S shall have the Manor of Dale, but it shall go to the heirs of the
Devisor.

If one devise his land to the children of I S, by this devise the children
that I S has at the time of the Devise, or at the most the children that I S
has at the time of the death of the Testator, and not any of them that shall
be borne after his death, shall take.

If one have two daughters by diverse women, and devise a moity of Dyer 34^.
his land to his wife for seven years, and that the elder daughter shall enter
into the other moity at her day of marriage, and if his wife be with child of a
daughter, that then she shall have an equal portion with the other sister, and
the Devisor dies, and the wife does enter and has not a daughter, and then
the elder daughter does take a husband, and enters upon a moity, the younger
daughter dies without issue, and the seven years expire; in this case and by
this devise, the collateral heir of the younger daughter shall have the moity
of the whole, and not the moity of a moity only and that by descent.

If a man have issue B C and D sons, and he devise his land Curia B. R. Mich.
20. Ia^.
Next of blood.
to D his son, the remainder proximo de sanguine, or to the next of blood of
the Testator; in this case and by this Devise B shall take after the death of
D, as the next of blood. In like manner, if the Testator have four daughters,
and he devise his land to the youngest in Tail, the remainder to the next of
blood; by this Devise the eldest daughter and not all the rest shall have the
land: And if the Testator have issue B his elder son and C his younger son,
and B have issue D his son, and B is attainted and dies, and the Testator
devises his land to I S for life, the remainder to the next of blood of the
Testator; by this Devise D and not C shall have the land.

If a man have issue B and C sons, and D a daughter, and devise Broo.
D^scent. Pi^ 19. 8. A^^. Pl. 4.
his land to C for life, and after that it shall remain to the next of blood
to his children* to the next heirs of the blood of his children, and C dies
and B dies without issue, and D has issue a daughter; in this case and by
this Devise, the heirs of A shall not take, but the next of blood to the
children of A, which is the daughter of D, and his children themselves are
excluded, and if the sons have any issues living, they shall take with her by
this Devise.

If the Testator have issue by A his first wife, three daughters, ^^^^dged M^
20. I^c. peri^. vers^s Pea^se, B. R.
Joane, Elizabeth and Anne; and by B his second wife, ^lice and Elizabeth; and
by C his third wife, William a son, and three daughters, Mary, Katharine and
Johan; and he devise his land to Johan his youngest daughter for life, paying
1^s. 4d. to the son, and after her death to the son and the heirs of his
body, and after his death without issue to Elizabeth the daughter of the second
wife, and Mary the daughter of the third wife for their lives; the remainder
(in Latin) to the next of the blood of the Devisor for ever, and the elder Joan
has issue I P, and dies, the son dies without issue; the younger Joan has
issue and dies, Elizabeth of the first wife has issue and dies; Anne dies
having issue, Alice dies without issue, Mary and Elizabeth born of the second
wife die without issue, Katherine dies without issue; in this case and by this
Devise the son and heir of the elder daughter after the death of the son
without issue, and of Elizabeth and Mary, and not all or any of the children or
their children shall have the land, because proximo in Latin does devote a
person certain; and there be express Devises to others: But if in this case
the remainder be limited in general to the next of blood without any other
matter, all the daughters perhaps may have it as Joint-tenants.

If a man have two sons and a daughter which has two daughters, ^^^z. Devise
9. Perk. Sect. 508.
and he devise his land to a stranger for life, the remainder to his second
son for life, the remainder in Fee to the next of blood to his son; in this
case, if the eldest son die without issue, the daughter and her daughters
shall have the land.

Whatsoever will pass by any words in a Deed, will pass by Secondly, in
respect of the thing devised.
See in the Exposion of Deeds supra.
the same words in a Will, and more also; for a Will is always more favorably
interpreted then a Deed; And therefore if a man devise the profits, use, or
occupation of land; by this Devise the land it Coo. 8. 94. Plow. 525.
self is devised.

If a man devise thus, I give all my lands to I S, or I give all my Mevils
case. Fitz. Devi^e 4. B^oo. Done. 41.
teneme^ts to I S, or I give all my lands and tenements to I S; by this Devise
is given, and I S shall have not only all the lands whereof the Devisor is sole
seized, but also all the lands whereof he is seized in common or co-parcinery
with another, and not only the lands he has in possession, but also the lands
he has in reversion of any estate in Fee-simple; but by this Devise
regularly, Leases for years of lands will pass.

If a man devise thus, I give all my land in possession only; by Plow. 66.
this Devise there is given the lands he has in possession only, and none of
the lands he has in reversion.

If a man be seized of land in Fee-simple in Dale, and devise thus, Plow. 343.
544. old N. (...). 89. Fitz. Devise 17.
I give all my lands in Dale to I S, and after Will made and published, he does
purchase other lands in Dale and dies; in this case and by this devise I S
shall not have the new purchased lands: and in this case it has been held
further, That if the Testator do by word of mouth after the purchase of the
same lands declare himself to be minded that I S shall have the same new
purchased lands also by this Devise, that notwithstanding I S shall not have
them by this Devise. Trin. 37 Eliz. B. R. Breckford versus Parinco^e.
And yet it has been adjudged, That if in this case one come to the Devisor to
buy his new purchased land, and he say nay but I S shall have it as the rest,
that this is a new publication of the* Will, and that I S by this devise shall
have these new purchased lands; for a new publication of the Will in these
cases will make the land to pass. But if a man devise the Manor of Dale, and
at the time of the devise he has it not, or devise his lands in Dale, and at
the time of the devise he has no lands there, and afterward he does purchase
the Manor of Dale, or lands in Dale; by this devise, and in this case, the
Manor and the new purchased lands will pass; for in this case it shall be
intended he meant to purchase it. And yet the Statute enabling a man to devise
lands says, Any person See before.
having, etc. Coo. 3. 30.

If one have an ancient Tenement, and lands belonging to it, and Loftis versus
Baker. Hill. 20. Ia. B. R.
then purchase more lands, and occupy them altogether with the Tenement many
years, and being all thus in his occupation, he does make a devise after this
manner, I give my Tenement in Dale, and all my lands belonging to it now in my
occupation, to I S. by this devise I S shall have the ancient land only, and
none of the new purchased land; but if there be no ancient land belonging to
the Tenement, but new purchased land only, there perhaps it may be otherwise;
for in this case the words cannot else be satisfied. As in case where a man
has some lands in Fee-simple, and other lands for years only in Dale, and he
devise all his lands and Tenements in Dale; by this devise the lands he has
for years does not pass; but if he have no other lands in Dale but these
lands, in this case perhaps this land will pass.

If one have a moity of lands in Essex, and a moity of lands in In Mevils case.
Kent, and he devise thus, I give my moities, and all my other lands in Kent to
I S, it seems by this devise the moities in both Counties do pass, and that I
S shall have both the moities.

If a man be seized in Fee, in possession of the moity of a Farm called Plich.
20. 12^ Adjudged Scatergoods case.
the Farm of C. and of the reversion in Fee of the other moity, expectant on a
lease made to A and B for their lives, and he make his Will thus, I will that
my wife shall have all my living which I now occupy, until my son come to 21.
years of age, and then I will have her have the thirds of all my living, and
that my son shall have all my Farm of C to him and his heirs; by this devise
if A and B dye before the heir be 21. years of age, the wife shall have the
thirds of the whole Farm, and not of the moity in possession only.

If a man be seized of land in a Village, and in two Hamlets of the Dyer ^65.
same Village, and he devise all his lands in that Village, and in one of the
Hamlets; by this devise none of his land in the other Hamlet does pass.

If a man make his Will the first day of May, and thereby give the Plow. 34^.
Manor of Dale to one in Fee, and the tenth of May one of the Tenancies
escheat, and the 20. of May the Devisor dies; in this case and by this devise,
it seems the Devisee shall have the Tenancie that does escheat.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S and 3. In respect
of the estate and time that is devised. Fee-simple.
his heirs, or to I S in Fee, or to I S in Fee-simple, or to I S for Litt.
Broo. Sect. ^^3. Perk. Sect. 1. 6. Litt. Sect. 586. ^elw. 4^. Coo. super Litt.
19. 20 H. 6. 35. Litt. B100. Sect. 432. 19. H, 8. 10.
ever, or to I S Habendum sibi and suis, or to I S and his Assigns for ever;
or thus, I give my land to I S, to give, sell, or do therewith at his pleasure;
by all these, and such like devises, a Fee-simple estate is made of the thing
devised, and I S shall have the same to him and his heirs for ever. But if land
be granted by Deed after this manner, I S by this grant in all these cases,
except only in the Deed.
first case, has only an estate for life. Fitz Devise 111.
And if a man devise his land to I S, and say not how long, nor for what time,
by this devise I S has an estate for life only in the land.

If a man devise his land to I S and his Assigns, without saying Coo. super
Litt. 9. Perk. Sect. 57. 239 New Terms of the law tit. Devise.
[for ever] it is said by some, that by this devise I S has only an estate
for life. T^^n 2. C. B. R. reply and Daniels case. Coo. 6. 16. Dyer 126.
But the contrary is affirmed elsewhere, and that it is a Fee-simple.

If one devise his land to his wife, to dispose thereof at her will and
pleasure, and to give it to one of her sons; in this case, and by this
devise, she has a Fee-simple; but it is qualified, for she must convey it to
one of her children, and cannot convey it to another.

If one devise his land to I S, paying 10. l. and use no other words, by this
devise the Devisee has the Fee-simple of the land, albeit the 10. l. be not
the hundredth part of the worth of the land. Adiudge Hill 36. Eliz Co. B.
And yet if one devise his land to I S for his life, paying 10. l. by this
devise I S shall have an estate for life only.

If one devise land of the value of 50. l. per annum to J S for life, the
remainder to I D paying 40. l. to W. by this devise J D shall have the Fee
simple of the remainder upon condition.

If one have two sons, and he devise his land first to his wife, and Hill.
17. Iac. B. R. adjudged Spice^s case.
then he says thus: In like manner, I will that my son A. shall have it
after my wives death; and if my wife dye before my son B, then that my son
A shall pay to B 3. l. by the year during the life of B, and also 20. l. to W
S. by this devise A shall have the Fee-simple of this land.

^f one devise his land thus, I will my land to my son W, for his life, and
after his death to my son T, and if my son W purchase C^^ia M* 18. ^ac. B.
R. Green ver (...) ^us Dewell.
land as good as that land for my son T, then that my son W shall sell the
land devised to my son T as his own, and I will that my son W shall pay to
his Sisters ^0. l. by 20. s. a year; in this case, and by this devise W has a
Fee-simple; for power to sell gives by implication an estate in Fee-simple,
and it is paying also, etc.

If one devise land to his wife and her heirs, and if the heir put her out
that she shall have other land; by this devise she has the Fee-simple Pasch.
14. Iac. B. R. Curia.
of the first land, and is not abridged by the latter words.

If one devise his land thus, I give White Acre to my eldest son and his
heirs for his part: Item, Black Acre to my youngest son Trin. 30. Eliz.
for his part; by this devise the younger son shall have the Fee-simple of
Black Acre: So, if I give White Acre to I S, Item, Black Acre to I S and his
heirs; by this devise I S shall have the Fee-simple of White Acre also.

If one give land to his wife for life, the remainder to his son and Perk.
Sect. 566.
the heirs males of his body, and for want of such issue the remainder to the
next heir male of the Donor and the heirs males of his body; it seems by this
devise, that the next heir male of the son has a Fee-simple.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S, and to his, or [to
the] heirs males, or heirs females of his body, [or of his Coo. super Lit.
21. 26.
^ee-taile.
body begotten] or to I S and his issues male, or his issues female; or to I S
and the heirs males of his body begotten on M; or to I S and E his wife, and
the heirs males, or heirs females of their two bodies begotten; or to I S and
his heirs, if he shall have any heirs of his body, else that the land shall
revert; or to I S and his heirs if he have any issue of his body; or to I S
and the right heirs males of his body; or to I S and his heirs, provided that
if he dye without heirs of his body, that the land shall revert; by all these
and such like devises an estate tail is made of the thing devised, and I S the
Devisee shall have the same accordingly.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S et somini Coo.
super Litt. 9. Bro^. tit* tail 21. Coo. super Lit. 20. 6. 1^.
suo; by this devise I S has an estate tail: But if he say, I give my Deed.
land in Dale to I S et sanguini suo; it is said by this devise I S has the
Fee-simple of the land* If one devise his land to I S ^t exitibus, vel prol^bus
de corpore suo; by this devise if I S have no children at the time, it seems he
has an estate tail; but by such a limitation by deed is made only an estate
for life. If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S for life,
the remainder to I D and E his wife and their children; or to I D and E his
wife and their men children; or to I D and E his wife and their issues; by
these devises if the husband and wife have no children at the time of the
devise, is created an estate tail; and if they have any children at the time
of the devise, then hereby is created an estate for all their lives only in
joyntenancie. And if land be devised to A for life, the remainder to B, and the
heirs of his body, the remainder to I S and his wife, and after to their
children; by this devise I S and his wife have estates for their lives only,
and their children after them estates for their lives jointly: And albeit they
have no children at the time, yet every child they shall have after, may take
by way of remainder. And so also it seems is the law upon such a limitation by
Deed*
Deed.

If lands be devised to I S, and his heirs males, or his heirs females,
without saying [of his body;] by this devise I S has Deed*
Litt. Sect. 31. 9. H. 6. 25. 27. H. 8. 27.
an estate tail. But if such a limitation be by deed, it is a Fee-simple.

If one have two sons, and devise White Acre to his eldest son and his
heirs, and Black acre to his youngest son and his heirs, Hill 22. Iac. B.
R. Daniels case
and if either of them dye without issue, then that the other shall be his
heir; by this devise either of them has an estate tail, and no Fee-simple.

If one have land in Kent in W S and T, and have one male child Adiudge. M. 9.
Iac. Wallops ^ase.
and a daughter, and his brother has three children, B, C, and D, and he
devise his land thus; Item, I give my land in Kent to my male child and his
heirs, and if he dye without heirs of his body, that that the land in W shall
go to B and his heirs. Item, I will my land in S, to C and his heirs, and my
land in T, to D and his heirs; in this case, and by this devise, the male
child of the Devisor has an estate tail in all the lands, and after his death
without heirs it shall remain according to the Will; So that if one devise
his land to his eldest son and his heirs, and if he dye without heirs of
his body, that it shall remain to his youngest son and his heirs; by this
devise, the eldest son has an estate tail, and the youngest son the
Fee-simple.

If one devise his land to his son W, and if he marry and have any issue male
begotten of the body of his wife, then that issue to Coo. 9. 127*
have it; and if he have no issue male, then to others in remainder; by this
devise, it seems W has an estate tail to him and the issues male begotten on
the body of his wife.

If one devise White Acre to I S and the heirs of his body, and then after
says thus, and I will that I D shall have Black Acre in the same Perk. Sect.
561. 20. H. 6. 36.
manner that I S has White Acre; by this devise I D has an estate tail in
Black Acre as I S has in White Acre. Et sic de similibus Tr. 30. Eli.
And if one devise White Acre to I S, and then say; Item, Black Acre to I S and
the heirs of his body; by this devise he has an estate tail in both Acres.

If one devise his land to his wife for years, the remainder to his younger
son and his heirs, and if either of his two sons dye Dyer. 122.
without issue, etc. that it shall remain to his daughter and her heirs, and
the younger son dye in the life time of the Father, and after the Father
dies; it seems by this devise the elder son shall have the land in tail.

If one devise his land to his wife for life, and after to his son, Adiudge.
Tri. 7. Iac. Co. B. Robinsons case.
and if his son dye without issue, having no son [or having no male] then
that it shall go to another; by this devise the son has an Estate tail to
him and the heirs males of his body.

If lands be given to a man and woman unmarried and the heirs of their two
bodies, or to the husband of A, and wife of B, and the Coo. super* Litt. 20.
26. Plow. 35.
heirs of their two bodies; by these Devises are made estates in Tail.

If a man devise White acre to his three brothers, and Black acre to C his
brother, so as he pay 10l. to I S, and otherwise that it shall remain Dyer 333.
to the house, provided that the same lands be not sold, but go unto the next
of name and blood that are males, if it may be; it seems that by this devise C
has an estate tail in black acre, and that if he die without issue, it shall
go to the three other brothers and their heirs males in tail one after
another: and that white acre also is so entailed in every of their parts. For
the words [shall remain to the house] shall be construed to the most worthy of
the Family, and the words [that are males] shall be construed in the future
tense.

If land be devised to I S and the heirs of his body, and that if he die, that
it shall remain to I D, by this Devise I S has an estate Adiudg. 14. Eliz.
Coo. B. and Trin. 9. Iac. B. R.
Tail, and the latter words do not qualify the former, but I D must attend his
death without heirs of his body before he shall have the land.

If land be devised to I S and the heirs males of his body, and if it Dyer 171.
happen that he dye without heir of his body, that it shall go to H and his
heirs; by this Devise I S has an estate to him and the heirs males of his
body, and the subsequent words do not alter nor enlarge the estate.

If land be devised to I S and E his wife and to the heirs of Coo. super Litt.
26.
the body of the Survivor of them; by this Devise the Survivor shall have a
general estate Tail.

If land be devised to I S and the heirs he shall have by A his wife; by this
Devise I S has a Fee Tail, and not a Fee simple as Coo. super Litt. 26.
Deed.
he has in case of such a limitation by deed.

If land be devised to I S and to the heirs of the body of such a woman; by
this Devise I S has an estate Tail, and begotten Coo. super Litt. 26.
shall be intended begotten by him.

If one devise land to his son and his heirs, and that if his son die
within the age of 21 years or without issue, that the land shall Adiudg. M.
37. 38 Eliz. Sale versus Ge^rard.
remain over: and the son dies within age having issue; in this case and by
this Devise the son has an estate Tail, and [or] in this place shall be
taken for [and]

If land be devised to a man and his wife, and to one heir of their body, and
the heir of the body of that heir; by this Devise Coo. super Litt. 22.
Deed.
an estate Tail is made in a Will as well as in a Deed.

If a man devise his land thus, I give White acre to A my son M. 18. Iac. B,
R. Gilberts case.
and his heirs, Black acre to B my son and his heirs, and Green acre to C
my son and his heirs, provided that if all my said sons die without issue of
their bodies, that then all my said lands shall go to M my wife and her
heirs; by this Devise they have all of them estates in Tail of their land,
and as it seems cross remainders to either of them of the land of each other.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S, and if Co^. 9. 128.
he die without issue male of his body, then that it shall remain over to I D;
by this Devise I S has an estate Tail.

If a man has issue three sons, and devise his land thus, viz. one part to
two of his sons in Tail, and another part to his third Litt. Broo. Sect.
4^^. Broo. Devise 38. Done 44.
son in Tail, and that neither of them shall sell his part, but that either
of them shall be heir to other; in this case and by this Devise either of them
has an estate Tail, and if one of them dye without issue, his part shall not
revert to the eldest, but shall remain to the other son, for it is an implied
remainder.

If there be husband and wife, and they have issue a son and a Coo. super
Litt. 26.
daughter, and the husband die, and land is devised to the wife and the heirs
of her late husband on her body begotten; in this case, and by this Devise the
wife has only an estate for life, the son an estate in Tail, and so also
the daughter in case he die without issue.

If one devise to I S, that if he and his heirs of his body be not For life,
Coo. sup^r Litt. 147. 8. 85.
paid 20l. rent yearly, he and they shall distraine etc. by this Devise I S
has an estate tail of this rent. But if the Devise be that if I S be not paid
20l. yearly, he shall distrain etc. by this Devise I S has only an estate for
life. So if one devise a rent of 10 l. out of his land to be paid quarterly,
and say not how long the rent shall continue: this is but an estate for life.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S for his life, or to
I S [without any more words] or to I S and his Fitz. Devise. 16. Coo. 6. 16.
Perk. Sect. 577.
heir, in the singular number; or I S and his children, and I S has children
at the time of the Devise; or to I S and his successors, (I S being a natural
person;) by all these and such like Devises I S has only an estate for life in
the thing devised. Mich. 13. Ia. B. R. Dyer sect. 307.
But if the Testator have only a Term of years in the land whereof the Devise
is made, and devise this land to I S, and does not say for what time; it seems
that by this Devise the whole Term is devised, unless the intent does appear
to be otherwise. And if one devise land (whereof a man is seized in Fee) to I
S, paying 10l. to I D; by this Devise albeit there be no estate expressed, yet
I S has the Fee-simple of the land, in respect of the payment of See before
Litt. Broo. Sect. 406. 125.
the money. But if the intent of the Testator appear to be that I S shall have
the land but for his life, contra; for there the consideraration will not alter
the estate expressed upon the gift.

If land be devised thus, I give my land in Dale to I S and his Deed*
assigns, [without more words] by this Devise is held to be given Coo. super
Litt. 9. 4. 29.
no more but an estate for life by construction upon a Will, as it is upon a
Deed. And yet in the New Terms of the Law tit. Devise, the contraray is
affirmed, Ideo qu^re.

If one devise thus, I will that I S shall have and occupy my land Pasche 9.
Iac* Newmans case.
in Dale, and say not how long; by this Devise I S shall have the land for his
life. Dyer 342.
But if I devise that I S shall enter into my land, and say no more; by this
Devise I S has no estate at all, but power to enter into the land only.

If a man have a son and a daughter and dies, and lands are Coo. super Litt.
2^.
devised to the daughter, and the heirs females of the body of the Father; by
this Devise the daughter has only an estate for her life; for there is no such
person, for she is not heir.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S for Coo. 1. 6^.
his life, and after to the next right heir of I S in the singular number, and
to his right heirs for ever; by this devise I S has only an estate for life.
So if one devise land to I S for life, and after to the next heir male of I S,
and to the heirs males of the body of such next heir male; by this devise I S
has an estate for life only; but if it be thus, I give my land in Dale to I S
for his life, and after to the heirs, or to the right heirs of I S; by these
devises I S has the Fee-simple of the land; And if it be to I S for life, and
after to the heirs males of I S; by this I S has an estate Tail.

If one devise land to I S and E his wife, and after their decease, [or the
remainder] to their children; by this devise whether they Coo. 6. 16^
have, or have not children at the time, I S and E his wife have estates for
their lives only.

If one devise a Moity of his land to his wife for life, and the other Curia^.
Ia. Co. B.
Moity to his second son, and after by another clause does devise it all to
his son after the death of his wife: by this Devise the son has only an
estate for life after the wives death, and no more.

If one devise his land to I S in Fee after the death of I B (being Broo.
Devise 48. 52. Litt. Broo. 107. 13 H. 7. 13. New terms of the Law tit. Devise
Plow. 158. 414. 521.
By Implication.
his son and heir apparent;) by this Devise I B has an estate for ife by
implication, and until the Devise take effect, the law gives it to him by
descent. And so also it seems the law is where one does devise his land to I S
after the death of his wife: that by this Devise the wife has an estate for
life by implication. And therefore if a man devise thus, I give my goods to my
wife, and that after her decease, my s^nne and heir shall have the house where
the goods are; it is held by this Devise that the wife has an estate for life
in the house by implication; for a man is bound to provide for his own wife.
But if a man devise his land to I S after, the death of I W, (a stranger to the
Devisor;) it seems that by this Devise I W has no estate at all by
implication, and that this does but set forth when the estate of I S shall
begin, and that the intent of the Testator is that his heir shall have it
until that time.

If one devise land thus, I give my land in Dale to I S, to the intent Coo. 6.
16. 3. 20. B^oo. Estates 78.
that with the profits thereof, he shall bring up a child, or to the intent
that with the profits thereof, he shall pay to A 10l. or to the intent that he
shall out of the profits thereof pay yearly 10l. by these Devises I S has only
an estate for life, albeit the payments to be made be greater then the rent of
the land: And therefore, it is not like to the case before, where a sum of
money is to be paid presently.

If one devise his land thus, I give my land to Alice my Cousin in Dyer 357.
Fee-simple, after her decease to W her son (who is her heir apparent;) by
this Devise she has an estate for life first, the remainder to her son for
his life, the remainder to the heirs of A in Fee-simple: And so also is the Law
when the Devise is to any other after that manner.

If my father be tenant for life of land, the remainder to me in Fee, Dver 371.
and I devise this land to my wife, rendering for her natural life 40^. to the
right heir of my father; by this Devise my wife has an estate for life after
the death of my father.

If one devise his land unto his Executors, until his son shall F^r (...).
come unto 21 years of age, the profits to be employed toward the ^oo. 3. 20.
performance of his Will, and when he shall come to that age, then that his
son and his heirs shall have it; by this Devise the Executors shall have it
until he be 21 years of age, and if he die before that time, until the time
he should have been 21 years of age if he had lived so long; and [shall] in
this case shall be taken for [should.]

If one devise his land to his Executors for the payment of his debts, and
until his debts be paid; by this Devise the Executors have Coo. super ^^tt. 42.
but a chattell and an incertaine interest, and they and their Executors shall
hold it until the debts ^e paid and no longer.

If one devise his land to I S, and the heirs males of his body Coo. 10. in
Leonard ^oveis case, 87. 46.
for the term of fifty years; it seems that by this Devise, I S has but a
Lease for so many years, if the heirs males of his body shall so long
continue, and that for want of issue male, the term of years shall end: And
in this case, the Executor or Administrator, (...)
not the heirs males of I S shall have it after his death.

If one devise his land thus, I give to I S and I D, and their Adjudged Lowe^
versus C^xe. Mich. 37. 38. ^liz. Co. B. Dyer 25. Lit. B^o. Se^^. 133. L^tt.
2^3. Perk. Sect. 170. Dyer 350.
heirs, my land in Dale equally; or my land in Dale to be equally Fourthly, in
respect of other (...)
divided; by these Devises I S and I D shall have and hold the land, not as
^ointenants, but as Tenants in common, so that the heir and not the servivor
shall have his part that first dies: And yet in case of such a limitation by
Deed, it is otherwise: And if one devise his land to I S and I D, and their
heirs [without more words;] it seems that by this Devise they shall take and
hold as Joint-tenants. Dyer 326.
And yet if one devise land to I S and I D, and the heirs of either of their
bodies lawfully eng^^dred; it seems that by this Devise I S, and I D shall
take and hold a^ Tenants in common and not as Ioint-tenants. Pa^che 9. Ia. New
man's case.
And if one devise his land to I S and I D thus, I will that I S and I D shall
have my lands in Dale, and occupy them indifferently to them and their heirs.

If one be possessed of a term of years of land, and devise the Hill. ^3. Ia.
B. R. Adjudged. Blandfords case.
Devise of g^ods and chattels.
same to his wife during all the years, and if she die within the years, then
to A and B his two sons, if they have no issue male; but if they or either of
them have issue male, then that it shall go to First, in respect of the person
that shall take by the D^vise.
the use of those issues male; and she die, and the two sons die without
issue born, one of their wives being privily with child of a son, which after
his death is borne; in this case and by this devise this issue male shall have
it as soon as he is borne.

If one be possessed of a term of years, and he d^vise it to another Coo. 10.
4^. Lampets case Perk* Sect. 558. 559.
and his heirs, or his heirs males; by this Devise the Executors Executors.
or Administrators, not the heirs of the Legatee shall have it. And H^ire.
therefore, if Lessee for years of land devise all his interest therein to his
wife if she live so long, and after her death, if any part of the term be to
come devise the same to I S his son and the heirs of his body; in this case
and by this Devise, the Executors and Administrators of I S, not his heirs
shall have it, at least, so long as he has any heirs of his body: And yet if
one possessed of a term of years, devise it to I S, and after his death, that
the heir of I S shall have it; in this case I S shall have so many years of the
term as he shall live, and the heir of I S and the Executor of that heir shall
have the residue of the term.

If one give 10 l. to the children of I S, and at the time of the Swinb. 316.
Devise I S has four children, and after before the death of the Testator he
happen to have two more; in this case and by this Devise, the two children he
has afterward shall have no part of the 10 l. but those four he had before
shall have it all.

If one give 10 l. to his Parish Church, and at the time of the Will Swinb. 316.
made, he live in one Parish, and after he does remove into another Parish,
and die there; by this Devise the Parish where he lived before, and not where
he dyed, shall have this 10 l.

If one devise a third part of all his goods and chattels; by this D^er. ^9^
164.
Secondly, in respect of the thing.
Devise, some say, does pass and is given no more but a clear third part
after debts and Legacies paid: but it seems a third part of the whole, is
hereby devised out of which the debts must first be paid by Law.

If one devise to another all his goods and chattels, or all his plate, Plow.
343. Swinb. 31^.
or all of any other thing in general; by this Devise does pass and is given
not only all the Testator has of that thing at the time of the making of the
Will, but also all he has at the time of his death; and not only what he has
in possession, but also what he has not in possession: But if one devise all
his goods, or all his plate etc. in such a place, or in the occupation of I S;
by this Devise none other will pass but what are in that place, and in the
occupation of I S.

If one have a term of years of a portion of Tithes in Dal^, and have By the
opinion of diverse Lawyers.
a term of years of land in Dale; and he devise all his lands and tenements in
Dale, and all his estate therein to I S; by this Devise the the portion of
Tithes does not pass, for it is neither land, nor tenement: but by Devise of
all his heriditaments, perhaps it may pass. Sed Qu^re.

If one devise to I S all his goods and chattels; by this devise does Po^tman
versus Will^s. Pasche. 36 Eliz. Co. B. Coo. super Litt. 118. Swinb. part. 7. c.
10.
pass and is given all his estate active and passive, (except land of
inheritance and freehold estates, and such things as depend thereupon,) as
Leases for years, Wardships by Tenure in Capite, or by Knights Service, gold,
silver, plate, household stuff, cattle, corn, debts, and the like; and if one
devise to I S all his goods, or all his chattels, by either of these is devised
as much as by both of them.

If one devise to I S all his movables; by this Devise does pass Swinb. 305.
306. 307.
all his personal goods, both quick and dead, which either move themselves, as
horses, sheep, and the like; or may be moved by another, as plate,
household stuff, corn in the garners and barnes, or in the sheafe etc. Agree
H^ll. 9. Car. Co. B.
also all Bonds and Especialties; and by a Devise of Immovables does pass
Leases, Rents, grass and the like; but not any of those things that do pass
by the Devise of movables; but debts will not pass by either of these Devises.

If one devise to another all his household stuff; hereby does Swinb. 313.
part. 7. c. 10.
pass his plate, coaches, tables, stools, forms, beds, vessels of wood,
bras^e, pewter, earth, and the like; but not his apparel, books, weapons,
tools for Artificers, cattle, victuals, corn, plow-geere and the like; by a
Devise of all utensils, it is agreed that plate and jewels Dyer 59.
do not pass.

If a man devise to I S one of his horses, or a horse; by this ^evise Election.
Swinb. 302.
I S shall have the election, if there be more then one, which horse he will
have: but if the devise be thus, I will that my Executor shall deliver to I S
one of my horses; in this case, the Executor has the election, and he may
deliver which of them he will.

If one devise thus, I give to I S my corn growing in such a ground Swinb. 94.
this next year; or the lambs of my ^lock this next year; by these Devises the
Legatee shall have no more but what does grow that year: But if he devise so
many quarters of corn, or so many lambs; in these cases so much must be paid
howsoever.

If one have a Lease for years of land, and devise it to I S for life;
Thirdly, (...)
Coo. 4. 66. Plow. 520. Coo. 7. 23.
by this Devise the whole term is devised, and I S the Devisee shall have the
whole term if he live so long, and yet I S shall not have an estate for life
by this Devise; and so also it seems the Law is upon a Grant by Deed after
this manner: And if a man possessed of a Dyer 307*
term of years of land devise his term, or his Lease, or the land it D^^d.
self by a Devise, in either of these terms the whole term does pass.

If a man be possessed of two houses for years, and devise them to his wife
for her life, if she live sole; the remainder to I S; and if she Pasche 14.
Iac. B. R. Gough and Haywards case.
marry, then that she shall have one of them during the rest of the term, [and
then adds these words,] and also, I will that she shall have 20 l. a year out
of my other lands; in this case and by this Devise, it seems the Annuity shall
continue during the term. Sed Quaere, for the Judges were divided in this point.

If a Legacy be given, and no time is set for the payment or doing of it, if
it be simple, it must be paid and done presently; if it be Plow. 540. Swinb.
354.
conditional, and upon a condition precedent, it must be paid or done the time
the condition is first extant: and if there be a time set for the payment or
doing of it, it must be paid or done at the time appointed. See more in
Exposition of Deeds, Numb. 15.

Devise of Lands to Executors to sell, to pay debts, Legacies etc. are Coo.
super Litt. 236. 112, 113. 15 H. 7. 12. Dyer 177. 219. Kelw. 107, 108. Perk.
Sect. 513. 542. Litt. Broo. Sect. 371. Kelw. 40. 45.
some of them after one manner, and some after another; for sometimes 9. Devise
of lands to Executors or others to sell; or that Executors or others ^h^ll sell
or other ewile dispose them: how this shall be taken, and what sale and
disposition shall be good, or not.
the Devise is thus, I will that my Executors, or that A B and C my Executors
shall sell my land; and sometimes the Devise is thus, I give my land to my
Executors to be sold, or to the end that they shall sell it; in the first case,
the Executors have only an authority and no interest, and therefore in that case
the land does descend in the interim to the heir of the Devisor, and he shall
have the profits of the land until it be sold; and if it be never sold, he
shall ever have the profits of it; and in this case, they may sell it when they
will, if they be not hastened thereunto by order of Court, and when they do
sell, they must all join in the sale by the Common Law, or otherwise the sale
had not been good; and therefore if one or more of them had dyed before the
sale, they that had survived or their Executos could never have sold it by this
authority; so likewise if any of the Executors had refused the charge of the
Will, the land could not have been sold by the rest, unless the words of the
Will had been, that his Executors or some of them should sell it; for in that
case, some of them even by the Common Law it self might have sold, and now
also by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap 4. some of them may sell it without the
rest; as if one give his land to A for life, and that after his decease it
shall be sold by his Executors, and make four Executors, and one of them die
during the life of A, and then A dies; in this case, the other three Executors
may sell: So if one give his land in Tail, and that if the Donee die without
issue, that the lands shall be sold by his sonnes-in-law; and he have then five
sonnes-in-law, and one of them die in the life time of the Donee, and after the
Donee die without issue; in this case, the other four may sell the land, and
the sale made thereof is good: (...) And yet if the words of the Will be, That
it shall be sold by A B and C his Executors, or his sonnes-in-law; in this
case, if one of them die, it cannot be sold by the rest: but in the last case
before, where the Devise is, I give my land to my Executors to be sold etc. the
Executors have an interest in the land, and an authority about the land also,
and therefore in this case, the descent is prevented, and the Executors shall
keep it ^^^l the sale, neither will any di^^eisin fine, recovery, or Feoffment
by the heir prejudice their interest, but that they may sell it when they will,
but they must sell in time convenient, or otherwise the heir may enter and put
them out by a condition in Law, that is annexed to the interest, or perhaps the
heir may tender to them the worth of the land, and if they refuse to accept it,
he may enter upon them and out them: and it seems in this case, the mean
profits until the sale is no Assets, but Ass^^^
the money made upon the sale shall be Assets in their hand: and in this case,
albeit one or more of the Executors die or refuse, yet the rest may sell it,
even by the Common Law it self, and so also by construction upon the same
Statute, for the estate surviveth. But it seems they not may sell to him that
does refuse; neither may they in either case transfer their power to sell to
any other, nor keep the land themselves and pay so much of their own money as
the land is worth.

If one devises by his Will, that his land shall be sold to pay his debts, and
say not by whom; in this case it shall be sold by his Pe^k. Sect. 5^7. D^er
(...). 2^^.
Executors: and if one devise all his land except one Acre which he does
appoint to pay his debts; by this Devise his Executors or the survivor of them
may sell it: but if one say by his Will that I S shall have ^am gubernationem
puerorum meorum quam the disposing letting and setting of my lands; by this
Devise I S has not power given to him to sell the land.

If one devise that his land shall be sold after the death of his wife by his
Executors with the assent of I S, and make his wife and Dyer. 219.
a stranger his Executors and die, and after I S die; in this case, the land
cannot be sold, for the authority is determined.

If one devise that his Executors shall sell the land, and with Dyer 15^^ 152.
the money coming or made of it, shall pay such and such Legacies or sums of
m^ney, in particular to such and such persons by name; this is not a Legacy
for which a Suit lies in a Court Christian, but for this, every one that is to
have portion may have account against the Executors after the sale.

If one give lands to another, to give them again to the children of the
Testator, or to dispose them at the Will of the Devisees to Trin. 2. Car. B. R.
some of the children of the Devisor; in these cases, the Devisees must dispose
it accordingly, and cannot give it to any other: And if Coo. 6. 16.
one give lands to others, to the intent that with the profits thereof they
shall educate children, or pay such sums of money, or the etc. in this case,
the Devisees must do accordingly, or they may be compelled thereunto.

And in all cases of Devises of lands to Executors to sell, it is Coo. super
Lit. 112. 113.
wisdom to make it certain: i. e. that the Executors or the survivor of them,
or such or so many of them as take upon them the probate of the Will (if his
meaning be so) shall sell it: And it is better to give an Authority, then an
estate, unless his meaning be that they shall take the profits of the land
until the sale; and if he do so, then it is necessary that he appoint that
the mean profits until the sale shall be Assets in their hands; for otherwise
it shall not be so.

The same words that in a Deed will make a condition, and D^er 33. 3^ 126. Coo.
super Lit^ 236. S. (...) condition.
(...) Devise upon condition, and what words in a Will shall be construed in the
sense of a condition, and what not.
the thing granted thereby to be conditional, will make a condition in a Will,
an^ the thing given thereby to be conditional: And therefore these words,
Provided on condition, So that, If, and the like will make a condition in a
Will: So that if one devise land to I S on condition, or So that, or If, or
provided that he do bring up his eldest son, or pay his wife 20 l. a year
for her life, or the like; by these Devises, the estate is made conditional:
Also other words that being used in a Deed will not make a condition, yet being
used in a Will make a condition, and the estate made by the Devise to be
conditional: And therefore, if a man devise his land to his Executors to be
sold; or devise his land to them, or others to pay 20 l. to I S, or paying 20
l. to I S; in these cases and by these Devises, the estates are made
conditional: and of these conditions Dyer 33. 34^ 126, 128.
regularly the heir, and not a stranger shall take advantage So as if one
devise land to another, and his heirs, provided that ^e pay 10l. to I S,
otherwise that the land shall remain to I D, and his h^i^^s; in this case, if
the Devisee do not pay the money, I D shall not take advantage of it, nor have
the land according to the Devise, but the heir of the Devisor shall enter and
have the land and put out the Devisee. And if one devise his land to I S for
life, on condition to pay 20 l. to I D, and after to I D in Tail; in this ca^,
if I S do not pay the 20l. it seems the heir shall enter and hold the land
during the life of I S, and that I D shall not have it till then.

And in cases of Devises of goods or chattels, other words will Swinb. 136
make a Devise conditional in diverse cases, as [when] as, I give to to I S 10
l. when he shall be married; and [whiles] as, I give to I S ^0 (...). whiles he
shall abide with my children, which is as much as if he abide with my children;
and [which] as, I give him (...), which shall marry my daughter; and the
ablative Case absolute, as, my son being dead, I give to I S 20 l. And of all
these conditions regularly, the Executor and no other shall take advantage. But
if the condition be such, for the matter and substance of it, as is
impossible, unlawful, or the like; there perhaps these words may not make a
condition, nor the thing devised conditional, but rather make the whole
sentence void. Whereof read Swinb. part. 4. Sect. 5. at large.

If one devise his land to his daughter and heir apparent in Fee-simple, 11.
Where a Devise void or voidable in his exception, may become good by matter ex
post facto, or not.
^itz. tit. As^^se 27.
this Devise is void; yet if in this case, the wife of the Devisor be privily
with child of a son which is born after his death, now is the Devise become
good, for now she is not heir to her father.

If a woman that has a husband, devise her land by Will during Plow. 344.
the Coverture, and after her husbands death when she is sole, she do publish
and approve it; in this case and by this means the Devise is become good: but
if she make and publish it during the Coverture, and after her husband die and
she become sole, this accident without any more will not make the devise good;
the same Law is of the Devise of good and chattels.

If an Infant within age devise his lands or goods and publish his Plow. 344.
Will, and after he comes to be of full age, he does publish and approve it
again; in this case and by this means, the Devise is become good: but if the
Infant live to be of full age, and do not publish and approve it, contr^.

If a Legacy of goods or chattels be given on condition to a man Swinb. 340.
incapable, and before the condition is extant, he does become capable; in this
case and by this means, the Devise is become good. See before, at Numb. 6.
more of this matter.

A Devise that has a good beginning, is sometimes avoided and 12. Where (...)
Devise good in his inception, shall, or may become void by matter ex post
facto, or not.
Li^^. 16^. Coo super (...). 112. Plow. 540. 541. Coo. 8. (...) 33.
overthrown by subsequent matter in the same Will, and sometimes by subsequent
matter in another Will, and sometimes by some other accident ex post facto: For
if a man make a subsequent or latter Devise, either in the same or in another
Will, so contrary and repugnant to the former, that both cannot stand together,
this does overthrow the former: And therefore, if a man do give White Acre to
I S in Fee, or his white horse to I S, and after by the same or another Will,
does give White Acre to I D in Fee, or his white By a subsequent repugnant Will.
horse to I D; these latter Devises do^ overthrow the former, cum duo in^^r se
pugnantia reperiuntur in testamento, ultimum ratum est: And as a latter Will
does overthrow the fo^mer, so the latter part of a Will does overthrow the
former part of the same Will: But if the Devisees be such as they may stand
both together, and are not directly repugnant, nor do^ fight one against
another, there the latter shall not overthrow the former, but both shall be
received: And therefore, if one devise his land to I S, and his heirs, and See
before.
after by the same Will devise a Rent out of the same land to I D and his
heirs, or e contra. So if one devise White acre to A for life, and afterward
give the same acre to B in Fee; in this case the one may have it for his life,
and the other may have the Fee-simple afterward.

If one devise his land to his son and heir in Fee-simple: or Plow. (...).
Perk. Sect. 569. Litt. B^^^. 453. Kitchen 127. Dyer 317. 350.
devise it to a stranger for years the remainder to his son and heir By a
waiving of the estate devised.
in Fee-simple, and the heir after the death of the Devisor does (as he may)
waive the estate given him by the Devise, and claim the the land by descent;
in this case and by this means the Devise is become void. But if the Devise be
to the son and heir in Tail, the remainder to a stranger, there he cannot
waive the Devise and take it in any other manner. And so if a man have only two
daughters, (who are his heir) and he devise his land to them; or have
Gavelkind land, and d^vise it to all his sons: they may not waive these
Devises and take by descent, for by Devise they shall take as ^ointenants, who
otherwise by descent shall take as Parciners.

If one devise his land to another in Fee simple, Fee tail, for life, Litt.
(...). Sect. 482. Perk. Sect. 569. Dye^ 6^. Coo. 9* 140. Plo^ 543. ^4^
^r years, and the Devisee after the death of the Testator does refuse and
waive the estate devised to him; in this case and by this means the Devise is
become void. And it seems a verbal waiver is sufficient in this case. So if
one give goods or chattels to another, and the Devisee refuse it; by this
means the Devise is become void, and any waiver or refusal will suffice in
this case; for a man shall not be compelled Nolens volens to take a thing
devised to him

If a woman sole devise her lands or goods by Will, and after take Plow* 34^
a husband and die during the Coverture; by this means the Devise is become
void. And yet if she survive her husband, and die unmarried, now is the Devise
become good again.

If one devise his land to I S and his heirs, and afterward I S Plow. 60 34^.
34^. 34^.
die living the Testator; by this means the Devise is become void. And in this
case no verbal declaration of the Testator* that the heirs of I S shall have
it will help; for albeit a Devise of land in writing may be revoked by a
verbal subsequent declaration, or by any act crossing or controlling that
Devise, yet a Devise becoming vold by that means cannot be made good by any
such verbal dec^aratio^ subsequent to the same Countermaund. So if one give
any goods or chattels to I S, and he die before the Testator; in this case and
Se^ (...) Numb. 14.
by this means the Devise is become void, and the Executor of I (...). shall
not have it. And yet if a Devise be of land to A for life, the remainder to B
in Tail, and A die before the Testator; it seems Perk. Sect. 567. 568.
the Devise of the remainder does continue good notwithstanding.

And if one devise land or goods to the wife of (...) S. and afterward her
husband die^n, and she marry with another man, and then Plow. 3^^.
the Devisor dies; this is a good devise notwithstanding, and not avoided by
either of these Accidents,

If one devise a Term that he has to A for life, the remainder to such
persons as shall be occupiers of White Acre at the death of A; Per Justice
Jones M. 9. Iac, Co. B.
this Devise albeit in his beginning it be good, yet if the Devisor die before
A, it seems now to become void; for he that will take by way of Executory
devise, must take as an immediate purchasor, and be capable and known at the
time of the death of the Testator.

If I give to I S 20l if he marry my daughter, and she dye before he marry her;
in this case and by this means the Legacy is become Swinb. 356.
void.

If I give a debt owing to me to I S, and afterward I receive Perk. Sect.
or release the debt; hereby the devise is become void.

If a man make a Will and give Legacies, and appoint one or more Litt. Broo.
Sect. 300.
his Executor or Executors, and he, or they after his death all refuse to take
upon them the Administration: yet in this case the Legacies remain good, and
are not become void: And in this case the course is to grant the Administration
of the goods to him to whom it does belong, and to annex the Will to the
Administration, and then the Administrator is to perform the Will as the
Executor ought to do.

It is held also that a Legacy of goods or chattels may become void by the
injurious dealing of the Legatee against the Testator after the Legacy given:
whereof read Swinb. part. 7. Sect. 22.

And when the thing devised is dead, or spoiled: howsoever by Swinb. 357.
this meane^ the Devise is not become void, yet it loses his effect. and is
as if it were void. See more supra at Numb. 5.

In all these cases when the disposition of the Legacy is pure, and (...).
Where a Legacy shall go to the Executor when the Legate^ does die, before he
does receive it; And where (...).
no time is set for the performing of it; or there is a set time for Swinb.
350. ^55. 35^.
the doing of it, and the Legatee die before the time: and where the
disposition of the Legacy is conditional, and a time set for the doing of it,
if the Legatee live till that time, or the condition be performed; in all these
cases the Executor or Administrator of the Legatee shall have the Legacy, and
the same remedy to recover it that the Legatee himself had. But if the Legatee
die before the condition be performed, contra; And yet if in that case the
Testators mind shall appear to be that the Executor or Administrator of the
Legatee shall have it: or the condition be to be performed by another, and
there be no default in the Legatee: or if the disposition be modall: or the
Legacy that was at first upon condition, be afterward repeated without
condition, or it be referred to a condition to be afterward set down, and
none is set down; in these cases the Legacy is not lost by the death of the
Legatee, but shall go to his Executor or Administrator: as for Example; If one
devise 20l. to W S to be paid within 4 years after the death of the Testator,
and Broo. Devise 27. 45. Swinb. 350. 355. Dyer 59. Swinb. 358. 356. ^low. 345.
the Legatee die before the 4 years expired; in this case the Executor or
Administrator after the 4 years expired shall recover the Legacy. If one give
to W S 20l. when he comes to 21 years of age, and he die before he come to
the age of 21 years; in this case his Executor shall not have the Legacy. But
if the Devise be thus, I give to W S 20l. and I will that it shall be paid him
at his age of 21 years, and he die before he come to the age of 21 years; in
this case his Executor shall recover the Legacy. So i^ one give to I S 20l.
when he shall be married, and he die before marriage; in this case his Executor
shall not have it. But if one devise thus, I give to W S 20l. toward his
marriage, and he dye unmarried, in this case the Executor shall have and
recover the Legacy. So if one do give to W S 20l. when the Executor of the
Testator shall dye; in this case if W S die before the Executor, the Executor
or Administrator of W S shall not have the Legacy. If one devise goods or
chattels to I S, and I ^ die before the Testator, the Executor or Administrator
of I S shall not have this Legacy.

When any chattell real or personal is given to an Executor by a Plow. 519.
520. 543. Coo. 10. 47. 2. 37. 8. 96. Dyer 277. 367. Perk. Sect. 574. 573. 575.
Will, the Executor has an election given him by the Law to have 14. Where an
Executor upon a De^i^e to him has an Election to have the thing devised as
Executor, or as Lega^ee. And when he shall have it in the one righ^ or i^ the
other, and what act shall make a declaration of his Election.
and take it in the one right or in the other, viz. as Executor, or as Legatee:
and by his special entry, or seizing of the thing, or some special
declaration his election is to be made. And if the Executor do enter generally
(as most do) and never make any declaration which way* or by which right he
will have it, (as most Executors use to do) he shall be said to have it, and
the Law shall Adjudge it in him as Executor and not as Legatee. But if by any
subsequent words or deeds he shall declare his mind to be otherwi^e he shall be
in as a Legatee ab initio; And yet if once he do any such act as is proper to
an Executor, this is a disagreement to the Legacy ab initio; and after that it
seems he cannot take as Legatee, but must take as Executor. And if one Executor
of many to whom a term of years of land is devised, occupy the same alone,
and the rest intermedd^e not with the profits thereof, albeit he make no
declaration, it is said this is a good declaration of his election to have it
as Legatee. But if a term of years be given to the wife of I S, and I S be
made Executor, and he enter generally, and after makes his Testament and never
speaks of this term; this is (...) declaration of his Election to have it as
Legatee, neither shall the term be so deemed in him but as Executor. But in
these cases this must be heeded, that howsoever the Executor has power to take
as Executor or as Legatee, yet he cannot take as Legatee to prejudice Creditors
in their debts* but the same things they so take as a Legacy, if there be not
Assets*
enough besides, shall be said to be Assets in their hands as to the Creditor
for the satisfaction and payment of their debts.

If a man devise that after his Debts and Legacies paid, his wife shall have
all the residue of his goods and chattels to distribute for Dyer 331.
his Sarle etc. and make his wife his Executor; in this case it is said she
has no election, but she must take as Executor, and cannot take as Legatee.

When a Devise of goods or chattels is well made, the assent of 1^ Assent Quid.
the Executor is necessary to the perfection thereof, for until then the
Legatee may not have or meddle with the thing devised. And this Assent is
defined to be the agreement of an Executor or Administrator, Coo. 10. ^7. 52.
that a Legatee shall have the thing bequeathed unto him. And it is either
express, i. e. when the Executor or Administrator does by express words agree
to the Devise. Or implied, i. e. when the Executor does not by words, but by
some over^ act declare his assent that the Legatee shall have the thing devised
unto him.

This agreement of the Executor or Administrator is not needful in the case of
Devise of land; for if a man be seized of land 16. Where a^^ Assent is
necessary, or not. And where a man may enter into the lands, or take the goods
or chattels devised unto him without the assent or delivery of the Executor.
And what shall be said a sufficien^ Assent to execu^e a Legacy or not.
in Fee-simple, and devises to another in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, Coo. super
Litt. 111. Perk. Sect. 576. 578. 579. Swinb. 134. 135.
for term of life, or years; in these cases the Devisee may enter into the
land devised without any leave of the Executor or Administrator: and in truth
in these cases the Freehold or estate is said to be in the Devisee before his
entry: and therefore if the heir enter first, the Devisee may enter upon him,
and put him out. And in case where land is devised by the custom of a place,
if the heir enter first and keep the Devisee out, the Devisee may have a writ
of Ex gravi querela against him for his relief: and this writ is incident to
that custom. But if a Devisee enter first into the land devised unto him, and
then the heir of the Devisor enter upon him, then the Devisee may take his
remedy at the Common law as in other cases. And with these things the Ordinary,
Executor or Administrator is not to intermeddle. But regularly a devisee cannot
nor may not have or take any chattel real or personal Perk. Sect. 570. Coo.
super Litt. 211. Plow. 525. 20. Ed. 4. 9*
devised to him without the agreement or delivery of the Executor or
Administrator. And by this assent if the Devise be good (for otherwise an
assent will not make it good) the Devise is perfected, and the Legacy executed.
And yet if the Legatee have the thing devised in his own hands; or if there be
a special clause in the Will Swinb. 353. Broo. tit. devise 6. 30.
giving him authority to take it himself; or it be a Legacy to good and godly
uses; or the thing given be like to perish on the ground, being corn or the
like, and there be assets besides to pay all the debts; in these cases perhaps
the Assent of the Executor or Administrator may not be necessary, but the
Legatee may take the thing devised without his agreement. And if a Legacy be
given to one of the Executors themselves, he may take it without any assent of
his Perk. Sect. 5^^.
Co-executors, and that before Administration also if he will.

If there be many Executors, the assent of any one of them is sufficient; and
if there be but one and he be dead, the assent of his executor is sufficient;
or if he die intestate, the assent of the Administrator de bonis non
administratis of the first Testator is sufficient; or the Legatee himself in
this case where the Executor dies intestate, or where he does refuse to take
upon him the Administration, may take Administration himself, and by public
declaration assent to his own Legacy. And if a man be Executor and Legatee
both, he may assent to, and take the Legacy, and yet waive the Executorship,
and this assent is good. And therefore if the Legatee of a term of years be
made Executor, and he enter and claim and occupy the land Dyer 372, 367.
by force of the Devise, and dye before Probate of the Will: the Executor of
the Legatee, and not the Ordinary shall have this term; and, yet it seems the
Executor may not do this in prejudice of a Creditor to hinder him of his debt.

Any agreement in word or deed will suffice to make a^ assent and Coo. 4. 2^.
execute a Devise. Let Executors take h^ed therefore; for if an Executor A
C^v^a^ for Executors.
do but agree that the Legatee of a term of years of land shall take the
profits thereof, and that but for a time only; or say to the Legatee, God send
you joy of it: or I intend you shall have it according to the Devise, or the
like; this is a good assent to execute the Legacy. And if the Executor agree
that the Legatee and a ^^^anger together shall take the profits of the land, or
the thing devised; this is a good assent. And it seems that whatsoever verbal
agreement will amount to an Atturnment, may make an assent to a Legacy. See
Atturnment.
If therefore the Executor agree to the Legacy upon certain Terms and
conditions; this is agreed to be a good and absolute assent Per 2 Justices M.
37. 38. Eliz. B. R. Coo. 4 28
to the Legacy.

If a term of years be given to the wife of the Testator, during the minority
of his eldest son, to the intent that she with the profits Plow. 5^0.
thereof shall breed up his children, the remainder of the ^ame term to the
same eldest son, and she is made Executrix, and she ent^r generally, but does
always breed the children of the Testator; in thi^ case it seems that this
education of the children shall be taken for an assent against her to vest the
estate in the eldest son. And if a man possessed of a term of years give it
to his wife, if she Plow 516. Perk Sect. 57^.
live so long, and after her decease the remainder of years to I S, and make
his wife Executrix, and she enter, claiming to have it only for her life, the
remainder to I S according to the Devise; in this case this is a good assent
for the execution of the remnant of the term in I S. And if a term be devised
to A for life, the remainder to B, and the Executor assent to the Devise of A;
in this case Coo. 8. 95. 4 ^6. 10. 47 Perk. Sect. 574.
this is a good assent to the devise of B, and shall execute the some also
whether the Executor have assets or not. So if a man possessed of a term of 20
years, devise it one for 10 years. and after to another for the remnant of
the term; or if the Devise be to one for so many years of the term as he shall
live, and after to another for the rest of the time: in all these cases an
assent to the first Devisee is an assent to the second also. And so also it
seems is the Law of a chattell personal when the occupa^ion thereof is first
devised to one, 37 H. 6. 30.
and then the thing to another. And if one that has a term of years give it to
his wife for her life, the remainder to his son, and make Plow. 519. 54^.
Coo. 3. 96. 10. 47.
her Executrix: and she enter claiming by force of the Devise, and not as
Executrix; in this case this is a good assent to execute the Devise to him in
remainder.

If one be possessed of a term of years of land, and he devise it to Perk.
Sect. 574. 75. (...). Devise 6.
one of hi^ Executors alone for part of the time, and the remainder of the time
after to a stranger: and that ^xecutor alone albeit ^e enter generally does
occupy the land himself, and the other Executors do not intermeddle therewith;
in this case it seems this is a good assent to execute the Legacy to him in
remainder for the rest of the term. And yet if one give goods to one of his
Executors for life* and after to a stranger for life, and this Executor alone
get the goods into his own hands, and occupy them alone all his life time; it
seems this occupation without some assent, will not execute the gift in the
second Legatee,

If one possessed of a Lease for years, devise it to his Executors, and devise
a rent out of it to I S, and the Executors pay the rent; Plow. 540. 544. Coo.
8. 96. Plow. 541. 542. 5^^.
this is a good assent to the whole Legacy. But if he devise a rent, or Common
out of it for certain years to I S, and after devise the term to I D; and the
Executor does agree that I S shall put in his cattle, or does pay the rent to
I S (which is a good assent to the Legacy of I S;) this is no assent nor
execution of the Legacy of I D; And yet perhaps if he devise a rent at first to
I D for part of the term, and another rent to I S for the residue of the term
afterward; in this case it seems that an assent to the first is not sufficient
to perfect the Devise of the second Legatee. And yet if a Termo^ devise the
occuaption or profits of his land to I S for 10 years of his ^erme, and after
devise the land it self to I D for the rest of the term; in this case if the
Executor assent to the Legacy of I S, this will be a good assent to, and
execution of the Legacy of I D.

If one possessed of a term devise it to I S for life, the remainder to Coo.
10. 52
I W, and make I S his Executor, and I S take a release from I W of all his
right to the land; this is an implicit assent to the Legacy of I W.

If a man devise the occupation of a book or any other chattell personal to I
S, or that I S shall have the occupation of any such like Old N. B. 80. 37 H.
6* 30.
thing during his life, and that after his decease it shall go to I D for
ever, and the Executor deliver the thing to I S; it seems this is a good
execution of the Legacy to the second Devisee I D; and therefore after the
death of I S he may seize the goods and hold them according to the Devise.

If lands, or any rent, or other profit to be taken out of lands, be Perk.
Sect. 576. 597. ^7^. 579. Coo. super Li^^. (...).
devised to a man in Fee-simple, Fee tail, for life, or years; in these ^7. How
a Devisee may attain the thing devised. And what remedy he shall have to
recoverit, or damages for it.
cases the Devisee may enter into, and have and take the thing devised without
the leave or agreement of the Executor or Administrator: and so he may whether
there be any Executor made or not, and whether the Will be proved or not, for
the Ordinary and the Executor have nothing to do with these things. And if the
Devisee in any such case be disturbed in the having or taking of such things,
he may have the same remedy as men have in other cases. And where the land is
devised by custom, if the heir enter before the Devisee, the Devisee may be
relieved by a Writ called Ex gravi Querela; but if the Devisee enter first, and
then the heir enter upon him, the Devisee may have his remedy at the
Common Law.

If lands are given thus, I will that my executors shall sell my Trin. 9. (...)
Love^s ca^^ Dyer 151. 152.
land, and with the money made thereof shall pay 10l. to my daughter A, and 10l.
to my daughter B; in this case and for this gift A and B may either sue the
executors in a Court of equity, or have an action of Account against them in a
Court of Common law.

If Lessee for years devise his term to executors for life, the remainder Dyer
27^.
over to I S for the rest of the term: and the executor enters and does assent
to the Legacy and dye, and the executor of the executor does take the profits
of the land, and keep out the second Legatee; in this case it seems he may
have an Account against the executor of the executor for the profits of the
land. But T^in. 9 ^a. Lovers case
if one devise his land to his son and his heirs (except 20l. a year for
seven years to be employed as follows) and does appoint his son (being his
executor also) to pay that money to his daughters for portions; in this case
the daughters may not have an Account at the Common Law, but they they may sue
the executors in the Spiritual Court or in a Court of equity, and if the
executor be dead, they may sue his executor.

If one devise a rent out of his land, and do charge the land with Dyer 34^.
a distress: the Devisee may make use of that remedy and distrain or the rent:
but unless power be given him by the Will to distrain, he may not distrain for
it.

If one be possessed of a term of years of land, and devise it to his wife
Plow. 545.
to the end that she with the profits thereof shall breed up his children; in
this case this is no Legacy to them, and therefore it seems they have no
remedy but in Chancery or some other Court of equity against her if she refuse
to do it. Fitz. Devise 6. Plow. 540. Perk. Sect. 57^. 483. 20. Ed. 4. (...)
Swinb. 13^.


And in cases of Devises of goods and chattels, as Leases for years, rents out
of such Leases, and the like, the Legatee cannot take the thing devised before
he have the Assent of the Executor or Administrator thereunto: And therefore,
if in these cases the Executor or Administrator refuse to agree to, perform,
and deliver the Legacy, the Legatee may sue him in the Spiritual Court, or in
some Court of Equity to compel him thereunto: But a Legatee may not sue for a
Legacy in any of the Courts of Common Law, neither may he sue the Executor or
Administrator in the Spiritual Court for the Legacy until the Will be proved:
but he may by Suit there compel him to prove the Will or to refuse the
Administration: And in these Courts and by th^se means, the Devisee may
recover his Legacy against an Executor or Administrator, if he have Assets to
pay the debts of the Testator; for otherwise a Legacy is not recoverable at
all; but in case where the Executor or Administrator has once agreed to the
Legacy, so as it is executed, it is then so vested in the Legatee, and he has
such a property therein, that he may enter into, or seize and take the thing
devised as his own, and if any man keep or take it from him, he may have
relief as in other cases.

If another does claim by Deed of gift the goods a Legatee ^7 H. 6. 9.
does sue for; this may be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court.

If a debt, obligation, or any such like thing in action be devised Perk. Sect.
527. Swinb.
to another, the Devisee has no means to recover it, but by a Suit in the
Spiritual Court, or in some Court of Equity, to compel the Executor to sue
for it himself, or to make the Legatee a Letter of Attorney, to sue for it in
the Executors name; for the Legatee cannot sue for it in his own name, unless
he be made Executor as to that debt etc. (which is the best course in these
cases:) and yet if the Legatee have the Bond or Especialty in his hands, he may
deliver it up or cancel it.

If a man devise a term of years of land to I S, and make another Plow. 543.
5^5. And of this opinion were S^^ (...) ^^tor, and S^r (...) Bridge (...), upon
deliberate advise.
his Executor, and the Executor having enough besides to pay the debts does
sell this term; in this case, albeit the sale be good, and I S have no remedy
nor means to recover the term, yet he may sue the Executor for it, and recover
the worth of it in damages in a Court of Equity.

And now having done with the first part of a Testament, viz. a Devise; we come
to that which does concern the second part, viz. an Executor. See before at
Nu^. 4. part. 1.


Any person that may make a Testament, and devise his goods 18. what person may
make o^ appoint an Executor, and what not, and how*
and chattels, may make an Executor. Fitz. Executor, 28
husband, as to the goods and chattels she has as Execu^rix to another, and
as to her own goods and things in action, viz. debts due unto her upon
Obligations, and Especialties made to her alone before or after her marriage,
may make an Executor. Sw^^b. ^87. Dve^ 4. Broo. Executo^ 155. 1 H. (...).
(...). Litt. Broo. Sect. 180. 3 H. 6. 7. Swinb. 200. 19^.
And he that (...) make an Executor, may make either one, two three, or more
his Executors at his pleasure. And he may if he will make one man his Executor
for one year, another man his Executor for another year; or one man his
Executor until such a time, and then another his Executor; As one may make A
and B his Executors, and that B shall not meddle during the life of A. And a
man may make one man Executor for one part of his estate, and another man his
Executor for the other part of his estate; or one may make one man Executor as
to part of his estate, and die intestate, as to the residue of his estate: Also
a man may appoint one to be his Executor, if he will accept it, and if he
refuse that, another shall be his Executor. And lastly, a man may make another
his Executor upon condition, viz. so as he give Bond to such and such men to
perform his Will, or the like: And all these nominations and appointments of
Executor are good.

Any person that may be a Legatee, and take by the Devise of ^9. What person
may be made or appointed an Executor, and what not, and by what name.
goods and chattels, may be an Executor: And therefore it is said, See at Number.
4. part. 2. Numb. 7. Swinb. 222. Fitz. Executors 47. ^7. Devise 3.
That any person or persons, male or female, of the Clergy, or Laity, children
or strangers, friends or enemies, married or unmarryed, creditor or debtor,
bond or free, may be an Executor. Pitz. Executor, (...), 88. Non-ability, 18.
Broo. Non-ability, 38.
And that a Bastard, an Excommunicate, or an Outlawed person, may be as able
and as absosule an Executor as any other. Coo. 6. 67.
And an Infant or child in utero matris may be an Executor, but he cannot
meddle with the Administration of the goods until he be of the age of 17
years, and therefore the Ordinary must grant the Administration unto some other
until that time in trust, and for the benefit of the Infant. Fitz. Executor 24.
And a woman that has a husband, may be an Executrix Husband and wife.
to any other person. Fitz. Executor 24. Broo. Consultation, 5.
Also a woman may be Executrix to her own husband, and the husband may be
Executor to his own wife, and by this means he may recover all the debts due
to her upon Obligations, Recognisances, and the like, made to her before or
after the marriage; all which the husband shall not have but by Executorship or
an Administration of her goods and chattels. And all these persons that may be
Executors, may be Executors by that name See before at Numb. 7. Sw^b 29^.
as they may be Devisees: And yet if there be two of one name, and the Testator
make one of that name his Executor, and does not say, neither can it be
discerned which of them he does intend, in this case, neither of them shall be
Executor.

But it is said, that an Heretic, Aposta^e, Traitor, Felon, Recu^ant Swinb.
2^^. 223. Coo. 9. 39.
convict, Sodomite, Libeller, Bastard begotten in Incest, or a notorious Usurer
cannot be an Executor: And that if a man be for any of these causes incapable
at the time of the death of the Testator, when the Executor is to take upon him
the Executorship, that he is for ever incapable; but it has been held ^roo.
Non-ability 18. Fitz. Excomengment, ^3.
by the Common Law, that a person attaint, may be an Executor.

The most apt and proper words whereby to constitute an Executor, 20. By what
words a man may be made an Executor, and what words in a Testament shall make a
man full Executor, or not, but a Coadjutor or Supravisor; and who shall be an
Executor by such words.
Swinb. part. 4. Sect. 17. ^8, 1^. Dyer (...). 19 H. 8. 8. 21 H. 6. 6. Fit^.
Executor 43. ^roo. Executor, 98. 73. Fitz. Executors, 113. 121. Brief 999.
are, I make I S my Executor, or, I make I S the Executor of my Will etc. But
an Executor may be constituted by other words equivalent or by implication: And
therefore, if a man say in his Will, I will that I S shall be my general
Administrator, or I will that I S shall administer all my goods, or I will that
I S shall dispose all my goods and chattels, or I commit all my goods to I S,
or I commit all my goods to the disposition of I S, or I make I S Lord of all
my goods, or I make I S Legatary of all my goods, or I leave all my goods to I
S, or I give all my goods to I S, and make no other Executor; in all these
cases, I S by intendment of Law is made Executor of all the goods and chattels
of the deceased: So if a man say, Of all my goods I make I S, and say no more,
but omit the word [Executor,] by these words I S is made Executor: So if one
say, I will that I S shall dispose all the goods that are in his hands, by
these words I S as to those goods is made Executor: So if I deliver goods to I
S to keep until my death, and then to distribute ad pios usus, or for my
soul, hereby I S shall be my Executor if I D will not; by this I D is made
Executor in the first place by implication, and if he refuse, then I S shall be
Executor. But if a man make A and B his Executors, and say, I will that I S
shall be a Coadjutor, or helper to A and B ad distribuendum or ad
administrandum bona mea; or I will that I S shall be Surveyor, or Supravisor of
my Will; in these cases and by these words, I S is not made Executor with A and
B. And yet if he say, I will that I S shall have Administration of my goods, or
be Executor with A and B, or be Administrator with A and B; in these cases and
by these words, I S is made joint Executor with A and B. And if one supposing I
S to be dead, say, I will that I D shall be my Executor because I S is dead, in
this case and by these words* I S if he be living is made Executor first; and
if he refuse, I D shall be Executor: If one make A B and C his Executors, and
(...). 6. 6, 7.
then says afterward: And I will that B shall administer my goods alone, or
that B only shall administer my goods; it seems in these cases, B only is made
Executor, and that A and C are not made joint Executors with him.

In all Cases where a man has any goods or chattels to administer, (...).
Where and in what ^ase an Administ^ation is grantable, o^ (...) And to whom it
does belong to^ (...) to whom (...) must (...).
Coo. 9. (...). Plow. 276. Doct. and Stud 78. 132. Dyer 236. (...) H. 7. 13.
and he does die a natural or civil death, and dies in^estate, either in
deed i. e. does make no Will at all, nor appoint any Executor, or in Law; i. e.
that does make one or more his Executor or Executors, and he or they so
appointed, is, or are such persons, as are not in being; or if they be in
being, is, or are so incertainly named, that it cannot be discerned whom the
Testator does intend; or if he is, or they be well named, he is, or they are
all incapable by reason of some legal impediment; or if otherwise, they be
capable, they do all die before the Will be proved; or if they live, if being
cited to come in before the Ordinary to prove the Will, they either refuse to
appear, or if they do appear, they refuse to prove the Will, and to take upon
them the Administration of the goods and chattels of the deceased; in all these
cases, the Ordinary may and ought to grant the Administration of all the goods
and chattels of the deceased to him that of right it does belong unto according
to his discretion: And if a man make a Will and after the death of the
Testator, the Executor prove it, and then die intestate, the Ordinary must
grant the Administration of the goods of the first Testator, not administered in
the hands of the Executor to some competent person or persons according to his
discretion: but where a man has no goods and chattels to administer, i. e.
either he has none, or if he have, they are none of his, or if they are,
there is an Executor named, in rerum natura, capable, and well named, and he
does accept, or at least has not refused the Executorship; in these cases, the
Administration ought not to be granted; or if it be granted, it will be void or
vo^dable at the least: And where an Administration is grantable, it is to be
granted by, and had from the Ordinary of Stat. 31 Ed. 3. chap. 11. 21 H. 8. c.
5. Fitz. Administration 7. Litt. B^oo. Sect. 276. See infra Numb.
the Diocese, where the party whose goods are to be administered, lived at the
time of his death^; for regularly he that shall have the Probate of a Will, in
case where a man does make a Will, shall have the granting of the
Administration of his good and chattels, in case he die intestate: And
therefore, if all the goods and chattels of the party deceased, be within the
same Diocese wherein the intestate lived and dyed; the Ordinary of that
Diocese, or his lawful Deputy, or Commissary, or the Archdeacon of the
Diocese, or his Deputy or Official (as the Custom of the Country is) or the
Dean and Chapter in time of vacation of the Bishop shall grant the
Administration, and the Administration shall be had from him: but if there be
bona notabilia in the case. viz. if the party deceased have Coo. 5. 29. 3^.
D^er 30^. F. N. (...). 120. Plow. 2^7. 281. (...) 6. ^8. 19. Dyer 339. See
in^ra at Numb.
Bona notabilia.
goods or chattels of the value of five pounds or upwards, lying and being at
the time of his decease in diverse Diocesses; in this case, the Archbishop or
Metropolitan of the Diocese wherein the party dyed, or Sede vacant, the Dean
and Chapter being Guardian of the Spiritualties, and not the Ordinary of the
particular Diocese shall grant the Administration; and it must be had from
him; for if the Ordinary of the particular Diocese grant it when it ought to
be granted by the Metropolitan, the Administration is void not only as to the
goods that lie within the other Diocese, but also as to the goods lying within
the same Diocese: And so is it also, if it be granted by the Ordinary of
another particular Diocese, as if A die within the Diocese of Lincoln, the
King being indebted to him at the time of his death, and the Administration of
his goods and chattels is granted by the Bishop of London; this Administration
is void: And if the Metropolitan do grant an Administration, when it ought to
be granted by the Ordinary of the particular Diocese, the Administration is
voidable by sentence of the same Court out of which it is granted: If one die
in Ireland, and have nothing but an Dyer 305.
Especialty for money, and that Especialty does lie in England, the Ordinary of
the Diocese within which that place is where the Especialty does lie, shall
commit the Administration; and if the Ordinary of another Diocese grant it,
the Administration is void: And therefore the case was, A Merchant in Ireland
was bound in an Obligation of 40 l. to one I S in London, and the Obligation
was made in Ireland, but remained always in London, and the Merchant dyed
intestate in the County of Bedford in England, and a Bishop of Ireland did
commit the Administration to one, and the Archbishop of Canterbury did commit
it to the wife of the Intestate who had the Obligation; in this case the last
Administration was adjudged good: And it was there held, that the
Administration shall be granted by the Ordinary of the place, where the
Especialty does lie at the time of the death of the Intestate, and not by the
Ordinary of the place where the debt began. And in cases, where the
Administration is grantable by the Ordinary and others as Stat. 31. Ed. 3. c.
11. 21. H. 8. c. 5. Litt. B^oo. Sect. 233. 415. Fit^. Excomengment. ^3. Coo. 9.
39. 40, 3, 40. Dyer 339. (...) H. 7. 14.
before, such persons having power to grant it, may not grant it to whom they
please, but as they are bound to grant it, and cannot refuse so to do, so are
they directed and appointed to whom they shall grant it: For it is appointed by
a special Law, That the Ordinary shall depute the next friends of the
Intestate to administer his goods if they desire it: and the Administration is
to be committed to the widow, or next of blood, or both to the Intestate, and
where there be diverse in equal degree, and they all sue for it, the Ordinary
may accept them all or refuse some of them and commit the Administration to the
rest only; and if some of them only sue for it, he may grant it to them alone:
So that now the Law and course is to grant the Administration to the nearest of
kinn^ to the deceased: As 1. to the husband or wife; and if there be none
such, 2. to the children sons or daughters; and if there be none such, 3. to
the Parents, Father or Mother; and if there be none such, 4. to the brothers or
sisters of the whole blood; and if there be none such, 5. to the brothers or
sisters of the ha^^e blood; and if there be none such, 6. to the next of kin,
Uncles etc. And if these come in time and desire the Administration, the
Ordinary may and must grant it to them, and cannot grant it to any other if
they be capable of it as most men are: and if diverse of these in equa^^ degree
desire it, the Ordinary may grant to which of them he pleases; howsoever in
this case, it seems most just and equal to grant it to them all, unless he
have ^^me special reason to admit some and to exclude the rest: and if none of
these that are next of kin shall desire it, but suffer the time to slip; in
this case, the Ordinary may grant it to whatsoever stranger h^ please: And yet
then perhaps the next of kin may by Suit get the same Administration revoked,
and a new Administration granted to him. See infra at Numb. 41.

An Administration may and must be granted in writing under D^er ^94. ^itz.
Admin. 5. 34 H* ^6. (...) Plow. 27^
22. How an Administration may be granted, and what shall be said a good
Administration, or not.
Seal, for by word of mouth it may not be granted; and it may be granted as
well upon condition as absolute: and it may be granted as well for a part of
the estate as for the whole: And therefore, if a man have goods in two
Provinces, and he make a Will of his goods in one of the Provinces, and die
Intestate for the goods in the other Province, an Administration may be granted
for the goods in this Province: Also an Administration may be granted during,
or until a certain time, or continually. And therefore, if a man make a Will
and appoint an Executor for seven years, after the seven years ended, the
Ordinary may and must grant an Administration of the goods. So if one do
appoint another to be his Executor to be his Executor a year after his death,
the Ordinary may and must grant the Administration for that year, until the
power of the Executor does take place: And all these Administrations are good.

If an Executor die after he has proved the Will, and he has Sta^. 2^. Ed.
(...) c. 4. Coo. 5. 9. Plow. 286. 34 H. 6. 14.
23. Who shall administer after the death of an Executor or Administrator, and
who not, and how an Executor of an Executor shall charge and be charged.
made a Testament, and appointed an Executor therein; in this case, this
Executor also shall be Executor to the first Testator, as he is to the second,
and he shall have all the benefit and be subject to all the charge that the
first Executor had and was subject unto; and yet the goods of one Testator
shall not be subject to the debts of the other; but each of the Testators goods
shall be subject to the payment of his own debts only. Trin. 1^, Iac. Co.
(...). Wo^se and Heide^^ case.
And if in this case, the Executor of the Executor take upon him the
Administration of the goods of the first Testator, he cannot refuse the
Administration of the goods of the latter: but he may take upon him the latter
and refuse the former. But if the Executor refuse to administer to the first
Testator Dyer 372.
before the Ordinary, or die before the Probate of the Will, and he has made
a Testament and appointed an Executor therein; in these cases, it seems the
Executor of the Executor sh^d not administer the goods of the first Testator,
but the Ordinary must grant the Administration thereof: And (...) all the
residue of the goods of the first Testator be given by the Testament to the
first Executor after the debts be paid; in this case, albeit he die before
Probate of the Will, yet his Executor shall be Executor also to the first
Testator, or else he shall have the Administration of his goods and chattels
granted unto him: And therefore, if A make his Will, and Adjudged in H^ll.
(...). Car. in D^^s case,
give Legacies to B and D, and give all the rest of his goods and chattels
after debts and Legacies paid to C his wife, and make he^ his sole Executrix*
and she die before Probate of the Will, or any election made, not knowing of
the Will; and E sue out an Administration of the goods of A, and pay the
Legacies to B and D, and F sue out an Administration of the goods of C; in this
case, the Administrator of C, and not of A shall have the goods; for the Law
does judge them in C after the debts and Legacies paid without any election.

If an Executor after he has proved the Testators Will, die B^oo Executor
117. (...). H. (...). 7. Coo. 1 96. D^er 372. Terms of the Law. tit.
Administration.
Intestate; in this case, the Administration of the goods of the first Testator
not administered in the hands of the Executor must be granted to whom the
Ordinary shall think fit: And if the Ordinary please, he may grant the
Administration, de bonis non administratis of the first deceased, and of the
goods of the second deceased to one and the same person: And herein the
Administrator must take care that his Administration have special words for
the granting of an Administration of the goods of the first Testator, not
administered; Fiz. Administrator. 9
for howsoever some hold that by the general Administration, the Administrator
shall have not only the goods of the Executor, but the goods fo his Testator
also, yet it seems this is not taken to be Law at this day.

If there be two Executors made, and one of them does refuse Dyer 160.
before the Ordinary, and the other does prove the Will, and make a Will
himself and appoint an Executor and then die; in this case, it seems the
Executor of the Executor that did prove the Will alone shall have the
disposition of all the estate, and be Executor to the first Testator, and that
the surviving Executor shall not meddle therewith, for that his Election by the
death of his companion is gone. And if one make two Executors, and one of them
does Litt. Broo. Sect. 17^. B^oo. Executor. 49. 99. ^^tz. Executor 12. 113.
Dyer 187.
make an Executor and die, and the other that does survive has accepted the
Executorship; in this case, the surviving Executor shall have the sole
disposing of the estate, and the Executor of the deceased Executor shall not
intermeddle therewith: And if therefore the surviving Executor die Intestate,
an Administration de bonis non Aaministratis of the first Testator shall be
grantted: And if the Executor of the d^^eased Executor have any of the estate
in his hands, the surviving Executor may take or recover it from him: And if
two be ma^e Executors, and one of of them is incapable; in this case, he that
is capable shall administer alone.

If one that is Administrator of another man's goods do make Dyer 372. 112.
Coo. 5. 9
his Will and make an Executor and die; o^ do die Inter^ace, and the
Administration of his goods is granted to some body; in the first of these
cases the Executor, and in the last the Administrator, unless he be made
Administrator of these goods also shall not meddle with these goods of the
first deceased: but the administration of the goods of the first deceased in
the hands of the Administrator not administered must be granted again. And
hence it is that if the Administrator of my goods have a judgment for a debt
due to me, and he dye before execution, and make an Executor, o^ die intestate,
that in this case his Executor or Administrator shall never have execution of
this judgment. And the same law is of the Administrator of my Executor in this
case.

An Executor or Administrator may accept or refuse the executorship Coo. (...).
37. 37 H^ 6. 27. 28. 20. H. 6. 1.
24. Where an Executor ^r Administrat^r man accept or ref^^ the Executo^ship
(...) Administ^^^on, and ho^ And whe^^ ^e may b^^ Executor (...) ^e has ^^^ed
(...) And wha^ a(...) interm^dling with the goods of the dead shall b^^ said an
Adm^^^stration, and what not.
or the administration at his pleasure; and therefore he may at any time before
he has intermedled with the estate as Executor or Administrator refuse it; and
if he be sued by any as Executor or Administrator, he may plead, ne unques
Executor, i. e. he was never ^xecutor or Administrator, and did never
administer: and if it be true, he shall by this means avoid the suite; for a
man shall not be compelled to take such a charge upon him whether he will or
no* I^ therefore there be many Executors, or an adm^nistration be granted
unto many: and one of the Executors prove the Will in the name of the rest, or
one accept the administration in the name of all the rest, yet the rest may
refuse to accept it, and plead in any ^uite against them that they are not
Executors or Administrators. But as an Executor or an Administrator after he
has once legally refused the executorship or administration, can never after
intermeddle therewith: so after he has once legally accepted thereof* (that
is) has done any thing as Executor or administrator, and which is proper only
for an executor or administrator to do, he can never after refuse it. And his
acceptance of part, in this case, will make him chargable with all, except it
be in the case before of an Executor who may accept of the last Executorship,
and refuse the first.

If the Executors being cited to come in and prove their Will, appear Coo. c.
37. Fitz. administration 6. 11. B^oo. Administration 32. Executors. 117. Coo.
5. 28. Pe^k. Sect. 4^5. Dyer 1^0. 21. E^. 23.
before the Ordinary, and refuse to administer and to prove the Will, they
cannot afterward accept it or intermeddle with it. But herein this difference
must be observed; That where there be many Executors named and made, and they
being cited, so^e of them only do appear and refuse to accept it: (^he rest of
the Executors being then living) and after some or one of the rest of the
Executors prove the Will, or take upon him the Executorship; in ^^is case and
notwithstanning this refusal, they that do refuse may afterward at any time,
at least during the life time of their Co-executors that did accept it, accept
thereof and intermeddle therewith as far forth as either of the rest. And
therefore in this case howsoever the Executors refusing shall not be charged in
any suite against all the Executors for any thing due from the Testator, but
they may by their plea avoid it: yet the Executors accepting cannot sue for any
thing due to the Testator, nor be sued for any thing due from the Testator, but
they must sue and be sued in the names of themselves and their Co executors
that do refuse also. And if there be 3 Executors, and two of them prove the
Will, and the third refuse; yet this third Executor alone may release any debt
due to the Testator. But if there be but one Executor made, and ^e alone, or if
there be many made, and they do all together refuse before the Ordinary to take
upon him or them the administration; in this case the Testator is so far
forth said to be dead intestate, and thereupon therefore the Ordinary may grant
the administration of the goods of the deceased, and then the Executor or
Executors can never after accept thereof, or intermeddle therewith. And if one
or more of the Executors refuse, and the rest accept if he or they which accept
die before he or they that refused accept; it seems in this case they can
never afterward accept it, but the Administration must be granted.

If one be sued as Executor or Administrator, and he plead to the Suit ne
unques Executor, i. e. he was never Executor or Administrator, See the cases
before.
if he have not in truth intermedled before; this Plea is a refusal of the
Executorship or administration, and therefore he can never afterward accept or
intermeddle with the Executorship or Administration.

Every intermedling with the goods of the deceased, or with the office and work
of an executor, shall not be said to be such an administration Coo. 9. 37.
(...). 34. D^er 105. ^e^w. 63. B^oo.
as to amount unto an acceptance of the executorship or administration, and so
to make a man chargable as executor or administrator. And therefore if a man
that is an executor or administrator do only lay up and preserve the goods of
the deceased; or command Administrator 35. 36. Fitz. Administrator 7. (...).
Exec^tor 165. (...) H. 6. 6. Dyer 13^.
another to take away the goods of the deceased from one that has them in his
keeping; or see the deceased buried in a decent manner, and for that purpose
use, and if need be sell some of his goods to do it, or make an ^nvent^ry of
the goods and chattels of the deceased; or prove the Testators Will with his
own money; or take his own goods lying amongst the goods of the deceased: or
take and use some of the goods of the deceased only by mistake, or as a
trespast^r, or by the delivery of another; or take and dispose any of the goods
of the deceased when the executor or administrator does challenge them as his
own and in his own right: or if he redeem any of the goods of the deceased
with his own money when they are pledged to the full value, and the day of
redemption is past, as neither of these acts will make a stranger an executor
of his own wrong: Ex^^tor of his own wrong.
so neither will they amount to an acceptance of the executorship, and make the
executor or administrator chargable as executor or administrator. But if a man
that is an executor or administrator shall sue by that name for any debt due to
the deceased; or being sued by that name for any debt or duty due from the
deceased, shall imparle to the Suite, or plead any other plea besides ne unques
Executor; or shall take into his hands the goods of the deceased, and convert
them to his own use, and alte the property by sale, gift, or otherwise, and
all this as the goods of the deceased; (and so it shall be intended against him
if he do not declare the contrary, that he does take and use them as his own
etc.) or if he deliver the goods of the deceased to Creditors or Legataries in
satisfaction of their debts or Legacies; or receive any debt due to the
deceased, and give a release for the same; or release any debt due to him
before it be paid; or pay any'debt due from the deceased, except it be with his
own money: any or either of these acts will amount unto an acceptance of the
Executorship; and therefore after an Executor or Administrator has done any
such act, he can never after refuse the Executorship or Administration.

If a woman sole be made an Executrix to another, and she marry ^^oo. Executor.
14^.
a husband before she intermeddle with the estate, and then her husband does
administer; this is such an acceptance as will bind her, and she can never
afterward refuse it.

The Executor or Administrator shall have by virtue of his Executorship 25.
What things an Executor or Administrator shall have by virtue of his
Executorship or Adminstration. And what not. First in respect of the nature of
the thing.
or Administration all the chattels real and personal of the Coo. super Litt
209. 38^ Perk. Sect. 60. ^lo^. 293. Doct. and St. 39. 76. Perk. Sect. 8^3. Coo.
4. 65. 63. 7. ^7. Ke^^. 118.
Testator, as well those that are in possession, as Leases for years of Land,
Rent, Common, or the like, Grants of next Advowsons, and Presentations,
Wardships of heirs by reason of tenures in Capite, or Knights Service, corn
growing and cut, trees, and grass cut and severed, cattle, money, plate,
household stuff, and the like, as also those that are in action, as right and
interest of executions upon Judgments, Statutes, Obligations, Causes of
action, and the like; He shall have also all other things that are of the
nature of chattels. Coo. supe^ Litt. ^9. Dy^t ^^0. 283. Dyer 24. Broo. Executor
143.
And therefore the executor or administrator shall have the two years of the
heir female that is in Ward; a relief or an advowson that is fallen; and yet if
a Bishop have title to present by the vacation of a Church, and then he dye; in
this case the King and not the executor or administrator of the Bishop shall
present. And if the Lord have a greater estate in the Seigniory then for life
or years, it is said the executor or administrator shall not have the relief.
And the executor or administrator of the Lord shall have Fines assessed upon
the Tenants upon their admittances in the Lords time. Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 37.
Coo. 4. 48. Dye^ 575.
And if I make a Fcoffment in Fee, gift in tail, or lease for life, rendering
Rent, and the rent is behind, and then I dye; in this case the ar^erages of
Rent due to me in my life time shall go to my executor or administrator in the
nature of a chattell. So if a Rent be granted out of land to me in Fee-simple,
Fee-tail, for life, or years, and it be not paid to me in my life time; these
arrerages shall go to my executor or administrator, and not to any other. ^. N.
B. 120. L.
And so also if a Parson have an annuity in Fee in the right of his Church, and
it be behind, and the Parson dye; in this case the executor or administrator,
not the successor of the Parson shall have the arrerages, Dyer. 275.
And if I be seized of land and possessed of a stock of cattle, and let it to
another for years, and he covenant by the Lease to pay me and my wife our heirs
and assigns 100l. by the year, during the term; in this case after my death,
and my wives surviving me, her executor or administrator and not my heir shall
have this payment. Coo. 4. 63.
And if one seized of land in Fee make a Feoffment of it to me excepting the
trees, and after grant me the trees for years; or if he make me a Lease of the
land first for years, and after does grant me the trees for a number of years,
to begin after the end of the term of the land; in both these cases I have the
trees in the nature of a chattell, and if I dye my executor or administrator
shall have them. Dyer 283. 34 H. 6. 27.
And if a man grant to me the next Presentation to the Church of D; in this
case if I dye, my executor or administrator shall have it as a chattell. See
supra at Numb. 7.
And my wife shall have so much of her wearing apparel as is necessary and
convenient for one in her estate and condition: and therefore that shall not go
to my executor. But so much of her wearing apparel as she has superfluous and
more then necessary for her, shall go to my executor or administrator after my
death. And the charters and evidences that do concern any of my chattels which
my Broo. chat^els 12.
executor or administrator is to have, shall go with the same chattels. So also
any Charters whatsoever if they be pledged to me for money, shall go to my
executor or administrator until the money be paid. But otherwise those deeds
and evidences that do belong to the heir as incident to the Inheritance, shall
not go to my executor or administrator after my death. But matters of trust,
and such things as are personal, as offices of trust, wardships by reason of a
Tenure in Socage, or Jure nature, or the like, shall not go to the executor or
administrator after the death o^ him that has them. So an Plow 29^. Coo. 3.
39. 9. 99.
executor or administrator shall not have the grass and trees growing on the
ground no more then the soil or ground it self whereon they grow. So an
executor or administrator shall not have the Incidents of a house, as glass,
doors, wainscot, and the like, no Kelw. 118. See before at Numb. 7.
more then the house it self, nor pales, walls, stauks, fish in Ponds, Dear,
or Conies in Parkes, Pigeons in Pigeon houses, or the like.

If a Lease for years of land be granted to me and my heirs, Secondly i^
respect of the case.
or to me and my successors, and I dye; my executor or administrator Coo. 10.
^7, Litt. Sect. ^40. Fitz. Account. 56 F. N. B. ^20.
and not my heir shall have this term. The same law is if a wardship, or the
next advowson of a Church be granted unto me and my heirs, or if a Covenant or
an Obligation be made to me and my heirs: for in all these cases this is still
a chattell in me that shall go to my executor or administrator, and he only
shall take advantage by it. And if my heir or successor happen to get the
Deed, the executor or administrator may recover it from him. And if a Lease be
made to me for 20 years without naming my executors or administrators or
assigns in the Lease; in this case if I dye, my executor or administrator
notwithstanding shall have it during the term. Coo. super Litt. 46.
And if a Lease for years be made New terms of the Law tit. assigns
to a Bishop and his successors, and he dye; his executor or admistrator, not
his successor shall have it. And if a man be possessed of a term of years of
land, and grant it by deed, or give it by Will, to me and my heirs, or to me
and my heirs males: or devise Coo. 895. 10. 87. Plow. 524.
it by Will to A for life, the remainder to me and my heirs; in these cases I
shall have these terms of years as chattels, and after my death my executor or
administrator shall have them. Litt. Sect. 740.
And if a man grant a rent out of his land to me and my heirs for 20 years,
and I dye; my executor or administrator not my heir shall have this rent. M.
7. Ia. Co. B. Wats case Litt. Sect. 739.
And if a rent be granted to me my heirs and executors during the life of I
S, and for one half year after, and I dye; in this case the half years rent
shall go to my executor or administrator, and not to my heir. And if I be
seized Dyer. 5.
of land in Fee, and make a Lease for years of it rendering rent, and then
devise this rent to a stranger, and the devisee dye; in this case his executor
or administrator shall have it. And if Lessee for life make a Lease for years
absolutely; this in Law is a Lease for so Coo. 7. 12.
many years if the life so long live, and shall go to the executor or
administrator after his death.

If I have a box, chest, or trunk wherein my writings that do Broo. Executors
145. 9^. Fitz. Executors 111.
concern my inheritance do lie, and the same is open, and not sealed or locked:
in this case my Executor shall have it; but if it be locked or sealed, contra:
for then it shall go to him that is to have the writings as incident
thereunto. And yet if there be any money, plate, or any other such like thing
in the chest also; my Executor shall have that thing.

The Incidents of a house, as glasse-windowes annexed with Coo 4. 63. 21 H. 9.
26^
nails or otherwise to the windows, the wainscot fixed by nails, skrewes, or
irons put through the posts or walls, tables dormant, furnaces of lead and
brass, and fats in a brew and die house standing and fastened to the walls, or
standing in, or fastened to the ground in the middle of the house, (though
fastened to no wall,) a copper, or lead fixed to the house, the doors within
and without that are hanging and serving to any part of the house, shall not
go to the Executor or Administrator to be divided and sold from the house,
albeit the Executor or Administrator have a Lease for years of the house, and
by that means has the house also. But if the glass be from the windows, or
there be wainscot loose, or doors more then are used that are not hanging, or
the like: these things shall go to the Executor or Administrator.

If I make a feoffment to I S of land, on condition that if he Co 3. 5. 96.
Fitz. Executor 8.
pay me, my heirs or assigns, or my heirs executors or administrators a
100l. such a day, that the Feoffment shall be void, and I dye before the time
of payment; in this case if this money be paid at the day, my Executor or
Administrator and not my heir shall have it.

If one be seized in Fee of lands whereon there are trees growing, and he make
a Feoffment of the land to me, excepting the trees, Coo. 4. 63. 11. 48.
and afterward he does sell me the trees for ever, and after I dye; in this
case my Executor or Administrator shall not have these trees, as they shall in
case where the Feoffor does grant them to me for years. And if I be seized of
land in Fee, and I make a Lease for life, or years of it excepting the trees,
and afterward I dye; in this case my Executor or Administrator shall not have
these trees, but they shall go in both cases with the land.

If a Lease be made for life, or years of land whereon a house is standing, or
timber is growing, and the house is prostrate, or the Coo. 4. 63. 11. 81. 84.
timber is cut or fallen down (by whomsoever or what means soever it be;) the
materials of this house, and this timber is now become a chattell; and
therefore if the Lease be without impeachment of waste, it shall go to the
Lessee, and after his death to his Executor or Administrator, but if the Lease
be otherwise, it shall go to the Lessor, and after his death to his Executor
or Administrator. But if the timber be cut for reparations only, or the Lessee
will employ the materials of the house to build it again, and the Lease do
continue, it may be so employed, and then the Executor or Administrator of the
Lessor may not take it.

If one be seized in Fee-simple of ground whereon trees do grow, and he sell me
these trees for money, and afterward I dye before Coo. 11. 50. Perk. Sect. 58.
they be cut; in this case my Executor or Administrator shall have and may cut
them.

If the Kings te^ant by Knights service in Capite be seized of a Manor
whereunto an Advow^on is appendant and the Church become Coo. super Litt. 388.
void, and the tenant dies, his heir within age: in this case the King and
not the Executor or Administrator of the tenant shall have the Presentation.
And yet if in this case the land be held of a common person, the executor or
administrator and not the Guardian shall have it.

In all cases regularly where a man does sow land, whereof and wherein he has
such an estate as may perhaps continue until the Dyer 31^. Doct. and St. 35.
Perk. Sect. 59.
corn be ripe, if he that does sow it die before it be cut and severed, his
executor or administrator shall have it; as if the husband sow the land
whereof he has an estate in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, for life, or for a certain
number of years in the right of his wife, and dye ere it be ripe; in this case
the Executor or Administrator of the husband and not the wife shall have it.
And if one that holds land fot the life of I S, sow the land, and I S die
ere it be ripe and cut; the Executor or Administrator of the tenant shall have
this corn. And if tenant in Tail, or in Dower sow the land they do so hold,
and dye ere it be cut; the Executor or Administrator not the issue in tail, nor
the heir, or him in reversion shall have it. So if the husband make a Feossment
in Fee to the use of himself for life, and after of his wife etc. and he sow
the land, and after die; his Executor or Administrator not his wife shall have
the corn. But if a Feoffment be made to the use of the husband and wife
together in Fee, or for life, and the husband sow the land; in this case the
wife not the Executor or Administrator of the husband shall have the corn. So
if Lessee for years certain sow the land a little before the end of his term,
and the term end before it be cut; in this case he that is to have the land,
not the Executor or Administrator of the Lessee for years shall have the corn.

If there be Tenant for life, the remainder in Fee of a Tenancy, Coo. 2. 93.
and the Lord grant his Seigniory for life, and after he in remainder in Fee of
the Tenancy, dye, his heir within age, and after the Lord die, and after the
Tenant for life die; in this case the heir and not the Executor or
Administrator of the Lord shall have the Wardship.

If one be seized of land in Fee, and make a Lease for years rendering Hill 7.
Iac. B. R. per C^riam.
Rent at Michaelmas, or within 10 days after, and the Lessor happen to die
during the term after Michaelmas, and before the 10 days expired; in this case
the heir of the Lessor and not his Executor or Administrator shall have the
last half years Rent due at Michaelmas.

If one grant a Rent in Fee, and grant withal that if the Rent F. N. B. 120.
^itz. Covenant 17. D^er 24.
be behind, the Grantor shall forfeit 205. nomine poenae to the Grantee and his
heirs, and the Rent is behind, and the Grantee die; in this case his Executor
or Administrator not his heir shall have this money that is forfeit already. So
if one make a Feoffment in Fee of land, and the Feoffee does covenant to do
diverse things to the Feoffor, Et quoties defectus fuerit etc. that he shall
forfeit to him and his heirs 5l. and the Feoffee does fail and break his
covenant diverse ways, and the Feoffor dies; in this case his Executor or
Administrator not his heir shall have and recover all the forfeitures that are
past.

If a Bishop, Parson, Vicar, Master of Hospital, or any body politic be
possessed of any goods or chattels in their own right Coo. 4. 63. Perk. Sect.
58. Coo. super Lit^. 46.
and dye; these shall go to the Executor or Administrator not the successor of
such a person. And albeit such things be granted to them and their successors,
yet their executors and administrators and not their successors shall have it.
But if a Corporation aggregate as Dean and Chapter, Mayor or Cominalty and the
like, have any goods or chattels in right of their Corporation, and any of the
Heads or Members thereof dye; the Executors or Administrators of such person
shall not have them: but they shall continue in succession with the Corporation.

An Executor or Administrator shall have the benefit of a pardon Coo. 6. 80.
Dyer 201.
granted to the deceased, and shall have advantage of any error in any outlawry
against the deceased, and have restitution of the goods forfeir thereupon.

The Executor or Administrator of a woman that has a husband shall have by
right of his Executorship or administration all Actions, Husband and Wife.
Coo. super Litt. 351. Plow. 294. 192.
Rights, and Titles to any chattels, and possibilities, and things of that
nature which the wife had before the marriage, and which sell to her during the
marriage; for these things the husband shall not have by the intermarriage
after his wives death, as he shall have all the rest of her goods and chattels:
execept he have them as executor or administrator to her as he may be. And if
such a woman have any goods or chattels as Executrix to another, her executor
or administrator not her husband shall have these also; for she has these
goods in another, and not in her own right.

If I have any goods or chattels in Iointenancy with another, as if a lease be
made of lands to me and another for years, or a horse or other (...). Sect.
281. Perk. Sect. 525. 526. Litt. Sect. 320, 321.
chattell personal be given or granted to me and another; in these cases if I
die, my executor or administrator shall not have any part of these goods or
chattels: but the other surviving Iointenant shall have them all. But otherwise
it is of the goods and chattels that I and another have in Common. And
therefore if I and another have goods and chattels in that nature as before:
and he, or I grant that which does belong unto us thereof unto a stranger; in
this case the stranger, and him of us two that has kept his part are tenants
in Common of the things; and therefore if either of us die, the part of him
that dies in the goods and chattels shall go to his executor or administrator
and not to the other Tenant in Common.

If I have a Judgment for land in a real or mixed action, and for damages
recovered in the same Suit, and I dye; in this case my executor (...) Executor
53. 84. ^17.
or administrator not my heir shall sue execution for, and recover the
damages, but not for the land. So if I recover damages against another for the
detaining of my Charters, and dye; my executor or administrator shall recover
the damages, but the heir shall have the Charters, and the heir must sue his
Scire facias for the Charters ere the executor can sue for the damages. Also if
I recover any debt or damage in any personal action; my executor or
administrator shall recover and have this. See more infra at Numb. 39.

The power and interest which the Executor has is wholly by Coo. 6. 18. 9. 38.
5. 27. Plow. 280. 9. Ed. 4. 47. 36 H. 6. 7. Fitz. Administrator 2. 6.
the Will. And hence it is that an Executor whether he be absolute 26. What an
Executor may do by virtue of his Executorship. And the power of an Executor,
Administrator, o^ Ordinary.
or conditional whiles he is Executor, may do any thing as Executor, (except
only sue for debts and duties due to the Testator) as well before the Probate of
the Will as he may do after; for before the Probate he may enter into and seize
the goods and chattels whatsoever they be, or give power to another so to do:
and if any of them be taken or kept from him, he may have an action of
trespass, or a replevin to recover them; he may give or sell any of the goods
or chattels; he may pay any of the debts due from, and receive or release any
debts due to the deceased. But it is otherwise in the case of an
Administration; for in as much as his power and interest is given to him wholly
by the Administration, therefore he can do nothing until the Administration be
granted. And yet in this case as to the goods taken away before the
Administration, the Administration shall have such a relation as to give the
Administrator an action for them. But otherwise after the Administration is
granted, the interest and power of the Administrator is equal to and with the
power and interest of the Executor. And yet it is otherwise of the power and
interest of the Ordinary; For howsoever it seems by the ancient Common Law he
might seize, Coo. 8. 135. 9, 39. Dyer 255. Westminster. 2. cap. 20. 31 Ed. 3. c. 11.
preserve, give, grant, and dispose the goods of the intestate to pious uses,
yet might he not sue for the goods or debts due to the intestate, no more then
he might be sued for any debt due from the intestate; and at this day he may
only keep and preserve the goods of the deceased until administration be
granted and sue him in the Court of the Ordinary that does detain the goods
from him, and perhaps may sue him that shall take the goods out of his
possession; for he may not sell or give the goods of the deceased, nor receive
or release any debts; for in case where there is an Executor made that is
capable etc. he is not to meddle at all with the estate until the Executor
refuse: and where there is no Executor that the party is dead intestate, the
Ordinary is presently to commit the Administration to the nearest of the
kindred; which when he has done, his power is at a end, for it is doubted of
some whether he may repeal an Administration without cause or not; but it has
been clearly held by all that he may not dispose of the estate afterward, and
that he has not power to enforce the Administrator to give portions to
children out of the estate, and that if he do go about it either before or
after the granting of the Letters of Administration, the Administrator may have
a Prohibition. Hill 13. Ia. Co. B. Henslowes case Trin. 3. tac. Co. B. Davis
case, Hill 2. Car. Co. 9. Fotherlies case.
And accordingly diverse have been granted; And yet notwithstanding it seems
this course is usual: and Prohibitions not often granted at this day. Litt.
Sect. 69. Plow. 281. Broo. Executor 129.
An Executor or Administrator may after the death of the deceased enter into
the house where the deceased lived, and where he dyed, and where the goods are,
and take them away and justify it; but he must do it within convenient and
reasonable time, as within 30 days after his death or thereabouts, and in a
quiet and fair manner when the door is open etc. Dyer 2.
He may keep any of the goods of the deceased, so as he pay or lay out as much
of his own money in and about the Administration of the same estate. Plow. 543.
544.
He may if he want money to discharge Funerals, or pay debts, sell any of the
chattels real or personal whereof the deceased dyed possessed; and that
albeit the thing in particular be devised: as if a man be possessed of a term
of years inter alia, and devise the same term to I S; the executor or
administrator notwithstanding this devise may at any time before assent given
to the Legacy, if he have not assets to pay the debts, sell this term, and the
Legatee is remediless. And so he may do also albeit there be enough besides to
pay the debts, and he have no need; but then in this case the Legatee shall
have some relief in a Court of Equity against the executor or administrator
for damages, but the sale is unavoidable. An executor or administrator may
retain so much of the estate as to satisfy his own debt first if Plow. 184.
543. Coo, 5. 28.
any be due unto him. And if he has enough to pay all the debts and Legacies,
he may pay them in what order he will without danger to himself or wrong to
Creditors or Legataries. And if he has not enough, he may pay them in what
order he will, but not without danger to himself. But if any thing be due to
himself, he may pay that first of all; and for others that are in equal
degree, he may pay which of them he will first. And for the Legataries he may
prefer which of them he will, or pay one of them his whole Legacy, and pay
another a part of his, or not pay him any part of his Legacy if there be no
assets to do it. But an executor The Addition to Justice Dodridge treatise 93.
Kelw. 62 27 H 8. 22. Plow. 525.
or an administrator may not sell any thing that is given in special to a
Legatee to pay another Legacy given to another Legatee, nor compel a Creditor
or Legatee to take some of the goods of the deceased for his debt or Legacy
whether he will or no nor devise the goods he has as executor or as
administrator, neither can executors or administrators make division of the
goods amongst them.

An Infant that is an executor, after the time he is capable, has Infant.
Coo. 5. 28.
as much power as another Executor of full age; for he may sell the goods,
receive debts, and make Releases for the moneys he does receive, assent to a
Legacy when debts are paid, sue, and be sued, as another executor. And he is
only disabled to, do any thing to hurt himself; And therefore if he release a
debt before he receive it, the Release is void; and if he assent to a Legacy
before the debts are paid, the assent is void; and if he do ^^y (...) act which
will be a wasting of the goods in an executor that is of full age, it shall not
bind him. And it seems that howsoever an Infant Executor after 17 years of
age may sell any of the chattels And so was it held by Justice Hu^ton at Sa^um
Ass^es. 2^. Iac,
personal ^ee has as Executor, yet that after his age of 17 years, and
before he is 21 years of age, that he cannot sell a Lease for years he has
in the right of his Executorship, but that such sale is void.

A woman covert that has a husband, and is an Executrix may Broo. Executor
178. 152. Fitz. Executor 55. C^o. 5. 28.
do any lawful act as another Executor may do, but she may not do Woman ^overt.
any thing to prejudice her husband, as release a debt before it be paid,
assent to or deliver a Legacy before the debts be paid, or the like: and yet
the husband himself may do so.

The office and duty in general of an Executor or Administrator ^oo. 8. 133.
27. The office, duty, charge of an Executor or Administrator and of the
Ordinary. (...)
is to dispose all the estate of the deceased wherewith he has to do. 1.
Truly, not to convert any of it to his own use, but to the use and best
advantage of the deceased, nor to labor by any undue practice or means to
hinder any Creditor of his debt. 2. Lawfully, to pay debts and Legacies in that
order the Law prescribes. 3. diligently, quia egligentia semper habet comitem
infortnnium; but more particularly, The first duty and care of an Executor or
Administrator First in the Funerals.
after he has taken upon him the charge of the Administration Doct. and. ^t.
75. Plow. 543. Kelw^ 64.
of the goods and chattels of the deceased after the goods are laid up, is to
see the body of the deceased laudably interred according to his rank and
quality; wherein let the Executor or Administrator take this caution by the
way, not to exceed in Funeral pomp, especially if it be so that the estate
will scarcely reach to pay the debts; for let his expenses be what they will,
the Judges (who in this are to determine what shall be allowed) will allow what
they please, and they are pleased in such cases to allow but a small matter;
And whatsoever the Executor or Administrator does lay out more, he must bear
out of his own estate, if he have not enough besides to pay the debts. The
second duty and care must be to make an Inventary, i. e. a Schedule containing
a true and perfect Doct. and S^. 35. Stat. 21. H. 8. c. 5. Dyer 166. Swinb.
part. 6. Sect. 6. (...). 8. 9. 10.
Secondly, in making an Inventary.
description of all the goods and chattels of the deceased at the time of his
death, as of his Wares, Merchandises, Emblements, and the like with their
apprisement and value, and of none else, and of all debts due to him and from
him. And this must be made by and before two of the Creditors or Legataries of
the deceased (if there be any such and they will do it) and two others, or in
case they refuse, by and before two other men of the honest neighbors. And
here in let the Executor or Administrator take this caution by the way not to
intermeddle with the goods before he has done this; for howsoever he may do
any act as Executor before the Inventary be made, yet the Ordinary may punish
this upon him except it be done with the Ordinaries license, who in this case
may give what time he will for the doing of it; and until the Inventary be
made and put in, it shall be presumed against the Executor or Administrator
that he has assets in his hands to pay all men; and besides until this be
done, he cannot deduct to satisfy his own debt first, and bar other men by
Plea. But of the other side when he has made and exhibited a true and perfect
Inventary of all the goods and chattels, it shall be presumed against him that
he has so much as is contained in the Inventary and no more, unless more can
be proved by Witnesses. 3. The third thing whereof the Executor or Thirdly in
Probate of the Will.
See Probate infra at Numb.
Administrator is to take care, is to prove the will if there be any: And this
the Ordinary will compel him to do, but otherwise he may do any thing as
Executor save only sue actions as well before Probate as after. 4. The fourth
thing whereof the Executor or Administrator must take care, is to sell and make
money of the goods Fourthly, in payment of Debts and Legacies; and the order of
payment of Debts and Legacies.
Coo. 9. 88. Plow. 184. 545. Dyer 80. Doct. and St 75. 76. 77. 78. 132. Stat.
33. H. 8. cap. 39. Coo. 5. 28. 4. 54. 59. 60. 8. 132. Dyer 232. 32 21 Ed. 4^.
^21. B^oo. Executors 88. 172. Coo. 8, 132. Dyer 32. Plow. 279. 280. Broo.
Execut^rs 103. Kelw. 74.
and chattels, and to receive the debts due to the deceased, and then to pay
the Debts and Legacies due to the Creditors and Legataries, wherein the
Executor or ^dministrator must be very cautious and wary. And for this purpose
let him observe, That all the debts must be paid before any Legacies be paid or
delivered; and if there be not enough besides to pay the debts, any thing given
by way of Legacy may be sold to make money to pay the debts, and the Legataries
must loose their Legacies, for L^gatarii contendunt de lucro captando,
Crediteres autem de damno vitando. And in payment of debts this decorum must be
observed. 1. Amongst persons that are Creditors, the executor or administrator
himself shall be preferred, so that if any debt be due to him, he may deduct
to satisfy himself first, albeit others loose their whole debt thereby, and
especially then when his debt is in equal degree with others debts. 2. After
the executor or administrator is served and satisfied his debt, then the King
is to be preferred, so that if there be any debt due to him, and he begin his
Suit for it before any other man can get a Judgment for his debt against the
executor or administrator, his debt shall be paid before any others. 3. After
the King is served and satisfied his debt, then the debts of common persons
must be paid. And these also must be paid in this order or manner. 1. The debts
due by Record by any judgment had against the deceased in any judicial
proceeding in any Court of Record. 2. The debts due by Statutes or
Recognisances ented into by the deceased; for the debts due upon judgments
must be satisifed before these; sit jud^cium prius velposterius. 3. The debts
due by Obligations and penal and single Bills, for these are in equal degree,
and these are to be paid after Statutes and Recognisances. And yet if the
Statute or Recognisance be only for performance of Covenants, and no Covenant
is broken, an Obligation for the payment of present money shall be discharged
before it. 4, The debts due for rent upon Leases of Land, or grants of rents;
but some say that debts due for rent in the Testators life time (be the rent
reserved upon Leases made by, or without deed for years, or at will) are in
equality of degree with debts due upon Especialties. 5. The debts due for
servants wages and workmen. 6. The debts due upon shop-books and verbal
Contracts; and yet it is said Addition to Just. Dodridge 92.
by some, That Legacies are to be paid before debts due by shop-books, bills
unsealed, or contracts by word, Quod non credo. And amongst debts also that are
in equality of degree, those that are due are to be paid before those that are
not due; and those whose day of payment is already come before those whose day
of payment is not yet come: And yet if the Creditor whose day of payment is
already come, do not sue for his debt until his debt whose day of payment is
at a day to come, become due, the Executor or Administrator may satisfy which
of them he will first. And amongst debts that are due and already to be paid,
those that are first sued for, are to be first paid: Or if the Creditors begin
their Suites together, the Executor or Administrator may pay which he will of
them first, and to pay debts in any other order is dangerous: And therefore for
the purpose, if the deceased are two several debts of 10l. a piece to two
several Creditors by several Obligations, and the Executor or Administrator
has enough only to pay one of them, he that can first get Judgment and
Execution shall first be satisfied, and if the Executor or Administrator do
afterward pay the other his debt, he must satisfy the first out of his own
estate. If one that has a debt due to him from the deceased upon a simple
Contract or the like, sue the Executor or Administrator for it, and there be
debts due to others upon bonds and bills unsatisfied; in this case, the
Executor or Administrator may not pay this debt, nor may he suffer the
Plaintiff to recover in his Action; for if he do, and he have not Assets
besides to satisfy the debts due upon Bills and Bonds, he must satisfy so
much out of his own estate as he has so paid, or suffered to be recovered
from him; for in the case of an Action brought, he is to plead and to set forth
these debts upon Especialties, and to say that he has no more but what is
sufficient to satisfy them etc. and thereby he shall bar the Plaintiff in
his Action. In like manner it is, if one that has a debt due to him from the
deceased upon an Obligation, sue the Executor or Administrator thereupon, and
there be debts due to others upon Judgments, Statutes or Recognisances, and
the Executor or Administrator suffer the Plaintiff to recover the debt due
upon the Obligation for want of pleading the Judgments etc. or does
voluntarily pay that debt, and he has no^ Assets besides to pay the debts due
upon Judgments etc. in this case, he must pay so much out of his own estate
toward the satisfaction of the said debts due upon Judgments etc. as he has
paid of the debt due upon the Obligation. But here it must be noted that no
Judgment or Statute that is discharged, or is left and suffered to lie by
agreement to bar others of their debts, shall be any bar to others that sue
for their due debts upon Obligations etc. and Covin.
therefore if any Executor or Administrator shall plead any such Judgment etc.
in bar of any other debt sued for by any other Creditor, the Creditor may by
special pleading set forth this matter of Covin and avoid the plea and bar
of the Executor or Administrator. If one Creditor whose debt is in equal
degree and presently due and to be paid, begin a Suit against the Executor or
Administrator for his debt, and he has notice that the Suit is begun against
him, or the Action is laid in the County where the Executor or Administrator
does dwell, or (as some have said) in London, (in both which cases, it seems
he is bound to take notice thereof at his peril) and after this Suit begun he
does make voluntary payment of another debt in equal degree in all respects
for which no Suit is begun; this is a devastavit in the Executor or
Administrator, and if he have not Assets to satisfy him who began his Suit
first, he shall be compelled to satisfy so much thereof as he does voluntarily
pay to the other, and that out of his own estate: And yet an Executor or
Administrator may make voluntary payment of any debt due by Record, as by
Judgment, Statute etc. after such a Suit begun and justify it. If two
Creditors in equal degree to all purposes begin to sue for their debts at one
time; in this case, the Executor or Administrator cannot safely make voluntary
payment to either of them, unless he have enough to pay them both; but his
safest way is to pay him first, that in a due and legal proceeding (for he may
not covinously help one of them to a Judgment sooner) can first recover it by
Judgment and Execution: And yet if in this case no Suit be begun, the Executor
or Administrator may make voluntary payment to either of them in equal degree
of his whole debt, albeit he have no Assets left to pay unto the other any part
of his debt. If A and B be two Creditors in equal degree, and A begin his Suit
first, and after B does begin his Suit, and it happens that B bona fide
without any Covin or agreement between him and the Executor or Administrator
does get Judgment and Execution first; in thi^ case, the Executor or
Administrator may make payment ^o B first of all. But if the Executor or
Administrator does by any Covin and agreement help B to his Judgment and
Execution first, and by this means he is first satisfied, if there be not
Covin.
enough left to satisfy A, he must satisfy him out of his own estate. If two
Suits begin at or about one time upon two several Obligations, and the
Executor is forced to plead to them both before either of them has a
Judgment, so that he cannot plead the Judgment that the other has against
him, and he has not Assets to satisfy both the debts sued for, and after the
Plaintiffs in both the Suits get Judgment and Execution. Quaere what the
Executor or administrator may do in this case: And here note by the way, that
it is policy for a Creditor that has cause to sue an executor or
administrator, to be doing b^times, and to get judgment and execution as soon
as he may; for it falls out in this case, That he that does first come shall
be first served: After all the debts are paid in such order and manner as
before, then is the executor or administrator to pay and to deliver the
Legacies: and herein the executor may prefer himself so, that if any Legacy
be Doct. and St. 34. Plow. 54^. Swinb. 110. 114.
given to him, he may detain and deduct it, albeit there be nothing left to
discharge the Legacies given to others: and after he has satisfied himself,
he may satisfy and deliver what Legacies he will, albeit there be not enough
to satisfy all the Legatees; or he may pay to each of the Legatees a part of
their Legacy, and deduct a part out of every Legacy where there is not enough
to satisfy all the Legacies: But if any particular thing, as a Lease, or a
horse, or the like be given; this must be delivered accordingly, and may not be
sold by the executor or administrator to pay others all, or any part of their
Legacies: and if there be enough to pay all the Legacies they must be paid all
according to the Will; and it is said by some, that if an executor or
administrator make no Inventary of the goods, that he must pay all the Legacies
whether he have Assets or not. The last thing an executor or administrator is
to take care of, Swinb. Part. 6. Sect. 17.
is to make an account, (for it is ^eld that an executor or administrator
Fifthly, in making an Account.
is not bound in Law or Conscience to make restitution for personal wrongs)
wherein this is to be known, That the Ordinary may if he will call the executor
or administrator to account concerning the goods and chattels of the deceased,
either generally or particularly as the case requires; and that with or
without the Credito^s or Legataries instigation, within a year or what time he
will; unto which account he may call all the Cr^ditors and Legataries; and
therein the executor or administrator must show what he has received, and what
he has laid out and prov^^^ in such sort as the Ordinary shall like: And then
if it be found he has faithfully and fully administered, the Ordinary may
acquit him of the burden, and then he is discharged of all Suits in the
Spiritual Court; but this account and discharge will not help nor avail him
at all to discharge him of Suits at the Common Law.

The Office and duty of the Ordinary after the death of any Coo. 5. 83. 9. 39.
Litt. Broo. Sect. 233. F. N. B. 120. D^er. 23. Doct. and St. 132.
person within his Diocese, is, if he hear of any Will made, and any Executor
appointed, to cite the Executor, and to compel him to come in and prove the
Will, and to accept and take upon him the administration of the goods, or to
refuse it: and if the Executor Broo. Executor. ^0. Testament. 27. Stat. 31. Ed.
3. c. 11. 13 Ed. 1. c. 19. 21 H. 8. c. 5.
refuse, or if there be a Will made and no Executor appointed, the Ordinary
must commit the administration cum testamento annexo to whom he shall think
fit, and take Bond of the admistrator to perform the Will. And if there be no
will made, he is to grant the administration of the goods to the next of kin,
if he or they require it; and if not, to whomsoever besides shall desire it; or
if no body seek it, he may grant letters to whom he will ad colligendum bona
defuncti, and thereby take the goods of the deceased into his own hands: and
then it seems he is to pay therewith the debts and Legacies of the deceased,
so far as the same will reach in such order as the Executor or administrator
is to pay them. See more of this question in Numb. 29. infra.

An Executor or Administrator regularly shall charge others for 28. Where and
how an Executor or Administrator shall charge others in respect of the estate
of the deceased, and what actions and remedy he may have against others, and
what not, and how.
any debt or duty due to the deceased, as the deceased himself might have done;
and the same actions the deceased might have had, the same actions for the most
part the Executor or administrator may have also: And therefore he may have an
West. 2. c. 22.
action of account, F N B. 117.
an action of Trespass de bonis asportatis in vita testatoris, Dyer 322.
an action of debt against a Jailer upon the escape of a prisoner, Coo. 11. 41.
a Writ of error upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. Coo. 6. 80.
an attaint upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. a Writ of restitution upon the Statute
of 21 H. 8. Coo. 9. 86.
an action upon the case upon the assumpsit of the Testator, Stat 9. 11. 6. c.
4.
an Indempnitate nominis when the deceaseds goods are taken upon an Out-lawry
against another man of his name, Broo. Excutor. 161.
an action of Covenant for breach of a Covenant made to the deceased, Coo. 5.
27.
an action upon the Case upon the Trover and Conversion of the goods of the
Testator, 7 H. 4. 6.
an Ejectione firm for an ejectment of the Testator out of a Term, Coo. 4. 50.
an action of debt for the rent behind in the life time of the deceased, Broo.
Executor 169.
an action of debt for the arrearages of an annuity due to the Testator in his
life time, Broo. Executor 122.
and a Ravishment or Ejectment of guard for a wrong due to the ^eceased. Coo.
9. 8^.
But an Executor or administrator shall not charge another, or have any action
against him for a personal wrong done to the Testator, when the wrong done to
his person or that which is his, is of that nature as for which damages only
are to be recovered: And therefore an Executor or Administrator cannot sue
another for the beating or wounding of the deceased, or for a Trespass done to
him in his cattle, grass or corn, or for a waste done by his Tenant in his
lands; for these are said to be personal actions which die with the person,
according to the rule, Actio personalis moritur cum persona.

If the Testament be kept from the Executor, he may have remedy 36 H. 6. 7.
Coo. 8. 135.
to recover it in the Spiritual Court: So if the goods of the deceased be kept
from him, he may sue there for them if he will, or he may sue in any Court of
Common Law. And if there be a Will, and an Executor made, or two
Administrations granted together, he that is rightful Executor or
administrator may sue the wrongful administrator for the goods in his custody.

If one grant a rent out of his land for life, provided that it Coo. super
Litt. 146.
shall not charge his person, and the rent is behind, and the Grantee dies; in
this case, the executor or administrator of the Grantee may have an action of
debt for these Arrearages.

If any rent or arrerages of rent be due to me upon a grant of rent Coo. 4. 50.
Stat. 32. H. (...). cap. 37.
out of any land to me, or reservation of rent upon any estate made by me of
land; in these cases, my executor or administrator may have an action of debt
for this rent, or he may distraine for it, so long as the land chargeable with
the rent, and out of which it does issue, is in his possession that ought to
pay it, or in the possession of any one that does claim by or under him.

If any of my household servants do convey away and eloine or See Stat. (...).
H. 6. c. (...).
destroy any of my goods; any executor or administrator may have a special
Commission out of the Chancery to enquire of, and to punish it. And in case
where a man does sue as executor or administrator Coo. 5. 33. Broo. Tre^. pass
346. Fitz. Executor 1^.
he must in his action name himself as he is, i. e. if he be an Executor, he
must name himself so; and if an administrator, he most name himself so: And
if there be many Executors, and some accept and some refuse, if they bring any
action, they must be all named in the Writ: And yet if one executor have goods
in his possession and he alone sell them, perhaps for this contract he may
bring an action for the money in his own name; so also if the goods be taken
out of his possession alone, it is said he alone may sue for them; but the
safest way in these cases, is to sue in the names of all the Executors; for the
possession of one of them is said to be the possession of all of them.

An executor or administrator regularly shall be charged by Coo. supe^ Litt
209. 5. 17. Dyer 14. 23. 212. Doct. and St. Broo. Descent 53.
29. Where and how an Executor or Administrator shall be charged by others, and
what Actions and remedy may be had against him, or (...).
others, for any debt or duty due from the deceased, as the deceased himself
might have been charged in his life time, so far forth as he has any of the
estate of the deceased to discharge the same. And therefore if a man bind
himself by Obligation or Covenant to pay money or do any such like thing, and
do not bind his executors or administrators by name; in this case, the
executor or administrator may be sued and may be charged as far forth as if
they were named. And yet where the Covenant is but personal, as where one does
make a Lease for years, and the Leassor does Covenant to pay the quit rents,
but he does not say during the term; by this it seems the executor or
administrator of the Leassor shall not be charged. Coo. 9. ^6. Plow. 18^.
An action of the case lies against him upon an assumpsit or the simple
contract of the Testator, especial where the ground of the Assumpsit is a true
debt, F N B. 121
a rationabili part bonorum lies against him; 3 H. 6. 35. 11 H. 4. 45.
a Detinue lies against him for the goods delivered to the deceased, if the
executor or administrator do still continue the possession of them: Also an
action of debt lies against him for Arreatages of account found upon the
deceased before Auditors.

The executor or administrator of the father that has levied Stat. 25. Ed. 1.
c. 11.
Aid of his Tenant for the marriage of his daughter, shall be charged with it,
and the daughter may sue for it.

The executor or administrator of a Guardian in Chivalry that E N B. ^6.
does commit waste in the Wards lands, shall be charged and may be sued for the
heir for it.

If a man possessed of a term of years, devise it to another, and Coo. 5. 12.
Coo. 8. 94.
the executor or administrator of the Devisor before the assent to the Legacy,
does commit Waste in the land in Lease; in this case, he shall be charged with,
and may be sued for this Waste by him in reve^sion: But if the executor die,
his executor shall not be charged with it; for it is a personal wrong that
dies with the person.

If a Bishop grant an annuity out of his lands to I S for life and Dyer 370.
die; in this case, it seems the executor or administrator of the Bishop shall
be charged with the Arrerages due in the Bishops time.

If a Lease for years be made rendering rent, and the rent is behind Broo.
Executor 127. Coo. 3. 24. 22.
and the Lessee die; in this case, the executor or administrator of the Leassee
shall be charged for this rent. So also if Leassee for years assign over his
Interest and die, his executor or administrator shall be charged with the
Arrerages before the assignment, but not with any of the Arrerages due after
the assignment.

The executor or administrator of a Customer or Controller shall Broo. Exe^o^.
157.
be charged upon a Tail of the Exchequer showed to the Testator.

The executor or administrator shall be charged for a Ravishment West^. (...).
c. 35.
or ^jectment of Ward by the deceased.

The Executor or Administrator may be charged in the Spiritual Trin. 7. Ia. B.
R. (...) N B. 51.
all Court for Tithes due from the deceased: bu^ he may not (as it seems) be
sued in any Temporal Court for them.

The executor or administrator of a man that recovereth a debt Curia 21. Ia. B.
R.
upon a judgment had by the deceased, shall be chargable with restitution, if
the judgment be reversed for error.

An executor or administrator shall not be charged for any personal Coo. 9.
87. F N B. 117. Dyer 322. (...) H. 4. 46. Doct. and St. 76. Coo. 8. 94. 133.
wrong done by the deceased, and therefore no action may be brought against him
for any such cause, as because the deceased did burn the Deed of the lantiffe,
suffer a Prisoner at his suite to escape, cut down his trees, cat up his
grass, beat or wound the body of the Plantiffe, defame him in his name or the
like; for all these are said to be personal actions that dye with the person,
neither is there any remedy to be had against the executor or administrator in
equity in these cases, neither shall he be charged in any action of account for
any receipt or occupation by the deceased. And yet perhaps an action of the case
may lie in this case; neither will an action of debt lie against him upon the
simple contract of the deceased, but an action of the case only. Adiudge Hill
40. ^liz. B. R. Bowye^^ case.
Neither will an action lie against an executor or administrator upon an
arbitrament made in the life time of the deceased, albeit it be made in
writing. H^^l. 7. Ia. BR. ^per 3 Justices.
Neither will any action lie against any Executor or administrator for costs
given in the ^tar chamber or Chancery against the deceased in a Suite there,
but when the party dies, the same is lost; and Coo 9. ^9^. 40 Broo. Executor
78. 136. 136. Fitz. Brief 34^.
where a man does sue an executor or administrator in a Suite, he must charge
him as he is, v. z. if he be an Executor, he must sue him by that name; if an
administrator, then by that name. And where there be many Executors, and have
all accepted, they must be all sued; but if some of them have refused, perhaps
the Suite may be good enough against the rest. But otherwise one Executor
cannot be charged without his companions, except it be in the case of Summons
and Severance, and in some special case where one alone does the wrong and the
like, as where one Executor alone does detain the deeds from the heir; for in
this case he alone may be charged. See more infra at Numb. 39. 21 Ed. 4. 25. 4
H. 7. 4. 16. H. 7. 4. Broo. Executors 66. 30. 65. 9. Ed. 4. 12. Fitz. Executors
10.


All the Executors where there be more then one, be they never 30. What act one
Executor or Administrator alone may do; And where the act or laches of one may
prejudice or bar his companion, and where not.
so many, in the eye of the Law are but as one man; in which respect the Law
does esteem most acts done by or to any one of them, as acts done by or to all
of them. And therefore the possession of one of them of the goods and chattels
of the deceased is esteemed the possession of them all; payment of debts by or
to one of them is esteemed a payment by or to them all; the sale or gift of one
of them of the goods and chattels of the d^ceased, the sale and gift of them
all; a Release made by or to one of them is a Release made by or to them all;
and the assent of one of them to a Legacy the assent of them all. Adiudge M.
39. 40. Eliz. B. R.
And therefore if there be two Executors, and one of them deliver up the
Obligation to the Debtor whereby he is bound, the other Executor shall not
recover him in a Detinue. So if two Executors have lands or goods in execution,
and one of them release all his interest, this is a total discharge of the
execution. Crompt. Iac. 45. 4^^. 7. 4.
And yet if in this case there be any practice between the executor and the
Creditor in this matter, and there be not Assets besides to pay all the Debts
and Legacies, here perhaps the other Executor may have remedy in equity against
his Co-executor and the Creditor. But how the Law is of Administrators, quaere;
for some think that one of them also may sell-goods release debts, plead to
actions or the like without the other.

If one Executor atturn to the Grant of a reversion, or a rent; Dyer 210. Coo.
4. 31. Addition to ^ust. Do^^dge 4^.
this is as good as if they did all atturn and bind all the rest, as in case of
assent to a Legacy; for in this case the assent will bind all the rest, albeit
there be not enough to pay the debts besides the Legacy given away by assent,
but his assent shall not hurr his Co-executors in a Devastavit.

If one Executor appear to an action sued against them all, or Coo. 9. 38.
Dyer^ 10.
plead a Plea to it; this for the most part shall be said to be the appearance
and plea of them all, and shall bind the rest.

If two Executors sue together, and one of them is summoned and severed; in
this case he that is summoned may before Judgment Dyer 310. 210. 16 H. 7. 4.
release the duty; but if the other prosecute to Judgment first, and then he
that is severed acknowledge satisfaction, this will not benefit the Defendant,
nor bar the rest that are Plaintiffes in the Judgment. And if 3 Executors
sue, and 2 are summoned and severed, and the 3 recover and dye; in this case
the other two shall have execution. See more at Numb. 27. supra.^

One Executor or Administrator cannot give or sell any of the goods or chattels
of the deceased to another Executor or Administrator; (...). What act one
Executor may do to another, And what remedy or action one Executor or
Administrator may have against another or not.
27 H. 8. 21. 6 H. 7. 5. Plow. 343. ^itz. Executors 6.
and therefore they may not make division of the goods amongst themselves; and
regularly one of them cannot sue another of them. And therefore if one keep,
give, or sell all the goods, release debts, or the like in the disturbance of
the execution of the Will or due Administration of the estate; it seems the
other has no remedy against him, except it be in the case of Covin before; But
if all the residue of the goods and chattels after debts and legacies paid be
given to one of the Executors alone, and after the debts and legacies paid the
rest do detain it or any part of it from him; in this case perhaps he may
have some remedy against them.

If the Debtor make his Creditor and another his Executors, and (...). 483.
the Creditor does refuse the executorship, and the other does accept it; in
this case the Creditor may sue the executor for this debt: But if both prove
the Will, and the Debtor dye, the surviving Co-executor cannot sue the executor
of the debtor for this debt. And if one make a woman and two others his
executors, and a Creditor before she does accept of the executorship does
marry her; in this case he may sue the other executors for this debt; but if
she have accepted of the executorship first, contra. 32. Devastav^t. Q^id.
What shall be said a Devastavit and wasteing of the goods of the deceased by an
Executor or Administrator, And how he shall be charged thereupon.
(...) 5^3. ^oo. 532. Doct. and St. 75. Perk se, 488. 570. Kelw. 59.


A Devastavit or waste in an executor or administrator is when he does
misimploy the estate of the deceased, and misdemean himself in the managing
thereof against the trust reposed in him. And this may be done diverse ways, as
1. When the Executor or Administrator does bestow more upon the Funerals of the
deceased then is meet, having respect to his degree and estate. 2. When he does
pay Legacies in money, or assent to Legacies given in other things before the
debts are paid, and has not enough besides to pay the debts. 3. When he does
not pay the debts in that order and manner as is before set down, but does pay
them first he should pay last, and he has not enough to pay them all. 4. When
he does release a debt or duty due to the deceased before he does receive it,
or when the goods of the deceased being taken from him, he does release to him
that does take them the action whereby he may recover them. 5. When he does
sell the goods of the deceased much under value, especially if it be with
covin, as to his near friends, to his own use, to have money under hand, or the
like: but otherwise to sell them under value, especially where he cannot
conveniently make more of them, is no waste. All Dyer 185. Coo. 5. 32. Old B.
of Entries 11.
these and such like acts as these are said to be a waste in an Executor or
Administrator; and being discovered against him by the return of the Sheriff,
(or as some think by enquest of office) it will produce this effect, to make
the Executor or Administrator chargable for so much as he has misimployed and
wasted de bonis propriis, so that any Creditor may charge him for the debt due
to him from the Testator as for his own proper debt, and for so much the
execution shall be made against him upon own body lands and goods; And yet so
as one Executor or Administrator shall not be Dyer 210. Doct. and St. 78.
charged for the waste of another; for if there be many Executors, and one of
them only does commit the waste, he only shall be punished for this waste. And
the Executor or Administrator if he do commit a waste in the gift or sale of
goods, shall answer it alone; for he to whom the goods are given or sold shall
not be punished for it, neither shall the executor or administrator of the
executor or administrator be punished for it after his death. And howsoever the
husband shall be charged in a Devastavit for the waste of himself or his wife
where she is an executrix whiles they both live 2 H. 7. 15. Coo. 5. 2^. M 3.
Ia. B. R.
together; yet if a woman executrix take a husband, and during the marriage he
or she does commit a waste, and after she die; in this case it seems the
husband shall not be charged for the waste himself or his wife did, Sed quere
of this. For if a void Administration be committed, and the Administrator do
waste the goods, Coo. 6. 1^.
and after the Administration is committed to another; in this case the first
Administrator mae be charged by the Creditors for the waste done in his time.
But an executor or administrator may lawfully sell or convert the goods of the
deceased to his own use, Dyer 2, 187. Plow. 543.
so as he convert the money to the use of the deceased, in payment of debts, or
the like, and pay so much of his own money as the goods so converted to his use
are worth; and these acts are not esteemed a waste in him. Also he may sell any
special Legacy that is given, and this is no waste in him; ^owbeit it is a
wrong to the Legatee if there be assets to pay debts besides. And when he has
enough to pay all the debts and Legacies, then he may dispose of the whole
estate how he will without any prejudice to himself at all.

An executor of his own wrong is one that is neither lawful executor nor
administrator, and yet does take upon to do and act such Terms of the Law
Kelw. 59. 93. Dyer 105. 157. 255. Coo. 5. 32. ^^oo. Executor 162.
things as are only fit for, and proper to an executor or administrator, 33.
Executor of his own (...). Who shall be said to be so. And what act shall make
him so to be accounted. And what act such an Executor may do, And how he shall
be charged, or not.
as to take the goods of the deceased into his own possession, give and sell
them, pay the debts of the deceased therewith, release the debts due to the
deceased, and the like. And a man may make himself such an executor by any
such intermedling with the office and work of an executor as follows; 1. By
proving the Will with the money of the dead; but to prove another man's Will at
my own charge, will no more make me chargable as executor of mine own wrong,
then to bu^y the deceased in a decent manner out of his own estate. 2. By a
seizing, gaining, keeping and using of the goods of the deceased as a man's own,
especially if he convert them to his own use, sell, or otherwise dispose them;
and every color of title will not help in this case; for if a man make a Deed
of gift of all his goods and chattels to another, and dies intestate, and this
in truth is fraudulent and in trust, and the Donee after the death of the Donor
does dispose of these goods and chattels as his own; in this case and by this
means he shall be esteemed as executor of his own wrong. And yet if the Deed
of gift be bona fide in satisfaction of a just debt, and the goods be no more
then the debt, it may be otherwise: but if the goods be much more then the
debt, there it seems he shall be charged so for the overplus, and that whether
he have them in possession or not; and so was the opinion of Justice Jones at
Gloucest. Assizes 9. Car. If the Ordinary grant Letters ad colligendum and
vendendum the goods of the deceased that are like to perish, and I S to whom
the Letters are made, under color thereof does take and sell the goods; hereby
he may make himself chargable as executor of his own wrong: for the Ordinary
has no such power himself, and therefore he may not give that power to
another. If a man that is next of kin procure a Begg^r, or a stranger to take
out an administration, and then to make him Stat. 43. ^^^z. cap. 8.
a Deed of gift of all the goods for a small matter; he may be thus charged
for the overplus of the worth of the goods more then Plich. 7. Ia. Co. B. per.
chapter Justice.
he gave. So if a Debtor procure such an administration to be taken out, and
then get a Release of his debt from the administrator; this may make him
chargable as executor of his own wrong for so much as his debt does come unto.
And yet a man may take away his own goods that were in the hands of the
deceased without danger. And every having and possession of the goods of the
deceased will not make a man executor of his own wrong: Trin. 17. Iac. per
chief Just.
For if a man dye in my house and have goods there, and I keep them until I
can be well discharged of them; this will not make me chargable as Executor of
mine own wrong. Coo. 5. 34. Kelw. 63.
So if I do only lay up the goods of the deceased to preserve them in safety
for him that shall have right to them, this will make me no more chargable then
if I take an Inventary of all the goods of the deceased. So if another man take
the goods of the deceased and sell them to me, or give them to me; howsoever
this will make him chargable as Executor of his own wrong, yet this will not
make me chargable so. Neither will every disposition of the goods of the
deceased make a man Executor of his Kelw. 63. 52. 33 H. 6. 31. 32 H 6. 6, Dyer
167. Coo. 5. 34. 20 Ed. 4. 17. Fitz. Executors 122.
own wrong; for if a man sell some of the goods of the deceased (where there is
need) to help forward a decent Funeral of the body of the deceased: this is no
such disposition as to make a man chargable thus. So if I deliver the wife of
the deceased her necessary wearing apparel, or if I be wife to the deceased
and take it my self. So where I take any of the deceaseds goods into my hands,
by mistake, supposing them to be mine own, or under color of title, as when I
have a good Deed of gift or sale of them without any fraud or covin: or under a
good authority, as when I take them upon a warrant from the Sheriff that has
process out of the Exchequer to take them, or as a Trespassor only, as when I
kill, or otherwise abuse the cattle; such an intermedling with the goods of
the deceased will not make a man chargable as Executor of his own wrong,
neither may I so be charged in these cases. The third way by which a man may
make himself chargable as Executor of his own wrong, is by delivering of the
goods of the deceased to Creditors in satisfaction of their debts, or by
selling any See the (...) before.
of the goods of the deceased to pay the debts of the deceased, and paying the
same with the money made thereof; but to pay the deceaseds debt with a man's own
money will not make him chargable so. The fourth way by which a man may make
himself so chargable, is by receiving any of the debts due to the deceased.
Dyer 166.
The fifth way by which a man may make himself chargable so, is by releasing
any debts or duties due to the deceased. The sixth way, by delivering any
Legacies given by the deceased in kind, Dyer 166.
or by paying any Legacies except it be with a man's own money. The seventh way,
by taking a man's Legacy given to him before the Executor have accepted of the
Executorship and assented to the Legacy. The eighth way, by sueing as Executor
to the deceased for any debt due to the deceased. And the ninth way by taking
upon him to sell the lands of the deceased as his Executor. In all these cases,
and by all these and such like means, a man may make himself an Executor of
his own wrong: So that if an Executor after he Dyer 105.
has legally waived the Executorship, or an Administrator after his
Administration is repealed and revoked, intermeddle with the estate in any such
manner, he may be charged as Executor of his own wrong: And if a woman take
more of her wearing Dyer 166. 33 H. 6. 31.
apparel then is necessary and convenient for one of her rank and condition
without Legacy of the husband and license of the Executor, she may be charged
thus.

And if a man under color of an Administration that is not good, Dyer 255.
166. Coo. 5. 34. 9. 39.
or of a Commission ad colligendum bona defuncti that is not good, or of a Will
when in truth there is none at all, or no good Will, do take upon him to
intermeddle with the goods and to dispose of the estate in manner as aforesaid,
by this means he may make himself chargeable thus. And in these cases and by
these means, such persons that do so intermeddle, do make themselves to be
accounted in Law, Executors; but Executors by wrong only and not Executors by
right. Coo. 5. 34. Plow. 148. 145. 33 H. 6. 31.
And therefore, such persons have not the favor nor power of lawful
Executors, as to bring any Action for debt due to the deceased, to deduct and
pay themselves any debt due to themselves first of all and to bar other
Creditors, and the like. Dyer 210. Plow. 184. Coo. 5. 33.
And for so much as they have so disposed and mis-imployed, and no more, they
make themselves chargeable to any Creditor or Legatee of the deceased that
shall sue them as far forth as a lawful Executor is chargeable. And albeit,
he that does thus be a Creditor, yet this will not help him; for a Creditor may
not enter upon the goods of the deceased and pay himself first, and if he do
so, if there be a lawful Executor or Administrator made, he may sue the
Creditor; and if there be no Executor or Administrator made, the Creditor may
by this means make himself chargeable to other Creditors, as Executor of his
own wrong for so much as he has taken into his own hands: And then a man shall
be charged the Coo. 5. 33. Kelw. 59.
rather in these cases, and by this means when there is no Executor made; or
if there be an Executor made, when he does refuse to take upon him the
Executorship, nor any Administration granted; for when a man dies Intestate,
and a stranger takes and uses the goods of the deceased as his own, albeit he
pay no debt, or Legacy, nor do any other act as Executor, yet when no other
man takes upon him the administration, this intermeddling shall make him
chargeable as Executor of his own wrong; for in that case the Creditor has no
other remedy: But in case where there is an Executor made, and he does prove
the Testament, and does take upon him the Administration of the goods, and then
a stranger takes out of the hands of this Executor, or gets into his own
hands all or some of the goods of the deceased, and uses them as his own; this
will not make this stranger Executor of his own wrong; for now there is a
lawful Executor against whom the Creditor may have his remedy, and the
Executor shall have his remedy for these goods against the stranger; for they
are and shall be accounted Assets in the hands of the Executor still,
notwithstanding the stranger has the possession of them: And yet in this case
also where there is a rightful Executor, if a stranger shall take the goods
into his hands, claim to be Executor, pay debts and Legacies, and receive
debts, and intermeddle as an Executor; in this case, perhaps, and by this
express Administration as Executor, he may be charged as Executor of his own
wrong, albeit there be a lawful Executor: And if a man die Intestate, and a
stranger intermeddle with the estate as before, and then the Administration is
granted to another; in this case, the stranger may be charged by any Creditor
or Legatee as Executor of his own wrong for his intermeddling before the
Administration granted; for the rightful Executor or Administrator shall be
charged with no more then what does come into his hands. And if an
administration be granted afterward to any one that has so intermeddled with
the goods before; this will not purge Pasche. (...) Eliz. Co. B. B^adbury
versus Reynolds.
the wrong done before; and therefore in this case, a Creditor may charge him
as Executor of his own wrong, or as a lawful Administrator at his election.

The Administrator durante minori aetate is a special kind of Administrator,
34. Admininistrator durante minori aetate; what he is, and his power, and when
it shall end.
and is in case where an Infant under the age of 17 years Coo 5. 29. 6, 27. 9.
27.
(for at that age an Infant is capable of an Executorship) is made an executor,
and the Administration of the goods (as the manner is in that case) is
committed to one or more of the next friend or friends of the Infant during his
minority, which is until he be of the age of seventeen years; he that has
such an administration granted unto him is such an Administrator. And he is
sometimes general, i. e. when his administration is granted unto him without
any words of limitation: and sometimes he is special; i. e. when his
administration is granted to him ad opus and usum of the Infant only. In the
first case, he has as large a power as another administrator has, and
therefore he may assent to a Legacy, albeit there be not Assets to pay debts;
he may sell any of the goods or chatt^ls of the deceased, or give them away or
the like, as another administrator may do. But in the last case, it is
otherwise; for such a special administrator can do ^^tle more then the
Ordinary himself, and therefore he may not sell any of the goods or chattels
of the deceased, except it be in case where they are like to perish, for
funeral expenses, or for payment of debts, nor may he assent to a Legacy where
there is not Assets to pay debts etc. And this administration is ipso facto
determined when the executor does come to the age of seventeen years: And
therefore if it be granted during the minority of four Executors, and one of
them die, or come to the age of seventeen years; now is the administration
determined: And if the executor be a woman and she take a husband that is
seventeen years of age or upwards; in this case, it seems the administration
is determined: And therefore also it is that if such an administration durante
minori aetate be granted after the executor is seventeen years of age, the
administration is void.

It has been held that the Ordinary after he has granted the administration
35. Where an Administration once committed by the Ordinary may be afterward
revoked; and what shall be said a Revocation of such an Administration, or not:
and what acts done before shall stand in fores, or not.
4 H. 7. 14. Litt. Broo. Sect. 330. 34. H. 6. 14. D^er 339. Broo. Administrator
7.
of the goods of a man Intestate to another may afterward without cause revoke
the same and grant it to another, at his pleasure: and that if the Ordinary
grant letters of administration to one, and after grant letters of
administration to another, of the goods of the same man, that hereby the second
letters of administration are ipso facto countermanded, albeit there be no
words of Revocation in them. See the Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 5. Coo. 6. 18. New book
of Entries 38.
But it seems the Law is otherwise, and that after the Ordinary has granted
the administration according to the charge and direction given him by the
Statutes, that he cannot afterward revoke it, and grant it to another without
cause; i. e. unless the first administration be illegally granted, as when it
is granted to a stranger, and no^ to the next of kin or the like, or unless
the first administrator cannot or will not administer; for in these cases he
may without doubt grant the administration to another. And yet in these cases,
where there is a former administration granted regularly, all acts that the
first administrator does lawfully execute and do as administrator, as sale of
goods, payment, or receipt of debts, making Releases, and the like, are good and
shall bind the next and succeeding administrator. And therefore, if the Plow.
281. Coo. 6. 18, 19 Dye^ 339.
Ordinary after the death of a man Intestate, does grant the administration of
his goods to a stranger, and then the next of kin does sue by Citation to
have it repealed, and the first administrator hanging that Suit in the
Spiritual Court, does sell the goods of purpose to defeat the second
administration, and after the first letters of administration are revoked by
sentence, and the first sentence annulled, and the administration is committed
to another; in this case, the second administrator cannot recover these goods
or have any remedy for them. And yet perhaps if there be any fraud in the case,
an executor may have relief upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. But if the first Suit
and sentence be by Appeal avoided, then all that the first administrator does
is void, and the second administrator may recover the goods notwithstanding the
sale: And if the Coo. 6. 19.
first administration be upon condition, all the acts the administrator does
before the condition is broken, are good; and therefore i^ if he give or sell
the goods, the subsequent administrator cannot avoid it.

If a man die Intestate and have not bona notabilia, and the Bishop Coo. 8. 135.
of the Diocese grant Letters of Administration to one, and after the
Archbishop does grant Letters of Administration to another; in this case, the
effect of the first administration is suspended until the other be repealed
and declared by sentence to be void. If there be a Will, and it is concealed,
and thereupon an administration Plow. 281. 9 H. 5. 5.
is granted, and after the Will is produced and proved; in this case, the
administration is ipso facto determined, and all the acts the administrator
has done ab initio, are become void. See more in the next Question.

If a Will be made by an Idiot, and an Executor appointed therein, Dyer.
36. What Acts done by one Executor or Administrator, may be avoided by the
subsequent Executor or Administrator, and what not.
and the Executor take upon him the administration, and after the Will is
avoided for the weakness of the Testator; in this case, it seems that all the
Acts the Executor does before the avoidance of the Will are good and not to be
avoided by the Admistrator.

If there be a Will made, and an Executor appointed, and the 3 H. 7. 14.
Ordinary cite the Executor to come in, and prove the Will, and he does not
come, and thereupon the Ordinary does grant the administration to another; in
this case, all acts done by the Administrator are good, and shall bind the
Executor, if he may and shall afterward take upon him the Executorship. But
otherwise it is where the Ordinary does grant the Administration before the
Executor be cited to appear, or before the time given him to take upon him the
administration; for in this case, nothing that he does shall bind the Executor.

When there is an Administration granted, and it is afterward upon C^o. 6. 18,
^9 P^^w. 282. Coo. 8. 143, 135.
a Suit by condition only repealed; in this case all acts done by the first
Administrator are good and shall bind the subsequent Administrator. But in
case where the first administration is upon a Sui^ by appeal by sentence
annihilated and declared void, there, all acts done by the first Administrator
are void, and shall not bind the subsequent Administrator: And therefore, if
the Ordinary of the Diocese grant an Administration that does belong to the
Metropolitan to grant (in which case, the Administration is void;) all Acts
done by the Administrator are void, and may be avoided by the succeeding
Administrator. But when the administration does belong to the Ordinary of the
Di^cesse to grant, and the Metropolitan does grant it (in which case, it is
only voidable) in that case, all acts upon and by virtue of the first
administration before the second administration is granted, are good.

If an administration be granted to a stranger, and afterward it is revoked
and granted to the next of kin; in this case, all lawful W^son versus
Packman. M. 37. 38. Eliz. B. R.
acts done by the first Administrator before, and hanging the Suit, are good
and unavoidable by the subsequent Administrator; and yet perhaps if the first
Administrator waste the goods, it may be he may be charged for this by the
subsequent Administrator, or by a Creditor.

Where the Executor by the Will is not to administer until a Plow. 281. 282.
Coo. 6. 19. 34. H. 6. 14.
certain time; in this case, the administration of the goods is to be granted
until that time, and all acts done by such an ad^inistrator before that time
are good and shall bind the Executor. So where an Executor is made, or an
administration is granted upon condition, which is after broken, so that the
Executorship or Administration is determined; yet in this case, all acts done
by him before this time are good.

If there be a false and a true Will, and the Executor of the false 4 H. 7. 13.
Plow. 282.
Will prove this Will first, and afterward the Executor of the true Will does
disprove and avoid the first Will; in this case, he may also avoid all acts
the first Executor does.

The same Bars and Pleas regularly, that a man may have to Coo. 5. 33. Dyer
30. 80. Coo 8. 132. 134. 21 H. 6. 19 D^er. 2. 27 H. 8. 6. Coo. 9. 108. (...) H
4. 21.
Actions brought by the deceased himself in his life, a man may have 3^. What
shall be said a good bar in debt, or other Action brought by, or against an
Executor or Administrator, and what not.
to ba^re the Action and Suit of his Executor or Administrator after his death.
But an Executor or Administrator may have besides the same Pleas and Bars to
Actions the deceased might have had as Non est factum, Per Duresse, Non
Assumpsit and the like, diverse other Pleas and Bars to Actions in respect of
his estate and condition as Executor or Administrator: For if he never meddle
with the goods and chattels of the deceased, and yet be sued as Executor or
Administrator, he may plead Ne unque, i. e. he did never intermeddle as
Executor or Administrator; and if this be found for him, this will bar the
Plaintiff: And if he do intermeddle and take upon him the administration, be
may plead, if the case be so, that he cannot recover the goods of the deceased;
for he shall be charged for no more then what he can g^t in his possession. Or
he may plead that he has fully administered all the goods and chattels of the
deceased, and has nothing left to administer; or he may plead, that he has
paid so much of his own money as the goods in his hands do amount unto. Or if
he be sued for debts due by obliligations or such like Especialties entered into
by the deceased, he may plead that there are debts due, and ye^ to pay on
Judgments had against the deceased, or that there are debts due and yet to pay
on Recognisances or Statutes entered into by the deceased, and that he has no
more then enough to satisfy them: Or, he may plead that there are Judgments
had against him for other debts of the deceasEd in equal degree with the debt
sued for, and that he has no more then enough to discharge them: so as these
former debts, on, and for which these Judgments were had and Statutes given,
be bona fide du^, and the Judgments, Recognisances and Statutes in truth
continued for the same; for if there be any fraud in the case, viz. that either
the Judgments, Recognisances, or Statutes, were at first entered into, or are
afterward continued of purpose to deceive or delay others of their due debts,
when either the debt is satisfied, or compounded for less, or the like; in
these cases, this plea will not serve; but this matter being disclosed, by the
Plaintiffs pleading, he will avoid it: And if he be sued for a debt due upon a
simple Contract or promise of the Testator, he may plead there are debts to pay
due by Obligations and other especialties entered into by the deceased, and that
he has no more then enough to satisfy those debts, and this will bar the
Plaintiff in his Action: And therefore if an executor or administrator plead a
Judgment in bar of an Action of debt upon an Obligation, he must show also
that the Suit whereupon the Judgment was had, was upon an Obligation; for if
it were on a simple Contract, it is no bar. And if the Executor be sued for
debt on an Obligation, he may plead he made voluntary payment of other debts
due upon Obligations, or gave new security for them in his own name before the
Suit began, and that he has no more then enough to satisfy them. But to plead
such a voluntary payment or giving of new security after Suits begun upon this
Obligation now in Suit is no good plea. If an Action be brought against an
Executor or Administrator on an Especialty for money, it is no good plea in
bar of this Action to plead a Statute or Recognisance with Defeasance to
perform Covenants when there is no Covenant broken. If a Suit be against an
Executor or Curia Trin. 37 Eliz.
Administrator for a Legacy, it seems it is no good plea to plead a Bond with
Condition for performance of Covenants, or for the doing of any other
collateral thing that is contingent only, and not yet broken. Is is no good
plea in an Action for an Trin. 39. Eliz. B. R.
executor or administrator to say that the deceased was Outlawed.

An Executor or Administrator may make himself chargable of 38. Where and in
what case, an Executor or Administrator shall be charged by his own act or
pleading upon his own goods; and where Execution shall be de bonis propriis;
and where not.
his own goods, either by omission, as when he being sued upon 2 H. 6. 12. Dyer
185. 80 Coo. 9. 90, 94. 9 H 6. 57. 3^ H 6. 45. Broo. Executor 141. 105 Litt.
(...), Sect. 29. Klew. 61. Broo. Executors 164.
an Obligation, or the like, and there is a Judgment against him or the
deceased in force, and he has but enough to satisfy that Judgment, and he
does not plead this in bar of the present action, but does suffer the
Plaintiff to recover against him; in this case he must satisfy this second
debt out of his own estate; or by Commission, and that either by doing, as when
he does any act that is a waste in him, and thereupon a Devastavit is returned
against him, for in this case he must answer so much as he has wasted out of
his own estate: or by saying, as when a Suite is against, and he does plead
such a false plea therein as does tend to the perpetual bar of the Plaintiff
in the action, and yet it is of a thing that does lie within his perfect
knowledge, as when he does plead he is not Executor, nor did ever administer
^s Executor, and upon trial of this issue against him it be found he is a
rightful or wrongful Executor; in this case he must satisfy this debt out of
his own estate whether he have Assets or not, and the execution had upon the
Judgment had in this Suite shall be de konis propriis. And if an executor or
administrator be sued, and he plead to the action plene administravit, and upon
trial it is found against him; in this case if he have any of the goods of the
deceased left in his hand, the execution shall be of them; but if he have none
of the goods of the deceased left, the execution shall be, and he shall be
charged for so much as is found to be in his hands de bonis propriis. But where
he is sued upon a promise made by the Testator, and he plead non assumpsit to
it; and where he is sued upon a Deed made by the Testator, and he plead no ^est
factum to it, or the like; and these issues upon trial are found against him;
or when he shall confess the action, or suffer a Judgment to go by default
against him: or plead any vain plea; in all these cases he shall not be
chargable of his own estate, neither shall the judgment and execution in these
cases be de bonis propriis, but de bonis Testatoris only for the debt, and de
bonis propriis for the costs; And yet if an executor or administrator shall
entreat a Creditor to forbear his debt until a day, and then promise to pay
him; by this promise he has made himself chargable as for his own debt,
howbeit it shall be allowed him upon his Account. But in all these cases, and
such like where a man shall be charged of his own estate, and the execution
shall be de bonis propriis, Atworths case Mic^h. 38. 39. Eliz.
it seems the Judgment is always de bonis Testatoris, and the course is
this, the first execution is against the executor de bonis Testatoris, and not
de bonis propriis; And after a Devastavit 34 H. 6. 45. 46 Ed. 3. 9. Fitz.
Executor 9. Coo. 5. 32. 8. 134. Dye, 185. 32.
returned by the Sheriff against the executor or administrator, and not
before, a new execution is directed to the Sheriff to levy the debt de bonis
Testatoris; and if there be none of them to be found in his hands, then to
levy them de bonis propriis. And therefore if an Executor or Administrator be
sued by a Creditor, and the Executor or Administrator plead a plene
administravit generally, or plead specially that he has no more but to
satisfy a Judgment or the like; and upon trial this issue is found against
him, and it is found he has in all or part enough to satifie the debt; in
these cases the Judgment is de benis Testatoris, and thereupon an Execution is
(as in other cases) to levy the debt de bonis Testatoris in the hands of the
Executor or Administrator, and for the costs de bonis propriis. And upon the
return of the Sheriff a special execution does issue forth to levy the
money de bonis Testatoris: Et si constare poterit that he has wasted the
goods, then that he shall make the execution d bonis propriis. And h^reupon
also the Plaintiff may if he will have a Capias against the body, or an Elegit
against the lands of the Executor or Administrator, and no other course of
proceeding can or may be had against the Executor or Administrator in this case.

An action of debt was brought against two Executors, and one Dyer 21^.
of them did appear and confess the action, and the other made default, and
thereupon Judgment was given to recover against them both de bonis Testatoris
in their hands, and execution accordingly: and upon this execution the Sheriff
did return a Devastavit against the Executor that made default only, and
hereupon a Scire facias went out against him alone, and afterward an execution
against him alone de bonis propriis.

Assets in this case is said to be where one dies indebted and Terms of the
Law Coo. super Litt. 374.
makes his Executor, or dies intestate, and the Executor or Administrator
Assets, Quid.
has sufficient in goods or chattels or other profits to pay the debts or some
part thereof; this is said assets in his hands, and for so much he shall
charged.

All those goods and chattels, actions and commodities which were the deceaseds
in right of action or possession as his own, and 3^. What shall be said to be
Assets in the hands of an Executor or Administrator to charge him, Or not.
so continued to the time of his death, and which after his death the Executor
or Administrator does get into his hands as duly belonging to him in the right
of his Executorship and Administration, and all such things as do come to the
Executor and Administrator in liew or by reason of that, and nothing else shall
be said to be assets in the hands of the executor or administrator to make him
chargable to a Creditor or Legatee. And herein these things are to be known; 1.
That Assets in the hands of one of the executors shall be said to be Assets in
the hands of all the executors. Kelw. 51.
2. That Assets in any part of the world shall be said to be Assets Coo. 6. 47.
in every part of the world: and therefore if that point be in issue, and it
appear that there is Assets in the hands of any one of the executors, or in
any County or place whatsoever, the Jury must find that there is Assets. 3. All
goods and chattels of what nature or kind whatsoever that are valuable, as
oxen, kine, corn, etc. Coo. super Litt. 388.
shall be esteemed Assets. But such things as are not valuable, as a
Presentation to a Church and the like, shall not be accounted assets. 4. All
the goods and chattels that come to the executor or administrator in the right
of their executorship or administration, and Coo. super Litt. ^88. 5. 3^.
that are by Law given to them by virtue thereof in the right of the deceased
(for which, See before at Numb. 25.) and which Dyer 361. Kelw. 63.
are in possession shall be esteemed Assets in his hands. Coo. super Litt. 54.
Dyer 36^.
And therefore if a Feoffment be made to the use of the Feoffor for life, and
after to the use of his executors and assigns for 20 years; in this case it
seems this 20 years shall be said to be assets in the hands of the executor
of the Feoffor. 20 H. 7. 4. Broo. a^sets 22.
And goods pledged to the deceased and not redeemed, or the money wherewith it
is redeemed, when it is redeemed, shall be said to be assets in the hands of
the executor or administrator. See Before Numb.
And if the deceased does appoint that the executors shall sell his land to pay
his debts, the money that is made of the land when it is sold, shall be said to
be assets in his hands. 5. All the goods and chattels in action or in
possibility Coo. super Litt. 124. 5. 31. Broo. Assets 24. Dyer 264. 121. 2 H.
4. 21. Coo. 6. 58. Kelw. 63. Dyer 362.
at the time of the death of the deceased that are afterward recovered, and
are gotten in possession into the hands of the executot or administraror when
they are so recovered, ate esteemed assets in his hands. But they are never
accounted assets until they are recovered and come in possession; and
therefore if there be debts owing to the deceased upon Statutes or Obligations,
or otherwise, these are never esteemed assets in the hands of the executor or
administrator until he has recovered them. So likewise if there be debt or
damages recovered by a Judgment had by the deceased, but no execution is done
until execution be made, this shall not be esteemed assets in the hands of the
executor or administrator. So if the executor bring an action of trespass
against another de bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris, and he have a Judgment
for damages; in this case until he has recovered it by execution, it shall
not be esteemed assets in his hands. And if the Indgement be erroneous, and the
execution avoidable; in this case albeit it be recovered and gotten in
possession, yet it shall Curia Mich. 13. B. R.
not be esteemed assets. And therefore if one sue another and recover against
him as Administraror of I S; and after a Testament made by I S is produced and
proved, and thereby an Executor is made; in this case the money recovered by
the Administrator shall not be said to be assets in his hands as to any of the
Creditors because the Executor may recover it from him, or the debtor will have
it again. And if the Executor or Administrator do never recover and get the
thing into his possession, he shall never be Coo. 1. 98. Plow. 84. 292.
charged, especially there where he has done his best to get it and cannot. If
one covenant to make a Lease for years to the deceased his executors or
administrators, and after his death the Lease is made to the executor or
administrator accordingly; in this Coo. 5. 34.
case this Lease shall be said to be assets in his hands, and he shall be
chargable for so much to any Creditor. And whatsoever the executor or
administrator, must be forced to sue for by the name of executor or
administrator being recovered, shall be esteemed assets in his hands. 6. Albeit
the thing be extinct and gone as Coo. 1. 87. Broo. Leases 63.
to the executor and administrator himself, yet it may have his being and be
accounted assets as to the Creditors and Legatees. And therefore if an executor
or administrator have a Lease for years of land in the right of the deceased,
and afterward he does purchase the Fee-simple of the land (whereby the Lease
is drowned) yet in this case this Lease shall continue to be assets as to the
Creditors and Legatees still. Trin. 7. Ia. B. R. Simmons case. Coo. 8. 130.
And if the Debtee make the Debtor his Executor, or the Debtee dye intestate,
and the administration is committed to the Debtor; in these cases this debt
shall be said to continue and shall be esteemed assets for so much as to other
Creditors. And if a woman Executrix have goods worth 20l. and she marry with
one of the Creditors to whom 20l. is owing; in this case it seems the husband
may not retain the goods to pay himself, but they shall be assets to other
Creditors. And yet if the Debtor make the Debtee his executor, he may retain
so much as to satisfy his own debt, and that he does so retain shall not be
said to be assets in his hands as to any other Creditor. And if I S B^rnets
case Hill 8. Iac. Plow. 184.
have goods to the value of 20l. and he is bound to B and C in 20l. a piece,
and he dies intestate, and after D does administer, and then B dies and
makes D his executor; in this case D may retain this to satisfy his own debt,
and it shall not be said to be assets in his hands as to any other. 7. The
goods and chattels of other men in the hands of the executor or administrator
Kelw. 63. Coo. 6. 5^, Dyer 362.
that were in the possession of the deceased, if he had no right to them, or if
he had and they do not belong to the executor, will not make the execu^^r or
adminis^^ator chargable; for these shall not be esteemed assets in his hands.
And therefore if the goods of another man be amongst the goods of the deceased,
and these come all together into the hands of the executor or administrator;
these goods that are the goods of another shall not be said to be assets in
the hands of the executor or administrator. And if the executor does receive a
rent that does belong to the heir; this rent shall not be said to be assets in
his hands: and hence it is that if Doct. and St. lib. 2. cap. 3.
the deceased were outlawed at the time of his death, that his goods and
chattels are not no be accounted assets, for they are none of his. 8. Coo. ^.
30. Dyer ^.
If an executor of his own wrong to whom 20l. is owing, does enter upon so much
of the goods of the deceased as is worth 20l. intending to pay himself; this
shall be esteemed assets in his hands to make him chargable for so much to any
Creditor or Legatee. 9. 27 H. 3. 6.
It the deceased have goods worth 20l. and owe 20l. to A, and 10l. to B, and he
compound with A for 10l. in this case he shall be said to have assets, and be
charged to pay the debt of B also. 10. If a man have a Lease for years worth
20l. per annum at the rent of 5l. and he die; in this case not the Coo ^5. 31,
10 H. 7. 5.
whole value of the land, but so much as is above the rent shall be said to
be assets in the hands of the executor or administrator.

The Probate of a Testament is the producting and insinuating Swinb. 251, 264.
40. Probate Quid. Quotuplex.
of it before the Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary of the place where the party
dies, or other that has power to take the same. And this is done in two
sorts, either in common Form, i. e. upon the oath of the executor or party
exhibiting it upon his credulity that the Will exhibited is the last Will and
Testament of the party deceased, which is the ordinary course; and this the
Ordinary may accept if he will. Or per testes, i. e. which is when over and
besides his oath he does also produce witnesses or makes other proof to
confirm the same, and that in the presence of such as may pretend any interest
in the goods of the deceased, or at the least in their absence after they have
been lawfully summoned to see such Will proved if they think good. And this
course is used only where there is a suspicion of the Will, and the Caveat is
entered, or where there is a fear of contention and strife between the kindred
and friends of the party deceased about his goods; for a Will proved in common
form may be called into question at any time thirty years after; and when the
Will is thus exhibited into the Bishops Court, the same is to be kept by his
officers, and the Copy thereof in parchment under the Bishops Seal of his
office to be certified and delivered, which parchment so sealed is called the
Will proved.

The Probate of the Will (as having respect to the 41. Where the Probate of a
Will is necessary, and where not; And by and before whom, And in what time it
must be proved.
goods and chattels) is in some respect necessary; for howsoever Coo. super
Lit^ 292 Perk. Sect. 481.
as touching any Fr^e hold of lands devised it is not all material, and
howsoever the Executor before Probate may receive and release debts, and do
most other acts as Executor, yet he cannot sue, for any debt due to the
Testator. And if the Executor delay the Probate, the Ordinary may be Process
compel him to come in and accept or re^use of the Executorship. And when it is
proved it must be proved by the Executors or one Perk. Sect. 49. (...) 2. 486.
Coo. 9. 36. ^^. Testament ^^. 5. Plow. 280. ^tat. 23 H. P. cap. 9. 2^ H. 8. c.
5. See before at ^an. 21.
of them at least; and if all the goods of the deceased be within the same
Diocese wherein he lived and dyed the Executor must prove it before the
Ordinary of the Diocese, or before his lawful Commissary or Deputy, or before
the Archdeacon or his Deputy or Commissary (as their composition is) or if the
goods be in a Peculiar, then before him that is Judge of that Peculiar; or if
the goods be within two Peculiars, then before the Ordinary of the Diocese
wherein these two Peculiars lie. But if there S^inb, part. 6. Sect. 11.
be bona notabilia in the case, viz That the Testator have goods or chattels at
the time of his death of the value of 5l. or more lying in two or more
^ounties, or have good debts upon Especialties (as some say) for otherwise they
follow the person; or have any (Especialties as other ^ay) lying in other
Counties for debt, so that there be of goods and chattels or good debts to the
value of 5l. in any other Diocese then that wherein the Testator led his life
and dyed, then the Probate does belong to the Archbishop of that Diocese
wherein it is, unless the Ordinary of the same Diocese have the Probate by
composition between him and the Metropolitan; for otherwise there must be
several Probates for the goods in every Diocese (as anciently was used in
these cases.) But if a man die in his journey in another Diocese, and have
more then 5 l. goods about him, this shall not be said to be bona notabila, but
the Will may be proved before the Ordinary of the place where the deceased
lived and his estate does he. And except Stat. 23 H. 8. cap. 9.
it be in cases where men have bona notabilia, the Officers of the Courts of
the Metropolitans are not to cite men out of their own Diocese; and to
discover this matter, it is the duty of the Ordinary of the Diocese, when any
man comes to prove a Will, to give him an Oath, and examine him whether he know
of, or do believe, there are any goods to the value of 5 l. lying in any other
Diocese at the time of the Testators death, and if he hear of any to dismiss
them to the Prerogative Court, and to give them notice of it: Also in some
places, the Lords of Manors have the Probate of all the Wills within their
Manor by custom of the place; Fitz. Testament. 4. 5.
and in those places it must be proved there, and not elsewhere. And when an
Executor is bound to prove the Will before the Ordinary as before, the Ordinary
may give him what time to do it he does think fit, and when he does prove it,
the Ordinary does take an Oath of him to administer the goods faithfully, and
to take bond of him also if he please; but this some do omit.

And now because lands are oftentimes conveyed by the several kinds of
assurance aforesaid unto one man, but to the use of another, and to the intent
that another shall take the profits of it, we must of necessity hear somewhat
of the learning of Uses, and then we shall have done.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of a Use.
A Use is the profit or benefit of Lands or Tenements, or as 1. Use. Quid.
Coo. 1. 125. 122. See the Addition to Just. Dodr. Treatise. Coo. super Litt.
271. 272.
others define it, The equity and honesty to hold the land in conscientia boni
viri: Or, as others define it more fully; It is a trust or confidence reposed
in some other which is not issuing out of the land, but as a thing colatterall
annexed in privity to the estate of the land, and to the person touching the
land, so that he for whom he is trusted shall take the profit of the land, and
the Terre-Tenant shall dispose of it according to his direction: As for an
example, If a Feoffment be made to I S and his heirs, to the use, profit or
behoof of W S and his heirs; in this case heretofore I S had the estate and
property of the land, but W S had and was to have the profits in honesty and
equity. So if one agree with W S for a piece of land for 20 l. and pay him the
money, but has no assurance of the land, yet the equity and honesty to have
this land is in him, that has contracted and paid his money for it: and this
trust was called the use of the land; and hence came the course in conveyances
to set down in the Habendum to whose use, as Habendum to A and his heirs to
the use of A and his heirs: And he for whom this trust is, and that ought to
have the profit of the land by conveyance as aforesaid is called cestuy que
use. There is a use also of goods and chattels, which is properly called a
Trust or confidence, Cestuy que use, Trust or confidence. Quid.
for one may have such things to the use of another.

A Use is either express; i. e. when the use or intent is openly declared and
expressed between the parties upon the making of the 2. Quotuple^.
Doct. and St. 95 Perk. Sect. 533. Coo. 2. 58. 9. 11. Dyer ^8. 146.
estate of land, whereunto the use is annexed, as when a Feoffment is made of
land to I S and his heirs, to the use of W S, and the heirs of, or heirs
males of the body of the said W S, or to the end and intent that W S and his
heirs, or W S and the heirs of his body shall take the profits of it, or the
like; or when I covenant to stand seized of the land to the use of my wife for
life, and after of my eldest son, and the heirs of his body, or the like.
Or, it is employed; i. e. when the use is not declared upon the agreement
between the parties, but is left to the construction and made by the operation
of Law, as when a man seized of land makes a Feoffment in Fee, or does levy a
fine, or suffer a common Recovery of it to another without any consideration,
and it is not agreed nor declared to what use or intent it shall be; this by
construction of Law shall be to the use of the Feoffer, Conusor, or Recoveree:
But if there be any consideration of money or other thing paid or given, or any
rent or Tenure reserved, then by construction of Law, it shall be to the use of
the Feoffee, Conusee, or Recoveror, for otherwise the Law presumes that the
intent of him that did part with the land was so (viz.) that the other should
have the property of the land to his use, and that he himself should take the
profits of it. So when one does bargain and sell his land for money to
another, and no use is expressed; in this case the Law does say, it shall be to
the use of the Bargainee and his heirs. A use also is either in esse and that
in Coo. 1. 121.
possession, reversion, or remainder, as when a Feoffment is made to I S, to
the use of I W and his heirs, or to the use of I W, and after to the use of I
D, and the heirs males of his body, and after to the use of S T, and his
heirs for ever: Or, it is in posse, or in contingency, as when by
possibillity, it may happen to be in possession, reversion or remainder, as
where a use is limited to me for life, and after to him that shall be my first
son in Tail, this is only the possibility of a use, for it may or may not be.

A Use at the Common Law, before the Statute hereafter spoken Coo. in
Chudleighs care, in toto and Shelle ^ case. Kolw^ 160. Dyer. 12. Broo. Feoff^^
al uses, in toto, conscience, 25.
of was made, was, and where that Statute does not take place, is 3. The
nature, incidents, and original of it.
nothing but a meare confidence and trust colatterall to, and distinct from the
land annexed in privity of estate, and to the person touching the land to this
purpose, that cestuy que use should take the profit of the land, and the
Feoffee or Terre-Tenant that was trusted should make estates, and otherwise
dispose of the land as the cesty que use in his life, or at his death by his
last Will and Testament should direct and appoint; and if he made no
disposition, then that it should go to his heir, so that the Feoffee had the
Free hold or sole property of the thing in him, and cestuy que use, had neither
jus in re nor jus ad rem (for if he against the Will of the Feoffee had entered
into the land, he had been a Trespassor) but a bare confidence or trust for
which the cestuy que use had no remedy, but in Chancery upon breach of the
trust, and there to have the Feoffee imprisoned until he perform the trust
according to the order of the Court. And these uses to some purposes, were
reputed in Law as chattels, and therefore were devisable by Will, and to some
purpose as hereditaments, and a kind of Inheritance of which there was a
possessio fratris etc. and to some purposes, neither chattels nor
hereditaments, for they were not esteemed Assets in the heir or Executor,
neither were they reputed as Commons, Rents, Conditions, and such like
Inheritances which are discontinued or taken away by the Alienation of the
Terre tenant, Escheat, Disseisin etc. but a use is not so.

And to every of these uses, there were two inseparable Incidents, Incidents of
it.
confidence in the person, and privity in the estate, expressed by the parties
or employed by the Law, and when either of these failed, the use was either gone
for ever or suspended for a time at the least: And therefore if the Feoffee to
use, upon good consideration had enfeoffed another of the land that had not
notice of the use, the use had been gone for ever, because howsoever here was a
privity of estate; yet here was no confidence in the person, but if the
Feoffment had been without consideration to such a one, in this case, the use
had remained ^ill because the Law did imply a notice: So also it Trin. 17. Ia.
Cancellaria.
seems the Law was when it was made in consideration of marriage only. And if
a Disseisor, Abator, or Intrudor had come to the possion of the land whereof
the use was, albeit he had notice of the use, yet the use was su^pend^ during
their possession, and they should not have been seized to use as the Feoffee
was, for they come not to the land ^n the per but in the post. And if a Lord by
Escheat, Lord of a Villai^e, or one that had entered for Mortmaine, or that had
recovered in ^ Cessavit etc. had come to such land and had notice of the use,
the use had been ^ue for ever, for these came to the land in the post and above
the us^: And Tenan^ in Dower, and by the curtesy should not be seized to uses
in being, for all these wanted privity of estate: And if there h^d been Tenant
for life, the remainder in Fee to the use of another, and the Tenant for life
had made a Feoffment in Fee to one that had notice of the uses, this second
Feoffee should not have stood seized to the first uses: So if the husband had
made a Feoffment in Fee of the land of his wife, upon consideration and without
any use expressed, the wife should not have had a Subpoena because the Feoffee
was not in privity of estate of the wi^^: And if cestuy que use for life or in
Tail, the remainder in Tail with diverse remainders over in use, had made a
Feoffment to one that had notice; he should not have been seized to the first
uses causa qua supra. But otherwise it is of Commons, Advowsons, and such like
appendants or appurtenants, for if Tenant in Tail, or husband in right of his
wife make a Feoffment of a Manor, or of part of it with an Advowson appendant;
the Advowson at least after Presentment shall pass as appendant to the Manor
o^ to part of the Manor, and not to the estate of the land which is
discontinued by the Feoffment. So if a Disseisor, Abator, Intrudor, or the Lord
by Escheat, or the like. shall have these things as annexed to the land or the
possession of the land; so that there is a difference between a use, a
warrantie and such like things that are annexed to the estate of the land in
drivity, and Commons, Advowsons, and other hereditaments that are annexed to
the possession of the land.

And these Uses began first when the custom of property began and was brought
in, that one man knew his own from another The Original of ^^ and why so much
lands w^^ ^^t in use.
Doct. and Stud^ 9^. Coo. 1. 123. 12^. Stat. 17. H. 8. c. 10. in the preamble.
man's, and then was to enjoy his own, and not to be deprived of it without
consent or order of Law; for then he that had land, had two things in him, a
possession of the land, and power to take the profits of it, and those being to
be distinguished, he might give the Free hold or Possession to another, and
take the profits himself; and they were the rather allowed by the Law for a
time as reasonable, because they gave a man power to dispose of his land by
Will, which otherwise he could not have done but in some special cases by
custom of the place: But in time this use was turned into an abuse, and the
greatest part of all the lands in the Kingdom, especially in the time of the
broyl between the houses of York and Lancaster, were put in use, partly of
fraud and partly of fear, which produced not a few inconveniences, for thereby
many were deceived of their just and reasonable rights, as namely, a man that
had The mischief of uses.
cause to sue for his land, knew not against whom to bring his Action, or who
was owner of it; the wife was defrauded of her thirds, the husband of being
Tenant by the Curtesy, the Lord of his Wardship, Relief, Harriot, and Escheat,
the Creditor of his Extent for debt, the poor Tenant of his Lease, and other
Purchasors of their purchase, for these rights and duties were given by the Law
from him that was owner of the land and none other, which at this time was the
Feoffee of trust, and so the Feoffor the old owner of the land, should take the
profits, and leave the power to dispose of the land at his discretion to the
Feoffee, and yet the Feoffee was not such a Tenant of the land as his wife
might have Dower, or the land be extended for his debt, or that he might
forfeit it for Felony or Treason, or that his heir should be in Ward for it,
or any duty of Tenure fall to the Lord by his death, or that he could make any
estates of it; also lands were many times conveyed by last Wills, by words
only, and sometimes by tokens only in time of great extremity of weakness, and
many perjuries for trial of secret uses were daily committed. All which having
been espied, have been labored to be cured and helped by diverse particular
Acts of Parliament in all succeeding ages: Stat. 1. R. 2. c. 9. 4. H. 4. c, 7.
11 H. 6. c. 3. 1. R. 3. c. 1. 4. H. 7. c. 17. 1 H. 7. c. 1. 19 H. 7. c. 15. 27
H. 8, c. 10.
Uses and possessions united.
but the makers of these Laws finding the continuances of these uses so
mischievous, that they did overreach the policy of all Laws, for a general
remedy, and a perfect cure of all the said mischiefs and abuses, have at last
provided; That where any are, or shall be seized of any lands to the use or
trust of any other, by reason of any bargain, sale, feoffment, fine, recovery,
contract, agreement, or otherwise, by any means whatsoever cesty que use or
trust, that has any such use in Fee-simple for term of life or years, or
otherwise, or any use in reversion or remainder etc. shall have the possession
of the land in such quallity, manner and condition as he had the use or trust:
And where any one is seized of lands to the use or intent that another shall
have a yearly rent out of the same lands cestry que use of the rent, shall be
deemed in possession thereof of like estate as he had the use: By which Statute
the use and possession of land is now at this day coupled, conjoined and
married with an indissoluble knot, so as they cannot now stand apart and
divided, but he that has the one must have the other, and the one does ensue
the other as the shadow does the body; and therefore now upon Fines,
Recoveries, and Feoffments, the estate does settle as the use and intent of the
parties is declared by word or writing before the act done, as for example, If
a writing be made between two or more, that one of them shall levy a fine,
make a Feoffment, or suffer a Recovery to the other to the use and intent that
one of them, or another man shall have it for life, and after another in Tail,
and after a third in Fee-simple, in this case, the Law setleth the estate
a^cording to the use and intent declared, so that now what estate a man has in
the use the same he has in the possession. But herein for the more full
understanding of this Statute, and the Law at this day, it must be To what
uses the Statute of 27 H. 8. does extend, and to what not.
observed, That this Statute does not extend to all manner of uses, neither are
all uses executed and united to the possession hereby; for to every execution
of a use within this Statute, four things are requisite: 1. That there be a
person seized: 2. That there be a cesty que use in esse. 3. That there be a use
in esse in possession, reversion, or remainder. 4. That the estate out of which
the uses do arise be vested in cesty que use, so that when these four, viz.
Seisin in the Coo. 1. 126. 136. Plow. 3^^.
Feoffees, cestuy que use in rerum natura, use in esse, and that the estate of
the Feoffees does vest in cestuy que use, then there is an execution of the use
within this Statute; but if any of these fail, there is no execution of the
use within this Statute: And therefore, it is agreed that this Statute does not
execute any use but only uses in esse, so that the right of a present and a
future or contingent use are excluded until they come in esse, and then the
Statute does execute them; also if no alteration be of the estate of the land
before. And if cestuy que use in Tail with diverse uses in remainder had made a
Feoffment and dyed before the Statute, no execution Coo. 1. 126. Dyer 58. 88.
33^.
should have been of this right of a use until entry by the Feoffees. So if
cestuy que use in possession had made a Feoffment before the Statute; no right
of the use in possession or remainder shall be executed by the Statute until
the regresse by the Feoffees: So if a Feoffment had been made before the
Statute to the use of the Feoffee for life, and after to the uses of others in
remainder, and the Feoffee had made a Feoffment in Fee to another; this use
shall not be recontinued, or the repossession of the land executed unto it by
this Statute; so that the right of uses in esse and uses in contingency until
they happen to be in esse remain at the Common Law, as they were before the
Statute; and therefore if the estate of the Feoffees be in such cases divested
by disseisin; or the King, or a Corporation, or an Alien, or a person attaint
etc. be enfeoffed of the land before the use come in ^sse, or if the land be
aliened bona fide upon consideration to one that has not notice of the use;
this use can never be executed until these possessions be removed by lawful
entry or action of the Feoffees; and if their entry and action be barred, the
use is gone for ever, and the party grieved thereby has no remedy but in
Chancery: And therefore if cesty que use in Tail the remainder in Tail
restrained with a clause of perpetuity be disseised; no use in contingency can
be executed by this Statute: And if before the Statute, a feoffment had been
made in Fee to the use of I S for life, and after to the use of the right
heirs of I N, and the Feoffees had been disseised, and then the Statute had
been made, and after I N die, and after his death I S die; this use shall never
be executed in the right heir of I N. And so also if a disseisin be after Coo.
1. 138.
the Statute and before the death of I N, no possession shall be executed in
the right heir of I N: Also uses that need no Execution by the Statute, as when
a man does convey land to I S and his heirs to the use of I S and his heirs;
this does not need help of this Statute: Also uses that are against the rules
of the Common Law, shall not be executed by this Statute: And therefore if a
Feoffment be made to the use of A for life, and after to the use of every
person that shall be his heir one after another for term of his life: So if one
make a Feoffment to the use of another in Tail with diverse remainders over
with a previso, that neither of them shall discontinue or alien etc. these uses
shall not be executed because these limitations are wholly void; and in these
cases it seems there is no remedy to be had in Chancery against the Feoffees:
So that out of all this appears that some uses are executed presently, as
uses in esse, and some are executed by matter ex post facto, if they be
according to Law, and come in esse in due time; but if they be uses invented
and limited in a new manner, and not according to the ancient Common Law, they
are altogether void, and extinguished and abolished by this Statute: And where
lands are conveyed to others in trust after this or the like manner, viz. that
the Feoffees shall take the profits, and deliver them to the Feoffor and his
heirs etc. or that the Feoffees shall convey it to the heir of the Feoffor at
his age of twenty one years: And where lands are conveyed to certain uses
expressed and declared, and there be other secret uses and intents agreed upon
between the parties; these uses or trusts are not within this Statute, neither
will the Statute execute them, but they remain as they were before the
Statute, determinable in Chancery: Also Leases for years of lands in use that
have their being before, and are granted over in use are not executed by this
Statute: And therefore if a Leassee for years of land, grant or Dyer 369. 356.
Crompt. ^ur. 65.
assign over his estate to A and B and their assigns to the use of the Grantor
and his wife for the term of their lives; this use or trust is out of this
Statute, and not executed thereby; and therefore in this case all the estate is
in A and B, and the Grantor has nothing but a use, for which he has his
remedy in Chancery: So if one be seized of land in Fee, and he bargain and
sell it, or make a Lease of it to another in trust, and for the benefit of a
third person; this is but a Chancery trust etc. in this third person, as was
held clearly, M. 8. Car. B. R. And yet if a Feoffment be made to the use of I
S, and his assigns for the term of twenty years; this term of years shall be
executed by the Statute: And so in all such like cases and questions of Trusts
and uses that are not within the Statute of uses, the Law is now as it was
before the same Statute was made, and all those matters are determinable in
Chancery; for as the questions of uses and trusts that are within the Statue
are to be decided and ruled by the Judges of the Common Law, so are all other
questions of uses and trusts that are out of the Statute to be ruled and
decided by the Judges of the Chancery.

To make a good use, or to make a use to rise, especially such a 4. What shall
be said a good use of land, or not; and when and where such a use shall be
raised, altered or created, or not.
use as may be within the Statute, respect must be had to diverse Coo. super
Litt. 271. Plow. 301.
things. 1. To the ways or means of creating and raising of uses, wherein it
is to be observed, that albeit the quallity of the uses be changed in most
cases by the Statute of uses, yet uses, and uses within this Statute are, and
may be raised as they might before the Statute, either by transmutation of the
estate, as by fine, feoffment, common recovery etc. or out of the estate of the
owner of the land, as by bargain and sale, by Deed indented and enrolled, or by
Covenant to stand seized to uses upon good consideration: And therefore a First
in respect of the manne^ of raising it, and the several ways whereby uses may
be raised.
Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery may be had of land to the use and intent, that
either of the parties thereunto or others shall have it for any time or estate;
and by this means what uses and consequently what estates a man will may be
raised and created: And in these cases the Conusor, Feoffor, or Recoveree may
appoint the use of the same Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery to whom he will,
without any respect of marriage, money, kindred, or the like; for in this case
his will guides the equity of the estate. Or if a man make Dyer 186.
a Lease to A for life to the use of B for life; this is a good use and estate
in B during the life of A. Or if a man by bargain Coo. 6. 68.
and sale for good consideration sell his land to another; hereby the use will
rise according the estate bargained and sold unto the Bargainee: but in this
case if it be an estate of Freehold, Dyer 155. Coo. 7. 36. 7. 40. 8. 9^. 4.
70. See Bargain and Sale.
as of Fee-simple, Fee-taile, or for life, that is sold; the bargain and sale
must be made by Deed indented and enrolled within six months after in some of
the Courts at Westminster, or in the Cessions Rolls of the Shire where the land
lies, (except it be in Cities and corporate Towns where they use to inroll
Deeds) otherwise Coo. 2. 3^8. ^4.
no use will rise by it: but if it be an estate or term for years only that is
sold, there the use will rise well enough without any such matter. Or if a man
seized of land in Fee, covenant to stand seized of (...) to the use of his
wife, children, brethren, or other kinsfolk for life, in Fee-simple,
Fee-taile; or if one seized of land in Fee-simple covenant to stand seized of
it to the use of a woman he is to marry, or to the use of a woman his son or
other kinsman is to marry, or the like; hereby the uses and consequently the
estates will r^se accordingly. And in these cases there is no need it should be
by Deed indented etc. or that the Deed be enrolled, for uses may be raised by
Deed poll as well as by Deed indented. Also uses may be created (as some hold)
by word or parol-agreement Crompt. Iur. 61. 60. Plow. 301. 308. and the better
opini on of the Judges in Cor^ins case 38 Eliz.
as well as by Deed or writing: for it is said it has been adjudged, That if a
man say to his son and a wife that his son is to marry, that in
consideration of the same marriage they shall have the land to them two in
tail; that hereby a good estate tail will arise after the marriage; And that
where one does by word without Deed grant to his son and to his wife in tail
land in consideration of their marriage, that it was agreed by all the Judges
that the use did rise upon this agreement. Howsoever it is most safe in these
cases to do it by Deed and in writing, for Dyer 296. Plow. 22, seems to oppugn
this. And if a man make a Feoffment, levy a Fine, or suffer a Recovery to the
Litt. Sect. 462. 463. Coo. 6. 17.
use of his last Will, or to the intent to perform his last Will, or to the use
of such person and persons and of such estate and estates as he shall limit by
his last Will, and then afterward by his last Will declare the uses, these are
good uses, and this is a good way of raising of uses. So if a man devise his
land by Will to I S and his heirs to the use of I D and his heirs; it seems
that the use will See the Stat. 27 H. 8. of Uses Fitz. Devise 22.
rise to I D and his heirs by this means. And if a man by a verbal agreement
in consideration of money or the like sell his land to another, or agree and
promise that the bargainee shall have it Dyer 229.
for any time, howsoever that hereby no use nor estate will arise (if it be a
Freehold that is sold) within the Statute, because it is not by Deed indented
etc. yet it seems a good use will arise at the Common Law, and that the
Bargainee shall have relief in equity for his purchase. The second thing
whereunto respect must Coo. 1. 122. 127. 115. Plow. 2 8. Dyer 8. 263.
be had, is to the persons trusted, or to him to whom the conveyance Conscience.
is made; for to every good use there must be a person ^eised Secondly in
respect of the persons trusted and what pers^ns may not be seized to the use of
another, but to their own use.
to use, and he must be a person capable of such a Seisin. And for this it must
be known that any sole person that may make an estate to himself, may make an
estate to other uses. Al^o a man may be seized of his own land to other uses,
as in the case of a covenant to stand seized to uses. But the King, or any body
corporate, Re^olved in Doctor At^^s case 44. Q. Co. B.
alien born, or p^r^on attaint, cannot be seized to other uses no more by an
original Feoffment to use, then when they come by the land in use at the
second hand; in which case (as has been showed) neither such Persons, nor
disseisors, abators, or intrudors, or Lords of villains, or by Escheates, shall
be seized to other uses; but in all these cases the uses are void, and the
parties shall hold the land to their own uses, or to the uses of the feoffors
etc. and not to the use of Cestuy que use. And a bargainee of land for valuab^e
consideration Dyer 155. Litt. Broo. Sect. 10.
cannot be seized of the land to any other use but his own. Coo. 1. 136
The third thing to be respected is the Cestuy que us; for to every good
Thirdly in respect of the persons for whom the trust is, or the Cestuy, que use.
use, as there must be a person seized to use, so there must be a person to
whose use he is seized, and he must be capable also. And for Broo. Mortmai^e 37.
this it must be observed that any man that is capable of an estate directly
and immediately to himself, is capable of the same estate by way of use: but
if the use be limited to a Corporation, there must be a license had; otherwise
it will be an alienation in Mortmaine. And if future uses upon Contingences be
limited to such See before.
persons as are not in being, these uses howsoever they are good at the
Common Law, yet they are not good within the Statute, neither does the Statute
execute them at all until they come in 12 H. 7. 27. ^0 Ed. (...).
possession. And if a Feoffment be made to I S and his heirs to the use of the
Parishioners of Dale; this use is void, for they are incapable by this name;
and it shall be to the use of the Feoffor. The fourth thing to be regarded is
the estate of him that does Fourthly in respect ^f the est^te and p^ssession of
him that does create the use.
raise the use in the land whereof the use is raised; for howsoever the Tenant
in Fee-simple of land may create what uses he will in Fee, for life, or years
upon it, and such uses are good; and the Tenant in tail, or for life may
perhaps grant their land for their own lives to the use of a third person;
Hill. 38. Eliz. Co. B. Curia. Coo. 2. 52. Pasche 13. Ia Co. B. Seignior
Sarversus Smith.
Yet if a Tenant in tail for good considerations covenant to stand seized to
the use of himself for life, and after of his eldest son in tail; no use
will rise by this Covenant. So if Tenant in tail of an Advowson in gross
grant it by Deed to one and his heirs to the use of himself for life, and
after to the use of another in ^ee; this grant is void by the death of the
Tenant in tail. Coo. 10. 96
And if such a Tenant in tail bargain and sell his land by Deed indented and
enrolled; hereby the bargainee has an estate discendible to his heirs, but
determinable upon the death of the Tenant in tail ^ Yelverton^ case 37. Q. B.
R.
And if one covenant by Indenture to stand seized to the use of B of White Acre
which he has not then, but he does afterward purchase it; by this no use will
rise. And if one that has but a term of years grant it to I S to the use of
himself for life etc this is no good use within the Statute, but a Chancery
trust only. The fifth thing to be respected, is the estate of him that does
take Dyer 369.
by the conveyance out of which the uses are derived: for howsoever Fi^^ly, in
respect of the est te and possession of him that does ^ke by the conveyance.
where a man does grant in Fee-simple to another and his Coo. 2. 78.
heirs, he may limit what uses he will upon this estate; and if a man make an
estate for life to another, he may limit an use Coo. super Litt. 1^.
thereupon; yet if a man make a gift in tail to another, he can limit no use
thereupon. And therefore if one grant his land to I S and the heirs of his body
to the use of I S and his heirs in Fee, this limitatiom of use is void, and I S
has hereby an estate in Tail. Trin. 14. Ia. B. R. Adjudged Couper and
Franklins case.
And if a Feoffment be made to I S to have and to hold unto him and the heirs
of his body to the use of him his heirs and assigns for ever; this use is
void. Dyer 169. Cromp. Iur. 53. Litt. Broo. Sect. 284.
And where one does bargain and sell land for money (in which case the law does
make an express use) no other use can be appointed. And therefore if A for
money bargain and sell land to B and his heirs to the use of A for life, and
after of B in Tail, and after of A in Fee; all these uses are void, for a use
cannot rise out of a use. So if A make a Lease to B for years rendering Rent, To
have and to hold to the use of the Lessor; this use is void as being against
reason also. And if a Feoffee to use before the Statute of uses, had bargained
and sold the land to one who Dyer 155. Coo. 1. 136. 137.
had notice of the former use: no use had been made hereby; for there might not
be two uses in being of the same land at one time. And if A enfeoffe B to the
use of C and his heirs, with proviso that if D pay to C 100l. that C and his
heirs shall stand seized to the use of D and his heirs, this last use is void;
for the use must arise out of the estate of the Feoffee, and not out of the
estate of the Cestuy que use. The sixth thing whereunto respect must be had, is
the cause or S^ixthly i^ res^ect of the cause or con^^ ^eration of it, and what
shall be a ^ufficient consideration to raise or alter a use, Or not.
consideration: For howsoever in ca^es where uses pass by way of transmutation
of possession, as by Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery there Coo. 1. 176
the consideration is not at all material; for he that does make the estate,
may appoint the use to whom he will without any respect to marriage, kindred,
money, or other thing; for in this case his own will and consideration guides
the use and equity of the estate: yet in Bargains acd Sales, and Covenants to
^and seized to uses, it is otherwise: for there considerat^on is so necessary
that nothing will pass, neither will any use rise without a Consideration, i.
e. some matter that may be a cause or occasion meritorious which amounts Dyer
1^9^ Comp. ^ur. 62.
to a mutual recompense in Deed or in Law, which must be expressed or impli^d
in the Deed whereby the use is created, ur else supplied Ave^ment.
by averment and proof: ^or howsoever in this case an averment shall not be
allowed and taken against a Deed, that there was Dyer 146. Coo. 1. 176. 11 ^^5.
Dyer ^1^.
no consideration given when there is an express consideration upon the Deed;
yet when the Deed expresses no consideration, or says I for diverse good
con^^derations] or the like, there an av^rment of a good consideration given
shall be received, for this is an ave^ment that may stand with the Deed; and
without consideration Inrolment will not help. And therefore if one bargain and
sell his land to another by Deed indented and enrolled without any
consideration; it seems no use will rise by this to the Bargainee. 41 ^. Ad
judged.
So if one [for diverse good causes and considerations or for diverse great and
valuable considerations] bargain and sell his land to another, or covenant to
stand ^eised of his land to the use of another that is not of his kindred; no
use will rise by this, unless it be proved that money or something else was
given for it. But if a man by Deed in consideration of money, as [in
consideration of the sum of 100l. to Plow. 301. Brao. Fait. Inroll. 9. Doct.
and St. 99 Cromp. Iur 60. 61. Dyer ^0.
him paid, or in consideration of a competent sum of money to him paid or
otherwise promised to be paid, or in consideration of other land, or of giving
of counsel, or the like] bargain and sell or by such like words grant his land
to another in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for life, or years; in these cases the use
will arise to the bargain well enough. And therefore if I covenant with B that
when he does Cromp. Iur 61.
infeoffe me of White Acre, I will stand seized of Black Acre to the use of him
and his heirs and he does infeoffe me accordingly; in this case the use of
Black Acre will rise to B, and he and his heirs shall have it according to the
agreement. f So if I agree with my Lessee for years, that if he pay me 100l.
within his term, that I will stand seized of the land to the use of him and his
heirs, and he ^ Broo. Exposition of words 44.
do pay me the 100l. accordingly; in this case the use will rise, and he and
his heirs shall have it a^cording to the agreement. So if I covenant that my
son shall marry the daughter of A, and A promise to give me a 100l. for the
marriage portion, and I covenant that i^ the same marriage do not take effect,
I and my heirs will stand seized of the land to the use of A and his heirs
until the 100l. b^ paid; in this case a good use will rise of the land
accordingly if the marriage do not take effect; But in all these and such like
cases, the covenant must be by Deed indented, and it must be enrolled;
otherwise no uses will arise. And when the Deed is enrolled it shall take
effect as from the beginning by relation to avoid all intervenient estates and
charges whatsoever; And in like manner Relation.
Plow. 302. ^^H. 7. 20.
it is if one for no cause, or for no consideration, as [because he is of his
anc^ent acquaintance, or because there has been entire love or great
familiarity between them, or because he has been his chamber-fellow,
school-^ellow, or fellow servants, or because he has done him good service, or
because he was his Master and taught him, or to the end that he may pay his
Debts and Legacies and discharge his Funerals, or for diverse good causes and
considerations] if one for any of these or any such like cause and
consideration covenant with another that he will stand seized of his land to
the use of that other and his heirs, or that he and his heirs shall have the
land etc. by this covenant whether it be enrolled or not, no use at all will
rise. So if one covenant to stand seized to the use of I S (who is his Dyer 374.
Bastard son) and his heirs; no use will arise hereby: And yet perhaps upon
such a Covenant as this, whereupon no use Covenant.
nor estate does arise, an Action of Covenant may lie^^ Bu^ Coo. 7. 11. 10.
143. 1. 83. Plow. 301. Litt. Broo. Sect. 284. Coo. 1. 254.
if one [in consideration ^f ^^ure, kindred, blood, (...) with ones self, or
any of ^is (...) payment of debts or the like cause] or without any such
exprese consideration at all, Covenant to stand seized to the use of himself,
his wife, children, brothers, sisters, or cousins, or their wives; these are
good considerations, and the uses and estates thereupon thus raised and made,
are good: And therefore if one covenant by his Deed without expression of any
consideration to stand seized of his land to the use of himself for life, and
after of his wife for life, and after of his child in Tail, or for life, and
after of his brother in Tail, or for life, or in Fee, or in any such like
manner; these uses will rise and the estates will be well made hereby
accordingly. So if I agree with Plow. 301. ^r^o. Feoffment al. use^, 54.
another, that if he marry my daughter, that from the time of the marriage,
they shall have my land to them and their heirs; in this case, and by this
agreement, if he do marry my daughter, they will have my land according to the
agreement: So if I being about to marry with a woman, covenant with I S, to
stand seized of my land to the use of my self for life, and after to the use
of the woman I am to marry for her life, and after to the use of the heirs of
my body begotten on her; these are good uses and estates that are made by this
covenant: But here by the way, this difference Curia Trin. 10. Car. B. R.
Hoskins case.
must be observed where a man does Covenant in consideration of a marriage to
be had, to stand seized to use, and the marriage does not take effect, there no
use shall arise: So also if the parties disagree at their age of consent: and
so was it held in the Lord Harberts case: But where one does covenant to make a
Feoffment, or levy a fine to such uses, and the Feoffment is made, or fine
levied accordingly, there notwithstanding the marriage does not take effect,
yet the use shall arise; for there he is in by the fine or Feoffment, in which
case there needs no consideration. And therefore if A covenant with B, that in
consideration C is his kinsman, and in consideration of a marriage to be had
between C and E he will make a Feoffment and other assurances to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to C and E, and the heirs of their two
bodies, and after assurances are made accordingly by F^ne or Feoffment, but
they do not intermarry, but marry others; in this case notwithstanding E shall
have a Moity of the land. So if I covenant (in consideration of the love I
bear to my wife) to stand seized to the use of Coo. 7. 40. 11. 24. Dyer. 374.
her and her heirs of my body upon her begotten, and after to the use of my
brother: hereby the use will rise to my brother also, albeit he be not within
the express consideration. So if one covenant with his two sons for the love
he does bear to them, to stand seized of his land to the use of himself for
life, and after of his wife for life, and after of his two sons in tail one
after another; in this case the consideration is sufficient to raise the use to
the husband and wife also. So if one (in consideration Plow. 307.
of the love he does bear to his brother) does covenant to stand seized to the
use of his brother, and the wife of his brother for life, or in tail; in this
case the consideration is sufficient to raise the us^s to them both. So if I
covenant (in consideration of the marriage of my son with the daughter of
another) to stand seized to the use of my self for life, and after of my son
and his wife in Tail; these are good uses and will rise accordingly. If I
covenant with I S to stand seized to the use of him, his Executor Plow. 307.
Dyer 1^4.
etc. (he being none of my kindred) for twenty years, and after to the use of
my son in Tail; in this case, the use will not rise to I S, but it will rise
to my son well enough. For albeit the consideration of money given by one,
may be a consideration to all the estates; yet the consideration of blood etc.
is singular and will raise the use of that only to which it goes: But if I
covenant with B in consideration of the marriage of my son with the daughter
of B to stand seized to the use of R (a stranger) for life, and after to the
use of my son and his wife in Tail; in Inrolment.
this case, the use shall rise to R, albeit he be a stranger, and that for the
supportance of the remainder, which cannot be without a particular estate: and
in all these and such like cases, no inrolement of the Deed is necessary. If I
(in consideration of 10 l. given to me by my son,) covenant with him to stand
seized of land to Coo. 11. 24. 25. 7. 40.
the use of him and his heirs; in this case, no use will rise without
inrolment by the employed consideration, because there is an express
consideration, Et expressum facit cessare tacitum. And yet if I covenant, that
in consideration that I S is my son, and has paid me 10 l. that I will
stand seized Ma^^els case Trin. 3 ^ac. B. R. Broo. Feoffment al use 15. Plow.
Manrels case 4.
of land to the use of him and his heirs; in this case, the use will arise
without inrolment. And if I covenant in consideration of 100 l. and of a
marriage, ^o stand seized to the use of my self for life, and after of my
son in Tail; hereby the use is raised, and the possession charged without
inrolment. So also where a Feoffment is made, fine levied, or recovery
suffered, and no use declared Coo. 1. 24. D^^t. and St. 97. 99. 101.
thereupon; and the same is without any consideration of fine or rent; by this
the use is no^ changed, for it does result to the Feoffor, Conusor, and
Recoveree, and he has the (...) as he had it before; but if in these and such
like cases, there be but a p^^y o^ a penny worth of consideration given, or any
rent reserved upon the Feoffment; the use will rise well enough to the ^^off^e
etc. And if any Tenure be created, as where a gift in Tail, Lease for life or
years in made; in these cases, albeit there be no consideration given, yet the
use will rise well enough to the Donee or Leassee, and especially, if any rent
be reserved, for that is a kind of consideration: But if a Leassee for years
grant over his term to another without any consideration at all, it seems by
this no use at will ^ise to the Grantee, and therefore that the Grantee shall
hold all it to the use of the Grantor; sed Quaere. The seventh thing whereunto
respect is to be had, is the manner and form of words used in the Seventhly,
in respect of the manner and ^rame of the words used in the raising of uses,
and what manner of uses may be made, or not.
making and raising of uses, wherein there is much regard to the mind and
intention of parties: For if one covenant in consideration Coo. 3. 91.
of 20 l. paid him by I S, to stand seized of land to the use of I S and his
heirs: or if one covenant that I S and his heirs shall have his land; if this
Deed be enrolled, this is a good bargain and sale to raise the use, and will
do it as well as when it is made by the words [bargaine and sell.] So if one
for good consideration by words Coo. 2. in Sir Rowland Hay wards case. Wards
versus Lambert. Co. B. Pasche 37 Eliz.
of Demise and Grant, make a Lease of his land for a term of years; hereby the
use will rise to the Leassee as well as if the Lease were made by the words,
bargain and sell, Et sio de similibus. And yet if one by words of bargain and
sell, convey his land to his son, Inrolment.
no use will arise by this, except there be money paid, and the Deed be
enrolled. And if one in consideration of money grant his land to his son, or
any other by the word [enfeoffe;] no use will rise by this, unless Livery of
Seisin be made thereupon, because the intent of the parties in these cases does
appear to be to pass it in another manner: And if in the last case Livery of
Seisin be made, Resolved in Styles case 3^ Eliz.
then the use shall be guyded by Law, that is, if nothing be given, it shall be
to the use of the Feoffor, and not amount to a limitation of use to the son.
21 H. ^. 18. Plow. 308, 301. Broo. Feost mental use, 16.
If one covenant with his son, that his land shall remain, or that his land
shall descend to him; this is a good covenant to raise the use according to the
limitation. And yet if one covenant with his son upon his marriage, that his
land shall remain, revert, or descend to his son in Fee, or in Fee-Taile; by
this no use will be raised, because it is so incertaine; but perhaps this may
amount to a covenant, whereupon the son may have an Action of Covenant. If I
covenant for me and my heirs, that Covenant.
I and my heirs and all others that are seized, shall be thereof seized to
the use of etc. this is a good covenant to raise the use, albeit it be in words
of the future tense. If I covenant with my Dyer 374.
eldest son and strangers to convey my land to the same strangers to the use
of my self for life, and after of my son in Tail etc. and I grant by the
Deed, that the said persons seized of the said land, shall be from thence
seized to the said uses, and none other use, and no other conveyance is made;
it seems this is sufficient to raise the use: And yet if I be seized of land
in Fee, and Covenant with I S, that A B and C D and their heirs, shall stand
and be seized of this land to the use of etc. it seems, this is not a good
covenant to raise the uses. If a Feoffment or other conveyance Coo. 1. 120.
be made to the use of the Feoffor and the heirs of his body, on the body of M
the wife of S T, and for default of such issue, to the use of him and the heirs
of his body of S the now wife of W K, and for default of such issue, then to
the use and performance of his last Will for 10 years immediately after his
death, and after the term ended, to the use of the Feoffees and their heirs
during the life of W (eldest son of the Feoffor) and after his death to the
use of the first issue male of the body of the Feoffor lawfully begotten, and
the heirs of the body of such first issue male, and for default of such first
issue male to the second issue male etc. [in the same manner;] these are good
limitations of uses. So if a use be limited to I S for life without impeachment
of waste, and after to the use of Coo. 1. 90.
B and C, their Executors and Administrators for the term of twenty years, and
after to the use of C and the heirs males of his body etc. these are good
uses. So if a use be limited after this manner, Coo. 6. 18. Lit. Sect. 462. 403.
viz. to the use of a man's last Will and Testament, or to the use of such
person and persons, and of such estate and estates as he shall limit, and
appoint by his last Will and Testament; or to the use of such person and
persons, or to such uses and purposes as he shall by any writing under his hand
and seal declare and appoint; these are good limitations. If I covenant with
another in consideration of Coo. 1. 176.
blood etc. that I will stand seized of my land to the use of such of my
sons, or such of my cousins as the Covenantee shall name; in this case, after
a nomination made, the use will rise well enough. But if I (for and in
consideration of 10l. or the like good consideration) Incertain^y.
covenant to stand seized of land to the use of such persons as the Covenantee
shall name; in this case, albeit the Covenantee do nominate some of my
cousins, or blood, yet no use will rise by this for the incertainty of it. If a
Feoffment or other conveyance be to the use of I S and his heirs, provided
that if the Foeffer pay 10l. at such a day, that then it shall be to the use of
the Feoffer and his heirs; this is a good limitation, and the use will rise
accordingly. A use may be limited to a woman durante viduitate sua, and this
Coo. 4. 3.
is good.

If a man be seized of two Manners, and covenant to stand Coo. 11. 23.
seized of the same to the uses following, viz. of the one to the use of the
Covenantor for his life, and after to the use of his wife for life, and after
to the use of his eldest son in Tail etc. And for the other Manor, to the
use of his second son in Tail etc. these are good limitations, and the uses
will rise accordingly.

If a man seized of land in Fee agree with another, that a Fine Coo. 2. 69. 70.
shall be levied of it, and that the same shall be to the uses following, viz.
that I S (the Conusor) shall have one yearly ^ent of 50 l. during his life to
be issuing out of the same land, and as touching the land charged with the rent
etc. to the use of I D (the Conusee) until default of payment of the said
yearly rent, and then to the use of I S and his heirs for ever; this is a good
limitation and the use will rise accordingly, Et sic de similibus.

If a Feoffment be made by I S to the uses in certain Indentures Coo. 10. 78.
Tripartite of the same date, and therein is declared that it shall be to the
use of A for life without impeachment of Waste, and after to the use of such
Farmo^, or Tenants to whom he shall demise any part of the premises for life,
or lives, or for any term of years, as in any such demise shall be limited
and appointed, and after to the use of the performance of the last Will of the
said L, and to the use of such person or persons severally to whom the said L
by his last Will and Testament shall appoint any estate, and after to the use
of etc. these are good uses, and the estates shall rise accordingly.

A use may be limited upon condition, and the condition may Coo. 4. 14.
be annexed to one of the uses, and not unto another.

If lands be conveyed to I S and the heirs of his body, to the Coo. sup^ L^^.
19.
use of I S and his heirs, or to the use of a stranger and his heirs; this use
will not rise in this manner. And yet if lands be conveyed to I S, and his
heirs, to the use of him and the heirs males of his body, and after to the use
of a stranger and his heirs; it seems this is a good limitation.

If one grant lands by Deed to husband and wife, To have and to Hill. 6. Car. B
R. A^ judge.
hold to the use of the husband and wife and of the heirs of their two bodies;
this is a good estate Tail by this limitation, albeit he do not say Habendum
to them and their heirs etc. but Habendum to their uses; but otherwise it were
if the use were limited to a stranger in this manner.

If lands be conveyed by I S to I D, to the use of I S, or to the Dye^ (...)
use of his wife for life, or to the use of any other for life, the remainder
to another in Tail or for life, the remainder to a third, his Executors etc.
for six months, and after the six months ended, to the use of a fourth and his
heirs; these are good limitations, and the estates will rise accordingly.

If a use be limited to the Conusee of a Fine, or a Recoveror in a Dyer 2^^.
Recoverie until he make a Lease for forty years, and after to the use of
the Recoverees or Conusors and their heirs; this is a good limitation and the
use will rise accordingly.

Contingent uses, or use, in posse may be created as well as uses in esse; and
therefore if lands be conveyed to the use of a man and the Coo. 1. ^^ C^^ case.
13^.
wife he shall afterward marry, or to the use of his first, second, or third
wife; or to the use of I S for life, and after to the use of the right heirs
of I D, and I D is then living; or to the use of I S for life, and after to the
use of him that shall be his first heir male, and the heirs of the body of
such heir male etc. all these and such like, are good uses; but they are uses
at the Common Law Righthly, in respect of the nature and quality of the ^^e.
still, and are not executed by the Statute until they come in esse. The last
thing whereunto respect is to be had, is the nature and quali^y of the use: And
herein it is to be known, that a man may at this day by act executed in his
life time, or by his last Will and Testament at his death, give his Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments Coo. 1. 26. 3. 131. 4. 113.
Charitable uses.
to any person or persons not corporate, and their heirs, for any religious,
charitable, or civil use as well as for any private use: And therefore a man
may so dispose of his lands for the finding of a Preacher, erecting or
maintenance of a School, relief and comfort of maimed soldiers, sustenance
of poor people, reparations of Churches, Highways, Bridges, discharging of
the poor Inhabitants of a Village of the common charges, to make a stock for
poor Laborers i^ Husbandry, and poor Apprentices, and for the marriage of
poor Virgins, or other such like uses, and these uses are not prohibited by
any Statute: And it is good policy upon every such Feoffment or estate to
reserve to the Feoffor and his heirs some small rent, or to set down some
small consideration: But these uses are not such uses as are executed by the
Statute of uses, neither are they to be resembled to the us^s aforesaid; for
in this case, if there be any mis-imployment of the lands, or breach of the
trust by the parties trusted, redress is to be had by the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper by a special course of proceeding. For which, see the Statutes of
39 Eliz. chap. 6. 43. Eliz. chap. 9. 7 Iac. chap. 3. But if any man have
heretofore given, Superstitious V^^s.
or heretofore shall give any Lands, Tenements of Hereditaments Stat. 15. R. 2.
chapter 5. 37. H. 8 chapter 4. 1. Ed. 6. chapter 14.
by act executed in his life, or by his last Will at his death to any person
singular, or corporate, in Fee-simple, Fee-Taile for life, or years, to the
intent or upon condition to maintain any superstitious use, as to find a
Chaplain, and have the service of a Priest to say Mass, or to have a Priest
or other man to pray for the Soul of any dead man in such a Church or other
place, or to have or maintain perpetual obites, lamps, or torches etc. to be
used at certain times to help to save the souls or men out of the supposed
Purgatory; all these and such like uses are void; and the lands that are so
given to such superstitious uses, are to be forfeited, and given to the King,
and he shall have them, and yet so that if there be any charitable use
intermixed with the superstitious use, and they may be distinguished, the King
shall have only so much as is given to the superstitious use, and not that
which is given to the charitable use also: For which, See Adams and Lamberts
case at large, Coo. 4. 104. Coo. 1. 175. 176. Dyer 109.
5. Declaration of Uses: And where a use of land may he declared upon any
Assurance, and ^^ a shall be said a suffien^ d^^laration of such a u^e, or not.


As touching the Declaration of Uses, i e. the manifestation or agreement of
the parties, to what uses and intents the Assurance made shall be, these things
are to be known: 1. That uses may be declared or averred on a Fine, Feoffment,
or recovery of land; but on a bargain and sale of land, no use may be declared
or averred, but what the Law does make. And upon a covenant of uses, no other
use may be declared or averred, but what is con^ained within the Deed. 2. Every
one may declare and dispose the use of land according to the estate that he
has in the land; for the Coo. 2. 57. Dyer 290.
declaration and disposition of the use does ensue the ownership of the land
sicut umbra sequitur corpus. And at this day the use does draw the land to it,
as the body or principal the shadow or accessory: And therefore the owner of
the land, or he from whom the land does move, ought to limit and declare the
use of the land; as if the husband and wife levy a fine of the land, whereof
he is seized in the right of his wife; the husband alone may declare the use of
this fine, and this declaration shall bind the wife, albeit her assent to the
limitation of the uses do not appear, if her disassent does not appear; but
in this case, it is most proper to have a declaration of the uses by the
husband and wife both; for she alone, because she is sub potestate viri,
cannot alone declare or limit any use; neither can the husband alone limit any
use against her good will, because he has not the estate of the land: And
therefore, if A and B his wife be seized of land in the right of his wife, and
she without the consent of her husband, covenant by Indenture with C and D, 14
Martii 14 Eliz that a fine shall be Husband and wife.
levied of this land, and that it shall be to the use of her self for life
without impeachment of waste, and after to the Conusees for their lives, to the
intent that they shall suffer I S to take the profits for his life with diverse
remainders over; and afterward, and before the fine levied, the husband alone
by another Indenture 31 Febr. 22 Eliz. (wherein the wife is named a party)
without the consent o^ his wife, does agree that a fine shall be levied to the
use of him and his wife, and after to the uses limited by the wives Indenture,
and after the fine is levied accordingly; in this case, albeit the variance be
in one particular only, and the limitations in all the ^est of the uses and
estates do agree, yet all the same limitations by both Indentures are void,
and the use upon the conveyance is left to construction of Law, and therefore
shall be to the wife and her heirs for ever: And yet if the husband and wife
agree in the limitation of the uses for part of the land, and differ in the
rest, the limitations for so much as they agree in are good, and void for the
residue^ And in these cases where the declaration is good, the wife and her
heirs shall be bound by it. So if two Joynt-tenants are, Joint tenants.
and they, or two others having several estates join in a Fine, and one of
them declare the use in one manner, and the other does declare the use in
another manner; this declaration is good for either of their parts; for the
declaration shall be governed according Infant.
to their estates. And if an Infant, or a man de non sane memory does declare
the use of a fine levied by him, this declaration De no^ sane memo^^e.
is good and shall bind him so long as the fine shall continue in his force. 3.
This declaration of Uses may be made either by Deed indented (which is the
most usual and safe way,) or by Deed Poll; As where the parties do by such a
writing agree Coo. 2. 73. 5. 2^^
that an Assurance passed, or to be passed, shall be to such and such uses; As
that a fine shall be levied by such a time, and that it shall be to the use of
one for life, another in Tail, and another in Fee. Or it may be made by a
verbal agreement without any writing at all; as where an agreement is so had,
and made between two or more, that a fine, or Recovery shall be had, and it
shall be to such and such uses, and the same is had accordingly; in this case,
this is a sufficient declaration being proved; but it is not safe in these
cases to depend upon slipper memory. 4. This declaration by Coo. 2. 69. 70. 6.
^7, 63. Dyer 290. Coo. 7. ^0. Coo. 9. 8. Dyer 136.
word or writing, may be made before, at, or after the time of making the
Assurance: and therefore one may covenant or agree that I S shall recover
against him, or that he will levy a fine, or make a Feoffment to I S of such
land, and that the same shall be to the use of etc. And if one make a
Feoffment, he may declare the uses of it at the same time, and that within the
same, or in another D^ed at his pleasure: And if the Assurance be past, and no
declaration of uses had before, or at the time of passing it, a declaration may
be subsequent. viz. That the same Assurance was and shall be, and the
Recoverors etc. shall stand and be seized to such and such uses; for an
Indenture subsequent may direct and declare the uses of a Fine or Recovery
precedent. But herein these diversities are to be observed; when precedent
Indentures are made to direct the uses of a subsequent Assurance, and after the
Assurance is made accordingly; there Averment.
no Averment shall be taken by word, that the same Assurance was to other uses
then are declared by the Indenture: But against an Indenture subsequent,
declaring the uses of an Assurance precedent, an Averment may be taken, that
there were other uses expressed and limited, before or at the time of the
Assurance, then are contained in the Indenture. If a precedent Indenture be
made to direct the uses of a subesequent Assurance, when the Assurance comes,
the land is bound, and the Conus^r or Recoveree cannot by any act of his, after
the Recoverie had, charge or avoid it; but if the declaration be subsequent,
if in the interim, between the Assurance had, and the declaration of the uses,
the Conusor or Recoveree sell, give, or charge the land to others; this
subsequent declaration will not subvert the mean estates, charges or
interests, unless it can be otherwise proved, that by a certain and complete
agreement of the parties, the Assurance was had and made to these uses. 5. When
the agreement for the limitation of uses is precedent, whether it be by
writing or word, it is but directory and does not bind the estate until the
same. Assurance be afterward had, and therefore by a new agreement or
declaration made in the same manner as the former, viz. in writing, if the
former be so, and between the same parties either before, or at the time of the
same Assurance passed, new uses may be made and the former uses changed; but
when the same Assurance is pursued accordingly, and no intervenient alteration
is made, it shall be expounded to be to the same uses, and shall bind the
parties, and no naked Averment shall be received of any latter or other
agreement contrary to the Indentures. 6. The declaration of the uses must be
certain, and that especially in three things; in the persons to whom, in the
lands etc of which, and in the estates by which the uses are declared; and if
there want certainty in either of these, the declaration is not good; and it
must be complete of it self without any reference to Indentures, or other
writings to be made afterward; for then it is but an imperfect communication,
and no complete declaration. 7. Where an Indenture precedent is to limit the
uses of a subsequent Fine or Recovery, and it is not pursued in some
circumstance of time, person, quantity, or the like; yet if no other new mean^
agreement may be proved, the Assurance shall be in judgment of Law to the uses
contained in the same Indenture; but if the variance be in these particulars,
and the form of the Indenture be not pursued, there an Averment without writing
may be taken, that the fine or other Assurance was to other uses then are
contained in the Indenture; and if none such can be made, then it is left to
construction of Law. And therefore if A be seized of diverse Manors in Fee, and
by his Indenture dated 10 Martii. 21 Eliz. does covenant with B and C, that he
before the end of Trinity Term next Will by Fine or other Conveyance assure one
of these Manors to them, and that the same Assurance shall be to the use of A
and E his wife, and of the heirs of A, and the 28th day the Deed is enrolled;
and the 29th day of the same month, he does by another Indenture Covenant with
the same C and D to convey all the same Manors to the same C and D before the
Annuntiation next, and that the same Assurance shall be to the use of A, and
the heirs males of his body, and for default of such issue, to the use of
diverse others in remainder and by this Indenture does covenant, that if he
shall not sufficiently convey this land by the day, that he will stand seized to
the same uses etc, and no Fine is levied by the end of Trinity Term, but the
17th of September following, a note o^ a Fine is acknowledged to B and C, and
the heirs of B, of the land within the first Indenture; and the 18th of the
same month, another note of a Fine is acknowledged to C and D of the same, and
other land in the last Indenture, and both these Fines are entered in Octabis
Mi^h. following; in this case, these Fines cannot be directed and declared by
both Indentures, and therefore it seems the declarations are void.

As touching Averment of Uses; i. e. the proof of uses by witnesses, 6.
Averment o^ V^es; and ^^ere a use ^^ and may be
Coo. ^. ^. 5. 2^, 25. Doct. and St. 95. Coo. 2. 57.
these things are to be known, that where any use is expressed upon a Charter
of Feoffment, no other use contra or preter the use which is expressed shall be
admitted. But in cases of Fines and Recoveries averred upon any assurance; And
what shall be said a sufficient averment, or not.
wherein no uses are expressed, other uses then what Law construction will make
may be showed and proved to be agreed upon, and the same assurances shall be to
such uses as by proof shall be made to appear to be the intent of the parties:
As if a man and his wife sell her land for money, and after levy a Fine to the
vendee and his heirs; in this case it may be averred it was for money, and this
shall carry the use to the Vendee without any declaration of use, which
otherwise would result to the woman and her heirs: and yet if a Fine be with a
Grant and Render, no averment to prove it to be to other uses then what are
contained in the Fine shall be received. And where the uses of a Conveyance be
declared by Coo. 9. 8.
Indenture before, or at the time of the same Conveyance, no averment shall be
received of any other uses then what are contained in the Indenture: But if the
Indenture of declaration be subsequent, there an averment lies and shall be
received that there were other uses agreed upon at, or before the time of the
conveyance made. And where an agreement is made to levy a Fine, or suffer a
Recovery, Coo. 5. 26.
before, or at a time certain, and that it shall be of such and such lands and
to such and such persons; and after it falls out the Fine, or Recovery is not
had by that time, or not of the same land, or not between the same persons; in
these cases an averment may be had of other uses and of another agreement.

Where the uses of an assurance are certainly agreed upon and 7. To what use an
assurance of land shall be by construction of law, And how the Limitation of
the Uses of land by a Deed shall be construed.
Doct. and St. 25. Perk. Sect. 533. Coo. 1. 24. Dyer 18. Cromp, Iur. 62. Coo. ^
super Litt. ^7^.
declared between the parties thereunto, there regularly it shall be to such
uses as are declared and agreed upon and to none others. But if a conveyance be
made of land by Fine, Feoffment, or recovery, and no uses thereof declared and
agreed upon, the Law will limit and appoint the use according to equity and
conscience. And therefore if a man levy a Fine, make a Feoffment, or suffer a
recovery of land without any consideration; the Law will adjudge the use to be
in the Feoffor, Conusor, and Recoveree who does part with the land: And so if a
man make a Feoffment to the intent to perform his last Will, or to the use of
his last Will, or to such persons as he shall limit by his last Will; in all
these cases the use shall be in the Feoffor and his heirs whiles he does live
to dispose at his pleasure. And so if one make a Feoffment of land to Bakers
case Co. B. Hill 37 Bliz.
I S and his heirs, to the use of W S for 20 years, and limit the use no
further; in this case the residue of the use after the 20 years, shall be to
the Feoffor and his heirs: But if in these cases there be any consideration of
money or the like, though never so little given, or any rent reserved upon the
Feoffment, the Law will adjudge the use in the Feoffee, Conusee, or Recoveror:
And yet in that case also if other uses be expressed upon the Deed, it seems it
shall go to the uses expressed; as if A for 20l. paid by B, enfeoffe B and his
heirs to the use of C and his heirs. If the husband and wife levy a Fine of the
wives land without consideration, Coo. 2. 57. 58.
and without any declaration of use, the Law will adjudge this to be to the use
of the wife and her heirs; but if they sell her land for money, and after levy
a Fine thereof to the Vendee; this shall be to the use of the Vendee and his
heirs. And if a man be seized of land of the part of his Mother, and without
any consideration make a Feoffment in Fee of it; this shall be said to be to
his use in the same nature he had it before. So if two Jointenants be of land,
the one in Fee-simple, and the other but for life, and they without any
consideration levy a Fine of it, and make no declaration of use; the use shall
be to them of the same estate as they had before in the land. So if ^^ tenant
for life of land; and B in reversion or remainder, levy a Fine of this land,
generally, this shall be to the use of A for life, and to the use of B in Fee
afterward as it was before. So if A be seized in Fee of an Acre of ground and
he and B join together and levy a Fine of it to another without any
consideration; this shall be to the use of A and his heirs only.

If one make a gi^t in tail or Lease for life, or years, albeit Perk. Sect.
533.
it be without any consideration of Fine, or Rent, yet the Law will adjudge the
use in the Donee, or Lessee and not in the Donor or Lessor.

If one at this day by Deed indented bargain and sell his land Plow. 539. Coo.
1 87. ^et see Litt. Broo. 536. C^ompt. ^^r. ^7 2^ H. ^. 6. Co. ^. 110.
to another for money, and does limit no estate, but the Deed is Habendum to
him only, and not Habendum to him and his heirs, or to him and the heirs of
his body, or to him for life; howsoever in this case before the Statute of uses
was made, it was other wise, yet now the common received opinion is that by
this there does pass only an estate for life and not a Fee-simple.

If a Feoffment be made to I S and his heirs to the use of I D without any
more words; by this limitation I D has only an Coo. super Litt. 42. Dyer 169.
estate for life: So if a Feoffment be made to I S and his heirs to the use of
I D for ever, without saying [and his heirs;] hereby I D has only as estate
for life: And so of other uses the construction shall be according to the rules
of Law.

If a use be limited to I S and his heirs until A shall come from beyond the
Sea, and attain his full age or dye, in this case Pasche 3^ (...) B. R. the
Lord Morda^^ case.
if he come from beyond Sea, attain his full age, or dye, the use shall cease.

If one covenant to stand seized to the use of A his eldest son Hill. 17.
^ac. B. R. ^^ waye^ ca^e.
and the heirs males of his body, and after to the use of B his second son
in tail in the same manner, or according to the limitation to A; by this B has
an estate tail to him and the heirs males of his body.

If a Feoffment in Fee be made to the use of a man and his wife Coo. super
Litt. 28.
for their lives, and after to the use of their next issue male to be
begotten, in Tail, and after to the use of the husband and wife and of the
heirs of their two bodies begotten (they having no issue male then;) by this
the husband and wife are tenants in special Tail executed; and after they have
issue male, they are tenants for life, the remainder to the son in Tail, the
remainder to them in special Tail.

If one make a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, and after his decease
to the use of Alice whom he does intend to marry, Dyer 300.
until the issue he shall beget of her shall be of the age of 21 years, and
after the issue comes to that age, then to the use of the wife during her
widdowhood, and the husband dye without issue; by this the wife shall have an
estate at least during her widdowhood.

If I covenant with B that in consideration he will marry my daughter, that
from the time of the marriage I will stand seized to Coo. 1.
the use of my self for life, and after to the use of C a stranger and the
heirs males of his body, and after to the use of B and my daughter and the
heirs of their two bodies; in this case albeit the use limited to C the
stranger be void, yet it seems B and my daughter shall not have the land till
the death of C without issue, but that my heirs shall have it till that time.

If I covenant with B to stand seized to the use of my self for life, and
after my death to the use of C a stranger for the term of 20 years, Coo. 1. 155.
and after the end of the term to the use of my son in tail; in this case the
use limited to C is void, and my son after my death shall have the land: But
if the words of the covenant be [and after the end of 20 yeares] instead of
[and after the end of the term] my son shall not have the land until the 20
years be expired. See more in exposition of Deeds. Chap. 5.

All such uses as are not within, nor executed by the Statute of 8. Where and
how V^es of Land ^ay be extinguished and destroyed or suspended, or no^; And
where the ancient Uses shall be revived by the entry of the Feoffees, or not.
27 H. 8. but remain at the Common Law, may be destroyed, discontinued, Co. 1.
Chudleighs ca^e.
or suspended as uses before the Statute might have been. And therefore
contingent uses may be extinguished or suspended at this day. As it a man
seized of land in Fee have three sons A B and C, and he make a Feoffment of
his land to diverse Feoffees to the use of them and their heirs during the life
of A, and after to the use of the first son that A shall beget and the heirs
males of the body of such first son; or if a Feoffment be made to the use of
a man and the wife that he shall marry, or the like; if in these cases the
Feoffees make a Feoffment over before the contingent uses happen to be in esse,
as before A have any son, or the man take a wife etc. albeit it be to one
that have notice of these uses, yet the uses are destroyed for ever, and the
Feoffees cannot enter and revive them contrary to their own Feoffment: And if
in these cases the Feoffees before the contingent remainder vest be disseised,
hereby the uses are suspended; but then by the Reentry of the Feoffees the
ancient uses will be revived again: And therefore if the Feoffees release to
the Disseisor and so bar themselves of their entry, the uses are extinguished
and shall not be revived, and the party grieved has no remedy but in Chancery
against the Feoffees for breach of trust. And if the Feoffees in the first case
before dye, before A have any son born, the contingent remainder is gone: As
where a Feoffment is made to the use of the Feoffor for life, and after to the
use of the right heirs of I S in Fee, and the Feoffor dye before I S; in this
case the remainder is gone, for a remainder cannot be without a particular
estate no more of a use then of an estate made in possession: and such a
remainder must vest during the particular estate, or at least eo instanti when
the particular estate does end.

If a Feoffment be made to the use of I S and the wife he shall Coo. 1. 136
afterward marry, and of the heirs males of their bodies; and I S make a
Feoffment of this land to another before he take a wife; hereby the contingent
remainder is destroyed.

If A enfeoffe B and his heirs to the use of C and D his wife and Hill 2. Ca^.
Scaccar Adjudged.
the heirs of the survivor of them, and C makes a Feoffment to E and dies;
this Feoffment does destroy the contingent remainder.

When the estate out of which the uses do arise is gone, the uses Dyer 186.
are gone also; As if a Lease be made to A for his life to the use of B for his
life, and A dye; hereby the estate of B is gone.

Also uses of lands may be gone by Revocation, whereof See in the next part.

Provisoes and Powers of revocation of uses of lands are very Coo. super Litt.
237. 7. 11. 12. 10. 143. 1. 110. 173. 107. Dyer 372.
9. Where a power to revoke Uses of Land shall be good, And how they shall be
taken; And what Revocation by real ^n of such power shall be ^o ^d, And what
not.
frequent in voluntary conveyances (whether by Feoffment or otherwise) that
pass land by way of raising of uses, and are executed by the Statute of 27 H.
8. and the Jnheritances of many depend thereupon. As if a man seized of land in
Fee have diverse sons, and he covenant to stand seized of that land to the use
of himself for li^e, and after of his eldest son in Tail, and for want of
such issue, to the use of his second son in Tail etc. with a Proviso that it
shall be lawful for him at any time during his life to revoke any of the said
uses, and to limit and appoint other uses etc. Or if A by ^ndenture between him
and B his heir apparent an Infant, covenant with B for the advancement of his
blood etc to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after to the use
of his said heir apparent and the heirs males of his body, and after to the use
of his right heirs, provided that if A by himself or any other during his
life shall deliver or offer to B a Ring of gold to the intent to make void all
the said uses, that then the same uses shall be void, and he may limit new
uses: Or if A by Indenture covenant with B to stand seized to the use of
himself and his wife and his daughter for their lives, and after etc. provided
that if the said A during his life and after the debts mentioned in the
Schedule annexed to the Indenture shall be paid, shall be disposed to
determine, disannull, change, alter, enlarge, dimin^sh or make void the uses or
estates, or any of them, of the Premisse, or any part thereof, and by writing
indented under his Hand and Seal subscribed in the presence of three Witnesses
shall declare his mind to be so, that then the same uses shall be void; all
these and such like Provisoes being coupled with a use are allowed to be good
and not repugnant to the former estates. But in case of such a Feoffment or
other Conveyance whereby the Feoffee or Grantee is in by the Common Law, as
where A does enfeoffe B and his heirs to the use of B and his heirs, it is said
such a Proviso is merely repugnant and void. And as touching these Provisoes or
Revocations, these things are to be known; 1. These Revocations are favorably
interpreted, because many men's Inheritances depend upon it: And therefore he
that has this power, may revoke part of the uses at one time, and part at
another time; and the revocation of the old, may be made by the making of new
uses without any express revocation; And by the same conveyance whereby the
old uses be revoked, the new u^es may be created and limited, and then the
^onner uses do cea^e i^so facio by this revocation without any entry or claim:
As if one covenant to stand seized to the use of himself and his wi^ for their
^ives, and after to the use of A his daughter for the and after to the use of B
his daughter in Tail etc. p^ovided that if he shall be minded etc. he may by
writing etc. make void the same u^es, and declare the uses to others, and he
does make void the use to ^s wise at one time and no more, and after by a D^ea
does limit and appoint new uses of the whole by a new cov^nant to stand eis^d
to other u^es; these are good rev^c^tions; for there needs no real and
expres^e revocation of former uses, but the creating of new uses as in Law an
actual revocation of the old uses, as the making of a latter ^s t^so ^ucto a
revocation of a former Will. 2. The Provi^o must for the substance of it be
pursued in the revocation, and all incident circumstances thereof must be
observed, as sealing, subscription o^ names, witnesses, and the like, otherwise
the revocation will not be good. And therefore if the Proviso be, that if the
Covenantor shall be minded to revoke, and shall^d clare his mind by writing
indented under his Hand and Seal, delivered before three Witnesses, the uses
shall be void; in this case a revocation by word without writing, or by a
writing and not indented, or by writing indented and not under Hand and Seal,
or under Hand and Seal, and before two Witnesses only, is not good. And yet if
a Proviso be that Trin. 18. Ia. Co. B. Tib. ^ be^ and Leas case.
if the Covenantor shall at any time during his life by writing under his Hand
and Seal delivered before two witnesses revoke the same etc. the old uses
shall be void, and the Covenantor by his last Will and Testament in writing
under his hand and Seal before two Witnesses does give the land to another,
and make no express revocation of the former uses: this is a good revocation
in Law. If the Proviso be that if the Covenantor be minded at Coo. 8. 92^
any time during his life to revoke the same uses etc. and shall pay or tender
to A B 20^. in such a place; in this case tender of this 20s. in that place at
any time is not good, unless he happen to meet with A B at the place, for then
tender at any time is good; but otherwise the Covenantor must give notice to A
B what time he will tender the 20s. in that place, otherwise the revocation is
not good. If one be to marry his daughter to the son of another, man, and
they do mutually covenant to stand Trin. 18. Ia. B. R. Savill and sterlings
case.
seized of their lands to the use of their son and daughter with Proviso to
revoke the uses with the con^ent of the mothers, if they or either of them be
then living, and one of them dye; in this case a revocation by the consent of
the surviving mother is sufficient. 3. When the covenantor does make void such
uses by virtue of such a revocation, he is seized again of the land in
Fee-simple, Coo. i. 111. 112. 113. super Litt. 237.
as he was at first without any entry or claim. 4. This power of revocation,
whether it be present, as those before and most are, or future, as when they
are upon contingent, as if the Covenantor over-live I S or the like, when it is
reserved to the party himself that made the uses, may by his ^ine, or Feoffment
be utterly extinguished; As if he make a Feoffment, or levy a Fine of the land
whereunto the uses and proviso are annexed; by this the Proviso is extinct; And
yet so as if he make a Feoffment, or levy a Fine of part of the land only: this
shall extinguish his power but to that part only: But if the power be reserved
to a stranger, it seems the Fine or Feoffment of him that made it, will not
extinguish it. This power also when it is present may be extinguished by a
Release made by him that has the Release.
power, to any one that has any estate of Franktenement in the De^ea^ance.
land in possession, reversion, or remainder; or it may be avoided by
Defeasance whether it be present o^ future.

If one convey his lands to certain friends in trust, to the intent 10. Other
Trusts and Confidences or lands and of chattels ^^all and personal, The
na^ture of such Trusts, the duty of them that are trusted, and the remedy to
be^ had against them for breach of their tru^^
that they shall convey it to such persons as he shall set down in Cromp. Iur.
48. 59. 58. 54. Dyer 160. Fitz. Account. 122
his last Will and Testament; or if a man deliver money to a friend in trust to
purchase land for him and his heirs, to the end that he may have the profits
thereof for his life, and to the end it may be conveyed to them afterward: or
if a man deliver money to his friend to buy land for him that does deliver the
money in his own name; or if a man enfeoffe his friend and his heirs of land,
to the intent that he shall alien the land to whom I S shall appoint; or if
land be conveyed to me in Mortgage and I pay all the money, but I to prevent
the jointure of my wife, or for some such like cause name a friend joint
purchasor with me, and so the conveyance is made to us both; if in any of these
cases, or in any other such like case the friend trusted prove false, and do
not perform the trust, but turn the profits of the land to their own use, or
refuse to settle it according to the trust, or the like, the party grieved must
have his remedy in Chancery, for these are not Trusts or Uses within the
Statute, nor such for which there is any remedy at the Common Law; And in that
case where the land is settled to the intent that the friends trusted shall
settle it where I S shall appoint, if I S do not appoint how it shall be
settled, it seems the Feoffees shall have it to their own use.

And if a man give or grant his goods or chattels, as Leases for years or the
like to friends in trust to the use of himself for life, Cromp. Iur. 65. Dyer
369. Broo. Feofment al use 60. C^omp. ^^ur. 62. 45, 11 Ed 4. 2. 7 Ed^ ^. 29.
and after to perform his Will, or the like; these are such uses and trusts as
are not within the Statute of uses, and for the breach of which there is no
remedy at the Common Law but in Chancery only. So if an Obligation or Statute
be made to A B to the use of C D; this is a trust of the same nature; and if A
B release the Obligation without the consent of C D, or get the money into his
own hands, C D shall have relief in Chancery; And in all these cases and such
like cases, the general rules by which uses were governed at the Common Law
are still in force and to take place as those by which uses and trusts are now
for the most part governed. As 1. If there be any cause to sue for or about the
lands or goods wherewith the parties are trusted, as if they deny 7 Ed. 4. 29.
or delay to perform the trust, they must be compelled thereunto by suite in
Chancery. 2. The Cestui que use, or party for Cromp. Iur. 62. 63. 65. 11 Ed. 4.
24. Ed. 4. 37.
whom the trust is, cannot of himself dispose of the lands or goods, for the
property and interest in Law is in the Trustees; and if it be an Obligation or
Statute that is made to the use of another, Cestuy que use cannot release it,
but the Trustee must release it. 3. If the parry trusted so with lands, goods,
or chattels give, grant, or sell the same lands, goods, or chattels to one that
has knowledge of the same uses or trusts (as it is always pre^umed he has
where the trusts are expressed upon the same Deed, by which the lands, goods,
or chattels are given or granted) or if the things so given or granted, be
granted upon the same trusts, or to the same uses, or without any consideration
at all; in these cases he to whom the thing whereabout the trust is, shall have
the same thing upon the same trust and to the same use as he that did give or
grant the same had it. But in case where no trust or use is expressed upon the
Deed, the purchasor or buyer has no notice or knowledge of the use or trust,
and he gives a valuable consideration for the thing, there for the most part
the sale is good, and the party grieved thereby has no remedy but against the
party first trusted in Chancery; and the purchasor shall have and enjoy the
thing so bought to his own use for ever; but he that is the party trusted,
will be forced in Chancery to make the party grieved an amends in damages for
this breach of trust; And if there be any practice, packing, or combination
between the buyer and the seller in the matter, there perhaps the Suit may
hold against them both, and the buyer may be forced to restore the thing it
self. 11 Ed. 4. 8.
And yet if A enter into a Statute to B and C to the use of B, and A having
notice of this use does get a release from C: in this case it seems B must
have his whole remedy against C, and shall have no remedy against A. 4. If the
Trustor or Cestuy que use in these cases commit Felony etc. so that the things
if he had Broo. Feofment al use 3^.
the property of them were forfeit; in this case it seems that neither they
nor their Heirs, Executors etc. nor yet the Lord etc shall have them, but the
Trustees shall keep them for ever. 5. If the Cestuy que use or Trustors dye and
appoint how the 15 H. 7. 12. Cromp. Iur. 54.
same things shall be disposed of, the Trustees are bound to see it done; as if
the Trustor appoint it shall pay his debts, or provide Legacyes, the parties
trusted must take care it be so employed; and in this case the Debtees and
Legatees also may compel the Trustees in Chancery. 6. In all these cases
regularly Dyer 49.
the thing whereof the trust is, is in equity at the disposing of him that is
the Cestuy que use, unless he do otherwise appoint it, and if at his death he
make no disposition thereof it shall go to his Heir, Executor etc. 7. In all
these ^H 7. 11.
cases the Trustees shall have their reasonable allowance in Chancery for
whatsoever they have laid out about the land etc. in Suites or otherwise for
the profit of the Trustor. Out of all which may appear how dangerous it is for
a man to meddle with any lands, goods, or chattels so conveyed or settled in
trust, for the Cestuy que use or Trustors have no property in the thing, and
therefore they cannot sell or give it, and the Trustee has it but to another
use; And it is not safe therefore to deal with either of them alone, nor yet
indeed safe to deal at all in these cases, unless the buyer may have the
consent, sale, and assurance, or the Release etc. of the Trustors and Trustees
altogether: And if there be any woman Covert, or Infant within the Trust, it
is most of all dangerous. And if goods or chattels be given to, or to the use
of a Feme Covert, or Infant, 7 Ed. 4. 14. Fitz. Subpena. 5.
and certain friends are trusted therewith, if they do sell or give away
these goods or chattels contrary to the Trust, they must be sure to answer it,
if therefore they sell them, let them see that the money made thereof be as
beneficial, and be bestowed for the wife or children; for it seems it is not
sufficient in this case, that the money made thereof be paid to them.

FINIS.
The Table.
Acceptance. WHere it will bind, or not, chap. 14. numb. 5. 9. chap. 21. numb.
8.

Acquittance. What it is, and when it must be made, chap. 19. numb. 10. 11.

Administrator, See tit. Executor.

Administration. Where it is grantable, and by whom, and to whom it must be
granted, chap. 23. numb. 22. 23. 34. When it is revocable, numb. 35.

Agreement and Disagreement See Deed, chap. 17. numb. 5.

Alien. What Assurances he may make, and what Acts he may do, chap. 12. numb.
4. chap. 23. numb. 4.

Apportionment. Where it shall be, chap. 6. numb. 12.

Assent. Where it is needful to make a Legacy perfect, and when it is good,
chap. 23. numb. 15. 16.

Assets. What shall be Assets in the hands of an Executor, chap. 23. numb. 14.
39.

Assigns. How they may charge others or be charged themselves, chap. 7. numb.
6. 8. chap. 8. numb. 12. chap. 16. numb. 2.

Attainted persons. What Assurances they may make, and what Acts they may do,
chap. 2. numb. 6. chap. 23. numb. 4. chap. 12. numb. 4. chap. 9. numb. 4.

Atturnment. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 13. numb. 1. The
effect of it, numb. 3. When it is requisite, numb. 4. By whom and to whom it
must be made, numb. 5. 6. when, and how it must be done, number. 5. 6. chap. 9.
numb. 4. How it shall be taken, chap. 13. numb. 10. 11.

Averment. Where it shall be allowed, chap. 3. numb. 4. chap. 10. numb. 5.
chap. 14. numb. 4. chap. 23. numb. 5. 6. chap. 24. numb. 6. 5. 4.

Bargain and Sale. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 10. numb.
1. 2. the effect of it, numb. 3. When it is good, numb. 4. 5. How it shall be
taken, numb. 6. 7.

Bastard. What Assurance he may make, chap. 2. numb. 6. chap. 12. numb. 4.

Bona Notabilia. What this is, See chap. 23. numb. 21.

Claym or Entry. Where it is necessary, chap. 6. Numb. 13. By whom it must be
made, chap. 2. numb. 12.

Codicill. What it is, chap. 23. numb. 1.

Common Recoverie. What it is, and how many kinds there be, chap. 3. numb. 1.
2. The manner of suffering it, numb. 3. The use of it, numb. 4. When it is
good, and who shall be barred by it, numb. 5. how it may be avoided, numb. 7.

Tenants in common. See Joint-tenants.

Condition. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 6. numb. 1. 2.
chap. 16. 2. what things may be done on condition, chap. 6. numb. 3. chap. 23.
numb. 7. what words do make a condition, chap. 6. numb. 5. what is a good
condition, chap. 6. numb. 5. 7. Expounded, and how it must be performed, chap.
6. numb. 8. 9, 10. Who shall have advantage of it, chap. 6. numb. 12.
Discharged, chap. 6. numb. 15. Condition of Obligation. See Obligation.

Confirmation. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 18. numb. 1. 2.
The effect of it, numb. 3. 7. where it is needful, numb. 4. when it is good,
numb. 5. 6. How it shall enure, numb. 7.

Corporation. What assurances they may make, and what Acts they may do, chap.
2. numb. 6. chap. 12. numb. 4. chap. 9. numb. 4.

Covenant. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 7. numb. 1. 2. what
shall be said a good Covenant, numb. 4. chap. 5. numb. 10. chap. 6. numb. 5. 7.
chap. 14. numb. 4. chap. 23. numb. 4. Expounded, chap. 7. numb. 6. when it
shall be said to be broken, chap. 7. numb. 7. who may take advantage of it,
chap. 7. numb. 8. discharged, chap. 7. numb. 10. chap. 17. numb. 3.

Covin. Where it does hurt an Assurance or mar an Act done, chap. 2. numb. 6.
chap. 3. numb. 4. 7. chap. 4. numb. 5. chap. 23. numb. 27.

Deed. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 4. numb. 1. 2, 3. when
it is good, numb. 5. when it is good in part and void in part, numb. 7. chap.
15. numb. 4. how a good Deed may become void, ch, 4. numb. 6. Expounded, chapter 5.
chapter 2. numb. 7. chapter 16. number. 5. chapter 17. number. 6. 7. In the Premises, chap. 5.
numb. 15. In the Habendum, chap. 5. numb. 2. 15. In the reservation, chap. 5.
numb. 9. 10.

Defeasance. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chapter 22. number. 1. 2. what
may be done by it, and when it is good, cha. 20. numb. 7. chap. 22. numb. 2. 3.
cha. 18. number. 5. cha. 23. number. 9. cha. 24. number. 9. chapter 8. number. 3.

Delivery. What is a good delivery of a deed, chapter 4. numb. 5.

Debt. Where an action of debt lies, chap. 5. numb. 10.

Devastavit, See Executor.

Devise or Legacy. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 23. numb. 2.
when it is good, numb. 7. Devise of lands to sell, numb. 9. where being once
void it does afterward become good, numb. 11. 12. means to recover the thing
devised, numb. 17.

Duresse or Manasse. When an assurance shall be said to be made by Duresse or
M^nasse, and therefore void, chapter 4. number. 5. cha. 12. numb. 4.

Ecclesiastical Persons. What assurances they may make, and what Acts they may
do, chapter 9. number. 4. chapter 12. number. 4. chapter 14. number. 7 chapter 16. number. 3.

Election. Who shall have it, cha. 22. numb. 14. Entry, See Claim.

Equity. Where one may have relief in equity, for wrong done, chapter 24. number. 10.
8. chapter 6. number. 14 chapter 9. number. 4.

Escrow. How a Deed may be delivered as an ^scrow, chapter 4. number. 5.

Estoppell. Where it shall be, chapter 2. number. 6. 11. chap. 4. number. 4. 5. chapter 5.
number. 13. chapter 14. number. 4. 8.

Exception, See Deed.

Exchange. What it is, and the effect of it, chapter 16. numb. 1. 2. How it must be
made, and when it is good, number. 3. 8. Determined, numb. 6.

Executors and Administrators. What they are, and how many kinds of them there
are, chapter 23. number. 2. who may make or be made an Executor or Administrator, number.
18, 19, 20. where he may accept the Administration, and what shall be said an
acceptance, numb. 24. what he shall have, numb. 7. 13, 25. chap. 14. numb. 4.
chap. 10. numb. 4. His duty and office, chap. 23. numb. 27. How he shall be
charged, chap, 23. numb. 29. 37, 38. chap 7. numb. 6, 8, 9. chap. 21 numb. 6.
what Executors or Administrators may do together, or apart, to others, or one
to another, chap. 23. numb. 26. 30. 31, 35. chap. 12. numb. 4. chap. 17. numb.
5. chap. 17. numb. 9. what ^all be said a ^^evastavit in them, chap. 23. numb.
32. who shall be said to be an Executor of his own wrong, and how he shall be
charged, chap. 23. numb. 33.

Extinguishment. Where an estate, rent etc. shall be exting^^shed, chap. 2.
numb. 11. chap. 17. numb. 3. chap. 19. numb. 6. chap. 24. numb. 8. chap. 6.
numb. 15.

Feoffment. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 9. numb. 1. 2. The
nature of it, numb. 3. who may make it, and when it is good, numb. 4.

Fine. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 2. numb. 1. 2. The parts
of it, numb. 3. The order of levying it, number. 4. The operation of it, numb. 5.
when it is good, numb. 6. How it shall be taken, numb. 7. who shall be b^rred
by it, and in what time, numb. 8. 10. chap. 8. numb. 7. where it may be
avoided, and how, chap. 2. numb. 12.

Forseiture. How many ways a Tenant for life or years may forfeit his estate,
chap. 2. numb. 6. chap. 3. numb. 4. chap. 5. numb. 13. 14, 15. chap. 14. numb.
4. chap. 17, numb. 7. chap. 6. numb. 11, chap. 9. numb. 4. chap. 12. number. 4.

Gift What it is, chap. 11,

Grant What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 12. numb. 1. 2. Things
requisite to a good Grant, numb. 3. when it is good, numb. 4. chap. 2. numb. 6.
chap. 23. number. 7. what things are grantable, chap. 12. number. 4. Expounded, chap.
5. chap. 23. 7, 8. when once good and does afterward become void, chap. 15.
number. 1. when once void or voidable, and it does afterward become good, chap.
15. numb. 3. when it is good in part, and void in part, chap. 15. numb. 4. who
may avoid it, chap. 15. numb. 2. 5.

Habendum, See Deed.

Heir. What he shall have, and where and how he shall be charged, chap. 21.
numb. 6. ^hap. 23. number. 7.

Husband and Wife. What assurance the husband and wife together or apart may
make, and what Acts they may do, chap. 2. number. 6. 8. 10. chap. 3. numb. 5.
chap. 9. ^^ 4. 9. chap. 12. number. 4 chap. 1^. numb. 5. chap. 14. number. 6. chap.
16 number. 2. chap. 17, number. 5. chap. 19. number. 7. chap. 2. ^^m. 4. 7, 19, 26.
chap. 16. number 7. 8. chap. 24. number. 5.

Incertainty. Where it will hurt, chap. 14. number 4. chap. 23. number. 7. chap. 24.
number. 4. Indenture, See Deed.

Infant. What assurance he may make, and what Acts he may do to bind him,
chap. 2. number. 6. 10. chap. 3. number. 5. chap. 6. number. 11. chap. 8. number. 7. cha.
9. number. 4. 9. chap. 12. numb. 4 chap. 13. number. 5. chap. 14. number. 4. chap. 15.
numb. 5. chap. 16. number. 3. chap. 18. number. 5. chap. 19. number. 7. chap. 23. number.
4. chap. 24. number. 5.

Inrolment. Where it is necessary, chap. 10 number. 4. chap. 24. number. 4.

Joint-tenants or Tenants in Common. What assurances they may make together or
apart, chap. 9. number. 4 chap 10. number. 3. cha. 14. number. 4. chap. 17. number. 5.
chap. 18. number. 5. chap. 16. number. 3. chap^ 24. number. 5. chap. 12. number. 4.

Jointure. How a Jointure for a woman may be made by Fine, chap. 2. number. 6.
Legacy, See Devise.

Lease. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 14. number. 1. 2. when it
is good, number. 3. 4, 8, 9. chap. 7. number. 4. How it may be made by Fine, chap. 2.
numb. 6.

Limitation of Estates. See for this in Condition, in toto, and chap. 23. numb.
7.

Livery of Seisin. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 9. numb. 5.
6. the nature of it, number. 7. where it is requisite, number. 8. chap. 14. number. 4.
chap. 16, number. 3. chap. 17. number. 5. chap. 18. number. 5. How it must be made, and
when it is good, chap. 9. numb. 9. 10. How in shall enter, chap. 9. numb. 11.

Manasse, See Du^esse.

Misnaming, Mistake or Misrecitall.

Where it will hurt, chap. 5. number. 4. 5, chap. 12. number. 4. chap. 23. numb, 7.

Non est factum. Where this may be pleaded, chap. 4, number. 11.

Non sane memory. What assurances such persons may make, and what Acts they may
do to bind them, chap. 2. number. 6. 10. chap. 12. number. 4. chap. 13. number. 5.
chap. 15. number. 5. chap. 16. number. 3. chap. 23. number. 4. chap. 24. number. 5. chap.
9. number. 4.

Obligation. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 21. number. 1. 2.
when it is good, chap. 21. number. 3. chap. 4. number. 5. chap. 20. number. 3.
Expounded, chap. 21. number. 6. when it is forfeit, chap. 21. number. 9. Discharged,
chap. 21. number. 11. what conditions of obligations are good, and how they shall
be taken, and must be performed, chap. 21. numb. 4. 5, 7, 8, 9. 10.

Occupant. What it is, and where it shall be, chap. 5. numb. 15. chap. 23. number.
7.

Outlawed person. What Acts he may do, chap. 23. number. 4. chap. 12. number. 4.
chap. 9. number. 4.

Premises, See Deed.

Prerogative of the King. Against a common Recovery, chap. 3. number. 5. in taking
and making grants, chap. 9. number. 4. chap. 12. number. 4. To save a condition,
chap. 6. number. 12. In a condition, chap. 6. number. 7. In his possession, chap. 9.
numb. 4.

Probate of a Will. What it is, and how and before whom it must be made, chap.
23. number. 40. 41.

Rasure, See Deed.

Recital. Where it is necessary chapter 5. number. 4. 5.

Recovery. What it is, and how many kinds there are chap. 3. numb. 1. 2. The
manner of suffering it, numb. 3. The use and nature of it, numb. 4. when it is
good, and who shall be barred by it, numb. 5. avoided, number. 7.

Relation. Where and how it shall be, chap. 4. number. 5. 8. chap. 24. numb. 4.

Release. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 19. numb. 1. 2. The
nature of it, numb. 3. what may be released, and where a release is good,
numb. 4. 5, 6, 7. chap. 18. numb. 6. chap. 20. numb. 7. chap. 23. numb. 9.
chap. 24. numb. 9. chap. 8. numb. 13. chap. 6. numb. 15.

Revocation, See Testament and Use.

Sealing of a Deed. When it is good, chap. 4. numb. 5.

Statute. What it is, and how many kinds of it there are, chap. 20. numb. 1. 2.
The effect of it, numb. 3. The proceedings thereupon, numb. 4. when it is good,
numb. 3. what things are subject to execution thereupon, numb. 5. where one may
have a new execution, numb. 6. Discharged, numb. 7. where one shall have
contribution against another, being charged upon a Statute, number. 8.

Surrender. What it is, and how many kinds of it there are, chap. 17. number. 1.
2. The effect of it, number. 3. when it is good, numb. 4. 5. How it shall be
taken, numb. 6. 7. what may be surrendered, numb 8.

Tenant in Tail. What assurances he may make, and how he may bar his issues
and others chap. 2. numb. 8. 10. chap. 3. number. 5. chap. 14. numb. 5. chap. 15.
numb. 5. chap. 16. numb. 3. 7, 8.

Testament. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 23. numb. 1. The
parts of it, numb. 2. The nature of it, number. 3. when it is good, numb. 4. when
it is good at first, and void afterward; or void at first, and good
afterward, numb. 5. 6. expounded, chap. 23. numb. 8.

Trust and Confidence. For this, see chap. 24. numb. 10.

Vacat of a Deed. See chap. 4. numb. 5. 6.

Villain. What he may do, see chap. 23. numb. 4.

Use. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 24. numb. 1. 2. The
nature and original of it, numb. 3. when it is good, numb. 4. Expounded, numb.
7. Extinguished, numb. 8. Declaration of Uses, numb. 5. Power to revoke Uses,
numb. 9.

Usury. What contract shall be said to be usurious, and what assurances shall
be thereby void, chap. 2. numb. 6. chap. 4. numb. 5.

Warranty. What it is, and how many kinds there are, chap. 8. numb. 1. 2.
chap. 16. numb. 2. The effect of it, numb. 3. What words will make it, numb. 4.
To what it may be united, numb. 5. When it is good and binding, numb. 6. 7, 8,
9, 10. chap. 19. 6. chap. 23. 7. Expounded, chap. 8. numb. 11. Who may take
advantage of it, and against whom, chap. 8. numb. 12. Avoided and discharged,
numb. 13.

FINIS.

