OF THE FOUR LAST AND GREATEST THINGS: Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell.

The Description of the Happiness of Heaven, and misery of Hell, by way of
Antithesis.

WITH The way or means to pass through Death, and Judgment, into Heaven, and
to avoid Hell.

By WILLIAM SHEPHERD, Esquire.

Revel. 21. 7, 8. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, And I will be
his God. And he shall be my Son. But the fearful and unbelieving and
abominable, Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, and all Liars shall
have their part, in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson for Thomas Brewster, and are to be sold at his
Shop a little within Creed-lane, near the West end of Paul's, at the sign of
the three Bibles. 1649.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons
House of PARLIAMENT.
Worthy Gentlemen,
WHen the World was shaken by Adams sin, God secured it by the promise of his
Son. When Canaan was distressed by the Genesis 3. 15. Judge. 6.
Midianites, he sent his servant Gideon a Savior to it. Now England is
distracted, and her foundations out of course, he has raised you up (the
unwearied Worthies of our Nation) to repair the breaches, and settle the
foundations thereof. A work albeit very honorable; yet (as your selves have
very well experimented) very hardly accomplished. For wha^ from the rage of
professed adversaries, the inconstancy, ingratitude, ignorance, and wilfulnes
of seeming friends, blinded with their own unruly passions, whereby they have
foolishly mistaken the men and their meaning, Your selves have been sometimes by
the mutinous distempers of the common multitude brought into great peril of
destruction: those whom you have saved, and who for your safety ought to have
sacrificed themselves, being willing to have you destroyed and sac^^ficed. But
unsearchable providence (hitherto your Sanctuary amidst these perils) has
wheeled and driven on (though in somewhat a dubious method) your great Counsels,
through your adversaries attempts. And its often appearing for you and your
Armies (as from under a Cloud) does assure my self, and the many thousands that
love and honor you, that a work carried on with so many hands and hea^ts; so
much prayer life and spirit; so much faith and patience, cannot by the rage of
man (which in all times hitherto has praised Psalm. 76. 10.
God be disappointed of its end.

And now Right honorable, since this providence has given you, in appearance,
some hope of a little breathing time. I crave leave humbly to present you with
this small Treatise of the ^o^re last things, Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven:
wherein are plainly but profitably handled things of highest concernment, and
therefore well becoming men of choicest employments. I know your wisdoms and
piety need not be minded in whose presence you stand, whose part (in the
managing of the weighty affairs of the Math. 12 16.
Kingdom you act, to what strength you are engaged for all your glorious, and
never to be forgotten deliverances, Romans 2. 6
and to whom ere long for the work you have done, words you have spoken, and
ends you have had therein, you must give an account. You n^^d not be minded
that for every word you speak, an account must be given by you, who by speaking
one word may make or mar a Kingdom^ We need not tell you that it is a double
crime which is committed under the sacred name of authority and greatness; that
the sins of great ones in the pollitique, are as dangerous as pestilent Fevers
to the natural body. Ps. 82. 8.
Shall we mind you (Gods amongst men) that you shall ^h^r^v die like men, and
that impartial Death knows no faces, that Heaven is the reward of the
righteous, Tophet is prepared of old for Kings: That you and we must all appear
before ^he highest bar, where all your judgments shall be rejudged, your
secrets discovered, and your selves rendered responsable not only for all the
good you have not done, but for the evil you have not hindered: have we need to
comfort you under your matchless labors, and to tell you of Beds and rest at
hand? you know how to Esa. 57. 2
arm your selves against Reproaches, Censures and Slanders, with the meditation
of the day of Revelation when the Lord shall bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, Romans 2. 5 1 Cor. 4. 5. Math. 10 ^^^ ^6.
and then shall every man [that deserves it] have praise of God. And that there
is nothing ^^d^ but shall be then made know^. These general truths, and such
like as these largely discu^^ed in this Treati^e, albeit you do very well know
already, and are established in them yet since the best of men to so easily
forget them, and are at some time or other to seek in them; shall I beg leave
in these few lines to become your remembrancer thereof? The Lord has many
times (Right Honorable) remembered you in your low estate; his people from all
places are mindful of you, you have the blessing of many thousand prayers upon
you; you are engaged in as acceptable a service to God and good men, as ever
any Assembly was; as great expectation there is from you as ever was, from any
Parliament of England, and as likely you are to have opportunity to render your
names renowned to succeeding generations, as ever any Parliament of ours had.
There are still those amongst us that would again cast us into the Fire and
Water, Mark 9. 22. And we say to you our Masters, help us, save, or else we
perish; If you can do any thing have compassion on this almost expired
Kingdom: the Lord grant you may keep back nothing from us that may do us good;
and that your own ways, ends, wills, and interests may be s^^allowed up in that
work you are called unto; and that therein your motion may be like that of the
Heavens, intrinsical and from within swift with the primum mobile; but slow
with your own: And if herein you may have any furtherance by these plain
meditations, it can be no dishonor to you, but will be much honor and comfort
to me, who begging pardon for my boldness and plainnes, Pray, that the God of
Heaven will give you all such a spirit as is fearlesse of danger, faithful to
your trust, and succesfull in your great work.

Which will be the daily Prayer of Your most humble Servant WILLIAM SHEPHERD.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader.
THou have here presented to thy view, a plain but profitable Treatise of the
four last things, Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven. And these, if they
(having respect to Saints or S^nners) wereever needful and useful; then in
this evil and pe^ilous time: wherein, albeit the foundations of the world seem
to shake, and Heaven Luke ^^. ^^^ 26.
and Earth to be passing away; and al^eit, there be trouble amongst the
Nations with perplexity, the Sea and Waters roar; insomuch as men's [yea, godly
mens] hearts fail for fear, and with looking after the Mat. 24. 12.
things which are coming on the world: yet iniquity does abound, and the whole
Earth seems to be filled with Genesis 6. 11.
violence and wickedness, and most men live as if there were neither God nor
Devil, Heaven nor Hell. It is true, these things are continually sounding in
our ears: and is it not as true (and woe and alas that it is so!) they do for
the most part, as soon pass through the ears of the hearer, as from the mouth
of the speaker^ Whence Vox audita perit. Amos 6. 3.
else is it, that wicked men approach to the seat of iniquity: but that they
put far from them the evil day? Whence is it that they cry peace, peace, and
sing a requiem to their Souls, with the fool in the gospel; but 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
2.
that they forget that sudden destruction is at hand, and Luke 12. 19, 20
this night their souls may be taken from them whence is it, that good men's
hearts shake so at the present Heb. ^2. 27. ^8
shaking of things in the world; but that they have forgotten the Kingdom that
cannot be shaken^ whence is it, that the good and bad both slumber and watch
not; but that they have forgotten that the coming of the Lord is nigh, and he
will come as a Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Thief in the night? And whence is it tha^ there is such an overflowing of sin
in the world, but from hence, that men think not enough of these things. For
the prevention and cure therefore of these epidemicall evils; I have gathered
and bound up together these heavenly truths, as medicine made of many
ingredients and give it you in writing. And oh that now we could persuade you
to turn aside from you^ ^age^ Litera Scripta manet.
pursuit of earthly things, and come and see what it is, and try what it will
do! And for this may we prevail with you to look into them, and keep them as a
sign upon your hands, as fron^^e^s between your eyes, that you will write them
on the posts of your houses and your gates, or rather on the tables of your
hearts, that they being ever in your sight, may be never out of Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7,
8.
your mind. Remember and forget not, that very shortly the grie^ly Sergeant
Death will a^ rest you, and clap you up in the Prison of the grave, where you
shall by and by hear the dreadful vo^ce of the last T^ump^ crying a wake ye
dead, and come to judgment: look sometimes in at H^ll gates, and think of the
wrath to come; and at other times take a view of the Heavenly Canaan, and walk
a turn or two in the Paradise of God. If the thought of one of these, how much
more shall the thought of them all make us apply our hearts to wisdom. Th^se
thoughts, w^ll (...) less, much settle the hearts of Saint, in this shaking
time, 1 Cor 15. 31. Psalm. 1. 1. 5. Mat. ^. 15. Col. 1. 12. Deuteronomy 32. 39.
make them active for God, careful to (...) their (...) so, that they may be
always ready to dye, able to stand in the Judgment; sure to escape the
damnation of Hell, and to be made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in
heaven. And oh, that men were thus wise to understand this, to consider their
latter end.

Thy Christian friend, W. S.

Of the four last and great things, Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell, and the
things that concern the same.
Of Death. DOCTRINE.
All men must die; or, There is an unavoidable necessity of dying laid upon all
men. Hebr. 9. 27. It is appointed to men once to die. Psalm. ^9. 48. What man is
he that lives and shall not see death? not a man. Eccles. 6. 6. Do not all go
to one place. Job 30. 23. I know thou wi^^ bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living.

FOr the opening of this point, we must say something to these three things;
First, what this death whereof we speak is: Secondly, What necessity there is
that all men must die this death: Thirdly, Wherefore this necessity is imposed
upon mankind, and wherefore it is so.

For the first, By death here, we mean, not the privation of our communion with
God, or the separation of soul and body from Gods favor in this world, which
is caused by sin, and is called an alienation from the life of God: or, the
second death, or spiritual death, Luke 1. 79. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 4. 18. or the
separation of the whole man from Gods heavenly presence and glory to be
punished with everlasting fire in Hell called eternal death, or the perdition
of soul and body in Hell, or the second death. And this is proper only to
wicked men, and cannot touch the godly, Romans 6. 23. Revel. 20. 6. 4. Romans 8. 6.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Matthew. 10. 28. Rev. 2. 11.

But by death in this place we intend the privation of the life of the body, or
the separation of the soul from the body for sin: or the change of this mortal
for an immortal life. And this is called a bodily or worldly death, or the
first death. And this death is common to all men good and bad, Heb. 9. 27. 1
Cor. 15. 32. Genesis 5. 24. 35. This death is either natural (i.) when a man
lives out his full days and then dies: or violent, (i.) when a man's death is
hastened by some violent accident, that a man does kill himself, or is killed
by another. Also it is said to be common and ordinary, when it is by an
ordinary or usual means, or extraordinary when it is by some strange or
unusual m^ans, Numb. 16. 29.

(...), The necessity we here speak of is not absolute but limit^ed to (...).
For he may if he please dispense with his own Law and the penalty thereof, and
exempt some men from this common lot of mankind, as once (...) (...), who is
said to be translated that he did not (...) death, Hebr. 11. 5. Genesis 5. 24. so
afterward Eli^h, 2 Kings 2. 11. and as again, he will do with those which
shall be a live at Christ's coming to judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 51.
W^ shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. But in an ordinary way,
God has appointed to all men once to die; and to this law of the King of Kings
must all men young and old, rich and poor without difference, of necessity
submit.

For the third thing, 1. That it is so and must be so that all men must die,
these reasons may be given for it. 1 God in his eternal counsel has decreed
it, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed to men once to die. And his counsel stands
fast for ever, and the thoughts of his heart unto all generations, Psalm. 33.
11. Esaias 46. 10. We read in ^say 28. 15. of some that had made a Covenant with
death That it should not come ^igh the^. But God tells them, v. 18. That he
would disa^^ull their Covenant, for the Lord brings the counsel of the
heathen to ^ought, and makes the devises of the people of none ^ffect. 2. Man's
sin has deserved it. Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou ^^test thereof thou shall
surely die. Romans 5 12. As by one man sin ^ntred into the world, and death by
sin; so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned. Rom 6. 23. 1 Cor.
15. 22. As in Ad^m all die, (i.) sin and death came upon all men. 3. Man in his
nature is mortal and corruptable, as the Trees, as therefore these, however
some of them, as Oaks and the like, live longer then others; yet do all of them
in time by age wither and die, and none of them live for ever, because they are
of a dying nature: so it is with men; though some of them live longer then
others, yet experience shows u^ that they all dye at one time or other, Eccles.
6. 6. 7. Though ^e live a thousand year^ (...). Do not all go to one place? 4.
Unless the body die it cannot be capable of that state to which it is
ordained. For the wicked man must have such a body as is fitted everlastingly
to burn without consumption, and the godly man must have such a body as is
capable of the everlasting enjoyment of the glory of heaven, which the present
body cannot do. As therefore the seed which is ^own is not quickened unless
it die, so unless these bodies of the Saints die, they cannot have those new
bodies prepared for them, which are bodies with new qualities. 1 Cor. 15. 37,
39, 40, etc. It is ^own in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sow^
in dishonor, raised in glory, sown in weakness, raised in power, sown a
natural, raised a spiritual body. The bodies of the Saints shall be then
sound, and of a nature that cannot corrupt, glorious and com^ly without any
deformity: powerful that is able to continue without the humane helps of meat,
drink, and cloths, without which they cannot new be kept: they must put off
their old ragged cloths of mortality if ever they mean to put on the princely
^obes of immortality and life. 2. And thus God will have it, and his providence
has disposed of it for the manifestation of his own glory; the glory of his
Justice in the punishment of man's sin, the glory of his Truth in making good
his word, and the glory of his power in the resurrection of the bodies of men.
Io. 9. 3. 11. 39, 40.

It is needful that we answer one objection, ere we go further. If death be

To this we answer: 1. This objection may be made against all the afflictions
Revel. 14. 13. Romans 8. 28. Hebr. 12. verse 8. 10. Revel. 3. verse 19. 1 Corinthians. 15 (...) 56.

If any man shall ask now when he must die?

We must answer him that we know not when, for as there is nothing in iuest
Q^^. Answer.
the world more certain then death, so there is nothing more uncertain then the
time when men shall die; this God has kept in his own hands. This only is
certain that at the longest it will not be long, for man's age is but short.
Psalm. 9. 5. As a hand breadth, and as nothing before God. Job 14. 1, 2. Man
that is borne of a woman is of ^ew days etc. He comes forth like a flower
and is cut down: He flees also as a shadow and continues not. Psalm. 102.
11. 03. 15. 144. 4. Psalm. 89 47. Remember how short my time is? Job 7. 6, 7.
20. 16. 22. Iam. 4 14. Esaias. 48 6. All flesh is grass. Psalm 90 10. Isa man
li^^ to (...). or by reason of strength to 80. yet is it soon cut of and we
(...). And how much of this in thy life is spent already? But perhaps thou
may not live out half thy days, for men like sheep die of all ages. Psalm
55. 23 and this does commonly fall out that the longer men think to live the
less while they have to live. 1 These. 5. 3. Luke 12. ^. 20.

This p^ynt being cleared let us now see what use may be made of it. Eccles. 1.
4. Secondly, to think of it: let us meditate and consider of this, that we must
die. For however it may be thought a vain and needless persuasion to persuade
men to believe and think they shall die, and every man will be ready to say he
does believe this and it is never out of his thought, and who does not so? Yet
it is more then manifest by most men's lives that they do not so. For does that
man that takes nothing about him to defend him against ^oule weather believe
he shall meet with it in his journey? Does he that makes no provision for a
new, believe he shall shortly be put out of his old house? Does he believe he
must shortly put of his old, that makes no provision for new clothes? Does the
Th^^fe or Murderer believe there is a Prison and Gall^wes for Thee^es and
Murderers whilst he does kill or steal? Or does that Servant while he wastes
or spoileth his Masters goods, or abuses his follow Servants think of his
Masters coming to call him to an account? Nor does he that neglects all the
care of provision for another life think of it that he must shortly go out of
this life. Can it be that the profane Scorner, cruel Oppressor, licentious
Epicure or s^^^re Libertine should be persuaded that he must shortly die, and
after death come to judgment? Has he not rather with them in Esaias. 28. 15.
made a Covenant with death that it shall not come nigh to him? And does he not
say with them in Amoz 9. 10. evil shall not overtake me? Albeit they see wise
men die and likewise the foollish, is it not their thought that their houses
shall continue for ever? Psalm. 42. 11. It is certain this lesson no man can
learn till God teach it him: otherwise Moses had not need in a time of
mortallity when so many fell on his right hand and on his left hand to pray
Psalm. 90. 12. Lord teach us to number our days. It is a p^ant of Gods own
planting in man's heart, sadly and seriously to think and be persuaded of the
vanity and shortness of man's life, that it is but a Tale, a Shadow, a Sleep,
a Race, a Bubble, a Smoke, a Wind, a Flower, to think how many ways and how
easy a man may take his death, that our life is short and much of it past
already, that the day of our death is at hand, that our Sun is about to set,
that our Shadow declineth and is ready to vanish, that it is certain we must
die; but uncertain when we must die; these and such like thoughts as these Gods
spirit only suggesteth, and the Devil with all his might opposes. Esaias. 28.
15. Luk 12. 19. Psalm. 30. 4, 5. Let us then think of it that death is the
common condition of mankind, and that our selves are mortal and may and must
die shortly: and let us say with Barzillai. 2 Samuel 19. 37. How long have I to
live? If it be asked, How we must think of it? We answer first daily and
continually; not once a week, much less is once a month, or once a year
sufficient to entertain this meditation of death. 1 Cor. 15. ^1. I die daily. 2
Cor. 21. 23. in deaths often. First, death hangs over my head continually,
and I do incessantly prepare my self for it. Psalm. 119. 109. Secondly,
seriously and sadly, as of a thing that does most of all concern us, not
cursorily, scornfully or profanely as ^.
the Gentles. 1 Cor. 15. 32. Esaias. 22. 13. Let us eat and drink for tomorrow
we shall die. Thirdly, profitably so as to make some advantage thereby to our
souls. Psalm 90. 12. Teach us so to number our days as to apply our hearts to
wisdom. Fourthly, let us think of it as near, and at the doors, and not
with those in Amoz 6. 3 and the evil servant Mat. 24. 28. as far of, as a
thing delayed or prolonged. Ezekiel. 12. 22. 11. 11. Prove. 7. 19. To quicken us up
to this duty let us consider these things. First, this meditation of death will
keep the heart in a good frame. First, in a repenting frame Jon. 3. 4. 5. 6.
etc. Secondly, in a patient and a contented frame Job 1. 21. 2 Samuel 12. 23.
Thirdly, in a sober frame toward the vain delights of this world; we shall not
easily be intemperate in the use of that we look upon as perishing in the
using Eccles. 6 11. 12. chap. ^. ^, 2. chap. 5. 9, 10. 15. Fourthly, in an
humble frame for we will not be lifted up with any thing we have or think we
have whilst we are persuaded we must shortly leave it Genesis 18. 27. Acts 14, 15.
5. This will keep the heart in a watchful and careful temper. 2 Cor. 5. 6. 9.
2 Timothy 4 5. 6. Secondly, this meditation will be a preservative unto us to keep
us from doing evil, and a spurr to provoke us to good Amoz 6. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 5.
2 Cor. 5 6, 7. 2. Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15. Thirdly, this meditation will make us to
take care to provide for death and keep us from being surprised thereby
unawares which will be dangerous to us. Mat. 24. 48, 49, 50. Helps. To help us
in this meditation let us use these means. First, let us have our Coffins
always ready in our houses. Remember to die: Written in great Letters before
us: and (if we may) have our Sepulchers in our gardens Io^. 19. 41. Mat. 27.
57, 58, 59, 60. Secondly, let us read often those Scriptures and Books that
treat of man's mortallity. Thirdly, let us look often upon the examples of
mortallity. Eccles. 7. 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning then to
the house of feasting, because this is the end of all men, and ^^e living will
^^y it to heart. Let us look much on our dying and think much on our dead
friends and say as David I shall go to them. Fourthly, pray that God will mind
us of it. Psalm. 90. 12. Thirdly, the third main duty we are from hence to be
exhorted to, is to prepare for death before it come; we use to provide for a
great journey when we are to undertake it, a great while before: and before we
go out of one house we use to take care where we may have another: And th^^ is
great reason for this. 1. because it is a needful care. 2. It is a wise care,
it is a high point of holy wisdom so to do, and extreme folly to neglect it.
Pro. 10. 5. 3. It is a glorious care, it will be much to the honor and praise
of him that does take it, and to the shame and reproach of him that does
neglect it. 4. It is a profitable care, for this will much joy the heart and
aswage the evil of death when it comes. Fifthly, we if we be found unprepared
for death when it comes are undone for ever. If you shall desire to know when
this preparation must be made? We answer: this work of preparation for death
(being the work of a believer) must be set upon presently and ^.
without delay, and may not be put of to the morrow, much less to the time of
old age, or of, or after men's death. For (...), although it be certain that a
(...) shall ^^e, yet it is uncertain when he shall die. Secondly, no man knows
what a day may bring forth; perhaps he may not have to morrows time to ^.
do it. Thirdly, he will be less ^it to morrow then he is to day. Fourthly,
^he latest preparation is never to late, but the late preparation is seldom
true. Fifthly, it will be hard late to do any thing to it when death comes; for
we shall be then most of all unfit for the work. Sixthly, old age is also a most
unfit time for (...) Eccles. 12. 1. 2. Seventhly, when we come to d^^ we shall
find it enough to do that work, it will therefore be our wisdom to have
nothing else to do at that time but to die. Eighthly, It will be too late to do
any thing after death, for there is then no time of amendment of any thing; for
as death leaves m^n, so judgment will find them. Ec. 9. 10. Ninthly, we read
but of one that did put of this care to the last and prospered in it: and this
instance is extraordinary. If now you shall ask how this preparation must be
made? We answer, It has respect to two times. First, to all the time of amans
life. Secondly, to the time a little before his death. First, all the time of a
man's life. Generally a man is to labor to be a new Creature by faith and
repentance, and to live a good life endeavoring to be better and better still,
and (...) to be sure to do a good day^ work whilst he does live, for he that
lives well cannot do ami^s, and he that lives the life shall be sure to die the
death of the righteous. 2 Pet. 16. 7. 11 etc. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 2 Pet. 3. 14.
Gal. 6. 6. More especially we must labor for. First, peace with God in Christ,
and peace in our own Consciences. Romans 5. 1. 2 Pet, 3. 14. Secondly, the saving
knowledge of God in Christ. Io^. 17. 3. 3. A life regulated by Gods spirit, ^
and word. Romans 8. 14. Phil. 4. 7. There are degrees of life eternal, and it
is begun here, the resurrection out of sin to holiness of life, is the
beginning of eternal life. Rev. 20. 6. Col. 1. 13. Gal. 2. 20. More
particularly let us do these things. First, let us get unto Christ by faith
and thereby make our peace with God and get an assurance of a better life when
this is at an end Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord (i.)
in the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 22. As in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive. (i.) As by Adam sin and death came over all, so
by Christ grace and life came to all believers. 2 Pet. 3. 14. ^uke 2. 28, 29.
Now let thy ^ervant depart in peace for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.
(i.) I do willingly and cheerfully leave this present life. Heb. 11. 13. Ioh.
8. 24. He is the ^^tter to leave his old when he knows where to have a new and
a be^^r dwelling. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2. etc. Secondly, let us pray continually that
God will fit us for death, say with Moses Psalm. 9. 12. Lord teach me to number
my days, so as to apply my heart to wisdom. Thirdly, let us labor to
mortify our sins daily, for here in lies the strength of death. 1 Cor. 15.
56. For this purpose let us confess it, be humbled for it, cry to God for
p^rdon of and power against it: and effectually apply by faith the death of
Christ against it, so shall we be sure that God will redeem our souls from the
power of ^
the grave and receive us. Psalm. 19. 15. Fourthly, let us enure our selves to
die by little and little (that is) not only live every hour as if we were
dying, but by our afflictions as lesser deaths prepare for our great death. 1
Cor. 15. 3^. I die daily. (i.) I am not only in danger of death daily, but I
do thereby enure and prepare myself to die daily. By undergoing a lesser, we
shall be prepared to undergo a greater burden; so men that are to run a large
race prepare themselves for it by the running of a shorter race. For this cause
did Bilney the Martyr often times before his burning put his little finger in the
candle, thereby the better to be prepared to suffer the burning of his whole
body. 2 Cor. 11. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. Fifthly, let us always watch and wayt
for Christ's coming to us in particular, by our death (that is) shaking of
security as we would shake of sleep, let us take great heed that we not
overcome by sin or Satan, and looking always for death, be in a dying posture,
and live every hour as if it were our last hour. Job. 14. 14. All the days
of my appointed time I will wait till my change come. Luke 2. 25. Motives. 1.
It will be very profitable for us so to watch. 2. It will be very dangerous for
us to neglect it. See Mat. 24. 42. to the end of that chapter and Mat. 25. 1.
to verse 14. Sixthly, let us be able to look beyond death into heaven and the
glory thereof. Heb. 11. 25. 2 Cor. 5. 1. He will not care much to be turned out
of the house he dwells in when he knows where to have a better house at hand to
go into. Seventhly, let us keep our hearts from being glued by overmuch love
to the world or any thing in it, for by how much the more we love, by so much
the more we shall grieve when we leave it. 2 Samuel 18. 33. Eighthly, let us get
as much of the taste of heaven here as we can, that the sweetness thereof may
make us more to desire the full fruition of it. The preparation to be made a
little before and at the time of a man's death lies in these things. First to
God-w^^d. Secondly to man-ward. To Godward. ^. If sickness go before death,
we are the^ (...) to look upon it as Gods hand and that for our sin. Lam. 3.
39. Ioh. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. and 30. 2. We are to labor to renew our
says and repentance, and so to get a renewed assurance of Gods favor by an
earnest seeking of him by prayer, so David Psa. 32. Psalm. 38. Psalm. 39. 2. To
man-ward our selves and others, when we be sick, we are to call in help from
the prayers and counsel of good people, who are able to help us herein. Mark 2.
4. Iam. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 1. 2. We are to use the best outward means we can for
the recovery of our health. 2 King. 20. 7. Luk 1^. 3 4. Matt. 9. 12. 3. We are
to set our house in order (i.) to make our will (if it be not made before) and
give direction what we will have done after our death. 2 Samuel 23. Genesis 25. 5,
6. 4. We are (as much as we may) to endeavor to be reconciled to our
Neighbors with whom we are at difference. Matt. 5. 25. Romans 12. 8. 5. We are
to get and make use of all the comfortable meditations we can think of against
the fear of death. 6. If we be Magistrates or Ministers we are to do what we
can to further the well ordering of the Commonwealth and Church after our
death. Deuteronomy. 32. 2. 1 Kings 2. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 5. In death it self, or being about
to die, we are to give up our souls to God. (i.) to his care and keeping, being
his by redemption. Psalm. 31. 5. Luke 23. 46. Acts 7. 59. And this we are to do.
1. Beleevingly as Stephen Acts 7. ^6. 59. died in the embracements of the Lord
Jesus Christ and calling upon his name. Job. 13. 15 1 Samuel ^0 6. Heb. 11. 21.
22. 13. These (...) in faith. 2. Charitably so Stephen. Acts. 7. 20. Lord ^ay
not this sin to their charge and Christ Luke 23. 34. (...) forgive them. 3.
Patiently. 2 King. 20. 2. Iam. 5. 7, 8. 4. Obediently and submissively so
Christ Matt. 26. 39. not as I will but as thou will. Phil. (...) defecta,
(...). etc.
2 8. Romans 14. 7, 8. 5. And we are then like the Swan to endeavor to sing
sweetest by our devout prayers and praises to God, and gracious speeches to
men: So Jacob Genesis 49. David 2 Samuel 23 Christ Luke 23. 34. Stephen Acts (...)
56. Isaac Heb. 11. 22. Job. Job. 1. 21. we shall say somewhat more to this
p^^nt in the next branch which we are now to descend unto. 4. The fourth thing
we are to be exhorted unto from this doctrine of the necessity of dying is to
make a virtue of this necessity and not to fear death, but when we see our time
is come to die, let us resolutely patiently and willingly undergo ^t. A
natural and moderate fear of it, as it is an Enemy to nature (...) be changed
as an evil upon us, being no other but what was in the (...) h^^rt of Christ
Jesus: but an immoderate afflicting distracting fear of it is to be avoided of
all Christians. And for the Cure hereof and our further fitting for death, let
us be well instructed in the nature thereof to a believer as it is set forth in
the Gospel, wherein we have these considerations. 1. That there is a necessity
of it, and it cannot be avoided. Psalm. 49. 7. 2. It is sancti^ed and sweetened
by Christ's death so as it is not now a curse but a blessing, a passage, a
departure, a change of rooms, a going out of a worse place into a better. 3.
As Soon as the body goes out of this world it goes to a place of rest where it
shall be troubled no more, and then Gods Covenant of peace shall be made good
to it. And (to speak properly) the ^.
believing Christian does not die, he lies down to sleep in his bed, for his
death is but the bodies going to bed, and to sleep after the many labors of
the day of this life are ended, out of which he shall awake after the night of
death is past, at the morning of the r^surrection to everlasting life, and no
s^oner is the soul out of the body then it is in possession thereof. Esaias. 57.
2, 3. The righteous are taken away etc. he shall enter into peace: they shall
rest in their beds etc. 2 King 32. 20. Thou shals be gathered to thy fathers
in^eace. Matt. 9. 24. Acts 7. 60. He fell asleep. 4. The body by death is not
reduced to nothing, as the body of a bea^t is, but it is only resolved to earth
again, where the ^otting of it is only to refine it, that as the Corn which
first di^^h it may arise more glorious. 1 Cor. 15. 36. Genesis 3. 19. So that
death to the Saints is neither total, but of the body only; nor perpetual,
but for a time only Romans 8. 10. 5. God is as much the God of the dead as of the
living believer Mat. 22. 34. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
(i.) his Covenant is with them to make them happy in communicating to them
grace life and glory, and this Covenant is with the body as well as with the
soul. Romans 14. 8. Whether we live or die we are the Lords. 6. The body and soul
of a believer notwithstanding the death of the body is still a member of
Christ. Ephe. 5. 30. Romans 14. 8. Death devides us not from God, but brings us
home to him. 7. God has the power of death and the grave, and his providence
does dispose thereof and of everything therein, and he will be with the
believer in this estate to support him under and deliver him out of it, and to
turn it to his good and he w^^ not leave him till he has settled his soul and
body in heaven. Rev. 18. I have the Keys of Hell and Death. (i.) power to keep
from or deliver to death. Jude verse 9. Acts 4. 28. Psalm 16. 10. 11. Thou wi^^
not leave my Soul in grave nor suffer thi^^ holy one to see corruption. Heb.
2. 14, 15. Acts 2. 24. Psalm 116. 15. The death of his Saints is precious to
him. (1.) either God will preserve them from wicked hands, or will sharply
revenge their death on them that kill them, Acts 20. 24. 2 Kings 1. 13. Psalm.
72. 14. 8. The death of the believer cannot separate his soul from Christ's love
to it, or its love to Christ, John 11. 5. 20. 3. 1. Romans 8. 38. 39. What shall
sep^rate us from the love of Christ, Shall death etc. 9. Death reaches to the
body only and not to the soul. Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the Soul etc. 10. By death God requires again of us
that soul he ^^usted ^.
us with, and every honest man will willingly deliver up his trust when it is
required Eocles. 12. 12. 11. The sting of death is now taken away to the
believer that it cannot hurt him. 1 Cor. 15. 55. Buzze it may snake whose sting
^^ pulled out. 1^. The Angels will be ready to receive and carry the believers
sold into the presence of the God of peace in Heaven. Luke. 16. 22. 23. Death
shall be destroyed and it is the last Enemy that shall be destroyed. ^evel. 20
v. 14. ^ C^rin^h. 15. v. 26. Rev. 20. 14. 14. The body of the believer shall be
gloriously raised after death to die no more, for then death shall be swallowed
up into victory, and body and soul united and placed in eternal felicity: for
the soul being loosed out of prison, the body may not be kept in prison. 2 Cor.
^. 1. Rev. 21. 4. 20. 13. 1 These. 4. 13. Psalm 49. 14, 15, 16. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 15.
43. John 6. 39. Romans 8. 11. To say all in one word, death to the believer makes
a happy change, and does infinitely better his condition, for it ^reeth him from
all evil and puts him in possession of all good. It ^reeth him from the evil
of sin and pun^^^ment felt and feared, present and to come, and puts an end to
all his ^.
cares, fears, tears, labors, griefs, combats with sin, the world and the
Devil; for in death he gets beyond and above them all. It is a passage and
going from Aegyt to Canaan; out of an old rotten house wherein a man has no
estate at all, into a glorious Mansion and Kingly palace of his own
inheritance; the going out of a base prison to a glorious liberty; the return
from a banishment to his own Country and home; the coming to the haven after a
long and dangerous voyage by sea: It is a going to bed after a man has
labored hard all day and is ^yred and weary: It is a going from corruption to
incorruption, from mortallity to immortallity, from death to life, from earth
to heaven, from a miserable to a happy life. It is the putting off a man's old
ragged Clothes, to put on princely robes: It is a loosing from the shore, and
a lanching out into the main, to take possession of a Kingdom: It is the door
of Heaven the ga^e of Life; the entrance into perfect peace and security, the
day break of eternal brightness. It is the consummation of a man's victory,
the beginning of glory to be perfected at the day of Judgment. Here the law of
the fle^^ shall no more oppose the law of the mind. Then shall be perfect rest,
settled peace, a sure inheritance, without any feeling of trouble, or fear of
l^sse. Then shall be the burial of all sins, the raising of all virtues:
Then shall the soul fly out of the body, as an Eagle above the Clouds, where
shall be neither nets nor snares to take it. Who would fear or fly from this
change? Who would not be glad and desirous to embrace it? 2 Cor. 5. 8. Esaias 57.
1. 3. Ec^les. 12. 7. The Spirit returns to God that gave it being absent from
the body we are present with the Lord. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed a^^ the dead that
die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors etc. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Our
Conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto hi^
glorious body and 1 These. 4. 14. 17. Luke 16. 22. When Laz^^^^ died it is said
the Angels carried his soul into Abraham's b^some, an all^sion (as some would
have it) to the sweet delights and fellowship the Saints shall have with Abrham
(the father of the faithful) in Heaven, as at a Feast whereat in the Eastern
Countries they used to lean on one another breast John 13. 23. others would
have it a m^ta ph^^ from Fathers who imbosome and hug their Children when
wearied with long running about, or have met with a knock and come crying to
them. By death the soul is married to Jesus Christ her dearest husband; the
which has been here kept at a distance from him: but then it shall be more
nearly united to him and enjoy the beatificall vision of the Godhead the
chiefest good, and then is there but one step more, and soul and body together
shall have the complete enjoyment thereof. Then shall the believer not only be
brought into the bouse of his Father prepared from all eternity for him, but he
shall also there for ever have and enjoy the fellowship of all the blessed
Saints and Angels; and of his dearest fr^inds who died in the Lord before him.
Heb. 6. 20. 1^. 23. 2 Samuel 12. 23. Who then would not be willing to die? It is
no ma^^ail^ therefore i^ Paul in the Contempl^tion or all these things desired
to be dissolved Phil. 1. 23. and that the Saints desire to be u^cl^thed of
their house of clay. 2 Cor. 5. 2. And that the wicked do so much desire to di^
the death of the righteous. Numb. 23. 10. And that the Maityrs loved not their*
lives unto death Rev. 12. 11. Acts 20. 24. but refused deliverance from death
when they might have had it Heb. 11. 35. they were as willing to die as to
live, Out of all this we may then conclude upon the believers death with
Solomon Eccle^^ 7. 3. The ^a of death is better then the day of his birth.

But here it may be objected that death is a fruit of Gods curse, the wages of
^^n, the destruction of nature and a bitter and dreadful thing?

To which we answer thus. It is bitter and dreadful in it self, but it is the
way all flesh do go, and Christ himself went into glory, and the nature of it
is now changed (as we have already showed) the sting of it is gone, and it
cannot hurt us, and it is sanctified and sweetened by the death of Christ who
will be with us, and enable us to endure it. Esaias. 43. 2. Oh! but you will say
I am afraid of a long and strong disease, and a painful death? To this we
say: Perhaps it may be otherwise, for some die with little, some without any
pain at all. But if it be so either god will lessen the pain or greaten thy
strength and comfort. 2 Cor. 1. 5. 10. 13. And very long the disease cannot be.
It is but like one swallow of a bitter pill and be cu^ed of all diseases, one
thrust out at a narrow gate, and we are out of prison, it is but one wink and
all is past 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Oh! But some will say the grave which follows death at the heels is a
dreadful spectacle?

To this we answer; That the grave shall be no other to the Saints but as a
sweet bed wherein they shall sleep quietly and feel nothing. Esaias. 57. 1. 3.
And Christ (the members of whose body they still continue to be) will be there
with them and bring them from thence into heaven Ephesians. 5. 30. Psalm. 16. 9. 0.

Fifthly, The ^ifth thing to which we are to be persuaded is, that since we
must shortly die and by death be for ever separated from our worldly
enjoyments, that we do not overmuch desire them before we have them, not to
much delight, glory, please and content our selves, or trust in them when we
have them, nor much be grieved for them when we loose them. Riches, Honors,
Offices, Authority, Command, Friends, Pleasures, and the rest what are they?
What can they do? Matt. 6. 19, 20. Lay not u^ for your selves treasures on
earth, etc. Jo 6. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, etc. 1 Cor. 7.
29. Let them that have wives be as if they ^ad none, 1 Timothy 6. 1^. Trust not in
uncertain riches, Psalm. 62. 10. If riches increase, set not thine heart upon
them, Prove. 23. 4. Labor not to be rich. But for the Cure of this consider
these things: 1. That all Silver, Gold, Pearls, etc. are but vile things, Earth
upon Earth, Matthew. 6. verse 19. Silver and Gold is but White and Yellow earth,
Pearls the guts and garbage of the Earth, all of them but thick clay: Hab. 2. 9.

2. Riches, Honors and the rest, reach no further then to this life, Job 17.
15, 16.

3. They can do little for us, while we have them, they can procure us no
spiritual or solid joy, they cannot preserve or deliver us from any great
evil: Prove. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. Prove. 11. 4.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath: Psalm. 49. 6, 7. They that trust in their
wealth, etc. none of them can by any means redeem his brother, etc. Luke 12. 15.

4. They are of a perishing, vanishing nature, they perish with the using, they
are but as heaps of Snow or Chasse, they melt away between our singers, as
butter before the Sun, and are gone we know not how: they that lean upon and
trust unto them are as men that trust to a hill^^k of Ye or heap of Snow:
Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Esaias 40. 6. All flesh is grass and the glory thereof as the
flower of the field. Prove. 23. 9. Job 38. 22. they are rather the shadow and
appearances of things then the things themselves, 1 Cor. 7. 3^. The fashion of
this world passes away: It is (as one says) like the water of a river that
runs by a City, or as a fair picture drawn upon the Ye that melts away with
it. The pomp of this world is but a fantasy, and the glory of it an opinion,
there is nothing of any firmnes or solid consistency in the creature; it is but
a surface, outside, or empty promise: all the beauty of it is but a skin deep:
Psalm. 39. 6. Surely every man walks in a vain shadow: (i.) he leads an
imaginary life rather then a life it self. It is but an ig^is fatuus, a walking
fire that leads men into brakes and ditches; so the hue of this world deceives
and car^yeth them another way out of the right way, for both the words and
shows of the wo^ld are full of fraud.

5. That which is good and real in it is as transitory as a hasty headlong
river. The posting ^un of all wordly pleasure after a short gleam of vain
glistering, sets in the Ocean of endless sorrow, sic transit glori^ mundi.

6 All these things are but a piece of vanity, Eccles. 1. 3. vainitie of
vaniti^s and all is vanity, (i.) most vain and exceeding full of vanity, it
has no continuance, soliditie or profit in it, but is full of unprofitable
travail and false deceit: men come to the worlds felicity as to a lotterie
with heads full of hopes but return with hearts full of blanks.

7 They are not only vain but ve^ing, they do not only not satisfy but
torture and torment the mind, as the body is tormented being set on a ra^k or
bed of thorns; the care of getting, the fear of keeping, and the grief of
spending and loosing like three vultures, do continually feed upon and ^at up
the heart 1 Timothy 6. 10. Ephesians. 6. ^^. 5. 1^. Psalm. 127. 2.

8 They are most uncertain things, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Trust not in uncertain riches.
Job 38. 22. For happily they may be taken from us and leave us before we die,
Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine eye upon that which is (...) For riches
certainly make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, Prove.
27 4. Riches are not for ever, and does the Crown endure to every generation?
But were we sure they could continu^ with us, we may not continue with them for
our life itself is most uncertain, this only is certain that we must shortly
die and leave all these things behind us, and go as naked out of the world as
we came into the world Job 1. 21. Psalm. 49. 16, 17. He shall take nothing away
when he dies, neither shall his pom^^ ^^scend after him, Eccles. 6. 11. and
being once dead we shall live no more this life: Job 14. 14. If a man die shall
belive again? Yea let us be hence persuaded not much to desire or care for life
it self, but use it as if we used it not: Let us desire it only for Gods glory
and his peoples good, and so long as it may serve in order thereunto;
otherwise, let us desire and choose rather to die, Phil. 1. 23. Psalm. 10 2. 26.
Esaias 5. 17. 2 Pet. 3. 12.

6 The next thing to which we are to be exhorted is, That since it is certain
we must die, and that we cannot tell how soon this may be: and that after death
there is no more time or place of doing good to our selves or others. That from
hence we be stirred up to be active and industrious in Gods service while we
live, as men that have much work to do, work so much the faster, by how much
the nearer they see the night approach, Gal. 6. 10 As we have then
opportunity, let us do good, Eccles. 9. 10. All that thine hand shall fin^e to
do, do^ it with all thy power, for there is neither work, nor invention, nor
knowledge, ^^r wisdom in the grave whither thou go, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember
(i) [know, love, fear, and serve] thy (...) in the days of thy youth, etc.
before dust return to dust, verse 7. Death is the night where^o no man can
work: old age the evening and latter part of the day, when it is ill working.
To provoke us hereunto, let us set before us, 1. the example of good men. 2.
The examples of Devils and bad men: Of good men P^^d: 2 Timothy 4. 5. I am now
ready to be offered and the time of my departing is at hand, watch therefore
etc. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 14, 15. I shall not be negligent to put you always
in remembrance etc. And I think it meet to stir you up, etc. Seeing I know
the time is at hand that I must lay down this my ta^ernacle etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Christ. Luke 12. 31, 32. Paul Acts 20. 28 25. The Devil also and wicked me, by
how much the more short they do perceive their time is, by so much the more
they do bestir themselves to improve that time to ou^ work the children of
light in a quick dispatch of the works of darkness. Rev. 12. 12. Luke 16. 4, 5.
Mat. 8. 29. And thus we have done with the exhortations deduced from this point
as it has reference to our own death. Now there follows an exhortation draw
from this point as it has reference to the death of others. And so it is
useful to exhort and persuade us to these things: 1. As to our friends 2. as
to our enemies. As to our friends, 1. living, let us look upon and make use of
them: as mortal and dying friends, and such as were born to die, 1 Cor. 7. 29.
Let them that have wives be as though they had none. 2. Dead, let us not mourn
for them above measure and as without hope: 1 These. 4. 13. Against this disease
let us applp a remedy by these considerations: 1. be they good or bad friends
that are dead: it is Gods pleasure to have it so, and this we must patiently
abide, Psalm. 90. 3. Ezech. 24. 5. 2. They must have died one time or other, for
man is born to die and cannot avoid it, Job 14. 1, 2. 3. It may be we had them
long and therefore we should be content now to let them go. 4. They were ^ent
us of God, and there is great reason we should be content to let him have them
again when he requires them. 5. Our dead friends are not at all sensible of our
grief. 6. Our case herein is not singular, but common to the Saints and to men,
1 Pet. 5. 9. 7. This affliction cannot hinder Christ's love 10. 11. 5. 8. Christ
is sensible of our sorrow and mourns with us, 10. 11. 33, 34. But if they be
Saints that are departed, there are some other things to be said for our quiet
and comfort. 9 They have made a blessed and happy change (as we have already
showed) and we are not to be much troubled at our own loss which is so much to
their gain: they are but gone to bed, and in a sweet sleep a little before us,
10. 11. 11. Ps. 37. 7. Luke 16. 24. 10. They are not gone from, but a little
before us, and we shall shortly go to them, 2 Samuel 12. 23. 11. They shall rise
again, and we shall meet again and live together for ever in a far better
condition then we are or can be in here, 1 Thessalonians 4. 3. 2. In the second place,
let this persuade us not to trust too much in friends: Psalm. 146. 3. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the sons of men, for there is no help in him,
his breath departs, he returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish, Esaias 2. 22. Cease from man whose breath is in his ^ostrils, for wherein
is he to be esteemed. 2. As to Enemies, Let this persuade us, not to live in
fear of them, be they never so mighty, rich, cruel, etc. able and willing to
hurt us. For first, all their power can reach but to the body, it cannot touch
the soul, Mat. 10. 28. 2. They can do no more to our bodies then God has
decreed, and shall give them leave to do, Acts 2. 23. Revel. 2. 10. Luke 8. 3^.
Job 1. 4, 5, 6. 3. They must shortly die, and then that power they have will be
taken from them: Matt. 2. 16. 19. Job 3. 17. there (i) in the grave the wicked
cease from troubling. Thus we have done with the use of exhortation.

The next use we shall make of this point shall be for consolation, and this
Job 3. 17. There the weary be (...), etc. they hear not the voice of the
oppressor: for being once dead, they can die no more. This very Use the Holy
Ghost does make of this point, (...) Rev. 14. 13. Esaias 7. 1. for as it is a
comfort to a man in a dark prison that he has no light but through a little
hole; If looking through it he can see some pleasant object that does delight
him, it will make his imprisonment seem shorter and lighter: So doubtless will
it comfort Gods people to contemplate this door of hope shortly to be opened
to them, by which they shall be let out of all the troubles of this present
life into a place and estate of perfect peace and liberty.

dissolved shall be with Christ: who shall have hope in death, whose flesh
shall rest in hope, whose (...) bodies shall be with Christ, who shall have
hope in death, whose flesh shall rest in hope, whose vile bodies shall be made
like Christ's glorious body: who shall have peace, who shall rest in our beds,
and be gathered to our graves in peace, we must be able to give this Character
of our selves. That we are upright, righteous persons, perfect and merciful
men, such as do studdy to approve our selves in all things toward God and men.
2 Cor. 1. 12. 9, 10. Prove. 14. 31. 32. Psalm. 37. 7. Esaias. 57. 1. 3. Numb. 23.
10. That we are in Christ Jesus. (1) eng^a^^ed into him by faith. Rev. 14. 13.
And if so then are we; 1. New Creatures. (that is,) we have new qualyties of
holiness created in us. Romans 8. 38, 39. 2 Cor. 5. 2. 2. We are dead to sin and
alive to righteousness. Romans 6. 3, 4. etc. 3. We walk not after the flesh but
after the spirit. Romans 8. 10. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 5. 4. We have tender hearts. and
humble our selves before God, his word, and his judgments. 2 Kings 22, 19, 20.
We are also active and industrious for Gods glory and his peoples good. Phil.
1. 1, 2 etc. 1 Pet 1. 12. Our conversation is heavenly. Phil. 2^, 21. We are
Saints and such as make the Lord ^u^ portion. Psalm. 16. 5 These are Gods people
who have the Lord for their God, and to whom the comforts of this poy^t belong.
Mat. 22. 32. What then have reprobate, unregenerate, unbeleeving, (...),
unmercifull, deceitful, careless, hard-hearted, proud, (...), wicked and
impenitent persons to do with those comfortable promises and discoveries? they
have no part nor portion herein, but their portion (...) in the next use.

The licentious ^^^cure that says, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Let us eat and drink for
tomorrow we shall die. Luke 12. 19. Psalm. 49. 18. The secure wordling that does
think his house shall continue for ever Psalm. 49. 11. and that he has enough
for many years. Luke 12. 19. The proud who trusts in his goods and glor^eth
in the multitude of his wealth Psalm. 49. 6. and all other sinners whatsoever,
that walk in the way of their own hearts, and either mind not at all, or put
far from them their dying day. Eccles. 7. 9. Amo^ 6. 3. All these are to know
to their grief and astonishment that they must certainly and shortly die and
that very suddenly, and when they least of all expect it, their souls will be
required of them, and return they must to God to give an account of all the
things they have done in their flesh, and from thence be sent packing to hell:
their bodies shall ^re long chop into the earth when they must leave all their
worldly enjoyments they so much glory and rejoice in, and settle upon to
others, and be gone from hence to be seen no more; A change they also shall
make, but not from a worse to a better estate, but from a better to a worse
estate, they shall go from peace to trouble, from liberty to bondage, from life
to death, from their heaven to hell, and from the enjoyment, and the hope of
all in this world, which either is, or they esteem to be good, to all that is
evil, or if they do (as some of them do) go from a sad condition here, they go
into a worse, out of the Drying Pan they g^^ to the Fi^e, ^ut of Prison to the
Gallows; they are lanching into an infinite ocean of scalding Lead, and in it
they must swim naked for ever. In one word, they are passing out of the world
into death and the grave, and from thence to judgment. Of which we are to speak
in the next place.

Of JUDGMENT. DOCTRINE.
There is without question a great and terrible Assist or day of general
Judgment set and to come, wherein every one must be brought to account, and be
judged for all his thoughts, words, and works.

IN this point we shall say something for Explication, something for
Confirmation, and something for Application. For Explication, 1. It shall be a
great day, and so it is called, ^ude v. 6. Mal. 4. 5. It is so called, 1 for
the great assembly and meeting that then shall be. If all the Juries and people
of the Kingdom were to meet at one grand Assise before the King himself for the
trial of all the Delinquents in the Kingdom, this would be a great day: how
great then will that day be wherein all the Men, Women and Children that ever
were, are, or shall be, must appear before the Lord Jesus to be judged? 2. It
is called a great day because there are great things to be done on that day. It
is also called a terrible day, because there are terrible things on that day to
be seen and done. Io^^ 3. 2. Rev. 20. 12, 13, 14. 13. 16. Joel 2. 31. Mal. 4.
5. It is also called the day, or that day, by a specialty, Luke 21. verse 34
Rev. 6. 17.

This day we call the day of the general Judgment, to distinguish it from the
particular Judgment which every man receives at his death, for every man's
deaths day is his doomsday, Hebr. 9. 27. Eccles. 12. 7.

This is to be a day of Judgment: For in it there shall be a formal and
^udiciall proceeding; Judgment contains three things, 1 Examination of the
cause wherein it is requisite, there be two things, 1. an equity in all things
and persons: 2. a laying open of this equity: 2. a giving of Judgment upon the
cause: 3. the doing of execution according to the Judgment, all this shall be
then done: For the Judge shall sit, parties shall be cited, evidence given in,
a trial had and passed, and judgment given; men shall be formally and orderly
examined, condemned and punished, Rev. 10. 11, 12. Matt. 25. verse 40. etc.

This day is decreed and set, Acts 17. 31. He has appointed a day wherein to
^^dge the world. And it is not past, but yet to come; nor shall it come till
the end of all other things be first come: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3. nor is the very
certain hour or day to be known by man, Matt. 24. 42. 25. 1^.

All flesh young and old, rich and p^ore, male and female must then appear,
none shall be so great to avoid it, none so little as to be forgotten. And they
must, (must you say is for the King) so says the King of Kings, they must
appear and that in person, they may not appear by proxy, nor may they be
excused for their default, or make delay, or have a day over, but they must
then and there appear to give anaccount, Revel. 20. 12. I saw the dead great
and small stand before God. 2 Cor. 5. ^0. We must all appear before the
judg^^^^ seat of Christ: Eccles. 11. 9. God will bring thee [i. the young man]
to judgment; though thou be unwilling to come, God will bring t^^^ by force,
Hebr. 6. 27. Romans 14. 10.

That all thi^ is out of all question, will appear by the Confirmation which
follows in the next place; 1. That it is so. 2. That it must be so: That it is
so, 1. many Scriptures of the old and new Testament do foreshew it: Da^. 12. 1,
^ard 7. 26. 22. Eccles. 11. 9. Mal. 4. 5. Joel 2. 31. Jude verse 14, 15. Acts
17. 31. Romans 14. 10. Acts 10. 42, 43. to him give all the Prophets witness,
that he is ordained of God to be judge both of quick and dead. Rev. 1. 7.
Behold he comes; (i.) It is as certain as if he were come. 2. The Devils and
wicked men at one time or another believe it, and tremble to think of it, M^t.
8 ^9. Art thou come to torment us before the time. James 2. 19. The Devils
believe and tremble; their hearts ache and quake within them. 3. All the Godly
expect it, 2 Pet. 3. 12. 4 Many signs there have been and are foreshewing it.
5. The prayers of good and sins of bad men will bring it about, Rev. 22. 17,
20. chapt. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

2. That it must be so, reason does evince it: 1. For it will not stand with
the justice, mercy, and goodness of God that it should be otherwise then well
with the good, and ill with the bad at last, since it falls out often, that
the condition of the best men is worst, and of the worst men is best in this
life. How can it stand with the justice of God, that wicked persecutors should
go unpunished, and not receive a reward of their works, and that the godly who
have suffered so much injury from wicked men should not be righted and
recompensed. There is nothing in all the world does more certainly prove the
day of judgment then the injustice of the wicked world; for thus we may reason,
will the Lord certainly punish the wicked and reward the just; this being not
always in this life, it must be certainly at the day of judgment, Beli^es,
what mistakes and mi^construction do the justice of God and inocency of godly
men lie under in this life, and how much do the names of God and godly men
su^^er hereby, and when or how will they or can they be delivered, but at and
by this day of judgment? For the clearing thereof therefore and manifestation
of Gods justice and godly m^^s integrity, the^^ must be of necessity such a day
to come: Hence it is called the day of the Rev^lation of the righteous
judgment of God. 2 Thessalonians. 6. We glory in your patience in your sufferings
which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God. The Saints
sufferings here are (as one says) an ocular demonstration of a future
judgment, where all their wrongs shall be righted, and all their labors of
love recompensed, James 5. 8. Romans 2. 5. That therefore there is such a
judgment to come we do rightly profess in one of the Articles of our Creed
That Jesus Christ shall come from Heaven to judge the quick and dead. 2. Gods
decree has set it, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed to man once to die, but after
this the judgment. 3. His word has spoken it and his truth must perform it. We
have done with the Confirmation* but we must answer two or three objections ^re
we can make our Application.



To this we answer, This judgment is begun here on good and bad; God judges
men by his word, by their own Consciences and by his administration and the
disposal of his works: but the final and solemn consummation and
manifestation thereof is not till this day of judgment.

John 12. 47. that Christ says He came not to judge the world but to save it.

To this we answer, That by those words Christ means nothing but

John. 3. 18. 5. 24. He that believes shall not come into judgment, but he^
that believes not is condemned already.

To this we answer, that the sense of this place is by Interpreters thus, that
the believer shall not be judged to condemnation, but in the judgment of
absolution he shall be judged. And as for the unbeleever he is condemned
already by that ancient sentence Genesis 3. 19. 2. 17. Gal. 3. 19. he is condemned
also by Gods council and decree, by Gods word and by his own conscience, the
sentence is as it were passed, the halter about his neck, nothing to be done
but turn him over the ladder of life, and he is gone for ever. Or he is as sure
to be condemned as if it were done already: but the full and solemn declaration
and execution of this is not till this last judgment.

And now we shall come to the application of this point and consider what
profitable uses we may make thereof wherein we must premise these things, that
some of the uses are deduced from the general doctrine of the last judgment,
and some of them from some particular branches of this doctrine, or some things
that do accompany this judgment; As the firing of the world, the end of all
things and the like: And some of the uses are applyable to all men, but some to
good men and some to bad men only.

Acts 17. 31. 10. 42. And herein his divinity and humanity both shall be
exercised. But as to the consent and authority the whole Trinity shall be
Judge. Romans 2. 5. 16. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Christ Jesus the second person of the
Trinity is to be the Judge. 1. That as he was judged by the world so the world
may be judged by him. 2. That as (...) people have seen him in his state of
humility, so they may see him in a state of glory. 3. That thereby he may
perfect his Kingly office. 4. Because the Father has committed all judgment to
him. John 5. 27. 22. 5. That he may have the same honor with his Father. 6.
That the Judge may be visible.

If that be objected which is in Matt. 19. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 2. that the Apostles
and Saints shall judge the world?

The answer is this. That some take the sense of this text to be but this. That
their doctrine, faith, and grace shall rise in judgment against the unbelief
and wickedness of the world and leave them inexcusable. Heb. 11. 7. Mat. 12.
41, 4^. Others thus. They shall sit with him as assistants and approve of the
sentence; as Justices of peace with the Judges. Others thus. They shall
according to their measure partake of the glory of Christ's Kingdom and be
therein preferred before others. Luke 22. 30. Rev. 10. 4. 2, 26 D^^. 12. 3.

2. What this judgment shall be? It shall be that whereby Christ will judge all
men without exception according to his word, some to eternal life, some to
eternal death.

3. The place where this judgment shall be? For this some have thought that the
place of this judgment shall be over the valley of Jehosa^hat n^^r to
Jerusalem, and for proof hereof have alleged some reasons and some places of
Scripture. As Joel 3. 1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 20. 1. 22, 23. etc. But this opinion
seems to be very doubtful; and it is more probable it shall be in the air
and alost; from th^se Scriptures. Luke 21. 27. Mat. 24. 27, 28. 30, 31. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

4. The time when this judgment shall be? For this some have held, it shall be
at the end of 6000. years. Others immediately after the discovery of Antichrist.
Others at another time. But these things are not, certain. Yet as to this point
the Scripture seems clearly to h^ld forth these things. 1. That Gods people
shall have a more certain knowledge of the time when this judgment shall be
then wicked men shall have: they may perhaps be able to see and say in what age
it shall be. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1, 2, 3. etc. But the very precise time no man or
Angel can or shall know, for this knowledge is hid from man, and kept in Gods
own power. 1. For his own glory. 2. For his peoples good, to the end they may
be always upon their watch, ^.
and still ready and prepared. Therefore God has kept one day from us, that we
may watch every day. There is nothing more certain then that Christ will come,
but nothing more uncertain then the time when. Christ will come to judgment.
Mat. 24. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of
heaven, but my Father only. But as the days of Noah were, so likewise shall
the coming of the So^^e of man be. Acts 1. 7. Mark 13. verse 32.

2. That this day shall come, when it does come, suddenly and unexpectedly as
a thief in the night, and a snare upon the blind and secure inhabitants of the
world. Luke 21. 35. When they shall cry peace, then shall come sudden
destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. Matt. 24. 38. As in the days before the (...) they
did eat and drink etc. and knew nothing till the flood took them all away,
so shall the coming of the Son of man be

3. This day is not far off but near at hand, and is hastened by the sins of
wicked, and the prayers of godly men. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Rev. 22. 17. chap. 14. 14,
15. etc.

4. The manner and order of this last judgment, and of Christ's coming to it.
This judgment will be in itself, and to all wicked men exceeding terrible and
dreadful; For as the Judge so the judgment will be most impartial just and
righteous. Romans 2. 2. We are sure the judgment of God is according to truth
against them which commit such things. If Gods temporal judgments which were
only shadows hereof were so terrible, how much more terrible will the
substance thereof, and the execution thereof, this last judgment be? See Joel
2. 1, 2. 31. etc. Zeph. 1. 14, 15, 16. This judgment is resembled and likened
to terrible things, as Lightening, Thieves in the night, the Childbirth of a
Woman, the coming of a Judge to guilty Persons etc. Notable is that place in
Rev. 6. from v. 12. to the end of the chapter, upon the opening of the sixth
Seal, being a prophecy of temporal judgments only to come upon the Roman
Empire already fulfilled upon diverse great men and others therein, enemies of
Christ and his Members. And I behold and there was a great earthquake, and the
Kings of the earth, great men, rich men, chief Captains, mighty men etc.
[notwithstanding their valor, power, wit, riches and friends] (...) themselves
amongst the R^cks and said to the mountains fall on us, and hide us from the
presence of him that sits on the Throne, an^ from the Lamb, for the great
day of his wrath is come and who can stand? Esaias. 34. 6. 8. Ezekiel. 10. 11, 12.
chap. 30. 2, 3. 9. Esaias. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Of this day then we may say much
more, who shall stand, who shall be able to abide it? Mal. 3. 2. This day
therefore in 2 Cor. 5. 11. is called the terror of the Lord. But the days of
temporal judgments the great and terrible days of the Lord. Terrible this
judgment will be. 1. For the things which shall go before it. 2. For the things
which shall accompany it. 3. For the things which shall follow after it. For
the things which shall precede it we will not speak of those foregoing, but
remote signs Which Divines say are 8. [To wit] 1. The preaching of the Gospel.
2. The Apostasy of professors. 3. The revealing of Antichrist. 4. Great wars
and troubles in the world. 5. Great trouble in the Church. 6. False Christ's. 7.
The calling of the Jews. 8. Strange signs in Heaven. But of the immediate
signs which shall appear a little before Christ's coming to judgment. For some
think that alittle before this, the powers of Heaven shall be shaken, the Sun
and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, out of
Mat. 24. 29, 30. Luke 21. 26. and that these Prophesies are to be taken
literally, that there shall be strange events in Heaven and Earth, that the
frame of the whole universe shall shake as a house that gives a Crack when it
is ready to fall. And it is most probable that that which the Apostle 2 Pet. 3
10. prophesies concerning this day. The day of the Lord will come as a Thief
in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise [like a
mighty Whirlwind or Temp^st, roaring and carrying all before it] and the
elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein
shall be burnt up. And after v. 11. That day of God by the which the heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved: answerable to that in Mat. 24. 29. 30. The
Sun shall be darkened and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. By which is
understood the purging renewing and changing of their form and not their utter
destruction; by comparing these places with Psalm. 102. 26. Romans 8. 21. 2 Pet.
3. 13. Rev. 20. 11. After this there shall be new heavens and a new earth. This
thing we say it is probable is to go immediately before Christ's coming, or that
Christ shall come in this fire: And as the day of Judgment is the last day, so
it is likely the judgment it self is one of the last acts of this day. For the
text ^aith, that (...) ^^ely after, these strange signs and sights, the on of
man shall appear: Matthew. 24. 29, 30. and in and by this change of all things,
it is probable that change shall be made of the Saints, whereof the Apostle
speaks (...). 15. 51, 52. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed
in a (...), etc. Some understand by the sign of the Son of man, Matthew. 24 30
some ex^^^ding glory which shall appear in heaven before the appearing of the
So^^e of man himself, which others take to be meant of the dreadful
dissolution of the world by (...) immediately to forego his appearing.

2. The coming of the judge shall be terrible: For 1, it shall be cons(...) as
the Lightning, for he shall appear in his humane shape, so that every eye and
those that have (...) him shall (...) him, Rev. 1. 7. Acts 1. 11. 2. It is not
improbable (as we have touched) that he shall descend and come in the clouds in
the midst or at the end of that (...), Psalm. 50. 3. God shall co^ and shall
not keep silence, a fire shall (...) before him, and a mighty tempest shall be
round about him: 2 Thessalonians. 1 6, 7. When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
(...) flaming fire: 3. his coming shall be sudden like the coming of the
Lightning, Matthew. 24 27. 4. his coming shall be with great power, b^^ghtnes,
majestre and glory, Psalm. 18. 7, 8, etc. So Matt. 24. 30. Chap. 25. 31. He
shall come (...), and sit mounted on the clouds, as on a stately Throne, Acts
1. 9. 11. env^^oned as with a flame of fire attended with an (...) h^^t of
heavenly Angels, there shall not one of them be left in heaven, but they shall
all minister to him in this work: What a bright day will this be, when so many
glorious Suns shall shine in the ^^rmament together, and (...) all the Sun of
righteousness out^^^ning them so much, that the Sun shall (...) but a (...) to
him, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 4 17. Matthew. 6. verse 27. Luke 21. 27. Matthew.
25. 3^. (...). 15. 16.

3. An unconceivable and unspeakable hor^our and fear shall seize upon all
especially upon all wicked men: Luke 21. 25, 26, 27. And there shall be signs
in the (...) and in the (...), and in the Stars, and upon the Earth d^^^resse
of (...) with (...), the Sea and the Wav^ roaring, men's hearts failing them for
(...), and ^or (...) after the things which are coming on the earth: For the
(...) shall be (...), etc. Matthew. 24. 30. Then shall the sign of the Son of
man ap^ear in Heaven, and all the tribes of the Earth shall (...). Revel. 20.
10. (...) and Earth shall ^^e away before him: Rev. 6. 18. The King Captains
(...) great men shall run into holes and corners.

4. There will be a long (...) terrible ^^und of a Trumpet made by Christ's
(...), an (...), (...) Christ's voice and the last Trump, like unto that at the
giving ^t the Law Exo. 19. 15. and as at their solemn meetings they did (...)
men together ^y a Trumpet, so n^w by this Trump, the dead in Christ shall be
first raised and called before Christ, and the rest of the dead afterward,
John 5 28. And by the Ministry of this and the rest of the Angels, as by his
(...) and executioners he shall send, cite, summon and gather together all
Nations before him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Mat 24. 31. 1 Corin. ^5 52. Matt. 25. 32.
And thus much for what shall go before the judgment. It will be terrible also
for the things which shall accompany the Judgment it self. For the proceeding
herein shall be much after the manner of the Judicatures of men. For here in
are thrones prepared for the Judge, his (...) and assistants, and they shall
sit on them, Dan. 7. verse 10. Matthew. 19. verse 18. Re^. 20. verse 11.

2. There is ^. a law making the offense, and a punishment appointed for the
^ssence: 2. a hearing of the cause wherein is an offense proved to be done
(...) sentenced to be punished: 3. the sentence executed according to that ^aw.
In the doing of (...) are two parts, 1. a hearing of the cause, 2. a doing of
execution, and in the first of these are four parts; 1. an accusation: 2. an
arra^gnment: 3. an examination of witnesses or giving of evidence: 4. a giving
of sentence, So here. The Judge being on his Throne and all Nations convented
before him, every man is brought forth, his case is examined, and he receives
his sentence according to it. But to open this yet more fully let us examine
these two things, 1. by what men shall be tried. 2. how it shall be done: 1. By
what? They shall be tried ^y their words and works by which their faith or
infidelity shall be discerned, Matthew. 25. 35, and 42, etc. Jude v. 15. 2 ^or.
5. 10. 2. How they shall be tried: 1, by discovery of the fact: 2, by discovery
of the Law. By discovery of the fact, For which purpose, The books of Gods
(...) know^edge, (...) every man's own consci^^^^ as an informer accusing and as
a thousand with (...), (...) then ^ly and lie so open, that every man shall
have all his (...), ^^d shall be left, and sit down speechless, excuselesse
and self-(...), Jude v 15. And this shall be such a discovery as nothing shall
escape it, for it shall be of every thought of ou^ heart, though never so
secret; every (...) ^f our (...), though never so car^lesly uttered; every
glance of (...) eye, every moment of our time, every omission of good, every
commission (...) done by ourselves, or by others, and suffered by us, of every
(...) we (...), of every good thing committed to us, of every work we have
done, ^f every company we have kept; all this must be brought to judgment: And
our (...) that ^e n^w written (as it were) with the (...) of (...) shall then
be by the fire of the last day made most legible, Matthew. 25. 19. Romans 2. 1, 6
R^^. 20. 12 Eccles. 20. 1. God will bring every work to judgment, with every
(...) thing whether good or evil. 1 Corin. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the
time, till the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness,
and make (...) of the heart manifest, and then shall every man (...) praise of
God. (...). 50. ^1. I will reprove th^^, and set them in order before thine
eyes. 2. This that be by discovery of the word of God, Law and Gospel; For men
shall have that light therein as to see, 1. what they should have done: 2. what
they have done against it: 3. what they must (...) for it. They that have had
no more but the law of nature shall be judged by that alone; they that have had
the law written, by that also; they that have had them both and the Gospel
shall be judged by them all: Romans 2. 12. 16. John 1 2. 48. Thus the ^^yall and
hearing of every man's cause being done and passed, there shall be a separation
made of the good and bad: the good shall be set on Christ's righthand, a place
of dignity and safety; the bad on his left hand, a place of neglect and
forsaking, Matthew. 25. 33. Then the sentence shall be pronounced, and this is
twofold: 1. of Absolution to the good, the sheep on his right hand in these
words. Come ye blessed, etc. every word full of sweetness and comfort. 2. Of
Condemnation to the bad, the Goats on his left hand in these words. Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: a sentence
breathing out nothing but fire and brimstone, stings and horrors, every word
whereof has in it a deadly sting. Depart, be gone, from me: from God, this
were Hell enough to go from God the chiefest good, But oh God! let me go with a
blessing, nay with a curse and vengeance: G^yee (...). Whether Lord must I go?
Let me go to some good place of pleasure? ^^y to H^ll fire, a fire as bad as
Gods wisdom can devise, of old by him devised for thy torment; yet let me I
pray thee come out again? ^ay into everlasting fire. Grant me then but some
good company there? nay with the Devil ^^d his Angels. And thus we have the
terriblenesse of the Judgment, and that which does accompany it.

Now that which follows it is the execution of this sentence, and this will
be much more terrible. For 1. it will be sudden and present, there can be no
reprieve, the (...) be no delay. 2. I^ will be certain, no pardon no^ other
thing can happen or come between the Cup and the Lip to prevent it. 3. It will
be unresistable and unavoidable; for no power or policy can rescue the
prisoner. 4. It will continue to all eternity. The wicked being then under that
shame and contempt spoken off by Daniel chap. 12. v. 2. and under ten thousand
time^ more horror and grief, then ever any guilty condemned person was after
his sentence of condemnation pronounced shall be violently pulled down to Hell
from the presence of the glorious God, Jesus Christ, all good Angels and Men,
and their godly friends, who shall be then so far from pitying and praying for
them, that they shall rejoice in Gods justice upon them, and there they must
suffer the pain and horror of eternal, ^aselesse, and re^^dilesse vengeance
in a dark dungeon; the gates whereof are to be for ever shut upon them, whilst
the godly shall be taken up into heaven, there to enjoy everlasting rest,
glory, and peace. Matthew. 25. 46. And they shall go into everlasting pain, and
these into eternal life. Revel. 20. 14. Death and Hell, (i.) the heirs of
Death and Hell; the reprobates shall be cast into the lake of fire this is the
second Death, of which we shall anon speak largly: 2 Cor. 5. 10. 7. This
Judgment being dispatched, the end of all things shall come, Matthew. 13. 40. 24.
3. 31, 32, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. 8. This doctrine of the last judgment, and
Christ coming ought much to be thought upon of every Christian, Rev. 22. 12.
9. By this we may be taught also; That God will have the glory of his justice
to be seen. 2 Thessalonians 1. 4. 10. Lastly, this does discover to us Gods goodness in
forewarning man of this day, for by this means he may be prepared for to
receive the good of it, and forearmed against the evil of it: so we have done
with the Use of Instruction.

Heb. 6. 2. 2. It being a point of so great moment and high concernment to us
let us meditate and consider of it, and this let us do. 1 Pup^sely and
willingly as Job did. Job 19. 25. I know that my redeemer lives etc. not
accidentally and unwillingly as devils and wicked men do. ^^mes 2. 19. Acts 24.
25. 2. Beleevingly so Job 19. 25. not doubtfully as those wicked in 2 Pet. 3.
4. There shall be m^ckers who shall say where is the promise of his coming. 3.
Desirously as a good day to be wi^^ed for, so the Church Rev. 22. 17. The
Spirit and the Bride say come, not fearfully as an evil day to be avoided as
Foelix did Act. 24. 25. And as he disputed of the judgment to come Foelix
trembled and answered, go thy way for this time, and when I have a convenient
time I will call for thee. 4 Often and continually Mat. 24. 44. not once a
year once a month or once a week only: let us think we ever hear this voice
sounding in our ears, awake ye dead and come to judgment. 5. Seriously so as to
prepare for it Luke 12. 35. 40. Be ye ready also, for the Son of man comes
at an hour when ye think not. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. The day of the Lord will
come as a Thief in the night etc. what manner of persons ought ye th^^ to be
in all holy conversation an^ godliness etc. looking for the coming of this
day etc. not scoffingly as those (...). 2 Pet. 3. 4. And in the meditation of
this day let us think of. 1. The certainty and unavoydablenesse of it. Acts 1.
11. 2. The terriblenesse of it. 2 Cor. 5. 11. 3 The neernesse of it, at least
to every man in particular Rev. 1. ^. To pr^v^le us to consider much of this
time, we are to kn^w. 1 That it is a wise profitable and useful meditation,
and will certainly leave some good impression behind it upon the heart. Deuteronomy
32. 29. For it serves 1. To take of our hearts from the vanities of this life:
he will not much care for that house which is shortly to be burnt down about
his cares. 2 Pet. 3. 1^. 2. It will serve to make us patient under our present
troubles to consider that this time will put an end to them Job 19. 25. 3. It
will make us have a ^are to keep our Accounts always in a readiness whilst we
are still in expectation of the coming of our Master to call us to (...)
account Romans 14. 12. 4. And finally it will much serve to forward the work of
grace, restrain us from evil, and make and keep us good Romans 14. 10. 12, 13.
Why do thou condemn brother, or why do thou despi^^thy brother? For we
shall all appear before the judgment S^ate of Christ, so then every one of us
shall give an account of himself to God, Let us not therefore judge one another
any more etc. Math. 3. ^. Who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath, Gods
judgment to come, in this but especially in the next life. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
Mat. 23. 23. Acts 3. 19 Amend your lives therefore and (...) that your sins may
be put away when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ etc. whom the heavens must contain until
the time (...) all things be restored etc. Acts 17. 30, 31. And the time of
this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonisteth all men every where to
repent, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousn^s by that man whom he has appointed whereof he has given (...)
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Remarkable for
this is that place, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man [thou that presumest of
thy ag^, and put far of the evil day of Death and Iudgment^ and let thine
heart cheer thee, etc. [like the fool in the Gospel Luke 12. (...), please thy
self in thine own vain concelts and wilfulnes] walk in the (...) of thine own
heart [pursue thy pleasures and satisfy thy lusts without (...)] but know that
for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment. Now to help us in this
meditation let us use these means, 1. Let us read and hear often those
Scriptures and other books which treat of this subject: 2. Let us speak much of
it with them who do most think of it: 3. Let us observe much those things
amongst men which do resemble it, as the Lightning, Iudicatures of men and the
like: 4. Let us still pray to God to put and keep this meditation in our hearts.

In the third place we are to be exhorted, that believing and thinking of this
last Judgment, and Christ's coming to it, we do prepare for it. This is Christ's
counsel, Matt. 24. 44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in an hour that ye
think not, will the Son of m^n come: Luke 12 40. Be ye also prepared therefore.
Matthew. 25. 13 Watch therefore, etc. for ye know not the day nor the ^ou^^ when
the son of man comes. Luke 21. 6. Watch ye therefore and pray always. And
this we must do for these reasons, 1. because this day hastes and will steal
upon us unawares if we look not to it: Luke 21. 35. As a snare it shall come on
them that dw^^ on the earth. Rev. 3. 3. If therefore thou shall not watch, I
will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come
upon thee. (...) ^^y the mo^e sudden the more terrible for 1, it amazes and
exanimates a man, as an unexpected storm does the Mariner: 2. it cannot be
prevented. 2 That which we do in the matter of preparation must be done before
that day come, for it will be then too late to do any thing to it: and delay in
this case is very dangerous, for though we could be sure of time, yet we cannot
be sure of grace as we have set forth to us in the instance of the foolish
Virgins, Matt. 25. 9, 10. They which neglect to get grace here have no way left
to get any then. And no other man's goodness will then stand them in any stead.
Psalm. 95. 11. Matt. 24 43, 44. it will be too late to bolt the door when the
thieves are broken into the house. 3. If at that time we be not prepared we are
undone forever, if we be prepared we are made for ever, Matthew. 25. 9, 10, 11.
4. None but such as are prepared will be able to stand justified in that
judgment. Luke 21. 36. Watch, etc. that ye may be counted worthy to escape all
these things which shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

If now you shall ask me how you may be prepared for Christ's coming.

I answer 1. We must labor for true repentance, which does consist in
contrition, confession, faith, and reformation. Acts 17. 30, 31. Now God
commands all men every where to repent because he has appointed a day
wherein he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has
ordained. etc. 1. Cor. 11. 31. If we judge our selves we shall not be judged.
Now let us weep over him in time because we have offended him, least we be
forced to weep and wail to late that we did not weep in time Acts 3. 20, 21.
Repent and amend, that your sins may be put away when the time of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ etc.
Mat. 11. 20, 21. Luke 13. 3, 5. 2. We must believe and obey the Gospel of
Christ Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. By this
faith we are united to Christ the Judge, and make him a sure friend to us Phil:
3. 9. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 2 These. 1. 10. when Christ comes to Judgment he shall be
admired of all them that believe, And he is a Savior only to them that obey
him Heb. 5. 9. But he will show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering veng^an^^ to them that do not know God, and which obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 These. 1. 7, 8. 3. we must labor for
a holy and unblameable life. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then all these things shall
be dissolved what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness, looking for and hasting to the coming of the day of God. And after
verse 14. be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and
blameless. Rev. 3. 4, 5. They who have not defiled their garments (i) have
kept themselves from the contagion of sin, even from the show of evil, Jude
ver. 23. they shall be clothed in white (^) gloriously and their names shall
not be put out of the book of life, in which the names of the elect are
written. But the wicked shall not be able to stand in the judgment. Psalm. 1.
5. and into the holy City there shall not enter any unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works Abomination, or Lies, but they which are written in the
Lambs book of life. Revelation. 21. 27. 4. We must labor with all diligence to
make good our Election to our selves, for thereby we shall be made sure of
salvation; if we can be sure our names are written in the book of life. Reve.
21. 27. Reve. 20. 12, 15. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before
God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened which is the book
of Life and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the
books according to their (...). And whosoever was not found written in the
books of life was cast into the ^ake ^of fire. And we shall find out our
Election by our Sanctification. Rom^n^s. 8. 30. 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. and Jude ver.
1. 1 These. 4. 7.

5. We must have a care to to keep our Accounts always even between God and
us. For this purpose we must 1. set them down exactly. 2. We must cast them up
often. Thus thriving men and such as mean not to be bankrupts use to do by
their Civil accounts. 6 We must seek the Lord now whiles he may be found. Esaias
55. 6. Let us now su^ out our pardon, and make our peace with him in Christ and
get the favor of the Judge, for now is the day of mercy, of grace, the day of
Judgment is a day of wrath and vengeance. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. Luke 3. 7. Romans 2.
5. 7. We must not sleep in (...) but be always awake unto righteousness and
having our Accounts ready, live always in an expectation of Christ's sudden
appeareance. Luke 21. 34, 36. Matthew. 24. 42. Romans 14. 12. 2 These. 5. 4 6 It is
doubtless one main cause of the freedom and boldness of men in sinning, that
either they think not of giving any account at all, or if they do they put that
day far from the^: he that without all consideration takes up money and runs
in debt, does certainly never mean to pay it again. Come says the Ha^lot Prove.
7. 8. Let us take our pleasure to the full etc. my husband is gone a far
journey etc. Matthew. 24. 48. The evil servant that smites his fellows, and
eats and drinks with the drunken, says, My master does defer his coming
Amos 6. 3. They put far from them the evil day and approach to the seat of
iniquity. 8 If we be professors of religion, we must not be content with the
lamp of profession only, but also labor to get the oil of true grace and
piety in our hearts. Matthew. 25. 1. 2, 3, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 9 We must be
faithful and active in the places wherein God has set us, and in the trusts
put into our hands Mat. 24. 46, 10. We must pray always Luke 21. 36. Pray with
David Psalm. 143. 2. Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
fight shall no flesh be justified. 11 And thus we must love, long, and wish,
for the speedy coming of this day and of Christ our dearest friend Rev. 22.
17. 2 Pet. 3. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 7. And rejoice that it draws nigh Acts 3. 19.
Luke 21. 28. 12. We must continue withpatience and sobriety to wait for Christ's
coming till he come. For 1. it will be long ere he come Mat. 25. 5. 2. A
general security will be upon all sorts of people Mat. 25. 5. 6. Mat. 24. 38.
39. 3. Security is dangerous to all Mat. 25 5, 6. 7. 8. 4 Herein is
watchfulness indeed, in an earnest care and bending of the mind, to live every
day as one would live upon his Judgment day, which may fall out to be every
day for ought that he knows. Thus let us be always prepared, for Christ will
come in an hour that we think not of. 4. Since at the day of judgment every
man shall receive according to his works, let us be from hence exhorted in the
next place to take care that our works be good, and that we be fruitful in
good works Romans 2. 6. 7, 8. Especially in succouring the needy members of
Jesus Christ Mat. 25. 35. I was hungry and ye fed me etc. The last definitive
sentence shall pass upon men according to their forwardness and freeness in
showing mercy to the family of faith and the meanest kindness done to them,
Christ will accept, and will reward as done to himself. Mat. 10. 41. 42. God is
not unfaithful that he should forget your labor of love etc. 5. In the next
place, since at this great day our conscience shall give evidence against us
and either accuse or excuse us, and it will be a time of great trouble; let us
labor to get good and quiet consciences toward God and man. 2 Pet. 3. 14. And
if at any time the conscience happen to be defiled or disquieted by sin, let us
by repentance and application of Christ's blood by faith, get it to be cleansed
and quieted again. A good conscience will be more worth than all the worlds
good at the day of judgment Acts 24. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 6. In the next place
let this serve to persuade us that are Gods people, to be patient under all the
sufferings of this present life James 5. 6, 7, 8. Be patient therefore for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh: and then when he comes all will be well, for
then his people shall have rest from all their troubles. 2 These. 1. 6, 7. But
of this we shall have more in the use of comfort. 7. Let us be persuaded in the
next place to think and speak more reverently of the Judge of all flesh, the
Lord Jesus. If we honor our civil Judges, we are much more bound to honor
this Judge. Rev. 14. 7. 8. Since that at this day of judgment all things shall
be dissolved by fire: Let this in the next place persuade us to moderation in
our desires after, and delights in all earthly things, the works either of
creation or natures daily production, or arts invention 2 Pet. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 7.
31. Let us use the world as if we used it not. 9 In the next place, since after
the dissolution of all things there shall be n^w heavens, and a new earth
wherein dwells righteousness. 2 Pet. 3. 13. (i) none but righteous persons:
Let us then labor by regeneration to be such persons. 10. Since this time of
Christ's second coming will be such a troublesome time: Let us take care to be
in a safe place at that time, as men do when a city is to be stormed: Let us
put our selves into Gods hands. Psalm. 31. 5. 11. In the next place let this
persuade us to a reverent fear of Gods judgments which are so terrible. Psalm.
119. 120. Hab. 3. 16.

Luke 21. 28, 36. Acts 3. 19 Rev. 22. 17.

Cor. 1. 5 Let us see whether our names be written in the book of life. (i)
whether we are elected to life, and our names are written in heaven, to be
taken up into life and glory with them that are appointed thereunto; for those
whose names are not written there, are to be cast out Rev. 21. 27. And hence it
is that this Book is to be opened at the day of Judgment Rev. 20. 12, ^5. to
see whose names are written there. Rev. 3. 5, 21, 27. Phil. 4. 3. The work is
then to find whether our names are written in this Book of life, for if once
written there, they can never be put out again. But you will say how shall we
know this, which is not to be known? we answer First this is to be known 1. For
otherwise Moses spoke he knew not what in Exodus 32. 31, 32. And Christ's speech
must needs be idle in Luke 10. 12. When he bids his disciples rejoice that
their names were written in the Book of life: And the Apostle 2 Pet. 2. 10.
spoke unadvisedly when he bid them make their Election sure 2. The Saints have
known this Job 19. 25, 26. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Secondly their names are written in
the Book of life. (i) they are Elected which are Christ's sheep: And they are
Christ's sheep which have. 1. Christ's Ear mark an inward and effectual C^l^^ng
(i) that are drawn by the work of Gods Spirit from sin to holiness, and made
of sinners saints and sons of God. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Acts 2. 39. Rom 8.
28, 30. Whom he predestined them he called. etc. 2. Christ's brand mark
brotherly love. 1 John 3. 14. John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples if ye love one another. 3. His mark in their foreheads, they
mourn for sin. Ezekiel. 9. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 7. 4. His Seal the spirit of God. Romans
(...). 8, 9, 10. 5. They feed in his pastures upon his ordinances and grow and
thrive thereby in grace. Ephesians. 2. 21. Psalm. 23. 2. Psalm. 84. 7. 6. That are
like to sheep in nature and quality. 1. Tractable and meek, that may be easily
governed and reduced from their strayings. Psalm. 100. 3. Esaias. 11. 6. Matt. 5
5. Ephesians. 4. 1. 2. 2. Chaste. Tit. 2. 5. 3. Innocent. Matt. 10. 16. 4. Patient.
James 5. 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 6. Psalm. 40. (...). Esaias. 53. 7. 5 Profitable Phil.
ver. 11. 6. Temperate Tit. 1. 8. Luke. 21. 24. 1 Peter. 1 6. 7. Sociable and
loving. Heb. 10. 25. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. 8. Clean from soul. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Rev. 3.
4 5. 7. They have not only a form but a power of godliness, not only oil in
their lamps but in their vessels also Matt. 25. 1, 2. 3. etc. 8 They are active
and faithful in their places for Gods glory and his Churches good Matt. 24.
46. And finally they are such as believe and obey the gospel of Jesus Christ,
turn from sin sincerely, stick to God constantly, and suffer patiently the evil
of this present time, desire, wait, and lock for the appearing of this Christ
to judgment. 2. These. 1. 7, 8. Matt. 24. 48, 13, 33, 37. Heb. 10. 25. To these
Christ's coming and the last judgment will be very joyful and acceptable. But
such as are not called out of the world, and from their sins, that are secure,
unregenerate, that hate Gods people, rejoice in iniquity, have not the spirit
of Christ, forsake the fellowship of Gods saints and ordinances, profit not
under them, but grow worse and worse, do not employ, or misimploy the Tallents
God has trusted them with, are hurtful, intemperate, filthy, fierce, that are
impenitent, unbeleeving, Apostates, hypocrites, Idolaters, whoremongers,
murderers, liars, and such like, have little cause to rejoice in this day. To
all these Christ's coming will be terrible, and the judgment day a sad day, as
we shall show you by and by. Io. 3. 3. 1 Ioh. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 1^. 6. Romans 8. 9.
Matt. 25. 14. etc. 44. 49. etc. 2 These. 1. 8. Luke. 13. 5. Rev. 21. 8 Heb. 10.
25. Matthew. 24. 51. Luke 21. 34.

The next Use shall be a use of Comfort to all believing Christians, that have
the characters of Christ's Sheep we have before given upon them; and Io. 5. 22.
The Father has committed the judgment to him. 2. It may comfort them against
the meanness and contempt of Christ (the Christians God) when he was in the
world: for he, albeit he did then appear in weakness, and in a mean condition,
yet shall he appear the second time with power and great glory, to the
admiration of his friends and terror of his enemies. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 1^.
When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels;
Inflaming fire etc. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints and to be
made marvelous in all them that believe. 3. It may comfort them against the
horror of the grave, and the corruption of the body; for at Christ's coming it
shall be brought before him: therefore it must be raised and restored. Job 19.
25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last day on the
earth, etc. 4. It may comfort them against persecutions, for when Christ comes
the persecuted shall be delivered and rewarded, and the persecutor punished, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, and to you which are troubled rest with us, When the
Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, etc. 5. It may comfort them against
the ^ast Judgment of men and things; evil men and evil things are now called
good, and good evil: Esaias 5. 20. But at this last Judgment all men and things
shall appear in their colors, and be seen to be as they are, Matthew. 10. 25,
26. There is nothing covered that shall not be disclosed, nor ^id that shall
not be known: and when shall this be if not at this day, which shall be the day
of the declaration of the just judgment of God. Romans 2. 5. and the time when
God will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsel of the
heart manifest and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Romans
14. 12, 13. Then the righteous cause and person trodden down, here shall have
the upper hand. Psalm. 49. 14. The upright shall have dominion over them in the
morning, (i) at the day of the resurrection, after the night of death and the
grave is past: Then it shall be known who was in fault, Joseph or his Mistress,
Genesis 39. 7, 8. etc. 17, 18, 19. Whether it were Ahab or Eliah that troubled
Israel, 1 Kings 18. 17, 18. And whether Christ or the Scribes and Pharisees
(that did so much censure him) were most faulty. Then will it be seen, who
indeed is the hypocrite, the factious, seditious, (...) person, who is the
truly fool, and who is the truly wise man; there will be a resurrection of
names as well as of bodi^s. 6. It may comfort them against the injuries they
su^^er by unjust Judges, and their unjust sentences, Iam. 5. 6, 7, 8. Eccless.
3. verse. 16, 17. 5. 8. Esdras 7. 32. the most high shall appear upon the seat
of Judgment, and misery shall vanish. 7. It may comfort them against all manner
of misery and sorrow: when Christ shall come to judgment, all sorrow shall be
done away, and perfect deliverance shall come to them, Then shall all tears be
wiped away from their eyes, Luke 21. 28. When ye see th^se things, lift up
your heads for your redemption draws nigh. It is called therefore a time of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. This held up Jobs
head above water, who otherwise had been overwhelmed with the floods of
affliction, Job. 19 25. and Daniel 12. 1, 2. and those Saints in Hebr. 11. 35.
and as the summer after the winter, so Heaven after these sorrows will be much
the sweeter. 8. This may comfort them against the dissolution of Heaven and
Earth; these shall be dissolved, but we shall have new Heavens, and a new
Earth: (i) we shall have them with renewed qualities, shining with brightness
and glory, somewhat proportionable to the Saints, to delight their eyes and
minds; Wherein shall dwell righteousness: (i.) none but righteous persons, 2
Pet. 3. 12. Esaias 1. 21. 9. This may comfort them in respect of all the good
they do, and evil they suffer: it is perhaps little heeded of men, they do as
much as they can obscure it, and the glory of the Saints for it: when Christ
comes to judgment, he will trumpet out their praise. Matthew. 25. 35. I was
hungry and ye fed me, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Then shall every one have praise of
God.

The next and last use we shall make of this point of the last judgment is a
use of discomfort and reproof to two sorts of people. 1. It is for the great
terror and fear, and sharp reproof of all such as viewing themselves in the
glass Disobedient, Unbelieving, Idolatrous, Ignorant, Unregenerate, Unpenitent,
Fearful, Hypocritical, Apostate, Unprofitable, Formal Persons, and such as
are ha^ers and despisers of Christ, his People, his Graces, and Ordinances: And
yet if they think at all of the day of judgment, and of Christ's coming it is
as of a day far off, or a day that will not hurt them; or (which is worse) do
neither believe it nor thing of it at all, or (which is worst of all) if they
do think or speak of it, it is to mock and jeer at it. They say let him make
have with his work that we may see it, Esaias 5. 19. Where is the promise of his
coming, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Out of a profane boldness and infidelity as provoking God
to bring (...) that once which he has so long threatened: or by an impudent
boasting of their own innocence, as if Gods coming to judgment should find
them not guilty, or not s guilty as they are charged to be: they desire the
day of the Lord, Amos 5. 18. Ior. 5. 11, 12, 13, etc. To all these we have this
to say: 1. They are worse then the Devils who do believe the day of judgment
and tremble to think of it. Matt. 8. 29. Iam. 2. 10. 2. The time will shortly
come, when all Gods words which he has spoken concerning this thing shall be
no longer delayed but come to pass and be performed against them. Eze^k. 12.
^1, 2,^, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 2. Pet. 3. 20. The day of the Lord will come
etc. I^r. 5. 13, 14. 3. This day will come too soon for these men when ever it
comes. 4. It will come on a sudden, and when they least of all do think of it:
It shall come as a thief in the night. 2 Pet. 3. 10. 5. It will be a terrible
day to them, for they must then be brought to judgment and cannot avoid it. 2.
Then shall all their sins (which now they will not see) be represented to them
in their colors, as a debt they are not able to pay, nor any will pay for
them, for which the Sergeant is ready to arrest them, the Jail ready to take
and keep them, till they have paid the utmost farthing which will never be, and
this shall be laid open to men and Angels. 3. They can look for no other but to
hear against them pronounced that dreadful sentence, Depart ye cursed into,
etc. and in what a case will their hearts be to hear it. 4. They must expect a
speedy and certain execution thereof like that of Haman, Esther 7 8. Mat. 24.
50. Cut him asunder and give him his portion with Hipocrites. 5. The punishment
will be intolerable, the time eternal. But to them which so much desire the
day of the Lord; we have this further to say out of Zeph. 1. 12. 15. An^os 5.
18. To what end is it for you: the day of the Lord is darkness and not light:
the great day of the Lord is near, and hastes greatly. It is a day of wrath, a
day of trouble and distress, a day of wastenesse, and desolution, a day of
darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness to them which
are settled on their lees, that say in their hearts, the Lord will neither do
good, neither will ^e do evil. To them and all the rest we say: There remains
nothing for them: But a fearful looking for of judgment and violent ^ire which
shall devour the adversaries, Hebr. 10. 27.

2. The second part of this use is to blame G^ods people. If t^ry of judgment
be a dreadful day, near at hand, and will come when men least think of it, are
not Gods people blameworthy that they do not think more seriously and
frequently of, and prepare more carefully for this day?

That this security may be and is the fault of Gods own people is evident.
Matthew. 24. 5. Whiles tho bridegroom ^arried long, they all slumbred. Matthew. 25.
38, 39, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. When Christ comes shall he find faith on the
earth? Lu^e 18. (...). Psalm. 30. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30, 31. And hence it is
partly that their hearts are so much set upon the things of this world* they do
so little mind the making up of their accounts, and that they are so impatient
under their lusterings, and so ca^elesse and uncircumspect in their lives;
because they d^^ not more mind the second coming of Christ to judgment, and
the near approach thereof: It was to Christ's own Disciples he said, Luke 21. 34
Take heed to your selves least at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting, drunkenness and the cares of this life; and least that day come on
you at unawares, Matthew. 24. 42, 43, etc. Matthew. 25. 12, etc. And truly as this
is an evil to which the Saints are liable, so is it not without danger enough
to them. The danger is set out and illustrated at large in Matthew. 24. and
chapt. 25. in the parable of the Virgins, and the Hou^^olders neglect of his
house, and the Thieves breaking in thereby, and the sudden coming of the
Master upon his evil Servant; for albeit it cannot overthrow the elect, and
prevent their salvation (for this is impossible to be done) yet so far it may
take upon them that they may be very hardly saved. 1 Pet. 4. 18. Matthew. 26. 39.
It is true, the great soul Thief, the Devil, come he at what hour he will,
cannot rob him, and spoil him of his salvation; but it is as true, he may
notwithstanding affright him sorely and much endanger his salvation. That Soul
to whom when Christ shall come in his particular Judgment at his death, and
find him somewhat careless and secure, may perhaps not know and much doubt
whether it shall be saved or not. And truly we cannot say but the last coming
of Christ to judgment in general may at the first be somewhat terrible, as the
coming of the Master on a sudden to the servant whose accounts are not made
o^n, and the coming of the Thief to the Householder that looks not for him,
though he knows he shall not rob him: and (as it seems) the ^ive wise, but
slumbring Virgins were, at the sudden coming of the Bridegroom. The more
watchful we are, and shall be found, the more confident assured and
comfortable, doubtless we shall be found when Christ comes to judgment: But if
we be otherwise, we may be saved; but it will be perhaps as a firebrand plucked
out of the fire, and as Lot was saved out of the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19.
16. It will be Gods decree and his care to keep us, and not by our watchfulnes
and care to keep our selves, it will be by his holdfast of us, not our ^oldfast
of him.

Of Heaven, of Hell.
IN the handling of this subject of Heaven and Hell, (to omit all curious,
endless, needless and fruitless questions) we shall endeavor for the
doctrinall part to prove 3. things necessary to be known, 1. That there is such
a state to come as Heaven and Hell is: For he that is such a fool as to say ^n
his heart, there is no God, may be such a fool also as to say, there is neither
Hell nor Heaven. 2. What Heaven and Hell are: that the one is a very glorious
and happy, the other a very base and miserable condition. 3. That there are
degrees of this happiness and misery. And then last of all, for the use of all
this, we shall show, how we may attain to the one, and escape the other. And
for a foundation of all our structure, we will first of all lay down this
doctrinall proposition or point.

DOCTRINE.
That there is a Heaven and a Hell, that this Heaven is a state of wonderful
happiness, And this Hell is a state of wonderful misery, And there are
degrees of this happiness and misery. These parts we shall take and handle
asunder.
That there is a Heaven.
THat there is a heaven may appear by these things. 1. Otherwise the condition
of the best men will be worst, for in this life they receive most evil things.
Luke 16. 25. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19. 2. How otherwise can God be just, or appear to
be just? And shall not the judge of all the earth do right? If God proportion
the worst ^sta^^ to the best men he must at least seem to be unjust, which
cannot be. 2 Th^^salonians. 1. 5, 6, 7. It is a righteous t^^^g with God (...).
to gi^e you rest who are troubled. It is a manife^^ taken of the righteous
judgments of God. This time and state is therefore called, The time of the
re^^lation of the righteous judgments of God. Romans 2. 5. 3. Otherwise the^e is
no reward for the righteous for all the good works they have done. And the
reward of their works shall be given them. I^say 3. 10. 4. Otherwise the
greatest part of the Scripture must be false, and the promises of heaven to the
righteous must be of no force, for the Scripture says there is a Heaven and
God has promised it to the righteous, and it is purchased and prepared for
them. Matthew. 2 5. 31, 5, 12, 19, 8, 1^, 21. Co^oss. 1. 5. Heb. 10. 34, 5. It is
begun here and men have a little taste of it in this life, which is an evidence
to them of the full f^u^tion thereof in the life to come. Romans 5. 2, 8, 23.
Mark 9. 45, 6. If there be a God, there is a Kingdom of God: But the first is
true. 7. There is a resurrection of good and bad and therefore a place for good
and bad.

That there is a Hell.
THat there is a Hell may appear by these things. 1. Otherwise the condition of
the worst men will be best, for in this life they (for the most part) receive
good things. Luke 16. 25. They are not afflicted as other men. (i) The
righteous, for there are no other men but the righteous and the wicked. Psalm.
78. 5. 2. Otherwise Gods justice is not seen in giving to every man according
to his deeds as in that Romans 2. 5, 6. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire
to take vengeance etc. 3. Otherwise the sinner shall escape unpun^hed for his
sin; for many of them are not plagued at all for their sins here. And yet the
reward of his hands shall be given him. Esaias. 3. 11. And every one mu^^ receive
according to that he has done whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 4.
Otherwise the word of God, that does assure us there is a Hell, and all the
threatenings of God against sinners, that they shall be cast into bell etc. are
false Esaias. ^0. 33. Tophe^ is prepared of old etc. Psalm. 9. 13. The wicked
shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God. Matt 5. 22, 10,
28, 18, 9. 5. It is begun here and they have a taste of it in this present
life, for what else is it that does cause that horror of conscience in some
men, but the fear of lying for ever under Gods wrath in this place, Judas.
Matt. 27. 7. Acts 1. 25. Spir^t etc. Belshassar. Dan. 5. Herod. Nero and others.

What Heaven is.
IN the opening of this point we shall show first in general what is either
properly, or figuratively and by way of resemblance and of it. And 2 in some
particulers wherein it does consist.

Heaven is the blessed state and condition made and appointed by God, for the
eternal happiness of the godly and elect, after this life is ended, with God
and his blessed Angels above, where the most lively visible and Comfortable
discovery of Gods gracious presence is; a little taste whereof we have here, a
greater when Soul and Body are separated by death, And the full fruition
whereof we have when the Body shall be raised and Soul and Body united
together.

As touching this place and condition, we must first know, that the excellency,
glory and sweetness thereof, no mortal heart, or created understanding can
possibly conceive and comprehend to the life. For S. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 2.
9. That neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, n^^ther heart of man conceived,
the incomprehensible height and glorious mysteries of that heavenly wisdom and
inutterable, divine sweetness revealed in the Gospel: How transcendently then
unutterable and unconcewable is the fulfilling perfection, the real, actual,
and full fruition of all those evangellicall revelations accomplished to the
height in the highest heavens through all eternity. But this is ce^tain, that
this state and place is a state and place of inconceivable happiness and
pleasure. For if the Disciples of Christ in the Transfiguration, were so taken
and ^avished with a little glimpse of this glory, that they desired they might
for ever enjoy it. Matt. 17. 2, 3, 4. What then will the full view thereof be?
and if the taste of it only be a ^^y that passet^ all understanding Phil. 4. 7.
a joy unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1. 8. Then the whole cup and full
draught thereof must needs be an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor.
4. 17. There is a fullness of joy in it. Psalm. 17. 15. The soul shall have so
much that it shall desire no more; it shall have so much that it can receive no
more, as a vessel that is full to the top. It is a rich inheritance. Ephesians. 1.
18. No man can know it in the extent, but he that injoyeth it: and all that can
be said of it, can but as he that drew out the whole body of Hercules by his
foot, frame unto us a conjecture of the matter that will come^ar^^ short of the
thing it self. The Scripture does set it forth unto us by the most excellent
and precious things that are in the world: It is called a kingdom and crown,
which is the top and Crown of all earthly happiness; In this there is a
confluence of all (...), pleasures, glory, and what man's heart can with for
outward welfare and felicity: they that p^ssess this are said to be Kings, and
to have Crowns, Matthew. 25. 34 Rev. 1. 6. 2. Tim. 4. 8. James 1. 12. And what
what will not men do and suffer for a Kingdom. It is called an Heavenly
Kingdom. Matthew. 7 21. to note that it exceeds in glory and excellency all
earthly Kingdoms, as farre^s Heaven surpasses the Earth and more. It is called
also, the Kingdom of God. Acts 1^. 23. a Kingdom of Gods own making, (who does
all things like himself) filled and shining with all Majesty; leisure and
unspeakable (...), beseeming the dwelling of the King of Kings: It is said to
be also a kingdom in^corruptible, 1 (...). 1. 4 and that cannot be shaken,
Hebr. 12. 28. It is not subject to any hazard, (...) change as earthly Kingdoms
are (for all (...) is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field,
Esaias 4^. 6.) but it will be as fre^h and as full many thousand of years hence
as it is at the first. It is also said to be undefiled: 1. Pet. 1. 4. to note
that it may be had and kept without any sin at all; which hardly can be in the
having and holding of earthly kingdoms: they are accompanied with many
temptations, so there is a transcendency in this kingdom above all earthly
kingdoms.

It is compared to light, 1 Timothy 5. 16. It is compared to honor and glory, 2
Cor. 4. 17. It is compared to life, then which what more sweet? it is expressed
by the things that are most desired of men. Think we if a man that has a sound
mind in a healthy body, and that has together and at once all the most
exquisite and ravishing delights and contents to body and mind, that all the
world can afford? and all this is nothing to set forth this estate; for all
th^se things are no more to be compared to the glory of Heaven, then the
shadow it to be comp^^ed to the body. But by these earthly things the holy
Ghost does paint out this heavenly happiness to us. It is compared to a royal
fea^^, a glorious City, and the ^ike. Think we upon a Virgin of mean condition
and in great (...), graciously adopted by, and taken and ^^pou^ed to, a husband
of great worth, as a Prince o^ the like; one she loves dearly and longs for
much, one she has been long kept from, now to be gloriously and richly married
unto him in a stat^ly palace and glorious City, never to be ^undred from him
again: what ravishing joy and sweet delight would it be to such a Virgin? This
does a little shadow out unto us the happy condition of a Christian in Heaven.
For Christ has espou^^^ him (though most unworthy) to himself, and having
loved him first, makes him to love Christ, and long after him, but the marriage
is not to be consummate till they meet in Heaven, Ezech. 16. 4. 1 Io. 4 17.
Phil. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 5, 6, 7. Rev. 22. 20. 17. Rev. 19. 7. Rev. 21. What joy
will it be (think we) to an heir of a Kingdom or rich inheritance, that has
been long kept from it, in much warn and misery; now to have the full and
peaceable possession of it, as David had at length of his kingdom, Psalm. 18.
What joy is it to a man that has been long at Sea in a dangerous voyage, even
fainting with desire to see the land, now to arrive at his desired haven, in a
goodly country and amongst his dearest friends, and there to be royally
feasted, and entertained with all possible delights? What joy to a man banished
from his country and friends, into an unknown uncomfortable place, and there to
be imprisoned and hardly used without any hope of return; for him to return to
his country and friends, and there to feast and rejoice together. What joy to a
man under the Turk^^h tyranny and bondage, and there designed to death, to be
redeemed and brought from thence, and advanced to great glory? What joy to two
dear friends that have been long assunder now to meet together? What are all
these things but life from the dead? yet all this is nothing to the happiness of
the Saints in heaven. Th sweet content of a Christian in this estate is
resembled to the sweet sleep of an Infant in its mothers bosom. Luke 16. 23.
If A^asucrus (to discover his great glory and riches) could make such a feast
as he did, Esth. 1? What manner of banquet then, how magnificent, how full of
majesty will the feast of the King of Kings be, which he will make to feast his
dearest friends to all eternity? we may well think it to be as great as the
power and wisdom of the maker can reach unto; which must need, be incomparable
and above all meas^^e infinity. And if God has made such a world for a world
of wicked men, for a a place of banishment, for a vale of misery; what place
has he made for his dearest and holy friends, in the ti^e of j^y and marriage
of his Son? If our Goal contain so great matters what shall o^ Country and
Kingdom do? To say all in a little room, in the words of a learned man, In
heaven the Lord shall be the Sun without rising, or setting; there we shall
partake of the greatest good without envy; there shall be fullness of joy
without disdain, perpetual triumph without war, perfection with out any defe^t,
perpetu^^y without end: God shall dwell in his people most clearly; he shall
crown them with all good things; he shall remove all sorrow and mourning from
them; Christ shall give them of the tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise
of God: to them he shall give the morning Star^^ Christ shall ^wn and honor
them in the ^^ght of God and Angels. The pure river of livingwater shall flow to
them they shall be satisfied with the fruit of the tree of Life; they shall
enjoy eternal health, they can never sin, they shall be for ever with God and
the Lamb: there we shall not loose a friend, nor fear an enemy; there we shall
live with good affection without defect; there no man shall be born, for no man
shall die, no man shall increase or decrease; no man shall hunger or thirst but
sati^^ie shall be immortality, and meat var^ety. It is life, therefore sweet;
It is an inheritance, all men desire this; It is a crown and a kingdom; all men
aspire to this: it is light, all men delight in it; It is honor and glory, and
all men labor to this; and it c^st Christ his precious blood, it must needs be
some rare purchase for which so much was paid. 1 Pet. 1. 18. There we shall be
^ed with Angels food which shall be to us a continual feast; there we shall be
clothed with immortality and glory: 1 Corin. 15. 43. There shall be chastity
without uncleanness, sanct^^y without pollution, gravity without foolishness,
temperance without gl^ttony: there the mind shall be always sober, holy,
pious, wholly and always addicted to the love of God. But we shall open these
things yet farther in some particulars.

As the misery of Hell, so the happiness of Heaven does (...) of two parts, 1.
in ^^exemption and (...) of all ^^^ll. 2. In a fruition of all good. The
righteous in heaven shall be freed from all manner of evil, from evil
spiritual; for they shall not, they cannot sin; that which makes the holy man
here to cry out, O wretched man that I am, etc. Romans 7. 24. they shall be freed
off: the Conscience shall not be unquieted any more; corporal, for there shall
be no more offense to the body, by hunger, thirst, cold, wearines, heat, ^^ame,
sickness, death, nothing shall annoy either soul or body; it shall neither feel
nor fear disturbance: Otherice blessed condition, that is so exceeding happy,
and whose happiness is so infallibly secured, Revel. 21. 4. Esaias: 5. 8. It is
said of this estate: And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain, etc. And again, Revel. 7. 14, etc. These are they which came
out of great tribulation, and they shall hunger no more nor thirst any more:
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in
the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And
again, Esaias 57. 1, 2. it is said, The righteous are taken away from the evil
to come. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds. And in
Matthew. 11. 29. Come unto me all ye that are (...) laden, etc. you shall find
rest to your Souls: of this time and state it is that Christ speaks, Mat. 22.
30. They neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God
in Heaven. Hebr. 4. 9. There remains a rest for the People of God: the which
was signified by the rest the Jews had in the ^^nd (...) Canaan, Psalm 95. 11.
This is that also the whole creation wa^teth for: Romans 8. 22, 23. For we know
that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together till now: And
not only they, but our selves also which have the first fruits of the spirit;
(...) we ourselves gr^^n within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit,
for the Redemption of our body. Nay then, shall do (...) self be swallowed up
in victory: 1 Cor. 15. 54. So that the triumphant ^oulin (...), (...) God (...)
the (...) our Lord Jesus (...). So that here we see (...) immunity and freedom
from (...), for Death and the (...) shall be abolished, and that last enemy
shall be destroyed. Coll. 3. 3. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law. Christ has taken away the sin, satisfied the Law, and obtained
eternal freedom for his own. They are never to return into bondage o^ to feel
evil any more. They are no more to come into this place; for they are to dwell
on high where no evil can reach them. The Devil shall be shut up in chains of
darkness in the prison of Hell. Romans 16. 20. no wicked person or thing shall be
in Heaven, for there dwelled righteousne^^: there shall be therefore perfect
freedom without any possibility of returning to bondage.

The second part of the happiness of heaven, is in the fruition of all good,
corporal and spiritual, and albeit this does consist of many particulars, yet
all these seem to be intended and contained in those three words in Romans 2. 10.
Glory, Honor and Peace, in opposition to the ^^ame, Contempt and Trouble, by
which the misery of Hell is described. The glory o^ the Saints in Heaven (...)
wherein a part of then happiness shall consist) shall be in these things 1. in
their bodies, which being glorified, shall be most beautiful and excellent,
either as it springs out of the blessed beauty and excellency of the soul, or
as it is ind^wed with an heavenly excellency originally implanted by God in it
self: For the Spirit of God and glory shall thou rest abundantly upon them. 1
Pet 4. 14. The body be^^^s the freedom that it shall have from all the evils
thereof, as lamenes, mis-shapenesse, sickness, hunger, nakedness, wearines, cold
and the like, it shall be gloriously end^wed with many positive and wonderful
excellencies, as 1. Immortality, for it can never possibly die, 1 Corinthians. 15.
verse 54. but it shall live as long as God does live, so that herein their
condition is a thousand times more happy th^n it was in the state of innocence
in Paradise. 2. Incorruptiblenes, for every glorified body shall be for ev^r
utterly impossible with any corruptive quality, action or alteration, and
cannot be subject to any inward decay or dissolution, 1 Cor. 15. 42. 54. 3.
Power, when to the Souls native strength there shall be an addition of
glorifying vigor, and Gods mighty spirits more plentiful habitation; and it
shall also put on a body which brings with it besides his own inherent power an
exact ablenes and readiness, fitted to the Souls highest abilities; how
incredible mighty may we conceive a Saint in Heaven to be? 1 Cor. 15 43. 4.
Spiritualnes, 1 Cor. 15. 44. The glorified body shall be more of the nature of
the Spirit (i.) more active not needing food etc. and more subject to the
Spirit; and be more fully possessed with the Spirit. 5. Beauty and a shining
amiablenes: 1 Cor. 15. 43. The glorified body shall have an exquisite feature
and stature, a welfavoured and comely proportion, and mutual correspondency of
all the parts thereof, a sweet and amiable color, and a bright shining
splendour of celestial glory, and a cheerful, lively, lightsome aspect; and
all this preserved in perpetual freshnes, with new supply of heavenly
activenesse by a more glorious Soul: yea, the very nakedness, now the shame
thereof, shall be then the glory of it, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile
bodies that it may be fashioned, like unto his glorious body. A glimpse of
which we have in Christ's Transfiguration. Matthew. 17. 2, 13, 43, 2, 4 2. A
second part of this glory shall be in the soul, wherein 1. The understanding
shall be abundantly and comfortably enlightened, and enlarged to the uttermost,
that the creature can reach unto, in all natural things that may delight, and
especially in heavenly things, as in Gods word, the glorious mysteries of the
holy Trinity, The union of Christ's natures, the union of his elect unto him,
Gods eternal council in election and reprobation, and the like. 2. The will
shall be conformable to Gods will. 3. The memory shall still keep what it
knows. 4. The affections shall be according to the perfect pattern. And all
this shall be in perfection 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12. For when that which is perfect
is come, that which is in part shall be done away. And it must n^eds be where
there is so much grace there should (...) to much Glory, for wisdom make, the
face of man to (...). What with the glory of the soul, and the body together it
is an ex^eeding weight of glory. It is said therefore D^n. 12. 2 They shall
(...) as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. And therefore it is that they
are compared to Kings (...). 21. 26. There is glory in this, therefore it is
called a glorious inheritance Ephesians. 1. 1^. And a glorious liberty Romans 8. 21.
And this shall be of the whole man, body and soul.

2. The honor of the Saints in Heaven (wherein another part of their
happiness shall consist) shall be in these things. 1. As conquerours and (...)
by whom their spiritual enemies have been vanquished, as Judges by whom the
world has been judged, they sit down in triumph for ever. Rev. 16 1 Cor. 6. 2.
Psalm. 49. 14. The righteous shall have dom^^ion over them (i.) The wicked. In
the morning: for their beauty shall consume. etc. Rev. 21. 2. 2. They shall be
Citizens and freemen of a stately and glorious City Hebr. 11. 10. Rev. 21.
They shall be members of a glorious society and company of the blessed Trinity,
holy angels and just and perfect men. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. 3. They shall
inhabit a great and glorious house. John 14. 2, 3, 4 They shall have the
estimation, approbation, and commendation of God, Angels, and good men. Mal. 3.
17. Matthew. 25. 21. 23. 34. Well done good servants etc. Come ye blessed. etc.
Matthew. 19. 28. They shall stand in the presence of God, and attend (as it were)
upon him in his privy chamber, and they shall do nothing but serve him, their
work shall be to praise God: and if it be an honor thus to serve in the
presence of a King? what honor is it thus to serve in the presence of the King
of Kings? Psalm. 17. 15. I shall be satisfied with his (...) etc. See a little
of all this, as in a Glass, in the example of Mordecai, a man, though in
himself, and toward the people, of much worth and merit, yet despised and
rejected of men, and now, for his goodness and fast ^^^^ving to his God, in
great distress and much danger; by and by, quit of all his misery and
advanced to great honor, to wear the Kings own Royal Ring and apparel, and
to ride upon the Kings own horse, and to be the next man to the King Esther 5.
6. Also in the example of Joseph, this day in the prison, in the dungeon, under
much contempt, and to morrow, advanced to great honor, to be the second man of
the kingdom etc. Genesis 41. 14. 42, 43. So the Saints by their death shall be
taken from all their contempt and misery here, and carried to much honor and
happiness as was Lazarus Luke 16. 20. 1. And this of God who raises the
beggar from the dunghill to set him amongst Princes 1. Sam. 2. 8. This honor
shall be to all the Saints Psalm. 139. 9. And thus shall it be done to the man
whom the King shall honor. Esther 6. 9.

The third term by which the happiness of heaven is expressed is Peace which
indeed does comprehend all good things to the soul and body called in Psalm.
16. 11. Fullness of joy and pleasures. And this is in diverse perticulers. For
1. There will be joy, delight, and contentment, there will be true and solid
joy, there will be plentiful and ample delight, there there will be a pure and
perfect delight, every man shall have as much as he would, he shall desire no
more, nor yet shall he be glutted with what he has: every vessel of mercy
shall be as full of mercy as it can hold, and it must needs be so, for heaven
is a place ordained for joy and delight. 2. There is nothing but happiness
there, 3. It is the consummation of all happiness and joy. 4. The persons
there to be entertained are the persons of Gods singular love, ^ight de^^ unto
him. What feast think we then will God make for the entertainment of his
dearest friends. If an earthly king would make such a royal feast as Esther.
1. What feast can the King of kings make Matthew. 25. 23. John 16. ^2, ^4. Psalm
16. 11. R^^. 21. 4. Good measure pressed down shaken together and ranning over
Luke 6. 38. Every part of body and soul shall be filled with wonderful sense
of delight and sweetness, Yea, even the whole man shall drink down rivers of
pleasures, and in the fullness thereof be made drunk. There we shall enjoy the
Sabbath of our thoughts, and that sweet tranquillity of mind, which we shall
receive from the presence and fruition of that good whereunto our desires have
carried us; when they shall have reached their object, when they shall be
really, and eternally, present with and united to it. Every passion and faculty
of the soul shall have its happiness, for it shall be freed from all that may
disturb it. The soul must nee^s be wonderfully contented and pleased, w^^h that
excellent glory wherewith the shall be invested. Then will be that sweet
tranquillity of mind, resting in the f^uition and poss^ss^^n of good. The bo^y
must nee^s be marvelously taken with (...) singular happiness^ wherewith it is
(...). For every sense thereof shall be ^^lled with its several singularity,
and excellencies of ad p^ssible pleasure and perfection: The eye shall be
delighted in the beatificall beholding of God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the blessed Angels, and Saints; The ear with the mellodious harmony of
that Hallelu^a^ The smell with the odoriferous perfume of all the flowers of
the Paradise of God, of all that may delight it, And the taste with that bread
of life which shall so satisfy him that eats thereof, that he shall not
hunger or thirst any more. If you ask, whence this joy and delight which the
Saints in heaven shall have arises? we shall answer you. From that Glory and
honor and the rest of the happiness of the Saints before spoken of, which the
glorified person shall have.

2. From peace, for he shall have peace internal^ with God; and his own
conscience; that blessed peace that passes all understanding: Phil. 4. 7.
Wherein a part of Gods Kingdom is Romans 14. 17. part of Christ's Legacy. John 14.
27. a continual feast Prove. 15. 15. Which the world, can neither give nor take
away. Peace external, with good men, against Satan, persecutours, wicked men,
all the creatures. Job 5. 23. His enemies shall be at peace with him. Prove. 16.
7. Peace without war, a safety without an enemy: For the last enemy which shall
be destroyed i^ death; and therefore this peace shall be eternal also. It is
the complaint of Gods people Psalm 120. 5, 6. That they live amongst them that
hate peace. Woe is me etc. My soul has too long dwelt with him that hates
peace: They shall then be freed of this misery. 3. From the blessed vision of
God: 1. For the glorified person shall see as he is seen, he shall have a most
clear, beatifficall, sweet, and comfortable beholding of God, by the
understanding of the mind: as far as the creature is capable. And this sight
of God shall be 1. True, not imaginary and by delusions. 2 It shall be perfect
according to the capacity of the soul. 3 It shall be immediate without the help
of any other thing. 4 It shall be joyful as one that sees his dearest friend,
and not terrible as one that sees his Judge, or Tormentour. And this must
needs be a blessed thing. For 1. God is Light. 2 He is joy: 3 He is satisfying
to the soul. 4 There is participation of him by this means to the creatures. 1
Io. 1. 5. Psalm. 16. 7. 171 Ioh. 3, 2. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Cor. 13. 12. Job 19. 5. I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him, etc. And faithful
shall also have a sweet, and comfortable and certain knowledge of one another,
Mat. 27. 3. 4. From the perfect conformity of the whole man to Gods will, for
then the work of grace shall be perfect and entire. 1 Cor. 13. 10. When that
which is perfect i^ come, then that which is in part shall be done away, then,
and there, the faithful shall not sin, for they shall enjoy a perfect rest,
which cannot stand with sin, and they shall do Gods will perfectly as the
Angels in heaven, and as Christ him self. Mat. 6. v. 10. 22, 30. Psalm 103 v.
21, 22. 1 Jo. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 18. We shall all meet together, etc. unto a
perfect man, and the measure of the age of the (...) of christ, Ephesians. 4. 13.
The Church shall be glorious at last, not having spot or wri^kle, or any such
thing. Ephesians. 5. ^7. When he is manifest we shall be like him. 1 Jo. 3. 2. Then
shall the Saints be freed from that body of death, under which they groan so
much now; then shall they be freed from that body of corruption under which
they cry out so much, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me etc. Romans
7. 23, 24, 25. Rev. (...). 4. 1^. 5. From their fruition of what they have, for
they shall not only have much, but enjoy what they have; they shall therefore
know it, that is theirs, what it is, and that they cannot lose it, none can
take it from them. There are these things in fruition, 1. there must be a
propriety in the thing: 2. a possession of the thing: 3. an accommodation of it
to the ends for which it is appointed: 4. an as^urance that they shall not lose
it: all this is here, for then he shall dwell on high, and his defense shall be
the munition of Rocks, Esaias 33. 16. compare then the happiness and security of
this estate together, and we must needs say it is a very happy estate, John 10.
28. 6. From their contentment and satisfaction in it. For then shall they not
desire more or other then they have; but God alone shall be their portion: they
shall desire none other with him, or besides him; then shall it come pass that
God shall be all in all, 1 Corinthians 15. verse 28. 7. From their work and
Employment which shall be that and nothing but that, wherein the regenerate man
does much delight, Romans 7. 21. They serve God night and day in his Temple, and
sing praises to him. Revel. 7. 15. Halleluia, Salvation and glory, and honor,
and power unto the Lord our God. Revel. 1. 1. And when those Beasts gave glory,
and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the Throne, who ^^o^th for ever and
ever: the four and twenty E^^ers fall down before him that sat on the Throne
and worship him that lives for ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne,
saying, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, for
thou ha^^ created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created,
Revel. 4. 9, 10, 11. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take
the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, tongue, and nation, and people.
i. From the state of the wicked, as the Israelites turned back on the Sea and
saw the Egyptians drowned, themselves delivered. And as there shall be no evil
person, so there shall be no evil work there. Revel. 21. 27. 22. ^ (...). 15.
2 Pet. 3. 13. All things that offend shall be removed. Mat 13 41. 9. That
nothing shall disturb their happiness, or in the least measure lessen it; and
that there shall be no intermission of it, but that it shall be night and day
continued. Great peace shall they have that keep thy Word, and nothing shall
offend them, Psalm. 119. 165. Your joy shall no man take from you, Io. 16. 22.
Add we to all this the su^dennesse and ^nexpectednesse of them, the place, the
company, and the time, wherein, and with whom all this happiness shall be
enjoyed: and we will see and say that there is indeed matter of wonderful joy
and delight in it, 1. From the place in 3. particulars, 1. It is above and on
high, it shall be very conspicuous, and therefore more glorious; it does
somewhat add to the glory of a building, that it is a little mounted Jerusalem
which is above Gal. 4. 6. Acts 1 9, 10, 11. 2. It is a place of unmeasurable
greatness and largenes; it ads to the glory of a ^arm, and the hapines of hi^
that ows it, that it is spacious; to have (...), that very good; a fair (...)
it, and ^ll in a sweet soil, and fa^^ly ^^^tuated, all this together is in
this possession: for the Heaven is the biggest of all created bodies, and
infinitely bigger then the Earth: 2 Cor. 12. 2. and all this shining with
exq^^^te glory and brightness of purest light. Men love stately houses built by
curious workmen, especially if ^hey be safe, pleasant, and delightful
h^^^tations. Such is this, Heb 11. 12. Jo. 14. 2. In my fathers house are many
mansions. It is called the great City. Rev. 21. 10. and the City of the great
and mighty King and Lord of Heaven and Earth: made of purpose for the
manifestation of his glory, and the habitation, and entertainment of his
dearest friends. 3. It is a place of incomparable and supercelestiall light of
a perfect and constant light: for there shall be no night there. It is set out
by a City whose wall is of Jaspar, building of Gold, Gates of Pearls, and
foundation of precious stones. I^ needs not the light of the Sun and Moon, For
the glory of the Lord shall enlighten it, and the Lamb shall be the light
thereof. And it must needs be infinitely shining and bright; for God himself in
his most ^^^nsparent glory shall there shine out most admirable: the glorified
body of Christ shall shine brighter then the firmanment, and the splendour of
many millions of glorified bodies, by the brightness of God communicated to them
outshining the Sun and Stars in brightness shall there concur. It is called
therefore the inheritance of the Saints in light, Collos. 1. 12. Revel. 21. 13.
Mat. 17. 2. Dan. 12. 3. Phil. 3. 21. Collos. 3. 4. Exodus 34. 29. 2. For the
company, the society and company shall add much to the felicity of the Saints
in Heaven; For their company shall be, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, The
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, the Marty^^ and Saints; Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all our godly friends depa^ted; for we shall all meet together, and
be for ever with the Lord: and with these they shall have a familiar
acquaintance: they shall all rejoice in each others happiness, and thereby
increase each others joy. This I say, etc. That ye may also have fellowship
with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his Son
(...) Christ, 1 Jo. 1. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up, etc. and so shall we be for ever with the Lord. Jo. 17. 24
Father I will that they which thou have given me be where I am, that they may
behold that my glory which thou have given me. Hebr. 12. 22, 2^, 24. But ye
are come to the mount Sion the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
the company of innumerable Angels, the Congregation of the first born written
in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the Spirits of just and perfect men, to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, etc. Phil. 2. 1. Psalm. 17. v. 15. Rev.
21. v. 3. 22. 33. Mat. 8. 1^. Mat. 13 28. Luke 20. 36. 1 These. 4. 13. And there
shall be none but saints there Rev. 21. 27. 22. 3 ^4. 15. 2 P^t 3. 1^. So that
then our Union and Communion with God shall be perfect. Suppose we a wife that
loves her husband dearly and desires his company much above all things in the
world; but hitherto his occasions have been such that she could not enjoy him:
now that he is resolved to live at home always with her; how comfortable and
joyful a thing will this be to her? So now the Church of Christ, and Christ
heretofore kept a part shall for ever dwell together, and be parted no more. 3.
For the time of enjoyment of this happiness, it shall be for ever and ever. It
is therefore called an inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Acts 20. 32. and everlasting
life Mat 25. 46. If we ask why God should give an eternal reward for ^emporall
service, we must answer, because it is his pleasure: as it is his pleasure to
give a Kingdom, for to give an everlasting Kingdom. And it is a gift like
himself, and ^^t for such a one to give, Luke 12. 32. James 1. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Now put all this together, and then let us think what a state and condition
heaven is, and whether he be not a happy man that is born to inhe^it this. May
we not say of this; O joy above all* (...) yes and without which there is no
joy; when shall I enter into thee, to see my God that dwells in thee! O
everlasting Kingdom! O Kingdom of all eternities! O Light without end! O Pence
of God that (...) all understanding! in which the Souls o^ Saints do* rest with
thee, and everlasting joys are upon their heads, and all pain and sorrow is
fled from them! O how glorious a Kingdom is thine O Lord, where in all Saints
do dwell with thee, adorned with light as with apparel, and having Crowns of
precious stones on their heads! O Kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou O
Lord the hope of all Saints art, and the Diadem of all their perpetual glory
rejoicing the^ on every side with thy blessed sight! In this kingdom of thine,
there is infinite joy and mirth without sadness, health without sickness, life
without death, ease without pain, light with out darkness, and all good without
any evil; where youth flourishes that never waxes old, life that knows no
end, beauty that never fades, love that never cools, health that never
dimini^heth, joy that never cease, where sorrow is never felt, complaint is
never heard, matter of sadness is never seen, nor evil success is ever feared.
For that they possess th^e O Lord which art the perfection of (...).

What Hell is.
IN the opening of this point we shall take the same course as w^ do in the
opposite branch. 1. What it is in general. 1. Wherein it does consist in some
particulers.

Hell is the miserable state and condition, made and appointed by God, for the
eternal torment of the wicked and reprobate, with the devil and his Angels
after this life is ended, beneath, where the most lively sensible, and terrible
discovery of Gods wrath is. A little taste whereof men have here, a greater
after death. And the full and perfect suffering whereof they have after the
resurrection of the Body, and reuniting of Soul and Body together.

As touching this place, and state also, we must conceive the sorrows and pain
thereof as inconceiveable and inutterable as the other. If the weight of the
little finger of Gods wrath herein be so heavy as insupportable, what will his
whole loins be? If the taste of it be so intolerable, what will the full cup
thereof be? yet so it is, For the Holy Ghost speaking of that little, men do
see and feel in this life, expresses it thus. A wounded Spirit who can bear:
Pro. 18. 14. It is intolerable for so that manner of speech does intend. This
weight made Christ himself, though he knew he should get out of it wuickly,
yell, and whiles he was under it, was supported by a mighty strength, to sweat
drops of blood, and cry out aloud Lord, Lord, Why have thou forsaken me? This
is it that has made the faithful themselves (though supported by Gods hand)
so heavily to lament, and so bitterly to bemoan their estate. Psalm. 77. This is
that which has made the wicked weary of their lives, and to choose death rather
then life, as Judas, Saul, Spira, and others. It is but the apprehension of
this state to come, and near at hand that mako^ those kings and great persons
Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. To hide themselves and to say to the mountains fall on us
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Thronc^, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, For the great day of his wrath is come and who shall be able
to stand? like unto that Esaias 33. 14. The sinners in Sion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites: Who amongst us shall dwell with
devouring ^ire, Who amongst us shall dwell with with everlasting burnings? If a
glimpse and a glanse of this now, and that seen a far of^, be so dreadful and
horrid, what will the weight and feeling of it present be, then, when the wrath
of God shall for ever in all extremity rest and remain upon them? for besides
the less of Gods blessed and joyful presence and favor, (getter then life)
and an eternal separation from those everlasting joys and delights above,
ther^ is the pain of feeling the torment of an everlasting red hot scorching
fire, without any possibility of dying or being ever consumed. All that can be
said of it, cannot come near it; all that can be felt here, is nothing to it.
If the fire of Hell be a true fire (as some suppose) it does as far exceed our
hottest fire, as ours does exceed the painting on the wall: And it must needs
be so; for the one was created for comfort, the other purposely to torment; the
one is made by the hand of man, the other is tempered by the angry arm of
almighty God; with all terrible and tormenting ingredients to make it most
fierce and raging. It is said to be prepared, Matthew. 25. 41. as if Gods wisdom
and power were set on work deliberately to devise it. And when God shall take
upon him to do a thing for the uttermost declaration (in a certain sort) of his
power, wisdom, and justice: what a thing will it be be? will not the work
belike the workman? who knows the power of his wrath? Psalm. 90. verse. 11. And
the thunder of his power who call understand? Job 26. 1^. Consider the making
of Angels and men, and the making of this transitory world; and then imagine
what God can do? Moreover, this fire is blown by the airy breath, the other by
the angry breath of the great God, which does burn far hotter then ten thousand
rivers of Brimstone. The pile thereof (says the Prophet) is fire and much
wood, ^he breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it, ^say
30. 33.

Our fire must be fed continually else it goes out, that burns always
without feeding; ours gives light, that gives none; ours consumes and
dispatcheth; the matter laid in it; that tormenteth but consument not, our fire
may be qu^^^fied or put out, but that has neither abatement, nor possibillity
of putting out: if the several pains of all the deseases incident to our
nature, as the Stone, Gou^, Coll^^k, broken Bones, Toothache, and the rest, and
with all, the most exquisite tortu^os which have been or may be inflicted upon
man by any Tyrant; and with all also, all the griefs, horrors, and despaires,
that over rent in pieces any heavy heart and vexed conscience, as Judas, Spira,
etc. if all these together and at once were upon one man, yet would they come
infinitely short of the pain and anguish that shall torment the soul and body
of the wicked in hell. But by these corporal things we may the better attain
to ^he view of those spiritual matters. The evil conscience here (a ^^ame of
this in^ernall fire) is compared to a Lion, a Serpent, a Sword, and Fir^, Job
20. Eccles. 2^. 2. to broken Legs, a Bone crushed to pieces, Psalm. (...). It i^
compared to darkness, shame, and contempt, to death and the like; things man's
nature do most of all abhor. Suppose we, a man that for a long time has
enjoyed a Kingdom, and all the glory that the world can afford, that he is now
to be banished into a strange Country, and there to be for ever kept in a
filthy s^inking Dungeon amongst Snakes and the like: Or a man that has been
long wedded to a wi^e he loves dearly, and with whom he has lived sweetly; and
he is now to be divorced from her and made to marry a loathsome filthy
creature, and with her to spend all his days, in all the misery besides, that
such a life is capable of: What torment and misery will the torment and misery
of such a man be? But alas, this cannot come near to that torment we speak of.
Think we of a man much more in debt then he has to pay to a furious and
implacable creditor; apprehended by fierce S^rjeants, in Prison under a fierce
and cruel Jailer, having no friend to succor him, that looks for no other but
to spend his days in th^^ miserable estate. Or of a Traitor, that has
uncensed his Prince, who has sent out his fierce officers, and apprehended and
cast him into Prison under a merciless Keeper, to be judged before a dreadful
Judge, who is sure to be condemned, and to suffer most exquisite torments. Or
think we of what we can, and we can think of nothing that can give us a taste,
or discover a glimpse of it unto us. The wicked indeed have their Kingdom and
their glory here, their portion is in this life, Psalm. 17. 14. Luke 16. v. 25.
And they are w^dded to this world which they make their God: but they shall be
suddenly taken from it, and cast into Hell, they spend their days in wealth
and suddenly go down to Hell, Job 21. 15. And woe, woe unto them, for the misery
that shall come upon them, James 4. 3. Phil. 3. 19. They mu^^ with the Devil
and his Angels to everlasting fire, Matthew. 25. 41. there to lie, until they
have paid the uttermost fa^thing which will never be. Matthew. 5. 26. and what
else can be expected, for they have provoked to the uttermost the wrath of the
King of Kings against them. And if the wrath of an earthly King be as
messengers of death, Prove. 16. 14. and as the roaring of a Lion. Prove. 19. 12.
how terrible will the wrath of the King of the Kings of the earth be, Heb. 12.
29. 10, 31.

If we would know reasons why this condition shall be so importable, they may
be these among others: 1. because they shall look upon the angry countenance of
God, and apprehend t^ the uttermost his irefull indignation, and that so
unmeasurably fearful and terrible sustain it; Rev. 6. 16. 2. The guilt of
sin shall still be to the uttermost upon the heart to feel, and as an hideous
object in the ^ye to see, and this always before them, and continually on
them. No debt though of millions, and to the cruellest creditor in the world;
so dreadful as sin: no Writ so frightfull as the curses of Gods Law. No Arrest
so irksome, as he biting accusation of the conscience. 3. The continuance of
their misery, that they shall be ever dying and never able to dye, ever
destroying and never destroyed, does mightily dismay them, and add to the
weight of their misery. 4. God has made this estate of purpose so miserable,
and will make the creature able everlastingly to undergo it. 5. The knowledge
that the creature shall then have to the uttermost of Gods wrath, its own
misery, etc. for Sapiens miser magic quam stultus miser. It is called Death,
which is bitter, and who does not shun it; it is called a Prison, who will not
labor to keep out of it; it is called darkness, who does not abhor it; it
iscalled shame and contempt, who does not labor to avoid it. But this shall
yet farther appear in the things tha^ follow.

There are also two parts of Hell, as there are of Heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. 1.
The pain of loss, or an exemption from all good. 2. The pain of sense, or the
enduring of all evil. Matthew. 8. 29. The damned in Hell are deprived of all
good, and means, and hope of good. Their Consciences shall have no more peace,
they can do nothing else but sin; their bodies shall have no more ease nor
rest, but torments day and night (...). 14. 10. They shall hunger, and have
nothing to eat; thirst, and have nothing to drink; be cold, and have nothing to
heat them; hot, and have nothing to cool them; weary, and cannot rest, sick,
and dying, and yet cannot be well nor yet dye. And no marvel that they are
deprived of all other good, for they shall be deprived and for ever separated
from that summ^on bonum, the chiefest good, and well spring of all good: they
shall be for ever driven out of and excluded from the blessed, sweet, and
comfortable presence, of the most glorious God blessed for ever, the Lord Jesus
Christ, the blessed Spirit, and all the blessed ones, and those that were their
dearest friends, who shall then justly abandon them with all loathing and
scorn, and forgetting all neernes, and bonds of nature shall rejoice in the
justice of God in their everlasting condemnation: So that no eye of God or man
shall then pity them; no prayers, promises, or means be then heard or prevail
in their behalf; or any one in heaven or earth be heard to speak for them. The
serious thinking of this loss will then more afflict the understanding Soul,
then all the extreme sufferings of Sense; to be shut out everlastingly and
unrecoverabl^ly, and to be for ever banished of the blessed sight of God, which
had they ever had but a a taste of, they would know to be an incomparable
l^sse, and greater then the l^osse of ten thousand worlds: this renting of the
Soul from God, and the horrible sense of Gods forsaking, and casting it of is
incomparably more grievous then the renting of Soul and Body asunder. And then
withal they shall think of their shameful negligence, and wilful folly in
the neglect and refusal of the means of salvation, how near they were to it,
how easily they might have had it, how much they are deceived, how these men
are exalted that they thought fools, and they proved fools that thought
themselves wise. And in those and such like thoughts, what then will be the
gnawings of the never dying Worm: what rage of their guilty Consciences, what
furious despair, what horror of mind, what distractions and fears what bitter
looking back upon their misspent time in this world: what cursing of the day of
their birth, their Brethren in iniquity, and even blaspheaming of God himself;
what tearing of the hair, gnashing the teeth, wayling and wringing the hands;
no tongue can tell, no heart can think.

The second part of Hell is the pain of Sense, or enduring of evil, which
though it does comprehend many particulars, yet perhaps also may be all
intended and comprehended in the terms of Shame and Contempt in Dan. 12. 2 and
th^^ employed in Esaias 57. 31. in opposition to that Glory, Honor and Peace, by
which the felicity of Heaven is set forth. The unhappines of the wicked in Hell
we must needs conceive to be in the contrary, 1 that there shall be an uglines
and lothsomnes in them, and in their bodies and souls both; for they shall have
nothing in or upon them, nor shall they come near to any thing that may make
them glori^u^, they are separated from God and all good^^^s as far as Hell from
Heaven; they shall then be perfectly wicked, and therefore perfectly fil^hy and
unclean, Rev. 10. 11. their fellowships is with unclean spirits, Matt. 12. 43.
and they (...) like unto them. Those therefore that are to be cast into the
Lake of fire and brimstone (amongst the rest) are said to be abominable, Rev.
21. 8. And in Esaias 66. ^4. They shall be an abhorring to all flesh. Their
bodies shall be immortal also, but this shall be their death that they cannot
die; they shall be ever dying, but never dye. It is called therefore an
everlasting destruction; so that they shall be an everlasting abhorring: they
shall be always corrupting but not corrupted, always decaying but not
decayed. Their bodies shall be powerful also; but alas for this power, there
shall be an addition of suffering-strength, for God will make them able to
endure, what else were intolerable, and he will give them strength to bear
that burden which otherwise were insupportable: for they shall be able to live
so as always a dying; but so shall dye, as that they shall always live; they
who torment, shall never be weary, they who are tormented, shall never be
killed. They may have also more power to sin, for they shall be given up
thereunto without restraint, there shall be no grace nor means of grace three;
the natural ability or capacity of receiving or doing good shall be lost. And
if the light in them be darkness, how great is the darkness? Their vile bodies
shall be yet more vile, and as vile as sin and misery together can make them.
And because the body has sinned, therefore is the body to be vexed with
corporal pains. The damned body shall be more spiritual also: but woe worth
this spiritualnes, for it shall be now immortal like the soul; but happy were
it for it if it could die. Their bodies also will be then much more deformed
and ug^y: if sin or misery, the fellowship of Devils, in a smoackie, filthy
Dungeon, can make a man filthy and ignominious, the persons of the damned must
needs be so. Gods Spirit has forsaken them and Satan has filled their heart.

2. The understanding and memory of the damned soul shall also then without
doubt be much greater, and shall be so far forth enlarged and confirmed as it
may thereby be made more capable of misery: for as grace shall be perfect in
heaven so shall per^^bation in hell, the minds of those damned wretches shall
be tormented with anger, fury, madness, sorrow, fear, outcries, and the like;
1. With the sense of their sin which now they shall see in order before them
Psalm. ^0 21. in quantity and in quality, as it is in Gods eye, and his words
censure, all which they shall now see and remember at once exactly. 2. In the
sense of the happiness they have lost, by the loss of Gods favor and
presence, the society of good Angels and men, of the happiness of which, then,
they shall be doubtless far enlightened to see the extent; for there shall be
nothing wanting to make them perfectly miserable. But they shall neither see
nor remember any thing at all that may conduce to their ease, or release the^
of their mise^ie, here they shall envy the happiness of the Saints, despair of
help and mercy; and be utterly destitute of all courage to support. If the
near approach to God and an intimate communion with him draw a ^ustie and glory
upon the person approaching, then the eternal separation from God with an
eternal communion with the Devil that unclean spirit, and all wicked men must
needs attract a shame and a dishonor to the person that is in such a
fellowship with them Exodus 34. 29, 30. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

2. The dishonor and shame of the wicked in hell (wherein another part of
their unhappiness shall be) i^ in these things. 1. That they must for ever
suffer under the brand of base Cowards, the slaves of Satan, by whom they have
been carried captive at his pleasure, and notorious malefactors, justly for
the same devoted to this condition. 2 Their company and society shall be those
unclean spirits: The (...) fall and unbeleeving the abominable, whoremo^g^rs,
murderers, dogs, inchanters, etc. Like snakes, and serpents, frogs, and toads,
and such like creatures. This is the second death. Rev. 16. 13, 21, 8, 22, 15.
3. And this in a blind narrow; and stinking prison. Rev. 9. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 19.
4. They shall be neglected, rejected, and despised of God, good angels and good
men Psalm 119. 18. Psalm 1. 5. Go ye cursed Matthew. 25. 26, 41. Matthew. 19. 28.
5. They have no master to serve but the devil, no work to do but sin, and
suffer for sin. And if it be a shame and dishonor to be the mean servant of
a base and unworthy person, and to serve him in a base and servile work, as to
cleanse his houses of office or the like: then, the work and service of the
damned in hell to the devil must needs be shameful and dishonorable indeed
Prove. 6. 33. He shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall never
be put away. The least part of this dishonor and infelicity we may consider in
that example of proud Haman, Esther chap. 6. and 7. Tumbling from his exceeding
great height of honor and earthly felicity, upon a sudden, and when he least
thought of it, into a most shameful condition and extreme misery and contempt.
And this of the Lord. Who shall cut off the Spirits of Princes, and is terrible
to the Kings of the earth Psalm 76. 12. That pours contempt upon Princes
Psalm. 107. 40. That brings Princes to nothing; and makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity. Esaias 40. 23. That makes the strength of the mighty weak
Job. 12. 21.

The opposite term to peace is trouble or no rest, which also must comprehend
many perticulers. In hell there is no rest Rev. 14. 10. But torments day and
night Rev. 20. 10. It is a place that deprives from all comfort that is
ordained for torment only. And this also is in diverse particulars, For 1.
There will be sorrow, anguish, and discontent, such as none like it. For 1. it
shall be in such a place as is ordained for torment. 2. The persons to be
tormented there, are men forsaken of God for ever. 3. Their Executioner will be
their mali^ious, eternal, and powerful enemy. 4. There is not the least
comfort, no light to comfort the eye, water to cool the tongue, nor courage to
support the heart. 5. It is the consummation and compleatment of all misery. It
must needs be an ample torment, every vessel of wrath will be full of wrath
also, every part of body and soul shall be filled with wonderful torment.
There is nothing but torment in hell, The soul the most tender part shall be
distracted to think upon. 1. All the sin that ever it has committed. 2. The
time and means of grace which it has neglected, trifled away and despised,
and the eternal misery it has acquitted. And they then shall think of their
shameful negligence and wilful folly in neglect and refusal of the means of
Salvation how near they were it (...), how easily they might have had it, how
much they are deceived, how those men are exalted that they thoughts fools, and
they proved fools that thought themselves wise. And in th^se and such like
thoughts, what then will be the gnawing of the never dying worm? what rage of
their guilty consciences? what furious despair? what horror of mind? what
distractions and fears? what bitter looking back upon their misspent time in
this world? what cursing of the day of their birth? their brethren, in
iniquity; and even blaspheming of God himself? what tearing the hair; gna^^ing
the teeth wailing and wringing the hands? no tongue can tell no heart can
think. See a little of it in this familiar example. A man of mean condition is
very likely and in great hopes to attain to be a special favorite of the King
and by that means to come to great fortunes indeed, he is fair for it, and in
his own thoughts so sure of it, that he cannot miss of it: and at length by
some small mistake, or some little neglect he is utterly defeated; and does not
only loose the kings favor but incur his displeasure, and is perpetually
banished his presence, and committed to perpetual imprisonment, how much will
this afflict the mind of such a man? So it is in this case. The wicked man
especially that is under the means of Grace is fair for heaven, and near to
eternal life* and might no doubt with more ease attain to it, then many of them
do go to hell; he dreams all his days that heaven is his, and makes himself
sure of it: but at last when he thinks to take possession of it, he is
irrocoverably and endlesly cast and thrust into hell. 2 Thessalonians. 9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power. Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed. etc. And then
shall they say too late. How have I hated instruction. etc. Prove. 5. 12.
Remember Hamans case Esthe^ chapter 6. et 7. It shall be tormented with the memory
of pleasures past, and with the apprehension of pains present and to come; it
shall free at its own folly and misery: and grieve to set the prosperity and
happiness of the godly in heaven: there must needs be grief unmeasurable. For
the creature has lost all that good wherein it delighted, it is disappointed
of all that hope wherein it ^elied, and it wants all that it desires: and it
is unable to remove what it suffe^eth, to recover what it loses, to supply
what it wants. All the faculties and passions of the soul shall suffer; for
their joy and delight shall be drowned with sorrow, and their sorrow shall none
take from them, if they love and thing they shall not enjoy it, if they hate it
they shall have it; if they l^ath, they cannot leave it, if they desire, they
cannot have it. The body likewise will have no part free, for every sense shall
have a singular kind of suffering. The eye shall be afflighted and afflicted,
with the ugly and fearful light of devils: and the torments, and tormented
before it. The ear with the horrible noise, clamor and cry, and cursed
blasphemies of tormented, and the confused noise of the tormentours shadowed in
the cry of the children in the valley of Hinnon, when they were sacrificed by
their parents. The smell with the stinch of fire and brimstone, and other
filth, shadowed also by that valley where men did use to lay all the filth of
the city: the taste with most ravenous hunger and thirst, and all the sensible
parts with burning fire. Luke 16. 24. 1 Pet. 4 18. Romans 9. 22. Rev. 20. 15.
Matthew. 5. 21. 22, 11, 22. 24. Mark. 9. 44. Matthew. 8. 13, 22. 24. Luke 16. 23.
13, 28.

And now if you ask me whence all this anguish and torment arises? We shall
answer, we have touched it before; but to give yet further light herein, it
arises, 1 From the shame and dishonor we have before spoken of: 2 From their
unquiet estate, fro the wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast out mire and dirt. There is no peace says my God to the
wicked Esaias 57. 20. 21 No no internal Peace: but they are still under that
torment, Prove. 18. 14. which who can bear? their conscience does still presage
to them terrible things, they see so much that their hearts sink to behold it;
there is no terror of Conscience here like it, no peace with God, but an
irreconcilable hat^ed and war. No external peace from good men, devils, or
wicked men, no not among themselves; but as they delighted in war and trouble,
so they shall have enough. Psalm. ^8. 30. 109. 17. And this trouble also shall
be eternal. 3. From the loss of Gods presence, and blessed vision: for they
are to be driven out of Gods presence, and shall never see any thing in God
that may yield them any comfort: if they look upon him at all, it must be as an
angry Judge, as a terrible Enemy. They are to go from the Presence of God and
Glory of his Power. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 13. according to Gods sentence. Go ye cursed,
etc. Mat. 25. 41. And that Mat. 7. 23. Depart from me ye workers of iniquity,
I know ye not, and instead thereof shall see nothing but Devils and damned
Spirits, nor shall they have any other fellowship but this with the Devil and
his Angels. Mat. 25. 41. Of this punishment then may they say, that are to
undergo it as Cain, Genesis 4. 12, 13. that was to be driven out from Gods
presence. My punishment is greater then I can bear. 4. From the Enmity and
inconformity of the whole man against and to the will of God; not because the
wicked in Hell shall define to do Gods will, or be grieved that they cannot do
(for this is grace) but because from their eternal mind and practice to sin,
they have drawn upon themselves an eternal misery they shall then do nothing
else but sin, and suffer for sin, for there shall be nothing to keep them from
sin. 5. From their feeling of what they have, for they shall not only be under
amiserable condition, but they shall feel their misery to the uttermost, a man
may be in desperate case, and yet not feel it, for he may be sensles: they
shall see their misery to the full, and they shall know that it will be
endless; all the powers and faculties of their souls and bodies shall be very
quick to apprehend, and very lively to feel their present and future misery:
Nay, (if it can be) they shall apprehend worse then they feel. 6. From their
coffeehouse in their condition, for they shall be utterly impatient of their
estate, and this also shall add to the misery of their condition, Luke 21 v.
19. And hence shall arise those bitter execrations and cursed blasphemies
against God, other men, and themselves. Rev. 1. And they gnawed their tongues
for pain, and blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their pains and their
soars, and repented not of their deeds: their work shall be to curse and ban,
and to blaspheam. 7. From they happy estate of the godly: for it shall be a
pa^^ of the torment of the damn^^ that they shall be compelled to behold the
godly placed in heaven and enjoying eternal bliss, and themselves shut out
with (...) hope of a b^ter state, Mat. 13. (...) 16. 23. It is elegantly set
forth in the book of Wisdom, which though (...), yet ^^r ornaments sake we
will set down at large. Then shall the righteous stand in great boldness before
the face of (...) him, and taken away his labors: When they see him they shall
be vexed with horrible fear, and shall be amazed for his wonderful
deliverance; and shall change their minds, and sigh for grief of mind, and say
within themselves, this is he we sometimes had inderision, and in a Parable of
reproach; we ^ools thought his life madness, and his end without honor. How
is he counted amongst the children of God, etc. which does show three things in
God, 1. how little he regards them: 2. how far he is from helping them: 3. how
exceeding hotly he is displeased with them. 8. That there is no avoiding of
this, or any part of it, no relief, ^ase, or comfort under it, nor any
intermission of torment to be expected. Mat. 22. 13. Luke 16. 24, 25. ^ev. ^0
10. no place for repentance in God, though they seek it with tears of blood:
nay so far will God be from pitying or helping them; that he will laugh at
their destruction, and mock when their fear comes. Prove. 1. 6. 27, 28. 9. Add
we to this the suddennes and unexpectednes, the place and time in which, and
they company with whom; all this misery shall be endured and we must needs say,
that it is misery incomparable: 1. For the place in 3. things, 1. The place
appointed for the Damned is beneath, and (as is probably conjectured) in the
heart of the Earth. Luke 16. 26. They go down into Hell. Psalm. 55. 15 Deu^. ^2.
22. 2. It is a place of straitnes, able only to contain that huge multitude
that must be for ever shut up therein. It is set forth therefore by a Prison, a
place of restraint, a Pit, a Dungeon, a Lake, places that are not great, Revel.
9. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 19. I^r. 38. 6. The earth it self (in which it is conceived to
be) is not great. 3. It is a place and state of perfect and complete darkne^^,
and without any light at all. For there shall be all night, no day; they shall
be bound with the bonds of darkness, and of everlasting night: we read of a
dreadful darkness, one of those g^^^vous plagues that God inflicted upon Egypt,
Exodus 10. 22, 23. But alas, what was that to this? It is called utter darkness,
Mat. 8. 12. 22. 25. 30. It is called in Jude (...). 13. 2 Pet. 2. 17. it is
called the blacknes of darkness (i.) extreme darkness. And it must needs be so
dark, that is so far remote from all that may enlighten it: yet it is a strange
darkness, to be dark where fire is; as it is a strange fire where no light is:
and this darkness must needs be then a dreadful darkness, that is so
extraordinary, when al ordinary darkness is terrible to nature. 2. For the
company the wicked shall have in Hell, they shall be such as cannot but add to
their misery, for they shall have no other company but Devils and wicked
persons, Mat. 25. 26. Go ye, etc. into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Their fellowship shall be with Devils, and with them
they must be for ever. Their company shall be the fearful, unbelieving,
abominable, murderers, dogs, whoremongers, idolaters, sorcerers and all liars.
Rev. 21. 8 22. 15. They shall still live with, and look upon their deadly enemy
the Devil that by his bewitching deceits, and malicious and cunning devises
has brought them into this misery, and does now triumph and rejoice therein
over them: they shall still live and look upon the Devil their powerful and
malicious executioner; they shall still live with and look upon those wicked
men that by their wicked Counsel and example have h^lpen together to bring
them into this miserable estate, and they shall still live with, and look upon
also those men, whom they themselves by their wicked example and counsel have
been a means to draw into this misery: and how much this will add to the heavy
weight of misery upon them, no heart can think, or tongue express. It is one
case and help against many a misery to go from the sight and sent of it, For
out of sight out of mind; but from this we may not, we shall not go; we must
have it still in sight, and therefore still in mind. 3. For the time of
enduring this misery, it is everlasting, Mat. 25. 46. These shall go into
everlasting pain, and v. 41. everlasting fire, J^de v. 6. Mat. 5. v. 2^. Dan.
12. 2. ^^ark 9 43. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. And this drives the (...) to the head.
[Bolton] The consideration of this eternity will so torture the damned soul,
that he would think himsel happy, if he might endure those pains no more
millions of years then there be sands upon the Sea shore. For this thought
would comfort, my misery will once have a^end. But alas, this word never will
ever rent the heart in pieces with much rage, and give still new life to th^se
in^offerabl^ sorrows which infinitely exceed all expression, or imagination. Let
us suppose* this great body of the earth on which we (...) to be turned to
Sand, and a Wron to come but every hundred thousand year, and carry away one
grain of this great heap, what an innum^rable number of years would be spent
before this heap of Sand would be fetched away: And yet we and alas, that ever
thou wast born; when thou have lain all this time in this misery thou art no
nearer coming out, thou the first hour thou entrest in! Now suppose what it
is to lie one night in some disease, and have all the helps and comforts for
^ase; what will it then be to lie in this estate for ever? O eternity,
eternity, eternity. If you shall ask why the temporal (...) is punished with
eternal punisment? We answer, 1. Because Gods justice can never be satisfied by
the sinners punishment. 2. The sinners mind to sin is eternal. 3. The souls
and bodies to be punished shall be eternal. 4. The sinner does sin all his
time, and God does punish all his time, which is eternal. 5. The stain of sin
is eternal. 6. The sin is against an infinite God, and therefore the
punishment is an infinite punishment. So now, put all this together, and then
think what a state and condition Hell is; and whether it had not been good for
a man never to be born, rather then to be born to this condition. Matthew. 26.
verse. 24.

That there are degrees of joys in heaven.
IT is certain and infallible, that the glory of heaven is the gift that God
bestows upon all the Saints, and every Saint shall be full of glory: and that
as some do and suffer more then others here: So they shall have and receive
more glory, then others hereafter.

That this is so, is more then probable. Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. 1 Cor. 15. 41. The
Apostle speaking of the bodies, of the glorified bodies of the Saints in
heaven, uses these words: There is another glory of the Sun, another glory of
the Moon, another glory of the stars: for one ^arre differs from another
star in glory. So al (...) is the resurrection of the dead. 2 Cor. 9, 6. The
parable of the Talents Luke 19.

Rea^. ^1. For though God give not heaven for, yet he gives it according to our
works: and some men's works do far exceed others. 2 All are not alike capable,
but differ as vessels, that are some greater and some less. If it be asked
then who shall have most glory? The answer must be this. 1 Those that suffer
most for Christ's sake. Matthew. 5. 12. Great is your reward in heaven. 2 Those
that do most good for others souls. Dan. 12. 2. They shall shine as the stars
etc. 3 Those that are most humble. Matthew. 18. 1, 2, 3, etc. Christ being asked,
who should be the greatest in the Kingdom of God, he sets a little child
before them and says. He that shall humble himself as this little child, the
same is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven.

Now that we have made it appear that there is a heaven, and that it is such a
heaven, such a happy and blessed estate, and that there are degrees of this
happiness; you will say unto me Quorsion (...)? What of all this, or what is
(...) to us? That we may therefore know these things for our selves: Let us see
what use may be made of all this, for our own profit.

Use 1. This then serves for instruction, to (...) the folly and madness of
the men of the world, that willingly deprive themselves of this endless glory
for a few base lusts, that be^eave th^mselves of a room in the city of pearls;
for a few carnal pleasures, that shut themselves out of everlasting
habitations, for a little transitory pe^^e, that wilfully keep themselves out
of this palace of infinite pleasure: for the short fruition of worldly trash
and trifles. These are like profane Esau, that sell their birthright for a
mess of portage Heb. 12. 16. These are like the co^k in the fable, that let go
a pearl for a barley corn. Will not every man think him out of his wits, that
is promised a Kingdom, ^he will forbear to do some small matter that will not
profit, but hurt him to do, and do some small thing he may easily do; and he
will not do this little for so great gain? certainly every man will think him
so. Should not a man rather, sell all that he has to gain this Matthew. 13. And
account all but durg in comparison of this Phil. 3 [Jerome] What says the
father. fire, gallows, etc. All the torments of hell, so I may enjoy the
pleasures of heaven. Who does not then marvel at the wisdom of the men of this
world (rightly termed folly) that embrace straw, and contemn gold, set their
hearts upon that which is not, and so greedily follow after shadows, and
neglect that which is, and let go enduring substances; what folly and madness
is this?

2. Exhorta. To diverse duties. 1 Let us labor to see, know, and believe this.
But you will say of this as of death, is there any man alie, that makes a
question of this, whether he shall die, or whether there be a hell or a heaven
or no? Yes certainly it is more then manifest, that most men do not know nor
believe this truth: for if they did, it is not possible they should live as
they do. To know, is to know by causes, and for our selves, and to apply to
our selves, and our own private profit what we know: which is the knowledge we
are pressed to in this place. To believe (because the God of truth has said it
in his word, that there is a heaven to reward the righteous, and a hell to
punish the wicked, that we must all die, and after death come to judgment: and
to live so as those that expect such things. 2 P^t. 3. 14. Wherefore beloved,
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless. Let us consider it well, spend many
thoughts upon it, enter into deep meditations of the inestimable glory of it,
and view that heavenly Canaan well. And to help us herein, let us pray with the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 18. That we may be enlightened to see what is the riches,
and glory of this inheritance. These things beleevingly thought upon will bring
us much profit. 1 They will expel other thoughts. 2 They will keep us from
sin, we shall say then, shall I sin, and for a few base lusts loose such a
place as heaven is. 3 They will provoke us to good works, and make them more
easy to us. 4 They will make us bear the cross the more patiently, as they
did the Martyr who said well, Though I have a sower breakfast, I shall have a
sweet sup^^^. 5 They will more inflame us with the love (...) this felicity,
and consequently make us more to strive to attain it. 2 In the second place
this may exhort us, to use the means, and take the course to attain to this
happy estate. 2 To get assurance that we belong to this estate, and shall come
at the last to it; For the first of these, we are to see that we labor and
strive to get into this golden city, where streets, gates, walls, and all are
gold and pearl: Nay, where pearl and all is but as mire and dirt and nothing
worth. 2 Pet. 3. 13. 14. And now, and now only is the time to do this. And to
move us hereunto, we are to consider th^se things. 1 It is a thing to be done,
heaven may be had if we seek after it: Matthew. 7. 7. 2 It is an excellent
condition as we have shwed. 3 It is an everlasting happy condition, 4 Else we
perish everlastingly. If now you shall ask how you may attain, or which way you
may come to it: we must answer you. We must go the way. And herein there are 2
things. 1 That we know the path that leads to this blessedness. 2 that we
tread this path until we do attain it. As he that would go to any place
here, must first know, and then go the way thither and not another way. If you
desire to be showed this way, we must first of all show you, that is the way
that Gods word prescribes, that a man that will come to heaven must walk; this
is the King of kings high way, James 2. 8. That leads to true blessedness, he
then that means to come thither, must be acquainted with the word of God, both
Law, and Gospel. And for that purpose he must be a diligent hearer, reader, and
meditatour of it Psalm 1. Psalm 119. John (...). 39. Acts 20. 32 And this is
that, that shows us the way; it shows us Christ who is the way, it gives us
grace and makes us sit for glory: this is as the star that brought the
wisemen to Christ. See Matthew. 7. 24. Romans 10. 14. Ephe 4. 11 1, 13. 2 Cor. 5
19. Heb. 1. 1.

If you desire yet to be farther instructed in this point, you must observe
with us 3 things, 1 some lets or hindrances, that do keep men from heaven, and
the way which must be removed. 2 Some helps and furtherances, as provision for
the journey, that do help onwards in the way to heaven, that must be used. 3
the steps of this way it self. The hindrances and impediments are many But to
give you some 1 All sin in general is a hinderance to men's attainment of true
blessedness, for every sin is a step in the contrary way, and leads toward
hell. But there are some special things that let, as 1 Inf^delitie; the J^ws
could not ente^ into the earthly Canaan, because of their unbeleef Heb. 3. 19.
And the Christian will be kept out of the heavenly Canaan by his unbeleef. Job.
3. 18. 2 Pride James 4 6. God ref^^teth ^e pr^^d: When m^n are puffed up and
(...) so big, with the conceit of their own external o^ internal worth, they
cannot get into heaven. Matthew. 19. 24. It is easier for a Ca^^ll to go through
the eye of an^^dle. etc. 3. Trusting to a man's self and his own righteousness
Romans 10. 3 Gal. 2. 17. 4 A r^misse and careless seeking of it, men will not
give enough for it, he that would have heaven must go beyond all men Luke 13.
24. 5. Presumtuous security, whereby a man is content in his present condition,
presuming all is well when it is not so, Matthew. 25. 43. 44. and v. in the
parable of the ^ive ^^^lish virgins.

The helps and furtherances that must be used, are. 1 Resolution, as a man that
prepares for a journey does gird up the loins etc 2 All the means and
ordinances of grace. And the spiritual traveler can no more go to heaven
without the constant and conscionable use of th^se, then a trava^ler here can
go a great journey without a guide, food, and other provision for his journey.
These means are the Word, and Sacraments, prayer, and the rest i^ the
Sanctification of the Sabbath, all which being the means to beget increase and
che^^^, grace, which is he way and means to attain to glory must be carefully
and constantly used of all those that look to ^^me to glory: Io^n^ 6. 24. Act^
20. 32. John 5. 29. Romans 10. 13. 2 Cor. 5. ^9. 1 P^^. ^^0. Esaias. ^8 14. Romans
10. 14. They That call upon the Lord shall be saved.

3. The steps of this way it self, are in general, the conformity of a man's
ways in righteousness and holiness to the will of God, doing good and avoiding
evil; or a walking in holiness and righteousness before him: Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heavens; but he that does
the will of my Father in Heaven: Matthew. 7. 2^. They th^^efore for whom this
place i^ prepared, and that shall be Inhabitants of this heavenly Jerusalem,
are said to be, the righteous, just, Saints etc. E^ay ^7. 1. Righteous men are
taken away from the evil to come. Mat. 25 46. The righteous shall go into
everlasting life. Mat. 1. 43. Then shall the just shine as the (...) the
kingdom of their Father: and heaven it self. Col. 2. 1^. It is called the
inheritance of the Saints, of them that are sanctified Acts 20. 32. Hebr. 12
14. Revel. 21 27. For it is but reason, that they that would have the wages of
eternal life of God hereafter, should do his work here: Hebr. 12. v. 28 If yet
you d^si^e to see this branched out further in (...); we may observe it to be
noted out unto us to ^ivers gracious works of Gods Spirit in us and by us: as,

1. In Sanctification, that is, the peculiar work of Gods Spirit, creating in
the elect, converted souls, that new quality of holiness; whereby they can in
some measure truly hate their own sins, with firm purpose to leave them and
love Gods Law with resolution to do it in some good measure. For all those, and
those alone that are sanctified here shall be saved hereafter. And this
sanctification, is one part of the will of God that must be done of all that
will be saved. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is the will of God, even your
Sanctification. Romans 8. 3. Whom he will glorify, he will sanctify. And this
we know does comprehend two things, Mortification of sin, and a quickening
virtue to goodness. And the first or rather the Spirit in the first, works by
these degrees, 1. it does make a man labor to find out his sin, especially
roo^-sin. 2. It makes him loath it, and be weary of it, and desirous to be rid
of it. 3. It makes him to fetch power from the death of Christ, in the use of
all the means of grace to kill it. 4. It makes him to apply this power as a
corasive to proud flesh, to eat out his sin. The second works thus: 1. It
makes a man labor to find out that righteousness which God retquireth. 2. To
strive for a willingness of heart ^o perform it. 3. And that he may so do to
fetch power from Christ in the use of all the means of Grace. 4. A love to all
good persons and things. And by these pure motions as streams, the fountain is
known to be pure. Io. 4 14. 5. A pure and a holy life shows the heart as the
fruit does the Tree to be good.

2. In Regeneration, That work of Gods wonderful power, begetting the Elect
again to himself, by the Word and Spirit; thereby making them the children of
God through (...) in Christ, who were the children of w^^th by (...): which is
one of the first steps in the way to salvation. And all those, and those only
that are regenerate here of God, by his Spirit and Word, by a spiritual birth,
and by that means made new creatures, shall come to this happy place, John 3 3.
Christ's own words. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a (...) be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God Joh. 1. 13. 1 Pet 1. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
who has begotten us again to a lively hope, etc. To an i^her^tance, etc. For
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Jo. 1. 14.
And this work where it is wrought does show it self thus: 1. by the change,
their hearts are changed, their stony heart is turned into a heart of flesh,
etc. and their lives are altered; they are other men as Paul and Manassah: they
have new thoughts, words, and works. Gal. 1. 22. 2. They desire after, and
delight in the means of Grace, 1 Pet. 2. v. 2. 3. They know how to work and do
work in the work of God.

3. In Repentance, (a fruit of sanctification) which is, where a man is sorely
displeased with himself for his sins, because they are offensive to God and
against his Law; and a true hatred of all sin, a settled, constant desire and
endeavor to order his life by Gods Word. For those only that turn from all sin
to God in heart and desire, and labor to show the same by eschewing all manner
of evil, and doing all manner of good shall be saved. It is called repentance
unto life, Acts 11. 18. Ezech. 18, 21 Mat. 18. 3. Christ's own words, Verily I
say to you, except you be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of God. Acts 3. 19. Amend your lives therefore and
turn, that your sins may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord. And this repentance if it be true, has these
things in it. 1. a hearty grief, chiefly, because we have offended a gracious
God that has been so good to us. Psalm. 51. 4. 2. An unf^^ned hat^ed and
detestation of all sin: especially of that we have loved most Psalm. 119. 104.
3. A groaning under the burden of it. Luke 15. 17. he to whom sin is a burden
shall come to this rest. Mat. 11. 28. Acts 3. 9 4. A constant resolution
against all sin especially our own sin, Psalm. 119 57. 5. An earnest striving
all our life time against all that we know to be evil. 6. A practice in some
measure in now, obedience, Luke 1. 6. sin begins to be left, corruption begins
to work out. 7. A daily examination of our selves, judging and humbling of our
selves for our sins. Psalm. 32. Romans 7. 8. A quick apprehension of Gods word
against it self. Acts 2. 37. 2 Kings 22. 19. 9. A love of the word of God and
Ministers thereof, as that by which we have had our healing, as a man will do
the Physician and Physic that cured his body.

4. In an effectual or inward calling: the special and free work of Gods
spirit, singling and drawing the elect from the reprobates, making them that
they were not before, Saints, etc. for they, and they only who are inwardly
called by Gods Spirit, as well as outwardly called by Gods Word, out of the
state of nature ot the state of grace, to faith and repentance, shall be saved.
And all such as are delivered into the ^ingdome of his dear Son. Col. 1. 13.
This calling is a sure sign that one is ordained to everlasting life. Romans 8.
30. Whom the Lord has called, them he has also glorified. For these are the
Vessels of mercy prepared to glory, and on whom God will declare the riches of
his glory, even them whom he has called. Romans 9. 22, 23, 24.

The evidence of this is 1. when the soul does answer to God in every thing he
does require, Psalm. 27. 8. 2. when a man is made a new creature by the
powerful work of regeneration.

5. In our Faith, that gift of God whereby the regenerate heart receives
Christ, and all his b^nefits to it self, as they are offered by the word, or
that tift whereby the believer is persuaded that the word of God is true, and
does belong all unto it self. And those only that have a true justifying Faith
here in their hearts, shall be saved hereafter, and none others: and those shall
be saved, for God has promised salvation to them. Jo. 3. 36. He that believes
shall be saved. 1 Pet. 1. 9. receiving the en^^o, your Faith, even the
salvation of your Souls: for this brings us unto and into Christ, who is the
way to salvation; and has the Keys of Heaven doors that opens and no man
shuts. io ^4 6 Rev. 14. 13. Acts 16. 30, 31. And this Faith may be found by
these signs, 1. It is bred by the word, Romans 10. 17. Law and Gospel. 2. It
gives a power against the powerfu^l work of Satan. Ephesians. 6. v. 16. 3. It makes
a man earnestly desire reconciliation with God, and assurance of his favor.
Psalm. 106 4. 31. 16. 4. It makes a man careful to please God, though he
displease himself in it. Heb. 11. 5. Genesis 22. 10. 5. It makes us to long for
Christ, for a more abundant taste and participation of his heavenly grace and
gifts. Cant. 1. 11. 6. It raises in us a heavenly and spiritual joy. 1 Pet.
1. 8. 7. It purges the heart of sin, Acts 15. 9. 8. It moves in us a love to
God and all his People. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Gal. 5. 5. James 2.

6. In our Justification, in the forgivenes of our sins, by the sufferings of
Christ, and the imputation of righteousness, by his obedience through faith: for
whosoever is justified shall be saved, and so e converse: Romans 8. 30. Whom he
justified them he also glorified. This does consist in the pardon of sin,
which may be known to be ours, if we have repented of it, 1 John 1. 9. and of
the imputation of Christ's righteousenes which may be known by such a peace of
Conscience as 1. does follow or accompany trouble of Conscience. 2. As does
make one careful to preserve a good Conscience. Romans 5. 1. Heb. 13. 8. 2 Corinthians. 1. verse. 12.

7. In our adoption, which is, the taking of a man, the child of wrath by
nature, to be a child of God by grace. For they that are to inherit heaven
hereafter are the children of God here, and so e converso: Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
If we be children, then are (...) heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ,
which we may know by these things, 1. If we do partake of the divine nature by
Regneration. Io. 1. v. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2. If we have such spiritual
affections toward God, as children have natural affections toward Parents.
3. If we have the Spirit of Adoption, that gi^t of the spirit assuring us of
our Adoption, Romans 8. 15. 4. If we do willingly submit unto, and desire wholly
to be governed by the spirit of God, Romans 8. 14. 5. If we do in some sort
resemble God.

8. In a true love, that holy affection of the heart causing us to delight in
God for his g^odnesse sake, and in our neighbors for Gods sake, Iam. 1. 12.
The Lord has promised the Crown of life ot them that love him. And this we may
know by these thing, 1. That we desire a more near union to him: 2. we are well
pleased in him 3. We much esteem him. 4. we are careful to please him. 5. we
hate that he hatheth. 6. We are zealous for him. 7. we love his ordinances and
servants by which we have intercourse withhim.

9. In a true love to Gods people, whereby a man is moved to wish them well and
labor their good: 1 Io. 3. 14. Hereby we know that we have passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren: which may be known by these things, 1.
That we love them all; those that have no respect to us, as well as the rest.
2. That we love them for their goodness sake: Psalm. 16. 3. 1 Cor 12. 26. 3.
That we have a fellow feeling with them in their misery. 4. That we are willing
and ready to do them all the good we can, and do help and succor them in their
misery. Matt. 5. 34, 35. I was sick and ye visited me, etc. they that shall
rest Esaias 57. 1, 2. are merciful men.

10. In the true filial frear of God, Psalm. 145. 19. that holy affection of the
heart awing us, and making us loath to displease God by sin, in respect of his
great goodness and mercy, and for a love we bear to righteousenes: The Lord has
promised to (...) the desire of them that fear him; And that he will h^ar their
cry, and save them And this fear those men have, that 1 do love God. 2. that
are truly humbled, Genesis 33. 3. 3. that are afraid of sin, Exodus 4. 3. Psalm. 16.
8. 4. that hate sin, Pr^v. 8. 13. 5. that depart from evil, Prove. 3. 7. Luke
1. 74. 75.

11. In true saving knowledge: in the clear and distinct understanding of
heavenly truth contained in the word by the spirit, Io. 1^ 2. This is life
eternal to know thee, the true God, etc. and then it is true, 1. when it is
distinct: 2. universal of all truths in a good measure: 3. it is humbling: 4.
it is experimental. 5. it is joined with practice.

12. In new obedience; when a man is ready to do Gods will in all things,
though never so much against heart: Romans 6. 17. Psalm. 119 6. And this must be,
1. of the whole man inward and outward: 2. it must be to the whole word. 3. it
must be always and in all places, times, and companies.

13. In a true joy, a sweet motion of delight in the soul, raised by the sense
of Gods favor in Christ, whereof the sold by good grounds is assured. A
glimpse of heaven upon earth, 1 Pet. 8. 9. Saint Peter speaks of such as
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory: That they shall receive the
end of their Faith, even the salvation of their souls; which is known by these
things: 1. it goes with faith: 2. it follows godly sorrow: 3 it is in
heavenly and spiritual things: 4. it is the fruit of the spirit: (...). it is
a lasting joy: 6. it is a victorious joy: 7. and it is a solid joy.

14. In patience under the Cross: when a man is able to bear the cross
quietly with a ready submission to Gods will, who will have it so for his own
ends. Jam. 1. 12. B^essed is the man that endures tentation, for when he is
^ried he shall receive the crown of life. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. And this patience we
shall know to be ^^ue by these things. I when a man does find fault with the
least inclination to impatiency. 2 When he does not go about to limit God. 3
When a man does more fear the evil of sin, then he does the evil of
punishment. 4. When a man is the better for the cross. Romans 5. 8. Psalm 119
67. Dan 12. 10. 5. When he does wholly resign up himself to God in it. Heb. 12.
9. David (...) El^e.

15 In the earnest of the SPirit, in their he^rts, whereby they are sealed upto
the day of redemption, and assured of heaven. 1 Cor. 1 22. Ephesians. 1. 14. 4. 30.
Romans 8. 16. 17. Which bears witness with our spirits that we are Gods
children, and kn^w^ by the fruits thereof as love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
and the rest Galla. (...). 22.

16. In their Spiritual poverty, or humbleheartednesse in the sight and sense
of their own spiritual wants, when a man is tamed by affliction, so that he
has a lively feeling of his spiritual poveritie and want: and is humbled and
made low thereby. Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of God.

17 In their holy mourning for their own and others sins, and the miseries of
Gods people: Matthew. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. They that mourn for spiritual things in a spiritual manner, and
upon spiritual motives Luke 6. 11. Blessed are they that weep etc.

18 In humility, when a man looking on his worse^ part, has a mean esteem of
himself, and a higher esteem of others, and does walk humbly before his God; in
a patient bearing of evil and doing of good Prove. 18. 12. Before glory goes
lowliness: Phillip. 2. 7. 8, 9. Matthew. 5. 23. 4. Matthew. 18. 12. 3, 4, 5.
Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, the same is greatest in the
kingdom of heven.

19. In their mercy and pity, to them that are in misery: When we pity and help
and succor them in their misery. Blessed are the merciful for they shall
obtain mercy: Matthew. 5. 7. Esaias 57. 1. Merciful men are taken away etc. Matt.
25. 34. I was hungry and ye fed me etc. Sell that ye have and give alms, make
you bags which wax no^ old, a treasure that can never fail in heaven etc. Luke
12. 33. Where no thief comes, nor moth corrupts.

20. In a lively hope, to an assured expectation of all goodthings promised
Romans 8. 14. We are saved by hope. This is an anchor to the soul sure and
steadfast. Heb. (...). 19. And then true, when 1 it arises out of faith Heb.
11. 1. 2 It follows (...) effedtuall cal^ing: Ephesians. 1. 18. 3 It makes a man
use all good means to have the thing hoped for. 4 It makes a man sit himself
for the thing hopes for: he that has this shall not be ashamed of it. Romans 5.
5. 1 John 3. 3.

21 In a broken hearts and contrite Spirit, when it is b^u^sed as it were to
powder through deep grief, from the apprehension of Gods wrath against him for
(...), Psalm. 34. 18 Psalm 50. He (...) such (...). Psalm. 147. 3. Ezekiel. 6. 26.
Romans 7. 8 (...). P^ritie and (...) of heart, that have hearts partly freed from
the (...), and endeavoring (...) to be more (...) from the gu^lt and
punishme^^ of (...) and from the power of sin by (...). Matthew. 5. (...).
Blessed are the pure^^ heart, for they shall see God Rev. 7. 14. These are the^
which (...) m^^e them white etc. ver. 9. Clothed with white Roles in (...) of
purity. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

23. In their (...), their mutual concord and agreement with their brethren:
Matthew. 5 9. Blessed are the peace makers: Gal. 5. 24. Fruit of the Spirit is
peace.

24. In their sincerity and uprightness, when the heart is right toward God
and man: studying to do all things to please God, and not for any by (...).
Esaias 57. 2. Upright men are taken away.

25. In doing good in every state and condition of life. Romans 2. 6. 7 Go^ will
reward every one according to his work: That is to them who through patience in
(...) seek glory: etc. Eternal life, ver. 10. To every man that does good
shall be Glory, Honor, and Peace.

26 Especially by fruitfulness in well doing. Matthew. 7. 19. When we forget
what is past and prosse forward to more, not trusting to what who have done.
Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, and he that honors
him shall be honored. Phil. 3. 13. Job. 15. 8. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Matthew. 25. 37.
38. Christ shall say to them I was an hungry and ye fed me etc. And they shall
say unto him, Lord when saw we thee an hungry and fed thee, etc.

27 In picking close to God herein, in improving all our talents and
opportunities for this end, and mightily opposing all that does oppose us
herein. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. I have fought a good sight and have finished my course,
I have kept the faith, From henceforth is said up for me the crown of
righteousness etc. 1 Pet. 5. 4. Matthew. 25. 21.

28 In laboring by their example and Counsel to convert others to
righteousness: Dan. 12. 2. And they that turn many to righteousness shall
shine as the ^arres for ever and ever.

29 In cherishing and furthering every good thing.

30 In pers^vering in good: Mark 13. 13. He that continues to the end shall be
saved. Rev. 2. 10. Be faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.

31 In loving and ^onging for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 4.
8. Luke 21. 8. Rev. 22. 17. 20. Romans 8. 10. 23.

32 In embracing and reverencing the truth 2 Thessalonians. (...). 10.

If now upon all this we shall begin to think that this way is impossible to be
gone, we must answer and tell you in Christ's words, the way t^ heaven is a
narrow and a straight way. Matthew. 7. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 18 For 1 It is a persecuted
way. 2 Timothy 3. 11. 12. 2 It is a way through many troubles Acts 14. 22 James
(...). 12. 2 Cor. 4 17. Typed by the travel of the Israelites through the
wilderness. 3 It will admit of no turning: Acts 13. 10. 4 It crosses all a
man's corruptions 1 Cor. 1. 23. Romans 5. 5 There are many enemies against them
that walk in this way. But all this is but to make us to do as Christ does
exhort, Strive to enter in etc. Luke 13. 24. Use all means and be at any
charge to attain it. Esaias 55. 1 Prove. 23. 23. Matthew. 13. 44. And that we may
not go without it, Let us 1. begin bet^^es to deal upon this purchase. 2
Labor earnestly, neglect no time nor means. 3. Be industrious as men that
cleave a knottie piece of wood. 4. Let us be sure to bid enough for heaven. 5
Let us go through, and let us resolve to go through with the bargain what ever
it cost us: for wisemen have given their life for it; and it is the best
bargain in the world.

3. The 3. duty whereunto (in this use) we are to be exhorted is, That we
labor to get an assurance of heaven before we die. 2 Pet. 1. 10. For 1 We know
not how soon we shall die, and then we must part from the present things we
have here: It is good then to be assured of better, before we leave these
things. 2 This assurance brings a world of joy with it. Rom 14 17 3. It will be
one special means to keep of many of Satan's tentations Ephesians. 6. 16 4 Hereby
we shall be able to come with boldness to the throne of grace Heb. 4. 14. 16.
And to move us thereunto, let us consider theseunto, let us consider these
things. 1 It is possible to attain it, for some of the Saints have attained it.
Exodus 15. 2. Ioh 19. 23. Ioh 20. 21. ^7, 28. Ephesians. 1. 14. 2 We have means to
attain it, and time also to make use of that means Job 14. 14. 19. Ioh. 12. 36.
3 God requires it 2 Pet. 1. 10. 4. Many excellent benefits flow from hence to
us, and (amongst the rest) we shall have a taste of this happiness here, we
shall have a heaven upon earth.

If now you shall ask how you may come by this assurance, we must make the
answer in 3 branches. 1 This assurance cannot be had presently; for commonly it
is not gotten without much labor and a-doe, and that for a long time, and
after a long waiting. 2 The best means that can be found of our assurance
herein, will be the work of the spirit of God, so much as we can find of the
work of the Spirit in our Sanctification, Regeneration, Repentance, Faith,
Love, Joy, etc. So much assurance we may have upon solid grounds of our
salvation, and the more we find of the one, the more we have of the other: 2
Pet. 1. 5. 6, 7, 10, 11. Psalm 15. 1. 2. etc. Romans 8. 28. 30. 3 The means of
increase of grace, which are 1 The constant use of all the means of grace, the
word. Psalm 1. 3. Acts 20. 32. The Sacraments. 1 Cor. 11. 26. Prayer. Matthew. 7.
7. And by this means we shall get into Christ, by and from whom, all our virtue
to grow and increase does come: as the branches from the tree. Ioh. 15. 15. 1
Pet. 2. 5. In the third place for application of this point of heavens
happiness, there are some uses to be directed to them only that upon a
serious examinatin of themselves, find themselves to be justly entit^led to
this blessedness, and those are 4. first of all they are from hence, to be
taught thankfulness to God, who has bestowed this gift upon them, prepared
them for it, and does preserve it for them, and them for it: to be delivered
from such an evil as hell, is no small favor; but withal to be brought to
such a good as heaven, is a favor above all comparison. If a man (of whom we
may deserve something) should bestow a good farm upon us in fee simple, we
should think our selves bound to owe him much thanks for this. What thanks then
think we do we owe to God (from whom we can merit nothing) who has freely
given us a Kingdom, nay more then all the Kingdoms of the world at once: For
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6. 23. For
by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift
of God: Ephe. 2. 8. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light Coloss. 1. 12. Well may we
assume the Apostles words; 1 Pet. 3. 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us to a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ to an inheritance etc. 2 They
are from hence to be learned to rejoice in the hope and expectation of this
happiness; who is there that is born to a crown, and does not rejoice to think
of it? The godly have as much cause to rejoice for the happiness to come upon
them, as the wicked to weep and howl for the misery to come upon them. James
1. 1. 2. Romans 5. 2. We rejoice under the hope of glory. Luke 10. 20. Rejoyc^
that your names are written in Heaven Luk 21. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 13. 3 They are from
hence to learn patience and comfort under the cross: have we many and grievous
afflictions here? it will not be long but we shall be freed of them all, and we
shall be made amends for all; are we poor here? we shall have a kingdom then;
are we in trouble here? we shall have rest then; are we under shame and
contempt here? we shall have honor then: 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light afflictions
here, which are but for a moment, cause unto us a far more excellen^ and
eternell weight of glory. Romans 8. 18. I (...) of this present time are not
worthy (...) the glory which shall be showed unto us: The coming of the Lord
draws nigh. 1 (...) 5. 6 7. And this will be a time of refreshing, Act, 3. 19
And then there shall be, no more curse; and all tears shall be wiped away from
our eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow. etc. Rev. 22. 3.
Let us wait till then, Jam. 5 7 Be patient my brethren to the coming of the
Lord; behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the Earth, and
has long patience for it till he receive the former and the latter rain, Mat.
12. So let us wait, Jude 21. 4 They are from hence to learn moderation in their
desires after, and use of, these earthly things, since they are shortly to have
so much, they may be content with a little in the meantime; nor should they
much esteem those things they have, since shortly they must leave them for far
better things. It is not for him that is born to a kingdom, to set his heart
upon an old rotten Cottage. 1 Cor. 7. 31. In the fourth place for application,
since, heaven is such a place and condition, Let us all be then persuaded, not
only to get it for our selves, but to do our best to help others to it also,
bonian que communius comelius, the better the thing is the more we should
desire the communication of it to others, and the more goo^ we shall do
thereby, there is room enough in heaven for us all, and it will not lessen, but
increase our happiness to have others to partake of the same happiness with us:
they that turn many to righteousness shall shine, etc. it is one note and mark
of our being in the state of grace, and our going to the state of glory (as we
have showed) to be of this making, Psalm 51. 13. Gal. 4. 19. Luke 22. 32. grace
is communicative, for there is love in it, which is b^utifull and good; and he
that has tasted the sweetness of Gods goodness; himself, has so much love to
others, that he desires, that all others should cast thereof with him; it is
the nature and temper of all the heavenly passengers. Let us every one of us
therefore be of this heavenly mind, not to hinder men in the way by laying
blocks of ill example or bad council, but rather by all good persuasions and
examples, labor to have as many with us to heaven as we can, the father his
children, the husband his wife, the wife her husband, one friend and neighbor
another; and for this purpose, let us instruct, reprove, and admoni^^ them our
selves? and let us draw and bring them to Jesus Christ, who is the way; and for
this purpose let us pray for them, and draw them to the means and ordinances of
grace, the word, prayer, and sacraments; by which as by a Conduit pipe, grace
and glory, Christ and all, is conveyed and derived to us. So let us bring the
sick souls of our friends now to Christ, as men did the sick bodies of their
friends to Christ heretofore, and were healed: let us persuade them to wash in
that heavenly bath, that is open for sin and transgression, Zach. 12. 1. Let us
say, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, etc. Esaias 2. 3. In the last
place, since it is so, that there be degrees of glory in heaven, and some shall
have more then others: Let it then be to persuade us to labor for the utmost
degree of glory, by doing and suffering: let us not only labor to be good,
but to be passing good; to do good, but to do much good; to do all the good
we can, not only to suffer for Christ and righteousness sake; but to suffer
gladly and willingly, any thing for Christ's sake, We will end with the Apostles
exhortation, in the 1 Cor. 15. 59. therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the works of the Lord; forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord: i. not without a reward
from God, seeing there is an eternal life.

That there are degrees of torments in hell.
IT is most certain, that the torments of hell shall be imposed upon every
impenitent sinner, and he that bears least thereof, shall bear an intolerable
burden: yet it is more then probable, that as some sin more then others* so
they shall be punished more then others: and therefore that there shall be
degrees of torments in hell. Matthew. 23. 14. woe unto you Scribes etc. Therefore
you shall receive the greater damnation. Matthew. 11. 22. It shall be easier for
Tire and idon in the day of judgment thou for you. Matthew. 5. 22.

Reas. For Gods justice so requires, and the judge of all the earth will do
right. If then it be demanded who shall have most torment? The answer will be,
he that has most sinned: And the aggravation of sin will rest upon these
circumstances. 1 Upon men's knowledge for they that have much knowledge, and yet
sin much: must look for much torment. Luke 12. 48. 2 Upon man's will, for the
more of the heart runs to a sin, the greater is that sin, in which respect,
some sinful thoughts are deemed greater then other sinful works. 3 Upon the
means of amendment, for they that have had much means of amendment, and yet are
as ^ad as ever they have been, must look for a great share of hell. 4 Upon the
hurt they do by their sin, for the more hurt they do by their sin, the more
torment they must expect to suffer in hell for their sin: hence it was (as it
is conceived by some) that Dives would have had his friends admonished, least
they being hurt by his counsel or example, this might cause increase of this
torments in after time.

Now having made it to appear, that there is a hell, and that it is such a
hell, a miserable and intolerable condition: And that there are degrees of
this misery. Let us b^ing home this a little ne^rer to our selves, and consider
what use the Holy Ghost in the Word of God teaches us to make of all this.

Use 1. First then let his be to set forth, the folly and madness of those
men, who though they hear before of such a state and condition, and are
forewarned thereof: yet wilfully run themselves upon the hazard of everlasting
undoing therein, to have the fulfilling of a few base lusts here: these show
plainly that either they believe none of these things, or if they do, that
they suppose they have made a Covenant with death, and are at agreement with
hell, that it shall not touch them. Esaias 28. 15. They run upon all this danger,
as the horse unto the battle. Ier. 8. 6. Being ignorant of Gods judgment.
ver. 7. What will it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul
Matthew. 16. 26. Will we not think that man mad, who being told that if he go
such a way, he will fall into a dangerous (...) it, or be torn in pieces of
wild beasts: that ha^ing no need will notwithstanding adventure that danger?
doubtless every man will think him so. [Bolton] Ah then is it not madness
above admiration, and that which may justly astonish heaven and earth, that men
who are reasonable creatures, that have eyes in their heads to foresee, and
hearts in their bodies to tremble, consciences capable of horror, and bodies
and souls that can burn in hell; that may (by taking less pains in the right
way then a drunkard, wordling, or other wicked man in the ways of hell) escape
everlasting pains, yet will not be warned or moved; until tho fire of that
infernal lake flame about their ears. O monstrous madness! and merciless
cruelty to your own souls.

2. Let us then consider of this, see and believe this. For whatsoever men may
pretend, or imagine, they do not believe there is any such place as hell is,
for if they did, they could not so desperately and inconsiderately, run into
evil as they do. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Esaias 27. 11. Let men therefore know and believe
as a part of Gods infallible truth, that there is a hell, and that the torment
thereof is extreme and perpetual, and let them labor to avoid it. (and cries
[Ward] In hell there is nothing heard but (...) In hell the fire nere slakes,
nor worm (...) dies. But where this hell is plac^d (my muse stop there) Lord
show me what it is, but never where.

Let us then spend many though^s, in the meditation of this also: and for this
also pray, that God will open ^he eyes of our mind; that we may see that which
the devil labors with all his might to keep from us, what is the misery of
this condition, and let us know it for our selves, for this knowledge will be
very profitable to us. 1 It will keep us from sin, and it is the ^fore proposed
as a remedy and help against it. 2 It will wean us from the world, and make us
prepare for heaven. 3 It will make us more afraid of the place, and of sin
leading to it: and provoke us with more care and study, to endeavor to avoid
it, Forewarned and forearmed. 4 It will make us more thankful to God and
Christ for the work of Redemption, by which we are freed from such a misery.
But to forget these things, or to put far from us ^he thought of death,
judgment, hell, and heaven, is to open the stood-gates, and let loose the
reins to all unrighteousness, as the minding and expecting of them, is to shut
up and restrain them. Job gives this as the reason of his care to walk with his
God, Job 31. 23.

For Gods punishment was fearful to me, etc. Amos 6. 3. Ye that put far away
the evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity.

2. Let this then persuade us, to use all the possible means we may to escape
this place and condition. Matthew. 3. 8. To fly from the wrath to come. And for
this let us hearken to the counsel of Gods Word Luke 16. 31. Which is to fly
all sin: for that leads to this misery. Let us therefore resolve to do or
suffer any thing rather then knowingly, wittingly, and willingly, to sin
against God. Let us invincibly oppose all the motions and temptations to sin,
watching and praying continually against it that we may be found worthy to
escape the things that shall come upon the world. Luke 21. 36. And to provoke
us to this let us consider these things.

1. What a terrible place hell is (as we have showed) 1 Torment inexplicable. 2
No manner nor measure of ease or comfort. 3 all this endless. 2 There is a
possibility now of escaping it, the promise is to all, and God is rich in
mercy to all that call upon him, Christi^ merits are sufficient for all, and
the greatest sinners have found mercy, that have sought it with repentance.

If now you shall ask what is the cause, that most men notwithstanding they
know this; do so desperately hazard themselves: and are so careless to avoid
so great a danger, We shall answer: these 4 causes especially.

1. Security, They are asleep in sin, and so as Jonas was sometimes in the
ship, do not apprehend any danger though there be never so much. Or 2
Presumption. They are in a dream of another case then indeed they are in, for
they that do spiritually sleep, do spiritually dream, and as a man out of his
way, that notwithstanding is confident he is in his way, will not heed them
that shall tell him so; so is it in this case. 3 Delay, if it be so that men
do think there is some danger in the case, they think it is time enough, and
they will look to it hereafter. 4 Remissness, We think a little will serve,
and that we have done enough; and so as good never a whit, as never the near:
Be because we have not done enough, we have undone our selves for ever. For
Remedy whereof we must labor to be thoroughly awaked, examine our case, and
put our selves in the balance of the Sanctuary: see which way we are going,
and if we find we are going the broad way to destruction, let us make haste
with all care to get out of this way into the narrow way that leads to life
Psalm 119. 59. I have considered my ways and turned my feet to thy
Pe^timonies. If now you shall ask what means you may use and what course you
may take to escape this miserable condition, we shall answer you in these
perticulars, wherein also you may se^ who are yet in this broad way to
destruction. 1. Hearken to the counsel of Gods word, and his faithful
servants speaking to us by it Luke 16. 28. 29. For as the neglect and contempt
of this brought the old world into hell 1 Pet. 3. 19. 20. So the heeding and
obeying of this will keep men out of hell. 2 Pray earnestly for Gods favor in
the pardon of our sins

3. Get the spirit in us to help us. Romans 8. 26. 4. Make Christ our friend and
bring him to God for us. 5. Get out of the broad way of our own hearts in evil,
and forsake the way of sin which leads to this misery, resolve to do any thing
and suffer anything rather then sin, and so get into the narrow way of Gods
mind in good.

For they for whom Hell is prepared, and that shall be members of this black
and h^ll^sh crew, shall be the unrighteous, the wicked that do o^tend, that do
iniquity, etc. Psalm. 9. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 9. The unrighteous shall not i^h^rit the
kingdom of God. Mat. 13. 41. They shall gather out of his kingdom all things
that offend, and them which d^e iniquity. If yet you desire to see it further
set forth, what evils especially they be that bring men to this miserable
condition, that all m^n must avoid as the way, as they will avoid this as the
end. 1. The cherishing, nourishing, and sparing of sin; for if we kill not sin,
sin will certainly kill us, Rom 8. 15. For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die. But if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall
live. Mat. 18. 7, 8. 9. Wherefore it thy hand or thy foot cause thee to offend,
cut it off and cast it from thee. It is better for the (...) enter into life,
halt or maimed, then having two hands, or two feet to be cast into everlasting
^ire. And if thine eye cause thee to offend, pl^ck^n^ous, and ^^st it from
thee. It is better to enter into life with one eye, then having two eyes to be
cast into hell fire And then a man does cherish and spare his sin, when 1. he
will not endure reproof for it, when he will not have his sin dist^^bed. 2.
When he does labor to hide his sin. Job 20. 12, 13. 3. When he does plead for
his sin. 4. When it is pleasant to him. 5. When he does not care to be rid of
it, nor does groan under it. 6. He cares not to know what that good will of God
is; nor does he labor to bring his heart to it. 7. He cares not to draw nigh
to God in the means of grace. Job 21. 14 They say to God depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways. 8. Their fruits are the fruits of the
flesh, and this shows them to be bad Trees.

2. The continuance in an Unregenerate state, which is the natural state and
condition of every man: there is no hope for any man to escape damnation, but
for such as are begotten again by this work. And this is the condition of all
these persons following: 1. Such as in whom there is no change at all wrought,
but they are still in their pure naturals; as they were born, so they live, and
they mean to dye. 2. Such in whom is there no desire after, nor delight in the
means of grace. 2. Such as have neither will nor skill to any of Gods works, as
Prayer, or the like. 4. Such as have no holy motions, for these are like the
breath and beating of the Pulse; that show the natural life: and where they
are not, it is a sign the body is dead. And to where those are not, it is a
sign the soul is dead; and that there is no spiritual life begun in it.

3. Impenetency in Sin; it is not man's sin so much as his not repenting of his
sin that damns and undoes him. Manasseth and Paul sinned much; but they
repented and were saved. Ezech. 18. ^1. Cast away all your transgressions, etc.
For why will you die o house of Israel. And this is then most pernicious, when
God calls Upon men to repent; when men are exhorted and persuaded to (...), and
will not hear? Matt. 11. 20, 2^. 12. 41, Acts 17. 30. 2 Chronicles. 36. 11, 12. 14,
15, 16. And they do continue in their impenitent estate. 1. That do not see a
filthiness in sin, but think it a beautiful thing. 2. That are not burdened
with sin, though they have never so much upon them. 3. They whose hearts are
like a Vessel without a hole, where into the word cannot Pierce. 4. They who
live in sin still, and leave no sin. 5. They that cry not out of their sin and
bewail it. 6. That are untractable to Gods will. Hebr. 3 13. Romans 2. 5. 7.
That will not endure a plain and sincere Ministry, they will not be awaked out
of sin; as a man disturbed is angry does show he is willing to sleep on, and
not to be awaked; so it shows these men are not willing to come out of their
sin. Better to endure the pain of Repentance here, then everlasting pain
hereafter: for one of them must be endured. Luke 13. 3. 5. Christ's own words
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

4. An effectual or outward calling when men are moved by the Word, or
afflictions to repent, but do not; such men as are still under the power of
darkness, such are they that hear the word, but do not repent of sin; nor
believe the Gospel: such are like to a man in a dead sleep, when he is called,
who hears not, and therefore lies snorting still in his sin. These answer not
Gods call, but put them off with delays and excuses. Luke 14. 16, 17. Math.
20. 16. Prove. 1. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused. I have stretched
out my hand, and none would regard: those that were called to the Supper; one
says, I have bought a farm; another, I have married a wise; a third, I have
bought oxen. 2. These continue still in their unregenerate state and are not
changed at all.

5. Infidelity, the privation and utter want of Faith: when Gods promises are
wholly distrusted: for such men as believe not, are damned already (that is) as
sure to go to hell as if they were there already. Jo. 3. verse 36. He that
believes in the Son has everlasting life: And he that obeys not the Son,
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him: Romans 1. verse 20. Heb
3. verse 2^. They could not enter in, because of unbelief. Mark 16. verse 16.
He that believes not shall be damned. And this unbelief may be discerned by
the effects thereof, also which are 1. by a man's weakness to withstand
temptation, that he is carried and hurried hither and thither with every
temptation. 2. That a man takes so little care and pains to be reconciled to
God. 3. That a man does so little care to please God. 4. That a man does so
little desire after grace. 5. That a man has no spiritual joy in him. 6. That
the heart is so foul and unclean still: And 7. that they have so little love
to God and his People, 1 John 3. 14, 15.

6. In a man's own guiltines, when a man's sins remain upon his soul being
unpardoned, because they are not repented of; and he has nothing to do with
Christ's righteousness, but must stand upon his own bottom: the plague of wicked
men, Psalm. ^9. 27. Lay iniquity upon iniquity, and let them not come into thy
righteousness. Matthew. 22. 11, 12. Man how came thou in hither not having on
thy wedding garment, that knows not what a troubled Conscience for sin, and
quieted by Christ's blood does mean; and therefore take no care, use no pains to
keep the Conscience quiet and good.

7 If we continue still as we are by nature the base born of Satan, by
similitudinary resemblance: we are said to be the Devils children, such as bare
his image and resemble him in malice and subtilty, called children of wrath, of
the flesh, of perdition, of Death, of Hell. John 8. 41. 44. You are of your
father the Devil and his works will ye do. And thus it is, when we have none
of the divine nature in us: nor any good affection toward God at all, we are
more like unto Satan than unto God; and when Satan, and not Gods Spirit has
filled our hearts, and we are led by the Devil and not by the Spirit of God.

8. In the warn of love ot or hatred of God, the case of all wilful disobedient
sinners: for every man that is wicked (as every man is in his estate of nature)
does hate God, Romans 1. 30. which does appear by his desire to have God depart
from him, Job 20. by this that he does not regard him, nor care to please him,
that he cares not for Gods glory; nor does he regard his ordinances.

9. In the hatred of Gods people, when men have a settled malice against them
without cause, that they neither wish them well, nor endeavor their good. 1
Jo. 2. 11. He that hates his brother is in death. Verse. 15. is a man slayer;
and ye know that no manslayer has eternal life. 1 Jo. 3. 13. 15. Psalm. 34
21. They that hate the righteous shall perish: which may be thus discerned: 1.
That they love not one of them but for some respect: 2. That they hate them for
their goodness sake. 1 Jo. 3. 12. Because his own works were evil, and his
brothers good. 3. That they rejoice nover them, and that they ^o not pity them
nor yield them any help in their misery. Math. 25. I was hungry and ye fed me
not, sick and in prison, and ye visited me not; naked and ye clothed me not,
etc. Judgment merciless, shall be to him that shows no mercy Jam. 2. 13.

10. In Presumption or the want of Gods fear: either they fear him not at all,
or if they do; it is as an angry Judge, and with a servile fear, they sin
nothing the less but the more. Romans 3. 16, 17, 18. The fear of God is not
before their eyes. And therefore they love not God; they are not humbled before
God, do not fear sin nor depart from it Jer. 5. 22.

11. In their Ignorance, want of the true knowledge of God and heavenly things,
when either they have not and cannot, or have means and will not know. 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8, 9. Ephesians. 4. 18 The Lord will come from heaven in flaming fire, to render
vengeance on them that know him not, etc. And then it is not true, if there be
any, when it is confused, partial, proud, without experience or practice.

12. In disobedience; when a man refuses to hear, and do what God requires.
2 These. 1. 8, 9. He shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance, etc. and
obey not the gospel. 1 Pet. 3. v. 19, 20.

13. In the want of true joy: for their joy if any is, 1. without faith: 2. and
did not follow godly sorrow; 3 it is in carnal and earthly things, Psalm. 4. 6.
4. it is a fruit of the flesh and not of the spirit. 5. And it is not a solid
lasting nor victorious joy, Eccles. 7. 8.

14. In impatiencie under the Cross, wherein men cannot submit to God and be
quiet, but fret and repine: one of the sins that provoked God so much against
the Jews, and kept them out of the earthly Canaan. Psalm. 106. 25, ^6. Dan. 12.
10. Psalm. 78. 41. 2 Kings 6. 33. For it makes God to increase the Plague still
until at last he utterly destroy, Levit. 26. 21. And they discover it in these
things 1. They limit the holy one of Israel; and neither can or will endure to
wait upon him: 2. They are troubled only with the evil of punishment, and not
at all with the evil of sin as Pharaoh: 3. They are not the better but the
worse for their crosses: 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. This is King Ahaz, who in the time of
his affliction did trespass, yet more and more.

15. In the absence of the Spirit of God, which they have not Jude 1. 19. and
the presence of Satan that evil Spirit, wherewith they are filled. Acts 5. 3.
by the illusion whereof, they prosume of salvation, having no right to it, nor
reason for it. And as this is of the flesh, so it yields the fruits of the
flesh, as adultery and the like. Gal. 5. 19.

16. In their spiritual fulness: that in their pride and high conceitednes of
their own sufficiency feel no need of Christ; that in their own sense think
they have all things, and want no spiritual good thing. Luke 1. 53. Luke. 8.
24, 25. W^ (...) you that are full, Rev. 3. 17. Luke 18. 9, etc. He fills the
hungry with good things, but the rich be (...) empty away.

17. In their wicked joy and mirth, that are so drowned in their present
pleasures that they shun all pains and crosses for godliness or Gods glory,
rejoice in wickedness and in earthly things at the best; and mourn not at all
for any spiritual thing, Luke 6. 25. Woe unto (...) that now laugh, for ye
shall wail and we^y. Jam. 5., 1 2. 5.

18. In pride, that haughtines of mind, when a man is puffed up with a conceit
of his own excellency to the neglect of God, and contempt of men; that which
brought Satan to Hell. Prove, 18. 12. Before destruction the heart of man is
^aughty. Math. 23. 12. He that exaltech himself shall be brought low. Ezech.
28. Obadia, verse. 3. The pride of thy heart has deceived thee; thou that
dwell in the clifts of the Rocks, etc. Though thou exalt thy self, etc. Yet
I will bring thee down.

19. In their cruelty and unmercifulness toward (...) in misery; that have
not a heart to grieve nor a hand to help them. Jam. 2. 13. Condemneation
merciless, shall be to him that shows to mercy, Jam. 5. 1. etc. Weep and
^owl ye rich men for the misery that shall come upon you etc. Behold, the hire
of the Laborers is of you kept buck; and it cries in the ears of the Lord:
ye have condemned and killed the just. Luke 16. 20, 21. Dan. 4. 24.

20. In despair or want of hope or presumption, a groundles vain hope, that
has no foundation, that brings to fruit. Job 8. 13. The hope of such shall
perish, and be cut off: and their trust shall be as the Spiders web: and then
they shall be ashamed of their hope. Psalm. 25. 3.

21. In a hard and stony hears: when the heart is disobdient and unyeelding:
which men get by custom in sin, Gods judgment and Satan's malice. Romans 2. 5.
Thou after thine hardness, and as a treasure, wrath againist the day of wrath
and declaration of the just judgment of God. Romans 9. 18. He shows mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will be hardens: so then, those that are hardened
are such on whom he shows no mercy, therefore such are to perish.

22. In their unclean hearts, that have hearts spiritually defiled with Sin:
that are either a generation cleansed in their own eyes, and not indeed; and
have an outward cleansing: or, are openly and pr^^^ssedly filthy and abominable
Esaias. 64. 3. Ephesians 5. 5. Rev. 21. 27.

23 In their hatred and variance, when being of contrary desires and opinions,
they fall out amongst themselves. Matthew. 5. 22. Romans 1. 29.

24 In their hypocrisy, when men cloak in fidelity and sin, with the
appearance and show of faith and repentance: Woe to you hypocrites, Matthew. 23.
1^. 28. You shall receive the greater damnation etc. ver. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 1.

25 In doing evil in every state of life. Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish
shall be upon every soul that does evil etc. Gallat. 6. 7. He that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption Esaias 3. 11. Woe to the wicked, the
reward of his works shall be given him.

26 Especially they that be fruitful in evil doing: Heb. 6. 8. For if every
tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire, Matthew. 7. 19. Much more the trees that bring forth evil, and much evil
fruit: and especially if they glory in it. Phil. 3. 1^. Their end is
damnation, they glory in their shame.

27 In hanging loose from God, in not using, or misimployment of our talents
Matthew. 25. 30. Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. All such as suffer Satan to carry them
captive to their own destruction.

28 In drawing otoers by their council and example to sin with them: Matthew.
23. 13. 15. woe ^e unto you etc. For you compass Sea dn Land to make one of
your profession, and when he is made, ye make him two fold more the child of
hell then yourselves.

29. In hindering the growth of goodness, like tares amongst corn. Matthew. 13.
30. Matthew. 23. 10. Acts 13. 20. They are to be burnt.

30 In gluttony and worldliness. Phil. 3. 19. The end of such men is
destruction of body and soul in hell. Matthew. 19. 28.

31 In Apostasy, and progress from evil to worse. 1 Timothy 5. 12. 2. Tim. 3.
13.

22 In not enduring to think of the coming of the Lord Jesus to judgment, They
shall call on the mountains to cover them, etc.

33 In Heretical opinions, Romans 3. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 12. God shall send them
strong delusions to believe lies, that they may be damned, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 1.

If a man would now desire to know which way he is passing, whether he be going
to heaven or to hell; Let him examine himself by these rules, and try himself
by the particulars aforesaid. And thereby he shall soon see which way he takes,
and to what (...) will come: If he be going the broad and easy way of sin
which man's carnal reason directs, and man's corrupt will and affections
embraces, he is going the way to destruction, if he walk after the prince that
rules in the air, after the course of this present world: then he is still in
practice, as we are by nature, The child of wrath. There are three sorts of
men. 1 Such as are affected with desperate horrors and fears as Judas, these
will not escape hell. Matthew. 27. 5. 2 such as are sottish and senseless, that
fear nor, or care for any thing: these are not the likely men to escape it. 3
The vain presumptuous man that (...), and has no ground for his hope. 4. Such
as have a lively hope upon good and solid grounds; these may expect deliverance
from ^^ll and the obtaining of heaven. 2 Timothy 4. 8. We shall shut up this part
in the words of M^ses Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they were wise then they would
understand this, they would consider their latter end.

3 The 3. thing we are to be exhorted to, is to g^t (if possible we may) an
ass^ance that we shall escape this miserable condition: that God has not
appo^uted us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. And
the best means to assure us of that, is to be assured that we are not in the
way. If you can assure me that you go nor the broad way of sin that leads to
destruction, I can assure you, you shall never come to the place of
destruction: And if we can be assured we are appointed to salvation, we may be
sure we are not appointed to wrath. And therefore herein for further
satisfaction in this point, we must refer and send you to the evidences of our
assurance of salvation.

In the fourth place for application, if it be so that hell be such a miserable
place, state, and condition? Let it be the^ for the terror and dread of al
those men, which upon the view of their own hea^ts, and lives, in the glass
before proposed to them, find themselves to be in the broad way to this
misery, to call upon them to fear: to turn their laughter into mourning, their
joy into sorrow, and to weep and howl for the misery that shall come upon
them, do you laugh now? Oh woe to you that laugh now, Luke 6. 25. For you shall
mourn and weep. Are you m^^^y now, truly you have little cause were all well
known; your case is little otherwise then that of the devils, who are delivered
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. 2 Pet. 2. 4. As
condemned prisoners and malefactors, they are shortly to be haled out to a
dreadful execution. Are you consident and fearlesse? truly it is marvel, for
the heavy wrath of the Almighty like a sharp sword, by a small thread hangs
over your heads: and when this thread of your life breaks, (and it will break
shortly) then will it f^ll upon you to the uttermost: And who shall be able to
abide it? Rev. 6. 17. Will you not fear him that has the keys of hell and
death? Matthew. 10. 28. Fear him that when he has killed the body can cast soul
and body into hell (...), fear him: Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 5 6. Were it not so
that you were spiritually dead, twice dead and therefore senseless, and (as it
is) that the god of this world has blinded your eyes, that you cannot see the
things that belong to your peace: Luk^ 10. 42. you could not be so confident,
and secure as you are: did you see but the least part, of what is to come upon
you shortly: you would soon change your note, and as B^lshassar when he saw the
hand writing upon the wall, their countenance would be changed, their thoughts
would be troubled; so that the joints of their loins would be loosed: and their
knees would smite one against another. Oh that thou had known these things,
but now they are hid from thine eyes: Luke 19. 42. Can thine heart endure, or
can thine hands be strong, in the days that the Lord shall deal with thee.
Ezekiel. 12 14. When his wrath is kindled but a little (O but a little) blessed
are they that trust in him: Psalm. ^1. 12. For who (O Lord) knows the power of
thy anger, the thunder of thy power who can understand. Job 2^. 14. Even
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. Remember and forget not That the day of
the Lord, that great day and terrible day of the Lord is at hand: the coming of
the Lord Jesus draws nigh. That before this the Sun shall be turned into
^^rknesse, the moon shall not give her light, the stars of heaven shall fall,
and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Matthew. 24. 29. The heavens shall
pass away with a noise: the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth
with all the works thereof shall be burned up. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Then shall come
days, or, that great day, or day of his wrath Rev. 6. 17. The day of judgment
and destruction of ungodmen. 2 Pet. 3. 7. When the dreadful and glorious sign
of the Son of man in heaven shall be seen. Matthew. 24. 30. The Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire. 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7. 8. And he shall come in the clouds of heaven, and all his holy-Anggels
with him, with power and great glory. Luke 9. 26. (...) admired of al his
saints. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. and then the Lord shall descend from above with (...)
shoat, and the trumpet, that is, [first loud, shril, terrible] trump, the
trumpet of God shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, 1 Thessalonians 4. 16. 1 Cor.
15. 50. And all the kindreds and Tribes of the earth shall mourn. Mat. 24. ^0.
Because of him, and shall hide themselves in the holes of the earth, and they
shall say to the mountains, and the rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the
presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb:
for that great day of his wrath is come, and who shall stand. Rev. 6. 17. And
then shall he send his Angels: with this great sound of a trumpet to gather
together his elect from the four winds: Mat. 24. 31. And then shall all flesh
appear before his judgment seat. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Who is the judge of quick and
dead: Acts 10. 42. And he shall sit whose garment shall be white as Snow, and
the hair of his head like pure Wool; his Throne like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire; a fiery stream shall issue and come before him,
thousand thousands shall mini^er unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
shall stand before him, the judgment shall be set, and the Books shall be
opened: Dan. 7. 9, 10. Jude 14. And before this Judge, for his knowledge is
infinite, his courage in comparable, his uprightnes incorruptible, these wicked
Catifs shall have a most just and equal trial, and be convinced by more then a
thousand witnesses; and being separated as Goats from the Sheep of Christ, hear
that dreadful sentence. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, which shall be speedily, effectually, and eternally
executed in the state and place we have before spoken of, And what will ye do
in the time of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far, and
to whom will ye fly for help, and where will lyee leave your glory: oh
consider this, all ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there
be non^ to deliver you. Esaias 10. 3. 4. Psalm. 50. 22.

In the third place, if Hell be such a miserable condition, then how much
thanks do they owe to God, that are delivered and preserved from this estate;
that are not appointed to wrath: but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Had a man been taken captiveby the Turks, and there being appointed to
die; and another man no way obliged to him, of whom the captive had deserved no
good but evil, should ransom him at a great rate; all men would say that this
captive was infinitely bound to give thanks to this redeemer. But ala^! what is
this to the work of redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ? surely, nothing at
all: then are we much more bound to God, who has translated us from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, Col. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Ps. 16 9,
10 11. 1 ^et. 18. 19.

In the fourth place, if Hell be such a miserable condition, and there be no
persuading of us to keep our selves from it; yet let us be persuaded not to
further others toward this misery, as all men do, that by wicked council or
example, provoke, persuade, and draw men to sin, or dishearten, or drive them
back from good: a monstrous and barbarous cruelty, yet common in most; yea,
frequent in Parents to children; but rather let us pity them that are under
this misery, and do what we can to keep others; especially these that are near
us from it. If we saw another, one of our children especially, ready to fall in
the fire or water, do we not, should we not, do our best to save and preserve
them; even nature teaches it: much more then, let us so do in this case: by
Council, Prayer, and Correction also where we have authority, Jude 22, 23. And
have compassion on some in putting (...), and other, save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire. And to move us hereunto, let us consider, 1. that he that
converteth a sinner from going astray out of the way, shall save a soul from
death and hide a multitude of sin, Jam. 5. 20. 2. H. this turns others to
righteousness shall (...) the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 2. 3. Otherwise
we shall seem to be worse then the damned in hell: for Dives would have A^^^ban
to send to his brethren to (...) them that they might not come into this place,
Luke 16. 27. 28. 4. hereby God is glorified much.

In the last place since it is so, that there be degrees of torments in Hell,
and that the wicked man will thither, say what we can. O that we might yet
persuade him not to sin so much! if he will to hell, and there be no nay, he
would a^ least provide, that his torments in hell may not be in the most
extreme degree! But if none of all this will do to persuade him; then have we
no more to say to him, but the words of the Holy Ghost Rev. 22. 1^. He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still: And be which is filthy, let him be filthy
still.

Finis.

