OF CORPORATIONS, FRATERNITIES, AND GUILDS.

Or, a Discourse, wherein The LEARNING of the LAW touching Bodies-Politique is
unfolded, showing the USE and NECESSITY of that Invention. the Antiquity,
various Kinds, Order and Government of the same.

Necessary to be known not only of all Members and Dependants of such Bodies;
but of all the professors of our Common Law.

WITH Forms and Presidents; OF Charters of Corporation.

By William Shepherd, Sergeant at Law.

London, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring and J. Place: and are to be sold at
their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, at the George in Fleet Street, and at
Furnivals Inne-Gate in Halborne. 1659.

TO HIS Dear Countrymen.
My good Friends,
THe Sovereignty which is placed in Man over the rest of the Creatures, is
derived from the sole advantage of his Reason; for in Corporeal power he is
much inferior to many. The Excellency of Reason consists in fitting Laws and
Polities for our better Government, and the best of Polities is that Invention
whereby men have bin framed into Corporations, Guilds, or Fraternities. For,
whereas other Laws are adapted, but for the benefit of Individuals; this has a
more noble end, and, if it were possible, would preserve the Species: and
although Art cannot altogether arive at the perfection of Nature; yet has it in
this showed a fair Adumbration, and given to man the nearest resemblance of his
maker, that is, to be in a sort immortal. And for the Utility that has by this
Invention accrued to mankind, it may be collected, not only from the frequent
usage of it, amongst the Greeks, Romans, and afterward in the German Empire;
but also (which is best known to English men) from our own Practice. How many
Cities and Burrouhgs are there in this Nation, whose flourishing estate
depends, merely upon the antiquity of their Incorporation? I thought therefore
that nothing would be more acceptable to my Country men, than a discourse in
this kind of Learning, the rather because no man's pen amongst us, has bin
employed on this subject before: but I have the confidence to think it has
something to commend it, besides, the Novelty; and it is the opinion also of
those that deserve the greatest Credit.

Your affectionate Country man W. S.

THE Contents of the Book.
SECT. I. WHat Corporation is, and the kinds thereof. SECT. II. Who may make
it, and how it is to be made. SECT. III. What persons may be Incorporated.
SECT. IV. By what name such persons may be Incorporated. SECT. V. In what place
a Corporation may be made. SECT. VI. By what words a Corporation may be made.
SECT. VII. The Charter for Corporations divided in two parts and opened. SECT.
VIII. What Ordinances a Corporation may make. SECT. IX. The nature of a
Corporation. And what it may have, hold, and do. And how.
OF Corporations.
SECT. I.
Of a Corporation, or an Incorporation: what it is; and the kinds of it.

A Corporation, or an Incorporation (which is all one) is a Body, in fiction of
Law; or, a Body Politic that indureth in perpetual succession. And herein we
are to know; That our Law does take notice of a Body Natural, and a Body
Politic. The Bodies politic, whereof the Law has taken notice, are some of
them gone; as Abbeys, Priories, Deaneries, and the like. And some do continue
still. They are said to be some of them Ecclesiastical, or spiritual: And some
of them are said to be Civil, or Temporal; and some of them are said to be
Mixed. And this politic body, is either of Single, or of one person.
one person only, and so the King was, and Lord Protector is, a Body politic.
So the Bishops, Deans, Prebends, and Canons of Churches were, and the Heads of
some Hospitals and Alme-Houses, which go by succession in one person, and some
Chaplains of Chappells, and all Parsons and Vicars at this day, are Bodies
Politic. Or it is Aggregate of many persons.
of many persons together: So Majors and Cominalties, and all such kind of
Corporations: Masters and Fellows of Colleges; and some Guardians and Masters
of Hospitals; and diverse others, where the succession is in many persons, are
said to be Bodies politic. So also the Parishioners or Neighbors in a Parish,
Village, or Town, and the Churchwardens of every Parish; some purposes are in
the eye of the Law Corporations, aggregate of many persons. Our purpose here is
not to say any thing to any bodies politic, in one person, or gone: but only
to Corporations, aggregate of many persons, and yet continuing, as Major and
Cominalties, Masters and Fellows of Colleges, and Houses; Masters and
Guardians of Hospitals; their Houses, and such like persons, Houses and Places,
and especially of the first sort of bodies politic, Majors and Cominalties,
and such Corporations. And so we say, A Corporation is a body politic,
Authorized by the Lord Protector's Charter, to have a Common Seal,
Head-Officer, or Officers and Members; all which together are able by their
Common consent to grant, give, receive, or take any thing within the Compass
of their Charter, or to sue, and be sued, as any one man may do, or be. Or they
are said to be, An Assembly or Cominalty, of many men, gathered or joined
together in a City, Town, or Borough, into one fellowship, Brotherhood, or
Mind; by mutual consent, to support the Common Charge each of other, and to
live under such Laws as they shall agree upon to make, to be governed by for
their mutual good, and advantage in a perpetual succession. These are also
sometimes more general, as where a whole Town is Incorporate, and many
Franchises granted to it. Or more special, as where a Company of Tradesmen
only in a Town is Incorporate, and some one or few special Franchises are
granted to them, for the better ordering of their Trade. These, and such like
Corporations of Cities and Towns, are called Guilds, Fraternities, Companies,
Companies Corporate, Companies Incorporate, Brotherhoods, Fellowships, and
Bodies Corporate. Coo. 10. 29. 11. 66. Coo. upon Littl. 250. 94. 95. 34. 14. H.
8. 3. Coo. 11. 20. 67. 7. 75. Plow. 457. 102. 409. 537. 12 H. 7. 29. Coo. Inst.
part. 1. 66. 6. 3.

SECT. II.
What things are Requisite to the making of a good Corporation, and are of the
Essence of it.

There are certain things said to be of the Essence, and requisite to be had,
and found in the case of every Corporation well made, and without which it
cannot be a good Corporation. As,

1. There must be a good and Lawful Authority, and Warrant Lawful Authority for
it.
for the Erecting of it; And for this we are to know, that a Corporation, or
body politic, may be made four manner of ways, or by four means.

1. By the Common Law; so the King was, and Lord Protector By Common Law.
is, and many others are Bodies politic:

2. By Authority of Parliament; so the College of Physicians By Parliament.
in 14. H. 8. Chap. 5. was made a Corporation: And so Suttons Hospital was
intended to be made: And so any man might, for twenty years after the making of
the Act of 39. Eliz. Chapter 5. have built an Hospital or House of Correction for
twenty years, after the Act of 39. Eliz. and had it Incorporated without How a
Corporation may be claimed and had.
License of the King.

3. By prescription. That which has been, and continued time out of mind, a
good Corporation; and has had all the By Prescription.
Incidents and Badges of a good Corporation, shall continue so, albeit they
cannot show any Charter for it: For this doubtless was by Charter at first,
the which has been since lost. But they that will have a Corporation by this
Title, must have all the necessary Requisites to a good Corporation, in their
prescription.

4. By Charter, or Letters Patents of the Kings: And so, most By Charter.
of the Corporations have been made. And so they may, and must be made at this
day; or by Act of Parliament: And so by Charter, the Lord Protector may make
what Corporation he pleases; and without this, none can be Erected at this
day. And so he may erect a Corporation, or Society of Merchants, or other
Tradesmen, for the better Government of their Trade; or any other Corporation
he pleases to make; observing herein the Rules, by Law laid down.

And by Charter, the Lord Protector may make many Corporations in one Town: as
in the Corporation of the City of London, and many other places, they have, as
they may have, many lesser Corporations within it. And so, many Corporations
may be in one place; but they must all be made by Charter of the Lord
Protector. For one Corporation cannot make another Corporation, much less may
it make many Corporations out of it self. Coo. 10. Suttons Hospitall's case.
Stat. 39. Eliz. 5.

SECT. III.
Of the Persons to be Incorporated.

2. THere must be persons to be Incorporated: and as to this point, these
things are to be known.

1. In the case of a City, Borough, In a City or Village, etc.
Town, Village, or Parish Incorporated; The Citizens and Inhabitants; or the
Citizens, Burgesses, and Inhabitants; or The Inhabitants, or The Inhabitants
and good people of the place. Or the whole City, Town, Borough or Village may
be Incorporated.

2. Or a part of the City, as the Burgesses of the Borough, or the Freemen of
the City only, may be Incorporated.

3. Tradesmen of the City, or the men of such a Trade only, in the Town, may
be Incorporated.

4. The Head Officers, and Governors only, chosen and to be chosen from time
to time in the place, may be Incorporate.

5. In the case of Colleges, the In Colleges.
persons Incorporated, may be either the Governors alone, as Masters and
Fellows, and the like: or the Governors and Governed together; as Masters,
Fellows, and Scholars of the College.

6. In case of Hospitalls and In Hospitals and Almes-houses.
Almes-houses, the persons Incorporate may be the Governor or Governors, as
Masters or Guardians, or, Masters and Guardians; or, them, and the rest of the
Officers, and poor, as the Founder shall desire, and the Lord Protector grant
it.

7. A Corporation may be made up of natural persons, or it may be made up of
persons or bodies incorporate and political. And so a New, or another
Corporation may be granted to an old Corporation, or body politic. So Ed. 6.
granted to the Major and Cominalty of London, the House called Bridewell, to be
an Hospital. And that the same Major and Cominalty should be Governors
thereof, and Incorporated by the name of the Governors of the possession of
the Revenue, and goods of the Hospital, etc. The persons Incorporated in
Suttons Hospital, were the Governors thereof only. In the case of the College
of Physicians in H. 8. his time, the Physicians named, and all others of that
profession, of and within the City of London, were the persons Incorporated. H.
7. 10. Broo. Corporations throughout Coo. 10. the case of Suttons Hospital.

SECT. IV.
By what Names such persons may be Incorporated.

THe third thing required to the essence of a Corporation, is, that it be
constituted and made by apt words: not that there are any certain words for
Corporations; for they may be made by almost any intelligible words, importing
the matter intended. And as to this, these things are to be known.

1. That Cities, Town-ships, and Villages may be, and are In a City, or Village.
Incorporated, some by one, and some by another name. Some by the name of Major
and Cominalty of, etc. in the County of G. Some by the name of the Major,
Bailiffs, and Cominalty of, etc. Some by the name of the Major, Aldermen, and
Cominalty. Some by the name of Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel. Some by the
name of Major, Citizens, and Cominalty. Some by the name of the Major and
Aldermen. Some by the name of Major and Burgesses. Some by the name of Major
and Bailiffs. Some by the name of Bailiffs and Burgesses. Some by the name of
Bailiffs and Sheriffs. Some by the name of Citizens. Some by the name of
Citizens and Cominalty. Some by the name of Cominalty only. Some by the name
of Citizens and Burgesses. Some by the name of Burgesses. Some by the name of
Aldermen, Bailiffs, and Sheriffs. Some by the name of the Burgesses, Citizens,
and Cominalty. Some by the name of Master and Wardens. Some by the name of
Master and Brethren. Some by the name of the Major, Sheriff, and Citizens. Some
by the name of the Major, and Sheriff. Some by the name of the Warden,
Burgesses, Bridg-Masters, and Cominalty. Some by the name of the Inhabitants,
or good men, or the men of date. And some by other names.

2. The Companies that are Companies of Tradesmen.
Corporations, are, and may be Incorporated thus. The Master or Governors, and
Cominalty of the Mystery of Cooks of London; The Masters and Wardens of the
Company of Pewterers, in the City of London: The Company of Merchant-Taylors in
London: The Guardian and Fellowship of weavers in Newbery, The Wardens,
Cominalty, and Fellowship of Drapers, Tailors, Mercers, and ware-men. and
Coopers in D. The Masters and Guardians, and Cominalty of Tailors, and Workmen
of Cloth of D. The Masters or Wardens, and Fellowships of the Crafts of
Clothiers, Drapers, etc. or the Guild and Fraternity; or, by any other such
like Names.

3. The Colleges and Halls In Colleges.
of Universities, and other like places are, and may be, Incorporate by the
names of Warden and Fellows of, etc. in the County of, etc. Or, Provost, and
Fellows; or Provost, Fellows, and Scholars; or President and Fellows, or
President and Scholars; or Master and Fellows, or Principal and Fellows; or
Warden, Fellows and Scholars; or Wardens and Scholars; or Masters Fellows,
and Scholars; or Master and Scholars, or keepers of the College, and the
Scholars of the same College: or any other such like Names.

4. The Hospitals, whether In Hospitalls or Almes-houses.
made up of one or more Heads, are, and may be Incorporated by the names of the
Master, or the Guardian of the Hospital of, etc. The Master and Assembly or
Convention of the Hospital St. Mary of B. The Master and Brethern of, etc.

5. A Corporation may have Of two Names.
two Names, or be Incorporated with a power to sue, and be sued by one Name;
and to grant and purchase by another Name.

6. A Corporation may change its name, it may be Incorporate at the first by
one name; and it may afterward by, another Charter, be Incorporated by another
name. And this without any prejudice at all to themselves or others, only if
they be sued or sue, give or take, care must be had, it be by their New or last
name.

SECT. V.
In what place a Corporation may be made.

4. THe place there must be a place certain, where to fix and bottom the
Corporation. As, for a Corporation of a City, Town or Parish, The City For a
City or village.
of New-Sarum in the County of Wilts. The Borough and Village of Malmsbury, in
the County of Wilts. The Village of Maidenhead in the County of Berks. The
Town and Parish of Leeds in the County of York. The honest persons now
exercising the Trade of, etc. within the Town and Borough of G.

For a College or Hospital; For a College or Hospital.
A house in Oxford called D. wherein one T. S. now dwells, and whereof T. S.
has an Estate in Fee. The house called Charter house, lying within the Parish
of K. in the City of London. A parcel of ground called the Savoy, lying within
the Parishes of St. Clemens, and St. Mary le Strand, etc. and the like.

And it is usual also, and safe in this case, for a Town or Village, to
describe the Limits of the Corporation, and how far it shall extend it self.

And yet we read of very many grants of Corporations allowed to be good, that
were not so exactly described and ascertained; as, The Hospital of St. Lazer of
Jerusalem in England. Masters of the Knights of the Temple, and their brethren
of the Temple of Jerusalem in England. And the like, Coo. 10. 32, 33. But the
safe way is to describe the place truly, and certainly as it is.

SECT. VI.
By what words a Corporation may be constituted.

IF it be constituted and made 5. Apt words of Constitution.
by Charter, there must be apt words therein for the making thereof, which are
the words commonly used in Charters for this purpose. For a For a City or
Village.
Town or Village. That the same Town or Village, and all the Inhabitants
thereof be in Deed and Law one body, and perpetual Cominalty or Corporation,
and Incorporated by the name of, etc. Or thus; That the said Town of B. be and
remain for ever, a free Town of it self. And that the said Warden, etc. and
their Successors for ever be, and shall be, as now they are, one body, etc. Or
thus; That the said Borough and Village of M. in the County of W. be from
henceforth, and shall be, a free Borough Corporate, in thing, deed, and name,
of a Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough and Village of M. in the County of W.
And that the Mayor and Burgesses of that Borough and Village be from
henceforth one Cominalty, or Body Politic in deed, and name, for ever, by the
name of, etc.

And for a College or Hospital, For a College or Hospital.
thus: That the Hospital of the said City commonly called, etc. and the poor
people thereof be, and from henceforth, and for ever, shall be governed and
ruled by the Mayor and Burgesses of the said City, and their Successors. And
that the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their Successors be, and shall be
Masters and Governors thereof. And that the said Mayor and Burgesses, together
with the poor of the said Hospital, for the time being, shall be from
henceforth, and for ever hereafter continued, and remain one Body Politic,
etc. by the name of the Masters and poor people. Or thus, That the said
Governors of, etc. shall be incorporated, and have a perpetual succession for
ever in deed, fact, and name, by the name of, etc.

And there is no necessity that there should be the words, Fundo, Erigo, or
Stabilio, used for the Erection of the Corporation in any case; but it may be
done by other apt words also. All these 5 things, every Charter by which any
Corporation is well made, must have within it.

For the further Illustration of all these things, we shall give you some
Examples and Presidents of Charters allowed by Law to be good.

The Act of Parliament prepared for Sutton's Hospital did give him power first
of all to build such a house, in such a place, for such an use and end, for
poor people, a Preacher, and Schoolmaster: And that the same should have such
a name certain. That such men therein named, and those whom he, during his
life, and that the greater part of them after his death, should choose in their
Rooms, should be always Governors thereof. That the Governors and the
Hospital should be incorporated by such a name, Give and Grant, Sue and be
sued, etc. receive and hold for ever, the Manors and Lands in the Act named,
have and change their seal. That he for his life, and afterward the Governors
should place and remove Officers and poor people, visit the same Hospital, make
Ordinances for Government thereof, not Repugnant to the Laws in force. Stat. 7
Iac.

The Charter for Sutton's Hospital by which it was erected, did first license
him to found an Hospital in such a place, to appoint the Governors thereof,
gave power to those Governors to place and displace Officers and others, and
order all things. Afterward did grant and ordain, That there should be 16
persous named in the Charter, and the Master of the Hospital for the time
being, and their Successors, always Governors hereof. That they should
choose their Successors. And that those 16 persons, and the Master should be
incorporate, choose new Governors, Officers, Scholars, poor, and make Orders
and Ordinances not repugnant, etc. And did license them to hold Lands in
Mortmain.

Edw. 6. declared, That Bridewell Hospital of Ed. 6. in London.
in London should be an Hospital. And for this end by his Letters Pattents
willed and ordained, That the said Hospital when it should be erected and
established, should be called, The Hospital of Ed. 6. King of England, of
Christ, Bridewell, and of St. Tho. the Apostle for ever. And that the Mayor,
Comminalty, and Citizens of the City of London, should be Governors, etc. And
that they should be for that purpose a Body Corporate, by the name of the
Governors of the Possessions, etc. Coo. 10. 31.

King H. 8. granted by his College of Physicians.
Letters Pattents to diverse Physicians then being by name, That they and all
men of the same faculty of and in the said City of London, should be one Body,
and perpetual Community, or perpetual College of Physicians for London, and
the Suburbs thereof. That there should be a President over them by their own
choice yearly. That they should buy and sell, sue and be sued. That they should
make Assemblies and Ordinances for Government, with diverse other provisions.
Stat. 14 H. 8. chap. 5.

H. 4. by his Letters Patents Chauntry house in London.
recited; That Rob. Ramsey was seized of a house in the Parish of St. Margarets
in London, called the Sun, and that he notwithstanding the Statute of
Mortmain, de gratia speciali: and for 20 l. did give license to R. Ramsey, that
he should give 20 Marks of Rent issuing out of the said house cuidam Capellano,
etc. to a certain Chaplain at the Altar of the blessed Mary, in the Church of
St. Magn. London, always pro salubri statu, (that is, for the health) of the
soul of the said Rob. and Ioane his Wife. To have and to hold to the said
Chaplain and his Successors, Chaplains of Chantrie aforesaid, in the Church and
at the Altar aforesaid, and for the health of the soul, etc. according to the
Ordination aforesaid of the said Rob. on this behalf, to be done and celebrated
for ever. This was resolved to be good. Coo. 10. 27.

Some Charters run thus: After a Recital of the present state of the
Corporations, names of the Officers, etc. there is a grant to them and those
that shall always be the elect head-Officers, that they shall be Incorporate
by such a name, and buy and sell, sue and be sued, make Ordinances, etc. and
govern after such a manner, and describe the whole form of their Government. So
Sacum in Wilts. After many Recitals, The Charter runs thus. Know ye, That, etc.
we name and Constitute A. B. of, etc. to be the present Mayor. C. D. Recorder,
etc. and the Aldermen, and so all the Common-Councell-men, and then say, And,
etc. That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, etc. within the same City for the time
being, and their Successors for ever, be Incorporate by the name of of Mayor
and Cominalty.

King Ed. 3. by his Charter Queens College in Oxford.
gave license to T. S. his Chaplain; That he in such a house in Oxford should
erect, and set up a Colledg-Hall of Scholars, Chaplains, and others, to
continue for ever under the name of the Hall for the Scholars for the Queen at
Oxford; which shall be governed by one President of the said Scholars,
according to the appointment of the said T. S. And that the said T. S. may
grant the said house to the said President and Scholars for ever. And that
thereby they shall be enabled to hold it for ever in succession. This was
admitted a good Corporation.

Stat. 39 Eliz. 5. gives power to any man to erect an Hospital Hospital or
House of Correction.
or house of Correction, without License, and endow it with Lands not less
then 10 l. nor more then 200 l. a year for ever. That it shall be Incorporate
by the Founder, and by what name he or his heirs shall give it, and so buy,
sell, sue and be sued, have a Seal. That he shall place and remove the Head and
Members for his lifetime at his pleasure; And be ordered and visited by such
persons as he or his heirs shall name. And by such Rules and Orders not
repugnant to the Laws, etc. as the founder or his heirs shall set down under
his hand and Seal.

The Executors of H. 7. Reciting. Savoy.
They had bought a piece of ground called the Savoy, etc. to such an end, to
build an Hospital upon it. H. 8. thereupon licensed them a certain Hospital of
one Master and 5 Chaplains, to erect and found in and upon the said piece of
ground called the Savoy. And the same so founded, shall be Incorporated by the
name of the Master and Chaplains of the Hospital of H. late King of England 7.
of the Savoy. Coo. 10. 31.

If a Charter be made to the Inhabitants of Dale, to give them power to choose
a Mayor, and to sue and be sued by the name of the Cominalty of Dale, or by the
name of the Cominalty only. It is said, That this without more words, will
make it a Corporation.

For the Reforming of the abuses in the making of Cloth in Norwich and Norfolk.

That there be and shall be a Corporation of Presidents, Wardens and Assistants
of the Warsted Weavers of the City and County of Norwich, and County of Norfolk.
Corporation within the City and County of Norwich, and County of Norfolk,
consisting of two Presidents, 12 Wardens, and 40 Assistants: All which are to
be Master-Weavers within the places aforesaid. And one of the said Presidents,
and six of the said Wardens, and 20 of the said Assistants, shall be yearly
chosen upon the last Wednesday in the month of November, at some public
place, by the Master-Weavers, or the greater part of them present, of the said
City and County of Norwich; and the other of the said Presidents, six Wardens,
and 20 Assistants, shall be chosen on the same day in some public place by the
Master-Weavers, or the greater part of them present, of the County of N. And
the said 12 Wardens shall within 14 days, etc. take the Oath set down in the
Act. And that the said Presidents, Wardens, and Assistants for the time being,
shall for ever hereafter in name and fact be one Body Politic and Corporate in
Law to all intents and purposes, and have a perpetual succession, and be called
by the name of the Presidents, Wardens, and Assistants of the Worsted Weavers
of the City and County of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, and Sue or Plead,
etc. See the rest for power to purchase, keep Courts, and make Bylaws. Act. 12
November. 1653. and 1656.

Act: of 27 July, 1649. There Corporation of the president and Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in New England.
is a Model for the making of a Corporation for the Propagation of the Gospel
in New England to this purpose: That from henceforth for the furtherance of
this Work, there should be a Corporation in New England, consisting of 16
persons, (viz.) a President, Treasurer, and 14. Assistants. And that A. B. C.
D. etc. be the first 16 persons whereof the Corporation shall consist, out of
whom the said 16 persons at such time and place as they shall think sit, by
themselves, or the greater number of them, shall clect and choose one of the
said 16 persons to be President, and another of them to be the present
Treasurer. And that they, or the greater number of them, shall choose a new
President Treasurer, or Assistants, so ofr as any of them shall dye or be
amoved. Which said President, Treasurer, and Assistants for the time being,
shall be for ever hereafter in Name and Fact one Body Politic and Corporate in
Law to all intents and purposes. And shall have perpetual succession, And shall
be called by the name of the President and Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in New England. And so had power to buy, sell, take, and give, sue and
be sued, make Ordinances, etc. See the Act at large.

If the Lo. p. at this day make a grant by Charter of Lands to the honest men
of the Village of Islington, without saying, To Have, and To Hold to them,
their heirs and successors yielding Rent. This is a good Corporation whilst
it does continue, and until it be (as it may be) dissolved by the Lord
Protector. Dyer 100.

It is said, If the King had granted to the Cominalty of Islington, that they
should be an Incorporation of a Mayor and Bailiffs, the which they shall have
power to choose one, That this is good, not withstanding that the Election of
the Mayor be future. Coo. 10. 27.

Out of all which we observe, Observations.


1. That an Incorporation may be made with few words, and that there is no
certain form of words for it. That it may be made absolute and perfect at the
first, or with Reference to some what after to be done to perfect it. This only
is of the Substance, and must be expressed, or strongly employed by the words,
That the Lo Protector does give leave to make such a Corporation, That in such
a place certain, such a house shall be built for such a use, and such a
Government and Governors shall be of and in it. And those persons shall be a
Corporation to continue for ever by such a name.

2. Sometimes the King himself did express the words, design the place,
appoint the number, and gift, and name all in the Charter, so that it is a
complete Corporation, and nothing is left for the Founder or Donor, but to make
an Endowment of Lands. And sometimes the King by his Charter reserves as well
the nomination of the persons, as the name of the Incorporation to the Founder.
And then when he has declared it in writing according to his authority, then
are they Incorporate by the Letters Patents of the King, as if it had been all
put into the Letters Patents. But we shall look over the whole Charter, and
observe somewhat in general upon it; and then name the particular. heads
thereof, and make some few Observations on each of them.

SECT. VII.
The Charter for Corporations divided into parts, and opened.

THe most of all our Corporations have been (as we have showed) made by the
Kings and Queens of England, and none can be created now but by Act of
Parliament, and the Lord Protector's Charter or Letters Patents. And so he may
make what Corporations he please. This being the common way of erecting of
them, we shall look a little upon these Charters, and the form of words
commonly used in them by which Corporations are erected. And herein we shall
say a word in general to them, and then we shall look over some of the pieces
of them, and lay down the effect of all the passages and pieces thereof. And
thereupon we shall make some few Observations or Collections for the better
understanding of the Law therein.

1. As to these Charters or Letters Patents for Corporations in the general,
these things are to be known:

1. That in these Charters there are some things necessary in Law, and that may
not be left out. And other things not necessary, but are declaratory, or
explanatory, and are inserted only in point of discretion, and for
convenience. So the Clauses, to buy and sell, sue and be sued, have and use a
Common Seal, to restrain alienation or demise of the Land belonging to the
Corporation. That the Survivors shall be Incorporate. That if the Revenues
increase, they shall be employed to the public use of the Corporation. To be
visited by the Governors. To make Ordinances, That the Ordinary shall not
visit it, License to purchase in Mortmain, and some general Clauses and
Provisoes. The Corporation is well made without all this.

2. There are also usually granted, together with the making of these
Corporations, and in the same, diverse Franchises and other things; as Felon's
goods, and of fugitives, and persons outlawed in Civil Actions, The
Forfeitures by penal Statutes, Recognizances, Hundreds, Courts and Conusance of
pleas, Fairs, Markets, Wayfs, Estrayes, Treasure Trove, Deodands, Exemptions
from serving in Offices, Juries, payment of Toll, Picage, etc. The Assise of
Bread and Beer, Pillory and Tumbrell, The Office of the Justice of the Peace,
Coroner, Clerk of the Market, and a great part of the Sheriff's Office, and the
like. These things have no dependence, or are they at all incident to
Corporations, but commonly granted to them when they are erected.

3. There are some things often inserted in these Charters that are unlawful;
as, to make Ordinances to imprison men; or to forfeit goods upon disobedience;
or to restrain the liberty of Trade, and such clauses as restrain the
Corporation from having of that which is incident to it, and the like.

Our Observations upon these Charters in the general, are such as these:

1. That all these Charters have the most favorable interpretation in Law that
can be. And they shall be taken strongly against the Lo. Pr. and to advance the
Work intended by it.

2. That the draught now generally used in the making of these Charters, is the
best and safest. Notwithstanding, there is in it much more then is absolutely
necessary to the erecting of the Corporations. And therefore we advise all men
that are to sue out Letters Patents herein, to follow that president.

We will now look over the several Parts, Heads, and Clauses of the Charter,
and make observations upon them apart.

The Charter always made The Title of the Supreme Magistrate.
by the Supreme Magistrate, it does begin with his Name, Title, etc. after this
manner: Oliver Lord Protector, etc. And this may not be omitted. Then it is
usual if (it be a Corporation Recitals
before, and not newly created, And they can find any Record of Letters Patents
for it) They always use to recite these Letters Patents, and make a
Confirmation of them in the New Charter. Or, if they can find no Record for it,
but de facto, they have a Corporation, and hold it by Prescription; then they
use to recite what it is, and what they have and take, and have a Confirmation
thereof by the New Letters Pattents. And this is the best and safest way to do
it. And this is the Authority by which it is erected.

After this, there does usually follow the main part of the Charter, in the
setting down of the Persons to be Incorporate, Name, place, and words of
Incorporation.

The persons to be Incorporated, the name and place of Incorporation, and the
words whereby the Incorporation of the persons and place is made, are usually
to this effect as it follows:

Now know ye, That We our of, etc. Have ordained and granted, And by these
presents do grant, That the same City, For a City or Town.
Town, and Parish of G. from henceforth for ever, shall and may be, and is
hereby made, tuted, and Ordained to be for ever a free Borough and Village of
it self. And that all and singular the Inhabitants of the same City and Town,
and the Parishes thereof, and their Successors from henceforth and for ever,
may and shall be one Body Corporate and Politic in Deed, Action, and Name, of
the Mayor and Aldermen of the Borough of G. in the County of G.

Or thus: That the same Mayor, Cominalty, and City, shall for ever hereafter
stand and be Incorporated, established, and founded in name, and in Deed, a
Body Politic and Corporate, to have continuance for ever by the name of the
Mayor and Aldermen, etc. And that they by the said name shall and may have
power, ability, and capacity to grant, let, acquire, and get, sue and be sued,
and to do, perform, and execute all and every other lawful Act and thing, good,
necessary, and profitable for the said Incorporation, in as full and ample
manner to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes, as any other Incorporation,
or Body Politic or Corporate, fully and perfectly founded and Incorporated,
may do. And, We do erect, make, ordain, create, constitute and declare for Us
and Our Successors, the same to be one Body Corporate or Politic in Deed,
Action, and Name, really and fully by these presents.

Or for an Hospital thus; That For an Hospital.
the same Governors and Hospital shall for ever hereafter stand and be
Incorporated, established and founded in name and in deed, a Body Politic and
Corporate, to have continuance for ever by the name of the Governors of the
Hospital of, etc. And that the said Governors may have a perpetual succession.
And by that name be, and shall be and continue, persons able and capable in the
Law from time to time, etc. Or thus: And that for the maintenance and
continuance of the said Hospital, etc. And that the same may take the better
effect. That the said persons, etc. be one Body Corporate and Politic, to have
perpetual Succession for ever to endure; We do by these presents for ever
hereafter fully and really Incorporate, etc. to have capacity and ability to
take, etc. This part of the Charter hitherunto, is the main part; as that
wherein all the necessary Clauses of the Charter, And wherein the five things
of the essence thereof, (as we have showed) is comprehended. That which
follows is not so essential.

It is usual to give the limits and bounds of the Corporations by some such
words as these: That all the houses and buildings, Lands, Water, Watercourse,
soil, and ground situate, lying and being within the City or Town of G. and
the Parishes within the same, from henceforth and for ever are and shall be
within the limits, metes, bounds and Jurisdiction of the said City of G. and
the Incorporation aforesaid.

Or thus; We declare and appoint, That the said City of G. and of the
Corporation and the compass, precincts, and limits thereof, and the
Jurisdiction of the same shall from henceforth extend and reach itself, and may
and shall be able to extend it self as well in length and breadth, as in
circuit, to such and the like bounds and limits as the same from the time
whereof the memory of man, etc. has extended itself; that is to say, From,
etc. Or thus, That the Limits and Jurisdiction of the said Corporation shall be
as follows; that is to say, etc.

And as to this, we are to know,

1. That the Lo. Pro. cannot extend it to prejudice any other man's interest;
but however, it is very good and safe to describe it by some such like words as
before.

2. It may be enlarged beyond its former limits, and something more united to
it.

There are diverse other Clauses besides the words of Incorporation usually
inserted into Charters for Corporations; The which we shall name by
particulars, and then give our Observations upon them as they lie.

It is usual to insert the Clause To Sue or be sued.
to License and authorize the Corporations to sue and be sued, by some such
like words as these. And that they by the name of Mayor and Cominalty of G. may
sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded before any Judge, in any Courts or
places that are or shall be within this Nation, and in all manner of Suits and
Actions whatsoever, and of what nature soever the same shall be.

As to which we shall observe, Observation.
That this Clause is needless in Law. For this power to sue and be sued, is
incident to every good Corporation, and yet it is not amiss to express it.

It is usual to put in a Clause, To hold in Mortmain.
that they may buy and hold Lands, Goods, and Chattels, to this purpose: And
that the said, etc. and Successors, shall be for ever persons able and capable
to purchase, have, take, and possess in Fee-simple, Lands and Tenements, Rents,
and other possessions whatsoever, within or without the same City or
Corporation, to them and their Successors for ever, without any other License,
so as the same exceed not the yearly va^ue of 200 l. a year, the Statute of
Mortmain, or any other Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

As to this, we observe;

1. That by this License to Observe.
alien, there is no power added or given; nor is it needful, for they may do
it without leave. And this Clause is therefore superfluous, for it is incident
to the Corporation. And this Body may buy, sell, give and grant, take and have,
as well as any natural body or single man by Law may so do.

2. Only this; for Land of Inheritance, if the Corporation purchase of this
without License of the Lo. Pro. it is in danger to lose the Land, upon the
Statute of Mortmain; therefore this Clause is necessarily to be inserted by
some such like words as those before spoken of.

It is usual to insert a power Common Seal.
to make, keep, and use a Common Seal by some such like words as these: And we
further will, etc. That the said Mayor and Cominalty for the time being, and
their Successors shall have and enjoy for ever a Common Seal; wherein shall be
engraven the Name and Arms, etc. whereby the same Corporation shall or may seal
any manner of Instrument touching the same Corporation, Or the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Annuities, Goods, Chattels, and other things
thereunto belonging, And which they may make and use for the doing of all
things in any wise touching or concerning the same Incorporation. And that it
shall be lawful for them and their Successors at any time hereafter to break,
alter, or change the same at their pleasure.

It is usual in these Charters The Order of Government.
by way of Grant or Direction from the King, to set down all the form of
Government, the numbers and names of their chief, and other Officers, and
whereof their Common Council shall be made up, and what Officers and Members
there shall be, how chosen, sworn, continued, and removed, to this purpose;
That there shall be a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Aldermen, and Common Council. That 20
be chosen out of the Inhabitants for the Common Council, That out of these the
Mayor and Aldermen shall be chosen. That 12 of these 20, (whereof the Mayor,
Recorder, or four of the Aldermen, or any two of them, to be two) shall make a
Common Council to make Orders, etc. How and when they shall meet, To appoint
what Officers shall be in the whole Corporation; To say, that there shall be
besides the Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, Justices of the Peace, a Custos
Rotulorum, a Town Clerk, Clerk of the Market, and Coroner, Clerk of the Peace,
two Chamberlains, a Sword Bearer, two Sergeants at the Mace, one Bailiff, a
Clerk of the Statutes, two High Constables, etc. To appoint how Officers and
Members shall be from time to time elect. To name the present Mayor, Recorder,
Aldermen, Councel-men, and Officers. To set down what shall be done to them
that refuse the Office or place being chosen; How they shall be sworn, continue
in their place, or be removed upon death or misdemeanour, and others put in.
And so otherwise as the Government is constituted.

1. All this we look upon as Observe.
not necessary to be inserted in the Charter, for they are not of the essence,
for they may govern themselves without this; or, happily, they may do it in
another manner then is set down: but it is providently done, and the best way
to insert and express it in such a manner and such words as is usual, let them
be of what force they will in Law.

2. Albeit it be expressed in the Charter, that the Choice of their Mayor,
Bailiffs, or other principal Officers, shall be by the Cominalty, yet, if by a
long usage they have chosen them by a select number of the principal of the
Cominalty, or of the Burgesses, although no such constitution can be showed to
warrant such Election, yet this Election is good Law, being intended and
presumed to begin by common consent. Coo. 4. 77.

It is usual to have inserted in Sword Cap of Maintenance, etc.
the Charter, a Power to use a Sword, Maces, Cap of Maintenance, Arms, and such
like Ceremonies. And it is best so to express it, that the use thereof may be
without dislike, and without Question.

It is usual in these Charters, Justices of Peace.
to provide for the making of Justices of the Peace, and for the exercise of
their power within the Corporation, to this purpose. Either that the Mayor,
Recorder, and all the Aldermen [or such a number of the most Ancient Aldermen]
shall be always so, or that they be chosen by the Corporation every year. And
that these so chosen, shall have and execute all the power of the Justices of
the Peace; And that such a number of them, whereof the Mayor, Recorder, etc. to
be 3, or 4, be a part, may hold Sessions; And that other Justices shall not
intermeddle there. Sometimes it is added, That the Corporation may not
withstanding send their prisoners for the greater offenses to the County-Goal,
and that the Sheriff shall receive them.

Upon which branch we observe:

1. That the best way of the Observe.
making of the Justices of the Peace by the Charter, is the first way. For we
cannot approve the election of Justices by the Corporation. And so this power
may be limited or restrained, that they may or may not hear and determine
greater offenses, etc.

2. This Grant of power is Observe.
good, and shall be taken and may be exercised in a Corporation, as when it is
in other men.

It is usual to insert a Clause, That other Officers shall nor intermeddle
there.
to prohibit the Justices of the Peace of the County, to intermeddle there in
any thing concerning the Office. So for the Sheriff, Clerk of the Market, and
Coroner's Office. And this is useful and sufficient to keep them out from
intermeddling there.

It is usual to have Grants in Felons goods, Fines, Issues, Amercements,
Waiffes, Estrayes, etc.
the Charters to the Corporations, of all forfeited goods of Felons, Fugitives,
and persons outlawed in Civil Actions; And all Wayffs, Estrayes, Treasure
Trove, and Deodands happening in the place, The Forfeitures by Fines, Issues,
Amercements, and upon penal Statutes, Recognisances forfeited at any of the
Courts of the Corporation, or at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace,
happening upon any that live within the Corporation, And post-fines.

Upon which Clauses, these things are to be known:

1. This Grant may be limited Observe.
or enlarged; more or less hereof may be granted as please the Prince.

Observe. 2. The Grant is good for so much as is in it, and may be taken and
used by a Corporation, as by any other body.

Observe. 3. The Law in all points as to these things is the same, where the
things are in the hands of a Body Politic, as where they are in the hands of a
natural body.

It is usual to have within Exemption from serving in Offices in Juries.
these Charters of Incorporations, a Grant to them, to this purpose:

That the Inhabitants of the same shall not be forced by Justices of Assize,
Oyer or Terminer, or of the Peace, to serve in Offices or in Juries in the
County, and without the Corporation, etc.

1. As to this for Juries. This Observe.
privilege may also be limited to Juries, but in case of Trial of Land lying
within the Corporation, or the Juries for the Lord Protector, and the like.

2. This Privilege of Exemption Observe.
is allowed generally; and it is but reasonable it should be so, especially
where there are Jurymen enough besides.

3. The Exemption from Offices Observe.
also may be good and unquestionable, as to Offices made by the Lord Protector,
and the Judges, and Justices that act by his Commission; and is but reasonable,
wherein there are enough of others to serve the Offices.

We have seen also a Charter Exemption from payments.
that has granted an Exemption to the Inhabitants of the Incorporation, from
the payment of Toll, Piccage, and the like payments in other places. And as to
this Clause we say,

That, where such a payment Observe.
is time out of mind to be paid, and this in the Lord Protector's own hands,
it may exempt. But if it be in another hand, and granted away before to
another, or another has right to it by Prescription, the Charter will not
Exempt.

It is usual also in these Charters, Retorn of Writs.
to grant a part of the Sheriff's Office, or the Retorn of Writs to the
Corporation, to this purpose: And that the Corporation and Precincts thereof be
a distinct Bayliwick and Liberty of it self. And that the Mayor for the time
being, and his Successors, be the sole Bailiff, and shall have the Retorn and
Execution of all Writs against any man, living in the Corporation, except
Process of Execution. And that the Sheriff, but in case of Omission or neglect,
may not intermeddle there.

As to this part, this only is Observe.
to be said;

That this Franchise may be as well granted to a Body Politic or Corporation,
as to any single person.

Some Charters have such Gaol, Common Hall, Gallows.
like Grants in them: That the Corporation shall erect and use a Town-Gaol, or
use the Gaol there being, to imprison such as are to be imprisoned: And so far
a Town Hall, and a Gallows. And these may be erected and used accordingly; and
so perhaps it might be, without any such Grant or Authority given.

It is usual in these Charters, Counters.
together with the Grants of the Incorporation, to grant Courts to this
purpose, if it be but the Confirmation of an old Corporation, to grant all the
Courts of the place; the Leets, view of Frankpledge, Courts-Baron, Py-powders
Courts, and all other Courts formerly kept in the place. And if it be a new
Corporation, to grant these Courts within the place. And a new Court of Record
for the Trial of Civil causes, to be before the Mayor, Recorder, or
Town Clerk, one or two Aldermen; or such a Court to be held at such a time,
before such and such persons, and for such and such causes, and in such a
manner.

1. As to this we shall observe; Observations.
That this is properly in the power of the Lord Protector, to give the Courts
of the place to whom he will.

2. He cannot by any such Grant, take from any Subject any Jurisdiction or
Franchise, that he has well settled in him by former Grants of Kings, or by
Prescription.

3. He cannot force any man within or without the Corporation, to sue in that
Court, or restrain him from suing elsewhere, if he will. Stat. 19. H. 7. 7.

4. Any of the Corporation may also be sued elsewhere, as well as there, if the
Plaintiff please.

5. Nor can he restrain any man sued there, from his liberty to remove the
Action, where the Law gives him power to remove by Writ of Error, Attaint,
Habeas Corpin, Certiorari, otherwise. Stat. 21. Iac. chap.

It is very usual in these Charters, Markets and Fairs.
to confirm the old Markets and Fairs; and to grant new Markets and Fairs. Or
to change the days of the old Markets or Fairs. And to grant to the
Corporation the Py-powder Court, and Incidents and profits of the Fair.

And all these Grants are good, and may be used, taken, and Observe.
enjoyed accordingly. This only when any new Market or Fair is granted, that
it be not gotten on such a day as to prejudice other Markets and Fairs
thereabouts. Or if any Question be made of it, To have an Ad quod damnum sued
out, and executed before the Charter be passed.

It is usual in these Charters Clerk of the Market, and Coroner.
to grant power to the head-Officer of the Corporation to be Coroner, and Clerk
of the Market; or that the Corporation shall choose and make these Officers,
And that they shall do within the Town all that belongs to the Office.

The first way is the best of Observe.
providing for these Officers, and not the so safe to make them by the election
of the Corporation.

It is usual to give to the Affise of Bread and Beer.
Corporation all the office and power of the Justices of the Peace, and Clerk
of the Market, as to the Assise of Bread and Beer. And this is good.

Some Charters have this Acknowledging of Statutes.
power in them, That the Mayor, etc. of the Corporation shall take the
Conusance of Statutes and Recognisances as formerly they have done. And this
perhaps is good, where they have time out of mind used to take Conusances. But
if such a Grant be to a new Corporation made at this day, there may be some
doubt in it. And yet the Statutes of Action, Burnell, and of Merchants, made 13
Ed. 1. do say, That the King may appoint who shall take Statutes Merchant.

Some Charters have this Inrollment of Deeds.
power given by them to the Corporation, That it may take the Acknowledgment,
and make the Inrollment of Deeds before such an Officer there.

That which we observe upon Observe.
this, is,

1. That no Inrollment can be made there of any Deed of bargain and sale of
Lands, whereby any Freehold passes, but where it is Enrolled before two of
the Justices of the Peace, Custos Rotulorum, and Clerk of the Peace, according
to the Stat. of 27 H. 8. chap. 16.

2. That in some ancient Observe.
Corporations where Recoveties, Deeds, and Releases have been acknowledged,
taken, and Enrolled, they may be so still, and good. But not otherwise. Stat.
34 H. 8. chap. 22. 5 Eliz. chap. 26.

Some Charters forbid the Not to make Leases.
making Leases of the Land of the Corporation for longer time then 21 years,
with the old Rent, etc. some give the Corporation leave to make a Lease for 21
years, yielding the old Rent.

As to this we observe:

1. That these and such like Observe.
Clauses show the Princes desire to have it so. But in Law have no operation at
all. For the Lord Protector cannot by Law Restrain the alienation of their
Land, which is an incident inseparable to the Corporation, from the very first
Creation of it.

It is usual and best to have Rent.
some Rent or other reserved to the Lord Protector. Albeit perhaps the
Corporation may be well made without it.

And not amiss to annex Without Fine or Fee.
to the end of the Charter, That it shall pass without Fine or Fee in the
Hamper.

Some Charters give the Corporation Perambulation.
power to walk the Circuits of it in Perambulation as often as it will. And so it
may, and without such a power given, as much as with it.

It is usual in these Charters General Words.
to insert general words by way of Grant from the Kings, to this purpose:

That they shall have and enjoy all the powers, Franchises, Privileges, etc.
that the Corporation of L. or any Corporation in the County of G. does, or may
use, enjoy, or take. And that the Corporation shall have and enjoy all the
lawful privileges, powers and benefits, They have and use, or any of their
predecessors at any time within 60 years last past, had or used, or ought to
have had and used under pretense of any Charter, or by prescription, although
the same have been discontinued or forfeit, etc. And that no Officers of the
King shall hereafter interrupt them therein. And this clause may be used still,
but it operateth little in law where no particulars are expressed.

It is usual to have within it Saving to Strangers.
also a saving to strangers of all their Right and Title, And that no prejudice
be done to them, by this Charter. And this is a good clause to be inserted to
declare the Lord Protectors mind, and the true meaning of both sides. And it is
also usual to add a clause to this purpose.

That the Incorporation shall Not to wast or misimploy any thing given to Pious
or Charitable uses.
not do any thing, nor the Charter be construed to give power to do any ought,
whereby any thing given in the place to pious or charitable uses may be wasted
or misimployed against the mind of the Founders; But that the Charter be
construed in advancements of Religion, Justice, the public good, and to
suppress the contrary.

This clause also albeit it may Observe.
be of little operation in Law, yet is fit to be put in for the reasons
aforesaid.

Such clauses as these are in Not to use a Trade, not being Aprentice etc.
some Charters; That none shall use the Trade, not having been Apprentice, nor
be Apprentice for less then seven years, nor keep away another Apprentice
from him, nor get away another work and Customers by sinister means under
pain of five pound.

As to these kinds of clauses of Observe. Trussell and Norris his case, 15 Iac.
10. B.
prohibitions to forbid unlawful things, it is not amiss to insert such, but
the pain cannot be imposed, nor can any such sum be so imposed by the
Charter.

It is usual in these Charters to insert such clauses of Restraint and
prohibitions as these.

That no Apprentice after he Prohibition to use Trade.
has served his time in the place shall keep shop, or set up his Trade, take
an Apprentice, or keep a Journy-man, or work as a Journey-man, or, that no
Forrainer shall set up his Trade there, or, that he shall not set up his Trade
without License and admittance of the Mayor or Guardians, and Society of the
Trade, or, till he pay such a sum of money.

Or, that a Forrainer shall pay Impositions of payment of money where none was
before.
five pound to the heads of the Corporation before he use his Trade, and the
like. And these the Law does adjudge to be void. So also such clauses of
Charters, as (Coo. 11. 53.) put upon the subject any illegal Imposition, or
charge: As thus, That every one that comes over a bridge there pay a small sum
toward the repair of it or the like; and such like restraints or impositions
that are against the common Liberty of the Subject, all these generally are
void in Law, Stat. 19 H. 7. chap. 2. 22 H. 8. chap. 4. 25 H. 8. chap. 5. So
clauses of Charters that restrain a man from that liberey which the Law gives
him, or that give a man power to do that which the Law forbids him. It is held
therefore that the Lord Protector cannot by his Charter make a man Free of a
City, that is not free by the Law and Custom of the place.

So Charters that have Clauses to give power to imprison men's bodies, set great
Fines, sell men's goods as forfeit, for breaking any Charge of the Charter, or
any Ordinance of the Corporation. All these and such like clauses inserted into
Charters of Corporations, are held by Law to be void.

So Charters that give power To pardon Felonies, make Justices, etc.
to make Justices of Peace, or of Oyer and Terminer, pardon Felonies, and the
like. These are all illegal and void; For they are royal Franchises
inseparable from the person of the Lord Protector.

So if he grant any thing to the Corporation, that he himself has not, it is
void; all such Clauses are void, therefore not to beinserted in Charters.

And so generally, any thing that being put into an Order or By-law, made by a
Corporation, will be against Law, and void; the same thing being expressed by way
of Prohibition in the Charter, will be of as little force and use. All these
and such like things therefore are warily to be avoided. And yet perhaps some
of them may be of use to be inserted in a Charter, and may be used so as to
help forward the berter Government of the Corporation, and be no oppression or
prejudice to the people of the place.

SECT. VIII.
What Ordinances a Corporation may make.

IT is usual to put into the Charter a power to make Laws and Ordinances to
this purpose:

And we further grant to them, To make Ordinances.
That the said Mayor and Cominalty may lawfully, as occasion shall be, and need
shall require, assemble themselves together, and make such wholesome and good
Laws and Ordinances, for the better Government, Oversight, and Correction of
the same City, and the people thereof; and to add, alter, diminish or reform
them; as to them shall seem good, and be thought meet. So as they be not
repugnant to the Laws of the Nation, against the public and common good of
the people within or without the same City.

Upon which Clause, we observe these things:

1. That this Clause of giving Observe.
power to make Bylaws, is not necessary to be inserted in the Charter; For by
the very Act of Incorporating, this power is given.

2. The Clause of addition, Observe.
that they may not make Ordinances repugnant to the Laws, etc. is idle, and to
no purpose. For the Law does understand that, and it is included, and such
By-lawes made by a Corporation, are void by the very Common Law.

But for the further clearing of this Point, these things are to be known:

1. It is provided by an Act of Parliament, 19 H. 7. chap. 7. That no Masters,
Wardens, and Fellowships of Crafts or mysteries; Or Rulers of Guylds or
Fraternities; shall make and put in ure any Order or Ordinance by them made in
diminution of the King's Prerogative, or against the Common profit of the
people, not confirmed by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Loras Chief
Justices of the two Benches, or three of them, or by the two Judges of Assize
of the County where the same Corporation is, under pa^ of 40 l. For the
understanding whereof, these things are to be known:

1. That an Order or By-law, made by a Corporation, not against the Prerogative
of the Lord Protector, or profit of the people, is good, without any such
Confirmation.

2. That all Bylaws by them made against the Liberty and Freedom of the
People, as, to forbid, or Restrain Trade, Impose Taxes or Burdens of payment on
the people, where the Law does not impose them; to bind a man's Inheritance, to
restrain men from suing in what Court they please, or to enhance the prizes of
Commodities to the hurt of the public, and private advantage of the place, are
void. Nor can they annex to a good Ordinance, a penalty of Imprisonment, or
Forfeiture of goods bought or sold.

3. No Clause in the Charter to this purpose can help or make such an Ordinance
good. Nor will any Confirmation of Lords or Judges make such an Ordinance or
By-law good.

4. But a Corporation may make such Bylaws and Orders, as any Town, Parish, or
Neighborhood of men by the very Common Law may make, by a general consent for
the better Government of themselves, and common good of the place. And if it be
for the public good, not only of the place, but of the Country; as for the
repair of their Churches, Bridges, Highwayes, or the like; there the greater
part may bind the lesser part of them. And in this case, upon disobedience, it
is good to appoint the penalty to be given to the Corporation, and to be
leavied by distress and sale of the goods, and an apt Officer to do it; as the
Churchwardens for the Church money, and Surveyors for money for the Highway,
or how they will. And upon such an Order made by general consent, the Officer
may do it, and justify it accordingly. But they cannot, by this, charge any
strangers that dwell without the Town. Also by Custom and Prescription they
may perhaps go further, and do more, where, time out of mind, they have used so
to do; as in London, and some other ancient Corporations, they may by Custom
or Prescription justify the doing of some things against common Right. So, a
Custom, That a Forreiner within the City shall not sell things by Retale, is
good. So also, if it be that he shall not sell so, under pain of 5 l. But this
is not good by way of Charter. And therefore Cities which are incorporate
within the time of memory, cannot have such privileges without Parliament.
Coo. 8. 125. Dyer 279. But an Ordinance made amongst themselves in pursuit of
such a Custom, may be good and binding. But otherwise, an Ordinance made to
such a purpose, will be utterly void.

5. Also a Corporation may make any Reasonable Orders and Bylaws for the
better Government thereof, in the ordering of the Common. Council-Officers and
Members; And for the better ordering of the Trades and Mysteries, and other
matters amongst them, either by a common consent, and voluntary submission of
the whole, or by their Council, according to their Charter of Constitution.

6. They may also make any Orders in pursuance, and for the better execution of
the Laws and Statutes of the Nation, and to prevent deceit, as for the better
ordering and Government of Trade, and the like. And all these will be good,
without any Confirmation of Lords or Judges. Coo. 5. 63. Hobbard Rep. 211. Coo.
11. 53. 11 H. 7. 14. 44. Ed. 3. 19. Coo. 10. 30.

We shall now lay down some Examples of Cases, to prove and illustrate these
Rules and Differences.

An Ordinance was made, Coo. 8. Case of the City of London.
That no person, not a Freeman, shall directly or indirectly by himself or
other, keep shop or any place whatsoever for show, or putting to sale any
Merchandises whatsoever by way of Retail, or use any Trade, Mystery Dr.
Bonham's Case. Coo, 8. 115. etc.
or Occupation, for their gain or sale in the City of London. And it was
agreed, That this Ordinance was not good there, if they have not a Custom and
Act of Parliament to warrant it. And therefore a Charter granted to this
purpose to any City is not good. And Coo. 8. 125. The Case of the City of
London.
it is said, That no Corporation made within the time of memory, can have such
a privilege by Charter only, unless it be confirmed by Parliament. So that
goods foreign bought, and foreign sold, shall be forfeit to the Mayor, etc.
as in York is a good Custom, but this privilege cannot be created by Charter:
So that a Corporation shall have the sole Trade of Case of the City of London.
making and Importing of playing Cards, is not good.

Hen. 6. granted to Corporation of Dyers in London power to search, etc. And if
they find any Cloth dyed with Logwood, that the Cloth shall be forfeit. It
was adjudged, Austin's Case.
that by a Charter no Forfeiture can be made of the goods of a Subject.

An Ordinance was made, That no person using any of the said Trades within the
village of Ipswich, shall keep any shop or chamber, or use the same Trades, or
Coo. 11. 53. Tailor of Ipswich' s Case.
any of them, or take an Apprentice or Journeyman to work, till they have
presented themselves to the Master and Guardians of the Society for the time
being, or three of them, and made proof, that they have served seven years as
an Apprentice, and before that he be by them allowed to be sufficient Workman,
under pain of 5 Marks to be forfeit to the Masters and Guardians. It was
adjudged to be an unlawful Ordinance, and void. And these 4 points were agreed
upon by the Judges, in that Case. 1. That at the Common Law none may be
prohibited to exercise any Trade, although he has never been an Apprentice to
it, or be ignorant. But that if he misdoe any thing in it, an Action of the
Case lies. 2. That this Ordinance or so much thereof as is not prohibited by
the Statute of 5 Eliz. is against Law; for after seven years Apprentiship, he
may exercise his Trade without allowance of any. 3. That the Statute of 5 Eliz.
does nor prohibit the private exercise of any Trade in a Family; this is
therefore out of the Ordinance. 4. That the Statute of 19 H. 7. cap. 7. does
not corroborate any Ordinance against Law, albeit it be allowed according to
that Statute. But the allowance discharges the penalty of 40 l. for the
putting of such an unlawful Ordinance in use.

A Corporation regularly cannot impose de novo, a small payment on the people,
But by help of a Custom or Prescription for it, as in London it may be good.
And such a reasonable Ordinance may be made, and a penalty or Fine set that is
reasonable, for breach of it; And appoint, that there shall be a distress
taken, or Action of debt brought for it; this may be good. Tailor of Ipswich's
Case. Coo. 5. 63.

But they cannot annex Imprisonment, nor a Forfeiture of Goods bought or sold;
for this is against Law.

The Company of Merchant-Taylors in London made an Ordinance, That every
brother of the same Company that shall put any Cloth to be dressed by any
Cloathworker not being a brother of the same Society, shall put the one half of
the same Cloth to some brother of the same Society, that does exercise the Art
of Cloath-working under pain to forfeit ten shillings, and to distrain for it:
It was adjudged void, and against the liberty of the Subject, that one may put
his cloth to dress where he will, and may not be restrained from it. Coo. 11.
The Case of Monopolies.

The Common Council in London Ordain, That the Bricklayers shall not be
Plaisterers with Lyme and Hair, but with Lyme and Sand, under pain to forfeit
forty shillings: And that the Lyme and Hair belongs to the Plaisterers. This
was resolved by the Court to be a good Ordinance; for it is for the ordering,
and not the destruction of Trade; For (for any thing appears) it is
indifferent to which of the Trades it does belong, and so the Ordinance does
but determine the Question amongst the Companies. But if the dawbing with Lyme
and Hair belong to the Bricklayers then by the Chief Justice it is otherwise.

Goodyer brought an Action of B. R. 21 Iac.
Trespass for an Assault and Battery, and wounding of his Servant, and taking
12 platelocks, against Shaw. The Defendant Shaw pleaded not culpable to the
Assault and Battery, and Wounding; and as to the taking away of the Locks, he
pleaded a special Plea of Justification, by virtue of Letters Patents of
Incorporation granted to the Locksmiths of Durham, by Cutbert Bishop of Durham,
who had Iura Regalia within the County Palatine of Durham, and that by virtue
of this Charter, the Locks being not good, he as Warden of the Company did take
them. To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and for cause it was showed, that it
appears not by the Plea, that the Blacksmiths are a Corporation created by the
Bishop, but only that the Customs used amongst them in order to the
Regulating of their Trade, were confirmed by the Bishop, which does not make
them a Corporation. Plow. F. 199. Longquint. F. 40. 41. 2. It does not appear
by the Charter, that they have any Authority to take away illmade Locks; and
therefore Judgment was prayed for the Plaintiff. Rolls Chief Justice said, That
here does not appear any Order made by the Corporation to take away the Locks,
and therefore it was done without Warrant, though the Corporation had such a
power. But besides, it will be very hard to maintain the Locksmiths to be a
Corporation, because the Bishop confirmed their Orders. Therefore let the
Plaintiff have his Judgment. Nisi. Stile's Reports. 298.

The Corporation of St. Albons, when the Term was to be there, rated all the
Inhabitants and Burgesses a small sum to build Courts; and Ordained, That if
any Burgess refused, he should be Imprisoned: And it was adjudged to be
naught: But resolved, That they might Coo. 5. 64
have inflicted a reasonable penalty, and appointed it to be levied by
distress; or that an Action of Debt might be had for it.

A By-law was made to this purpose, That Commodities be sold on the Marketday
in public, and not in private and secret; it seems is good, and no
Prescription against it shall be admitted good. For in London this Ordinance
was made, That if any Citizen, Freeman, or Coo. 51. 62.
Stranger within the said City shall put any Broad-cloath to sale within the
City of London, before it be brought to Blackwell-Hall to be viewed and
searched, so that it may appear to be vendible, and before there be a penny
paid for hallage for every cloth, that he shall forseit for every cloth 6 s.
8. d. and that the Chamberlain shall have his Action of Debt; for it was
adjudged good here. And there it is said, That the Assessing of a small sum
by an Ordinance, when it is for the public good, and not the private gain of
the place, where the stranger has more profit then loss, is good. And so
perhaps a small sum for Ponrage, Murage, or Toll, may be put where it is more
benefit than loss to the people. But Quere of this, and see 13 H. 4. 14. 44
Ed. 3. 19. 8 Ed. 2. Tit. Assise. 21 Ed. 4. 54. 11 H. 7. 13. 21 H. 7. 21. 40.

Robert Norris, and Thomas Trussells, Wardens, and the Society of Weavers in
the Borough of Newberry, in the County of Berkshire, brought an Action of Debt
for five pounds, against John Stapes, and declared, That Queen Eliz. by her
Letters Parents, 14 October. An. 44. at ^he request of the Inhabitants there
using the Art of Weaving; and to the intent that Corruption therein might be
taken away and avoided, etc. did grant to all Weavers within the said Town to
be a Body Politic, by the name of the Wardens and Society, etc. as before, and
to have perpetual Succession, and a power to purchase, to plead, and to be
Impleaded: And also power to make Laws and Ordinances agreeable to Reason, and
not in any wise contrary and repugnant to the Laws and Statures of the Realm,
for the well government of the Society, Apprentices, and Servants, and all
using the Trade of Weaving or selling any thing thereto belonging within the
same Borough, And power to inflict punishment by Imprisonment, Fine, or
Amercement upon the offenders. And Granted further, That the said Wardens and
Society shall have the survey of those Laws, and the benefit of the
Forfeitures; And that no other person, born within or without the said
Borough, shall exercise the Art of Weaving within the said Borough, if he
shall not be admitted thereto by the Wardens and Society. And they recite the
Act of 19 H. 7. Cap. 7. of not putting of any Law or Ordinance in execution,
before it shall be allowed by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, and two Chief
Justices, or three of them, or before both the Justices of Assize in their
Circuits, upon pain of forfeiting forty pounds. And shows, that one Cuthbert
Goodwin, and John Hame, Wardens of the said Society, with the greater part of
the said Society, I Maii. 45 Eliz. at the Guild. Hall within the said Borough,
made diverse Laws and Ordinances for the better Government of Weavers; And that
the 18 November. 1. Iac. the said Orders were confirmed by the Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, and Lord Anderson, one of the Chief Justices; among which, one
was, That none should use the Art of Weaving within the said Borough, or
should have any Loom in his house or possession, to have any benefit thereby,
unless he had been an Apprentice to the said Art within the said Borough, for
the space and term of seven years, or had used the said Art within the said
Borough for five years before the making of the said Ordinance, or shall be
admitted thereto by the Wardens and Society, upon pain of forfeiture for every
month twenty shillings. And they further show, That after the said Ordinance
made and confirmed, the Defendant (such a day) before his inhabiting in the
said Borough; and after (such a day) that one William Goodwin being then
Warden of the Weavers, gave notice to the Defendant of the said Ordinance. And
that he afterward, etc. during five months continued using the said Trade
there: And that he had two Looms in his possession, where he had not been an
Apprentice, nor used the said Art for five years, as before, etc. by which he
forfeited to them five pounds, viz. for every month twenty shillings. The
Defendant pleaded, Nil debet and after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved
in Arrest of Judgment, that this Ordinance was not reasonable. And upon
Arguments and Conference, without Arguments at the Bench, it was agreed, That
the Ordinance was against Law; and Judgment against the Plaintiffs.

And Lord Hobbart in Hill. 15 Iac. declared, that we were all of opinion, that
Judgment should be given against the Plaintiffs: And he repeated the Case, and
the reasons of this Judgment, because the Ordinance was, That none should use
the Trade of Weaving, nor have any Loom in the Town, unless he had served,
etc. before the making of this Ordinance; so that all Apprentices which serve
after, shall be excluded, unless they shall be admitted by them, which is
unreasonable: And the Plaintiffs do not convey to themselves any good Title to
be Wardens. But as to the principal point of making such a restraining
Ordinance, the Court did not deliver any opinion.

The City of London made a By-Law, That none of such a Trade should take to his
Apprentice the son of an Alien: And if he did, That the Obligations and
Covenants made between them, should be void. It was adjudged a void Order, and
that the Covenants and bonds of binding that Apprentice were good. Dogrell.
verse. Powks. Trin. 37. Eliz.

The President and Censors of the College of Physicians in London, by color of
Letters Patents of H. 8. and 1. M. Fined and Imprisoned Doctor Bonham, for
practicing of Physic in London without their allowance, (the Fine to be paid
to them) and for contempt made to the College; Whereupon he brings an Action of
false Imprisonment; And it was adjudged for him. And in this Case resolved;

1. That in this Case they have no power to punish by Fine and Imprisonment,
those who practice without their License, but those practisers who
mis-administer Physic.

2. Admitting they have power given them, yet they have not pursued it
according to the Statute and Patent. Coo. 8. 14. Doctor Bonham's Case.

An Ordinance made by any Masters, Wardens, or Fellowships of any Crafts, or
Rulers of Guilds, or Fraternities, That every Apprentice shall pay at his first
Entry into the Common Hall, into the Wardens of the same Fellowship for his
Entry into the Fellowship, above two shillings six pence; or for his Entry when
his Term is expired above three shillings four pence, is against Law by the
Statures of 19 H. 7. 7. 22 H. 8. 4. 28 H. 8. 5. So an Order, that they shall
not set up after they have served their time, and are Freemen, or open any
Shop, House, or Cellar; or occupy as Freemen, without the Agreement or License
of the Master, Warden, or Fellowships of the Company. This Ordinance is void by
the Statute of 28 H. 8. chap. 5.

So that every such Apprentice shall make Oath, or enter into Bond to the
Warden, etc. not to set up shop otherwise. Stat. 28 H. 8. 8.

It seems then by these Cases, That if a By-law be made by Victuallers
Incorporate and by Compact not to sell their Victuals but at certain prices;
or if the Corporation be of Artificers, Workmen, or Laborers, And they
conspire and make a By-law, to work to such a proportion, or such a Rate; that
this is void. Stat. 2. and 3 Ed. 6. 15.

So an Ordinate to restrain Masons, Carpenters, Brick-layers, Plaisterers,
Joyners, Hardewers, Sawyers, Tylers, Paviers, Glasiers, Lyme-burners,
Brick-makers, Tile-makers, Plummers, or Laborers, Strangers that are not
Freemen there to work in the place, except it be in the City of London, is not
good. Stat. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 25. But Ordinances made upon pursuance of the power
they have by diverse Acts of Parliament, as about Victuallers, the Assise
thereof, Gauging of Barrels, Maulsters, and the like, these being wisely
penned, may be good. So such as are made for the Order and Government (which is
for the furtherance and Increase) of Trade, may be good. Coo. 5. 63.

SECT. IX.
Some other general Rules, needful to be known about a Corporation.

A Corporation is a Body only in consideration of The Nature and capacity of
it.
Law, and not like to a natural Body, for it cannot commit Treason, be
Out-lawed, Excommunicate, appear in person in a Court, be Sworn, Dye, and other
such like Acts which a natural body may do; yet may it give and grant, have,
and take, sue, and be Sued. Coo. 10. Suttons Hospitals Case.

2. The Members of a Corporation have a double Capacity; for they retain, as
their natural Bodies, so the natural capacity thereof still, to do and be
done unto, have and enjoy in that capacity as they did before they were Members
of the Corporation: The capacity of the single Members of it.
And so they may dispose of that Estate they have in their natural Capacity as
they did before; And if such a Member dye seized of Land, it will go to his
heir: if possessed of Goods and Chattells, they will go to his Executors, or
Administrators, and not to the Corporation. And as they are Incorporate Double
Capacity.
with the rest of the Corporation, they are in another capacity; so that if
they have any Lands, Goods, or Chattels with the Corporation, they alone cannot
dispose of it; And if they dye, it will not go to their Heirs, or Executors,
but to the Corporation. And so they may still do, suffer, or be done unto in
either of these capacities. Yea in a diverse capacity, they may act under the
same Corporation; so one Member of the Corporation in his natural capacity,
may be a Bailiff or Attorney, may make a demand of Rent or Entry into Land, for
the same Corporation whereof he is part. Yea a Grant or Lease made by the
Corporation in the Politic capacity, to one of the members thereof in his
natural capacity is good. Yea, if any one of the members of a Corporation be
seized of land in his own right, and in his natural capacity, he may make a
Feoffment of this land to the same Corporation whereof he is a member. And so a
man in a diverse capacity may both give and take at once. 10 H. 7. 16. 5 H. 7.
26. Broo. Corp. 4. Perk. 11.

2. A Corporation cannot be How to be known.
without a lawful commencement; it has a common Seal, and the head or heads
thereof, is or are commonly eligible, and not presentable. Dyer. 81.

4. One Corporation cannot make another, and yet many lesser Corporations may
be made One Corporation cannot make another Corporation.
within a greater, as in London, and other Cities. Broo. Corporations 45, 46.

5. A Corporation may change its name, and continue good, and Change its Name.
it may perhaps have two names given it, the one after the other. but if it buy
or sell, sue or be sued, it is best to be done by the new name. And yet perhaps
it may be good enough by the one, or by the other name. Broo. cap. 3.

6. The Head alone without How it may act.
the Members, or the Members alone without the head of a Corporation aggregate
regularly, cannot act any thing about the disposal of the revenues of their
Corporation, especially in that wherein there may be a prejudice to the
Corporation; but there must be an unanimous consent in it, and it must be done
by their common Seal. And no Act otherwise done by the one party without the
other, for the passing of their Lands, or for acceptance of Rent, or the like,
will bind the other party. Coo. 11. 79. Plow. 91. 5. H. 7. 25: Perk. Sect. 30.
32. 6, 7.

7. A Corporation may have, What it may have
enjoy, and retain, Lands, Goods, and Chattels, and have debts by bonds, and
take and hold, and make use of engagements, as a body natural may do, with
this difference. That all that which the Corporation has, does go in
succession to the whole Corporation. But if any engagement be to one of the
members, or he have any private estate, this will go to his heirs, and
Executors. But for lands purchased by a Corporation, for the enjoyment thereof,
it must be sure it has in their Charter a License, to hold land in Mortmain;
otherwise the Lord Protector may by Law have it from them, as forfeit to him.

8. The Head and Members Grant by or to it
of a Corporation aggregate, may all together under their Common-Seal make a
Feoffment, or Lease of the Land belonging to the Corporation, to whom they
please: but if they make a Fe. offment, they must make Livery and Seisin by
Letter of Attorney, under the Common-seal, or they may grant by fine the lands
of their Corporation, as the members of the Corporation may grant their own
land by fine. Plow. 535. 538. Leases made by Spiritual persons Incorporate.


But the persons Corporate in Colleges or Halls in either of the Universities,
or elsewhere, the Masters or Guardians of Hospitalls, cannot make any Leases
for longer time then for three lives, or 21 years. And these things are
requisite to be observed in the making of these Leases also; otherwise they
will not be good:

1. The Lease must be of Lands manureable, and corporal, whereof a Rent may be
reserved, and not of any thing that does lie in grant. Such is an Advowson,
Marker, Fair, Portion of Tithe, or Rent out of lands, albeit it be made for
three lives, or one and twenty years, yet it is not good.

2. Such Leases must be by Deed Indented, and not by Word only, or by
Deed-Poll only.

3. They must be made to begin from the time of the making thereof. And
therefore a Lease made by such a Corporation to begin from Michaelmas, which
shall be three years, for 21 years; Or a lease made to begin after the death of
the head of the Corporation, for twenty one years, is not good. But if a Lease
be made from the day of the date of the Lease, this is good. Coo. 5. 6. Dyer
246.

4. If there be an old or former Lease in being of the Land, the same must be
surrendered or expired within a year of the time of making of the new Lease. And
this surrender must be absolute, and not conditional; also it must be real,
and not illusory, and in appearance only. Coo. 5. 2.

5. There must not be a double or concurrent Lease in being at one time, as if
a lease for years be made according to the Statute, the College cannot
afterward expulse the Lessee, and make a Lease for lives, or another Lease for
years, according to the Statute, nor e converso. But if a Lease for years be
made to one, and afterward a Lease for life is made to another, and a Letter
of Attorney is made to give Livery of Scisin upon the Lease for life; and,
before the Livery made, the first Lease is surrendered; in this case the second
Lease is good. Coo. 52. and Spark's Case, Trin. 4. Iac. B. R.

6. These Leases must not exceed 3 Lives, or 21 years from the time of the
making of them. And therefore a Lease made by the Ecclesiastical Corporation,
of the Lands they have in right of their Corporation for 22, or 44 Years, or
for 4 lives, is void; and that not only for the Overplus of time over the
three lives or 21 years; but it is void for that time also. And it has been
resolved, That a Lease made by them for 99 years, if three lives so long live,
That this Lease is not good. Nor will it help to make the Lease good, if one of
the 4 lives where it is so made, dye before the Head of the house dye, nor any
such after-Accident. But a Lease made by them for a less time, as for 20 years
or two lives, is good.

7. It must be of Lands or Tenements which have been most commonly let to Farm,
or occupied by the Farmers thereof, by the space of 20 years next before the
Lease made: so as if it have been letten for 11 years at one or several times
within 20 years before the new Lease made, it is sufficient. And albeit the
letting of it have been by Copy of Court. Roll, yet such a letting in Fee for
life or years is a sufficient letting. And so also is a letting at Will by the
Common Law. Coo. 6. 37. Dyer 271.

8. There must be reserved upon such Leases yearly, during the same Leases due
and payable to the Colleges or houses in Succession, so much yearly Farm or
Rent, or more, as has been most accustomably yielded or paid for the Lands,
and within 20 years next before such Lease made. And therefore if the Rent be
reserved for part the time of the New Lease only, this Lease is void. And if
the College have 20 acres of Land that has been usually letten, and make a
Lease of these 20 acres, and one acre more never let, and add so much Rent as
this acre comes to, it is void. So if it have two Farms, at two Rents, one 20
l. the other 30 l. and lease them both at 50 l. Rent; this is not a good Lease.
But if upon the former leases some other things have been added as Heriots,
Fines or profits at the death of the Farmers, or profits out of another's soil,
and this be omitred in the New Lease, the New Lease may be good
notwithstanding. And if the new Lease have more Rent reserved upon it, then the
old Lease had, it is good enough. And if the old Rent were all or part of it in
Corn, the New Lease must be so also, or it will not be good, And by 18 Eliz. 6.
in Colleges in the Universities, a third part is required to be reserved in
Corn upon all such Leases. But this will not suffice, where anciently more was
reserved in Corn. And if the old Rent wore reserved at four days in the year,
the New Lease must be so also; for to reserve it payable at one or two days,
is not good. And if the old Rent be in Gold, it seems the New must be so also.
If it be a Manor that is let, and the Rent be 10 l. and after a Tenancy
Eschear, and the New Lease of the Manor has but 10 l. reserved, it seems this
is good. But if the house purchase the Tenancy, it is doubted. Coo. 5. 6. 8.
and 6. 37.

9. Such Leases must not be without impeachment of Wast; for if it be, it is
void. So if a Lease be made by the house to one for life, the Remainder to
another for life, it is void; for this is in effect during the life of him in
Remainder, without Impeachment of Waste.

10. These Leases must have all due Ceremonies, as other Leases have to make
them good; as Livery of Seisin, Attornment, or the like. Coo. 7. 7. And then
are these Leases made by these Colleges, etc. good, when they are so made, and
with these provisoes, not otherwise. But if they be otherwise made, they are
good against the present Heads of the Colleges that made them, so long as they
continue there. But they are voidable, and may be avoided by their Successors.
Coo. upon Litt. 45: 329. Stat. 13 Eliz. 10. Dyer 356. Coo. 2. 46. and 6. 37.
and 11. 67. and 3. 76. and 5. 14.

9. The Head and Members together of a Corporation, may have or take Lands or
Goods by the Grant or gift of others, as a Natural Body may do; But if they
take it by Feoffment, it must be by warrant to an Attorney to take it under the
Common Seal. Also a Corporation may take Land by Fine. Coo. 10. 67. 5 H. 7. 25.
Plow. 535, 538.

10. But a Corporation must Common Seal without Writing, it can do nothing.
always give and grant in writing, and by their Common-Seal, or their Grants
will not be good. For a Corporation cannot give or grant the Lands of the
Corporation for years, or a Rent out of the Lands for any time, or grant an
Annuity, or enter into Covenants or Bonds, or give or sell the goods of the
Corporation, but by writing under their Common-Seal. And it is a general Rule,
That nothing may be done by a Corporation, that does concern the whole
Corporation, but it must be done by Deed under the Common-Seal. And therefore
however perhaps it the Head of it, or the whole Corporation together make any
Contract for necessary provision, for the use of the whole, which is employed
accordingly; or retain a necessary servant, as Baker, Brewer, Butler, or Cook,
from year to year; or give a power to enter into Land, or demand Rent or other
small matter, for the advantage of the Corporation, by word, or writing,
without Seal, happily some such Acts may be good; yet it is doubted, and is not
safe: For the general and constant opinion is, That no Contracts, Bills, Bonds,
Granting of Offices, as of Stewards of Courts, Bailiffs of Manors, Retainers
of Servants, as Bakers, etc. no Deputation, Grant of Power, License, Contract,
Agreement or Authority given by them, is or can be maintained in Law to be
good, but what is under their Common Seal. 7 H. 7. 9. 4 H. 7. 6. 13. 19. 12 H.
7. 27. 13 H. 7. 17. 2 R. 3. 7. Plow. 91. 92. Dyer 102. Coo. 6. 38. Coo. 11. 79.
Coo. 10. 67. Perk. 14. Broo. Abridgment Corporation throughout.

11. The Grant of a Corporation will bind the Successors, though they be not
named in the Grant. Plow. 457.

12. A Corporation cannot be Seized to uses.
seized of Land to other uses. Coo. 10. 24.

13. A Corporation Civil Barred by Fine.
aggregate, as Mayor and Cominalty, and the like, may be barred and concluded
by a Fine and Non-claim, as a Body natural may be. But otherwise it is of a
Corporation Spiritual or mixed, such as Colleges, Hospltals, and the like; For
they cannot be hurt by it. Stat. 13 Eliz. chap. 10. Coo. 11. 71. Plow. 367. 538.

14. A Corporation may sue Sue and be sued.
and be sued, as a Body natural may be; but care must be had, that it sue and
be sued by the right name of it whereby it was Incorporated. Coo. 10. 29.

15. If a sum of money be Money levied upon it.
to be levied on a Corporation, it may be levied upon the Mayor or chief
Magistrate, or upon any Member of the Corporation. By Chief Just. Rolls, in B.
R. Hill. 1652.

16. If Land holden of H. had been given to an Abbot and Corporation dissolved,
the Lands revert.
his Successors, (or to any other Corporation) if the Abbot and all the
Convent had dyed, so that the Corporation had been dissolved, the Donor, and
not the Lord, by Escheat should have had the Land again. Coo. Inst. Part. 1. 13.

17. If the King had given Lands to a Mayor and Cominalty, and their
Successors, to be holden by Knights-Service; in this case the Pattentecs
should not have done homage, neither should there have been any Wardship or
Relief, only they should have found a man, etc. or pay Escuage. But if they
had conveyed over their Land to any natural man, and his heirs; now the Ward,
Marriage, Relief, and other Incidents belonging thereunto, (before they were
taken away) had been Revived. Coo. Inst. Part. 1. 70. 6.

18. If any Corporation shall oppress any of the people under their power, by
Imposition of unjust Rates, the making and execution of unreasonable
Ordinances, See the Act of 5th of September, 1649. For the Oaths of Mayors, etc.
the Imposition of unjust Oaths, or by forcing men in the taking of an Oath, to
use the Ceremony of putting their hands on the Bible, which men now may not be
forced to; but they may if they please take it by the lifting up of the hand
only: And if they shall upon this account set any Fine upon any man, imprison
his person, or distrain his goods, (the which in some Corporations have been
done) or they shall by any such like means grieve the people; the party grieved
hereby may have his Relief by Complaint in the Upper-Bench.

19. A Corporation may be dissoved by Parliament. And it seems it may not be
dissolved otherwise. Yet see Dyer 100. Coo. Inst. Part. 1. 13.

FINIS.
THE FORMS AND PRESIDENTS OF Charters; Concerning CORPORATIONS.

WITH The chief Matters that are usually contained in them.

LONDON: Printed by I. Streater, for Thomas Dring, and H. Twyford, MDCLIX.

THE FORMS AND PRESIDENTS OF CHARTERS, CONCERNING Corporations.
OLIVER, Lord Protector of, etc. Consideration of Inducement.
Whereas our City of N in Our County of N. is a very ancient City; and the
Citizens of the said City have anciently been a Body Politic and Corporate;
and, from the time whereof the memory of man is not to the Recitals.
contrary, the Citizens of Our said City have held, used, and enjoyed, as well
within the same, as elsewhere in England, diverse and sundry General works.
Rights, Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Free-customes,
Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Advantages, Emoluments, and Immunities, as well
by Prescription, as by sundry Charters, Letters, Patents, Grants, and
confirmations of diverse Kings and Queens of England. And whereas diverse
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Jurisdictions, Liberties,
Immunities, and Privileges, have heretofore been given and granted, or
mentioned to be given and granted to the Citizens and Inhabitants of our said
City, sometimes by the Names of the Citizens, of the City of N. Sometimes by
the Name of the Mayor and Citizens of N. Sometimes by the Name of the Mayor,
Bailiffs, and Commonalty of the city of N. Sometimes by the Name of the Mayor
and Commonalty of N. Sometimes by the Name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty
of the city of N. And by diverse other Names; as by their several Letters
Patents, Charters, Grants, Writings, and Muniments, (amongst other things) may
more fully appear. And whereas since the taking away of Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Deans and Chapters, by Authority of Parliament, the Mayor and Commonalty
of our said city of N. by the name of Mayor and Commonalty of Our said city,
have, at their great charge, purchased to them, and their Successors, (amongst
other things) a Tenement within the same city, commonly called Guild Hall,
together with the Prison, and Prisonhouse there (being Guild Hall. Prison.
part of the said Guild Hall) with their Ap^urtenances, late parcel of the
possessions of, and belonging and appertaining to the late Bishops of N. And
also all Wastes lying, and being within the said c^ty; and all Fairs and
Markets usually holden, and taken and kept within the said City, and the
benefits and profits, Commodityes and advantages thereof. And all, and Courts.
all manner of Courts, Court-Leeres, views of Frankpledge, and whatsoever
thereunto belongs, Courts-Baron, and Courts of Pleas, and all other Courts
usually holden and kept within the said City. And all Fines, Issues, and
Amercements, as well at the said Courts, and every of them, as at the Assizes
and Sessions of the Peace, Fines Issue Amercements.
holden and to be holden for the County of W. and payable, or happening from
time to time to be payable by any of the Inhabitants of the said City, and the
Power and Privilege to hold and keep the aforesaid Courts, and every of them
from time to time. And to Award and Issue the accustomed Writs, and Process to
be awarded, out of the said Courts, which should from thenceforth bear Test
in the name of the Major of the said City for the time being, and the said
Courts to be kept by the said Major, or Recorder, or by the Steward or Bay
liffe of the said Major and Commonality, and their Successors for the time
being, and such other Officers of the said Mayor and Commonality, and their
Successors for ever to be from time to time attendant upon the said Courts, to
serve and execute the Writs and Process, and other matters and things in the
said Courts, as were usually attendant upon the said Courts in the time of the
said late Bishops of N. And power to distraine Distress.
for all Rents and sums of money, payable by reason of the said premises and
all other remedies and means for the having, receiving, levying and enjoying
the said premises, and every part thereof. And also all Waives, Estrayes,
Deodands, and goods of Felons, happening and Waives, Estrayes, etc.
being within the same City. And all sum and sums of money to be paid as a
Post-Fine, or Post-Fines upon any Fine or Fines, from time to time to be levied
of any Lands, or Tenements Post-Fines.
within the same City. And all Lands, Tenements, Mills, Meadows, Rents,
Courts, Faires, Markets, Royalties, Services, Annuityes, Libertyes, Franchises,
Privileges, Immunityes, and other possessions, and Hereditaments whatsoever,
of what nature or condition whatsoever, scituating lying and being, happening,
arising, or coming The Bishops Lands.
within the said City of N. and the Libertyes thereof, which at any time within
10 years before the beginning of the Parliament (begun the third day of
November, 1640) were belonging to the late Bishop of N. or his Predecessors
late Bishops of N. or his Assigns, as parcel of the possessions of the late
Bishopric of N. As by their deed of Purchase thereof, bearing date the 17th
day of November, 1647. and in the 23. year of the Reign of the late King
Charles, and enrolled of Record in our Chancery at Westminster, in our County
of Middlesex may more fully appear. All and every which premises in the said
Deed of Purchase specified, were (amongst other things) by the said late King
Charles (by and with the advice of the Parliament of England then sitting at
Westminster aforesaid) confirmed to the said Mayor and Comonalty of our said
City of N. and their Successors, by the Letters Pattents of the said late King
Charles, under the great seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the
19th. day of January, in the 24. year of his Reign, as by the said Letters
Pattents, remaining also of Record in our said Court of Chancery, relation
being thereunto had, may more fully appear. And whereas the now Mayor and
Comonalty of our said City of N. have humbly besought us to be graciously
pleased to grant, ratify, and confirm unto them and their Successors, all and
singular the aforesaid premises, and all, and every, the Libertyes,
Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Royaltyes, Free-Customes, Jurisdictions,
Preheminencies, advantages, emoluments, and Immunityes, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments aforesaid, and all and every other like Libertyes, Privileges,
Franchises, Rights, Royalties, Free-Customes, Jurisdictions, Preheminences,
Advantages, Emoluments, and Immunityes whatsoever heretofore granted, or
mentioned to be granted to the said Mayor and Comonalty, or to the Citizens of
the City, by their several names of Incorporation or any of them, or otherwise
howsoever, or to the late Bishop or Bishops of N. within the said City, or with
any Circuit of ground in or adjoining to the said City called the close of N.
and which have heretofore been lawfully enjoyed by them, or either or any of
them respectively by Prescription or grant, or any other Title whatsoever, with
alterations additions and Explanations as we should think fit. And further that
the said close of N. might be united and annexed to the said City, and be
subject to the same Government of the same City. And that the said Mayor and
Comonalty, and their Successors may hold, exercise, and enjoy such and the same
Libertyes, Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Royaltyes, Free Customs,
Jurisdictions and Immunityes within the said Close, as they have or ought to
have within the said City. Know ye therefore, that we, at the humble Petition
of the now Mayor and Commonality of The new Grant.
our said City of N. and for diverse other good causes and Considerations Us
hereunto moving, and of our special Grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, have granted, ratified, and confirmed. And by these presents for sand
our Successors, do give, grant, ratify, and confirm, and approve to the said
Mayor, and Comonalty * etc: the aforesaid Tenement * etc: Express their names
as before.
the Prison house, * etc: And the aforesaid Faires and Markets, * etc: And the
aforesaid Courts, * etc: And all Fines, Issues, and Amercements as well at the
said Courts, and every of them, as at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace,
holden and to be holden for the said County of W. and payable, or happening
from time to time, to be payable by any, the Inhabitants of or within the same
City. And also all and every, the powers All the Franchises they have had.
and Authorityes herein before mentioned, for the holding and keeping of the
aforesaid Courts, and every of them from time to time, and to Award, and Issue
the accustomed Writs, to be issued and awarded out of the said Courts, and the
same to bear Test in the name of the Mayor of the said City for the time
being, and the said Courts to be kept by the said Mayor, or by the Recorder of
the said City for the time being, or by the Steward or Baylieffe of the said
Mayor, and Comonalty, and their Successors for the time being. And that such
other Officers of the said Mayor and Comonalty, and their Successors for ever
shall be from time to time attendant upon every of the said Courts, to serve
and execute the Writs, and process, and other matters and things in the said
Courts, as were usually attendant thereupon in the time of the said late
Bishops of N. as aforesaid. And also the aforesaid power to distraine for all
Rents and other sums of money payable by reason of the said premises. And
all other lawful remedies, and means for the having, receiving, levying, and
enjoying the said premises, and every part thereof. And also all Waiffes,
Est^aies, Deodands, and goods of Felons, happening and being within the said
City. And Felons goods, Waiffes, etc.
also all and every sum and s^mmes of money to be paid as a Post Fine, or
Post Fines, upon any Fine or Fines from time to time, to be levied of any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments within the said City. And also all, and
every Post-Fines.
such other Manors, Lands, Tenements, Mills, Meadows, Feedings, Rents, Courts,
Faires, Markets, Royaltyes, Services, Annuityes, Libertyes, Franchises,
Privileges, Immunityes and other possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever, as
the Mayor and Comonalty aforesaid, or any of their Predecessors have at any
time or times heretofore, by whatsoever name or names of Incorporation had,
held, used, or enjoyed, or now do hold, use, and enjoy to them and their
Successors, of Estate, of Inheritance, by reason or pretext of any Grant, or
Grants, Charter or Charters, or Letters Pattents, by any the late Kings or
Queens of England, heretofore granted or confirmed, either to them, the said
Mayor and Comonalty, and their Successors, or to any the late Bishop or Bishops
of N. or by any other lawful Right, Title, Customs Usage, or Prescription
whatsoever, although the same or any of them have been forfeited or lost. And
although the same or any of them are not in these presents, particularly
expressed, and in certain named and specified: To have hold and enjoy all, and
singular the premises to the said Mayor and Comonalty of the said City of N.
and their Successors for ever. And moreover, We, will and Extent of the Limits.
by these presents, for Us and our Successors, do grant, appoint, and declare,
that the said City of N. and the Compass, Precincts, and Limits thereof, and
the jurisdiction of the same shall from hence forth extend, and reach it self,
and may, and shall be able to reach forth, and extend it self as well in length
as in breadth, as in [here set forth the limits of the Corporation.] Rendering
the old Rents.
Circuit, to such and the like bounds, metes and limits, as the same from the
time whereof the memory of man, etc: has extended it self (that is to say)
from the end, etc. Rendering and paying therefore, yearly to Us and our
Successors, such and the like Rents, Services, sums of money, and demands as
have been heretofore rendered, or paid unto us for the same. Wherefore we will,
and by these presents for us and our Successors, do firmly enjoyne and command
that the aforesaid Mayor, and Comonalty of the City aforesaid, and their
Successors shall and may freely and quietly have, hold, use, and enjoy the
aforesaid Libertyes, Authorityes, Jurisdictions, Franchises, Rights, Royaltyes,
Privileges, General words.
Exemptions and Quittances, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid,
according to the Tenor and Effect of the aforesaid Letters Patents,
Prescriptions, and Customs, and of this our Letters Patents, of Grant, and
Confirmation, without the let, hinderance, or Impediment of us or our
Successors, or of any our Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, Bayliffes, or other
Officers, or Ministers of Us or our Successors whatsoever. And that the said
Mayor and That the Officers of the Lord Protector do not disturb them.
Comonalty of the City aforesaid, or their Successors, or any of them in the
free use, and enjoyment of the premises, or of any of them, by Us or our
Successors, or by any of them shall not be hindered, molested, or in any wise
disturbed. We also willingly and by these presents, commanding, and requiting
as well the Treasurer, Commissioners of the Treasury, Chancellor, and Barons
of the Exchequer at Westminster for the time being, and all other the Justices,
of Us and our Successors, as also our Attorney and Solicitor general for the
time being; and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, of Us and our
Successors: That neither they, That no Officers shall molest the Corporation
for any thing past.
nor any of them, shall make or cause to be made, mentioned or prosecuted any
Writ or Summons of Quo Warranto, or any other Writ or process whatsoever,
against the aforesaid Mayor and Comonalty of the City aforesaid, or their
Successors, or any of them, for any causes, things, matters, offenses, claim,
or usurpation by them or any of them heretofore unduely claymed, used,
attempted, had, or usurped before the day of the date of these presents:
Willing also, and by these presents for us and our successors commanding and
requiring; That the Mayor and Comonalty of the City aforesaid, or their
Successors, or any of them by any of the Persons, Justices, Officers, or
Ministers aforesaid, in or for the undue use, Claim or Usurpation of any other
Libertyes, Franchises, or Jurisdictions within the City aforesaid, or the
Limits, or Precincts thereof, before the day of the date of these presents
shall not be molested or disquieted, or compelled to answer to them, or any of
them. And whereas also in and by a certain Grant, or Charter of the late King
James, made and granted to the said Mayor and Comonalty of the said Recitalls
of Charters.
City of N. and their Successors bearing date at Westminster the second day of
March, in the 9th. year of his Reign over England. And in and by one other
Grant, or Charter made by the late King, bearing date at C. the 17, of August.
in the 6th, year of his Reign, or by one of the said Charters, it is (amongst
other things) granted and confirmed to the Mayor and Comonaltyes of our said
City, and their Successors that are in The Frame of the Corporation.
the said City, there should be one Mayor, one Recorder, 24 Aldermen, and eight
and forty Assistants. Now for as much as we are informed, that our said City
of N. is less populous then heretofore, whereby Trade and Commerce there is of
late decayed, so that the aforesaid number of Aldermen and Assistants there,
cannot with Convenience to the present Government of the said City be had and
continued, as in times past, We therefore for us and our Successors, do will
ordain, and grant to the Mayor and Comonalty of our said City of N. and their
Successors by these presents, that for the better Government of our said City,
Libertyes and Precincts thereof The Officers to be in the Corporation.
there shall be for ever hereafter within the said City a Mayor and Recorder,
15. Aldermen, and 24. Assistants to be nominated, chosen, and sworn, as is
herein after mentioned, who shall be for ever hereafter called the Mayor and
Comonalty of the City of N. And that there shall be for ever hereafter two
Chamberlaines, one Bayliffe, one Town-Clark, one Coroner, A Clarke of the
Market, four high-Constables, thirteen sub-Constables, and three Sergeants at
the Mace within the said City to be chosen in manner and form herein after
mentioned. And of our like spetiall grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, we do by these presents for us and our Successors, Will, Ordain,
Declare, Constitute, grant and appoint, that the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and
Assistants of our said City of N. for the time being. And they which The making
of the Corporation.
hereafter shall be the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants within the
same, and their Successors for ever hereafter be and shall be by force of these
presents, one body Corporate, and politic in Deed, Fact, and Name, by the
name of the Mayor and Comonalty of the City of N. And them by the name of the
Mayor and Comonalty of the City of N. One body politic and Corporate in Deed,
Fact and name, We do for us and our Successors, really and fully create,
ordain, make, Constitute, and confirm by these presents. And that by the same
name of the Mayor and Comonalty of the City of N. they may have perpetual
Succession. And that they and their Successors for ever, by the name of the
Mayor and Comonalty of the City of N. be and shall be forever hereafter persons
able and in Law, capable to have, get, receive, and possess Lands, Tenements
Rents, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Franchises, and Hereditaments, to them and
their successors in Fee-simple, or for term of life, lives or years, or
otherwise; and also goods and Chattells, and also other things of what nature
kind or quality soever. And also to give grant, let, set, and assign the same
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattells, and to do and execute all
other things about the same, by the name aforesaid. And also that they be and
shall be for ever hereafter persons able, and in Law capable to plead, and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended in all or any
the Courts of Sue and be Sued.
us and our Successors, and other places whatsoever. And before any Judges,
Justices and other person or persons whatsoever, in all and all manner of
Actions, Suits, Complaints, Demands, Pleas, Causes, and matters whatsoever, of
what nature, kind, or quality soever in the same, and in the like manner and
form, as other people of England, being persons able, and in Law capable, may
plead, and be impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended by
any Lawful ways or means whatsoever. And that the said Mayor and Comonalty
of the City of N. and their Successors shall and Seal.
may for ever hereafter have one Common Seal to serve for the sealing of all,
and singular their affairs, matters, and businesses, touching and concerning
the said Corporation. And that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
Mayor, and Comonalty of the said City of N. and their Successors at their will
and pleasure from time to time, to break, change, and alter, and new make their
said Common Seal, when and as often as to them it shall seem most convenient.
And further know ye, that we have The present Officers named.
assigned, named, ordained, and constituted And by these presents for Us and
our Successors, do assign, name, ordain, and constitute our well beloved W.
S. now Mayor of our said City of N. to be the present Mayor of our said City.
And that he the said W. S shall remain and continue The Mayor.
in the Office of Mayor, there, until another fit person shall be chosen and
sworn into the said office, according to the usage and custom of the said
City, and as in and by these presents is hereafter mentioned and directed. And
we have assigned, named, ordained, and constituted; And by these presents do
assign, name, ordain and constitute, create and declare our well beloved H.
^. Esquire. to be the present Recorder of The Recorder.
our said City, to do and execute all things which unto the office of Recorder
of the said City, does or may any w^y appertain and belong. And also we have
assigned, named, constituted, and made, and by these resents do assign, name,
constitute, and make our wellbelowed I. I. I. A. etc: Citizens and Inhabitants
of our said City of N. to be the present 15. The Aldermen.
Aldermen of our said City. And also we have assigned, named, constituted, and
made. And by these presents do assign, name, constitute, and make our
well-beloved N. B. S. R. etc. Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City of N.
to be the present 24. Assistants of the said City. Assistants.
And also we have assigned, chosen, named, and constituted our well-beloved A.
G. D. M. Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City to be the Chamberlaines.
present Chamberlaines of the City aforesaid. And we have assigned, named,
constituted, and appointed, and by these presents do assign, name, constitute,
and appoint our well-beloved Th. C. one other of the said Citizens, there to be
the present Bayliffe of our said City, who shall continue in that office until
another fit person Bayliffe.
be chosen and sworn in his place.

And also we have assigned, chosen, named, and constituted our well-beloved E.
F. R. W. S. N. and I. L. Citizens and Inhabitants of the High-Constables.
said City, to be the present High-Constables of the said City, who shall
continue in that office of High-Constables of the said City, until other fit
persons be chosen and sworn in their places. And also we do assign, choose,
nominate, and constitute our well-beloved D. R. L. T. etc: also Citizens and
Inhabitants of the said City, to Sub-Constables.
be the present sub-Constables of the said City, who shall continue in the said
office, until other fit persons be chosen, and sworn in their places. And
also we have assigned, chosen, nominated, and constituted; And by these
presents do assign, choose, nominate, and constitute our well-beloved R. H.
Citizen of the said City to be the present principal Sergeant at Mace within
our said City. And F. W. and G. H. Citizens and Sergeant at Mace.
Inhabitants there, to be the two other present Sergeants at Mace. And we will,
and by these presents for us and our Successors, do grant to Sword and Cap of
Maintenance.
the said Mayor and Comonalty of the said City of N. and their Successors. That
the Mayor of the said City for the time being, shall and may have a sword to be
borne before him, and a Cap of Maintenance in such sort as is used before any
other Mayor of any of our Cities in England. And that for ever hereafter there
be and shall be an Officer of the said City, who shall be called Sword Bearer.
the Sword Bearer, and to wear a Cap of Maintenance before the Mayor of the
said City for the time being. And we have assigned, chosen, nominated, and
constituted. And by these presents do assign, choose, nominate, and constitute
our well beloved R. F. Citizen and Inhabitant of our said City, to be the first
and present Sword bearer of our City. And do hereby appoint that the said
Officer shall have precedence of place before the Sergeants at Mace of the said
City. Also we will, and by these presents, for us and our Successors, do grant
to the Common Council.
said Mayor and Comonalty of our said City of N. and their Successors. That
the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City for the time
being; Or the Mayor, and any eight or more of the Aldermen, and twelve or more
of the Assistants for the time being, be and shall be called the Common
Council of the said City. And that they, or the greater part of How called.
them, shall or may have full power and Authority by virtue of these presents
from time to time, to call and hold Common Council within the Common Counsel
House of the said City. And Making of Orders and Ordinances
there as occasions shall be to make Laws, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions in writing, and to add, alter, diminish or reform them from time
to time, as to them shall seem necessary, and convenient (not repugnant to the
prerogative of Us or our Successors, or to any of the St^tutes, or other the
Laws of England) for the good rule, oversight, Correction, and Government of
the City and Libertyes of the same. And all the Officers thereof, and of the
several Companyes of Merchants, and other Tradesmen, and of Victuallers,
Arrifieers, and of all other, the people and Inhabitants of the said City,
Libertyes, and Precincts aforesaid; and for the better preservation,
government, and disposal of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, goods
and Chattells of the said Corporation. Which said Laws, Ordinances, Orders,
and Constitutions, shall be binding to all and every the Inhabitants of the
said City, Libertyes, and Precincts aforesaid. And further we will, and grant,
that the said Common Council of the said City for the time being, as often as
they make, ordain, and Establish such Laws, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions as aforesaid shall or may make, ordain, limit, provide, set,
impose, and tax reasonable Fines, and Amercements, against, and upon all
persons offending against such Laws, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, or
any of them to be made, ordained, and establ^shed as aforesaid. And the same
Fines and Amercements, shall or may require, demand, levy, take, and receive by
Warrants under their Common S^ale, to and for the use and behoof of the Mayor
and Comonalty of the said City, and their Successors, either by distress and
sale of the goods and Chattells of the offenders therein, if such goods and
Chattels may be found within the said City, Libertyes, and Precincts thereof,
rendering to such offender or offenders the overplus, or by any other lawful
ways or means whatsoever.

And we do by, etc. appoint and ordain the Election of the Mayor of the said
City, and of Election of the Officers how to be.
the Aldermen and Assistants of the said City, that it shall be as follows,
viz.

And we do, etc. give, grant, full power and authority unto the Major,
Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City of N. or any 8. or more of
the Aldermen: and 12 or more of the Assistants, the Major and Recorder for the
time being, or either of them, being present as aforesaid; on the Wednesday
before the Feast of, etc. yearly in the Councel-house of the said City, if they
shall think fit to nominate, elect, and choose out of the Inhabitants of the
said City, fit and able persons to be in the respective Offices and places of
Mayor, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City. And that such person as shall
be so elected and chosen Mayor as aforesaid, Oath of the Mayor.
shall on the Wednesday month, next after the Feast of S^. etc. then next
following, in the Council house aforesaid, take his Oath before the Recorder,
Aldermen, and Assistants for the time being, or before any five, or more of the
Aldermen, for the due execution of his Office. And that the said Mayor so to be
chosen, as aforesaid, shall remain and continue in the said Office, until
another fit person shall be chosen and sworn in his place of Mayor of the said
City, in manner as aforesaid. Which Oath the said Recorder, Aldermen, and
Assistants, or any five or more of the Aldermen, shall, and may lawfully
administer: and have hereby power to administer unto the said Mayor so elected
from time to time accordingly. And further we will, that the Recorder, etc.
(name all the Officers) and all other Officers of the said City, before they,
or Oath of all Officers.
any of them shall be admitted to enter upon, and execute their respective
Offices, shall be sworn to execute the same before the Mayor, or any three or
more of the Aldermen of the said City for the time being. And we do by these
Presents, etc. give power and authority to the Mayor of the said City for the
time being, or any three of the Aldermen of the said City for the time being,
to administer the said respective Oaths unto them accordingly. And further, we
will, and by these Presents for us, etc. do grant, Justices of the Peace.
That the Mayor and Recorder of the said City, for the time being, and five, or
more of the Aldermen of the said City (not exceeding the number of 8 Aldermen)
being such as have born the Office of Mayor there, shall be Justices and
Keepers of the Peace of us and our Successors, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, of us, and our Successors within the said City, and the Liberties and
Precincts thereof. And that they, or any three or more of them (whereof the
Mayor Power to keep Sessions.
and Recorder of the said City for the time being, we will to be two) shall and
may for ever hereafter, have power and authority, by virtue of these Presents,
to hear and determine all and all manner of Petit Treasons, Murders, Felonies,
Ryots, Routs, Oppressions, Extortions, Fore-stallaries, Regratories, and all
other Trespasses and Offenses whatsoever within our said City of N. and the
Liberties and Precincts aforesaid, from time to time arising and happening, and
which shall arise or happen, and any ways belong to the Office of Justices of
Peace, or Oyer and Terminer, and the correction and punishment of the offenses
aforesaid, every of them according to the Laws of England: and to do and
execute all other things within the said City, Liberties, and Precincts
aforesaid, so fully, and in as ample manner, as to the Commissioners assigned,
and to be assigned, for the keeping of the Peace within the said county of N,
or elsewhere in England, does, or may belong. And as amply and fully, as any
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, by virtue of any Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, heretofore appointed, or hereafter to be appointed, (matters of High
Treason only excepted) have used to do, or may do and execute. And we do by
these Presents for us, and our Successors, inhibit and forbid all and singular
the Commissioners Other Justices of the county not to intermeddle.
assigned, and to be assigned, for the keeping of the Peace: and Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer of our said County of W. for the time being, That they, or
any of them do not intermeddle with, or exercise any Jurisdiction as Justices
of Peace, or as Justices of Oyer and Terminer, for any matter or thing arising
within our said City, and Liberties and Precincts thereof, for, or concerning
any offense or offenses whatsoever (except for High Treason only as
aforesaid). And we do by these Presents, will, declare, assign, and appoint,
that the present Mayor and Recorder of our said City herein before named, and
I. G. I. F. H. P. E. L. and R. P. be our present Justices of Peace of Oyer and
Terminer, within the said City, Liberties, and Precincts aforesaid. And further
we will, That our Justices of Peace, and Justices of Oyer and Terminer, before
named, nor any (...) them, nor any other person or persons hereafter to be
chosen Justice or Justices of the Peace, or Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
within our said City, and Liberties thereof, do take upon him and them the
execution of the Office of Justice of Peace, or of Justice of Oyer and Terminer
there, until such person and persons shall have taken the Oath appointed, or to
be appointed for such Justice and Justices, before the Mayor and Aldermen of
the said City for the time being: and any three, or more of them, shall have,
by virtue of these Presents, full power and authority, to give and administer
the Oath and Oaths aforesaid, unto such person and persons, and every of them,
as shall be chosen Justice or Justices of the Peace, and as by virtue of these
Presents, shall be Justice, and Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, within the said City and Liberties thereof. And moreover we do by
these Presents, for us, etc. will and appoint, That the Justices of the Peace
of our said City, and the Justices of Oyer and Terminer within the said City,
and the Liberties thereof (except the Time of choosing of Justices.
Mayor and Recorder for the time being) be yearly chosen on the aforesaid
Wednesday next, before the Feast of, etc. in the Councel-house, etc. by the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City; or by the Mayor,
and eight, or more of the Aldermen, and twelve, or more of the Assistants of
the said City for the time being.

And that the aforesaid Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer there for the time being, and every of them so chosen and sworn as
aforesaid: and also the Mayor and Recorder of our said City for the time being,
by their, or any, or either of their Warrants, all and every person and
persons, for High Treason, or Petit Treason, or for suspicion thereof, and for
other Felonies whatsoever; and all Malefactors and Disturbers of the Peace, and
other Offenders, for other misdemeanors, who shall be apprehended within the
said City, or Liberties thereof, shall, and may send and commit, or cause to be
sent and committed to the Common-Goal of the said City, there to remain, and to
be kept in safe custody by the Keeper of the said Goal, or his Deputy, for the
time being, until such Offender and Offenders shall be lawfully Goal.
delivered thence.

And we do by these Presents, for Us, and our Successors, charge and require
the Keeper and Keepers of the said Goal for the time being, and his, and their
Deputy and Deputies, to receive, Offenders, where to be committed.
take, and in safe custody to keep all and singular such person and persons so
apprehended, or to be apprehended, and sent and committed to the said Goal by
Warrant of the said Justices, or any of them as aforesaid, until he or they so
sent and committed to the said Goal, shall from thence be delivered by due
course of Law.

And further we do by these Presents, for us, etc. grant to the said Mayor and
Commonalty of our said City, and their Successors, that the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and their Successors, shall, for ever hereafter, have full power
and authority, by virtue of these Presents, to cause a pair of Gallows to be
set up within the City, Liberties, and Precincts aforesaid, to hang Gallows.
Malefactors adjudged so Death within the said City, according to the Laws and
Statutes of England; or else to cause the same malefactors adjudged to Death,
to be led to the Gallows erected, or to be erected at F, etc. in the county of
W. there to be hanged.

And we will, ordain, constitute, and appoint by these Presents, for us, and
our Successors, That the Recorder of the said City for the time being, be, and
shall be custos Rotulorum of our said City. Custos Rotulorum.


And that the Mayor of our said City for the time being, and C. B. (who is
hereby nominated the present Clerk of the Statutes there) have, and by virtue
of these Presents, shall have power, as formerly, to take Recognizances of
Debts there, according to the Form of the Statute Power to take Conusance of
Statutes.
of Merchants, and the Statute of Acton Burnel.

And that the Mayor of the said City, and Clerk of the Statutes there for the
time being, shall, by virtue of these Presents, have full power and authority,
to do and execute all things by force of the same Statutes, or either of them,
as does, may, or ought to belong to them, or either of them, to do or execute.

And further we do for us, etc. will and grant by these Presents, That the said
Mayor and Clerk of the Statutes, within our said City for the time being, may
have one Seal, such as they from time to time shall think fit to make use of.
And that the said Seal shall be of two pieces, of which the one part shall be
called the greater, and shall remain with the said Mayor for the time being;
and the other part shall be called the lesser, and shall remain with the Clerk
of the Statutes for the time being, to seal such Statutes, Merchants, or
Recognizances, in the nature of Statutes Merchant hereafter to be acknowledged
before them, or Certificates, as well of any such Statutes or Recognizances
heretofore acknowledged, as of such Statutes or Recognizances hereafter to be
acknowledged within the said City, according to the Statutes aforesaid, and
either of them.

And we will, that the said Clerk of the Statutes for the time being, do write
and inroll the said Statutes, Merchant, or Recognizances aforesaid so to be
taken: and shall do all other things expedient and belonging to the said Office,

And we do likewise by these Presents, for Us, Naming a Clerk of the Statutes.
etc. will and grant, that the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of our
said City, for the time being: and the Mayor, Recorder, or any eight, or more
of the Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants for the time being, shall
upon the Death or Removal of the said Clerk of the Statutes, for the time
being, have full power and authority, by virtue of these Presents, at their
will and pleasure, and within convenient time, to choose one other fit person
to be the Clarke for the taking of such Statutes, or Recognizances of debts
within the said City as aforesaid.

And also from time to time, to choose such Town Clerk Clerk of the Peace,
Clerk of the Court of Pleas.
person or persons, as they shall think fit to be Towne-Clerke, Clerk of the
Peace, Cerke of the Court of Pleas, and to be Clerk and Clerks of the other
Court, and Courts, to be holden within the City, and the Libertyes, and
Precincts thereof, when and as often as the said several places shall happen
to be void.

And we do by these presents, Constitute and oppoint our well-beloved I, G.
gent to be the The present Ttown Clerk, and Clerk of the Peace, etc.
present Town-Clarke, Clarke of the Peace, Clerk of the Court of Pleas, and
Clerk of the other Court and Courts, to be holden within our said City, and the
Libertyes, and Precincts thereof.

And further we do by these presents for us and our Successors, require and
straightly charge and command, That the Bayliffes of the said City, the
Town-Clerke, Clerk of the Peace, the High-Constables, Sword bearer,
sub-Constable, and Sergeant at Mace, within our said City for the time being,
and every of them respectively, jointly, and severally, as cause shall require,
shall attend upon the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace, of
the said City for the time being, and every or any of them, according to the
duty of their respective places, in and about the executing of such, the
Commands, Precepts, Warrants, and Process of them, and every of them as
belongs and appertains to be done or executed.

And further we will, etc. That the Mayor of our said City for the time being
and no other, Clerk of the Market.
be and forever shall be Clerk of the Market, within the City aforesaid, the
Libertyes, and Precincts thereof. And that he and no other shall and may
forever do, execute, and perform all, and singular, Acts, Deeds, and things
whatsoever belonging to the Office of the Clerk of the Market, within the City
aforesaid, the Libertyes, and Precincts thereof to be done, executed, and
performed. And that the Mayor of the said City aforesaid, for the time being,
and no other person, or persons, shall or may have Assise, or Assay of Bread,
Wine, and Beer and of all Coal, Wood, and of other things to the Office of
the Clerk of the Market, belonging or concerning as well in the presence, as in
the absence of us and our Successors.

Also we Will for us, etc. And grant to the Coroner.
Mayor and Comonalty of our said City of N. That the Mayor of our said City for
the time being, and his Successors during the time, that they shall remain in
the said Office of Mayor of the said City, for the time being, and no other be
or shall be the Coroner of us and our Successors within the City aforesaid, the
Libertyes, and Precincts thereof.

And that he and no other shall do, execute, and cause to be done, and executed
within the City aforesaid, Libertyes, and Precincts thereof, all and singular
matters, and things to the said office of Coroner belonging, there to be done.

And that the said Mayor of the said City, for the time being, shall take his
Corporal Oath before the Recorder, and any three or more of the Aldermen, etc.
well and duly to execute the said Offices of Clerk of the Market, and Coroner
of the said City, before he take upon him the execution of either of the said
Offices. Deposing of Officers for Misbehaviour.


And in case the Mayor of our said City for the time being, shall, during the
time of his Mayrolty, misbehave himself in that Office; We do by these
Presents, for us, etc. will and declare, that it shall and may be lawful to,
and for the Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants, or for eight, or more of the
Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City for the time
being, to remove such Mayor from his said Office of Mayoralty for misgovernment
or misbehaviour therein. And in such case, or in case of Death of the Mayor of
the said City for the time being, in the time of his Mayoralty; We will that
within four days, or other convenient time, next after such removal or death,
the Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants, or eight or more of the Aldermen, and
twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City for the time being, do choose
another fit and discreet person (in the place of him so dead or removed) to be
Mayor of the said City: and left there should be a Failer of Justice or
Government in our said City, in such Interval; We do for us, and our
Successors, will, that the senior, or eldest Alderman of the said City for the
time being, shall take upon him the place and Office of the Mayor there; and
shall exercise the same, until another fit person shall be chosen as aforesaid:
and in case of the disability of such eldest Alderman, that then the next
Alderman in seniority to him, shall take upon him the said place and Office of
Mayor of the said City and Liberties thereof, and shall exercise the same as
aforesaid: and that such senior, or eldest Alderman, or such Alderman next in
seniority of place to him, shall be immediately after the Death or Removal of
the former Mayor, sworn to execute the same accordingly, before three, or more
of the Aldermen of the said City for the time being, who are here by authorized
to administer the same Oath in that behalf.

And we do likewise by these Presents for us, and our Successors, grant unto
the said Mayor and Commonalty of the said City of N. and their Successors, That
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City for the time being, or the
Mayor, and eight or more of the Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants
of the said City for the time being, shall have power and authority, by virtue
of these Presents, at their pleasure, to remove the Recorder of the said City,
for the time being, from his said place or Office of Recorder there: and in
case of such removal, or in case of the death of the Recorder of the said City,
for the time being, to choose and elect another fit person, learned in the Laws
of England, to be Recorder there, and so to continue, during pleasure as
aforesaid. And further, That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of
the said City for the time being; or the Mayor, and eight or more of the
Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City for the time
being, shall have power from time to time, by virtue of these Presents, to
remove any one of the Justices of the Peace within the said City for the time
being (other then the Mayor or Recorder there for the time being.) from the
Office of Justices of the Peace there, for misbehaviour, or other just or
reasonable cause: and in case of removal, or in case of the death of any of the
Justices of the Peace there in convenient time, to make choice of, and nominate
and elect one or more of the Aldermen of the said City, who has, or have born
the Office of Mayor there, to be a Justice, or Justices of the Peace, within
the said City, in the place of such Justice, or Justices of the Peace, so
removed, or dead as aforesaid.

And further we do by these Presents, for us, etc. grant unto the said Mayor
and Commonalty of our said City of N. and their Successors Tha if any Alderman,
or Aldermen of the said City, shall at any time hereafter, misdemean him, or
themselves, in the execution of his or their places of Aldermen there, it shall
be lawful to, and for the Mayor, Aldermen, and Assistants of the City, for the
time being; or the Mayor, and any eight, or more of the said Aldermen, and
twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City, for the time being, in such
case, to remove such Alderman, or Aldermen (so misdemeaning him, or themselves)
from holding or exercising such place or places of Alderman, or Aldermen of the
said city: and in such case of removal, or in case of death of any of the
Aldermen of the said city, in conventent time, to choose other fit person or
persons to be Alderman, or Aldermen of the said City, in the place or places of
him or them so removed or dead.

And if any of the Assistants of the said City, Bayliffe, Coroner, Town Clerk,
Clerk of the Peace, Clerk of the Market, Clerk of the Court of Pleas, and other
Courts aforesaid, Clerk of the Statutes, Chamberlaines, high-Constables, Sword
bearer, sub-Constables, Sergeants at the Mace for the time being, or any of
them shall mis-behave him or themselves by neglect, or otherwise in the
execution of their, or any of their respective place or places; Then and in
such case if shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
and Assistants of the said City for the time being, or the Mayor and any eight
or more of the Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City
for the time being by virtue of these presents, to remove him or them from his
and their place or places, for such his or their mis-behaviour and neglect
therein. And in case of removal, or of the death of any person or persons, in
such office or offices as aforesaid, in convenient time to choose other fit
person or persons, to be in the place or places of him or them, so dead or
removed. Refusers of Offices to be sined.


And also we will, and by these presents for us, etc. do grant to the said
Mayor and Comonalty of our said City of N. and their Successors, that if any of
the Citizens of the said City, or Inhabitants within the Libertyes, and
Precincts thereof, that shall hereafter be elected, nominated and chosen to the
office of Mayor, Justice of Peace, Aldermen, Assistants, Bayliffe, or
Chamberlain of the said City as aforesaid, and having notice of his or their
said Election, shall refuse or deny to take upon him or them, and to execute
that office, to which he or they shall be so chosen, and nominated, That then
and so often it shall and may be lawful for the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and
Assistants of the said City for the time being; Or the Mayor, or any eight of
the Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants of the said City, for the
time being to Tax, Assesse, and impose upon such person or persons, so refusing
or denying such reasonable and moderate Fines, and sums of money as to their
discretions shall be thought most fit. So as the said Fine, Penalty, or sum
for refusing or denying to hold and execute the office of Mayor of the said
City, do not exceed the sum of 100. l. And the fine for refusing or denying
to hold and execute the place of an Alderman do not exceed 40. l. And the fine,
etc. of an Assistant, 20. l. And so as the fine for refusing or denying to hold
and execute the respective places of Bayliffe or Chamberlain of the said City
do not exceed 10. l.

And we do by these presents for us, etc. authorize the Mayor, Recorder,
Aldermen and Assistants of the said City, for the time being. Or the Mayor, and
any eight or more of the Aldermen, and twelve or more of the Assistants there
for the time being, to frustate, and make void the election of such person or
persons so refusing or denying as aforesaid. And then and in such case and
cases, any other fit and able persons, Citizen or Citizens of the said City, or
Inhabiting within the Libertyes, and Precincts thereof in convenient time to
elect a new to execute such office or offices, so denied or refused to be
excuted as aforesaid.

And that if it shall happen that such person, or persons so to be elected a
new, shall refuse or deny to take upon him or them any of the said Office or
Offices, unto which he or they shall be chosen and elected as aforesaid, then
and in such case the said Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the said
City for the time being; Or the said Mayor and eight or more of the Aldermen,
and 12. or more of the Assistants, shall and may set, and impose upon him or
them, so denying or refusing such and the like moderate Fines, etc: (as is
before set down in the like cases;) And so to continue to make void the
election, etc: (as before). All which said Fines so to be set and imposed, We
will and grant by these presents for us, etc: shall be, and shall remain, and
belong unto, and shall be put into the possesion and seisin of the Mayor and
Comonalty of the said City for the time being, and their Successors to be
levied and taken by warrant under their Common Seal, and by distress and sale
of the goods and Chattells of the several persons so refusing or denying as
aforesaid, if such Goods and Chattels may be found within the City, Libertyes,
and Precincts aforesaid, rendering to the parties the overplus, or by any other
ways, or lawful means whatsoever, to the only use of the said Mayor, and
Comonalty of the said City of N. and their Successors without any account to be
rendered, made or done to us, or our Successors for the same.

And further of our more ample grace, etc: We do by these presents for us, etc.
Grant and That they shall not serve in Iewries.
Confirm to the said Mayor, etc. That the Citizens of our said City, or any of
them, shall not at any time hereafter be distrained, or compelled to go out of
the said City, or the Libertyes, or Precincts thereof, to serve upon, or
touching any pleas, Assizes, Juries, or Inquests to be taken, unless the same
do concern us, or our Successors, or the Comonalty of the said City, as has
been there accustomed.

And we do likewise by these presents for us, etc. Grant unto the said Mayor
and Comonalty of our said City of N. and their Successors, That the Mayor and
Recorder of the said City, or either of them for the time being, shall by
virtue of these presents have power to take Conuzance of Record, and duly to
enrole any deed or Deeds in writing, made or to be made by any Conuzance of
Deeds.
person or persons whatsoever (Married Women excepted) of, for, or touching any
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments, Debts, Goods, and Chattells whatsoever
within the said City, and the Libertyes, and Precincts thereof, which
Acknowledgment and Enrolement there shall be, and shall be adjudged, reputed,
and taken to be as good, and valid in the Law, as if the same had been taken,
or acknowledged before any other person, or persons, authorized to take the
acknowledgment of Deeds, or Writings, and enrolled in our Court of Chancery, or
in any other our Courts of Record, etc.

And further know ye, that we for the Government of oursaid City, and for the
welfare of the Citizens, Tradesmen, and Inhabitants thereof, do by these
presents for us, etc. Give or Grant to the said Mayor, and Comonalty of our
said City, and their Successors, That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and
Assistants, etc. Or the Mayor and any eight or more of the Aldermen, and 12. or
more of the Assistants of our said City of N. for the time being, shall from
time to time, and at all times hereafter have full power, and Authority at any
Common Council, to be held within the said City, under the Common Seal to
make free Citizens To make Freemen.
of the said City and Libertyes thereof. And that no person or persons
whatsoever, other then such Free Citizens, shall hereafter use any Art, Trade,
Mystery, or manual occupation, within our said City, the Libertyes, and
Precincts thereof, saving in the times of the Faires, there to be kept, and
during the continuance of such Faires only. And in case any person or persons
whatsoever, not being free Citizens of our said City, as aforesaid shall at any
time hereafter use, or exercise any Art, Trade, Mystery, or manual occupation,
or shall by himself, themselves, or others, sell or expose to salo any manner
of Merchand^ze or Wares whatsoever, in any house, shop, place or standing
within the said City, or the Libertyes, precincts thereof, no fair being then
kept in the said City, and shall persist therein, after warning to him or them
given, or left by the appointment of the Mayor of the said City for the time
being, at the place or places, where such person or persons shall so use, or
exercise any Art, etc. or shall sell or expose to sale any Wares, or
Merchandises as aforesaid, then it shall be lawful for the Mayor of the said
City for the time being, to cause such Shop-Windows to be shut up; And also to
impose such reasonable fine, etc: not exceeding 10. s. every time, etc. And the
same Fine and Fines so to be imposed to levy, etc: (as before.)

And further we do by these presents, for us and our Successors, Grant to the
Mayor and Comonalty of our said City; That they and their Successors be for
ever persons able, and capable, and shall have power to purchase, have, take,
Mortmaine.
and possess in Fee simple, Lands, Tenements, Rents and other possessions
within or without the same City, to them and their Successors for ever, so as
the same exceed not the yearly value of 1000. l. a year, the Statute of
Mortmaine or any other Law to the contrary, notwithstanding. Power to let Lands.
And the same Lands, Tenements, etc. or any part thereof to demise, grant,
Lease, set over, assign and dispose at their own will and pleasure. and to
make, seal, and accomplish any Deed or Deeds, Lease or Leases, evidences and
writings for or concerning the same, or any part thereof which shall happen to
be made and granted by the said Mayor and Comonalty of the said City for the
time being.

And further know ye, etc. That we of our more ample Grace, etc. Have given,
etc. and by these presents for us, etc. do give and grant to the said Mayor,
etc. and their Successors, that the said Hospital of our said City commonly
called, etc. And the poor people there be, and from thenceforth, and for ever
shall be governed, and ruled by the Mayor, etc. of the said City and their
Successors, and that the said Mayor, etc. and their Successors be, and shall be
Masters and Governors thereof.

And we have Willed, etc. And by these presents for us, etc. do will, that the
Mayor, etc. together with the poor of the said Hospital for the time being
shall from henceforth and forever hereafter be continued, and remain one body
Politic, etc: by the name of the Master and poor people, etc: (As in other
Cases for Corporations.) And that they and their Successors for ever may seek
for, and improve, have, enjoy, and possess. And may Grant and demise all, and
singular Lands, and Tenements, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattells, and
Rights whatsoever now belonging, and which shall or may hereafter belong to the
said Hospital upon trust, that all the same be employed for the benefit of the
poor, there as formerly, and not otherwise.

And also we will for us, etc: That our said Return of Writs.
City of N. and the Libertyes, Precincts and Circuits thereof be, and from
henceforth shall be a distinct Bayliwick, and Liberty of it self, and that the
said Mayor of our said City for the time being, and his Successors shall be the
sole Bayliffe thereof. And shall by his Sergeant or Sergeants at Mace, have the
sole power of executeing of all Writs, and process within the said Town and
the Libertyes thereof, except process of Execution. And that the Sheriff of
the County of W. or any of his Officers shall not intromit themselves, nor
execute any Writ or Writs or other process thereof, or make any Return or
Returns thereof within the same Corporation, or the Libertyes, or Precincts of
the same, But in case of Omission, and neglect of the said Mayor, and his
Officers in the Execution of the said Writs.

And further we will for us, etc. And Grant to the said Mayor, etc: That they
and their Successors Faires and Markets, etc.
shall and may for ever hereafter hold and keep within the said City in every
Week of the year, two Market days, the one upon Monday, the other upon the
Saturday, as heretofore they have had and held, and now have and hold the same
within the City aforesaid. And also three Faires there every year, the first
of them to begin yearly upon Wednesday, etc. and to continue for all that
Wednesday and the two days next following, the same to be held in a place
there called N. The next to begin yearly upon Monday, etc. and to continue,
etc. and to be held in the Parish of P. And the third, etc. (set down the
particulars.) Together with a Court of Py-powders there, the time of the Set
down
said Faires and Markets to be held before the said Mayor of the said City for
the time being, and the Recorder or Town Clarke, or any two Court of Py-powder.
of them, whereof the Mayor to be one, together with all Libertyes and Free
Customs of Toll, Stallage, Piccage, Fines, Ame^cements, and all other profits
whatsoever from such Market and Court of Py-powders arising and happening, or
as thereunto belonging, or appertaining, so as the said Markets, and Faires, or
any of them be not to the hurt of other Markets or Faires near adjoining.

And further we will for us, etc. and grant to Court of Record.
the aforesaid Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, That they, and
their Successors, shall, and may have, hold, and keep within the said City and
Liverties, and Precincts thereof, in every week, in every year for ever, upon
Tuesday, one Court of Common Pleas, for all Actions of Debt, Trespass, Trespass
upon the Case, and detinue, wherein the Debt, or Damage demanded, do not exceed
one hundred pounds, the same to be held before the Mayor, Recorder, and
Town Clerk, or any two of them; whereof the Mayor to be one, who shall have
power to hear and determine the same Pleas or Actions, according to the Rules
of the Common-Laws of the Nation, and the course of other Courts of
Corporations in the like nature.

And whereas we have received Information, that the said circuit of Ground,
commonly called by the name of the Close of N, wherein the Cathedral Church
there now stands, is, and has been in times past, reputed to be parcel of
the said City of N, within the Ward there commonly called New-street Ward: and
that the same has been heretofore under the Rule and Government of the same
City, until of latter times, that the same has been under some color taken
from the said City, whereby there has been a failer of Justice there; Know ye,
therefore, that we, for the remedy thereof, have granted, and do hereby for us,
and our Successors, for the more orderly Government of the people, now, and
hereafter to be residing within the same Close, ordain, declare, and appoint,
and grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, that the
aforesaid Close called N. S. with the Liberties and Precincts thereof, be, and
shall be for ever hereafter esteemed and taken to be parcel of our said City of
N. And we do for us, etc. by these Presents, unite and annex the same, and
every part thereof, unto our said City of N. for ever; and do will, that the
same shall be reputed and taken for ever hereafter, to be part of the said City.

And we do further, for us and our Successors, give and grant to the said Mayor
and Commonalty of our said City of N. and their Successors, by these Presents.
And we do will, constitute, declare, and ordain, that the Metes, Limits, and
Bounds of our said City of N. shall extend unto, and through the said Close,
and into, and through all the Site, Circuit, and Precincts thereof, and from
such a place, etc. (bound it).

And we do further by these Presents, for us, etc. give and grant to the said
Mayor, etc. And we do hereby will, ordain, and appoint, that the Inhabitants
of, and within the said Close, and the Precincts thereof, shall be for ever
hereafter ordered, ruled, rated, taxed, and governed, from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, with, and as the rest of the Citizens and Inhabitants of
the said City of N. are, or shall be ordered, ruled, rated, taxed, and
governed, according to the Laws and Statutes of England; and according to the
lawful Grants, Customs, and Usages of the said City: and that the said City of
N. together with the Close aforesaid, with the Liberties and Precincts thereof,
shall be for ever hereafter a free City, and called and known by the Name of the
city N. in the county of W. And that the said Mayor and Commonalty, and their
Successors, shall, for ever hereafter, have, hold, exercise, and enjoy within
the said Circuit of Ground, called the Close of N. such, and the same
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Royalties, Free Customs,
Jurisdictions, and Immunities, as by virtue of these Presents, or otherwise,
they may or might have, hold, exercise, and enjoy, within the said City, or any
part thereof.

And we will for us, etc. and do by these Presents grant to the Mayor and
Commonalty of General Words.
our said City of N. and their Successors; that the said Mayor and Commonalty
of our said City, and their Successors, that they shall have and enjoy all the
lawful Privileges, Franchises, Powers, that they have and use, or that any
their Predecessors at any time within sixty years last past, had, took, or
enjoyed, or ought to have had, by reason, or under pretense, of any of their
former Charters: Or by Prescription, or any other Right, Custom, or Usage. And
all Privileges and Benefits, that by the Common-Laws, or by any Statute Law,
is given to, or conferred upon Corporations: although the same have been
forfeit or lost, or have been ill used, or not used, or abused, or
discontinued: albeit, they be not particularly named herein: and that no
Officer of ours shall disturb them therein, under any pretense whatsoever: Not
only for their future, but for their present enjoyment thereof. Saving to all
Persons, Bodies Saving to strangers.
Politic and Corporate their Heirs and Successors, all such Right, Title, and
Claim, Possession, Rents, Services, Commons, Emoluments, Interest, in, and to
any thing which is theirs, save only the Franchises aforesaid, in as ample
manner, as if this Charter had not been made.

Nevertheless, We will and declare, that the Proviso.
Incorporation to be founded by this Charter, shall not at any time hereafter
do, or suffer to be done, any thing; by means whereof, the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, Stock, Goods or Chattels thereof, such as have been settled to
pious or charitable uses, shall be wasted, or misimployed, contrary to the
Trust and Intent of the Founders thereof. And that such, and no other
construction shall be made hereof, then that which may tend most to advance
Religion, Justice, and the public good; and to suppress all Acts and Devices,
to be invented, and put in ure, contrary thereunto.

And lastly, We do for us, etc. grant, that this present Charter shall pass
without Fine, or Fee, Fine, or Fee.
in the Hamper. In witness, etc.

FINIS.
NOTES OF Another President.
OLIVER Lord Protector, etc. Whereas the Bridge of our Village of M. in our
county of B. over the Water of Thames there going, is of great use to our
people for carriages, etc. and the same was used to be repaired by the charge
of a certain Fraternity, and Guild now dissolved, etc. And that they were used
to have certain sums of money to help to the repair thereof. And had certain
Customs, Profits, and Liberties, granted by H. 6. And whereas Q. Eliz. 7.
Marcii, 24. Eliz. by her Letters-Parents, for the Recital of Patents.
better repair of this Bridge, made the same Village a free a free Village of
it self, and the Inhabitants of the same Village and their Successors,
Inhabitants, there Incorporate by the name of Guardians of the Bridge, and the
Burgesses and Commonalty of the Village of M. in the county of B. And have use,
and enjoy diverse L^berties, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Franchises, and
Preheminences, by the said Letters Patent, to them and their Successors for
ever; as by the said Letters Patent, etc. And whereas our beloved Subjects to
the Nnow Guardians of the Bridge, etc. of the Village of M. aforesaid, have
humbly besought us, that we would grant to them our Regal Grace and Bounty; And
that we for the better Government, and public good of the said Village, that
the said Guardians of the Bridge, etc. into one Body-corporate, or Politic, by
our Letters Patent, would ratify, approve, and confirm, or anew constitute,
create, and make the same, as to us shall seem best. We therefore considering
the Premises, and that the said Village of M. is an ancient and populous
Village; to and through which, there is frequent coming and going by our
subjects, and over the same Bridge. And being willing that for ever hereafter
an undoubted and certain manner and order be had and held within the Village
aforesaid for the keeping of the Peace, and for the good Government of our
People there. And to the end, it may for ever hereafter remain a Village of
peace and quiet, to the fear and terror of the evil, and the reward of the
good; And that our peace be maintained and kept: And to the end the said Bridge
be from time to time well and sufficiently repaired without delay. And hoping
that if the Guardians of the Bridge, etc. of the Village aforesaid, and their
Successors, may enjoy by our Grant greater Liberties, and Dignities, that then
they will put themselves forth to the uttermost to do us and our Successors
service; And that they will account themselves the more obliged to us. Of our
special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have willed, ordained,
constituted, and granted: And for us, and our heirs and successors, will, etc.
declare, That our said Village be, and remain for ever hereafter a free Village
of it self. And that the said Guardians of, etc. and their Successors, be for
ever hereafter, and shall be by virtue of these Presents, one corporate and
Politic Body, in Deed and Name, by the name of the Guardians of the Bridge,
the Burgesses and Commonalty Name of the Corporation.
of the Village of M. in the Village of M. in the county of B. And them by the
name of the Guardians, etc. in the county of B. one corporate and
Politick-Body, in Name and Deed, really and to the full for us, our heirs, and
successors, do make ordain, grant, constitute, and confirm, declare, and create
by these Presents; and that by this Name they shall have a perpetual
succession: And that To have, take, buy, sell.
they and their Successors, by the name of the Guardians, etc. b^, and shall be
at all times hereafter a Person able, and in Law capable to have, get, receive,
and possess Laws, Tenements, Liberties, Privileges Jurisdictions, Franchises,
and Hereditaments, to them and their successors, in Fee-simple, or for term of
life, lives, or years, or otherwise. And also Goods and Chattels, and all other
things of what kind, nature, or quality soever. As also to give, grant, let,
set, and assign the same Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattels;
and do and execute all other things by the name aforesaid: And that by the name
of Guardians, etc. they may sue; and be sued, etc. As in the first President,
Mutatis Mutandis. And moreover, Number of Burgesses, and Officers.
we will, and by these Presents, for us, and our successors, grant to the
aforesaid Guardians of the Village aforesaid, that there be, and shall be in
the Village aforesaid, 11 Burgesses, Inhabitants of the Village aforesaid, and
there resident in the Form, as by these Letters Patent is hereafter specified
to be chosen and made: of which said 11 Burgesses, two shall be Guardians, and
two shall be Bridg-Overseers, who shall have the care of the repair, and
maintenance of the Bridge of the Village of M. aforesaid, and of the good
Government, Order, and correction of the Burgesses, and Inhabitants of the
Village aforesaid. And for the better execution of our said Pleasures and
Grants on this behalf, we have assigned, named, constituted, and made; And by
these Presents for us, etc. do assign, etc. our beloved W. I. H. B. etc.
Inhabitants of the Village aforesaid, to be by virtue of these our
Letters Patent, the first Burgesses of Presens Burgesses.
the Village aforesaid, and that every one of them shall be, and remain in the
Office of a Burgess of the said Village, as long as he shall live and inhabit
within the said Village, if he be not before removed, or discharged from the
said Office: every one of which for his evil behavior, or unfit being, we
would have to be removeable at the pleasure of the Guardians, Overseers of the
Bridge, and the residue of the Burgesses of the same Village for the time
being, or the greater part of them. And we have assigned, named, etc. and by
these Presents do assign, etc. the said W. I. and H. B. to be the first
Guardians of the Village aforesaid; and will, that they shall continue in the
said Office, from the date of these Presents, unto Wednesday next after the
Feast, etc. and from that Wednesday, until other Burgesses of the Village
aforesaid, to the said Office, shall be chosen and sworn, according to the
Ordinations and Provisions in these Presents expressed, if they shall so long
live and dwell within the same Village, if they shall not be before removed or
discharged from the said Office; which for their evil behavior we would have
to be removeable, and to be discharged by the Overseers of the Bridge, and
residue of the Burgesses aforesaid, or the greater part of them. And moreover
of our further grace, etc. For us, etc. We will and grant to the aforesaid
Guardians, Overseers of the Bridge, Burgesses, and Commonalty of the Village
aforesaid, and their Successors; That the Guardians, Overseers, and Burgesses
of the Village aforesaid, for the time being, or the greater part of them,
gathered and assembled together, whereof, the Guardians, and one of the
Overseers of the Village are aforesaid, we will have to be three, shall have,
and by these presents, may have full power Ordinances.
and authority to make and establish, from time to time, such Laws, Ordinances,
and Constitutions, as to them, or greater part of them, shall seem good,
wholesome and profitable, and necessary, according to their discretions, for
the good government, and order of the said Guardians, etc. of the Village
aforesaid; and all the Officers, Ministers, A^^isicers, Inhabitants whatsoever,
in the Village aforesaid, for the time being, and about, or in any thing
concerning the repair and maintenance of the Bridge, and other the Ways and
Passages aforesaid leading thereunto; and for the Declaration in what manner
and order the said Guardians etc. and all and singular other the Officers, etc.
of the Village aforesaid, in their Offices, Functions, Ministeries, and
Businesses, within the Village aforesaid for the time being, shall behave and
dem^an themselves. And for the better government and profit of the said
Village, and for the reparation and keeping of the said Bridge-ways and
Passages; and also for the better preservation, government, and disposal of the
said Lands, Tenements, Revenues, Heredicaments, Goods, and Chattels, to the
said Guardians, etc. and their Successors by these Presents, given or granted,
or hereafter to be given or granted; and all things and matters whatsoever the
said Village, Estate, Right, or Interest thereof, touching or in any wise
concerning the same, We will, ordain, etc. that the Guardians of the Village
aforesaid for the time being, or the greater part of them; whereof the
Guardians, etc. to be three, as often as they shall make, etc. the Laws, etc. in
form aforesaid; and such Punishments, Pains, and Penalties, by Fines,
Amercements, or other lawful Penalties.
ways, toward, and upon all the Inhabitants within the said Village, offending
against the said Laws. etc. or any other or others such as the said Guardians,
etc. for the time being, or the greater part of them whereof the Guardians,
etc. to be three, for the observation of the said Laws, etc. shall be fit to
ordain and appoint, and the same Fines and Amercements, that they shall, and
may levy, and have without any let of us, our Heirs, or Successors, or any of
the Officers or Ministers of us, or them; all and singular which Laws and
Statutes, etc. so as aforesaid to be made, We will have to be observed under
pain therein contained. Yet so, as the said Laws, etc. Penalties, Fines, and
Amerciaments, be reasonable, or agreeable to Reason, and not repugnant to the
Laws, Liberties, Rights, Customs, and Statutes of England. And moreover, we
will, etc. and grant to the aforesaid Guardians, Election of officers.
etc. that the said Guardians, etc. and the greater part of them from time to
time, and in perpetual future times, have, and shall have power and authority,
every year in the month of September. (that is) Wednesday next after, etc. to
choose and name, and that they shall have power to choose and name two of
themselves, that shall be Guardians of the Village aforesaid, for one whole
year next to come; and that they, afterthat they shall be chosen and named for
Guardians of the Village aforesaid, before they be admitted to execute that
Oath of Officers.
Office, shall take their Corporal Oaths upon the Holy Gospel of God, within a
month after their Nomination and Election, before one of the Guardians, being
his Predecessor, in the presence of the Overseers of the Bridge, and the
Burgesses of the Village aforesaid for the time being, or the greater part of
them, well and truly to execute the said Office: And after such Oath so taken,
that he or they shall and may execute the said Office unto Wednesday next,
before the Feast of, etc. then next following; and from thence until one or two
other (as occasion shall be) of the Burgesses of the Village aforesaid shall be
chosen, appointed, and in due manner sworn into the said Office of Guardian, or
Guardians of the Village aforesaid, if he or they, shall so long live, and
abide in the same Village and shall not before that time be removed or
d^scharged of his or their Office of Guardian, or Guardians of the Village
aforesaid; which for his, or their evil behavior of the Overseers, and residue
of the Burgesses of the Village aforesaid, or the greater part of them, we
would have to be moveable, and to be discharged. And moreover, We will, etc.
and for us, etc. grant to the said Guardians, etc. that if it happen the late
Guardians of the Village aforesaid, or either of them, or any other Guardian of
the Village aforesaid, for the time being, so as aforesaid, to be chosen after
that to the Office of the Guardian of the Village aforesaid, so as aforesaid,
he shall be chosen and sworn, he shall happen to die, or be otherwise removed
or discharged, that then, and so often, it shall be lawful for the said
Overseers, and Burgesses of the Village aforesaid, for the time being, or the
greater part of them, to choose and appoint another of themselves to the Office
of the Guardian of the Village aforesaid; and that he so elected, and set up,
may, together with the other Guardian, have, and exercise the said Office,
during the residue of the same year, if he shall so long, etc. And so in the
like manner, as to the other Officers, Mutatis mutandis.

And moreover, we will and grant to the said Guardians, etc. That the said
Guardians, etc. for the time being, and the greater part of them from time to
time, in perpetual future times, have, and shall have power and authority
yearly, and every year, upon Wednesday next after, to choose and name two of
themselves, who shall be Overseers of the Bridge of the Village aforesaid. (And
so throughout as in the choosing of the last Officers). And moreover we will,
etc. and grant to the said Guardians, etc. that if it happen any one or more of
the Removal of an Officer, or Member.
Burgesses of the Village aforesaid to die, or otherwise to be removed or
discharged from his or their office, or offices of Burgesses of the village
aforesaid, who or whom, or for his or their evil behavior, or being unfit,
etc. (as in the like case before) that then, and so often, it shall and may be
lawful for the Guardians of the Village aforesaid for the time being, or the
greater part of them, and other, or others of the Inhabitants of the Village
aforesaid within 15 days then next following, after the death, removal, or
discharge of any such Burgess, or Burgesses, so dying, or discharged into his,
or their place or places, to choose and set up; And that after he or they
shall be so chosen, that they take their oaths within 15 days before the
Guardians, etc. and then that they shall execute the same office as long as
they live, unless they be removed by misbehaviour, etc. (in the same manner as
it was penned for the other Officers.) And moreover, we will, etc. and grant to
the said Guardians, etc. that they and their Successors from henceforth for
ever, shall and may have and hold within the Village aforesaid, one Court of
Record every 3d week through the year (that is) on the Wednesday of the said 3d
week, or oftener at their pleasure, before the Guardians and Overseers of Court
of Record.
the Bridge of the Village aforesaid, or before two of them for the time being
to be held. And that in that Court they may hold Plea from time to time, of all
and all manner of Actions, Suits, and Demands, of all and all manner of
Trespasses (By Force and Arms) and of all other Trespasses, faults, and
offenses, within the Village aforesaid, the Limits or Precincts of the same,
made or committed, or to be made, moved or committed, and of all and all manner
of Trespasses, upon the Case, Debts, Accounts, Covenants, Deceipts, Detainers
of Writings, taking and detainers of Goods and Chattels, and other Contracts
whatsoever, of, or for any causes or things, personal or mixed, within the
Village aforesaid, the Limits, Precincts, and Liberties thereof arising or
happening. So as the Plaintiff, or Defendant in such Actions, Suits, or
Complaints, be dwelling or abiding within the said village, the Liberties or
Precincts thereof. And so as the same Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Covenants,
Contracts, and other Actions personal or mixed singularly by themselves, do not
exceed the sum or value of 100 l. And that such Pleas, Complaints, and Actions,
personal and mixed, shall be from time 10 time heard and determined before the
said Guardians and Overseers of the Bridge of the said Village, or two of them,
by such the like, and such like process, manner, means, and ways, as shall be
suitable to our Laws of England; and in as large and ample manner and form, as
in any of our Courts of Record, in any other Corporate, Village, or Borough
within England, now or heretofore has been, is, or ought to be used or
accustomed. And that the said Guardians and Overseers, and their Successors, or
two of them, upon every such Complaint, Pleas, Actions, and Suits, have, and
shall have power and authority over the persons, Defendants, and every of them,
against whom such Complaints, Actions, and Suits, in the aforesaid Court,
shall be raised, or moved to bring into Plea, by Summons, Attachment, and
Distress: And for default of Land and Chattels of such Defendant within the
Village aforesaid; and the Bounds and Liberties thereof, where, or by which
they may not be summoned, attached, or distrained, by attachment, or taking of
their Bodies, according to the custom, in some other Villages incorporate and
Buroughs within England is used. And the' said Actions, Suits, and Pleas
severally to hear and determine. And by the like Process, Judgment, and
Executions of Judgments, to deduce and determine by which the like Pleas in any
other incorporate Village or Borough within this of England, are deduced and
determined, or have been used to be deduced or determined.

NOTES OF Another President.
OLIVER Lord Protector, etc. To all to whom these present Letters Patent shall
Recitals.
come, etc. Whereas the late King CHARLES by his Letters Patent bearing date,
etc. did incorporate the Town and Parish of L. in the County of W. And did
ordain and constitute the same to be a free Borough consisting of six
Aldermen, ten Bergesses, and twenty Assistants: And therein did grant unto them
diverse Franchises, Privileges, and Immunities, as by the said Letters Patent,
relation being thereunto had more at large may appear.

And whereas the Inhabitants of the said Town and Parish of L. by their humble
Petition, have represented unto us diverse and manifold defects that were in the
said Patent; and humbly pray, that for the removing of their grievances, and
better government of the said Town and Parish, We will be pleased to grant a
new Charter of Incorporation of the said Town and Parish, to consist of a
Mayor, twelve Aldermen, and thirty Common-Cuuncel men, with such other
Alterations, Additions, and Clauses; as We shall think fit:

We considering the Premises, and willing for the future, that a more firm,
certain, and peaceable government may be established within the said town and
Parish of L. Do, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere motion, by
these Presents, will, ordain, grant, and constitute, that the aforesaid Town
and Parish of L. from henceforth for ever, may and shall be, and is hereby made
and constituted, and ordained to be for ever a free Borough of it self. And
that all the Houses, and Buildings, Lands, Waters, Watercourse, Soil, and
Ground situate, lying and being within the town and Parish of L. aforesaid,
from henceforth and for ever, are, and shall be within the Limits, Meats,
Bounds, and Jurisdictions of the said Borough of L. And that all and singular
the Inhabitants of the Town and Parish of L. aforesaid, and their Successors,
from henceforth and for ever, may and shall be one Body-Corporate and Politic,
in Deed, Action, and Name, of a Mayor and Aldermen of the Borough of L. in the
County of W. And we do erect, make, ordain, create, constitute, and declare,
for us and our Successors, the same to be one Body-Corporate and Politic, in
Deed, Action, and Name, really and fully by these Presents. And that the said
Mayor and Aldermen, and their Successors, shall and may from henceforth for
ever, be Name.
the immediate Successors of the said Aldermen and Burgesses of the Borough
aforesaid. And that by the same name of Mayor and Aldermen, they may have
perpetual Successi^n. And by the name of Mayor and Aldermen of the Borough of
L. in the County of W. may, and shall be in perpetual future times, fit persons,
and capable in Law, to have, To have, and take.
take, receive, and possess Lands, Tenements, Liberties, Privileges, etc. (As
in the other Presidents, Mutatis, Mutandis.)

Notes of another President.
We do grant to I. S. etc. that they, and all men that shall be Elect there
Majors, Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers, etc. in the same City, be in Fact,
Deed, and Name, one Body, and perpetual Commonalty, or Corporation, and
Incorporate by the Name of, etc. And that the same Commonalty and Corporation,
every year for ever, may choose and make of the same Commonalty, some wise and
godly man Mayor of the same commonalty, to oversee and govern the same
Corporation, and all the Persons and Affairs thereof during that year, etc. And
that the said Mayor and Commonalty Successions Common-Seal.
shall have and enjoy a perpetual Succession; and have and enjoy a Common-Seal,
to serve for ever for the businesses of the same Corporation, etc.

Notes of another President.
THat we at the request of A. B. C. D. honest persons now exercising and
occupying the several Trades, Arts, Mysteries, Crafts, Faculties, and
Occupations of Drapers, Tailors, Mercers, Hardwaremen, Coopers, and Chandlers,
within our Borough and Town of D. in the County of G. And for the better
Government and common profit of the same Town, and of all and singular the
persons, as well now as hereafter, their Arts, Mysteries, or Occupations there
exercising, professing, and practicing; as also, according to the ancient
Custom within the said Town, where time out of mind has been a certain
Commonalty or Fellowship of the aforesaid honest men, who the several Tradesmen
a Corporation.
Trades, Arts, Crafts, Mysteries, Sciences, or Occupations of Drapers, Tailors,
Mercers, Hardwaremen, Coopers, and Chandlers aforesaid, or any of them within
the Borough or Town aforesaid now do, or hereafter shall or may exercise,
trade, or occupy, will, have, instituted, and begun. And therefore we do by
these Presents grant to the aforesaid A. B. C. D. etc. That they, and all the
Occupiers of the said Trades, etc. and every or any of them within the
Lordship, Borough, and Town of D. aforesaid, shall be in Deed and Name one Body
Politic, Commonalty and Fellowship perpetual. And that the said Fellowship and
Commonalty, may every year choose out of them three expert Choose Wardens and
Officers.
men that have lived three years, and been of one of these Trades, to be
Wardens for a year, to oversee the Trades, and govern the Society and Tradesmen
thereof, and strangers using the Trades there and to punish Offenders against
their Orders herein mentioned, with the consent of the major part of the
Commonalty. And that the said Wardens, Commonalty, or Fellowship, shall and may
have a perpetual Succession, and Common-Seal for Bylaws.
their Affairs, called the Common-Seal of the Wardens and Commonalty or
Fellowship of Drapers, etc. And that they the said Wardens and Commonalty, and
their Successors, may lawfully make honest and lawful Assemblies, Orders, and
Ordinances, for the Government, oversight, and correction of the said
Commonalty or Fellowship; and of all persons trading, practicing, using, or
occupying the Arts, Trades, etc. aforesaid; or any of them within the said
Borough, etc. to the Laws etc. of this Nation agreeable, etc. And that such a
day they meet yearly, and choose their Wardens, and one to be Clerk of the
Company for that year; and there make such Orders, as the most of them shall
agree to for Government, etc.

FINIS.

