Imprimatur,

Joh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo
Archiepis. Eboracensi, a Sacris Domesticis.

Datum Episcopo. Thorpae. Oct. 12. 1668.
THE MYSTER^ OF AFFLICTIONS. Being the Substance of a SERMON Discoursed.

By W.S. Master of Arts, and Rector of ESKRICK.

Ad hoc corripit ut emendet,
Ad hoc emendat ut servet,
Cyprian. YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, 1668.

To my Honored, and his very good Mother, Mis. Elizabeth Shipton.
Madam,
THese Collections being Preached unto You, whilst I was Your Minister, had
Your Approbation and Hearing: now they request Your Acceptance, and Your
Reading. And though they lose much of their life, (Printing being but a dry
Preaching) I hope they will not lose their labor, they issuing only from an
Obedience to Your Commands, which, to my endeavors, have always been candid,
and favorable.

I have often been thinking, That when Age, or Sickness, or any other bodily
infirmity deprives us of the Public Ministration of the Word, there are two
ways whereby we may comfort, and improve our selves; Either by Conversing with
Men; or with their Works.

1. By Conversing with Men, when we may have them: So the Disciples did with
Christ; And the Eunuch did so with Philip. The breathing Instructions of good
men are most profitable, and have an operation in them beyond the dead Letter.
Now, of all men, those that by Office are to speak a word to weary souls, are
most to be conferred with, as speaking to us in Christ's stead: We are
Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. An Ambassador is one, who is Vicarious,
or Officious for another; Alterius locum tenet -- He supplies the place of
another. But the Grecians call him (...), one that stands in another stead;
Just such Ambassadors are Ministers; they are Christ's Officialls, they bear
his Person, and stand in his stead; so it follows, We pray you in Christ's
stead, be ye reconciled to God: Such men as these we must chiefly conferr with,
whilst we have them.

2. By Conferring with their Works, (when we want them.) A man that would
improve his skill in remote Countries, either advises with a Mapp, or with a
Traveller. So, a man who would improve his Heavenly skill under the exercise of
cross Providence; either consults with a Traveller (an experienced Traveller)
one that has had his graces exercised under various dispensations: Or else he
consults with a Mapp. Jehoshaphat did the one, when he was doubtful, whether,
or no, he should go up to Ramoth-Gilead, thinks it his best course to enquire,
and take advise, (not of the Captains of his Host, but) of the Prophets of the
Lord of Hoasts; he consults the men. But David did the other; he consulted the
Mapps -- Thy Testimonies are my delight: and my Counselors, Psalm. 119.24.
Whatever duty, whatever divine truth, whatever case of Conscience is necessary
for man to know, God does plainly determine by his Spirit, answering, and
resolving us by the Voice of his Written Word; David therefore consults them.
Thus Mapps are of great use, and Books may instruct, and improve as well as
Men. It Is Storied, The Word Read converted Cyprian. And Thomas A Kempis was
wont to say, He could find rest no where -- Nisi in angulo cum libello -- but
in a corner with his Bible -- so I translate it, 'cause the best Writing -- yet
it may be any other Writing. It Is true, we should principally read the Book of
God, as most fit to influence our souls, and to improve us. Theodosius,
Alfred, and Alphonsus King of Arragon, are renowned in History for their
constant Reading of the Scriptures: Yet with subordination to that great Book,
we may read all other good Books, as means of comfort and improvement -- Give
attendance to reading -- says Saint Paul, ( 1 Timothy 4.13.) And indeed St. Paul
himself gave so much attendance to reading, that (as you will find in his
Epistle to Titus, chap. 1.12.) he confuted the Cretians, and other learned
Heathens, out of the Books of their own Writers, Aratus, and Menander.

Now, if among many other Books, You vouchsafe Your Eye upon these worthless
Papers, it will not only give a splendour to them; but, a high favor to him,
who is in all humble Offices,

Your obedient Son, WILLIAM SHIPTON.
September. 28. 1668.
THE MYSTERY OF AFFLICTIONS.
Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that
love God --


It Is common to men in this World, to be variously exercised, and to have
blessings and crosses interchangeably: Even the Saints themselves live under
the exercise of crosse-Providences and Events. We are not like the Isle of
Rhodes, which Travelers report to be, Semper in Sole, always in the Sunshine,
but we are sometimes in Storms. As the Pillar of Cloud had it is light-side,
and dark-side; so have our conditions. Gods Providence, and the change of
things, are mystically represented to us, Zach. 1.8.
by those Speckled Horses among the Myrtle-trees -- which were Red-Horses,
Speckled, with White. Thus God does speckle out our conditions; They are
sometimes Red and White, sometimes Black and White; they are seldom of one
color. If Solomon had not said, There is a time to laugh, and a time to mourn
-- experience would have made every man a Solomon in this respect, and have
taught him feelingly to acknowledge; that, As things never go so ill with men,
but they have some Consolations; so, things never go so well with men, but they
have some Afflictions.

Now as Afflictions do often happen under cross Providence; so, it is hard for
a man to gain so great a conquest, as to be submissive under his Afflictions,
considering how weak the flesh is, and how impatient. It takes delight only in
the objects of it is Senses, and is (...) ver. 26. For we know not what to Pray
for, as we ought: but the Spirit helps our infirmities -- we know not what to
Pray for as we ought -- St. Paul (one would think) had so much skill, as not to
ask the thing that was not good, that was not convenient for him; yet, no
sooner had he, A Messenger of Satan, (that is, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
an Affliction) sent to buffet him: but he prayed thrice unto the Lord, that it
might depart from him. Indeed, as to flesh and blood, which ^^nnot endure
Afflictions, it seems to have (...) a reasonable Petition; but seeing it was
(...) necessary (to cure his spiritual pride) (...) will should be humbled
with Afflictions, he received a Rebuke for his Prayers from God, who tells him,
That he would perfect his strength in his weakness, which was more then this
great Apostle knew, or understood. Thus also the Sons of Zebedee, in their
Petition to Christ, they had a desire to obtain some good thing at his hands,
this was a good determination; but they could think of nothing better, then to
be Lordly, and to be advanced to some place of honor: therefore they desire,
Mark 10.37.
That they might sit, the one on his right hand, the other on his left hand --
But see how ill they sped, Ver. 38.
Christ tells them, Ye know not what ye ask. Every one must not go crowned;
nor is honor fit for all men, they were his Disciples, not the worlds, and
must rather drink the Cup of Affliction, then court such high Ambition. The
meaning of the Apostle then in these words, (We know not what to Pray for as we
ought: but the spirit --) is this, We know not what condition is good for us,
therefore we must leave all to God, and to the Spirit of God, who will support
us, and direct us in every condition.

5. From the Cooperation of all Afflictions, to the good of all believers, as
in this Verse propounded, -- We know that all things shall work together for
their good -- These words need no explanation; the meaning is, That all things
that happen unto the Saints in this life, (especially Afflictions) are directed
by Gods Providence, to their eternal good and happiness; And this we know,
says he, -- that is, This truth is confirmed by our own experience, and the
experience of all Gods Saints: Believers have experimentally found God doing
them good, by their Afflictions. David found the mystery of this truth, I know,
Psalm. 119.75.
O Lord, that thou in thy faithfulness, (that is, in love, and goodness) have
afflicted me; out of pure love and goodness, God brings his people to
Afflictions; this troubled Prophet found it so: and seeing other Saints have
found, all Saints may expect to find, All things, (that is, the worst of
things) working together for their good. This I call, The Mystery of
Afflictions. A strange Mystery indeed, (you will say) and an odd kind of
working, to gain by the worst, to purchase by loss, and to triumph by
Affliction: Yet so it is, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light affliction works for us, a far more exceeding weight of glory --
Who have more consolations of Spirit? Who are more renewed in the inner man?
Who have more tranquillity, and content of mind? then those who submit to God,
as knowing his power so great, that he can bring the greatest good out of the
greatest evil.

I lay down these two Propositions.
1. The Mystery of Affliction is such, that it will work for the good of all
Christians.

2. This Mystery of Affliction should encourage and comfort all Christians.

1. This Mystery of Affliction is such, That it will work for the good of all
Christians. I might prove this, from the Author of these Afflictions, God
himself: As they are directed by his wise Providence, so they must needs tend
to this eternal good and happiness. Afflictions come not by chance, nor do they
light where they list, but are commissionated from Heaven: 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, (says good old Eli) let him do what he pleases. The destiny
of our troubles are written above, by a wise Decree: and as they are wisely
ordained; so, out of a principle of love, they will be wisely exercised upon
all Christians: Thus Christ by his Spirit speaks unto the Churches, Rev. 3.19.
-- As many as I love, I chasten -- Affliction, like Wormwood, makes the Cup
bitter; yet, how bitter soever the Cup be which I am to drink, Faith shows the
soul of a Saint, that it is from the hands of a Heavenly Father, (who though
he put some displeasing, will put no destroying herb therein.) And therefore
may I not say, says the soul, as Christ himself did, The cup which my Father
has given me to drink, shall I not drink it? It is in love to my soul all
this; God corrects me, with the same hand also he crowns me. You see, Christ
himself experimentally found, and so shall all Christians find, that these
Afflictions are not so much our crosses, as our crowns. God will one day
recompense their sufferings, and cause all these things to work together for
the good of them that love him.

Now if you please, I shall discourse, and discover, That all Afflictions work
for our good, these three several ways. 1. By promoting Comfort. 2. By
promoting Grace. 3. By promoting Glory.
1. All Afflictions work for our good, as they tend to promote Comfort. Great
Afflictions are the usual times for great consolations. John had his
Revelation in the Isle of Patmos: and Jacob had glorious Visions, whilst he was
flying away from the wrath of his discourteous brother. He had richer Dreams
upon that heap of stones he laid his weary head on, then these have perhaps,
who sleep upon softer pillows. When was it that Christ was trasfigured, and his
face did shine as the Sun? It was immediately before his bloody Passion; Christ
was first taken into the Mount, before he was lifted upon the Cross. It was in
the Wilderness, that God spoke to his Church of a Canaan, a comfortable
happiness. Indeed, you may tell me, that the exercise of Religious duties (more
then the exercise of Afflictions) is a special time for comforts. You may tell
me, That when Grace is exercised to prepare our hearts to Prayer, or to make
our souls wait in attendance to the other Ordinances, God fills us full of
heavenly consolations. Thus, when Hannah was Praying, what melody did she find
within? what joy did surround her? When old Zachary was sacrificing, he saw the
glorious Vision. Thus, when Mary sat at Christ's feet, hearing the Word, how
did he fill her heart with comfort? You may tell me, none have sweeter solaces
of joy, and consolation, then those who maintain a constant Communion with God
in holy duties: I grant it, it is the Word and sanctifying Spirit, that does
the main work: but I say, as Solomon did, That there is a time for all things:
There is a season for the Word to be delivered in, and Affliction times are the
most seasonable times. When the unruly Patient is bound hand and foot, you may
search the wound, and apply the plaster: So when God has men in fetters of
Affliction, and their spirits are tamed, you may then the better speak to them,
and give them counsel, If they be bound in fetters, Job 26.8.9.10.
and holden in cords of affliction: Then he shows them their work, and their
transgression. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that
they return from iniquity. Affliction-times, are disciplinary-times;
persuasions and reasons will then be heard, which would not before be heard,
which reasons work comforts. Thus, when did Christ ever Preach such comforts to
his Disciples, as when he was ready to leave them to the persecuting world, and
their souls began to be sorrowful at his departure, John 14.16.
I will Pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever. Christ was now going from them, and he tells them,
That he could no longer stay -- and this was sad news to his Disciples, who
were ready to break their hearts at his departure. But see how he chears them
again, (and it was the best of comforts) by telling them, I will Pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he might abide with you
for ever. Believe it, here in this Verse, our blessed Savior was so careful
that his Disciples should not be too much dejected, that he forgot his own
bitter Passion, to comfort them; He tells them of a Comforter (which includes
all comfort) that should never leave them, especially in Afflictions but abide
with them for ever. And this the Disciples found true, for they were full of
comfort: And when was this? Immediately before they were carried from the
Council to be scourged, Acts 5.41.
-- they departed rejoicing -- Hence did proceed that Heroic spirit, that
History reports to be in those primitive Martyrs, who spilt their blood for
him, who spilt his blood for them. 'Twas not the face of man could daunt them,
their inward consolation did always exceed their outward tribulation; they
were even ambitious of the flames, as knowing from these ashes there would come
an immortal Phoenix; and from these little Afflictions, there would flow the
purchase of eternal comforts. God indeed does comfort his Saints in all
conditions; but he does never give his Saints so deep a taste of comfort, as in
their troubled conditions; he does never bestow those precious drops of divine
consolations in a world of pleasures, but keeps them only to make pleasant the
bitter Cup. The very end of God in afflicting, is to fit us for comforting --
Premit, ut solatea praestat -- says the Poet -- He afflicts us, that he may
comfort us; and this comfort is so much the sweeter, by how much Affliction
has been bitterer

I must enlarge my Discourse, to show you, That this Mystery of Afflictions
works comfort in our hearts two ways.
First, By opening a vein of godly sorrow in our hearts. This is the next way
to spiritual comfort against sin, when a man can once spiritually mourn for
sin. Now Afflictions open this vein of godly sorrow; this vein opened, lets out
the corruption; and the corruption being let out, makes way for spiritual
consolation. The blessed Apostle says of Christ, That in the days of his
Flesh, Heb. 5.7.
(I suppose he means, whiles he was continually burdened with temptations, and
afflictions) in those days, he offered prayers and supplications, with strong
cryings and tears. Christ was in a strong conflict of Affliction; and as his
conflict was strong, so also were his cries. When Jacob wrastled with the
Angel, he did not only Pray, Hosen 1^.4.
but Cry, He wept, and made supplication Affliction causes tears and
supplication; and tears and supplication, cause comfort and consolation. Water
drops from Violets and Roses, when fire is put under the Still; so the waters
of godly sorrow drops from ou^ eyes, when the fire of Affliction is upon us
Believe it, God does usually prepare his people for the stamp of spiritual
consolation, by thus melting them in the fire of Affliction (...) the softer
the heart, the cleerer the Impression. Thus when God brought that great
Affliction, and sickness upon Hezekiah, when the Prophet brought him that heavy
message, Set thy house in order, for thou must dye -- what a vein of grief was
opened, and how was his heart softened? How full was he of vehement and weeping
importunity, -- Hezekiah wept sore, and said, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember
now, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart -- 2
Kings 20.3. This Visitation brought him to his Tears, and Supplications; and
his Tears and Supplication, like Noah's Dove, sent from the Arc, 2 Kings 20.5.
brought him at last an Olivebranch of consolations -- Turn again, and tall
Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord, I have heard thy Prayers, I have seen thy tears:
behold, I will heal thee -- The God of all comforts would not let him languish
long without comforts. Indeed this godly sorrow (the vehemence whereof
Affliction causes) has the very promise of comfort and consolations: Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. It is a matter of
mavelous comfort to a Believer, when he can kindly mourn for sin. The
Penitential Soul, is secretly a joyful Soul. This was the cause of those
sweet smiles, and joys upon the Apostle's Spirit, I rejoice that you were made
sorrowful after a godly manner: 2 Cor. 7.9.10.
For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation -- If it work repentance to
salvation; how much the easier to consolation? And so it does, godly sorrows
always bring comfort: This was the mysterious temper of the Apostles -- As
sorrowing, 2 Cor. 6.10.
yet always rejoicing -- Ignorant, and carnal spirits are stumbled at this
expression, and looks upon it as a Riddle, That the Disciples of Christ should
be sorrowful, yet always joyful -- But it is a plain case; though they be
troubled without, they have peace within; though they have matter of sorrowing,
in respect of outward Affliction, they have matter of rejoicing in respect of
inward consolation; their godly sorrows have the promises of comfort, and they
shall have it.

Secondly, Afflictions work comforts in the hearts of men, by bringing in more
of Gods spiritual, and special presence. We have a promise of Gods immediate
presence in times of Affliction, and this works for our good, and consolation
-- I will be with him in trouble, Psalm. 91.15.
there is the promise -- God will be with us in trouble -- And how can it be ill
with that man, who has Gods powerful presence with him, in his trouble. When
God laid that strict charge upon Moses, saying, Depart, Exodus 33.1.
and go up hence, thou, and the people which thou have brought up out of the
Land of Egypt, unto the Land which I swear unto Abraham -- Moses in the 12. and
13. verses, strongly argues the case, in these words, See, thou say unto me,
Bring up this people, and thou have not let me know what protection, or what
consolation I shall have in this Journey. Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have
found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way, that I may know I have found
grace in thy sight. You see, he comes to God with a strong request, and
Petitions him, That he would show him the way, that is, that he would show him
what comfort, and what protection he should have in so difficult a way, that by
some visible, and occular demonstration, he might know that he had found favor
in his sight. In the 14. verse, Why, says God, My presence shall go with thee
-- there is the special Promise, My presence shall go with thee. In the 15. and
16. verses, Moses said unto him, It is well thou art pleased to promise so
great a comfort -- For if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.
For wherein shall it be known, that I and thy people have found grace in thy
sight? Is it not in this, that thou go with us? Observe how richly Moses
pleads the case with God^ he questions how his grace and favor, he questions
how his love and mercy, he questions how his comfort and protection could be
with them in that troubled condition? unless they had his special presence
with them: Is it not in that thou go with us? and indeed, it is well spoken:
For how should the world judge Christianity to be any thing, but a severe
command? How should men believe that God rewarded Piety, and favored his
Saints? Or, that in every sad occasion, he would be their comfort, and
protection: were it not for this, That wheresoever they go, his presence
always goes with them. Believe it, God is Emanuel, God with us, not only to
behold us, but to uphold us also in every Affliction; and this is our comfort,
and our consolation. Our Savior alludes to this, The Father has not left me
Alone, (that is, Alone in any of my trials, John 8.29.
or in any of my troubles) for I always do the things that please him. Christ,
when he was most assaulted, then was he most assisted: when he was the most
afflicted, then was he the most comforted. Christ had the gracious presence of
his Father in every Affliction, and so shall Christians. If they be present
with God in a waiting way, God will be present with them in a comforting way.
God has ( Virtute promissi, by the obligation of his promise) engaged his
presence to them, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. This is his promise, and he will
perform it. What matter is it then if we have more troubles then others,
seeing we have more of Gods countenance then others? What matter if we have
more Afflictions, seeing we shall have sweeter consolations? What need we value
the worlds crosses, or the worlds frowns, seeing we shall have more of Gods
graces, and his smiles? Thus in the first place, Afflictions work for our good,
as they tend to promote comfort. And this they do, by opening a vein of godly
sorrow, and by bringing in more of Gods special, and immediate presence into
the hearts of men.

2. All Afflictions work for our good, as they tend to promote grace in our
hearts Grace is a rich Jewel, 2 Cor. 91 15.
and as the Apostle calls it, It is a gift unspeakable -- Martial reports of a
Fly, That by a drop of Amber falling upon it, a great sum of Money was bidden
for it: Just such is the soul, a very inconsiderable thing, till Grace enrich
it; if the least drop of this Heavenly Amber fall upon it, then only is it
precious. Believe it, Glorious things are spoken of this Grace: It is the
spiritual food of Saints! It is the life of the soul, and the blessed Manna
of Angel^! But if you would have me to wing my expressions higher -- It is the
New birth of a man, whereby he takes up another Nature, a new Nature, a
spiritual Nature, a God-like Nature. As Christ was borne (and thereby took on
him the Nature of Man) and was made Flesh: So Man is borne again by Grace (and
thereby takes upon him the Nature of God) and is made Spirit. And here you have
the Mystery of Grace -- Indeed there is another thing, which is as Mysterious
as Grace, and it is Peace: It is the Feast of a good Conscience, and the very
beauty of this present life. I mean by Peace, that transcendent kind of
Peace, which is Peace with God, and Peace with Conscience. This Grace, and this
transcendent kind of Peace, are the two Mysterious Privileges of the Saints;
they shine in constellation, and go hand in hand together, like Hippocrates his
twins, they live and dye together. The Apostles therefore in their Salutations,
used to say, Grace be unto you, and Peace -- And in their Valedictions, Grace
and Peace be with you. Not one without the other, yet one before the other;
Grace before Peace. Grace has the proheminence; there can be no true Peace
without it: and with it, there cannot but be Peace. No blessing comes before
Grace, and no blessing lasts longer. Now this Grace, which is the chief
Privilege of a Believer, is by Afflictions Mysteriously wrought upon the
hearts of men.

And here I must again enlarge my Discourse, to show, That the Mystery of
Afflictions is such, that it works this grace upon the hearts of all Christians
these four several ways.
First, By quickening our graces: Affliction raises up our souls to the
exercise of all Religious Duties, Psalm 119.54.
Thy Statutes have been my Songs; Where, may a man ask? David answers, Not
upon the Throne; but, in the house of my pilgrimage: There it was, that his
Devotion was more excited, and his graces more quickened. Nothing better to
make Aromaticall Spices send forth their savor, then bruising: so, nothing
better to quicken the soul, and to make her send forth the perfumed breath of
true devotion, then Gods Afflicting. In prosperity, amidst the confluence of
all desirable and choice pleasures, we are apt to neglect these duties; we
then but seldom worship God, and seldom Pray: But when God sends his
Pursivants (his strong Afflictions) to summon us, Isay 26, 16.
these make us run, these make us make have unto him, They poured out a Prayer
when thy chastening hand was upon them. Before, they would scarce say a Prayer,
or read a Prayer: Oh, but now, that his chastening hand was upon them, they
powered out a Prayer unto him. You may from hence see, what a difference there
is betwixt our Prayers in health, and Prayers in sickness; between Prayer
before, and Prayer after Affliction: Before, how cold, and flat were they? Now,
how spiritual and quick are they? Those that before had not a tear to shed, or
sigh to utter: those that before were Blocks in Prayer, Hypocrites in heart,
and Laodiceans in affections; nay, those who before had a Nabals heart, a heart
of stone in every duty: How are they now softened, and melted? How do they now
purpose, and promise Reformation? How! oh, how do they now besiege the Throne
of Heaven, with every new, and every fervent supplication? They powered out a
Prayer, when thy chastening hand was upon them. Thus Affliction fetches the
soul to God, and brings it upon it is knees, in it is Devotions, and Prayers.
Believe it, Gods gracious Spirit is the best Schoolmaster, and sanctified
Afflictions are the best School wherein to learn devotion: I say Sanctified
Afflictions; otherwise, in stead of being quickened, (like resty Horses) we
shall go on worse, if our Afflictions be not sanctified. However, God sees
that mere love will not prevail with us; he sees that naturally our hearts are
so dull, so heavy, they must be driven up to Heaven, (mercy will not do it)
therefore is it, he uses the Spur, and Rod of his Afflictions: And these
indeed excite our souls to duty, and make our graces quicker.

Secondly, By exercising our Graces: As every thing is most in it is excellence,
when it is most in exercise; so is Grace: it puts forth the brightest colors
in Affliction. Rust will eat up the best Steel, which is not used: and the
best graces of the Saints would rust and corrupt, were they not sometimes
exercised, and refined: Afflictions therefore, they are so many Files, that
fetch off the Rust from the graces of the Saints, and renders them the
brighter. Waters that stand still, and and have no current, are apt to
putrify, and breed venomous creatures: and Bodies that want exercise, grow
obstructed with gross humors: Just so do our graces, they rust, and contract
corruption, if they be not exercised. The winter of Affliction, though it have
fewer Flowers, it has also fewer Weeds: but let a Christian be never so well
tempered, (like the best ground, which, if not Plowed, will be overgrowne) if
the winter of Afflictions come not on him, weeds and corruptions will come upon
him; especially these four corruptions, Pride, Cruelty, Security, and the
Immoderate love of this world.

1. Pride, It is the observation which is usually made in every Age, That not
only great men, but good men too, in prosperity, while they have full Estates,
succesfull fortunes, rich friends, are apt to forget themselves, and to be
swelled with Pride: Who is the Lord, says the proud King of Egypt? I shall be
like to the most highest, was the Language of the Babilonish Monarch. The Voice
of God, and not of Man, goes down with Herod. This is the elevation of Pride,
which dares thus justle the immortal Powers, and vie with the Almighty. David
does not only confess his own sin, in seeing the prosperity of the wicked, I
was envious, when I saw the presperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.3. But he also
she weth what sin prosperity breeds. Therefare Pride compasses them about as
a chain, ver. 6. but this golden chain of Pride, at last strangles them, They
are brought to desolation in a moment, and are utterly consumed, ver. 19.
Indeed, what Pliny reports of the poysonfull herb Aconite, so eagerly desired
by the Panthers, that being hung up by Hunters above their reach, they never
leave leaping at it, and straining at it, till they burst themselves, and so
dye. The same may I say of Pride, men in prosperity have such an immoderate
desire to it, that they are always spreading their sails for the wind of
popular applause to breathe upon, and always using of their wings to soar
high, till at laft swollen to too proud a height, these frail supports failing
them, they fall, and so dye. Exemplified in Sigismund the young King of
Hungaria, who beholding the greatness of his Army, said, What need we fear the
Turk, who need not fear the falling of the Heavens, being able with our
Spears, and Halberts to hold them up. He shortly after received a great
overthrow, he himself to save his life, being glad to skull Danubius in a
little Boat. A presumption not much unlike Edom's Language, Obadiah 3.4.
Who shall bring me down to the ground? -- possibly there was no man on earth,
that durst accept Edom's challenge, when he threw down his Gantlet, and bid
defiance to all worldly Powers, Who shall bring me down? But God accepted the
Challenge, and undertook that vain boaster upon higher terms then he proposed:
He tells him, That though he set his nest (where never man yet set his nest)
even among the Stars, yet thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord. God
does but lift wicked men up in prosperity, as the Eagle did the Cockle-fish,
that they may catch a greater fall. Yet notwithstanding this danger, how common
a sin Pride is to a prosperous condition, may be seen in that Precaution of
Moses to the Israelites: Moses warns them, Deuteronomy. 8.11.12.13.14.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God -- Lest when thou have eaten, and
art full, and have built goodly houses, and have dwelt therein. Lest when thy
Herds, and thy Flocks are multiplied, and thy silver and thy gold is
multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied. Then thine heart be lifted
up, and thou forget the Lord thy God -- How careful was Moses over them, and
how jealous of them, lest they should forget God, who had sufficiently
remembered them? Or, lest their hearts should be lifted up against him, whose
hand was so often lifted up for them. But alas! all in vain's his counsel;
What Moses here by way of Prophecy, is cautioning them not to do; by way of
History, Deuteronomy, 32.35.
he is else where reproving them for doing: But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked --
then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
salvation. Israel, like a sed beast, grew proud, and insolent in green
Pastures: And so will the best of men do in flourishing and fresh conditions.
But now Affliction puts a stop to men in this high career of their riches; it
intercepts the provisions of Pride; it takes away the fuel that should
increase the heat, and fire of men's Passions, and so their insolences are
abated. Job 33.17.
By Afflictions, as Job speaks, God hides pride from Man. By these corrosives,
he eats out the proud flesh, and makes us humble, and submissive: Afflictions
are compared to Thorns; Behold, I will hedge up thy way with Thorns, Hos. 2.6.
that is, with troubles and Afflictions. Afflictions are as Thorns; and I may
say, with these Thorn God pricks the bladder of Pride, and our ^igh mindedness
is cured.

2. Cruelty, This sin never acts above board, or upon the Stage, but in
prosperity; it goes unseen till then, or at most, but half seen: half the
wickedness of a man appears not, when he is in want, and in Affliction. He
cannot feast like an Emperor, spend like a Prodigal; nor can he say of his
sins, as the Roman glutton did of his dishes, That those are best, that cost
him dearest. No, wicked men, when they are kept to hard meat, and want: when
they are under Affliction, when like unruly Stallions, they are tied to rack
and manger, though their lusts be not thereby absolutely mortified; yet they
are thereby so stifled, and starved, they cannot act. It Is only worldly
affluence, and warmth, that broods and brooks corruption; it is riches and power
that lets the lusts and wickednesses of men loose, to pursue their gain and
pleasure. Hazael was a cruel man; yet he did not believe there was so much
cruelty in his heart, as in his heart was lodged. When the Prophet told him, 2
Kings 8.12, 13.
-- I know the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: their
strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the
sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child. Hazael
answered, and said, But what is thy servant a Dog, that he should do this
great thing? Well, how does the Prophet convince him? Elisha replied, The Lord
has showed me, that thou shall be King over Syria. As if he had said, Thou
shall have much prosperity in thy hands, and then the wickedness of thine heart
will be apparent; thou art but a poor, private, inconsiderable person now, and
wantst means to show the cruelty of thy spirit: but when thou art High and
Mighty, Lord over all, and King in Syria; when thou have all this prosperity
and power in thy hands, then will thou let thy heart loose unto wickedness, --
and do all this evil unto Israel.

3. Security, This is a sin which is very apt to trouble us in a prosperous
condition, which Afflictions banish, by excreising our graces, and creating in
us a great measure of sober watchfulness over all our ways. A weak Christian
with watchfulness walks safer, then a stronger Christian, that gives way to
security and presumption. The presumptuous Christian, he persuades himself
nothing is impossible, nothing is too hard to perform, nothing too difficult
to resist; upon which confidence, he does not like the militant holy man, keep
his Castle; but like Goliath, he boldly stalks forth, and dares every thing to a
Combat: He thinks no Religion good, but in the house of wicked Nero: nor, no
chastity of life commendable, but in Sodom and Gomorrah. Assuredly, this man's
resolutions are dangerous! As well may the Bird escape the Lime-wand; as well
may the Fish escape the Nett, as a Christian not enter into temptation. We
should not therefore think our selves secure; but, as he who best knows our
temper bids us, so should we do, Watch, and Pray, Mat. 26.41.
lest we enter into temptations. Those sins that so cunningly beset us, will
easily enter (if not by violence, by deceit) if we set not a guard upon our
senses. Some Angel therefore must stand at the door of Conscience, like the
flaming Sword of a Cherubim at the gate of Paradise, to examine what comes in.
There must be a watch set to keep out every sin. It Is a general caution, Mark
13.37.
What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Oh, what need has a Christian to
be ever upon his watch? what need has he to keep strict watch and ward? That
Christian, who like some over daring Giant, thinks himself secure, and sleeps
upon his guard, will by his corruptions, soon be foiled: Whilst the Crocodile
sleeps, (as Historians relate) the Indian Rat gets into him, and eats his
entrails: So sin never enters so well, nor dedestroys us with more ease, as
when it takes us naping upon the soft lap of a prosperous condition. But now,
as the Saints are never in danger when they are watchful; so, nothing tends
more then Afflictions to make them watchful. Afflictions open the Eyes of the
Saints, and makes them look about them. Apollonius writes of certain people,
That could see nothing in the day, but all in the night: Thus many Christians
are so blinded with the Sun shine of prosperity, that whilst those bright days
last, they can see nothing: but when the Winter-night of Affliction comes upon
them, then they can discern all things, then their Eyes are opened, and made
to look about them. Believe it (as it is well observed by many) Afflictions are
to the Saints, as the Thorn at the Nightingales breast, which makes her sing
sweetly, and keeps her waking.

4. The immoderate love of this World: This is a sin which is apt to grow upon
us in prosperity. When the Candle of prosperity shines upon our heads, (as Job
speaks) and the secrets of the Lord are within our Tabernacles; when our Root
is spread by the waters, and the dew lies all night upon our tender branches:
that is, when we have fresh and flourishing conditions, how apt are we to have
our hearts riveted, and fastened to the creatures? How apt are we to sing
Requiems to to our souls? and to say as rich Dives did in the Gospel, Soul
take thy rest, thou have goods enough for many years. How apt are we to doat
upon, to idolize, and to make a God of our enjoyments? but when Affliction
comes upon us, when there is a fall of the leaf upon all our comforts, when
our possessions are deftroyed, our hopes blasted, and our growing joys
defloured; we begin to love God more, and to doat less upon the creatures, and
so our earthly mindedness is cured. By a long continued prosperity, even the
soul of that wise King Solomon melted into a love of the world, and an
effeminate declination in Religion, gross humors did arrest him, and he grows
youthful in his old age, for want of an evil occurrent (the sharp Physic of
Affliction) to recover him: (...) Kings 31.14.
God therefore stirred up an adversary unto Solomon -- He sent Afflictions, and
storms of war upon him, and these exercised his graces, purged out his
corruptions, and recovered him. A tempest exercises the skill of a Pilot: A
battle exercises the valor of a Soldier; and Affliction exercises the
graces of a Christian. That expression of the Apostle is very apt, Heb. 12.^1.
Now no Affliction for the present seems to be joyous: nevertheless,
afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. Wars train up Soldiers; and Afflictions train up the
Saints: they are pleasant, and they are profitable exercises.

Thirdly, By increasing our Graces. What Naturalists say of the Colewort, That
it thrives better when it is watered with salt water: The same may I say of
Grace, it thrives better, and increases most, when it is sprinkled with the
salt water of Affliction. The growth of Grace is commonly promoted, when God
steeps it in these brinish waves. Grace is like the widows Oil in the cruse,
the more it was powered out, the more it increased: so grace, the more it is
afflicted, the more it is increased. Romans 5.3, 4.
We glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works patience: And
patience experience: and experience works hope. Tribulation works patience,
that is, (according to Interpretations) it increases it and carries it on to
perfection: it is the engrease and perfection of this grace, and of all our
other graces. Christians (like Children in their sicknesses) they wax stronger,
and wax taller, in grace, in virtue, and in goodness, in and after their
Afflictions.

Fourthly, By proving our graces: Afflictions are for the probation, and trial
of our graces -- That the trial of your faith (being much more precious then
of gold that perishes, 1 Peter 1.7.
though tried with fire) may be found unto praise, and honor, and glory --
It Is a precious faith, which like a Star, shines brightest in the darkest
night: It Is a precious faith, that abides trial. They say of the Eagle, That
she tryes her young brood, by exposing them to the bright beams of the Sun, and
so judges them of the right kind, if they can steadfastly look upon it: May
not I say, God does thus deal with the Saints? he brings them to the hot fire
of Affliction, and thereby tryes them. That grace is of the right kind, which
will abide trial. Moses was a lofty Eagle of the right kind; He chose rather
to suffer, Heb. 12.15.
then to enjoy sin for a season. He preferred the Afflictions of Israel, to the
pleasures of Egypt. But Lots Wife was not right, who regreeting the loss of
Sodom, and her sweet pleasures there, upon her trial, Looking back, was turned
into a Pillar of Salt. Believe it, it is an easy matter to profess Christ, in
Jubilee-dayes, and days of pleasure: but give me the man who is a second Job
triumphant, who is metal to the back, and can endure all Afflictions, this is
a man only of the right kind, this man only is the best Christian. Thus you
see in the second place, All Afflictions work for our good, as they tend to
promote Grace in our hearts. And this they do, By quickening our Graces, by
exercising our Graces, by increasing our Graces, and by proveing of our Graces.

3. All Afflictions work for our good, as they tend to promote our glory.
Afflictions are the Red Sea, which while it threats to swallow us, preserves
us. As Israel passed through the Red Sea to Canaan: So through the Red Sea of
Affliction, we pass to our Heavenly Canaan. The way to our glorious Crowns, is
by our earthly crosses. It Is a common Speech, When the way is harder, we Ride
the way the faster. None so hard, as that which Affliction makes, and no way so
good to Heaven; the harder that way, the faster we ride. Christ himself went
from the Cross, to Paradise; and so shall Christians. If you look upon the
History of his Life, you will find that he was, A man of many sorrows: Lam.
3.1.
Or as it is in the Original, Hewas the Man that had seen Affliction. And what
greater honor can there be, then to resemble him? it should be the Christians
ambition here, as hereafter it will be his glory. When the Soldiers of that
brave and gallant Emperor Severus, (for greater pomp in a Triumph) were to put
on Crowns of Bays upon their Heads; one Christian, who was a Soldier, put his
upon his Arm: And being demanded the reason, answered, Non decet Christianum
in hac vita coronari: In this life a Crown is not becoming. And Godfrey of
Bulloigne, when he had defeated the Saracens, and conquered the Holy Land; when
he should have been made King, and have worn the Imperial Crown; he refused
it, saying, It was not fit, that the servant should wear a Crown of Gold
there, where his Master wore but a Crown of Thorns. It Is too much to live
delicately here, and find Abraham's bosom hereafter. The Sons of Zebedee were
all for ambition, and honor; they were for Dignities, and Thrones: but Christ
called them to suffering, and to a bloody Baptism rather: he tells them, ere
they can sit with him on his glorious Throne, they must drink with him on earth
that bitter Cup. I know you commend the merry worldling, who is never troubled
with crosses, nor exercised with Afflictions: but excuse me, if I say, this
felicity is his misery: Assure your self, it is so much pleasure here, so much
torment hereafter; so much Affliction, so much Glory. We may say of every man,
and to every man, who enjoyes altogether the delights of this world, Rev. 18.7.
as the charge is given against Babylon, How much she has glorified her self,
and lived deliciously every day, so much torment and sorrow give her: How much
of the one, so much of the other. Dives in Hell, exemplifies this truth, who
entreats Abraham to send Lazarus from the dead -- to speak to his Brethren,
Luke 16.27, 28.
lest they also come into this place of torment. Now I cannot think, there is
so much charity among the damned; I cannot think there was so much goodness in
Dives in Hell, that he would not have his Brethren come to the same place of
torment, out of love to them, but out of love to himself: he then found by sad
experience, the more his sins were imitated, the more was he tormented: As he
had every day fated deliciously, he now every day fares miserably; how much of
the one, so much of the other. So, how much Affliction, so much Glory. The
Emperor, when he had one Crown upon the point of his Sword, and another upon
his Head, said, Tertiam in Coelis, That there was a third for him in Heaven,
So, the Saints who have the Crown of tribulation here, may be assured of
another Crown, a Crown of Honor; and of a third Crown in Heaven, 2 Cor. 4.17.
a Crown of Glory: Our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. We read not, that a man's
wealth, or riches, work for him a weight of glory; but his Afflictions do, and
that exceedingly, They work an exceeding weight of Glory: Not that Afflictions
merit Glory; Merit is the fond Fable of the Church of Rome: they are the ways
too, but not the causes of, our Glory; they purchase not, though they take
Possession of Heaven; they are the method, but not the merit of salvation:
James 1.12.
Blessed is the Man that endures temptation, or tribulation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life. This Crown of life, the Cross of
our life makes way for: though there was no Cross, that could, or did ever
merit it, but that of our Saviors: Yet thus much I may say for the humble, and
submissive sufferings of a Christian, That the heavier the weight of our
Affliction, the heavier the weight of our Glory: Nay, our light Affliction,
shall work for us an exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory. And now you see,
The Mystery of Affliction is such, That it works for the good of all
Christians: 1. By promoting Comfort. 2. By promoting Grace. 3. By promoting
Glory.

I come now to the second Proposition.
2. The Mystery of Affliction should encourage, and comfort the hearts of all
Christians. Some there are, who in stead of comforting, and encouraging
themselves under their Afflictions, are complaining at the things they suffer,
and are murmuring under their Afflictions: Rachel weeps, and refuses to be
comforted. Our spirits are seldom troubled with inward corruptions; but
usually too much with outward evils. When God reproved Jonah for his Passion,
Jonah ^.9.
Do thou well to be angry? Jonah replied, I do well to be angry, even to
death. Believe it, what this Prophet said of his Passion of Anger, I do well
-- others say of their Affliction, We do well to be sorrowful: We do well to
be comfortless. They are clothed in blacks, go mourning all the day long, and
think they have reason to take their Cross heavily: When indeed (the good of
the Cross considered) they have no more reason then Micha had, to walk
mournfully before the Lord: When the Children of Dan said, What ayleth thee?
Judge. 18.23, 24.
He answered, Ye have taken away the gods which I made -- and what have I more?
-- and what is it that ye say, what ayleth thee? As if he should say, Have I
not reason to be troubled, when you have robbed me of my gods? Do you think I
can be comforted, when I am thus afflicted? Thus some, like this impatient man,
when they have lost but some superstitious Idols of their own making, some
vanities, and trifling toys, (which yet they adored as gods) they are
sufficiently troubled: And when they are thus Afflicted, they refuse (as if
they had reason for it) to be comforted. But though this is the carriage of
many in Afflictions, it is but a foolish carriage. We should say with David,
Why art thou disquieted, O my soul? We should not say, Why art thou not
disquieted? It Is dangerous to give too much way to grief in Afflictions, and
to dispute against our comforts. There are many considerations, which may
administer comfort and encouragement to us in our Afflictions; especially these
two Considerations.

First, If we consider the Author of these Afflictions, which is God himself,
one who in his own time, will make all these Crosses good, and beneficial. The
distrustful Christian under Affliction, cries out, 2 Kings 6.33.
as that impapatient King of Israel -- Oh my tormentor! And, this evil is of
the Lord, why should I wait any longer? But the true Believer, when the bitter
cup of Affliction is proffered to him, says, as Christ himself did, Mat.
26.39.
Oh my Father! And the Cup which my Father has given me to drink, shall I not
drink it? He acknowledges the Affliction to come from the hand of a merciful
Father, (one, who as he tempers it with his wisdom, so he sweetens them with
his love) and hereby he is comforted. Indeed the carnal heart (who does not
experience that Gods Rods are steeped in oil and honey; like a curious
Patient, who having an ill opinion of the Physician, will take none of his
Receipts) has a prejudice against God; and therefore, because it smarts a
little, cries, Away with the Plaster, and while the Affliction lasts, refuses
to be comforted. But the gracious soul, who sees the hand of God in every
condition, is comforted in every condition; and therefore takes his load from
God, as the Camel does from his Master, always upon his knees: This man
knows, it is neither chance, nor blind fortune, that has brought upon him
this, or that Affliction, but the Divine Deeree, and the Divine Will; and
therefore silently submitting to the Divine will, he is encouraged, Levit. 10.3.
and cheerful. -- Aaron held his peace, -- that is, he submitted, when God
Afflicted him. So when the Prophet told Hezekiah, Beheld, all that is in thine
house, Isay 39.6, 7.
shall they carry into Babylon: And thy Sons which issue from thee, shall they
take away. When Hezekiah heard all this, what said he? Good is the Word of the
Lord, ver. 8. He is not discouraged with the sad Prophecy of his Afflictions,
nor does he dispute the case, and say, Why Lord! what, give up Jerusalem, the
holy City, into the hands of Babylon? Shall the Sons descended from David, be
destined to the Captivity, and Bondage of the uncircumcised? Or shall those who
are borne Princes, become no better then Babylonish Pages? No, though this Rod
was smart, yet good Hezekiah kisses it, and silently yields to this Divine
correction: he knows, Lam. 3.32.
That though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies. And therefore he speaks nothing, but what breaths
forth humble submission, Good is the Word of the Lord. Thus David was dumb,
and silent, when God Afflicted him: I was dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Indeed, there is a threefold
silence. 1. There is a sinful silence, when men hold their peace to see God
dishonored, and his Truth wounded: this silence is a loud sin; As Hierom said
to Vigilantius, so may a man say to Gods enemies, Meam injuriam patienter tuli
-- the wrong done to my self is patiently suffered; but an injury to God, is
not to be endured. It Is a sin to be silent, when we may bring glory to God, and
good unto our Brethren. 2. There is a superstitious silence: Such were those
old Monks of Egypt, who (as Cassian reports) were Vmbrarum more silentes; as
speechless as Ghosts. What do the loose, and disorderly rabble of our
Phanaticks at this day, but superstitiously imitate them, who will not speak a
word to any as they meet them, or pass by them. It was the common greeting of
the Jews, Peace be unto you. Thus David by his Proxey saluted Nabal -- Peace be
unto thy house -- Christ himself was no enemy to good manners: Mat. 10.12.13.
When he sent forth his Disciples, this was his Doctrine, When you come into a
house salute it. And the Apostles, that they might mix New Testament matter,
with Old Testament manners, had this form of Salutation, Grace be unto you,
and Peace. These new Sectaries then, they are not like unto Christ; they are
not like unto his Apostles; nor are they like unto his Saints. Unto whom then
are they like? Believe it, they have not only lost their Religion, but their
good manners too, and are superstitiously silent. 3. There is a holy silence,
when the soul is at quiet, and submits to God in every condition. Such was the
blessed temper of Ely, a holy silence seals his Lips, and he says only, It is
the Lord, let him do what he pleases, 2 Samuel 13.18. Princely David invites
all men to a strange sight, Come, behold! What is the strange sight? what is to
be seen? A very strange thing! A thing of great amazement! Come, Psalm 46.8.
behold the works of the Lord, what desolation he has made in the Earth?
Behold these desolations we may: nay, behold them we must: but how must we
behold them? we may behold them with compassionate hearts: But must we behold
them with complaining hearts? No, see how we must behold them! Be still, and
know that I am God, ver. 10. As if he should say, I know you will be
complaining, and saying, Why are we thus smitten? Why are we thus Afflicted?
why are we thus desolate and troubled? But here is your answer in a word, Be
still, and know that I am the Lord. Know but, that it is a God that brings upon
you your Afflictions, and you cannot but be still, and silent; you cannot but
be still, and comforted: for as he is a God, so he is according to the
confession of the Prince of Prophets, Righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145.1.
and holy in all his works. The Saints have experimented this, and therefore
have not been sullen, but silent, have not been discouraged, but comforted
under their Afflictions; They have patiently held their backs to the stripes of
an offended Father, and have resigned themselves over into his hands, as
knowing that he is a God, who in his own time will make all these crosses good,
and beneficial. If this God afflict us, then we must not be discouraged, and
remain comfortless under our Afflictions; but rather say with the Church, I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
Micha 7.9. It is true, I am the Clay, and God is the Potter, and the Clay must
not find fault with the Potter: Yet would I expostulate the cafe, and say,
Lord, let me be a vessel of Honor, and not a vessel of wrath: Let me be the
vocal monument of thy love and mercy; not the dismal trophy of anger, and thy
fury: yet would I submit my self to his good pleasure, as knowing, it should
be as well our daily duty, as our daily Prayer, to say as Christ did, Fiat
voluntas tua, thy will be done.

Secondly, If we consider the nature of these Afflictions, they are not from
vindicative wrath, Rev. 3.19.
but from divine love: As many as I love I chasten. They are our crosses
indeed, but not our curses. David commends them, Thy Rod, Psalm. 23.4.
and Staff, they comfort me. I know what David speaks, may seem to be a
Samson's Riddle, The Philistims could not understand, how -- Meat should come
out of the eater. So a natural man, (an uncireumcised Christian) knows not how
honey should come out of contrary expectations; How tribulation should work
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. But every strong
Samson, by his experience, can well expound this Riddle: he finds honey in the
dead Lion, and extreme comfort issuing from extreme danger. Believe it, there
is no true Christian, to whom every Lion does not yield some honey, to whom
every Affliction does not yield some consolation. As the skillful Physician
knows how of the poysonfull Viper, to make a wholesome Medicine: so the
heavenly Physician of our Afflictions, makes the most precious Cordialls. He
turns all our troubles into pleasures, and makes our greatest evils
beneficial. If God afflict us therefore, we should not be discouraged, but
comforted, considering the nature of these Afflictions, they have a medicinal,
a beneficial virtue in them. So long as the Physician keeps his patient at a
strict diet, and under a constant course of Physic, there is some hopes of his
cure; but there is no greater danger, then when God is weary of afflicting, and
gives us over. I look upon those Bona malis, that uncheckt current of the
Affairs of the wicked, to be dangerous. The Israelites were no sooner fed with
Quails, but God slew the fattest of them. And the very Heathen man could
observe, That God spares many a man for their greater mischief. That man who
i^ soothed up under an uncheckt current of Affairs, he is like a beast
fattened for the slaughter: Or like the Roman Ox, crowned with Garlands, and
gayer flowers, when he is going to be Sacrificed. But those Mala bonis, those
sad troubles, which happen to righteous men, they are (as one speaks) Ad
sanitatem, Medicinal, and in order to their cure: Or if you will, they are,
what Seneca said of Socrates his poisonous potion, Medicamenta immortalitatis,
Healths to the glorious immortality of their souls, and names. These
Afflictions always end in consolations. Thus you see how this Mystery of
Afflictions should encourage, and comfort the hearts of all Christians.

Application.
Is it so? Then this is a just reproof for those, who are not comforted under
their Afflictions. The true Christian, as he must not be a dead Sea; so he must
not be a raging Sea, he must have some Affections, but he must have no
Passions; he should be so ballassed, as to keep a steady course, neither lift
up too much, nor cast down too much under all conditions; nothing should put
him out of this frame. Even nature does teach Bees, not only to gather Honey
out of sweet Flowers, but out of bitter: How much more should Grace act the
Admired Chemist, and extract the sweetest potions, out of the bitterest
Afflictions. These two forementioned considerations, cannot but encourage
Christians. 1. To consider that Afflictions are naturally good, and
beneficial. 2. However, to consider, they come from God, who will make them
instrumentally good, and beneficial. The sanctified Christian is comforted,
for he knows God is a faithful God, and will not afflict above what he is
able. It is well observed (by some) that Sarah, though she was Abraham's Wife,
yet she knew nothing of his trials, nor did she undergo any of them: And they
give this reason for it, Because she was not strong enough; and God will not
make choice of a weak Champion, he will not press us with any heavy
Affliction, unless he find us strong. God dispenses his Afflictions,
according to the abilities of the Saints: He spared Sarah for her weakness,
lest (as they think) the severity of those many Afflictions should basle her:
he lays the whole burden of those many Afflictions upon Abraham, because
strong in Faith, able to endure them. Believe it, what St. Paul says of
temptation, I may say of Affliction, There has no Affliction taken you, but
what is common to Man: Now God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be
Afflicted above what you are able: but will either make you a way to escape it,
or else make you able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. We cannot pretend an exemption
from those usual Afflictions, which in all Ages have happened unto others; but
we may pretend to more consolations then others. The Saints, though they be
Afflicted, they are not dejected. We are cast down -- there is their Affliction,
but not destroyed, (2 Cor. 4.9.) there is their consolation: They know all
Afflictions are naturally good, or instrumentally good; one way or other, God
will make all these things work together for the good of them that love him.

FINIS.

