THE TRIVMPH OF BEAVTIE. As it was personated by some young Gentlemen, for whom
it was intended, at a private Recreation.

By JAMES SHIRLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVI.

THE Triumph of Beauty.
Enter Bottle, Crab, Clout, Toad-stoole, Shrub, Scrip, Hobbinoll, Shepherds:
they overtake, and hang upon Bottle, and cry: Omnes. A Bottle, a Bottle!


Bo. I am out of wind. So, so, are we all here? good men and true stand
together, and hear your charge. Hum, hum.


Hob. Bottle has something in him. I knew him of a little one.


Scr. A very sucking Bottle.


Bot. Peace Scrip and Hobbinoll, Toad-stoole draw a little nearer, -- you all
know --


Crab. What do you know?


Bot. Silence neighbor Crab, -- which of you all is so wise, as to know what I
would say now? why there is it, and yet you will be prating ignorant Puppies and
a man should knock your brains out -- You all know, I say --


Cra. I say again, we know not. Bottle you forget your self, you called us all
ignorant Puppies. But now, and now again you say we all know. --


Bot. -- The Prince excuse me, you all know Paris the Prince of Troy.


Cr. We know him now, but it was a mystery for many years.


Ho. Our young Lord and Master?


Bo. Why very good then, and yet I must be corrupted? No, no, Bottle is a dry
coxcombe, an empty fool. Bo'y te'e; make the Prince merry your selves.


Scr. Nay Bottle, sweet Bottle, sweet Bottle; you will never leave this peevish
humor Crabbe; come, he is sorry.


Cra. Well, I am sorry; but will you not give a man leave to speak?


Bo. Speak? yes, but then you must not talk and bolt such peremptory
questions, when I mis-call you for your own good. What is it to me, and the
Prince shall take a convenient twig, or drown himself in one of his
melancholy fits: I can live, when you have all betaken your selves to Hemp, I
can. Only I prefer the public good before all the world, and and the Prince
before that, and my self before the Prince, and my wife before my self, and
your wife neighbor before her: I know what is what. But what is all this?
unless we be reconciled and perfectly divided among our selves. I know you all
love me.


Scr. I love Bottle with my heart.


Bo. But the Prince is another manner of man, though I say it, and every day
falls away with a humor of melancholy; if we shall join our Panniers, to make
him merry with some rare and pleasant device -- why; your old friend and
Bottle, and so forth. Now let every man speak his opinion freely, as his own
want of discretion shall direct him.


Ho. Some new device? there be a thousand new devices, and a man could but
remember one on 'em.


Sc. Stay some strange shapes Bottle. -- Silence, what do you think and we
should all be Fishes?


Bo. He says well for silence, this must consist of Mutes.


Scr. I can play a Mute rarely.


Crab. You the Mute? as if nobody could speak but you: you the Mute?


Ho. And the river hard by, will serve us rarely to act in.


Scr. And when we dance under water, no body can see our footing. And you love
me, let me be a Whale: oh I can foot it curiously; and I can drink like a Fish.


Bo. No. I do not like these Waterworks. I was in a fair election to be
drowned at the last sheep-shearing; and the Cramp is a thing to be considered.
No Waterworks.


Hob. What do you say to Birds: a Device of Birds?


Bo. Birds? You Will be an Owl too.


Hob. I have been taken for one in a tree a hundred times.


He counterfeits the voice of an Owl. Bot. No, I have thought of a conceit --
dee hear? we scorn fishes, they are dull, phlegmatic things, and your Birds
at best are melancholy matters. What do you think of --


Hob. Beasts then: let us all be Beasts Bottle.


Bot. Be all Asses will you not? Bou'y tee again. Play the fools your selves,
do, and see how the Prince will like it, if Bottle be out. I am a puppy, I?
no, no.


Scr. Nay, nay, honest Bottle: did you not bid every man speak according to his
discretion?


Bot. I grant you; but is there discretion in a Beast? Let us all play the
Beasts quotha? Oh, I could be as musty as the Prince now; but I am of too
sweet a nature to fly out: which makes you presume. Well, now or never, will
you be ruled yet?


Hob. Now, and never too, Bottle?


Omnes. A Bottle, a Bottle. Silence, break Silence.


Bot. Why then, I Will make you all Princes or Lords, or something else that
shall be little better: and because we are all Shepherds, we will do a thing
proper to our callings.


Omn. That, that Bottle.


Bot. What do you say? if we act the Tragedy of the golden Fleece?


Cra. How? a Tragedy to make the Prince merry?


Bot. There Is the conceit: if he do not laugh at every man of us, I Will lose my
part of the next possit, neighbor.


Scr. He cannot choose.


Bot. You all remember the story of Jason, that sailed to Colchos, with
Hercules, and a Company of Blades, where he killed the Brazen-footed Bulls, and
the fiery Dragons.


Bot. Let me see, how many Actors are we? -- The number will serve, well let
me see, first, who shall do Hercules in the Lions belly?


Hob. Belly?


Bot. Why in the Lions skin, it is all one.


Shr. I Will do Hercules.


Hob. Let Shrub do Hercules, he has played before.


Shr. I have a Club already, and I know where a terrible Lion is, if any man
will but flea off his skin for me: Let me alone.


He struts and speaks small. Omn. A Shrub a Hercules.


Bot. Who shall do Lady Medea the Kings daughter, that fell in love with Jason,
and bewitched the Dragon?


Toad. I Will do the Lady, and the Kings daughter, and for a Witch I am right by
the mothers side.


[He speaks big.] Cra. His very voice will conjure.


Toad. Who plays Jason my sweetheart?


Hob. Is Jason a man or a woman?


Bot. Jason is a Kings son, and Captain of a ship called Argo.


Crab. For a Prince or an Emperor, I know where a choice might be made. But I
have no heart to the Captain.


Bot. Your reason neighbor Crab.


Crab. I know not which limb I can best spare, and Carpenters makes but
scurvie legs. At Football, or Fifty-Cuffes, I fear no Prince under the Moon.


Bot. You fight against no body but Bulls, and fiery Dragons.


Cra. Do I not?


Bot. And they must be all fast asleep when you kill 'em; Nay, Hercules
himself must take your part too.


Crab. Nay then let me alone.


Bot. Now my Masters, who shall do the Dragon?


Scr. Is it a he, or a she Dragon?


Bot. No matter which.


Scrip. What do you think of my wife? she will do it. She does the Dragon at
home, 'twod do a man's heart good to be out of the house; no body is able to
endure her; she is a flying Dragon, and will fit yon rarely --


Bot. We wo'not be troubled with women; and you will do it your self; well and
good.


Scr. Rather then the play shall not go forward my wife shall teach me my part.


Hob. Do you mean I shall have no part? Shall Hobbinoll play nothing? Clout
has no part neither.


Bot. You shall be Medeas Brother, Absirtus, a little child.


Hob. I shall be too tall.


Bot. You must be cut a pieces, and have your limbs thrown about the waves.


Crab. And when your legs, and your head are cut off, you will be no bigger
then a child: we will take a course to make you little enough. And Clout, do
you see? you shall be the ship, hung all round about with Flags, and fine
things, we cannot come to Colchos without you.


Clout. Shall I play the Ship? let me alone to carry my body swimming.


Crab. Have a care you do not leake before the Prince; and be sure to carry a
good wind in your Poop-Clout. But stay, all this while, who shall do the
golden Fleece? Bottle, you forget that?


Bot. The chief part in the Play, and one that must wear the best clothes
too.


Crab. Why let some body else do Jason, and I Will do the golden Fleece.


Scr. Or I.


Hob. Or I.


To. Or any body -- Or what if we left out the golden Fleece?


Bot. What if you left out the play? the golden Fleece out? why it is the name,
and the only rich thing in the Play.


Scr. Why then leave out the Ship.


Cl. Yes, and go by land to Colchos. May not somebody do two parts. Let Scrip
do the Dragon and the Kings daughter.


Cr. Or leave out the little boy; he has but a small part.


Hob. I Will be cut in pieces a hundred times first, leave out Hercules and you
will, or Jason: if I do not fit you Crab.


Shr. Why Hercules, left out, good man Hobbinoll?


Toad. No mutiny Shrub, neighbor Crab.


Shrub strikes Hob: they all fight. Bot. So so, we shall have a Tragedy indeed;
have a care of the Kings daughter among you. Hold, they will tear Clout all to
pieces, Have a care of the Ship.


Cr. Sink or swim, I care not.


Clout. Oh my Ribs!


Bot. He that gives the next blow shall lose his share, if he be not turned out
of the Company. What my Masters, you shall not fall out about this golden
Fleece: I kept that part for my self I warrant you; you shall not fall out
about sharing: I am resolved the golden Fleece is mine, as I am the best Actor,
and Master of the Company.


Clout. Bottle indeed had no part before: So, so, then we are all friends, and
fitted.


Hob. When shall we have out parts? oh Bottle how I thirst! when our parts?


Bot. Part? why you must do it instantly, the Prince stays for it.


Shr. How? the Lion is to be killed, whose skin I must wear when I play
Hercules.


Clout. Do you think, I can do the ship, and have not half my ^acklings
about me?


Scrip. And I have not practiced to spit fire yet.


Bot. I knew what a company of sots you would be. You Will be Hercules, and
you will be a Whale, and you will be a Ship, and you will be a Dragon, and you will
be a Lady. You Actors? you Animals, to undertake a Play, and ask when you
shall have your parts; Oh I am ashamed! but there is no remedy, with such dull
capacities: do you remember the Antic Dance, I taught you last? that shall
serve for this time. The Prince Keeps his old walk: be sure to be within reach
of my voice, when I call you. Get behind the trees; I spy him. Exit.


Enter Paris. Par. What is it to be sprung of Kingly race,
Or have the blood of Priam in my veins,
Yet dare not call him Father? he was cruel,
Thus for a dream to banish me his sight,
And my dear mothers arms.

Bot. within. So ho, ho, ho.


Par. This busy shepherd will afflict me still
With his unseasonable mirth; I am
Only in love with Melancholy; Pleasures
Are tedious to my soul; Must I be ever
Confined to woods? are Beasts or men more wild
Than they, companions for a Prince? are these
Fit ornaments of State? is this a Palace?

Bot. within. So ho, ho, ho.


Par. Again? would I could hide me from the world;
I will go seek my dwelling in some rock
Where never day shall be acquainted with me;
The Sun whose beams cheer all the world beside,
Shines like a Comet over my head.

Enter Bottle. Bot. So ho, ho, ho.

I thought we had lost you: why how now? still in this humor? will your
highness never be a Changeling? De'e hear Sir; I met your your Nurse at the
bottom of the Hill.


Par. What Nurse?


Bot. The charitable Bear that gave you suck; for though you be a Prince
borne, your Parents would not be at the charge to bring you up at Court;
Mistress Ursula, and I, have have been the best friends to your blood Royal.


Par. I prithee leave me.


Bot. Leave my young Prince in a wood? A word to the wise -- are not you in
love?


Par. In love? with what?


Bot. Nay, I do not know what wild beast has entangled you: but I have a
shrewd suspicion; for thus simply did I look by all report, when I was in love
too, it had almost undone me, for it infected me with Poetry; and I grew witty
to the admiration of all the Owls in Ida.

You shall hear my Verses.

Heigh-ho, what shall a Shepherd do,
That is love, and cannot woe?
By sad experience now I find,
That Love is dumb as well as blind.
Her hair is bright, her forehead high,
Then am I taken with her eye:
Her cheeks I must commend for gay,
But then her nose hangs in my way.
Her lips I like, but then steps in
Her white and pretty dimpled chin.
But then her neck I do behold,
Fit to be hanged in chains of gold.
Her breast is soft as any Down,
Beneath which lies her Maiden-towne,
So strong and fortified within,
There is no hope to take it in.
And so forth. But I thank my dutiful father, he cured me with a Flaile, and
most learnedly thresh'd blind Cupid out of my sides. I had been no Bottle of
this world else.


Par. If thou do love me, do not interrupt me, I would be private.


Bot. I would be loath to be unmannerly, and hinder a Princely recreation: but
I see no temptations, nothing in the likeness of a Petticote. What would you
be private for?


Par. I have some serious thoughts to examine, if thou will use thy diligence
to keep off those that rudely would disturb my present retirement: trust me,
I Will reward thy care with my best weather.


Bottle. Weather? You are wise; do you think, Sir, I have so little honesty,
to be Sir Pandarus to your Melancholy. Illo, ho. --


Par. What, art thou mad?


Bot. You are little better: if you can get their consent.


Par. Whose consent?


Bot. Hobinoll, Crab, Toad-stoole, -- Illo ho, boys. Some friends of yours,
that sent me to hunt out your Highness, your humble Subjects and
Play-fellowes, that have a mind to be merry. -- To tell you true, we have
taken notice of your sullen disposition; and therefore half a dozen, have
penned a dance to revile your spirits. Simple as I appear, my head had a hand
in it. If you do hear an Oration over and above, by way of a preparative to
the Physic we intend, so. I name no body: all the Shepherds wit is not a
wool-gathering. Therefore stir not my dear Prince, as you will answer the
contempt of our authority at your peril. Exit.


Par. What a strange rudeness am I forced to obey?
Unhappy Paris! thy ungentle stars,
Not only have decreed thy cruel Exile,
From those delights thy blood and birth should challenge,
But by their fatal doom vouchsafe thee not
To enjoy a quiet misery.

Bag pipes are heard. Enter Bottle. Bot. Hold thou unlearned Bag-pipe: for now
I am to act a Speech unto the son of Priam. Hum, hum.

Most noble Prince! You must not lie down yet.
Most noble Prince! behold thy Bottle here,
Thy well-beloved Bottle does appear,
With many more that shall be seen hereafter,
To tickle thy kind spleen into a laughter:
With fear and wit, or without fear and wit,
We come, as it becomes, to friske a bit,
In a ridiculous round: and therefore lie
Thee down and laugh, Now you may lie down, so.
Thee down and laugh, for we do mean, whereby
It may be said in a well-written dance
To show thee sport, our heels for to advance.
Which is an excellent thing. Banish thy fears,
Oh lovely Prince, bred up amongst the Bears,
And bear with us.

The Shepherds enter, and dance. On the sudden other Music is heard; and
Mercury descending; the Shepherds run in. Par. What mist does dwell about my
eyes? I feel
Their heavy curtains fall; welcome soft sleep,
The cure of all unrest. help to repair
The broken silence of my brain, distill
Thy Balm into my wounded thoughts; oh see
I do obey, and throw my cares on thee. Dormit.

A Song.
Cease warring thoughts, and let his brain
No more discord entertain,
But be smooth and calm again.
Ye Crystal Rivers that are nigh,
As your streams are passing by,
Teach your murmurs harmony.
Ye winds that wait upon the spring,
And perfumes to flowers do bring:
Let your amorous whispers here
Breath soft Music to his ear.
Ye warbling Nightingales repair
From every wood, to charm this air,
And with the wonders of your breast,
Each striving to excel the rest.
When it is time to wake him, close your parts,
And drop down from the trees with broken hearts
Mer. Young Priam's son, and darling of the gods,
I Mercury, winged Messenger of Jove,
By his command have lest his spangled Court,
And through the silver Orbs descend to tell thee,
That he has chosen thee to be the Judge
Between three Deities, which shall best deserve
This golden Ball: Juno his Queen of heaven,
Pallas the goddess of fair Arts, and Arms,
And Citherea, Queen of Love and Beauty.
Shake off thy clouds of sleep, and freed from all
Distractions, prepare to hear them plead
Their glories here. Imperial Juno drawn
Be her proud Birds, is stooping from her Coach.
The Jove-borne maid already has dismounted
The Paphian Queen with her young Archer drawn
By Swans more white than Rodopcian snow,
Is now descending from her Chariot,
And on the green Plush of this Ida hill
They all move to thee with celestial pace.
Paris awake, Jove does his Herald call,
To the most worthy give this golden Ball.

Ascendit. Par. What have I seen? what strange
But heavenly dream has Paris had:
He spies the Ball. Yet this presents more then an empty shadow,
I Am sure it grew not here; there are no trees
That bear such fruit in Ida; such as these
Grew in the Orchard of Hesperides,
And ever guarded by a watchful Dragon.
Then Jove has gathered it and sent it me.
What Is here inscribed? This to the best deserver!
I am not then deluded; it is fit
I should observe with all obedience
Great Joves command.
Soft Music. What sacred change is this?
Such harmony must needs speak the approach
Of the Celestial powers.

Song of Juno within.
Jove sent thee Paris; what is mine,
be safely bold;
And for that trifle I resign
a wreath of gold.
Obey then and command, thou can not be
Just to thy self, if not to me.
Pallas.
Twice happy in thy choice: be wise,
ere thou dispense
This Treasure, give thy Reason eyes,
and blind thy sense,
Thus Arms and Arts thy humble name shall raise,
Alike to Wreathes of Oaks and Bays.
Venus.
She, whom all suppliants else implore
is here made thine,
And will for this a gift restore,
no less divine.
The best of pleasures thus enjoy, and try,
Where Beantie Courts who can deny.
Chorus.
Examine Princely Shepherd
here the Offerings which we send thee,
How for that narrow golden sphere,
Wealth, Fame and love attend thee.
And judge by this, how large these honors be,
None to each other yield, yet all to thee.
Juno, Pallas, and Venus at several places appea Juno attended by a King and a
Senator. Pallas by a Soldier, and a Philosopher. Venus by Hymen and Cupid.
They dance: At the close, all remove, but the three goddesses. Paris kneeles.
Juno. Put off thy wonder Paris, and collect
Thy scattered senses in our Temples, we
Expect those hummble adorations
And sacrifice from Mortals, that do bring
Petitions to our Altars. We are come
Juno, Minerva, and the Sea-borne Queen,
From our bright Palaces, to sue to thee:
(Think it no stain to our Celestial nature)
That golden Ball, sent thee by Jove, to be
Her prize, whose merits can obtain it from
Thy equal sentence of us three, has brought
Our competition hither; be just Paris,
And live for ever happy.

Par. How shall Paris,
Whose years are green, and too unripe for judgment,
Decide the worth of three such Deities.
Which not a counsel of the gods themselves,
Has wisdom to determine?

Juno. We will plead
Our own deserts before thee, to which give
Thy fixed attention, and hear Juno first
Court thy election.

Par. Humbly I attend.


Juno. I Will not insist, that I am with the vote
Of all the gods first both in place and title:
The Olimpian Empress, Joves wife and sister,
These are but names and shadows of my greatness,
And which do rather fright, than win from mortals,
Whose sense must let in objects to the soul:
Know Paris, with that Scepter I control,
Not skies alone, but all this under world:
Kingdoms and Crowns are mine, all wealth contained
In Neptunes watery circle, or the veins
Of earth as subject to my gift and largess.

Min. With favor of great Junoes Empire,
She that disposes golden Mines at pleasure,
('It Is strange) should hold contention for a Ball.

Juno. I do, and will reward it with more Treasure
Then his ambition knows how to ask:
Not that I prize that poor and narrow globe,
But that I hate, Pallas should be competitour,
Or any with Saturnia; give it me,
And I will furnish thee with the same metal,
To build thy self a Palace, about which,
The yellow Tagus, and Iberus streams,
Asian Pactolus, and the Indian Ganges,
Shall flow with golden sands: let thy Birth Paris,
Put thee in mind what it is to be a Monarch.
I will adorn thy Temples with a wreath,
Whose flame shall dim bright Ariadnes Crown,
Embellished with the glorious Lamps of heaven:
Name but the bounds and limits of thy Empire;
Asia shall bow, and all her stubborn Princes,
Like petty homagers shall kneel before thee,
And lay their shining Scepters at thy feet;
Europe shall prostrate all her Provinces,
And glory in her servitude, incline
To me, and India shall send thee Pearls,
As tribute to bestow upon thy Queens;
The precious Ermynes shall without pursuit
Present thee with her skins: and the cold climes
Bring home rich Furs, and Sables to adorn thee.
The servile rooms within thy Palace, shall
Have Babilonian hangings, and rich shapes,
Wrought by the needle of Semyramis.
The fish shall bring thee purple to the shore.
Panchaia send thee Spice, and wealthy Gummes,
Such as the Assyrian Bird does fill her nest with,
When she prepares for sacrifice. The spoils
Of Silkworms shall make proud thy meanest grooms.
What shall I say, present that Ball to me,
And in exchange I Will give the world to thee.

Pa. Juno has said; and were not Pallas here,
Might tempt thee Paris to forget thy self:
Her promises are vast, and full of State,
But weighed with what Minerva can bestow,
They shrink to air, and thou Ixion-like,
Embracing Juno do but graspe a cloud.
Nay, if thou do examine well her gifts,
How 'ere their flattering sound affect thy ear,
Or their possession court thy eye with show,
And specious glories, thou shall find within,
They have disguised a poison, that does lurk
To infect thy mind, and kill with their corruption
Thy intellectual Beauties, by soft ease
A sordid avarice, coward thoughts, and all
The train of Lust and Lethargies that hang
Upon a Masculine soul; where thy acceptance
Of what is in my power, shall make thee scorn
These things of care and golden slaverie,
That fool and flinty consciences adore,
And grasped, like theeving sands steal through our fingers.
I Will give thee Wisdom Paris, in which name
I comprehend all harmony of earth,
And heaven, and make thee kinse-man to the gods.
Nature shall open her dark bosom to thee,
And give thee leave to rifle all her wonders:
The Virgin Arts shall court thee to be called
Their Oracle, and whatsoever the extent
Of that wide Orb contains, whose bounds shut up
The universal creature, shall unveile
Their beauties, and be proud to enrich thy knowledge.

Ven. Juno and Pallas promise gallantly.


Pa. Yet this concludes not, what Minerva can
Bestow upon her Paris; if the Arts
Inflame thee not, or do appear less active,
And glorious to meet thy fierce Ambition.
Fame shall want breath to tell the world what triumphs
Shall Crown thy name in war, if Pallas arm
Thy breast with courage, which my bounty throws
To thy acceptance; if that Ball be mine,
I Will give thee a spirit Trojan, and such conquests
By thy own valor, as at once shall fright,
And please the hearers faith: Nations shall tremble
To mention thy great Acts, whose memory
Shall outlive all Egyptian Pyramids,
And bloome when Winters have defaced the world,
And feeble time shall droop and halt with age:
Trophies shall fall in duty to thy sword,
And Captive Princes wait upon thy Chariot.
Some shall build Statues, others invent games,
Some Temples to thy name, while holy Priests
And Virgin Quires shall make it their Religion,
To pay thee songs, and Crown thy images
With ever-springing Garlands. Be wife, Paris,
Resolve to make that golden Circle mine,
Both Arts and Arms shall make their glories thine.

Ven. What words? what argument to move thee Paris
Is left for Cytherea? Mighty Juno
Woes thy ambition with State and Kingdoms,
Courting thy Genius in a shower of gold:
Pallas not only will inspire thy soul,
With valor, on which victory shall wait,
And Crown thy head with her immortal Laurells,
But make thee rich in Science, and uncloud
The sacred beauties of all Art and Nature.
These bounties seem to have left Venus nothing;
But when my power and gifts come to the Balance,
Paris shall see their glories, thin and light,
Fly into air: I am the Queen of love:
Think but how poor are Pallas victories,
When I have made her greatest soldiers tame,
Forced 'em look pale, and tremble, sigh and weep,
Ready to give their ghost up at a frown,
And think my smile or kiss their only heaven.
Her Oracles of Wisdom and Philosophy
Have been my fools, and all their strength of learning,
But able to express great Loves supremacy,
And my dominions boundless. What do I
Boast the extent of my command on earth?
When under my Diviner Ensigns march
Etheriall Troops? my power confessed by Jove
To sway in heaven: and what are all the treasures
And gifts of Juno, Kingdoms pil'd on Kingdoms?
Which at the best but multiply thy cares
To keep, if Love be not propitious to thee?
Who can discharge a thousand stings upon
Thy heart, and make it prisoner when I please.

Juno. The goddess of vexation we allow thee.


Ven. But these are not the motives to incline
Thy thoughts young Prince to me; thus fear, not love
Should plead for me, although the torments are
High and consuming, where I fix displeasure,
The joys I pour upon my favorites
Shall be my Orators, whose endless charms
Are above counter-magick, and shall tie
Thy soul in everlasting chains of love.
Poets have feigned Elysium after death,
Which thou shall here possess; and all the pleasure
Of those blessed shades, they talk of in their songs,
Shall spread themselves before thee, which thou shall
Possess as Lord, not Tenant to the Groves.
It shall be ever spring, and ever Summer,
Where Paris shall inhabit, all rude aires,
The killing dewes, tempest, and lightning, shall
Be strangers to thy walks, which the West wind
Shall with their soft and gentle gales perfume.
The Laurel and the Myrtle shall compose
Thy Arbours, inter-woven with the Rose,
And honey-dropping Wood-bine; on the ground
The flowers ambitiously shall crowd themselves
Into Love-knots, and Coronets, to entangle
Thy feet, that they may kiss them, as they tread,
And keep them prisoners in their amorous stalks.
The Violet shall weep when thou remov'st,
And the pale Lilly deck her innocent cheek
With Pearls to Court thy stay; the Hyacinth,
When thou art passing by her, shall disclose
Her Purple bosom to thee, proud to be
Saluted by thy eye, and being left,
Blush, droop, and wither, like a Lovesick Virgin.
Does Paris thirst? Rivers of Nectar flow
In every crystal channel: would thou feed,
The trees shall bow under their heavenly fruit,
And offer their Ambrosia to thy gathering.
Nor shall thou be alone, a thousand Nymphs,
Fairer then ever thy eyes gazed upon,
Shall wait upon my darling, and with sport
Make thy delight immortal: these at last
To crown thy joys shall lead thee to a Mistress,
Compared to whom, their beauties have no name;
In whose least part more wonders shall invite
Thy amazed eye* than all the Queens of earth
Can boast together* and this beauties heaven
Will I bestow on Paris, in whose love
He shall possess more raptures, than are sands
In all the glass of time.

Juno Fine aerie Blessings;
A small Art will distinguish 'twixt us three
Who can deserve thee best.

Par. I am transported,
And first my humble gratitude presented
For this, an honor above all, that has
A name in story, lent to grace a mortal,
And give me patience you deviner natures,
If it distract, and fright my weaker counsels.
It is not safe to think, what language then
Shall have the confidence to express those thoughts
That merit to be stifled? I must tremble
To be my self, and speak: Yet if I dream not,
I am commanded to resign this Ball,
Not mine, but hers, of you three best deserving:
Is It not a sin to name one best? oh pardon!
That I had leave to whisper in the ear
Of Jove two minutes.

Pal. It was meant by him,
You should declare your self to us.

Ven. Be confident,
And wisdom guide the sentence.

Juno. It Is expected,
Be therefore bold and wise.

Par. I feel new courage
Infused; there is something spreads through every part,
And chides my timorous youth into resolve
Of something that must be.

Omn. It must be welcome,
We are prepared.

Par. Great Juno, I not dare
To question your vast power, the world and you
Shut all up with one circle, wealth and kingdoms
Are able to strike blind with their temptation;
The eyes of young ambition, and my birth
Had sure those seeds of glory; but my fate
Has stifled 'em, and made them so familiar
With shades and humble thoughts, I cannot find,
My soul now fit for those desires.

Jun. Despise
My gifts? perish in wants unpittied.

Pal. Nay stay, and hear one more concluded Juno.
The Ball is not bestowed.

Par. It Is some unhappiness,
I look not with that admiration
Upon M^nerva's gifts. Philosophy
That teaches to contemplate heaven and nature,
Carries some trouble with it: and for Arms,
There are enough will bleed to be triumphant,
A Limb to me is better than a Laurel
Purchased with wounds; your pardon, if I think
The Queen of Love to be preferred, accept
The Ball bright Citherea, and with it
The humble heart of Paris.

Jun. Am I thus
Neglected by a Boy? how I despise him.

Pal. I pity the fond youth. Exit.


Par. They are both gone.


Ven. Displeased.


Par. Their anger frights not me,
So I be welcome here.

Ven. Be confidentt Enter Cupid.
Love shall confirm it: see my son appears.
Cupid, I thought thou had been lost.

Cup. Though blind,
I never lose my way to Beauty: Mother,
I all this while but hovered in the air,
To hear how Paris would determine, and
Rejoice in Beauties triumph, and thy justice

Par. Let Juno fret, and Pallas frown,
Nature to all succeeding times shall prove,
Wealth, Arts, and Arms must yield to conquering Love.

Cup. That name belongs to me.


Par. Venus and Cupid will no doubt agree.
Love dwells with Beauty, they together move;
There is no Beauty where there is not love.

Cup. For this choice, young Paris know,
While powerful Cupid has a Bow,
A golden shaft, or skillful hand,
All shall move at thy command.

Par. You both make Paris happy.


Ven. But where are
Our train of Graces, and the pleasant Hours,
To entertain our Darling? Where is Hymen?
Where is Delight?

Cup. Mother they both appear.


Enter Hymen and Delight SONG.
Him. Come ye Graces come away.


Del. Ye pleasant Hours why do you stay?


Both. Upon your Mistress wait.


Him. See where in state
The Queen of Love and Beauty is.

Del. On such a solemn night as this,
Sacred to kissing:
What bold Nymph dare be missing?

Him. They come, they come, behold
The modest Graces.

The Graces and Hours Enter. Del. For loves sake mend your paces,
And blush not to be bold.

Him. The Hours have lost their wings, I fear,


Del. No, they appear.

Chorus.
And Ida green
Is now the Court of Paphos Queen:
Where every one does welcome sing
To Venus, and their new made King.
They all bow to Venus.

Ven. All these wait
On me, and I command them to attend
On lovely Paris.

Par. Let me dwell ever
With Citherea, Ida is turned heaven.

Ven. Now let us dance, these pleasures are not active.


They dance; after which a Song. The Hours steal off. How dully all your
joys do move,
Delight is crippled here.
Your motion should be like to that above,
This is too thick a sphere.
The feather-footed hours are fled away,
Ashamed to stay:
Then follow, fly, oh come,
You must make haste,
If you will taste
Loves new Elysium.
Ven. We want some of our Nymphs Eunomia,
Fair Diche, and Irene, are they gone?

1. Grace. Although we did entreat them stay,
The pleasant hours are stolen away.

Ven. Which way.


Grac. That way,
To the Elysian Bowers.

Pa. We Will fly, and overtake the happy hours.


Exeunt. FINIS.

