POEMS etc. By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Sine aliqua dementia nullus Phoebus. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1646.

To the truly Noble, BERNARD HIDE, Esquire.
Sir,
IT will be a long Ambition satisfied, if by this, I have the happiness of
making my self more known to you, though in the same Act I put my self to a
blush, that I have not a better present to excuse the confidence. If I do look
upon you but as you relate to me in the common Interest and Fame of your
virtues, wherein I share with others, I may be censured a bold man, since as
they are proportioned to me, they are more then equal to the whole deserts of
some that write both honor and abilities. But when I consider that graceful
part of your Character, Sweetness, which gives both the Price and Beauty to your
other furnitures of Art and Nature, I cannot think my self without capacity of
pardon for this application, the well meant tender of my service.

They are Papers in themselves not worth your eye, or to be numbered with those
reserves of wit and learning that wait upon your recreations; and if they
receive entertainment abroad, I shall acknowledge it rather a debt which men
pay to your Name, then a merit of the Poems; and if they meet with the frowning
world, I have subscribed my own, to be accused for them, and this presumption.
Howsoever, if they may enjoy but your smile and shade, which was the first
choice of my thoughts, it shall encourage me to reach your worth with more
suitable imaginations; till when, give me leave to write my self

Your faithful Honourer, JAM. SHIRLEY.

To my Worthy Friend Mr. JAMES SHIRLEY, Upon His Poems.
WHen dearest Friend, thy verse does re-inspire
Loves pale decaying Torch with brighter fire,
Whilst everywhere thou do dilate thy flame,
And to the world spread thy Odelias name,
The justice of all Ages must remit
To Her the Prize of Beauty, Thee of Wit.
Then like some skilful Artist, that to wonder
Framing a piece, displeased, takes it asunder,
Thou Beauty do depose, Her Charms deny,
And all the mystic chains of Love untie;
Thus thy diviner Muse a power 'bove Fate
May boast, that can both make, and uncreate.
Next thou call'st back to life that Lovesick Boy,
To the kind-hearted Nymphs less fair then coy,
Who, by reflex beams burnt with vain desire,
Did Phenix-like, in his own flames expire:
But should he view his shadow drawn by thee,
He with himself once more in love would be:
Echo (who though she words pursue, her have
Can only overtake and stop the last)
Shall her first speech and humane veil obtain
To sing thy softer numbers over again.
Thus into dying Poetry, thy Muse
Does full perfection and new life infuse,
Each line deserves a Laurel, and thy praise
Asks not a Garland, but a Grove of Bays:
Nor can ours raise thy lasting Trophies higher,
Who only reach at merit, to admire.
But I must chide thee Friend, how can thou be
A Patron, yet a Foe to Poetry?
For while thou do this Age to Verse restore,
Thou do deprive the next of owning more;
And have so far even future aims surpast,
That none dare write; Thus being first and last,
All, their abortive Muses will suppress,
And Poetry by this increase grow less.
THO. STANLEY.

To my honored Friend M. Ja. Shirley, Upon the printing of his Elegant Poems.
ALthough thou want the Theaters applause,
Which now is fitly silenced by the Laws,
Since these sad times that Civil swords did rage,
And make three Kingdoms the lamented stage
Of real Tragedies, it was not fit
We quite should lose such monuments of wit
As flowd from thy terse pen: the Press alone
Can vindicate from dark oblivion
Thy Poems, Friend; those that with skill can read,
Shall be thy Judges now, and shall instead
Of ignorant spectators, grace thy name,
Though with a narrower, yet a truer Fame,
And crown with longer life thy worthy pains.
All Muses are not guiltless; but such strains
As thine, deserve, if I may verdict give,
In sober, chaste, and learned times to live.
THO. MAY.

To his honored Friend, the Author, Upon his Poems.
WHilst I am in thy Poem, I am lead
Through a rich Gallery, in which are spread
The choicest Pictures of true skill and height,
Where every pause is Rapture and Delight.
Here, by thy Fancy taught Apollo Plays,
To his own Daphne in a stand of Bays;
Here Myrtle Shades are, there the Cypress Groves;
Here Lovers sigh, and there embrace their Loves:
By -- through a flowery vale, there gently glides
A silver stream, whose prattling current chides
It self in Turtle-murmures, and betrayed
To every eye, like to some bashful maid
Discovered in her beauties, fain would have
To hide those blushes which do speak her chaste.
Here thy Narcissus in his loved despair,
Courts all the rest to silence; sweet and fair,
His love, and sorrow shows him; but to hear
Him breath 'em thus, who would not be all ear?
What in his story did before but move
Our pity, we do now admire, and love
Beyond himself; so every maid would be
His kind Nymphs Rival, borrowing from thee
Those charms of love and language, where thy Art
Gives Cupid feathers unto every dart.
Thy Poem is as lovely, and all wit
Thy Echo is, and making love to it:
Let Ovid boast their story, but their names
Will take Eternity from thee, dear James.
GEO. BUCKE.

To his Learned Friend, M. JA. SHIRLEY, On his Elegant Poems.
FRiend, in this dearth of Art, when but to write
Or think in verse, is to be destroyed quite;
When Sergeants too implacable are set
To fill the Compters up with wit and debt:
Nor any hope of rescue but from those
Who would distrust their Creed if it were not Prose,
I wonder at the influence of thy Pen,
That could engage such generous knowing men
(Warmed with thy flame) so boldly to advance
Against the prevailing monster, Ignorance.
Sure this so fair return of gratitude
To dare thus in thy cause, must needs conclude
Thy elegant expressions (while the Scene
Obeyed thy powerful Empire) are not clean
Obliterated, when thy all-charming wit
Secures so firm Allegiance unto it.
It Is wisely done, thus to erect a Shrine
Teternize their own names as well as thine.
I envy not their Fate; let it suffice
They deck thine Altar; but the sacrifice
Is my fixed Heart, devoted to thy worth,
Which all their labord lines can never set forth.
Best Lapidaries oftentimes do set
The fairest Diamonds in a foil of Jett.
FRA. TUCKYR.

To my very Worthy and most Ingenious Friend, Mr. JA. SHIRLEY, Upon His Poems.
WHen I am raised by some more noble flame
To sing of thee, and thy Odelias Name,
So richly set in verse; Thy lines invite
Me still to read, and I forget to write.
So when a Painters hand would take the grace
And figure of some admirable face,
Struck with the sight, he lets his Pencil fall,
And when his hand should work, his eye does all.
Yet if a sense of thy sweat fancy may
Inspire a resolution to betray
My want of skill, and choice in husbandry,
To write my own, not read thy Poetry:
Be it enough to draw the Reader near,
While we but say the wit of Shirley's here.
And though thy worthier friends their flowers bring,
To set forth thy Odelia like the Spring,
Men will with envy look upon the dress,
That stays their eyes from the wished comeliness,
And when they see her beauty to be such,
Will say their love had shaddow'd it too much.
ED. POVVEL.

Amicissimo J. Sherleio, and Musae jam Reduci.
QUid non, Te rediente, dulce sperem!
Coelorum facies nova, and novus frons
Antiquusque vigor recurrit omnis;
Nympharum proprius decor, suusque,
Font and Castalides suo replentur.
Dignaris mihi, caeterisque grandem
Impertire salutem, and ipse plenus
Phoebi numine, Laeta Gratiarum
Musarumque Cohors amoena, Circum
Te (Sherleie) canunt, and ore captat
Dulci Quae que tuo Jocosa Carmen.
Sic optatus eras -- abibit omnis
Infoecunda and opaca nostra nubes
Te Claro rediente sole: Noster
Exul jam Genius redit; Poetam
Arridente oculo jucundus ipse
Musarumque suum Pater salutat.
Tendunt jam vacuam Chelyn Camoenae,
Cingit Laurea dum virens capillos:
Nectunt Coelicolae ex Tuo coronam
Horto (mellifluae Artifex Minervae)
Aptant inque Tuum Caput Sorores --
Tu illis dulce Levamen atque Amico
GEO. HILL.

When the Age groaned out Thou and thy Must were gone,
And Epitaphs each Wit was thinking on;
When to bestrew thy grave, and stick thy Hearse
With herbs, or the more fragrant flowers of Verse;
When to thy worth rich Trophies how to raise,
Our fancies strove; The Cypress then turned Bays,
Which on thy brow graced with Poetic Rage,
Secured Thee from the thunder of the Age.
Thus the Springs warmth brings back by mild degrees,
Raiment and food to the leafelesse, saplesse Trees:
Thus the wingd quire their vocal Lutes do string,
And Turtles having found their mates, do sing:
Thus like the quickening sun, thy flames do spread,
And add new life to us, that feared thee dead.
GEO. HILL.

CUPIDS Call.
HO! Cupid calls, come Lovers, come,
Bring his wanton Harvest home:
The West-wind blows, the Birds do sing,
The Earth's enameled, it is high Spring:
Let Hinds whose soul is Corn and Hay,
Expect their crop another day.
Into Loves Spring-garden walk,
Virgins dangle on their stalk,
Full blown, and playing at fifteen:
Come bring your amorous sickles then?
See they are pointing to their beds,
And call to reap their Maiden-heads.
Hark, how in yonder shadie grove
Sweet Philomel is warbling love,
And with her voice is courting Kings,
For since she was a Bird, she sings,
There is no pleasure but in men,
Oh come and ravish me again.
Virgins that are youg and fair
May kiss, and grow into a pair;
Then warm and active use your blood,
No sad thought congeal the flood:
Nature no medicine can impart
When age once snows upon our heart.
To his unkind M.
SUre thy heart was flesh at first,
For what sin has it been cursed
Into that stubborn thing of late,
Above the reach of wonder? what
In some winter was it lost,
And its blood drunk up by frost,
Grew stiff, and so a rock became?
Yet this would soften at a flame.
Or did thou bathe thy pretty limbs
In some cold and fatal streams,
Which turn what they embrace to stone,
And by degrees thy heart grew one?
I know not, but too true I find
A Quarry of prodigious kind:
Yet since I loved it, I will try
From the warm Limbeck of my eye,
In such a method to distill
Tears on thy marble nature, till
Their frequent drops by loves new Art,
Write my Epitaph on thy heart;
That men may know for whom I die,
And say beneath that stone I lie.
Good Morrow.
GOod morrow unto her, who in the night
Shoots from her silver brow more light
Then Cynthia, upon whose state
All other servile stars of Beauty wait.
Good morrow unto her, who gives the day,
Whose eyes preserve a purer Ray
Then Phoebus, when in Thetis streams
He has new bathed himself, and washed his beams.
The day and night are only thine, and we
Were lost in darkness but for thee;
For thee we live, all hearts are thine,
But none so full of faith and flame as mine.
To his Mistress.
I Would the God of Love would die,
And give his Bow and Shafts to me,
I ask no other Legacy:
This happy fate I then would prove,
That since thy heart I cannot move,
I Would cure, and kill my own with Love.
Yet why should I so cruel be
To kill my self with loving thee,
And thou a Tyrant still to me?
Perhaps, could thou affection show
To me, I should not love thee so,
And that would be my medicine too.
Then choose to love me, or deny,
I will not be so fond to die
A Martyr to thy cruelty:
If thou be weary of me, when
Thou art so wise to love again,
Command, and I Will forsake thee then.
To Odelia.
HEalth to my fair Odelia, some that know
How many months are past
Since I beheld thy lovely brow,
Would count an Age at least:
But unto me
Whose thoughts are still on thee;
I vow
By thy black eyes, it is but an hour ago.
That Mistress I pronounce but poor in bliss,
That when her servant parts,
Gives not as much with her last kiss,
As will maintain two hearts
Till both do meet
To taste, what else is sweet.
Is It fit
Time measure Lov, or our Affection it?
Cherish that heart Odelia, that is mine,
And if the North thou fear,
Dispatch but from thy Southern clime
A sigh, to warm thine here:
But be so kind
To send by the next wind,
It Is far,
And many accidents do wait on War.
To his Mistress confined.
THink not my Phebe, cause a cloud
Does now thy heavenly beauty shroud,
My wandering eye
Can stoop to common beauties of the sky.
Be thou but kind, and this Eclipse
Shall neither hinder eyes, nor lips;
For we will meet
Within our hearts, and kiss, when none shall see it.
Nor can thou in thy Prison be,
Without some loving signs of me,
When thou do spy
A sunbeam peep into thy room, it is I,
For I am hid within that flame,
And thus unto thy chamber came,
To let thee see,
In what a Martyrdom I burn for thee.
There Is no sad picture that does dwell
Upon thy Arras wall, but well
resembles me.
No matter though our years do not agree,
Love can make old, as well as time,
And he that does but twenty clime,
If he will prove
As true as I, shows fourscore years in love.
Loves Hue and Cry.
IN Loves name you are charged, oh fly
And make a speedy Hue and Cry
After a face, which the other day
Stole my wandering heart away:
To direct you, take in brief
These few marks to know the Thief.
Her hair a net of beams, would prove
Strong enough to imprison Jove
Dressed in his Eagles shape; her brow
Is a spacious field of snow,
Her eyes so rich, so pure a gray,
Every look creates a day,
And if they close themselves (not when
The Sun does set) it is night again:
In her cheecks are to be seen
Of flowers, both the King and Queen,
Thither by all the Graces led,
And smiling in their nuptial bed:
On whom, like pretty Nymphs do wait
Her twin-born lips, whose Virgin state
They do deplore themselves, nor miss
To blush, so often as they kiss
Without a Man. Beside the rest,
You shall know this fellon best
By her tongue, for when your ear
Once a harmony shall hear
So ravishing, you do not know
Whether you be in heaven, or no;
That, that is she; O straight surprise,
And bring her unto Loves Assize;
But lose no time, for fear that she
Ruin all mankind, like me,
Fate, and Philosophy control,
And leave the world without a soul.
Goodnight.
BId me no more goodnight; because
It Is dark, must I away?
Love does acknowledge no such Laws,
And Love it is I obey:
Which blind, does all your light despise,
And has no need of eyes
When day is fled:
Besides the Sun, which you
Complain is gone, it is true,
Is gone to bed:
Oh let us do so too.
WOuld you know what is soft? I dare
Remit you to the Down, or Air:
The Stars we all acknowledge bright,
The Snow too is exceeding white:
To please your sent, 't will not be hard
To present you bruised Nard:
And would you heavenly music hear,
I Will call the Orbs to take your ear,
If old Pythagoras sing true.
But Ambrosia, heavenly dew
Divinely must affect your taste,
And Nectar is your drink at last.
But would you have all these delights in one,
Know but the fair Odelia, and it is done,
A Fayring.
A Fayring if you ask, I will next day
Bestow upon you the new puppet play:
The children made in wax, I dare not try,
For I confess, the modells at your eye
Will melt themselves away, and then you know
The man will be undone, and lose his show.
What monsters would you see? I Will bring a man
Has been in France or Italy, that can
Play his deformities with all the fair.
We Will for the Cloisters, where the pictures are,
The King and Queens, the Princes, all the babies,
The paper Lords, and all the painted Ladies,
The men of ginger-bread, what art can do,
You shall see Canibals will eat them too.
We Will to the horse that dances, and ('it is said)
Tells money and which Virgin is a maid.
This beast must be an understanding creature,
For he will snort you by instinct of nature:
If you but name the Pope, there is something in it,
That a wall eye should read Geneva print.
These are but half the knacks we will see, and buy,
If you will walk into the Fair with me:
But you are angry, Mistress, troth, I meant
A jest, in answer of your merriment;
For sure you cannot mean, with hope to gain
That gift from me is worth your entertain.
For whatsoever is not I, must be
Trifles, and empty things bestowed on thee;
And you may thank your beauty for it, I am
So poor, I have not left my self a name,
Or substance, not translated thine before,
He that bestowed his heart, can give no more.
If thou will have a Fayring from me, then
Give my self back, I Will give it thee again.
To L. for a wreath of Bays sent.
SOul of my Muse! what active unknown fire
Already does thy Delphick wreath inspire?
O'th sudden, how my faculties swell high,
And I am all a powerful Prophecy!
Sleep ye dull Caesar's, Rome will boast in vain
Your glorious Tryumphs, One is in my brain,
Great as all yours, and circled with thy Bays,
My thoughts take Empire over all land and seas:
Proof against all the Planets, and the stroke
Of Thunder, I rise up Augustus Oak
Within my guard of Laurel, and made free
From age, look fresh still as my Daphnean Tree.
My Fancie's narrow yet, till I create
For thee another world, and in a state
As free as Innocence, shame all Poets wit,
To climb no higher then Elysium yet,
Where the pale lovers meet, and teach the groves
To sigh, and sing vain legends of their loves;
We will have other flights, and raste such things
Are only fit for Sainted Queens and Kings.
Musaeus, Homer, and ye sacred rest,
Long since believed in your own ashes blessed,
Awake, and live again, and having wrote
Our story, wish your other songs forgot,
And your selves too, but our high Subject must
In spite of death and time, new soul your dust.
What cannot I command? what can a thought
Be now ambitious of, but shall be brought
By virtue of my charm? I will undo
The year, and at my pleasure make one new:
All Spring, whose blooming Paradise, but when
I list, shall with one frown wither again.
Astrologers leave searching the vast skies,
Teach them all fate, Odelia, from thine eyes;
All that was earth resolves, my spirit's free,
I have nothing left now but my Soul and Thee.
To the Painter preparing to draw M. M. H.
BE not too forward Painter: it is
More for thy fame, and art, to miss
All other faces, then come near
The Lady, that expects here:
Be wise, and think it less disgrace
To draw an Angel, then her face:
For in such forms, who is so wise
To tell thee where thy error lies?
But since all beauty (that is known)
Is in her Virgin sweetness, One,
How can it be, that painting her,
But every look should make thee err?
But thou art resolute I see;
Yet let my fancy walk with thee:
Compose a ground more dark and sad,
Then that the early Chaos had:
And show, to the whole Sexes shame,
Beauty was darkness till she came:
Then paint her eyes, whose active light
Shall make the former shadows bright:
And with their every beam supply
New day, to draw her picture by:
Now, if thou will complete the face,
A wonder paint in every place.
Beneath these, for her fair necks sake,
White, as the Paphian Turtles, make
A pillar, whose smooth base does show
It self lost in a mount of snow:
Her breast, the house of chaste desire,
Cold, but increasing others fire.
But how I lose (instructing thee)
Thy pencil, and my Poetry?
For when thou have expressed all art,
As high as truth, in every part,
She can resemble at the best,
One, in her beauties silence dressed,
Where thou, like a dull looker on,
Art lost, and all thy art undone:
For if she speak, new wonders rise
From her teeth, chin, lip, and eyes:
So far above that excellent
Did take thee first, thou wo't repent
To have begun, and lose in the end
Thy eyes with wonder how to mend.
At such a loss, here is all thy choice,
Leave off, or paint her with a voice.
To a L. who had courted a Lady of much perfection, and after offered his
Service to another of an inferior Beauty and Parts; in confidence that the
first would re-accept him.
ANd can thy proud Apostate eyes
Court her again, with hope to entice
One gentle language, or a smile
Upon a Renegade so vile?
Thing called a Lord, forbear; it is fit
Ambition leave thee like thy wit.
Send for an Exorcist from Rome,
And let him with full orders come,
To dispossess thy wanton sense
Of this grand devil, Impudence.
Can she, in whom shines every grace,
Loves wide fancy can embrace,
Forget her nobler soul, to be
Upon thy pride retriv'd by thee?
She has let fall too many beams;
Thus heaven upon corrupted streams
Has dropped transparent dew, which shows
The Spring is clear, whence crystal flows.
Enjoy thy madness, or what is worse,
Thy new made Mistress, it is a curse
To be in hell, but thine is more,
Whose eyes have witnest heaven before:
The Hesperian apples thou may see
Hereafter, but never climb the tree;
For rather then thou gather fruit,
The Plant will wither at the root.
Dote still upon the Dragon, she
Is fierce, and formed enough for thee:
And if thy own ill can dispense,
Kiss there, and suck more poison thence.
A Lover that durst not speak to his M.
I Can no longer hold, my body grows
Too narrow for my soul, sick with repose,
My passions call to be abroad; and where
Should I discharge their weight, but in her ear,
From whose fair eyes the burning arrow came,
And made my heart the Trophie to her flame.
I dare not. How? Cupid is blind we know,
I never heard that he was dumb till now;
Love, and not tell my Mistress? How crept in
That subtle shaft? Is it to love a sin?
Is It ill to feed a longing in my blood?
And was it no fault in her to be so good?
I must not then be silent, yet forbear,
Convey thy passion rather in some tear,
Or let a sigh express, how much thy bliss
Depends on her, or breathe it in a kiss,
And mingle souls; loud accents call the eyes
Of envy, and but waken jealousies:
Then silence be my language, which if she
But understand, and speak again to me,
We shall secure our Fate, and prove at least
The miracles of love are not quite ceast.
Bar frowns from our discourse, and every where
A smile may be his own Interpreter.
Thus we may read in spite of standers by,
Whole volumes, in the twinkling of an eye.
To one that said his Mistress was old.
TEll me not Time has played the Thief
Upon her beauty, my belief
Might have been mocked, and I had been
An Heretic, if I had not seen,
My Mistress is still fair to me,
And now I all those graces see
That did adorn her Virgin brow;
Her eye has the same flame in it now,
To kill or save, the Chemists fire
Equally burns; so my desire:
Not any Rose-bud less within
Her cheek, the same snow on her chin:
Her voice that heavenly music bears,
First charmed my soul, and in my ears
Did leave it trembling, her lips are
The self same lovely Twins they were:
After so many years I miss
No Flower in all my Paradise.
Time, I despise thy rage, and thee,
Thieves do not always thrive, I see.
Upon his M. Dancing.
I Stood and saw my Mistress dance,
Silent, and with so fixed an eye,
Some might suppose me in a trance,
But being asked why,
By one that knew I was in love,
I could not but impart
My wonder, to behold her move
So nimbly with a marble heart.
Upon his Mistress sad.
MElancholy hence, and get
Some piece of earth to be thy seat,
Here the Air and nimble fire
Would shoot up to meet desire;
Sullen humor leave her blood,
Mix not with the purer Flood,
But let pleasures swelling here,
Make a Springtide all the year.
Love a thousand sweets distilling,
And with pleasure bosoms filling,
Charm all eyes, that none may find us,
Be above, before, behind us:
And while we thy raptures taste,
Compel time it self to stay,
Or by forelock hold him fast,
Least occasion slip away.
A Gentleman in Love with two Ladies.
IF Love his arrows shoot so fast,
Soon his feathered stock will waste,
But I mistake in thinking so:
Loves arrows in his quiver grow;
And it appears too true in me,
Cupid wants no Artillery,
Two shafts feed upon my breast,
Make it a mark for all the rest:
Kill me with love, thou angry Sun
Of Citherea, or let one,
But one sharp golden Arrow fly.
To wound that heart for whom I die.
Cupid if thou be a child,
Be no god, or be more mild.
Melancholy converted.
Welcome, welcome again to thy wits,
This is a Holy Day;
We Will have no plots, nor melancholy fits,
But merrily pass the time away.
They are mad that are sad;
Be ruled by me,
And never were two so merry as we.
The kitchen shall catch cold n^ more,
We Will have no key to the buttry door,
The Fiddlers shall sing,
The house shall ring,
And the World shall see
What a merry merry couple we will be.
To a Mistress in whose Letter some Tears were dropped.
THink not my dearest Mistress, that I can
Forget my vows to thee, and be a man:
Love is for more then life, that is but a span.
Those drops which on thy Letter did appear,
At once both stained and made thy paper clear,
I would have read thy eyes, and not thy tear.
Yet I Will not chide thee for it, it may be
To make me rich thou sentst those pearls to me:
Alas, I must be poor in wanting thee.
Had I a thought about me did not lay
Thee up a treasure to my love, I Would say
Thy tears were sorrow for my sin, and pray.
But knowing my self thine, how e're thou do
An act to grieve my love, and thy own too,
My self I Will flatter by not thinking so.
Examine thy own soul, and if thou find
Faith there, it was but coppyed from my mind;
Which may be wounded, never be unkind.
So farewell my Odelia, be thou just,
For when I die, I Will love thee in my dust;
And when I fail thee most, secure thy trust.
Presenting his Mistress with a Bird.
WAlking to taste the welcome Spring,
The Birds which cheerful notes did sing
On their green Perches, among the rest,
One whose sweet warble pleased me best,
I tempted to the snare, and caught,
To you I send it to be taught;
It Is young, and apt to learn, and near
A voice so full of art, and clear
As yours, it cannot choose but rise
Quickly a Bird of Paradise.
Upon Scarlet and blush colored Ribbands given by two Ladies.
LEt other servants boast a snowy glove,
Or glory in their Mistress hair,
Or think they straight immortal prove
If they once obtain to wear
A Ring enameled, by her finger blessed,
Wherein the Rainbow is expressed,
In whose circle Cupid dwelling,
Does offer a sweet Poesy to their smelling.
Not all the orient beauties that embrace
Fair Venus neck, nay grant that she
Daigne to disfurnish her own face,
And bestow her Mole on me:
Not this, nor those are half so rich, so fair
As these two silken Ribbands are;
Favors Juno might have given
The Graces, on her wedding day in heaven.
Mysterious Colors! carrying more then show,
For you express in your rich dye
Rare virtues, which the givers owe,
Constant love, and modesty:
To which when I prove false, my blood be cursed,
To satisfy the injured first:
Shame be next reward, and then
I forfeit Blush, and Scarlet back again.
To his Mistress upon the Bays withered.
FAir Cruel, see the Bays which thou
Did send to crown my verse:
How well with Cypress, and sad Ewe
Would it become my hearse?
It Is thy unkindnes that does kill
The leaves, which fade like me,
Yet on the wreath but cast a smile,
'Twill seem another Tree.
Such shine will quicken what is dead,
Then send it me again,
Which shall have virtue on my head,
To make the wearer green.
Thus in a frost I Will meet a flame,
And Phoebus Priest am made,
And Thee, I growing fresh, will name
My Nymph, my light, my shade.
Strephon, Daphne.
S. COme my Daphne, come away,
We do waste the Crystal day;
It Is Strephon calls.

Da. What would my love?


S. Come follow to the Myrtle grove;
Where Venus shall prepare
New chaplets for thy hair.

D. Were I shut up within a tree,
I Would rend my bark to follow thee.

S, My shepherdess, make haste,
The minutes slide too fast:

D. In those cooler shades will I
Blind, as Cupid, kiss thine eye.

S. In thy perfumed bosom then I Will stray,
In such warm snow who would not lose his way?

Chor.
We Will laugh and leave this world behind,
And gods themselves that see,
Shall envy thee, and me:
But never find
Such joys, when they embrace a Deity.
Taking leave when his Mistress was to ride.
HOw is it my ungentle fate,
When Love commanded me to wait
Upon my Saint, by break of day,
I brought a heart, but carried none away?
When we joined ceremonious breath,
And lips, that took a leave like death,
With a sad parting thought oppressed,
Did it leave mine, to glide into her breast?
Or was it when like Pallas she
Was mounted, and I gazed to see,
My heart then looking through mine eye,
Did after her out at that window fly?
'Twas so, and cause I did not ride,
My heart would Lackey by her side,
Or some more careful Angel be,
To see my Mistress safe conveyed for me.
Nay then attend thy charge, nor fear
Storms in the way, and if a tear
By chance, at looking back on thee
Bedew her eye, drink that a health to me.
But smile at night, and be her guest,
At once her music and her feast,
And if at any mention made
Of me, she sigh, say all thy travell's paid.
But when she is gently laid to rest,
Oh listen softly to her breast,
And thou shall hear her soul, but see
Thou wake her not, for she may dream of me.
But what is all this, when I am here,
If fancy bid thee welcome there?
Heart, this last duty I implore,
Or bring her back, or see thy Cell no more.
Love for Enjoying.
FAir Lady, what is your face to me?
I was not only made to see,
Every silent stander by
May thus enjoy as much as I.
That blooming nature on your cheek,
Is still inviting me to seek
For unknown wealth, within the ground
Are all the Royal metals found,
Leave me to search, I have a thread
Through all the Labyrinth shall lead,
And through every winding vein
Conduct me to the golden Mine;
Which once enjoyed, will give me power
To make new Indies every hour:
Look on those Jewels that abound
Upon your dress, that Diamond
No flame, no luster could impart,
Should not the Lapidaries Art
Contribute here and there a star,
And just such things ye women are,
Who do not in rude Quarries shine,
But meeting us you are made divine.
Come let us mix our selves, and prove
That action is the soul of Love;
Why do we coward-gazing stand,
Like Armies in the Netherland,
Contracting fear at eithers sight,
Till we both grow too weak to fight?
Let Us charge for shame, and choose you whether
One shall fall, or both together;
This is Loves war, who ever dies,
If the surviver be but wise,
He may reduce the spirit fled,
For the other kiss will cure the dead.
Upon the Princes Birth.
FAir fall the Muses that in well-chim'd verse
Our Princes happy birth do sing,
I have a heart as full of joy as their's,
As full of duty to my King,
And thus I tell
How every bell
Did ring forth Englands merry glee,
The Bonefires too,
With much ado
It were great pity to belie her,
Made all the City seem one fire,
A joyful sight to see.
The graver Citizens were foxt that day,
With beer and joy most soundly paid,
The Constables in duty reeld away,
And charged others them to aid:
To see how soon
Both Sun and Moon,
And the seven Stars forgotten be;
But when 'twas night
Their heads were light,
To which they did exalt their horn,
Because a Prince of Wales was born:
A joyful etc.
The Dutchmen having drunk so much before,
Could not so well express their joy:
The French condemned not to be sober more,
Drank healths unto the Royal Boy,
In their own wine,
Neat, brisk, and fine:
The valiant Irish, Cram-a-Cree,
It pledged has
In Vsquebagh,
And being in this jovial vein,
They made a bogg even of their brain,
A joyful etc.
The Welsh for joy her Cousin Prince was born,
Was mean to change S. Tavie's day,
Swearing no leeks was be hereafter worn
But on the twenty nine of May:
None so merry
Drinking Perry,
And Metheglin on their knee;
Was every man
A Trojan than;
Thus armed the Tivel her defy,
And dare tell Beelzebub her lie.
A joyful etc.
The Scots in bonny ale their joy did sing,
And wished the Royal Babe a man
That they might beg him but to be their King,
And let him rule'em when he can:
The Spanjard made
A shrugg, and said
After my pipe, come follow me,
Canary Sack
Did go to wrack,
Some Merchants went to Malago,
Some drowned in good old Charnico,
A joyful etc.
And now let all good Subjects prayers ascend,
That heaven with milk would swel their breast
That nurse the babe, may Angels still attend
To rock him gently to his rest.
Let his glory
Raise a story
Worthy an immortal pen:
So Charles God bless,
Our Queen no less,
And in conclusion of my Song,
I wish that man without a tongue
That will not say Amen.
To his honored friend Tho. Stanley Esquire, upon his elegant Poems.
A Palsy shakes my pen, while I intend
A votive to thy Muse; since to commend
With my best skill, will be as short of thee,
As thou above all future poesy.
Thou early miracle of Wit and Art,
That has prodigiously so got the start
Of Ages in thy study; Time must be
Old once again in overtaking thee.
I know not where I am, when I peruse
Thy learned loves, how willingly I lose
My self in every grove? and wish to be
(Might it contribute to thy wreath) a Tree,
Carew, whose numerous language did before
Steer every genial soul, must be no more
The Oracle of Love, and might he come
But from his own to thy Elysium,
He would repent his immortality
Given by loose Idolaters, and die
A Tenant to these shades, and by thy ray
He need not blush to court his Celia.
Thy numbers carry height, yet clear, and terse,
And innocent, as becomes the soul of verse:
Poets from hence may add to their great name,
And learn to strike from Chastity a flame.
But I expect some murmuring Critic here
Should say, no Poems ever did appear
Without some fault, this I must grant a truth,
And Sir, let me deal plainly with your youth,
Not error-proof yet, something may admit
A censure, if you will secure your wit,
I know the only way to bring't about,
Accept my love, and leave this copy out.
To the E. of S. upon his recovery.
MY Lord, the voice that did your sickness tell,
Struck like a midnight chime or knell;
At every sound
I took into my sense a wound,
Which had no cure till I did hear
Your health again
Restored, and then
There was a balsame powered into mine ear.
It was my wonder first, what could invade
A temper was so even made;
Then fear stepped in,
Lest nature should commit a sin
By yielding to resign your breath,
Upon whose hearse
All tears and verse
Would fall, but not enough lament your death.
But hymns are now required, it is time to rise,
And pay the altar sacrifice,
My heart allows
No gummes, nor amber, but pure vows,
There Is fire at breathing of your name,
And do not fear,
I have a tear
Of joy, to curb any immodest flame.
In you, since honor is restored, oh may
Health in your noble bosom stay,
And with your blood
Move in a Circle all that is good;
And though Time sicken with his years,
And winter's come,
Let your Age bloome,
And look as fresh as when the Spring appears.
One that loved none but deformed Women.
WHat should my Mistress do with hair?
Her frizling, curling, I can spare;
But let her forehead be well plough'd,
And Hemp within the furrows sowed.
No dressing should conceal her ear,
Which I would have at length appear,
At which should hang with a device,
The wealthy pearls of both her eyes.
And such a Nose I would desire
Should represent the Town a fire;
Cheeks black, and swelling like the south,
No tongue, nor mark within her mouth.
Oh give me such a face,
Such a grace,
No two should have sport,
Or in wedlock better agree:
The devil should into the bawdy Court
If he durst but Cuckold me.
The Commonwealth of Birds.
LEt other Poets write of dogs,
Some sing of fleas, or fighting frogs,
Another Muse be catching fish,
And every Bird cook his own dish.
The Commonwealth of Birds I bring
To feast your ears: then hear me sing.
A Buzzard is the Major of the Town,
And Gulls are Brethren of the Gown,
Some Widgens of the Peace and Quorum,
Commit all that are brought before um.
Cocks are the under-men of trade,
Within whose Hall a Law is made,
That every Spring each Citizen
Shall march, to bring the Cuckoe in.
Every Constable has a claw,
A head of Batt, and brain of Daw;
And as wife as these, you will
Know the Watchmen by their bill;
Who take no wandering Owls by night
But they convey them to the Kite
Who keeps the Compter, where together
They laugh, and drink, and molt their feather.
If you come to Court, there are
A Robin Red-brest, and a Stare;
Canary Birds do sigh, not sing,
The Larks have quite forgot the Spring.
What should harmonious birds sing there,
When a Rook's master of the Quire?
They that do practice Common Pleas
With greatest art, are Goldfinches:
And Crows by Physic, plump, and thrive,
Men die, that birds of prey may live.
If for the Church you look, sad age!
You Will find the Clergy in a Cage:
Faith and Religion declines,
When good wits are no more Divines:
For Lapwings everywhere you will see
Perch up, and preach Divinity;
Who sing, though every soul be vexed,
Here it is, when farthest from their Text.
But what most admiration moves,
The soldiers are all fighting Doves;
And no reward for Prose, or Verse,
The Scholars are turned wood-peckers.
So fast the various birds intrude,
Art cannot name them; To conclude,
Every wise-marris a VVren,
And black-Swans the honest men.
A wonder in the close I bring,
A Nightingale to these is King,
Who never (sweet Bird) goes to rest,
But has a Thorn upon his breast.
To the Excellent Pattern of Beauty and Virtue, L. El. Co. of Or.
Madam,
WEre you but only great, there are some men
Whose heat is not the Muses, nor their Pen
Steered by chaste truth, could flatter you in prose,
Or glorious verse, but I am none of those:
I never learned that trick of Court to wear
Silk at the cost of flattery, or make dear
My pride, by painting a great Ladies face
When she had don't before, and swear the grace
Was Natures; Anagram upon her Name,
And add to her no virtue, my own shame.
I could not make this Lord a god, then try
How to commit new Court idolatry;
And when he dies, hang on his silent hearse
Wet Elegies, and haunt his ghost in verse:
These, some hold witty, thriving garbs; but I
Choose to my loss a modest Poesy;
And place my Genius upon Subjects fit
For imitation rather then bold wit;
And such are you, who both in name and blood
Born great, have learned this lesson to be good.
Armed with this knowledge, Madam, I not fear
To hold fair correspondence with the year,
And bring my gift, hearty, as you are fair,
A servants wish, for all my wealth is prayer,
Which with the year thus enters. May you be
Still the same flowing goodness that we see.
In your most noble Lord be happy still,
And heaven chain your hearts into one will!
Be rich in your two darlings of the Spring,
Which as it waits, perfumes their blossoming,
The growing pledges of your love, and blood;
And may that unborn blessing timely bud,
The chaste, and noble Treasure of your womb,
Your own, and th'Ages expectation come!
And when your days and virtues have made even,
Die late, beloved of earth, and change for heaven.
To the H. Lady, D. C. at his departure.
MAdam whose first style is good,
Great in virtue as in blood,
For my entertainment, take
This warm sacrifice, I make
In wishes, which flow best, which art
Has little traffic with the heart.
May every Sun that rises, pay
You pleasure long lived as the day,
And at night the silent streams
Of pious thoughts fill up your dreams:
For him, to whom your heart is tied,
Keep it still Virgin, and Bride,
That often as you go to bed,
You give and take a maidenhead.
Never sigh, but when you pray,
May your Husband smile all day:
And when clouds make dark his sky,
Strike new daylight from your eye,
And if e're he think amiss,
May you cure him with a kiss!
But to keep his heart at home,
Be rich in treasures of your womb,
And taught by examples of your love,
With every Olive Branch a Dove.
A Letter to the Lady D. S. sent with a New Comedy.
MAdam, who make the glory of your blood
No privilege at all to be less good;
Pardon the rudenes of a Comedy,
That (taught too great ambition) would fly
To kiss your white hand, and receive from thence,
Both an authority, and innocence.
It Is not this great man, nor this Prince, whose fame
Can more advance a Poem, then your name,
To whose dear virtue truth is bound, and we,
That there is so much left for history.
I do acknowledge custom, that to men
Such Poems are presented, but my pen
Is not engaged, nor can allow too far
A Salique law in Poetry, to bar
Ladies the inheritance of wit, whose soul
It active, and not able to control,
At some usurp the chair, which write a style
To breathe the Reader better then a mile;
But no such empty titles buy my flame,
Nor will I sin so much to show their name
In print; some servile Muses be their drudge,
That sweat to find a Patron, not a Judge.
To you great Lady then, in whom do meet
Candor and Judgment, humble at your feet
I throw these papers, wishing you may see
Joys multiplied, to your eternity.
To the never enough Honored E. of St. on New-yeares day at night, after other
entertainment.
SIr, give me leave to Court your stay,
There is something I must pay,
Due to your greatness, and the day,
Which by a revolution of the Sphere
Is proud to open the New-year,
And having looked on you, has hid his face,
And changed his robe, with stars to grace
And light you going to bed, so wait
With trembling luster on your state.
Shine brighter yet, y are not the same,
Clear Lamps you were, shine like the name
Of him I bow to, while a flame
Active and burning here with pure desires,
Shall equal your best borrowed fires.
May health, the bosoms friend stream through your blood
And know no end of the chaste flood:
And though time shift, and years renew,
May yet the Spring be still in you.
May she, whom heaven has sweetly graced
And in your noble bosom placed,
Whose heart, by only you embraced
Has made one true, and holy Gordian prove
Fruitful in children as in love:
And may that fair top branch, whose early bloom
Does promise all the fruit can come
To virtue, and your name, be blessed,
And live a story to the rest.
All honor with your same increase,
In your bosom dwell soft peace,
And Justice the true root of these.
Wealth be the worst, and outside of your fate,
And may not heaven your life translate,
Till for your Royal Master, and this Isle.
Your acts have filled a Chronicle.
In all that is great and good, be bold,
And every year be copy of the old.
To W. M. of N.
HAil great Preserver of the King
And your own honor; such a thing
At Court but rare appears;
And when in calmer years
So much virtue, so much crime
Shall be read both at one time:
Treason shall want a Child, and your worth known,
Posterity shall thank the Kingdoms groan.
When I before did fancy Men
Of a most glorious soul, my pen
Did Prophecy of you,
To whom so much is due,
That each Patriot must rise
To court you with a sacrifice,
And boldest Writers telling ages, why
Need fear no fiction in their Poetry.
Great both in Peace and War, thus fame
Did honor Sidney; on your name
Two Laurels grew, and they
That speak them both, may say,
Thus the fluent Ovid wrote,
And thus too, wise Caesar fought;
For when your story shall be perfect, you
May both deserve, and have their envies too.
To M. Phil. Massenger on his Renegado.
DAblers in Poetry, that only can
Court this weak Lady, or that Gentleman
With some loose wit in time;
Others that fright the time
Into belief with mighty words, that tear
A passage through the ear;
Or nicer men
That through a perspective will see a play,
And use it the wrong way,
(Not worth thy pen)
Though all their pride exalt them, cannot be
Competent Judges of thy lines or thee.
I must confess I have no glorious name
To rescue judgment, no Poetic flame
To dress thy Muse with praise,
And Phoebus his own bays;
Yet I commend this Poem, and dare tell
The World I liked it well;
And if there be
A Tribe, who in their wisdom dare accuse
The Offspring of thy Muse;
Let them agree,
Conspire one Comedy, and they will say
It Is easier to commend then make a Play.
Io.
YOu Virgins that did late despair
To keep your wealth from cruel men,
Tie up in silk your eareles hair,
Soft peace is come again.
Now Lovers eyes may gentle shoot
A flame that wo'not kill:
The Drum was angry, but the Lute
Shall whisper what you will.
Sing Io, Io, for his sake,
Who has restored your drooping heads,
With choice of sweetest flowers make
A garden where he treads.
Whilst we whole groves of Laurel bring,
A petty triumph to his brow,
Who is the Master of our Spring,
And all the bloom we owe.
To a L. upon a Looking-glass sent.
WHen this Crystal shall present
Your beauty to your eye,
Think that lovely face was meant
To dress another by.
For not to make them proud
These glasses are allowed
To those are fair,
But to compare
The inward beauty with the outward grace,
And make them fair in soul as well as face.
A Song in a Play called Hide-Parke.
1.
Come Muses all that dwell nigh the fountain,
Made by the winged horses heel,
Which firked with his Rider over each mountain,
Let me your galloping raptures feel:
I do not sing of fleas or frogs,
Nor of the well mouthed hunting dogs;
Let me be just, all praises must
Be given to the wel-breath'd Iilian thrust.
2.
Young Constable and kill Deers famous,
The Cat, the Mouse, and Noddy Gray,
With nimble Pegabrig you cannot shame us
With Spanjard nor with Spinola:
Hill climbing whit-erose, praise does not lack,
Handsome Dunbar, and yellow Jack:
But if I be just, all praises must
Be given to the well-breathed Iilian thrust.
3.
Sure spurred sloven, true running Robin,
Of young Shaver I do not say less,
Strawberry Some, and let Spider pop in,
Fine Bruckly and brave lurching Besse,
Victorious too was Herring Shotten,
And spit in his Arse was not forgotten,
But if I be just, all honor must
Be given to well breathed Iilian thrust.
4.
Lusty George, and Gentleman hark yet,
To wining Mackarel, fine mouthed Freak,
Bay Tarral that won the cup at New Market,
Thundering tempest, black dragon eak,
Precious sweetlips I do not lose,
Nor Tobie with his golden shoes;
But if I be just, all honor must
Be given to well-breathed Iilian thrust.
Epithalamium.
1. OH look anon, if in the seeded sky
You miss no stars, here I did spy
Two gliding by.
2. Did not thy trembling sense mistake the shine?
Which from the flaming marriage Pine
Shot like divine.
1. No, no, oh no, within his stock of light
Hymen was never half so bright;
2. Behold the Nuptial Train
Come smiling back again;
Hymen, hold up thy Torch.
1. Now, now I see
The Virgin Bride, fair Willoughby,
From whose fair eyes
This day did rise,
2. Whilst her chaste blushing strowes
Fresh Roses on the morning as she goes.
1. What Music have they?
2. None,
But what is the Bridegroomes own:
See where he follows to supply
All that a well tuned ear
Can wish to hear,
Being himself a walking Harmony.
Chorus.
HEaven on this Payr drop all the joys
Of Love, Health, Fortune, Pleasure, Boys.
A Mother hearing her child was sick of the Small-Poxe.
WHat has my pretty child misdone?
That heaven so soon,
(As if it did repent
The sweetness it had lent)
Making so many graves, mistook the place,
And buried all her beauty in her face.
But it foresaw if she remained
Fresh and unstained,
So blooming in each part,
She might take every heart,
Charm all the Muses to forget their verse,
Or name no beauty in their song, but hers.
But this is still my sorrow child,
With which turned wild,
I send my tears to seek,
And bathe thy withered cheek:
Which could my kisses reach, with warm supplies,
I would leave thee no spots, or me no eyes.
Epithalamium. To his Noble Friend, Mr. I. W.
ADorn the Altar, many come to day
To sacrifice:
But first upon it let me presume to lay
My grain of Spice;
It Is all I have, though others bring
Rich gifts, mine is the offering.
Live one in heart so long, till time forget
You have been two,
Upon your bosoms, Joys more frequent sit
Then Pearls of dew
On the green check of earth, but may
No Sun kiss one of these away.
Plenty your Tables, chaste desires still meet
To crown your beds;
And may the Bridegroom the first night beget
New Maidenheads.
I could say more, but Verse ir tied,
Wild Joys in Prose are best supplied.
A Catch.
COme let us throw the dice who shall drink,
Mine is {:::} {:::} and his {:::} {:^:}
{:::} and {::} is a cast, {:::} and {^.} not too fast,
Come aloft {:^:} {^.}, {:::} {^} fair Play.
{::} {.} is your throw sir, {::} {^} they run low sir
{.} {.} we see {.} {^} is but three,
Oh where is the Wine, come fill up his glass,
For here is the man that has thrown {^} {^}.
On a black Ribband.
THough Love, and Honor take a pride to dress
Their servants in these silken liveries,
But choose the colors always gay, and bright,
Excluding black, as the dark child of night,
(Which constant to its own complexion, knows
Not how to blush, nor one Indulgence owes
Either to Beauty, or the gift of Kings,
This Jealousy, and that vexation brings)
Give me the black embracement on my arm,
Which like a potent Amulet, or Charm,
Shall countermand all Magic, and defy
The smiles of love, and snares of Majesty.
Of this, I Will be more proud, then when the fair
Odelia once gave me her wreath of hair,
Wherein, her fingers taught by love, had wrought
A Net, to catch, and hold each subtle thought.
This mourning bracelet is to me above
All Ribbands, which the Robinhoods of love
Are trickt withal, who but present at Court
Which are the Race-nags for the Ladies sport.
Give me that sable Ornament, that may
Vye honor with the Nova Scotia:
Or Crimson Bath; and still reserved to'th' King
My reverence, who is the soul, and spring
Of English Honor, for the Garters sake,
I should not mourn, although the blue were black,
And it is within his breast, when Charles will please
To create one of black, to outshine these,
For what bold Antiquaries will deny,
Of Colors, Sable the first Heraldry?
All Orders have their growth, and this, when sent
To me, had something that was glorious meant,
From One, whose blood writes noble, but his mind
And souls extraction leave that stream behind:
And this who knows in calmer time may thrive,
And grow into a Name, if Arts survive?
Till when, to this black Arme-let, it shall be
My Honor to be called a Votary.
To Gent. that broke their promise of a meeting, made when they drank Claret.
THere is no Faith in Claret, and it shall
Henceforth with me be held Apocryphal.
I Will trust a small-beer promise, nay a Troth
Washed in the Thames, before a french wine oath.
That Grape, they say is binding; yes, it is so,
And it has made your souls thus costive too.
Circe transformed the Greeks, no hard design,
For some can do as much with Claret wine
Upon themselves, witness you two, allowed
Once honest, now turned Air, and A-la-mode.
Begin no health in this, or if by chance
The Kings, 'twill question your allegiance;
And men will after all your rufling, say,
You drink as some do fight, in the French way;
Engage and trouble many, when it is known,
You spread their interest to wave your own.
Away with this false Christian, it shall be
An excommunicate from mirth, and me;
Give me the Catholic diviner flame,
To light me to the fair Odelias Name:
It Is Sack that justifies both man and verse,
Whilst you in Lethe-Claret still converse.
Forget your own names next, and when you look
With hope to find, be lost in the Church-book.
Upon a Gentlewoman that died of a Fever.
DEath, time, and sickness, had been many a day
Conspiring this sweet Virgin to betray;
At last impatient, vowed e're the next Sun,
To finish what their malice had begun.
Sickness went slowly on, but time, apace,
Death lag'd behind, by night all reached the place.
But when resolved of a surprise, they came,
They found her guarded by a holy flame
Her waking Fever kept, this did affright
The thieves, who are still fearful of the light.
Time stays without; but sickness, by the sin
Of bribing a false servant, was let in:
Death followed the advantage, and did creep
Into her chamber, where though in her sleep,
Sickness faint-hearted could not stop her breath,
But she soon found the Icie hand of death.
Her groan awaked some friends, and the maid killed,
With sighs, and clamors all the air was filled
Fearing a swift pursuit, Time ran away,
Sickness no longer had the heart to stay,
Death with his prey soon hid him under ground,
Not since by any living creature found.
Upon the death of G. M.
I Loved him, and I lost him too, then why
Should others weep their farewell, and not I?
If souls know more by being body free,
He Will know from all the rest, these drops from me.
Then flow apace, I see where store of rain
Is met, and swollen it self into a Main,
Go lose your selves in that, it cannot be
In vain, to add some water to the Sea,
Since heaven, whose glorious Constellations are
So many, has yet took another Star.
If any think my grief has but a face
Of mourning, and my tears a common place.
Be judge your selves, that know what it is to leave
A friend, then wisely teach me how to grieve:
Be judge you that did want him, while he lived,
But more now, since he then your lives repriv'd,
Forfeit to miseries, and let me know
What height and method you will prescribe your woe!
Be judge that were companions of his wit,
And knew with what wise Art he managed it.
When Natures darling bleeds, who can be found
Whose heart would not drop balm into the wound?
Last be you Judges, who best teach the way,
And steer our erring souls to heaven, then say
How much Divinity is gone, and by
Your grief I Will learn to write his Elegy.
Upon the death of K. James.
WHen busy Fame was almost out of breath,
With telling to the world King James his death,
I gave the voice no credit; not that I
Believed in Law, That Kings can never die:
For though of purer mold, at last they must
Resolve to their cold principle, the dust,
Distinguished only from the common men,
That being dead, their dust is Royal then.
What though the King were old? as soon must they
Be at home, whose journey's down-hill all the way.
But I would trust my eye, not every sound,
The ear often catches things at false rebound.
To clear my doubts, some told me, that did bring
By Torch-light, the dead body of the King:
When every star, like kinsmen to the dead,
That night close-mourners, hid their golden head,
And had reposed that Royal burden, where
His people might embalm him with their tear.
Sorrow finds quick direction: I came
To a fair House, I cannot giv't a name,
It had so many, only this I know,
It might be aptly called the House of woe,
Deaths Inn of late for Princes, who there lay,
As taking but a Lodging in their way
To the dark Grave. Entered the Court, I see
Many attired in black, but this might be
Their abstinence for Lent, for who is there
That cannot fast from Colors once a year?
After some justling with the guard, I came
Toth' presence, which but mocked me with a name,
For it presented nothing to my eye
But blacks, and tears for absent Majesty.
Thence to the Privie-chamber I did pass,
In hope to find him there, but there, alas!
I found new shapes of sorrow, Men whose eyes
Drunk up by tears, showed life in a disguise:
The mourning state here did renew my woe
For the lost Presence, Velvet hangings too
Made sorrow of more value, which beheld
The 'Scutcheon Royal in a Sable Field.
To the bedchamber, then (the shrine some said,
Where the pale body of the King was laid)
My wild devotion brought me, This sad room
At first did fright me, opening like a Tomb,
To show me death, where Tapers round about
Flameles, would tell me that our light was out:
But by that melancholy day was lent
I might discover on his monument
A King, with subtle Artifice so set,
My sense did stagger at the Counterfeit.
Alas, was this the way to gain belief
That he was dead, to paint him now to life?
As if, when we had lost him, it had been
Enough to have thought him but alive again:
But to these sad Remonstrances I give
No faith, the King I sought, might be alive,
For all these figures, and their Makers be
(At least as my soul wished) more dead then he.
From thence to hite-hall, when I came, with wing*
Nimble as fear could make, I found the King,
I triumphed here, and boldly did revive,
King James not dead, he was in Charles alive.
Upon the death of Sr. Th. Nevill.
SWelling Eyes forbear to weep,
Can the marble that does keep
So rich a Nevill, not appear
Full of cold drops without your tear?
Or the Earth beneath his Tomb
Not feel a labor in her womb,
When with her profaner dust
His ashes mingle? Sure it must
Break with burden of new pain,
And from her root he grow again.
An Elegy upon the honorable, fair, and virtuous M. Borlase.
COme hither Virgins that are good, and fair,
Instead of flowers, here careless strew your hair,
Pay down the tribute due from all your eyes,
For underneath this dewy Marble lies
One, worth you all; although you cannot make
Her live again, it is justice for her sake
To weep your selves blind, for in vain you keep
Your eyesight, while Marya's gone to sleep,
That was your path and Leader: but away,
You are but common mourners, for this day,
Hid in a storm of tears does wait the name
Of great Borlase, wounded, and led by fame.
The mist is blown away, I see it come
With tempered have to look into her Tomb
To find an arm, which from his body rent,
Does lie enbalmd in this white monument:
Forbear chief mourner, and consent to be
Without this limb, more must be torn from thee,
And kept by death, till the whole body meet,
And sleep together in one winding sheet.
Upon the Death of C. D. Engineere, who died upon service to which had no
command.
IF we those men for gallant justify,
Who when they are commanded on, dare die:
Tell me, how glorious shall their valor stand,
That dare like Dalby, die without command?
Though order be the life of war, the sword
And bullet will not ask us for the word:
Nor did his courage know to make a pause,
When honor called so loud, and such a cause
As would untame a Hermit, and make room
With his own fire to meet the Martyrdom.
All that the sons of Phlegm and fear can say,
Is, that he might have lived, and so will they,
Like earth-wormes, safe in their own slime, and sleep
Till the last Trumpet wake'em, and then creep
Into some Blind, and wish this worthy then
Alive to hide them in some Turfes again.
But his soul, winged with nobler flame, found out
Not to be active, is the way about
To Glory, which he being fond to taste,
They are too wise that blame him for his haste.
Epitaph On the Duke of BVCKINGHAM.
HEre lies the best and worst of Fate,
Two Kings delight, the peoples hate,
The Courtiers star, the Kingdoms eye,
A man to draw an Angel by.
Fears despiser, Villiers glory,
The Great man's volume, all times story.
An Elegy upon the truly Honorable Tho. Viscount Savage
IS Savage dead? and can the Rock which bears
His Name, not strait dissolve it self in tears,
And weep into the Sea? where it may have
A Burial too, whilst every frighted wave
At this new guest may raise his curled head,
And in a storm tell all the world who is dead?
But here is no want of Flood, for every eye
Conspires in melting to an Elegy.
But first, see where the King and Queen are come
To pour their grief into their servants Tomb,
Let public sorrow be first served, it is clear,
The Kingdom weeps in every Princes tear,
And now his children drop their pious rain,
(Though none can soften his stiff clay again)
And sigh, they had a Father, from whose care
And wealth in virtue, every Child's an Heir.
Their Tribute paid, close not the shrine, see where
The Treasure of his bosom does appear.
Now coming to her Saint with her drowned eyes,
(For sorrow leads her where her dead Lord lies)
To whose pale Relic she devoutly pays
A kiss, as holy as his life, and prays
With many tears, till quite dissolved in them,
She seems contrived into a walking stream,
As Destiny had meant her to descend
From Rivers, but to satisfy this end.
More sorrow does attend this hearse, for here is
A train of Lords that follow, though no Peers,
For all the stock of honor is too low
for competition, yet upon this woe
Wait all that in Nobility are good,
And he that weeps not, has no gentle blood.
Nor are these all the Mourners, see how fast
The Rear advances, I suspect their have
And weight may overbear his Sepulcher:
Friends to the dead, contain your selves, nor fear
You that were servants, crowding to the urne
Of your dead lord, but you will have time to mourn
This your immortal loss. But why among
Set shapes of mourning, suffer ye to throng,
Those that profane his monument, the poor?
What make they at his tomb, and leave his door?
He was their bread, and miracles not gone,
They hope to find it in his Funeral stone:
He gave the blind men eyes too, and they can
Do no less now, then weep them out again.
Be sorrow free for all men, since he dies
Worth love of heaven, and the worlds sacrifice.
Upon Mr. Charles Beaumont who died of a Consumption.
WHile others drop their tears upon thy hearse,
Sweet Charles, and sigh to increase the wind, my verse
Pious in naming thee, cannot complain
Of death, or fate, for they were lately slain
By thy own conflict; and since good men know
What Heaven to such a Virgin Saint does owe;
Though some will say they saw thee dead, yet I
Congratulate thy life and victory:
Thy flesh an upper garment, that it might
Aid thy eternal progress, first grew light:
Nothing but Angel now, which thou were near
Almost reduced to thy first Spirit here:
But fly fair soul, while our complaints are just,
That cannot follow for our chains of dust.
The Passing Bell.
HArk, how chimes the Passing bell,
There Is no music to a knell;
All the other sounds we hear,
Flatter, and but cheat our ear.
This does put us still in mind
That our flesh must be resigned,
And a general silence made,
The world be muffled in a shade;
He that on his pillow lies
Tear enbalm'd before he dies,
Carries like a sheep his life,
To meet the sacrificers knife,
And for eternity is pressed,
Sad Bell-weather to the rest.
Et longum Formosa vale. -- FRIENDSHIP, Or Verses sent to a Lover, in Answer of
a Copy which he had writ in praise of his Mistress.
O How I blush, to have adored the face
Of any Mistress, when I gave the grace,
For which I robbed the flowers. How I did swear
Her eyes were stars, and loves soft nets her hair?
Disgraced the chiming of the Spheres, to tell
Her voice: and in her breath, professed to smell
The Eastern spices on the Phoenix pile:
And for her Chin, and Forehead, did beguil
Heaven of his milky way: these trimmings must
Be paid again, they are taken all on trust.
But let the Mistress thou do serve, be fair
With her own beauty, as some such there are
Compound with the whole sex, to make a mind
Include the Graces of fair womankind;
I shall not think her worth my praise, or smile,
And yet I have a Mistress all this while,
But am a convert from that Sex, and can
Reduced to my discretion, love a man,
With Honor, and Religion; Such a one
As dares be singly virtuous against the Town;
A man that is learned too, and for his parts
Is held a Prodigy of all the Arts;
A man of a clear soul, bold, temperate, free,
Fortune and Passion wear his liverie,
And do obey; and when he will resign
To mirth, is in at all things, but the Wine:
Of an extraction Noble, and to do
Him and the wonder right, he is young too:
As handsome as thy Mistress, more divine,
And has no fault but that I call him mine:
My jealousy does cloud his name, it is fit,
Nor art thou ripe for thy conversion yet.
The Garden.
THis Garden does not take my eyes,
Though here you show how art of men
Can purchase Nature at a price
Would stock old Paradise again.
These glories while you dote upon,
I envy not your Spring nor pride,
Nay boast the Summer all your own,
My thoughts with less are safisfied.
Give me a little plot of ground,
Where might I with the Sun agree,
Though every day he walk the Round,
My Garden he should seldom see.
Those Tulips that such wealth display,
To court my eye, shall lose their name,
Though now they listen, as if they
Expected I should praise their flame.
But I would see my self appear
Within the Violets drooping head,
On which a melancholy tear
The discontented Morn has shed.
Within their budds let Roses sleep,
And virgin Lillies on their stem,
Till sighs from Lovers glide, and creep
Into their leaves to open them.
I the Center of my ground compose
Of Bays and Ewe my Summer room,
Which may so often as I repose,
Present my Arbor, and my Tomb.
No woman here shall find me out,
Or if a chance do bring one hither,
I Will be secure, for round about
I Will moat it with my eyes foul weather.
No Bird shall live within my pale,
To charm me with their shames of Art,
Unless some wandering Nightingale
Come here to sing, and break her heart.
Upon whose death I Will try to write
An Epitaph in some funeral stone,
So sad, and true, it may invite
My self to die, and prove mine own.
C^rse
WOman, I cannot call thee worse,
For thy vow-break, take this curse,
May that man whom thy embrace
Shall make happy in my place,
At a time when all thy blood
Lust has poisoned, and no good
Left in a thought, strike with that air
He breathes upon thee next, despair,
Some death in his curld forehead fit,
And every kiss more cold then it:
Yet live, and my revenger be;
For when thou do this Gorgon see,
Betwixt thy horror, and no doubt
But that thou art a stone throughout;
With some knife or poniard wound
Thy heart, till falling to the ground,
And pale, the world believe thee dead,
But not one tear upon thee shed.
No matter where thy spirit flies,
Or whose pity close thine eyes.
To the proud M.
PRoud woman, know I am above
As much thy anger as thy love:
I did once think thou had a face;
But when next thou take thy glass,
If thou can see through so much paint,
Pray to thy own; no more my Saint;
Thy eyes, those glouring twins, shall be
No more misleading fires to me;
Nor hope they shall continue bright,
For I will curse out all their light:
But this would show that I were vexed,
And so thy Tryimph might be next
That thou should force me into rage:
No, I will laugh thee into age,
Strike wrinkles on thy brow, and not
Discompose my pleasant thought,
Till thou, thy Witches face despise,
And grow angry with their eyes,
Thus wretched thou shall wish to die,
But late obtain it; and when I
Have j^erd thee into dead and rotten,
I Will throw thee into quite forgotten.
Cupid ungodded.
WHy how now Cupid, grown so wild?
So great a Tyrant, and a Child?
What were thou but an empty shade,
Until our superstition made
Thee first a God? Blind, young, to be
A soft and harmeles Deity.
Our Fancy gave thee that rich pair
Of Wings, to wanton in the air:
Thy gaudy Quiver, and thy Bow,
And golden shafts we did bestow,
But for no other exercise
Then to kill Bees, or Butterflies.
But since thou have employed thy darts
Only to wound thy Makers hearts,
And that thy wings serve but to fly
From Lovers, when they bleeding die;
Thy Blindness used but to invite
Our pity, till we lose our sight,
Thy weakness, not through want of years,
But from the Surfeit of our Tears;
Stoop to the Justice of thy fate,
We can unmake that did create.
And first give back (ungrateful Thing)
To us that made thy glorious wing
Those painted feathers thou shall find
Contemnd, and tossed by every wind,
Till wandering in some night, they are
The mark of a prodigious star,
And blasted; these the world shall name
The spotted wings of evil fame:
Next, give thy arrows back, which we
Did mean for Love, not Cruelty.
That rich enameled bow is mine,
Come, that gay quiver too resign,
And shining Belt; These will I burn,
And keep their ashes in some urne,
Till opened on that solemn day,
When men to souls sad requiems pay:
Lovers shall curse, and sigh, and make
A new Letany for thy sake.
But thou art still alive; and be;
To murder, were to pity thee.
Know wretch, thou shall not die, before
I see thee begging at some door:
And taken for a Vagrant stripped,
Then by a furious Beadle whipped,
No more with Roses, but with Thorn:
To all the world thus made a scorn,
I Will give thee Eyes before we part,
To see thy shame, and break thy heart.
Fie on Love.
NOw fie on foolish love, it not befits
Or man or woman know it.
Love was not meant for People in their wits,
And they that fondly show it,
Betray the straw, and feathers in their brain,
And shall have Bedlem for their pain:
If single Love be such a curse,
To marry is to make it ten times worse.
To a Beautiful Lady.
A Way with handsome faces, let me see
Hereafter nothing but deformity;
Ill-favored Ladies may have souls, and those
In a capacity to be saved, who knows?
All that are fair are false, and if you find
A middle essence here of womankind,
Party par pale they are, and cursed to be
Halting betwixt mishape and perjury.
Madam, put on your mask, your eyes have lost
Their charm; your beauty be at your own cost.
I am ashore, go muster up the Train
Of Mermaids, I am deaf to every strain;
And will so voice their story to wise men,
They shall not spawn upon the Land again.
Farewell fond love for ever! but to be
Safe in my soul, I could want charity.
Dialogue.
1. I Prithee tell me what prodigious fate
Has discomplexion'd thee of late?
2. Love that does change all minds and men,
Has thus transformed me, and when
Thou see her heavenly face. 1. Describe her then.
^. Her Hairs are Cupids nets. which when she spreads,
She catches hearts and maidenheads;
Her Forehead the white Alps does show,
Or rather it is a shrine of snow,
To which with fear approaching Pilgrims bow.
Her Eyebrows are loves bows, from which her eyes
Do never shoot, but some man dies:
Her cheeks like two fair gardens rise,
With the choice flowers of Paradise.
Her lips disclose where Musicks Temple is.
Her Tongue I call Loves Lightning, but the Throne
Of Graces is her Neck alone,
Or Poets may inspired say
There the wanton Doves do play,
When Venus means to make it Holyday.
1. No more for shame? how has thy fancy straid;
What a Chimera have thou made
To dote upon? what would I give
Old Michael Angelo to revive?
Make Titian, Vandike, or bold Ruben live?
But suppose one of them, or all their Art
Should paint this darling of thy heart
A net, a rock, a shrine of snow,
A Church, a garden, and a bow,
Is It not a pretty face compounded so?
Or if a Pencil, and their hand should make
A flame of Lightning, who will take
This for a tongue? Or if men see
A Throne, Doves billing two or three,
Who will commend this for a neck but thee?
Collect thy scattered sense (poor man) be wise,
Love, but first give thy reason eyes;
Thy fancy bears all like a flood;
Reduce them to their flesh and blood,
And Women then are hardly understood.
A Postscript to the Reader.
I Had no intention upon the birth of these Poems, to let them proceed to the
Publik view, forbearing in my own modesty to interpose my Fancies, when I see
the World so plentifully furnished. But when I observed most of these Copies
corrupted in their transcripts, and the rest fleeting from me, which were by
some indiscreet Collector not acquainted with distributive Justice, mingled
with other men's (some Eminent) conceptions in Print, I thought my self
concerned to use some vindication, and reduce them to my own, without any
pride or design of deriving opinion from their worth, but to show my charity,
that other innocent men should not answer for my vanities.

If thou be Courteous, Reader, there are some errors of the Press scattered,
which thy Clemency will not lay to my charge: Other things I remit to thy
judgment: If thou be modest, I repent not to have exposed them and my self
to thy censure.

J. S


