TWO SERMONS PREACHED IN St. MARY'S CHVRCH IN CAMBRIDGE.

BY ROBERT SHERINGHAM, Master of Arts, and Fellow of GUNVIL and CAIUS College.



LONDON, Printed by James Young, and are to be sold by John Williams, at the
sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is not any excellence that I suppose to be in mine own labor, has made me
expose it to the public view, but the manifold obligations that I owe to God
and the Commonwealth. My desire is to pay part of a debt, and not to set out a
Manifesto of mine own merits, which I know how mean and small they are. The
first and greatest debt I owe is to God: a debt so impossible to be fully paid,
that whilst I offer now to pay it but in part, I shall make it greater: for all
that I can render unto the Lord for all his benefits, is, to endeavor what I
can to set forth his glory; and when I have done that, I shall by such a
payment rather increase my debt, then lessen it, as doing whatsoever I do by
his grace and assistance. Howsoever, I shall strive this way to do what I am
able; and (when I cannot otherwise) labor by increasing my debt to pay it. The
glory of God is, and I hope shall ever be, dearer unto me then my own life, or
happiness; were there as many worlds in truth and reality, as some
Philosophers have conceited in their fancy, I had rather perform one Act
whereby God might be glorified, then be owner of them all. This that I have
now done, I confess, is not much; yet by his own blessing, it may in some
measure help to set forth his glory: and at the last, when the fruit and
succcesse of all men's labor shall be made manifest, be a joy and comfort unto
me.

The second debt I owe, is to the Commonwealth; whose good, profit, and
advantage, all men are bound to promote, according as their respective callings
and abilities shall make them capable. For, although our desires be various,
and spring from many several Fountains, yet they ought all to meet in the main
sea of public profit. They which neglect the common good, and seek only
occasions to spend their time in ease and pleasure, are but the superfluities
of nature, and may seem to be born for no other end but to contradict that
received principle, that God and nature makes nothing in vain. The light of the
Sun is ever in action, it produces gold and silver, and rich perfumes, and
makes the whole earth pleasant and fruitful: the light of knowledge ought to
inspire us also with the same activities, he that makes not the light of
knowledge as fruitful in spiritual, as that of the Sun is in natural
productions, makes not that gain of knowledge which he should: I will therefore
endeavor to make my light active; which, how small and weak soever it be, may
yet by the gracious assistance of God, and his concurrence with it, further the
spiritual progress and advancement of some.

These are the chief inducements, which, together with the invitation of
diverse friends (whereof some desired Copies, determining to put them in print
without my knowledge) moved we to publish these Sermons, not intended by me at
the first to be made public. Many that heard them when they were delivered,
have professed that they were much wrought upon, and affected by them: I hope
they will have the same influence upon those that read them. The faults that
are committed in the printing, are neither very many, nor very material; yet
there are some: Some things are set down by way of parenthesis, where they
ought not: In some places diverse words are omitted, in others mistaken. For, by
reason I could not be present to oversee the Press my self, the Composer was
forced to guess at the words where the Copy was blotted and imperfect, as it
was in many places. -- Yet these mistakes have not in any place, that I have
observed, either depraved the sense, or altered it, although sometimes they do
a little disfigure the phrase; and therefore I have not caused the Errata to be
noted at the end. For I desire not to seem curious, but have rather
endeavored to avoyde curiosity, especially where I have occasion to reprehend
the faults of any, lest I should seem to whip them with a posie. If thou
find any thing that proves useful and profitable unto thee, give God the
glory, to whose protection I will leave thee.

PSALM 41.4. Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.


THese words were uttered by David in the bitterness of his soul, after he had
committed the two crying sins of Adultery and Murder: For David, a man after
Gods own heart, (...), In Psa. 50.
as S. Chrysostom speaks of him, a man that lived as strictly in his kingly
palace, as in a cloister or monastery, fell notwithstanding into notorious and
scandalous offenses: He that, like an immovable rock, had broken the waves of
all temptations, was now broken himself. In a word; David, that victorious
King, whom neither the lion, nor the bear, nor Goliath himself, the terror of
a whole army, could overcome, was conquered by his own passions, wounded by
his own lust, and brought into that extremity, that neither the balm of Gilead,
nor all the physicians there could heal those wounds. But although he sinned,
yet he continued not long in his apostasy; as soon as the prophet Nathan moved
him to repentance, he confessed his fault, and began a repentance that ended
not til his death. There came a traveller (says the prophet Nathan) unto the
rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock, but took the poor man's
lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come unto him, 2 Samuel 12.4. Sin is
there styled but a traveller, for it was none of his domestic followers;
Transitus erat, non permansio, as S. Augustine: De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap.
21.
he did but lodge sin for a time, he did not suffer it to dwell with him for
ever; for as soon as he grew sensible of his own distemper, he makes his
complaint to God, the only physician of his soul, desiring him to restore and
heal him. If there be any here then that have imitated David's sins, learn also
to imitate his repentance: Sin came to David but as a traveller; God grant it
comes but as a traveller to you.

The parts of my Text are three: First, here is Designatio partis vulneratae,
David's discovery of the wounded part, and that was his soul; Heal my soul.
Secondly, here is Petitio remedii, his prayer and petition for a remedy, and
that was to be healed; Heal my soul. Thirdly, here is Confessio causae, his
confession of the cause of those wounds, and that was his sin; For I have
sinned against thee. I will begin with the first; that is, Designatio partis
vulneratae, his discovery of the wounded part.

The part that was wounded, and that David desired to have healed, was his
soul, the principal and most excellent part of a man. The Pelagians affirm,
that sin can no way wound the soul; for, being a bare privation, it cannot
have, say they, a positive and natural act: An error directly opposite to my
text. De natura and gratia, cap. 19.
Quid sanatur, si nihil est vulneratum, nihil sauciatum, nihil debilitatum
atque vitiatum? Why does David desire to have his soul healed, if nothing in
it were wounded, nothing debilitated, nothing corrupted? it is S. Augustines
inference out of these words. The Polagians then were full of vain presumption,
or else David was full of vain fears: But David's fears were just, and he spoke
these words out of experience and a deep sense of his own miseries. For, if we
descend into particulars, we shall see his soul had many wounds; it had some
as old as it self, his soul was wounded as soon as it was created; God gave
him life, and sin death, at the same instant: for David, together with all
mankind, sinned in our first parents, and was wounded in his soul by that
original sin which he derived from them: Behold, says he, I was shapen in
wickedness, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. Here was a sin,
and therefore a wound at his first conception. Apol. David. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Contra Julianum l. 6. cap. 7.
S. Ambrose calls it natural contagium, a natural contagion. S. Augustine,
morbum and languorem naturae, the disease and languishment of nature: And this
wound was deep enough, had he had no other; for original sin has not only
wounded the soul, but it has wounded all her powers and faculties.

First, it has wounded the affections; for whilst man stood in the integrity
of his nature, all his affections were regulated and governed by reason: the
superior faculties of the soul exercised a kind of regal authority and
jurisdiction over the inferior, and the inferior did inviolably perform
those duties that were required of them: Man was like a perfect Commonwealth,
like Jerusalem, that was built as a city that is at unity with it self: but
sin has now so wounded the affections, that they are no longer inclined, or
naturally able to execute the decrees of reason; but as a ship is carried up
and down by the violence of the waves in a tempest at sea, so a man is carried
by the violence of his own affections: he is driven by them, as by strong and
impetuous winds, upon many rocks. Now the inferior faculties of the soul
resist the superior, the affections (like seditious Tribunes) being always
ready to stir up commotions: I see another law in my members (says S. Paul)
(...), warring against the law of my mind, Romans 7.23. The affections are at
war with reason, and force it oftentimes to stoop to their unreasonable and
unjust commands. This is the first wound of the soul, which is called
imbecilitas and naturalis infirmitas, imbecility and natural infirmity.

Secondly, It has wounded the understanding, for the understanding did
naturally apprehend truth without difficulty; and as the eye looks upon a
beautiful object, so the understanding looked upon truth with delight and
pleasure; and the more excellent and eminent the truths were, the greater
pleasure had the understanding in the contemplation of them: It was not subject
to be deluded by the false insinuations of any affection, but could upon
deliberation clearly discern all natural truths; and as for those truths that
were supernatural and above its capacity, as many of them as were necessary to
be known, were infused, or revealed by God when he first created it: But sin
has likewise so wounded the understanding, as it can hardly apprehend its
first principles without difficulty. Now reason, like Achitophel, takes part
with rebellious Absalom, the corrupt affections; and is apt to represent things
to the will, not as they are in themselves, but as the affections please. Now
the understanding is filled with ignorance and obscurity, and has lost that
knowledge that was revealed to our first parents, and which should likewise
have been revealed to all their posterity, together with the light whereby it
was able to judge and discern supernatural truths. So that there is a double
ignorance in the understanding, arising from a double defect and want in the
soul. The first kind of ignorance arises from want of sufficient revelation;
for, naturally, the understanding cannot know the articles of faith. God has
given to every thing a certain circuit, and determinate sphere of activity
beyond which it cannot pass; as fire can heat to a determinate distance, but
cannot pass beyond that distance: The understanding has a sphere of activity
too, it has a natural sufficiency to understand some truths, such as are of
the law of nature, and such as it can come unto by the knowledge of the senses;
but cannot pass beyond them to those that are supernatural. The second kind
of ignorance arises from want of evidence after sufficient revelation, and is
always joined with falsehood, or doubt: Falsehood arises from deception, when
the understanding apprehends error for truth in things speculative; or in
things practical, when it apprehends that goodness to be in some actions
which is not; and in others, that goodness to be wanting which is in them.
Doubt arises from irresolution: I speak not now of irresolution in matters of
action, which belong properly to the will; but of irresolution in matters of
judgment, which belong to the understanding: for, there is an irresolution in
the will, and an irresolution in the understanding; as a Judge sometimes knows
the law, and yet suspends judgment out of partiality and affection; and this
is called suspensio facti, a suspension of fact: and sometimes when reasons are
equal on both sides, he knows not to whom the laws incline, and so suspends
judgment for want of evidence; and this is called suspensio juris, a
suspension of right. So it is likewise in the soul; sometimes a man knows what
he ought to do, but yet, out of particular and private respects, resolves
upon nothing; here the suspense is in the will, and is answerable to that which
in a Judge is called suspensio facti: and sometimes, when arguments are equal
on both sides, he knows not what to resolve upon for want of evidence; here
the suspense is in the understanding, and is answerable to that which in a
Judge is called suspensio juris: In the first case there is a conflict of
several desires; in the last, a conflict of several thoughts. And from this
kind of irresolution proceed all doubts and scruples in matters of conscience,
which although they be not joined with falsehood, because the understanding has
made no conclusion; yet they are always joined with ignorance. And this is the
second wound of the soul, which is called Ignorantia and coecitas mentis,
ignorance and blindness of mind.

Thirdly, It has wounded the will, that supreme faculty of the soul, and
mistress of all the other; for the will was once able to rule the affections,
and to hold them all in subjection: it had a natural power to love God, and a
natural inclination carrying all her desires toward him: But sin has now
wounded the will also, and deprived it of those natural perfections wherewith
it was created; it is now inclined to love the creatures, and to desire and
long after them more then after God. Could we but penetrate with our bodily
eyes into the souls of men, and behold all the several acts of their wills,
we should see an admirable diversity and multitude of desires, but all fixed
upon the creatures; we should see some desiring riches, others honor, others
to spend their days in lust and pleasure; we should see some transported with
love, others with jealousy; we should see an infinite number of desires, but
all pointed downwards toward transitory and earthly things. How few are there
whose desires fly upward? Who is there that will say, I desire to enjoy God,
though it cost me my lust, my riches, mine honor, and all that I possess? The
name of happiness is pleasing to our ears, but we regard not the thing it
self, or at least we pursue the shadow whilst the substance flies from us;
our disordered passions do now so overruled our wills, that we prefer lies
before truth, vice before virtue, the vain delights of the body before the true
and solid contentments of the mind; we prefer the spurious pleasures of our
senses before those which are legitimate, which virtue receives and approves:
Whilst we should moderate our affections, and establish a durable and lasting
peace within our selves, we rather give way to their disorders, and suffer our
happiness to be interrupted by their excess and riot. Our wills are full of
inordinate and unsatiable desires, and are become soft and pliable to evil,
but hard and impenetrable to every good motion. This is the third wound of the
soul, which is called Malitia and duritas cordis, malice and hardness of heart.

And yet this is not all; Sin has made another wound in the soul, which
troubles it worse then all the rest, and that is in the conscience. In the
spiritual conflict between sin and the soul, 1 King. 22.34.
the conscience may say like Ahab, Take me out of the battle, for I am
wounded. There are two effects of sin, macula, and reatus, the stain of sin,
and the guilt of sin; the stain of sin is that distemper and vicious
inclination that sin leaves behind it, and this adheres to the faculties
before mentioned: The guilt of sin is the obligation to punishment that lies
upon every sinner after he has committed it: for as he that breaks the
provincial laws and customs of any commonwealth, is guilty of the punishment
which the sanction and penalty of the law provides in that commonwealth; so he
that sins against God, is guilty of the punishment appointed by his law: and
this guilt adheres to the conscience. Thus sin has wounded all the powers and
faculties of the soul; not by any positive acts, as the Pelagians supposed a
necessity; but by depriving it of that original justice wherewith it was
created: as a man may overthrow a building as well by taking away a pillar, as
by applying outward force. The want of original justice has made the soul
lame and imperfect: he that has one leg shorter then another, cannot choose
but halt, and go unequally in his natural motion; and the soul that is moved
by Reason and Affections, tanquam a duobus pedibus inaequalibus, as by two
unequal legs, cannot choose but halt and go unequally in its moral motion:
for whilst it follows the motion of its longer leg, Reason, it rises toward
heaven; but whilst it follows the motion of its shorter leg, the Affections, it
falls toward the earth: God, to supply this inequality and defect, created
the soul with original justice, which did after a manner spiritualize the
Affections, and kept the whole soul in such a frame and temper, that all her
faculties moved toward heaven. But man sinned, and God, as a just judgment,
took from him that original justice that upheld his nature, for want whereof
the soul is fallen into that decay, and become subject to those vvounds and
defects that I have named. This is every finners condition, and this was David's
condition, he was wounded in all the powers and faculties of his soul; he was
wounded in his affections, in his understanding, in his will, and in his
conscience; and all these wounds were the effects of original sin.

But David had yet more vvounds, David had his personal and actual sins;
which, although they did not wound new faculties (for original sin had
vvounded all before;) yet they made new vvounds: but if I should undertake to
show you all those wounds, I should undertake that which himself was not able
to perform, though more privy to his own actions: Psalm. 19.21.
Who can tell (says he) how often he offends? His words have the form of a
question, but the force of a peremptory assertion; for there are (...), (as the
Philosopher speaks) questions which have the force of affirmative or negative
propositions, and so has this here: David's Quis intelligit? is as much as
Nullus intelligit; and if no man can number his sins, then surely no man can
number the vvounds of his soul, for every sin is as deadly as the first, it
vvounds as deep, though it vvounds not so many; and these wounds were
dangerous, though but light in comparison of others: for David had sins of
presumption also, sins against his knowledge, and against his conscience; but
those sins which made the vvorst vvounds, and which he desires in my Text
especially to have healed, were his adultery, and his murder. In the next
Psalm to my Text he complains of the bitterness of those wounds; Why art thou
so full of heaviness, O my soul, Psalm. 42.11.
(says he) and why art thou so disquieted within me? here was heaviness and
disquietnesse in his soul, and all this the effect of those wounds: His
adultery and murder were sins of an high nature, and most of all destructive
to the soul: Whosoever commits adultery with a woman (says Solomon) lacks
understanding; he that does it destroys his own soul, Prove. 6.31. Adultery
(you see) destroys the soul, it wounds it mortally: and murder is no less
destructive then adultery; Ye know (says Saint John) that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. This sin does not only deprive the
soul of health, but of life it self, it kills the soul outright: this made
David complain, My wickednesses are gone over mine head, and are like a sore
burden too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38.4. The cruel and unnatural
homicide sheds his brothers blood, and it falls upon the earth, and the earth
seems to drink it up; and yet the word of God says, that it rest upon the head
of the murderer, and so it rested upon David's head: that blood that ran in
Uriah's veins to preserve his life, sits now heavy upon David's head to procure
his death; it was time for David to have his soul healed, it having so many
deep and deadly wounds: And yet healing was scarce sufficient; for, in another
Psalm, he seems to require more; Create in me a clean heart, O God, (says he)
and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. All the faculties of his soul
were so wounded by those sins, that he desires not there a reparation, but a
new creation. And these sins considered in abstracto, simply and by themselves,
did deeply wound his soul; but if we consider them in concreto, with all their
adjuncts, we may find many circumstances that made his wounds the greater; for
David was (...), both a King and a Prophet; and, as a Prophet, was bound to
instruct; as a King, to protect the lives and chastity of his subjects. For
Bathsheba, something may be said in her excuse, for it was hard for her to
resist the importunity of a King: but all circumstances aggravate David's sin;
his holy profession, and the sword of justice which God had put into his hand
to punish such offenses, ought to have restrained himself from committing
them. This sin in David did not only wound his own soul, but it wounded the
whole Church, and laid it open to the calumnies and reproaches of the heathen:
for, as S. Ambrose witnesses, In the primitive times of the Church, when the
contention was hot between the Christians and the heathen concerning the truth
of religion, the heathen objected this against the Christians; Ecce quomodo
Christiani innocentiam sequuntur, Apoleg. David. lib. 2. cap 3.
fidem praeferunt, religionem venerantur, castitatem docent, quorum principes
homicidia and adulteria fecisse produntur: Behold (said they) how the
Christians embrace innocence, extol faith, honor religion, teach chastity,
whose chiefest masters were both murderers and adulterers. But I will insist
no longer upon these particulars, neither will I speak of his other sins
appendant to these; of his making Uriah drunk, to conceal and palliate his
adultery; of his ingratitude, in rewarding Uriah with death, whose faithful
services ought to have been rewarded with honor; of his deep hypocrisy, in
being present at the service of God, and offering sacrifice for the space of
nine months together, polluted in the mean time with these horrible crimes:
these and the rest I will pass over, lest, as Shimei reviled him in his life,
so I may seem to revile him after death. Saint Ambrose has made an apology in
his defense; and, for my part, I will not make an invective against him: God
himself has justified him, and then who shall condemn him? I have only named
his principal sins, that (according as my Text requires) I might show you the
wounds of his soul: Now therefore I will leave him, and come to our selves.

And first, since sin does wound the soul, let us be careful and watchful
over it; for the soul is the most noble and excellent part of a man. A man
consists of two parts, a body, and a soul; and both these have their natural
beauty and excellency: The excellency of the body (if we consider the outward
form and workmanship) is very wonderful; I will praise thee, (says David)
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.14. He uses two terms here
to express the rarity of this work, fearfully, and wonderfully; as if the
structure of man's body were so artificially framed, that the sight thereof was
not only able to beget fear, but wonder and astonishment. And in the next
verse he adds further; I am curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth:
the Original has it, (...), that is, I am curiously imbroydered; as if man's
body were made like a piece of Phrygian workmanship, being variously wrought
with veins, and sinews, and bones, and muscles: so that we have reason to be
careful of our bodies, and if they be wounded at any time, to make provision
for their health. How much more then ought we to be careful of our souls,
whose excellency, like Benjamins mess, is five times as much as the excellency
of the body? The soul of man is a divine substance, a rich and noble
possession, the greatest gift and most precious that a man ever received from
the liberal hand of his Creator; it is (...), as Gregory Nyssen: by it we
know the height, the breadth, and depth of the heavens, the number of the
stars, their greatness, distances, and approaches. What should I speak of
Divinity, Philosophy, the Mathematics? What should I speak of History, and
Poesy, of all the Sciences and Arts, as well liberal, as mechanical, the
knowledge whereof we attain unto by the benefit of the soul? By it, a man
being but (...), (as Saint Chrysostom styles him) a short creature, not above
a yard and an half long, obtaines the government of the whole world: By it,
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles spoke unto God, received divine
revelations, learned many secret and ineffable mysteries, and knew upon earth
what things were done in heaven. He that knows not the worth of this jewel,
may undervalue it; but a skillful Jeweller that knows the properties and
excellency of it, will prize it above the whole world. Such a Jeweller is God;
who, for the desire he had to those jewels, assumed our humane nature; and when
he could not have them at a cheaper rate, he took them in exchange for his
own blood. Such Jewelers are the Angels, which watch continually over men's
souls, that they may keep and preserve these jewels deputed to their custody.
And such a Jeweller (if I may lawfully rank him in this place) is the Devil,
who, to get these jewels, goes about continually, and compasses the whole
earth. Seeing the soul then is of so great excellency, let us be careful and
watchful over it; let us not suffer such a divine, learned, noble and active
creature to perish by our negligence.

Secondly, Seeing sin does wound the soul, let it be our chiefest care to avoid
sin; let us not set our affections upon it, but fly from it as from a deadly
enemy. The world sets too high a price upon her own beauty; for her fairest
things are but imperfect and defective: her wisdom is but foolishness, her
light but darkness, her riches but poverty: What shall we say then of her
deformities? her pride, ambition, lust, and all her other vices (which men
falsely think pleasures, but are indeed the price of their souls) are so far
from being good, as they are the worst of evils: for, how can we reckon those
among the number of good things, which destroy the soul? God is the life of the
soul, let us set our affections upon him: Why should we turn from God, who is
the substance, and run after creatures, which are but images and imperfect
adumbrations of his beauty? Why should we embrace the shadow, and let the
substance go? It has pleased God to condescend so much as to love the soul,
and to contract it to himself in a sacred and spiritual marriage: the soul is
Gods wife; and God, like an indulgent and loving husband, has given her all
the creatures to be her servants: but the soul oftentimes sets her affections
upon the creatures, as Potiphars wife set her affections upon her servant
Joseph; and the creatures, Genesis 39.7.
as if they were sensible of the injury which the soul offers to God, fly from
the soul, as Joseph fled from his mistress: riches, and honors, and worldly
delights do oftentimes fly from the soul that pursues them, as if they were
unwilling to be the causes of her adultery: Let us not then fly after our own
destruction, or set our affections upon those things whose love brings death,
not health to the soul. In heaven there are none of those delights which
worldly men use most to admire, and for which they are wont most to hazard
their souls; and yet there is perfect and true happiness. Can we not then
want those things here for a little while, and not think our selves miserable,
which in heaven we shall want for ever, and yet be most perfectly and truly
happy? Me thinks we should rather set our affections upon God, who is the
bridegroom of our souls, and who loves us in that excess, that it is
impossible we should return him equal love: yet, though we cannot love him
equally, let us love him again with the best affection that we can; and, as it
did not grieve us to leave the delights of children after we became men; so,
let it not grieve us to leave the delights of worldly men after we be advanced
to this sacred and holy union with God. And so much of the first part of my
Text, which is Designatio partis vulneratae; David's discovery of the wounded
part. I come now to the second, that is, Petitio remedii, his prayer and
petition for a remedy:

Heal my soul. I have shown you already that David was wounded in all the
faculties of his soul; and therefore this petition must be applied to all: and
first, to the affections; Heal my affections: For, except the affections be
healed, their distempers work upon the whole soul. A wound in any one part of
the body infects the whole; if one member suffer, all the members suffer with
it; not only because of the sympathy which one part has with another, but
because the blood, passing through the infected place, carries with it some of
the corrupt humors: so it is likewise in the soul, if one faculty suffers, all
the faculties suffer with it, not only by reason of the sympathy which one
faculty has with another; but because there is a mutual influence between
them, by transfusion of their qualities into one another; for, Reason is
corrupted by the affections, as blood is corrupted by an ulcerous part of the
body, and infects both the Understanding and the Will by their contagion. David
found this by experience; for the sensitive part made the rational to
transgress; (...), as Saint Chrysostom: The first hurt which he received was
at the eye, and from thence it was derived to the heart; his affections
corrupted his understanding and his will, and therefore his affections must
first be healed. Heal my soul, that is, change my affections; for the soul
cannot be healed till the affections be changed. There is an outward healing,
and there is an inward healing; the inward healing causes a true and real
change in the affections, the outward healing causes a change only in outward
appearance, and does not properly heal the wound, but cover it: for, after this
outward healing, the wound is still as great, and the danger greater; as a
wound which is healed in the outward skin and superficies of the body, if it
bleed inwardly, is so much the more dangerous, by how much it is more inward
and unsuspected. Now this outward healing is wrought diverse ways:

First, by time: In old age diverse affections seem to be healed, the flame of
lust seems to be extinguished; and yet in many it is not extinguished, though
it burn less violently, or seems not to burn at all. Tuto tractatur serpens
dum riget frigore; non deest illi venenum, sed torpet: a serpent cannot sting
whilst his members are numb with cold, and yet he wants not poison, but
strength to shoot it forth: and there are many, because of the coldness proper
to old age, want strength to execute, but not vicious affections to move them
to all uncleanness; had they sufficient heat to cherish their corrupt
affections, they are not so healed, but that they would soon break into their
former extravagancies and excess of lust.

Secondly, by place: He that lives in a cloister or call, where the affections
want outward objects to work upon them, may think himself healed, and the
world may think him a new man; and yet his affections may be still the same.
That fire which is buried in ashes, shows not the same fury which another
fire does, that meets with fit matter to kindle it; not because it has lost
its natural property, but because it wants like nourishment: and many that
live in retirement, sequestered from all worldly affairs, abstain from many
wrongs and insolences that other men commit; not because their affections are
less furiously inclined to do wrong, but because they want the same outward
matter to incense and kindle them.

Thirdly, by the persons among whom we live: They that live in a well-ordered
Commonwealth, where the care and vigilance of the Magistrate suppresseth all
vice; or they that converse daily with good men; may, in the former case for
fear, in the later, for shame, abstain from all notorious and infamous sins;
and may seem (both to themselves and others) to be just, patient, chaste, and
temperate; and yet not have their affections healed. As stones that lie in the
top of an high tower have not lost their weight and natural inclination to
descend downward, but are sustained by the other parts of the building: so
there are some supported by others, not by the soundness of their own
affections.

But this outward healing is not here meant: David desired to have his
affections changed and healed inwardly; which neither time, nor place, nor the
persons that were about him could effect: it is only grace can heal the
affections inwardly; and so grace is here the subject matter of his petition;
for the wounds of sin are too deep to be healed by any means less powerful
then grace: And if man in his innocence, having supernatural gifts, continued
not long in the purity of his nature; how much less shall wounded nature,
without supernatural gifts, recover her former purity? Yet I deny not, but
that a man may, by the help of nature, obtain habits that may have an inward
operation upon the soul, and may change the affections in some degree; but in
a degree so weak and imperfect as can never bring him to salvation. A man may
by the strength of Reason, assisted only by the general ordinary concourse,
acquire habits of virtue, and those habits may cause a readiness in the
affections to turn to virtuous actions: yet those acts of virtue will differ
much from those that spring from grace. Actions that spring from nature, if
they be done out of a love to honesty, and be without the mixture of all
private respects, may have a moral goodness; and I think they may truly be
called virtues: yet actions that spring from grace will as far excel them, as
domestic fruits that are kept and fomented by an husbandman, excel those that
grow naturally in the woods and open fields: for grace changes the affections
more powerfully, and so makes the work, which is partly measured by the
affections, to be of greater value. Our Savior Christ, having examined this
matter by his infallible scrutiny, ascribes more worth to a small gift which a
poor widow brought into the treasury, then to the large gifts of many rich
men; Of a truth (says he) I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast in
more then they all, Luke 21.3. They from their great heaps brought great gifts,
she from a small heap brought only two mites; and yet our Savior Christ,
having weighed all their charity against hers, found, that many grains would
not make them equal: for, though their gifts were voluntary as well as hers,
yet they were not so much voluntary, because their affections were not so
ready; for the affections work upon the Will: when the affections are not
ready, retardunt, si non impediunt voluntatem, they hinder and stop the Will,
if they do not divert her from a right course. There being then great
difference between nature and grace in working upon the affections, their
effects must needs be different: Nature may cause some change in the
affections, and perfect them in some degree; but grace changes the affections
powerfully, and makes them as it were new affections: If any man be in Christ
(says Saint Paul) he is a new creature; old things are passed away, behold
all things are become new, 2 Corinthians. 5.17.

And yet grace does not totally heal the affections in this world: there is but
a partial healing here, the flesh lusts against the spirit in the best men;
lustful, ambitious, covetous, and an innumerable company of unlawful thoughts
and desires will sometimes arise in every man: they which have obtained the
greatest measure of grace, had never sufficient to exsiccate and dry up the
streams of those impurities; yet this is our comfort, those wounds that
remain are not left for our destruction, but our trial; the danger and
deadliness of them is taken away, although they be not perfectly healed. As
God left the Egyptians, and the Jebusites, and the Ammonites amongst the people
of Israel, not to consume his people, but to prove them; so he leaves several
kinds of concupiscence in his children, not to destroy us, but to try whether
we will abstain from sin for his sake, when our affections move us to the
contrary: and as Joshua, Josh. 10.18.
having overcome the five Kings that combined against the Israelites, did not
presently put them to death, but kept them in a cave, that he might put them
to death afterward in the sight of all the people with greater triumph; so
God, having by his grace subdued the concupiscence and inordinatenesse of the
affections, does not presently destroy them, but keeps them a while in bondage,
deprived of their wonted liberty, that he may destroy them afterward in the
sight of all the world with greater glory. At the general judgment, when this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality, all inordinatenesse shall be destroyed, the affections shall be
totally healed; then the soul, like the sick man in the Gospel, shall take up
his bed and walk; it shall take the body, wherein it lay sick as in a bed, and
carry it where it please; portabit lectum a quo ante portatus fuerat, it shall
carry that whereby it self was carried; then the flesh shall yield to the
spirit, and shall rejoice to be overcome. In the mean time, the concupiscence
and inordinatenesse of our affections are so healed, that they cease to reign,
though they cease not to be; we may by the help of grace subdue our affections,
though we cannot keep them from rebellion. And this is the first thing to
which David's petition must be applied; namely, to the affections.

Now in the next place, this petition must be applied to the understanding,
Heal my understanding: for the wound of Ignorance is as great as the wound of
Infirmity, and therefore that must be healed too, or else the soul will be
never the better. And here two things are required; for, as I showed you
before, there is a double Ignorance in the understanding, arising from a double
defect and want in the soul; the first arises for want of sufficient
revelation, the soul having lost the knowledge of those truths that were
revealed by God to our first parents. The second arises for want of evidence
after sufficient revelation, the understanding being not able of it self to
assent to revealed truths without some light given her by God, whereby it may
discover the certainty of them. And therefore two things are required, I say,
to heal these two kinds of Ignorance; The first is divine revelation. The
second is divine illumination.

The first thing necessary to heal the wound of Ignorance is divine revelation:
The articles of faith must be revealed immediately by God himself, as they
were to the Patriarchs and the Apostles; or mediately by the working and
administration of the Church, or else they can never be known; Thou art
blessed, Simon Barjona, (says our Savior Christ unto Saint Peter) for flesh
and blood bath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 16.16. The revelations of flesh and blood do rather enlarge, then heal
the wound of Ignorance. Whilst Solomon followed the revelations of flesh and
blood, he lost that knowledge that was before revealed; and as formerly for
wisdom and knowledge, so afterward for simplicity and foolishness, he
became a second time the wonder and amazement of the world. The mysteries of
faith must be revealed from above, or they can never be revealed; No man
knows the Son (says our Savior Christ) but the Father; neither knows any
man the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matthew.
11.27.

The second thing necessary to heal the wound of Ignorance is divine
illumination: for, after the articles of faith be revealed, if there be not
something else added to make the truth evident, the understanding will either
be deceived by falsehood, or else perplexed by doubts and scruples. The eye
cannot discern an object, though present, except there be light to make it
visible: and although the articles of faith be sufficiently presented to the
understanding by supernatural revelation; yet if there be not a supernatural
light too, to make the truth evident, the wound of Ignorance cannot be healed.
Natural Reason is too weak to enlighten the soul sufficiently: for, as Noah's
dove could find no rest in the air for the sole of her foot; so when the
understanding enters into contemplation of supernatural truths, as in the thin
and subtle air, it can find nothing to rest on: or, as Saint Peter had sunk
when he walked upon the sea, Matthew. 14.30, 31.
if our Savior Christ had not upholden him with his hands; so the
understanding sinks when it walks upon the deep ocean of supernatural truths,
if it be not upholden by divine assistance. And yet, as Reason may move the
affections in order to supernatural goodness, but cannot heal their
infirmity; so it can likewise enlighten the understanding in order to
supernatural truths, but cannot heal its ignorance. The light of Reason may
make supernatural truths so evident to the understanding, that a man may think
his faith perfect in all respects; and yet it may be perfect in nothing. The
ancient Fathers of the Church, in their Apologies for Christian religion,
allege many reasons which may make a natural man believe the articles of our
Christian faith. The miracles which were wrought by the Apostles have given
their doctrine such authority, that a natural man cannot but assent unto it,
unless his understanding be carried away by some private respect and interest
of his own: And he that has this assent may think his understanding is
enlightened and healed sufficiently; but he deceives himself, like the
Syrians, which thought they had been in the way to the Prophet, 2 King. 6.20.
when they were in the midst of Samaria; or like Saul's messengers, 1 Samuel 19.16.
which thought they had found David, when they found but an image in his place:
For this faith that springs from natural Reason is but imago and simulacrum
fidei, the image and representation of true faith; it is like it in show, but
differs much from it in essence. For there are two properties essential to
true faith, which nothing but the light of grace can work in the soul. The
first is certainty: Nothing but the light of grace can work in us such a
certainty as is essential to true faith. He that believes a thing certainly,
must have some infallible motive, cui falsum subesse non potest, in which there
can be no error or delusion; for an uncertain motive can give a man no
assurance of that which he believes: Certainty of faith always supposes a
certain and infallible motive upon which it is built. Now concerning the
articles of our faith, nothing but the light of grace can give us an infallible
motive of their truth; for many of them being above Reason, cannot by the light
of Reason be made evident.

But some perhaps will say, A natural man, by the light of Reason, may believe
the Scriptures to be true, and to be the word of God, and so may have an
infallible motive: For he that believes the articles of faith because they are
grounded upon the authority of Gods word, has a sure and certain motive of
their truth, it being impossible that any falsehood should proceed from God.

To this I answer: Although a natural man may believe the Scriptures to be
true, and to be the word of God, yet his faith concerning this matter is but an
historical kind of faith, and is grounded upon deceitful and uncertain
motives: and therefore though the Scriptures be an infallible motive to those
that have certain grounds to believe them to be true, and to be the word of
God; yet they can be no infallible motive to him that has not such grounds:
for they that are not sure that the Scriptures are true, and that they are the
word of God, cannot be sure that any thing is true which they prove from them.
Now a natural man cannot, from the light of Reason, have any other but
uncertain and deceitful grounds concerning the truth of Scripture; for he
believes them to be true, and to be the word of God, either from the tradition
of the Church, from the miracles which were wrought by the Apostles, or from
some other humane motive; in which, although there be great probability, yet
there can be no infallibility. Such grounds as these can give him no such
assurance as excludes all possibility of deceit; he has but an historical
faith of the truth of Scripture, and so can have but an historical certainty.
But the light of grace shows us infallibly the truth of Scripture, it gives us
an experimental knowledge of it, and makes us as it were to see it with our
eyes: so that there is as great a difference between the faith that a man has
from the light of Reason, and that which he has afterward from the light of
grace, as there was between the faith which the Samaritans had of our Savior
Christ from the speech of the woman, and that which they had afterward when
they saw him with their eyes.

The second property essential to true faith, which nothing but the light of
grace can work in the soul, is a pious affection to faith, and to all the
truths which it reveals: nothing but the light of grace can work this pious
affection in us. The light of Reason, although it cannot make all truths
evident that are to be believed, yet (as I said before) there are many truths
that may be discovered by it; namely, such as are of the law of nature; but
then it cannot, like grace, work a pious affection in the soul toward them.
The Devil sees many excellent truths by the natural light of his
understanding: he sees that God is infinitely good, and infinitely wise, and
infinitely just, and infinitely merciful, and infinitely happy; but he can
have no affection to these truths: he sees them all in lumine coacto, in a
forced and compelled light; and not in lumine jucundo, in a delightful and
pleasant light. A thief may know by the light of reason, that theft is an
unjust act, or an adulterer that adultery is unlawful; but they can have no
affection to these truths: their faith is like the Devils, they believe them by
the force and compulsion of Reason, and not with delight and pleasure. But the
light of grace does not only make truth evident, but it produces also in the
soul a pious affection toward that truth; it makes a man to be in love with
it, and to delight in it: I have had as great delight in the way of thy
testimonies, as in all manner of riches, (says David) Psalm. 119.14. And so say
all they whose understandings are enlightened by grace. He that has the light
of reason, can delight only in such truths as entertain and second his humor:
but he that has the light of grace, delights equally in all truths, though
they seem directly to oppose his profit, honor, pleasure, and all his other
desires. He that has this supernatural gift, can say, like David, of all
divine truths; More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold;
sweeter also then the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. Whosoever then
finds in himself this pious affection to faith, and to all the truths that it
reveals, may assure himself, his understanding is enlightened by grace: but
he that finds it not, whatsoever he believes, his soul was never touched by
the influence of this divine light. Men do generally love such things as they
possess themselves; they which have faith cannot but love faith: it is our
Savior Christ's manner of arguing with his disciples; If ye were of the world,
the world would love his own: but ye are not of the world, therefore the world
hates you, John 15.19. The sum and abstract of our Saviors speech is this;
The world loves not a spiritual profession, because spiritual things are none
of their own; if spiritual things were their own, they would love a
spiritual profession. So I may argue with others, If faith be their own, they
cannot but love faith, and the truths which it reveals. And this is the second
thing to which David's petition must be applied; namely, to the understanding.

Now in the third place this petition must be applied to the will: Heal my
will. For, among all the wounds which the soul has received, there are none
greater or more mortal then those that are in the will: the wound of Malice is
worse then either the wound of Infirmity, or of Ignorance; and therefore that
must be healed before the soul can be in a safe condition. The will indeed is
in a better case after the affections and understanding be healed, then it was
before; for, being an indifferent faculty of it self, it is moved by the
affections; and therefore when the affections are healed, it has not such
strong provocations to sin: and being a blind faculty of it self, it receives
information from the understanding; and therefore when the understanding is
healed, it has not such false dictates to make it err. Yet this is not
sufficient to heal the will: the will has his proper wound, and so must have
his proper cure. And here the manner of healing is still by supernatural
grace: Grace has heat for the will, as well as light for the understanding;
otherwise it could not heal the soul sufficiently: For the Devil has light,
but he has no heat: his name is Lucifer, which signifies a carrier of light;
but it had been better for him (says S. Bernard) si ignifer magis esset quam
Lucifer, Bernard de verb. Isai. proph. sermon. 3.
if he had been a carrier of heat, rather then a carrier of light: light
without heat does him no good; to believe, and not to love, does but increase
his misery. But grace has both light and heat; light, whereby it begets faith
in the understanding; and heat, whereby it begets love in the will: and this
love is the chief of all the virtues, the best and most excellent effect of
grace. I know there are some which give faith the precedence, whom I leave to
enjoy their opinion: for my self, as in all other things, so for my part in
spiritual graces, I submit my will to Gods will, as knowing the least is more
then I am worthy of, yet my prayers shall always be to have love in the
excess; which I will not only desire above all other spiritual graces, but
above all them and all the joys of heaven together: Faith is the foundation
upon which we must build our love; (for how can we love God as we ought, if
we believe not in him as we ought?) and yet love may exceed faith in dignity,
as the superstructure may exceed the foundation in rich and costly materials.
But I intend not to speak of the excellency of love in general; love has many
operations in via, whilst we are in the way to heaven, besides the healing of
the will; and it has many operations in patria, when we are in heaven, where
the will shall be perfectly healed: but all these are out of my Text, and shall
be out of my discourse. I will only speak of the operation that love has in
healing the will; and love, when it flows from grace, has an operation in
this respect above all other things: for that alone is able to work true
repentance in the will, to melt it with sorrow for sin, to make it flexible,
and to mollify that stiffenesse and that hardness that is in it. Yet, as
Reason may work upon the affections, and upon the understanding; so it may work
also upon the will, but fails as much in healing this, as in healing the other
faculties. There is a natural repentance which springs from natural reason;
for he that has received many temporal blessings at the hands of God, cannot
choose (if he follows the dictate of right reason) but love him; and if he
loves him, he cannot but be grieved when he sins against him; for he that
loves, will grieve for the least offense committed against the thing beloved.
Yet this sorrow that springs from natural reason is not sufficient to heal
the will: For first, it fails in the cause: A natural man may be sorrowful
for his sins, but he has not a fountain of sorrow that flows and streams
continually: that love that springs from natural reason is soon extinguished;
and when the cause cease, sorrow, that is the effect proceeding from it, must
needs cease. But that love that proceeds from grace is more durable, it is able
to perpetuate sorrow; he that is endued with this love, has a constant habit
of repentance, and if at any time he sins through infirmity, his soul becomes
immediately an house of mourning, an Hadad rimmon, a valley of lamentation.
Secondly, It fails in the effect: That sorrow that springs from natural
reason cannot convert the will, and make it turn from sin: a natural man may
be sorrowful for his sins past, and have a full resolution to abstain from
sin for the time to come; but he cannot actuate and perform his resolutions;
for reason may enable a man to make good resolutions, but only grace can
enable him to keep them. Now when amendment of life is not joined with sorrow
for sin, it rather makes new wounds then heales the old: Qui plangit
peccatum, and iterum committit peccatum, quasi si quis laterem lavet crudum,
quem quanto magis laverit, tanto magis lutum fecerit, says Isidore; he that
mourns for his sin, and yet cease not to commit sin, is like him that
washes a tile stone that is not well burnt, which is made more dirty by being
often washed. He that is sorrowful for sin, and resolves to amend, begins
well; but if his repentance end where it begun, it is a sign his will is not
yet healed. When good resolutions vanish like the morningdew, and are never put
in execution, what fruit can they produce? but when resolutions and actions,
like the former and the later rain, succeed one another in their due season,
they cause a fruitful increase of glory and happiness; and it is an evident
sign that the will is wrought upon by grace; for that love that springs from
grace makes the soul affectionate to God, and careful to abstain from all
such actions as offend him: When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of
Jacob from among the strange people, the sea saw that and fled, Jordan was
driven back, Psalm. 114.1, 3. The Israelites departure out of Egypt to worship
God in the wilderness, was a type of man's conversion to God by love; and the
flight of the waters, was a type of the flight of sin that follows upon it:
Ante retrorsum aquae conversae fuerunt, nunc retrorsum peccata conversa sunt,
says S. Ambrose upon that passage: there the waters, but here sins are driven
backward; there the course of the flood was stopped within its channel, but
here the course of sin is stopped in all the secret passages of the heart. And
this is the third thing to which David's petition must be applied, namely, to
his will.

But David's soul is not yet perfectly healed, his conscience was wounded too,
and therefore in the last place this petition must be applied to his
conscience, Heal my conscience. And here the manner of healing is something
different from the former: grace can heal the stain of sin, but it cannot
heal the guilt; it can sanctify, but it cannot justify the soul: nothing
can take away the guilt of sin but forgiveness of sin; but sin being forgiven,
the obligation to punishment is taken away, then the conscience is healed, and
guilt is turned into innocence, fear into gladness. In the 102. Psalm David
laments his own case very passionately; My days are consumed away like smoke,
and my bones are burnt up as it were a firebrand: my heart is smitten down
and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread. For the voice of my
groaning my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh, etc. In the 103. Psalm he
seems to rejoice as much, and breaks forth into elogies of praise: Praise the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. Praise the
Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. What was it that transported
him so suddenly from one passion to another? If you read the Psalms, you shall
soon see the cause; his conscience was wounded when he made the 102. Psalm,
and healed when he made the 103. Psalm; his sins lay heavy upon his soul when
he made the one, and were forgiven him when he made the other. As long as the
guilt of sin disquieted his conscience, not all the glory of his Kingdom, nor
the pomp of his Court, not all the delights of Canaan, though a land flowing
with milk and honey, could content his mind: but when his sins were forgiven,
he found a sudden alteration; that heaviness that possessed his heart vented
it self, and gave place to joy: O Lord my God, (says he) I cried unto thee,
and thou have healed me, Psalm. 30.2. And what ensued upon this? Thou have
turned (says he afterward) my heaviness into joy, thou have put off my sack
cloth, and girded me with gladness. That contentment of mind, that
tranquillity of conscience, that circle of joy wherewith his soul was girt,
followed immediately upon the healing of his conscience and forgiveness of his
sins: forgiveness of sin is as proper to heal the guilt of sin, as grace to
heal the stain: In the Scripture, to heal sin, and to forgive sin, are
termini aequipollentes, terms which signify the same things, and are
promiscuously taken the one for the other: Return, ye backsliding children,
and I will heal your backslidings, Jer. 3.22. Here you see, to heal their
backslidings, is to forgive their sin. And so again; I have seen his ways, and
will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his
mourners, Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him: that is, I
have seen his sins, and will forgive them. But was not David healed before he
made this Psalm? did not the Prophet Nathan tell him, The Lord also has put
away thy sin, 2 Samuel 12.13. He did: but David being assured by the Prophet,
desired yet a greater assurance: The richest of Gods saints always suspect
their own poverty, and think that which they have nothing, in respect of that
which they have not, and of that which they desire to have: David was healed,
the Lord had forgiven him all his sins, and yet for all that he desires still
to be healed.

Let us then learn, by David's example, to be thus careful and solicitous to
have our souls healed. Pharaoh desired to be delivered from the plagues of
Egypt, but not from his hardness of heart: Let us rather desire the last, for
the wounds of sin are the worst wounds. The Scripture has in many places very
artificially painted out the nature of sin; but it always borrowes colors
from noxious and hurtful creatures: it compares it to the basilisk, to the
viper, to the asp, whose poisonous qualities are destructive to the life of
men: And it has also in many places allegorically expressed the nature of sin
by many deadly diseases; by the leprosy, by the palsy, by the bloudy-flux,
and sometimes by death it self in the abstract. By these, and many other
expressions in the Scripture, ye may learn the nature of sin, and see how
dangerous her wounds are if they be not healed. Let us then do as David did,
let us seek unto the Lord, who is the Physician of our souls; he only is able
by his grace to heal the stain, and by his mercy the guilt of our sins.

The time will not permit me to enter into the last part of my Text, I will
therefore conclude all with that of the Prophet Jeremiah; Heal us, O Lord, and
we shall be healed: save us, and we shall be saved; for thou art our praise.

FINIS.
PSALM 41.4. Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.


I Have formerly begun to speak of these words in this place. I divided my Text
then (as you may remember) into three parts; First, here is Designatio partis
vulneratae, David's discovery of the wounded part; and that was his soul: Heal
my soul. Secondly, here is Petitio remedii, his prayer and petition for a
remedy; and that was, to be healed: Heal my soul. Thirdly, here is Confessio
causae, his confession of the cause of those wounds; and that was sin: for I
have sinned against thee. I have already spoken of the two first parts; where I
showed you the wounds of his soul, and the manner how they were to be healed.
I come now to speak of the last part, which is, His confession of the cause of
those wounds, in these words, For I have sinned against thee.

The right method of healing requires that we show the cause of the malady, as
far as we are able; for, the cause being removed, the effect will cease: that
David does here in these last words, For I have sinned against thee. And this
last part of my Text is that which we are chiefly to look upon, and to take
into consideration. For before (as I have showed you) he gave occasion to
those that were of the Church, to sin; to those that were out of it, to
blaspheme: first, he commits adultery; and after that, as if adultery were to
be purged by murder, or as if Uriah's lost honor had been to be repaired by
the loss of his life, he commands him to be unjustly murdered: But here you
may see him marking out the way to repentance, and going himself before to
direct us. For, as he was not ashamed to commit sin, so he was not ashamed to
confess it, and to make public satisfaction to the whole world; for my Text,
and many other places of the Psalms, remain as it were so many public
registers of his sins; he sighed, and wept, and lamented day and night, and
(in a word) showed all the marks and tokens of an humble and contrite heart,
broken with the sense of his sins, and the apprehension of Gods anger against
them. If a gold ring be broken, it loses part of its grace and luster; but if
ye set a diamond, or a saphyr, or a ruby in the broken place, it gives a
greater luster then it did before: so David, by his sins, lost part of that
grace and luster that made him shine so brightly in the Church of God; but his
confession, humility, repentance, and other virtues (like so many precious
stones set in a gold ring in the place where it was broken) has made him shine
brighter after his fall, then in his former times of innocence; for, as his
sins were great, so was his sorrow and repentance: and I would to God that
all men which have eyes to see the one, had eyes also to see the other; and
could learn, not to love that in David, which David hated in himself.

This general confession contains in it three particular confessions, which
are the heads I purpose at this time, by Gods help, to insist upon. First, here
is a confession in respect of the subject. Secondly, here is a confession in
respect of the act. Thirdly, here is a confession in respect of the object. The
subject, I. The act, Have sinned. The object, Against thee. I will begin with
the first; that is, his confession in respect of the subject.

I have sinned: that is, I alone; not as a partial and less principal cause,
necessitated and compelled by a cause more active and powerful then my self;
but by the free and full consent of my will: I have so sinned, that these sins
are properly and only mine. It is the custom of many to excuse themselves,
and impute their sins to others; or at least, they will charge others to have
had such a causality and influence upon them, that they will seem themselves
to be but partial causes at the most. In Solomon's time two mothers contended
for one child, and both of them challenged it to be their own; but when sin
is borne and brought into the world, the contention is, who shall not have it:
in this case the true mother would have the child divided; as in that, the
false: the Will, whose child it is, will not acknowledge it for her own; and
when she cannot wholly impose it upon others, she desires at least to have it
divided between them.

Some impute their sins to the Devil, and to the violence of his temptations,
as if he did forcibly and irresistibly procure them to sin: and this is a kind
of hereditary disease, which we take from our first parents; for after Eve had
transgressed the commandment of God by eating the forbidden fruit, to excuse
the matter, she laid the fault upon the Devil, The Serpent (said she)
beguiled me, and I did eat. But David here uses no such evasions; I have
sinned, says he: he condemns himself, and not the Devil; and yet the
Devil sinned as well as David: and, if Saint Augustines opinion be true, the
Devil sinned worse then David; Lib. 3. de libero arbitrio, cap. 10.
Gravius est peccatum alteri per invidentiam dolumque suadere, quam ad
peccandum alterius suasione traduci, says he, speaking of the temptations of
the Devil. But yet David accuses not the Devil, who did only tempt, but
could not constrain him to sin; for all that the Devil can do, is to allure
and induce men by moral persuasions, he cannot physically determine their
wills to evil; he may (...), Tom. 6. Homil. 91.
(as Saint Chrysostom speaks) supplant, cozen, and deceive a man, but he
cannot force him to do evil. When the Devil tempted our Savior Christ in
the wilderness, without question he employed all the power he had to make
him sin; and yet he could not force him to it, nay, he did not so much as
offer to make him sin by force; for, if ye consider all the passages between
them, ye shall find great Boldness, great Pride, and great Malice in his
temptations, but no force at all: his first temptation (as they are writ in
order by Saint Luke) was this, Luke 4.3.
If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread: Here is
great boldness in this temptation; What, will nothing but a miracle serve the
turn? Must Christ turn stones into bread to satisfy his curiosity? This was a
bold request indeed; but yet you see he does not force his consent, but beg
it. The second temptation (after he had set him upon a mountain, and shown
him all the kingdoms of the world) was this; All this power will I give thee,
and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will,
I give it: if thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine. Here is
great pride in this temptation, a pride greater then that that made him fall
from heaven; for then he said, Ascendam super excelsa nubis, similis ero
Altissimo: I will ascend above the highest of the clouds, I will be like the
most High, Isa. 14.14. but here his pride reaches a degree higher, he desires
to be greater then God, and requires of him, that he would fall down and
worship him; but yet you see here is no force in this temptation, If thou will
worship me (says he) all shall be thine: he leaves him here to his own free
choice, if he will, he may; if he will not, he offers not by any violent
assault to make him. His third temptation (after he had set him upon the
pinnacle of the Temple) was this; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self
down from hence. Here is great malice in this temptation; for if he would have
cast himself down, the Devil thought that in all probability he should
perish by the fall: but yet you see no force in this temptation; Persuadere
potest, praecipitare non potest (says S. Jerome upon this passage,) the Devil
might persuade him to throw himself headlong, but could not throw him
headlong by force: and this is all that the Devil can do; if we will not
cast our selves headlong, the Devil cannot. For sins are (...), (as St.
Cyrill calls them) they are plants set by the Will, and are not planted by the
Devil in the soil where they grow. For God has not only given a man the
government of the world, but also the government of himself, and has made him
so independent in respect of all other creatures, that if all the powers of
hell should set themselves in opposition against one single man, they could not
force his Will: the Will, like Sampson, cannot be bound either with ropes or
withs; her liberty sits on her like a coat of male, and like the scales of the
Leviathan, it is impossible to offend her or hurt her by force. It is true, I
confess, that humane nature is corrupted and depraved, and cannot, without the
help of supernatural grace, perform a good action: it cannot work out of
faith or love, which are necessary qualifications required in all that we do;
but yet it is free in evil, it is flexible to this or that object, and can do
or not do any natural action, according to the outward substance and matter
of it. No man is bound to follow the suggestions of the Devil, but may follow
the dictate of his own reason; all that the Devil can do, is, by applying his
temptations, to move the Will to this or that object; he cannot determine or
fix her upon it: the Will indeed does usually go as it is moved by outward
objects, being won with the charms and delights which it hopes to find in
them; but yet her election is free in this case, and not wrested from her by
force. There is a difference between men and beasts: beasts are carried away
with the outward bravery of every object that presents it self unto them, and
cannot refuse their appetite those things which it requires: but men are moved
by inward reason, as well as by outward objects, and may, by the help of the
one, beat back the impulsions of the other. We must not therefore make the
Devil the author of our sins, for his temptations do only move, but cannot
determine the Will to this or that evil: The Devil is a suitor to the Will,
and not her ravisher; Non enim cogendo, sed suadendo nocet, nec extorquet a
nobis consensum, sed petit, says Saint Augustine: the Devil hurts us by
persuasion, not by constraint; and when we commit a sin, he does not ravish
our consent, but sues for it. No man is driven by the Devil to desperate
courses, but goes willingly and of his own accord; the Devil drives no man,
but makes use only of our own corruption to persuade us.

Secondly, there are some that impute their sins to destiny; that is, to a
necessary concatenation of second causes, which are so subordinate one to
another, that all things happen by necessity; inferior causes, and amongst
them the wills of men, being carried and moved irresistibly by their superior:
and this force of moving men's wills irresistibly they attribute chiefly to the
planets, and to several constellations of the heavens; as if men were
necessitated to evil by their malignant influences, or as if the stars ruled
over men's wills (as Dionysius over the Syracusians) by an arbitrary and
tyrannical kind of government. Saint Augustine, in his Commentaries upon the
31. Psalm, makes mention of some that were of this opinion, which did
undertake to foretell the sins that any man should fall into, by looking upon
the stars that ruled at his nativity; Et dicunt, quis quando vel peccet, vel
been vivat, and quando Mars faciat homicidam, and Venus adulterum: they took
upon them to declare who should be good or bad, when Mars should force a man to
commit murder, or Venus to commit adultery. But David here accuses not the
stars; he clears them, and condemns himself. Uriah might have grown
grayheaded in the chaste embraces of his wife; he might have long enough
enjoyed his breath, and she her honor, had David done no more but what the
influence of the heavens compelled him to; for the heavens force no man to sin:
Had they the conduct of our wills, there would not be so many sins committed as
there are; they would govern us better then we do our selves. When our
Savior Christ was crucified, the sun and the stars withdrew their light,
and were ashamed to look upon the cruelty and ingratitude that was committed
by men. Can we think then the stars were the authors of those evils which
they blushed to behold? Can deeds of darkness spring from the fountains of
light? Without doubt, the stars are so far from constraining any to sin
against God, that they would sooner withdraw their virtue from the world, then
afford a sinner either light or influence, had not God commanded them to shine
upon the unjust, as well as upon the just. Let no man then accuse the stars,
for their influence is not hurtful, but good; they are the cause of all action
and motion, the spring of joy and delight; they shed abroad their virtue
through all inferior bodies, and add strength and vigor to all things
living; and if at any time they stir up our inclinations to any excess or
defect, yet they offer no violence to the Will, but leave her in possession of
her full liberty: And indeed, if the Will were necessitated by the heavens, it
were in vain to consult, in vain to search reasons and motives for those acts
whereunto we are violently carried by destiny. In this constraint, as there
should be no place left for liberty; so there could be none for virtue or vice:
all punishments, how equal soever in outward appearance, yet in substance and
truth should be unjust, seeing they could not reach the principal author of
any sin. What can be more unjust, then that a man should bear the punishments
of those sins which are committed by the heavens? If the stars be the
principal cause of sin, the stars should bear the punishment; heaven should
go to hell, and men, which are but subordinate instruments, whose wills are
overruled and over-topt by those superior powers, should be dismissed and
freed.

Thirdly, there be some that impute their sins to God: Saint Augustine (in the
place before quoted) makes mention of those too; affirming, that there were
diverse that gave themselves free scope and liberty to sin, and then said, they
committed those sins, quia Deus sic voluit, because God would have it so;
making God the first mover and principal actor, and themselves only his under
agents in sinning: and this indeed has always been a common custom, as
Solomon (long before St. Augustines time) complained; The foolishness of man
(says he) perverteth his way, and his soul fretteth against the Lord, Prove.
19.3. But David here accuses not God, he clears him as well as others; and
indeed, it had been the most intolerable and unjust excuse that he could have
invented: for, do but look upon the world, and ye shall see it the sum of
perfection; it is as a table whereon the divine Wisdom has expressed many
rich inventions, and displayed them all in such colors, as it is impossible
any thing should be more complete, absolute, and perfect: if there be any
disorders, or any thing imperfect in it, they are the effects of second causes,
and were not made so by God; and if no disorder or no imperfect thing can come
from God; then surely no sin, which is nothing else but disorder and
imperfection. Let no man then pin his sins upon God, or think within
himself, that God constrained him to sin; Say not thou, It is through the Lord
that I fell away: for thou ought not to do that which he hates. Say not
thou, He has caused me to err: for he has no need of the sinful man,
Ecclus 15.11, 12. God created not the world, because he wanted a place to be
in; neither did he create men, because he wanted some to set forth his
goodness by their praises, and others to under-prop his glory by their sins:
for God was in himself before he created the world, and was both the Theater
and the Judge of his own action; his own applause and approbation of himself
was sufficient to his own happiness, though men had never been created. God
was as happy before he made the world, as he has been since; and should be
as happy if it were turned into nothing, as he is. Let no man therefore think,
that God has need of the sinner, or that it is he which procures his fall;
for whosoever sins, pulls down ruin upon himself; he is not Gods
instrument, but the principal cause of his own wickedness: Lo, this only
have I found, (says Solomon) that God has made man upright; but they have
sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. David therefore here lays all the
fault upon himself, he cleares God, nay, he cleares all the world: I have
sinned; not God, nor the stars, nor the Devil, but I alone: It is only I that
have sinned.

And this is the first part of David's confession, wherein he confesses his
sin to be his own: and thus must we do too. The first thing that we are to
confess, is, that our sins are our own; we must not seek to another author
for them, nor ascribe them to any predominant cause: if our souls be wounded as
David's was, the fault is our own. Other things may hurt our bodies, but they
cannot hurt our souls; the soul has an immunity and privilege in this
respect above the body, nothing can hurt it but it self: Therefore now thus
says the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel, Wherefore commit you this
great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and
suckling out of Judah, to leave you none to remain? Jer. 44.7. Wherefore commit
you this great evil against your souls? The Prophet condemns them here (you
see) as the only causes of their own ruin, they were the contrivers of their
own destruction, they committed evil against their own souls, and were not
subservient instruments to another. Let us not then strive to excuse our sins:
our sins are our own, committed willingly and freely by us; and therefore we
must not blame others, but our selves. Yea, our sins are so truly our own, that
there is nothing in the world so much our own as they: for, in respect of all
other things we are stewards, not owners; the dispensation is ours, but not
the propriety: but our sins are truly ours, we are the owners and proprietaries
of them. Other things are none of ours; we our selves are not our own, our
bodies and souls are none of ours, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
but Gods, and he may dispose of them as he pleases: and when our bodies, or
souls, or any thing that we possess are called our own, it is not in respect
of an absolute and independent, but in respect of a limited and dependent right
which we hold under him; for we gave not our selves a being, but received it of
God; yea, we were so far from giving our selves a being when we were not,
that we cannot continue our being now we have it: the world has no less
need of his assistance now, then at the first creation; and when it shall have
lasted ten thousand years, it shall be still in its minority; it must be no
less sustained by God when it is old, then in its first infancy. And, as we
our selves are not our own, but Gods; so our actions are none of ours, but
his: he co-operates with all his creatures, and gives them virtue and strength
to perform their actions. Had they not a continual supply and contribution of
power and strength from him, the stars would lose their light, the heavens
their influence, all things would become naked, disarmed, and stripped of all
their qualities; all the old elements would be dissolved, and in stead of them
darkness, silence, horror, and confusion would be the new elements of the
world. We cannot so much as eat, or drink, or move, or speak without him; for
in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. not only our being,
but our life and motion; that is, all our actions are from him. Now, if we be
neither owners of our selves, nor of our actions, then surely those things
which are without us, as riches, honors, and whatsoever else is in the world,
is none of ours, we cannot call our selves the proprietaries of them: But for
our sins, they are truly our own, God has no right at all in them; we produce
them, and give them a being of our selves, and therefore they are as truly
ours, as any thing is his which he created. But some perhaps will say, that
God concurres as well to evil actions as to good; and therefore if our good
actions must not be imputed to our selves, but to God; our evil actions ought
likewise to be imputed to him. To this I answer, that God concurreth to evil
actions in such a manner, as they cannot without injustice be imputed to him.
Its true, when a man sins, God assists the sinner, and concurres with him in
all subservient actions that are requisite to the sin; yet the concourse of God
is so innocent, so pure, so void of all malice, that no man can (without
execrable blasphemy) call God the author of that sin. For there are two
different things to be considered in every evil act; the first is the
substance and matter of the act, and this (considered apart by it self) is
neither morally good nor evil: The second thing to be considered in every act
is the obliquity and defect which accompanies it; that is, the disorder which
is in it, which makes it an evil act, and which does as it were set a byas
upon it, that draws it awry: For the substance and matter of the act, God goes
along with it, he gives it the free contribution of his help and concourse;
but for the obliquity and defect of the act, to that he does not contribute at
all; for it has no efficient cause, but a deficient only. When a lame man
goes, there are two things in that act, his going, and his lamenesse; his going
proceeds from his soul, but his lamenesse from some defect in the matter: And
so it is in evil actions; the actions themselves proceed from God, as motion
proceeds from the soul; but the obliquity of the actions proceeds from some
defect in men, as lamenesse proceeds from some defect in the matter. So that
Gods concourse to our actions does not (as you see) suppose his concourse to
the obliquity and defect which is in them; the evil of every action is our
own, though the action it self be Gods. And this is the first thing we are to
acknowledge when we make our confession; namely, that our sins are our own,
and that we are not necessitated to commit them by any overruling power. And
so much of the first part of David's confession, which is his confession in
respect of the subject. I come now to the second, which is his confession in
respect of the act.

I have sinned: David proceeds here (you see) to confess the act. Before he
confessed the efficient cause of his hurt, and that was himself: he goes
forward now, and confesses the isntrumental cause, and that was sin; he
wounded himself by sin, For I have sinned. And in this confession he lays
open the nakedness of his soul, without using vain excuses to defend
himself: For although this confession be delivered in general terms, so that
he seems not by it to acknowledge himself so notorious and scandalous a sinner
as he was: yet if ye read over the whole Psalm, and consider it well, you
shall find, that this confession must have reference of necessity to his worst
sins; namely, to those particular and individual sins of Adultery and Murder,
and it is generally by Expositors chiefly applied to them: For those sins which
this confession has reference to, are those which were publicly known, and
which made him be evil spoken of amongst his enemies, as we may read in the
rest of the Psalm; now those were chiefly his Adultery and Murder: so that
though they be not named in express terms, yet if ye consider the reference
my Text has to other things contained in the Psalm, there is enough expressed
to make them known. And this must we do also in our confession; it is not
enough for us to confess our sins to be our own, but we must confess the
act also; we must lay open, as far as we are able, every particular and
individual sin which we commit. There are two ways, as it has been observed
by some, to procure the favor of a Judge in civil Courts and Consistories of
justice, (...), either an open confession, or else some colorable excuse: but
in Gods court there is but one of these ways availeable; we may make him
propitious and favorable by confessing our sins, and relating all
circumstances that do aggravate them; but not by using colors to extenuate and
lessen them: they that deny or excuse their sins, must look for no favor at
the hand of God; Behold, (says God) I will plead with thee, because thou
say, I have not sinned, Jer. 2.35. Behold, I will plead with thee; that is, I
will allege all that I can against thee, I will give thee the very extremity
and rigor of justice, I will prove thee faulty, and convince thee to thy face.
But on the other side, if men confess their sins, then is God ready to acquit
and pardon them; If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.

Now, confession is either public, or private: public confession is when the
people at a public congregation confess their sins together; or, when some
Minister of the Church confesses in the name of all the people: and this may
be either ordinary, or extraordinary; ordinary confession is at ordinary times,
as upon Sabbath or festival days, when the people meet together to confess
their sins: extraordinary confession is when the people meet together at
extraordinary times, upon special emergent occasions; and we have diverse
examples in the Scripture of both these kinds of confession, which I cannot now
stay to mention. Private confession is when a private man confesses his sins;
and it may be done publicly at a solemn assembly, or in private before a
Minister of the Church, or to a friend, or before God. The first kind of
confession was much in use in the primitive times of the Church; and it was
performed many several ways, which are frequently mentioned by the Fathers.
The second kind of confession is exacted by the Church of Rome with great
strictness and severity, and imposed upon men's consciences as a thing
absolutely necessary to salvation. The third kind of confession has been
always practiced by good Christians, as a thing conducing to the glory of God.
The last kind of confession is of absolute necessity, and is generally
exercised in the Church. As for our Church, we allow all these kinds of
confession: for the first kind of confession, which is to be made before a
public assembly, our Church in many cases commands it, and enjoineth public
and scandalous sinners (which cause the Church wherein they live to be evil
spoken of) to do penance, to make an honorable amends, and to give a public
testimony of their sorrow and repentance for it. For the second kind of
confession, which is to be made privately before a Minister of the Church, we
enjoine it not; but yet our Church in some cases counsels it: as namely, when
the conscience is distressed and perplexed, and cannot free it self from
fears and doubts. For the third kind of confession, that is to be made to a
friend, it is approved also and commended by our Church, and is counseled by
the Apostle Saint James, who admonishes the children of God to confess their
sins one to another. For the last kind of confession, (as I said) it is of
absolute necessity, and is taught by our Church as a doctrine fundamental, and
necessary to salvation. Now if I should speak of all these kinds of
confessions, first, of public confession, both ordinary and extraordinary; and
then of private confession, and all the several kinds of it; if I should speak
of the manner how they are to be performed, and of the profit and benefit that
is in them, I should too much exceed the limits of the time: I will speak
therefore only of the last kind, that is, confession before God; because that
is necessary to salvation, and is a duty that cannot be dispensed with.
Whosoever looks to have his soul healed, must first confess his sin to God,
and lay open the cause of his distemper. And surely we cannot desire a more
cheap, or a more easy remedy: we shall not need to represent our spiritual
diseases in plates of gold, as the Philistines did their emerods; 1 Samuel 6.4.
that was a costly remedy, and yet they thought it cheap enough, when they
considered what an happiness it was to have their health. But we shall not
need (I say) to use such a costly remedy, we shall not need to represent our
spiritual diseases in plates of gold; let us but represent them in words, and
we shall be healed: David did but confess his sin, and presently obtained
pardon; the prodigal child did but confess his sin, and presently the cloud
of his fathers anger was dissolved into a mild shower of tears; the thief
upon the cross, confessing his sins, was canonized before he was dead, and
found a better paradise by confession, then Adam lost by sin: Let us then
acknowledge our sins, and we shall have pardon; let us lay open and discover
the cause of our wounds, and we shall be healed.

But some perhaps will say, All this is done already; I have and do confess
my sins before God every day. It is well done: yet take heed thou do not
content thy self with the shadow of confession. What if thy confession be
nothing else but an empty sound of words? What if it want substance? What if it
be but a mere formality? then thou art miserably deluded: Yet such is the
confession of most men; for there is a formal verbal confession, which is but
a mere shadow; a man may confess his sins every day, and yet be never the
better, for there are diverse conditions necessary to a true confession, which,
if they be absent from thine, it will not be available.

The first condition necessary to a true confession, is a due examination of
our selves, and of our former life; all the kinds of sin, and all the
circumstances that do aggravate them, are to be discussed: we are not to take
our sins in the gross, and so to make a light perfunctory confession, and say,
that we are miserable and wretched sinners; but we must take a perfect view
(as far as we are able) of all our particular and individual sins. It is for
want of this examination that many a man's confession is invalid; they confess
only such sins as come suddenly into their minds, and make no reflection upon
their former life. But whosoever desire to make such a confession as may be
pleasing to God, must take more pains, and do it more exactly; Stand in awe
and sin not, commune with your own heart, and in your chamber, and be still,
(says David) Psalm. 4.4. As if he should have said, In the silence of the
night, when thou enjoyest thine own privacie, when thou art free from the
cares and distractions of worldly employments, enter into secret communication
with thine own heart, examine thine own ways, and search out thine own
corruptions. And, lest he should seem to exact that of others, which he did
not perform as rigorously himself, he shows it in another Psalm to be his
own practice; I call to remembrance (says he) my song in the night, I
commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search, Psalm. 77.6.
The Prophet Jeremiah likewise exhorts his brethren the Jews, in the time of
their captivity, to the performance of this duty; Let us search and try our
ways (says he) and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3.40. Saint Paul also
(writing to the Corinthians) lays this as a necessary injunction upon them,
that no man should have access to the holy Sacrament, without diligent
examination of himself; But let a man examine himself (says he) and so let
him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. As if he should
have said, It is not sufficient to make a general confession of your sins
when ye receive the holy Sacrament; but every man must search accurately,
that, if it be possible, he may see the very bottom of his corruption, and
confess all his sins, and be humbled for them in that measure that their
number or quality do require. It is for want of this examination, that many
men think themselves better then they are, they take no notice of their sins;
or, if they do take notice when they commit them, yet, for want of a timely
examination, they forget them afterward: so that when they would confess,
their sins (like Nebuchad-nezzars dream) are quite gone out of their mind; and
if some Daniel do not bring them back again to their remembrance, they shall
never be confessed. But this slight and superficial kind of confession is not
availeable; they that would confess their sins effectually, must be intentive
and diligent in examination of themselves, that so they may discover the whole
mass of their own corruption: and as diverse artificers examine all their work
by the line and plummet, so they must examine all their actions by the exact
rule and straight line of Gods word. And here (would the time permit) I would a
little enlarge my self, because there are many that never yet performed this
duty; and many others that know not how to do it: there are many that never yet
performed this duty, which are so far from taking any strict account of their
own ways, and from searching diligently into their own lives, that so they
might discover their own imperfections, and judge and condemn them in
themselves, that they are not very well content when others would take the
pains to do it for them, and to lay open their sins and corruptions before
their eyes; but if their pastor or teacher (whose office it is to do it, and
who shall answer God for not doing it) take notice of any sin, and discover it
to them, they think him too uncivil and importunate. If there be any here that
have been thus negligent in confessing their sins, and examining their own
lives, be exhorted, I beseech you, to begin this duty before your souls be too
far overspread with sins: I went by the field of the slothful (says Solomon)
and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding, and lo, it was all
grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the
stone-wall thereof was broken down, Pro. 24.30, 31. His words are allegorical,
and imply thus much, that they which neglect this duty, and do not seriously
examine, and often confess their sins, their souls will soon be over-growne
with vices, as the field or vineyard of a fool or slothful person uses to be
overgrown with weeds. There are some again that know not how to perform this
duty, which are subject to deceive themselves, to let many sins pass
undiscerned, and oftentimes to mistake them for virtues. If there be any such
here, (as I am afraid there are too many) let me desire you to observe these
two rules for your direction: First, when ye examine your actions, take heed
you weigh them not by a false balance; that is, by a defiled conscience, for a
defiled conscience is as a false balance; it is impossible to weigh an action
rightly by it. The Jews having a defiled conscience, preferred Barabbas before
our Savior Christ. And this is that which deceives many, when they examine
themselves, and find they do nothing against their conscience, they think
themselves very upright and just; but they know not that their conscience is
defiled, they consider not that their affection swayes their conscience, and
can make it judge any thing lawful or unlawful, as it please. But you will
say, How shall I know when my conscience is defiled? The Apostle Saint Paul
will resolve that doubt; Unto the pure (says he) all things are pure; but
unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving nothing is pure, but even their mind
and conscience is defiled, Titus 1.15. Whosoever therefore lives in any
habitual sin; whosoever allows himself to do wickedly in any thing, his
conscience is defiled, and it is in vain for him to consult with it concerning
the lawfulness or unlawfulness of any action. Secondly, when you examine your
actions, favor not your selves, but give the same judgment upon your own
sins, and pronounce the same condemnation against your selves, which at other
times ye have pronounced against others that have committed the like offenses.
There are many, for want of observing this rule, which think themselves to be
much better then they are; they will censure and scoff at others for those
sins and infirmities which they commit every day without seeing them in
themselves. Would these men but look upon their own actions with the same
impartial eye that they look upon others, they would be able to judge better
of their own ways, and would discover the same corruptions in themselves,
which they can so easily discern in another. And this is the first condition
necessary to a true confession; that is, a due examination of our selves, and
of our former life.

The second condition necessary to a true confession, is, sorrow and contrition
of heart: They that confess their sins, and are not grieved for them, may be
said rather to relate or to describe their sins, then to confess them. Sorrow
is a condition so inseparable from this duty, that where it is wanting, it is
as good to deny our sins, as to confess them: and this condition is expressly
required Levit. 26.40. where God makes a promise to the Jews when they shall
be in captivity, saying, If they shall confess their iniquity, and the
iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against
me, and that they also have walked contrary unto me; And that I also have
walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their
enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of
the punishment of their iniquity: Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob,
and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I
remember, and I will remember the land. This promise (you see) which God made
to the Jews upon their confession, is a conditional promise, and the
condition expressed is this, If their uncircumcised hearts be humbled; that is,
if they be broken and rent with sorrow for their sins: he does not promise to
remember them whenever they should formally confess, but if their
uncircumcised hearts were humbled when they made their confession. And
therefore wheresoever you find the children of God confessing their sins in
Scripture, ye shall find them usually in an humble and mournful posture: In
such a posture shall you find Daniel, at the ninth chapter and third verse of
his own Prophecy; where you may see, that he first humbled himself, and, by
putting on sackcloth and ashes, expressed deep signs of sorrow and
contrition, and then he proceeded to make confession of his sins. In such a
posture shall ye find Ezra, at the 9th chapter and 5th verse of his own book;
where you may see, that he also, by the outward gesture of his body first
testified the inward heaviness and affliction of his mind, and then proceeded
to make his confession to God. And this is the true manner of confessing sin;
our confession is then available, when our hearts are ready to break with
sorrow: we may be confident the Lord will not despise us, when our tears lift
up our confession as the waters lifted up the Ark. I will not here dispute the
question concerning the quality of sorrow, whether a sensible sorrow be always
necessary, or whether an appreciative rational sorrow will serve the turn, as
our Romish Doctors do generally affirm. For my part, I take their appreciative
rational sorrow to be a mere figment, a fained and forged invention of their
own, as many other of their distinctions are: Sorrow is a passion of the mind,
and I think an appreciative rational passion is a new kind of passion, that
was never known to any but themselves. True sorrow, without doubt, has always
some sensible motions, some convulsions of heart to attend it; it could not be
a passion of the mind, if it did not infer passionem animo, some ways or
other sensibly affect the soul. I will also omit the question concerning the
quantity of sorrow which we ought to have; namely, whether sorrow for sin
ought to be the greatest sorrow. Bellarmines determination is, that it ought to
be the greatest appreciative, but not intensive. I will not at this time
examine this determination; I say only in general, that true sorrow,
proceeding from the grace of God, and not from the fear of punishment, or any
other sinister respect, in what degree or quantity soever it be, is sufficient
to make our confession available before God. Many, when they compare their own
sorrow with the sorrow of David, or with the sorrow of diverse other holy men
and women which are mentioned in the Scriptures, are much troubled in mind,
because they cannot equal them. What are my tears (say they) compared with
David's tears? What is my grief, compared with the grief of Mary Magdalen?
Thus they discourse within themselves, and are ready almost to despair,
because they cannot arrive at their perfection. But such comparisons as these,
beloved, are offensive and unprofitable; for why should every one compare
himself with David, or Mary Magdalen, which were Gods especial favorites,
and had a greater measure of grace conferred upon them, then is ordinarily
conferred upon others? Every one cannot hope to be so perfect as they were. I
speak not this to dishearten any, or inclining to an opinion, that it is not
lawful for you to desire to equal those worthy examples of repentance; for I
think it not only lawful, but commendable for every one to desire the best
gifts: we may desire to equal, and (if we can) to excel David, Mary
Magdalen, or any other, provided always, that we submit our wills to the will
of God; and when we see that it is not his pleasure to confer upon us such
gifts as he conferred upon them, we must not therefore murmr against him,
nor work our own disquiet and trouble by making such unprofitable comparisons,
but giving thanks to God for what we have, let us comfort our selves with
that; considering always, that all sorrow, whether it be in a great or small
quantity, if it proceeds from grace, is able to save our souls. And this is the
second condition necessary to a true confession; that is, sorrow and true
contrition of heart.

The third condition necessary to a true confession, is, amendment of life:
Although a man confesses his sins every day, yet if he forsakes them not, his
confession is but a mere formality; and this condition is required in many
places of the Scripture; but I will only name a place or two: In the 28th
chapter of the Proverbs and the 13th verse, it is said, He that covers his
sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have
mercy. Not every hypocrite that makes a formal confession, but he that
confesses and forsakes his sins shall have mercy. And again, Ezra 10.11. Ezra
says unto the people, Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your
fathers, and do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the
land, and from the strange wives. He does not only stir up the people to
confess their sins to God, but to do his pleasure also, and to separate
themselves from the people of the land with whom they had contracted affinity,
and to put away their strange wives, without which their confession had been
but vain. It is (I know) a common opinion at this time, that an actual
amendment of life is not necessary and essential to confession; but that a
purpose of amendment, with faith in Christ Jesus, is sufficient: and although
they commit the same sins every day, yet, if they resolve to amend after they
have committed them, many think themselves (if they should die after such
resolutions) in a good and safe condition. But this, beloved, is a gross and
manifest delusion, and contrary to those places of Scripture that have been
already alleged, and to many other which might be alleged to this purpose. It
is true indeed, that faith in Christ Jesus, if it could be in any man without
an actual amendment, is able to save him: but herein they deceive themselves,
in that they think true faith consistent with bare and naked resolutions, and
not always accompanied with an actual amendment; for true faith will show it
self in action, and cannot be perfected and known by bare and naked
resolutions: Whatsoever is born of God (says Saint John) overcomes the world;
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4.
By true faith therefore a man overcomes the world: now, how can he be said to
overcome the world, that has not forsaken his sins? for a victory is won by
action, and not by bare and naked resolutions. Have drunkards (think you)
overcome the world? Have adulterers, unclean persons, swearers, and usurers
overcome the world? No, they are overcome themselves, and have not overcome the
world. Take heed therefore ye deceive not your selves; think not ye have
faith, before ye find the fruits of faith in your life and conversation. I
presume there are none here but will say they have faith; but I pray God many
amongst you be not deluded. Should I demand of you, whether you believe in God,
or whether ye believe an heaven, and an hell, and a resurrection from the dead;
I dare say, you would all answer, Yes: But then, if I could look into your
lives, and see your secret practices, I am afraid I should find many of you to
be such, as if yet believed no such matter. I say, If I could look into your
lives, I am afraid I should find many of you to be such, as if ye believed
neither heaven, not hell, nor the resurrection of the dead, nor any other
article of faith: for wherein do many amongst us exceed an infidel, that
believes none of these things? Is it possible that infidelity should produce as
good effects in them, as faith in you? Is faith so sluggish a virtue, that it
can he still, and not be active? No, be sure, if thy faith breaks not into
action, it is but a dead faith. In the 11th chapter to the Hebrews there are
many commended for faith; but they are all said to have done something by it:
It is said, By faith Abel offered a better sacrifice then Cain; and so of all
the rest: it is said, they did something by faith; but there are none which are
said to have made good resolutions by faith, and to have kept none of them.
True faith therefore must be known and perfected by action, and not by bare and
naked resolutions. And this is the third condition necessary to a true
confession; that is, amendment of life.

The fourth condition necessary to a true confession, is, satisfaction. I shall
not need to prove this condition necessary, because it is manifestly included
in the former; for there can be no amendment without satisfaction: he that does
wrong another, and does not repair the injury, cannot be said to amend, but
sins against justice; for justice gives to every one his due, which he
refuses to do, that will not restore his neighbors goods, or his neighbors
credit, when he has wrongfully deprived him of them. Now therefore let every
one examine his confession, and see whether it has all these conditions or no:
First, whether he has made a diligent examination of his whole life, and
confessed all his particular and individual sins, as far as he is able.
Secondly, whether his confession be joined with true sorrow and contrition of
heart. Thirdly, whether he has for saken the sins which he has confessed.
Fourthly, whether he has made satisfaction (as far as he is able) for all
the wrongs and injuries he has done: if his confession has all these
conditions, it is good; but if it want any of them, he has but played the
formal hypocrite. And so much of the second part of David's confession, which
is his confession in respect of the act. I come now to the last part, which is,
his confession in respect of the object.

I have sinned against thee. The object against whom this sin was committed is
not expressed in the words of my Text, but is implied in this word thee: yet we
shall not need to go far to seek it, for it is expressed in the same verse;
I said, Lord, be merciful unto me; beale my soul, for I have sinned against
thee. It is the Lord God (you see) to whom this petition was directed, he it
is to whom this thee has reference: God then was the object against whom he
sinned; and this is that wherein he does most of all set out his own
ungratefulness: for if they that partake of the favors of Princes, cannot
dispense with their service, if children owe great respects to their parents,
scholars to their master; then how could David neglect this service, withdraw
this respect, and sin against God, without committing (in one act) all the
ingratitudes that can be committed. This is that which did most of all increase
his guilt, and which (without question) did most of all increase his sorrow,
who, like a zealous penitent, inflamed with divine love, and hating sin in many
respects, was yet most of all enraged against it, because it was committed
against God, who had obliged him to himself by many special and extraordinary
favors: for it was he, that (like a father) brought him up of a little child,
and which had many times (as it were) carried him in his arms; it was he,
that pulled the crown from off the head of Saul, to set it upon his, and
entailed it upon him and his posterity for many generations; it was he, that
(like a master) instructed him in the law, and (like a King) protected him in
all danger; and therefore, to sin against him, was to stain his soul with the
deepest colors of ingratitude.

But why did David confess only that he sinned against God? Did he not sin
also against Uriah, who (by his secret practices) lost his life? Did he not
sin also against Bathsheba, who (by his subtle persuasions) lost her honor?
Did he not sin also against Joab, whom he had made confederate to his purpose?
And did he not sin also against the whole army, whose lives were all exposed
to the sword of the children of Ammon? I answer, that he sinned against God,
both in respect of himself, and in respect of all these: for sin is against
God in a double respect, respectu sui ipsius, and respectu communitatis, as the
School speaks, both in respect of himself, and in respect of the community;
that is, in respect of all the creatures. First, sin is against God respectu
sui ipsius, in respect of himself, for it is against his chiefest attributes;
against his wisdom, and against his justice, and against his mercy: first, it
is against his wisdom, for wisdom enjoynes order; but sin is always
accompanied with disorder and confusion: Secondly, it is against his justice,
for justice commands that every one should have his due; but sin is also joined
with wrong and injury: Thirdly, it is against his mercy, for mercy desires the
preservation of the world; but sin tends to the ruin and destruction of it: to
dishonor our parents, to commit murder, or adultery, or to bear false
witness against our neighbors; what do all these sins, but tend to the
subversion of mankind? Men subsist by observation of the moral law, and would
soon perish without it: and therefore sin, which tends to the ruin of mankind,
is as much against Gods mercy, which wills their preservation, as against any
other of his attributes; so that the malice of a sinner is terminated
immediately upon God himself, he is the object against whom sin is committed,
respectu sui ipsius, in respect of himself. But that I may make this reason a
little more clear then the School has made it, I will lay down this ground,
That every sinner wishes that it might be lawful for him to commit those sins
whereunto he is addicted, and that there were no eternal punishment prepared
for them. This that I have laid for a ground, I think, will be easily granted;
for all men desire happiness: the Will, that is free in the means, is not free
in the end; it cannot but desire happiness, and abhor all things that are
destructive of it, and consequently, cannot but abhor an eternal punishment,
which it knows to be incompatible with happiness. Now then, if every sinner
wishes that it might be lawful for him to commit those sins whereunto he is
addicted, and that there were no eternal punishments provided for them; what
is this, but to wish that God were not so wise, or so just, or so merciful as
he is, (for sin, as I said, is contrary to wisdom, justice, and mercy) and
consequently, to wish that he were not God; for it is impossible he should be
God, and not be infinitely wise, and infinitely just, and infinitely merciful.
They that would have God want those perfections, would have him want his being,
for his being is made up of those perfections: so that all sinners do
inclusively (though not expressly) desire Gods ruin, and that his very nature
and being were destroyed; for it is all one in substance, to desire a thing
directly, or by way of consequence: As for example, he that desires that it
were night, does in substance, and inclusively desire the sun were down,
although he does not expressly and actually think upon the sun. In like manner,
they that desire it might be lawful for them to sin, and that there were no
eternal punishment appointed for sinners, do in substance and inclusively
desire, that God were not so wise, or so just, or so merciful as he is,
although expressly and actually they do not think upon his wisdom, or justice,
or mercy.

Secondly, sin is against God, respectu communitatis, in respect of the
community, or in respect of all the creatures; for the whole world is one
community or incorporation, whereof God is the governor and protector: the
creatures are as it were the members, and he is the head; and therefore
whatsoever is done against the community, or against the creatures, is done
against God. Our Savior Christ is the head and protector of the Church, and
therefore whatsoever is done against the Church, is done against him: Saul
persecuted the Church, and our Savior Christ esteemed that persecution as an
injury offered to himself; Saul, Saul, (says he) why persecutest thou me?
Act. 9.4. In the general carriage of affairs in all Commonwealths, that which
is done against the Common wealth in general, or against any particular member
thereof, is done against the King: if one man kill another, the King will
presently be plaintiff, and take the injury done unto himself, because the
party slain was under his protection, and was a member of that body whereof he
is the head: As Christ is in respect of the Church, and a King in respect of
his kingdom; so is God in respect of the whole world: and therefore what
injury soever is offered to any of the creatures, is an injury to God; so that
David sinning against Uriah, and against Bathsheba, and against Joab, and
against the whole army, may be said in that respect also to have sinned against
God. And thus you have seen all the parts of David's confession, both in respect
of the subject, in respect of the act, and in respect of the object.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons, and
one God, be ascribed all glory, and honor, and power, and wisdom, now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

