THE PARSONS GUIDE: OR THE LAW OF TITHES. Wherein is showed, Who must pay
Tithes, and to whom, and of what things, When, and How they must be paid, and
how they may be recovered at this day, and how a man may be discharged of
payment thereof.

By W. S. Esquire

London, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, at their Shops in
Fleet Street, 1654.

THE REASONS Of publishing this BOOK.
HAving made this little Treatise of Tithes at the first for mine own private
use, it came into my thoughts how much strife there is every where about the
payment, of Tithes, and other Duties, whereto and wherein the Parson or Vicar
by the present Laws of this Nation has as good right and property, as any man
has to the rest parts of the profits of his Estate. And that this strife may
arise much from the ignorance of the Law in this matter, there being as yet no
clear and full advice herein; and hoping, that when men know what the Law is
herein, the one will not demand more, nor the other offer less then what the
Law sets down to be due, much of this trouble may be prevented, and some peace
procured. For this cause, I say, I have put the same in Print. And now if any
man shall say, Why at this time, when there is so much talk of taking away
Tithes? I answer him, That we have had much talk of taking away many things a
long time, which are not as yet taken away nor perhaps ever will be. And I
suppose the talk of taking away Tithes is only the Tithes in the hands of
Ministers, and in relation to their Maintenance; and not the Tithes in the
hands of other men. And as to these, I wish they were taken away, so that first
of all a more convenient way of Maintenance in stead thereof be provided for
the Minister; but this I suppose will ask time, and till that time, and after
that time, for the help of other persons, I have taken the pains to write this
little Tract; which, as it does neither justify nor condemn Tithes, so it will
neither further nor hinder the continuance of them; and which may do some good,
but certainly can do no hurt at all.

The TABLE.
CVsteme Chap. 9. Sect. 1 Discharge of Tithes Chap. 9. Glebe Chap. 1 Mortuary
Chap. 1 and 10 Oblations ibid Obventions ibid. Parson Chap. 1 Plurality Chap. 4
Prescription Chap. 4. and Chap. 9. Sect. 1 Tithes. The kinds thereof Chap. 2
The rature of them Chap. 3 Who must pay Tithe, and who must receive them Chap.
4 Of what things they are to be paid Chap. 5 How, when, and where they must be
paid Chap. 6 Who must pay them, and to whom they must be paid. Chap. 7 How they
may be recovered Chap. 8 How they may be discharged Chap. 9 Vicar Chap: 1
THE PARSONS GUIDE:
CHAP. I.
Of a Parson and Vicar, his Parsonage or Vicarage, and the profits belonging to
them.

THE Parson at first was he that had the charge of a Parish Church, and was
called the Rector of a Church; but he is most properly so called, that has a
Parsonage where there is a Vicarage endowed.

The Vicarage is a certain portion of the Parsonage allowed to the Vicar for
his Maintenance. And this portion in some places is a sum of money certain. In
other places it is a part of the Tithes in kind, and commonly the smaller
Tithes, but in some few places the Vicar has part of the great Tithes also:
and he that has the right to, and possession of this, is called the Vicar; and
he that has the other part is called the Parson, who in some Parishes is the
Minister of the place, one they call a Clergy man or Minister; and in other
places he is a Layman, where it is an Impropriation.

The profits and fruits of a Parsonage or Vicarage, belonging to the Parson or
Vicar, are his Glebe Land, (if there be any) Oblations, Obventions, Offerings
and Tithes.

The Glebe is that portion of Land, Meadow, or Pasture, that is belonging to,
and parcel of the Parsonage or Vicarage, over and above the Tithes.

Oblations, Obventions and Offerings seem to be but one thing, and that which
was called merely Spiritual. The Oblations were said to be such things real or
personal as were offered to God and his Church by Testament or otherwise. And
Obventions did include Oblations and other things now unknown and lost amongst
us. And of this nature it seems the Mortuary is. And the other profits are the
Tithes.

CHAP. II.
Of Tithes, and their kinds.

TIthes are a certain part of the fruit or lawful increase of the earth,
beasts, or men's labors, which in most What they are.
places, and of most things is the tenth part, and has been by the Law given
to the Ministers of the Gospel, in recompense of their labor in the execution
of their Office.

There are three sorts of Tithes. Some of them are Predial, Their kinds.
that is, such as come in, and arise yearly of the fruit and profit of the
earth; such as are wood, corn, grain, hay, the seed of Rape, Parsley, hops,
saffion, woad, flax, hemp, darnel or cockle, fennel, annise, and the like. Such
are the fruits of trees, as Apples, Pears, Plums, Nuts, Cherries, Wardens,
Grapes, Mast, Acornes, and the like. Such also (as it seems,) are Herbs, as
Rue, Sage, Mint, and the like.

Some of them are Personal, and they are such as arise and grow due by the
profits that come by man's honest labor and industry in some personal work,
Artifice or Negotiation, as by buying, selling, merchandising; or by the labor
of handicrafts men, such as are Carpenters, Masons, Fishers, Fowlers, Hunters
and the like.

And some Tithes are said to be mixed, such are the profits of some things that
arise partly from the labor and care of men; and partly from the earth where
the things are fed, of this sort are Cattle, as their young Calves, Lambs,
Kids, Roes, the wool of sheep, milk and cheese of Cowes; so the eggs and
chickens of Hens, Geese, Ducks, and Swans, and the like.

Amongst Predial Tithes, some of them are said to be greater, as wood, corn,
hay, and the like. And some of them are lesser, as the Tithe of Herbs, Flax,
Hemp, and the like. And all these of the one sort and of the other, the dispute
is under the names of Tithes of harvest fruits; of woods felled, and preserved
to grow again; of wood not in use nor apt for Timber, but for fire; of trees
planted for fencing of grounds, in fields, pastures, and hedgrowes; of Turves
growing in fennish and moorish grounds; of pasture ground, of hay, of wool, of
lambs, of calves, of pigs, of colts, of milk, of cheese, of fruits, of trees,
of seeds, hemp, flax, onions, rape, of pot herbs; of mast of Beech or Oak; of
Mills driven by wind or water; of Parks, Warrens, pools, ponds; of wild Beasts
under custody, etc. of Dove-cotes or Dove-houses; of bees, of fowlings, of
huntings, of fishings, of swans, of geese, of eggs, of Crafts and manual
occupations, of Trade by wares, merchandise, etc. And about all these things
especially are all the Questions and cases that follow concerning this Subject.

CHAP. III.
Of the Nature of Tithes.

TIthes by our Law were accounted an Ecclesiastical Inheritance, and collateral
to the state of the Land out of which they come, which of common right are to
be paid out of all Lands, Meadows and Pastures, and which of their proper
nature originally were due only to Ecclesiastical persons by Ecclesiastical
Law; and till they were severed, were esteemed merely Ecclesiastical: for the
substraction whereof, no remedy was given by the Common Law. Neither can any
unity of possession extinguish or suspend them, but they remain still in esse,
and might be demised or let to any spiritual person. And if a Parson
impropriate had infeoffed another of part of his Glebe, or had made a Lease of
it to him, yet he should have had Tithe thereof still, so that a man might have
had Tithe against his own Feoffment, for they were not claimed in respect of
any ownership in the Land, but ex debito, by the Law of God, So if a Parson
purchase Land within his Rectory, and after lease the Parsonage, the Lessee
shall have Tithe of this new purchased Land. And a Layman by the Common Law,
could not have had an Inheritance descendable and grantable of Tithes as of
other Temporal possessions, neither will they pass by the same words in Grants
as other Temporal possessions will do. And therefore if one grant a ground cum
proficuis, and comoditatibus eidem pertinentibus, the Tithes will not pass by
this. But now the Law is changed herein, for they and other Ecclesiastical
Duties, especially such as came to the Crown by the Statures of 27. H. 8. 31.
H. 1. 1. Ed. 6. are by those Statutes, and the Statutes of 32. H. 8. and 1. and
2 Phil. and Mar. in the hands of Laymen Temporal Inheritances, and are of the
nature of other Land; it shall be accounted Assets in the hands of an Heir. The
wise shall be endowed of it, the husband tenant by the courtesy for them: real
actions may be brought, and they have all other incidents of Lay-Inheritances.
Cook 11. 14. Dyer 43. Cook 1. 3. Cook upon Litt. 5. 159.

CHAP. IV.
Who must pay Tithes at this day, and to whom, and who are capable of receiving
and retaining of Tithes, and by what Title, and how.

TIthes by the Common Law are due of common right out of all things; and every
man at this day Alien and Denizen, is bound to pay the same, that cannot show a
special exemption and freedom, by composition, custom, prescription, or some
Act of Parliament. So the Kings have paid no Tithes sometimes for their Lands
in their own hands, So neither the Lord Protector not his Patentees are to pay
Tithe for some of their ancient Forrests-Lands that lie in no Parish, or
between two Parishes; this is not to pay Tithe. And so the Vicar in some places
does pay no Tithe to the Parson, so long as his Vicarage Land is occupied by
himself. Cro. Jur. 60. Cook 2. 44. Broo. Dismes 10. And it is said, If a Bishop
had held Land discharged of Tithe, and made Feoffmeur or Lease of it, that his
Lessee or Feoffee shall not pay for it. Cook 2. 44.

And as to the persons to whom, and capable of receipt of Tithe, albeit by the
Common Law anciently, no Layperson was capable of them, save only by way of
discharge; as where a Parishioner had compounded with the Vicar or Parson for
his owner Tithe: Yet at this day any man may have them as other
Lay-Inheritances; and Laymen (as they call them) as well as Clergy men, have
them. And to make Clergy men capable of them, there were heretofore many things
required, as Examination and Allowance by the Bishop, subscription to the
Articles of Religion, Institution and Induction into the Parsonage or Vicarage,
to which the Tithes belong. But in these things the Laws are changed at this
day. And therefore it seems such a person once capable of Tithes, cannot be
made incapable Plurality.
afterward, as heretofore, unless it be where he has one Benefice of 81. a
year, and he take another; for in this case it seems he shall lose the first.
But for this, see the Statutes of 21. H. 8. 13. 28. H. 8. 13. Cook 4. 79. and
6. 20.

A Parson or Vicar may have Tithe out of his Parish, by Prescription
a special Prescription. Or he may prescribe to have a sum of Money for Tithes
within his Parish of any certain man there in lieu of Tithes. And another man
also may have Title to a portion of Tithes by Prescription. Bro. 85. Cook 11.
19. Book of Entries. N. B. f. 9. Cook 2. 45. Cook 4. 49. And a man may have his
own Tithe of the Parson by agreement between them, for the Parsons life, or
how they please.

CHAP. V.
Of what things Tithe is to be paid, and of what not, and out of what Land, and
how.

IN general the rule is, that Tithes must be paid of all things that are of
profit, and that arise from year to year, especially of the things wherein the
industry of man is helping, as in all things it is more or less helping. Cook
11-16.

Fitz. Not. Brev. 53. 32. H. 8. 7. And so it is to be paid for, and out of all
things within (not without) the Parish, that arise, grow, and happen from year
to year by the Act of God alone, or by the Act of God and man together. But
more particularly

All sorts of trees, but Timber trees are to pay Tithe (that Sect. 1. O^ trees
and woods.
is) their tenth of increase, living or dead, used or sold by the owner, for
the body, branches, bark, fruit, root, and branches that grow out of the root.
And within this rule all fruit trees, as Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Nut-trees,
Walnut-trees, and the like, are to yield the tenth of their increase of fruit
yearly; and if they be cut down, the tenth of the body whether sold or kept;
and if they be pared, the tenth of their parings, whether sold or kept. So
Tithe is to be paid of the fruit, body, bark and branches of all other trees
not apt to Timber, as willowes, sallowes, though they be above twenty years
growth, or of any age whatsoever, and were never cut before. So also Tithe is
to be paid of Silva caedua; that is, Under-woods and Coppices selled and
preserved to grow again, and which by good husbandry may grow again. And of all
these things the Parson is to have the tenth part, as the owner has, and at
the time when the Owner does receive his nine parts.

But of the Underwoods of Coppices, parings of Fruittrees, For wood cu for his
own use.
or other trees cut only for mounds, or for plow geer, for hedging and fencing
of the corn fields or other grounds within the Parish, or for fuel for the
maintenance of the plow or paile, no Tithe is to be paid for it, although the
Vicar have the Tithe wood, and the Parson the Tithe of the places enclosed. Nor
is Tithe to be paid of Underwoods, which are dug up by the roots. Nor (as it
seems) for the wood of Coppices or trees that a man does cut or spend in his
own housekeeping, though he spend much; by Hobbard Chief Justice. But if the
Parson can allege a special custom for it, he may have Tithe for this also,
M. 4. Jac. B. R.

But for Timber Trees, such as are Oak, Ash, and Elm, which are esteemed
Timber after they are twenty years old Timber.
in all Countries: and beech, horse-beech, hornbeam, maple, aspe, and hasel,
any of which may be, and are esteemed Timber in some Countries, as the usage of
the Country, or the plenty or scarcity of other. Timber there is; for these,
either living or dead, for their bodies, branches, bark, roots, or germines
that grow out of them no Tithe is to be paid at all, in any case; but Tithe is
to be paid for all this Timber wood, if it be cut within twenty years after the
first planting of it.

For the opening whereof (in relation to wood and trees) further, these things
are to be known.

1. If the Parson have Tithe of the fruit of a tree, and the same year the
owner does fell the tree, and make it into billets or fagots; in this case the
Parson shall not have tithe for the tree, for it is a rule, that he must not
have tithe of one thing twice in one year.

2 Beech in a Country where there is abundance of it, is not to be accounted
Timber, nor to be tithe-free. 16. Jac. Co. B. Pinders Case.

3. Cherry Trees in Buckingham shire have been adjudged timber and tithe-free.
Pasch. 17. Jac. B. R.

4. If a man lop a tree under twenty years growth, and after suffer the body to
grow past twenty years growth, and then lop it again; in this case no Tithe
shall be paid for it, though it were not tithe-free at the first cutting. Co.
B. by the whole Court. Brown. 1. part. 33.

5 If wood be cut to make hedges, which is not Tithable, and there be a little
remaining or left of it, no Tithe shall be paid for this remnant.

6 If wood be cut down and employed for Hop-poles, where the Parson or Vicar
has Tithe Hops; in this case he shall not have Tithe of the Hop-poles.

7. If a great Wood does consist for the most part of Underwood, which is
titheable, and some great trees of Beeches or other wood grow scattering
amongst them; in this case Tithe may be paid, and must be, unless the usage be
other wise of all both great and small together. And so if a Wood do consist for
the most part of timber trees, and there is some small parcel of Underwood or
bushes growing in the same Wood, no Tithe shall be paid for this underwood or
bushes. Trin. 19. Jac. B. R. Adjudg. 16 Jac. in C. B. Leonards Case.

8 No tithe is to be paid of Common of Estovers, the wood that he burns in his
house.

See for all these matters, within this point of trees and wood, Cook Rep. 11.
48, 49. 81. Plow. 470. Brownlows Rep. 1 Part 94. 2 Part 150. D and St. 169
Where and how this is to be paid and delivered, see more in Chap. 5. Sect. 1.

No Tithes are to be paid of Mines or Quarries, of iron, brass, tin, lead,
coals, stone, tile, brick, lime, gravel, Sect. 2. Of Mines and Quarries.
marle, chalk, and the like, which a man does find and make in his own Land,
for they are parcel of the inheritance, and the Parson or Vicar has tithe of
the grass and corn upon the ground; and it is a rule, the Land must not pay a
double Tithe; and besides it is not a yearly profit. Register 51. Fitz. Not.
Brev. 53. 9 Broo. Dismes 18.

No Tithes regularly are to be paid for houses of habitation, Of Houses.
nor of any rent, reserved upon any demise of them, for tithes are to be paid
of things that renew yearly by the Act of God. But by a special custom, or by
an Act of Parliament, as in London, where the Parsons have 2 s. 9 d. out of
every pound rent in lieu of Tithe, there it is good enough, Cook 11. 16. Fitz.
Not. Brov. 53. 37 Hen. 8. Chapter 12.

If any barren heath, or waste ground, that is barren Of barren heath and wast
ground.
in his own Nature, and that cannot be fitted for hushandry without an
extraordinary charge, although it may pay tithe of wool, or Lamb, or other
things, or the tithe that it formerly paid, yet it shall pay no tithe of corn
for seven years after they have by their Husbandry improved it, and made it fit
for tillage. But if a wood be grubbed up, and made fit to plough, this must pay
tithe presently. So if it become barren by a sudden accident of inundation, or
the like, or by being overgrowne with bushes or the like, and it be reduced,
this must pay Tithe presently. M. 11. Jac. C. B. Sharringtons Case, Dyer 170. 2
Ed. 6. Chapter 13.

Tithes are to be paid for all new Corn-mills, be they Of Mils.
wind or water Mils; and for Fulling, Paper, or Apple-mils that are common and
public mils; and whether they be driven by wind or water, some tithe or other
is to be paid for them. But for an old corn mill, that no tithe was ever paid
for, no Tithe is to be paid, exept personal tithe, as for a trade of profit,
and so it will be for the other Mils. But see how it is to be paid Chap. 5.
Sect. 1.

Tithes are to be paid of turves that grow in sennish and: Of Turves.
moorish grounds, when they are used for firing.

Tithes shall be paid of heath, furrs and broom, unless the Of heath, furs, and
broom.
own^r can prescribe, or make good a special custom of payment of milk and
calves, etc. of the cattle kept upon the ground, M. 29 El. B. R Adjudge.

Tithe is to be paid of the grass growing on the ground Sect. 3. Of grass, cut
or eaten.
whether it be cut for hay, or eat by cattle, to be set out according to the
custom of the place. And as to this kind of Tithe these things are to be known.

1 A rate Tithe is to be paid according to the custom of the place for the
feeding of Sheep and all other cattle, (save only Oxen that labor, and the
young cattle that are bred for Oxen or Cowes) as for horses and Cattle that are
fatted; for tithe must be paid for these, for the pasture and profit of the
cattle, whether they go on the Common or elsewhere.

2 If two Parishes together have Common because of Rate Tithe.
vicinage, and the cattle of the one side do stray to the other side, and there
a bide; in this case no tithe shall be paid for this to the Parson of the
Parish where the Cattle do stray, but to the Parson of the other parish. So if
sheep stray out of one into another Parish, and there cane, no tithe is to be
paid for this to the Parson of that place; but if they go there by the space of
one Month or more, for this a rate Tithe must be paid to that place where they
are for a month together. And so in all cases where sheep go a while in one,
and another while in another parish. Trin. 7. Jac. B. R. Bro^. Dism^^. 16.

3 If sheep after they be shorn dye before Easter next following, it is said no
Tithe shall be paid for their wool, unless the Parson or Vicar that claims
it, can allege a special prescription for it. So no Tithes are to be paid of
the pelts or fells of sheep which dye of the rot without a special prescription
for it. Trin. 3. Car. B. R. Ashton's Case.

4 Tithe must be paid for all the grounds within the parish; Grounds let.
and therefore if the grounds within the parish be let, or the herbage there be
sold to a stranger out of the parish, the Tithe must be paid to the Parson, and
that by the Owner of the Cattle, unless the course there be otherwise.

5 It seems Tithe is to be paid for the Agistment, that is, tracking in of
cattle of strangers in the parish: And that Agistment or rack of cattle.
to be paid by the owner of the Land that took them in, and not by the owner of
the cattle; for the Parson may not know the owner of the cattle, 17 Jac. B. R.
But if there be any custom against it, this may prevent it, and make it
payable by the stranger.

6 No tithe is to be paid for the herbage or feeding of Horses.
riding horses, that the Parishoner does use for his own riding. And if a man
let out his pasture Lands, reserving the pasture for one horse to ride about
his own affairs, or for husbandary, no tithe shall be paid for the pasture for
this horse. But if a man keep or breed a horse or horses in his pasture to sell
them, there a tithe shall be paid for the horses pasture. H. 15. Jac. B. R.
Hides Case.

7 No tithe is to be paid for the grass eaten by the Plough cattle.
working Oxen or Horses about Husbandry, that are used in the parish about
Husbandry. But if the Parishioner use them to other purposes within the parish,
or for husbandry without the parish, it may be otherwise. M. 8. Jac. Ct. B. in
Baxters Case.

8 No tithe shall be paid for the feeding of cowes that Sect. 4. Cowes and
barren cattle.
give milk, nor for barren and dry cattle that are bred for the plough or
paile, whether they feed in the enclosed or in the common grounds of the
parish. But if a man keep cattle until they are ready for the pail or the
plough, and then fell them, and make profit of them, in this case he is to pay
tithe for them; for if the owner feed his ground with cattle that bring no
profit to the Parson, he must pay tithes for them. M. 8. Jac. Co. B. Baxters
Case. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. The whole Court.

9 If a stranger feed a ground within the parish with his S^rangers renting
within the Parish.
cattle that do bring no profit to that Parson or Vicar, he is to pay Tithe for
it And therefore it seems reasonable, that though it he his own ground that is
the stranger, and he feed them with his own cattle that do work in another
parish, that he should pay as stranger that does rent a ground within the
parish.

10. No Tithe is to be paid of the Eamouth or after Eamouth or after pasture.
after the grass is mowed and Tithe has been paid of it, unless by covin there
has been more grass left then is usual. Nor is there any Tithe to be paid for
the herbage of the cattle that eat up the same grass, unless there be some
Fraud in the case. Pasch. 17. Jac. Co. B. Adjudg. M. 6. Jac. Co. B. Smiths Case.

11 No tithe is to be paid for the grass or herbage of the studs, or meers of
ground at the Lands end, and adjoining to the errable Land, where the Land it
self does pay Tithe. And so if Lands lie fallow every second or third year,
the Owner shall pay no tithe for the pasture of this Land, nor for feeding upon
the stubble, albeit it be fed with barren Cattle. Pasch. 7. Jac. Co. B.
Adjung. And yet if he keep it lay beyond the course of Husbandry, in this case
he is to pay Tithe again.

12 No tithe is to be paid for the herbage of the ground whereon corn has been
sown that has paid tithe, no more then for the rakings of the stubble, Pasch.
7. Jac. Co. B. Rankings of stubble.
Adjudg.

13 If a man bring in a slock of Sheep to dung the Land, and they come by night
only and lie there, no tithe is to be paid for this; but if they feed there
half their time, they will be tytheable.

For the time when and how these Tithes are to be paid and done, see in Chap.
5. Sect. 1.

Tithes also are to be paid of all such things as come Sect. 5.
in yearly by the blessing of God, and the industry of the party together. And
therefore Tithes must be paid of all kind of corn sown upon the ground; as
wheat, rye, Of corn sown
barley, beans, pease, and the like, to be set out after the custom of the
place. So also Tithe must be paid of plants, herbs, and seeds of Woad, Saffron,
Flax, Hemp, and the like.

And as to this, these things are to be known.

1 No Tithe is to be paid for the after rakings, or stubble of corn, when Tithe
has been paid for the corn it self, unless it be where there has been fraud
in cutting it overlong.

2 No Tithe is to be paid for the course corn, as Vetches, Tares and the like,
which is eaten up by the cattle that do the Husbandry there, whether it be
eaten green or ripe, or eaten upon the ground where it grows or elsewhere,
unless the Parson have a special custom for it.

3 If Corn be sowed where Woad was sown, or where other things grew, the
Tithe shall be paid of this, Change of grain.
and in its own kind also. So if Woad or other things be sowed where Corn had
been sowed; the Owner of the Soil must pay his Tithe, and pay it in kind of
that which grows there, as he does in the change of wheat, beans, barley, etc.

4 If the Soil of an Orchard be sown with any kind of grain, the Parson will
have Tithe of it; although he have Tithe of the fruit of the trees, for they
are of several kinds.

Tithes also must be paid of the calves of Kine, Lambs of Sheep, young Pigs of
Sowes, Colts of Mares, Kids of Sect. 6. Of cattle and foul.
Goats, etc. Also of the cheese and milk of Cowes, Sheep, and Goats, and of the
wool of Sheep; and of the eggs and young of Hens, Geese, Ducks, etc. and of the
honey and wax of Bees, and for dry cattle, and fat beasts sold and killed, and
according to the course of the place.

But for the further opening hereof these things are to be known.

1. If the Parishioner have but nine pigs, or six calves, the Parson can have
no Tithe in kind that year, without a special custom to warrant it, as in many
places there is; for these things are entire, and not divideable as wool is.
And therefore the Parson must have his Tithe prorata, either in money the same
year, if there be any custom for it, or in kind the next year, and so reckon
both the years together. M 7. Jac. Co. B. And if a Parishioner have but one
Cow, or milk his Cow every second day; so that he can make no cheese, in this
case the custom of the place is to be observed, so that something be paid;
otherwise no custom in this case will bind: so for calves, colts, and kids,
when they are under the number of Tithe in kind; and if there be no custom in
it, the Parson must have the tenth whenever it comes.

2. It has been said that no tithe is to be paid for dry Dry cattle.
cattle bred for the plough or paile, unless they be sold away before they be
put to that use; for tithe must be paid for such cattle, and for fatting cattle
sold or killed after the custom of the place. M. 17. Jac. B. R. curia, M. 2
Jac. B. R. W^bs Case. And though at first they were bred for the plough or
pail, yet after fatted and killed, or sold, Tithe must be paid for them. M. 8.
Caroli, by three Justices.

3 Tithe must be paid of the locks and flocks of wool, after Locks of wool.
the wool made up, if they be more then ordinary, and left deceitfully,
otherwise not.

4 Where sheep be removed from one Parish to another, Rate Tithe for wool of
sheep, and of young cattle.
each Parson must have prorata, but under three days no rate is to be paid; as
for example, If forty sheep yield eighty pound of wool, and these have been
fed and lain all the year in one place; in this case the Parson of that place
must have all the Tithe; if the sheep were there but half the year, then he is
to have but forty pound of the wool; if three months only, then but twenty
pound of the wool, and so ratably for four or five months more or less. And
the Parson in whose Parish the sheep lay and fed but one month he shall have
only the Tithe of the twelfth part of the wool: and if the sheep feed all the
year in one parish, and lie in another parish, the Tithe shall be divided
betwixt the Parsons. And if sheep come from one place, and be shorn in a place
where they were not before, it seems the Tithe must be paid where the sheering
is, unless it appear to be paid to the Parson of the place from whence they
came. And so of the young of cattle, lambs, calves, pigs, colts and the like,
where the dam was removed from one place to another, a rate Tithe must be paid
to the Parson according to the times of their abode in the several places from
the times of their engendring by the month rate. Broo. Dismes 16.

5 If any have cattle tytheable feeding in any wast place, not commonly known
to be in any Parish, yet the Tithe thereof is to be paid, and to be paid to the
Parson of the place where the owner of the cattle does dwell.

6 When the Tenth part of the milk is paid, there must be no Tithe paid of the
cheese which is made of the other nine parts of the milk. And so where Tithe is
paid for the cheese, no Tithe is paid for the milk.

But see more of this, and when, and how this is to be paid and delivered in
Chap. 5. Sect. 2.

Some Tithe is to be paid of Parks, Warrens, Pools, Ponds and Dove-houses, and
for Conveys, Pigeons, and Fish. Sect. 7. Of Parks, warrens, pools and
Dove-houses.
And some would have Conveys in a Coniger, fish in a pond, or several fishing
in the nature of Predial Tithes; and that the tenth of the profit is to be
allowed.

But for the opening of this, take these things,

1 That where the things bring in a certain profit, and without much charge, as
coneys, fish and pigeons, there is great reason the Parson or Vicar should have
the full Tithe Coneys, Fish, Pigeons.
of them; and in these cases a division may be easily made.

2 The Pigeons are a sensible loss to the Parson in the destruction of Corn,
and good reason then the Parson should have some profit by them.

3 In some cases, as where Gentlemen have turned their fields into Conigers,
and laid down their tillage, the loss of the Parson has been notorious, and
the case grievious hurtful to the Parson and Commonwealth, profitable to none
but the Owner of the Land; these cases deserve no favor.

4 We conceive the Parson will have no remedy in this case by Law; and that in
all these cases there is nothing to be had but what the custom or usage
yields; for Deer and Coneys being wild, are not reckoned a man's own till they
Ferae Naturae.
are catched. And a man is to pay Tithe of nothing where, of he has not a
property, except only the personal Tithe which is a small matter. When
Pheasants Partriges, Swans and such like wild things of profit become tame, it
seems Matters of pleasure.
they must pay Tithe, but not otherwise. And for such things of pleasure as are
of no profit, as Hawks, Hounds, Apes, Thrushes, Poppingjayes and the like, no
Tithe shall be paid of these.

Some Tithe has been by usage paid in the nature of Personal tithe. Trades and
labors.
personal Tithe for men's Trades and labors. So Fishers, Fowlers, Hawkers, and
the like, not such as fish, hunt, and foul for pleasure, but such as make a
Trade of, and get by Fishing, Hunting, and Fowling, have paid. So Carpenters,
Masons, and all handicrafts men have paid; so Merchants, Mercers, Drapers, and
all Tradesmen; so menservants and maid servants have paid some small matter in
the nature of an offering, as the tenth of their clear gain once a year to the
Parson: and this to be paid still according to the custom of the place.

And for any other things, or for things tytheable out of any Land, which by
the Laws, by any Privilege, Prescription or composition ought to be
discharged, no Tithe is to be paid.

See more of this, and how these Tithes shall be paid, chap. 5. Sect. 3.

CHAP. VI.
When, where, and how Tithes payable must be paid and set forth, and when the
Parson, etc. may take them:

FOR answer to this Question in the general, the Law says, That all Tithes and
Church duties are to be yielded and paid according to the usage and custom of
the place where they are to be paid. Stat. 27. H. 8. 20. 32 H. 8 7. And for
Predial Tithes, the tenth part of the profits are to be set forth and divided
from the nine parts in the place where they grow, before the Owner takes away
his part thereof: and the Owner is to send to the Parson, who is to send his
servant when the Title is to be served, and see that it be justly done; and
then the Law does give him a reasonable time to take it away. And if Tithe be
once set out and divided, the Parson, not the Parishioner must look to it, for
he must bear the loss of it, if any come to it. And this setting out of the
Tithe the Law says must be effectual; and therefore if the Owner set out his
Tithe, and then take it away again, this is not a good payment of his Tithe:
and if the Owner sell the whole to another before the Tithe be set out, with an
agreement to deceive the Parson; this is fraud, and not allowed for a good
payment in Law And this must be heeded as to the manner of Tything, That the
custom of the place is to be observed; for in some places the custom is to
leave the Tithe in grass in swathes, in other places in windrowes, in other
places in grass cocks, in other places in hay-cocks, and either way it is good.
So for the time when, and place where, the custom of the place must be
followed, but the Parson shall have reasonable time to take it away. Broo.
Trespass 125. Cook 2 Part Instit. 610.

To give to the Parson the Tenth Acre of wood in a Coppice, or the tenth coard
(if the coards be equal) is a good Of trees and wood.
payment and setting forth of this Tithe, especially if it be the custom of
Tithing wood in the Country.

The Tithe of the Mast of Oak and Beech, if it be sold, must be answered by the
tenth penny; it is be eaten by pigs, the tenth of the worth thereof must be
answered. And the most reasonable way of payment for any thing sold, is to pay
the Parson the tenth penny of the money made thereof.

The payment of Tithes and Church Duties in the City of London, which is 2 s. 9
d. in the pound of the rent of their Of Houses in London.
Houses, is to be made according to the usage there. Stat. 27. H. 8. 20. and
32. H. 8. 7. 37. H. 8. 12. Cook 11. 16.

The tithe of the new corn mil must not be the tenth penny of the rent, but the
tenth measure of the corn, or the Sect. 1. of Mils.
tenth tole dish, if there be no custom in it. But the Millard for his
Fulling-mil, Rape-mil, Paper-mil, Iron, Powder, Lead, Edge, Copper, and Tin
mils; and so for an ancient Corn-mil, is to pay only personal Tithe, as for a
Handicraft or Faculty. Pasch. 17. Jac. Johnsons Case. Fitz. Not. Brev. 41. G.
Coo. 2. 44. And if a rate tithe be paid for two Mils in one house, and one of
them is made a Corn-mill; in this case Tithe shall be paid in kind for this
Mill. And if one pair of millstones be turned into two pair of Millstones,
now both of them must pay Tithe, and the privilege is lost. Brownl. Rep. 1.
Part 31.

The Tithe of the hay, may be set out and delivered in Of grass, cut or eaten.
swathes, windrowes, or cocks, as the custom of the place is.

The Tithe fruit of Apple Trees, Pear Trees, and the like trees Fruits of trees
as Apples, etc.
are to be set out and delivered when they are newly gathered, and if then the
Owner do not give the Parson notice and set them out, and they be by his means
lost or impaired, the Owner is chargeable to the Parson in treble damages.

The common course of setting out and delivering corn Of corn sown
by the common Law, is by the tenth shock, cock, or sheaf; but if the custom
of the place be otherwise, the Parson must sit down by it; and if there be a
custom to put the corn into shocks, and that every shock be ten sheaves, and
that the Parson must have the tenth shock; it must be done by two Justices, B.
R. But without a special custom binding the Owner of the Land, he is not bound
to set the Parsons part of the corn up an end in shocks. Smith's Case, Co. B.
the Conrt.

The tithe seeds and herbs of gardens and fields, as Rape, Of seeds and herbs.
Hemp, Flax, Parsley, Fennel, and the like, and of Sage, Mints, Onions, Leeks,
and the like, either of the seed, or of the herb before the seed time; this
must be paid at the time when the Owner does receive in his nine parts thereof.

The time when the calves and Lambs are to be paid and delivered, is when they
are weanable, and able to live without Sect. 1. Of calves and lambs.
the Dam, and unless there be any custom herein against the Parson, at this
time all these young things are to be delivered. And if the owner sell any calf
or lamb, in most places the Parson is to have the tenth penny of the money, and
so must, if there be nothing in the custom against it. And if the Owner kill a
calf in some places, the Parson has the right shoulder, and the custom must
be yielded to as reasonable, if any thing though never so little, be paid for
it, otherwise not.

The Tithe of milk and cheese is to be paid in the season Of milk and cheese,
thereof, and so long, and so soon as either of them is taken by the
parishioner.

The tenth measure of honey and the tenth weight of wax, not the tenth Be, nor
the tenth swarm of Bees is to Bees.
be paid for Bees.

The Tithe of chicken and eggs, of all kind of tame birds Of hens, ducks wild
and tame.
or foul, as Swans, Hens, Ducks, Geese, they are to be delivered and paid, or
that which is paid for them, according to the custom of the place. But for
wild Swans, Geese and Ducks, if they be taken in, and from a certain and known
place, they are said to be tytheable, as Predial Tithes; but if from uncertain
and unknown places, they are said to be as personal Tithes. But I suppose no
Tithe is to be paid in either case.

For personal Tithes, which is for Trades, Crafts, and manual Occupations, and
the profit made thereby. It is Sect. 3. Personal Tithes.
provided by a special Law, That all such as use trading, buying and selling,
handicrafts (except common Laborers) shall pay their Tithes, as they were used
to be paid forty years before the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. and as of right they
ought to be paid. And for this the Parishioner does use at or about Easter (in
most places the usual time of payment for small Tithes) to pay a small sum of
money to the Parson or Vicar. And according to the custom of the place men are
to pay, for without a custom for it nothing at this day is to be paid for this:
by three Judges. Co. B. 17. Jac.

And for all, or any of these things, in case where the Owner may let or sell
the thing of which the Tithe is to be had, the best way is to let the Parson or
Vicar to have the tenth penny made by the sale, as they have generally of
grounds let to strangers out of the parish; in which case the Parson has
commonly, and must have, if there be no custom against it, the tenth penny of
the Rent.

But in no case the Parson or Vicar may take his Tithe before the same be
severed from the nine parts and tythed. And if the Owner will not cut his corn
till it be spoiled, the Parson is remediless. 12 Ed. 4. D. and St. 169.

CHAP. VII.
Who must pay the Tithe that is to be paid, and may be sued for it? and to whom
the Tithe must be paid?

FOR answer to the first part of this Question, take these things. Sect. 1.


1. That generally he that receives the nine parts, is to pay the tenth part
to the Parson. And yet if a main that is Owner of a Coppice, or other such like
thing, and he cut it and sell it all; in this case the Seller must answer the
Parson for his Tithe, and not the buyer. And therefore if A cut the grass of
his ground, and put it all (not setting out Tithe) in a Rick in the ground, and
three months after he sell it away to B, in this case B cannot be sued for this
tithe. Hill. 16 Jac. by chief Justice, in Ashfields Case. And if one sell
underwoods standing, the Buyer, not the seller must answer the tithe. But the
tithe due for fellets before the sale, the seller must answer for this.

2. If a Parishioner dye before he pay his tithe, his Excutor, if he have
Assets, must pay it. Executor.


3. If a Parishoner let or sell his ground or herbage, it is said the Parson
may sue the Owner of the ground, or the Owner of the cattle, at his choice,
which is reasonable, if the usage be not against it.

4. If cattle be pawned or pledged, the Gagee must pay tithe for them. But if I
deliver my goods to H. to be redelivered to me, I must pay tithe for them.

And for answer to the second part of this Question, these things are to be
known.

1. The Tithes must paid to him that has right to them, be he Layman, as an
Impropriator, or a Clergyman (as we have called them, and be he Parson or Vicar
of the place.

2 The rule generally is this, That the tithe must be paid to the Parson or
Vicar of the Parish wherein it arises, and not to the Parson or Vicar of
another Parish.

3 The tithe happening in the time of the vacation, the succeeding Parson is to
have it; but they that gather it in may keep up so much thereof, as to pay them
their charge in the collection thereof, and to Ministers that did serve the
Cure there. And if one be put into a place, and then he is removed, and another
is put in, the first of these shall have the Tithes that happened in the vacation
time. Hill. 18. Jac. Woods Case.

4. If any man have cattle tytheable feeding in any waste, or place which is
not certainly known to be in any Parish, the tithe thereof shall be paid to the
Parson of the place where the Owner of the cattle does dwell.

5 If a man living in the Parish of A, being a common Fisher, Fowler, or
Hunter, and fish, foul, or hunt in the grounds of H. in B, and take fish
there, if this were free and without reward in H. then it is a personal Tithe
that must be paid to the Parson of A. But if H. had money or reward for this,
then it is said H. must pay the Parson of B, as for a predial Tithe.

6. Personal Tithes are always to be paid to the Parson or Vicar of that place
where the person that is to pay the tithes does dwell.

CHAP. VIII.
Which way the Owner of Tithes, and such like things, may recover them being
detained.

FOR answer to this, we are to know, that by the ancient Law of the Nation,
Tithes were not recoverable by any man in any place but in the Spiritual Court,
and there by no person but such as they called Spiritual persons, or Clergy
men, and this Ecclesiastical Court is gone. But they are now recoverable by all
sorts of men alike, and in these ways, First for Predial Tithes, such as are
the Tithe of wood, grass, fruit, hay, and the like divideable things; if these
be not duly and truly divided and set forth, as before is showed they ought to
be, the Parson or Vicar may sue for them in any of the Courts by an Action of
Debt, wherein he shall recover treble damages upon the Statute of Ed. 6.

But for lesser Tithes of Wool and Lamb, and the like, no Action will lie upon
this Statute, nor for money given to the Parson in lieu of them. But for the
one and the other, the party grieved may at this day sue in the Chancery, or in
the Exchequer, or before two Justices of the Peace, who in most cases for all
Tithe, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions, rates for Tithes, and all Arears
thereof, are to give relief. Stat. 27. H. 8. 20. 2 Ed. 6. 13. 32 H. 8. 7. Cook
upon Litt. 159:

And if the Tithe be once served and set forth, and they be after taken away by
the owner of the Land or a stranger; in this case the Parson may have an Action
of Trespass against him. Broo. Dismes 6. Brownl. 2 Part 30.

CHAP. IX.
In what case, and how a person or place may be quit and discharged of Tithes:
and what shall be a good discharge, or not?

SPiritual persons were some of them formerly discharged of Tithe by their
Order, but there are no such discharges Sect. 2.
now; but a discharge of tithes may be at this day by the custom of a Country,
or by a Prescription, or by a Composition, which at first was made by and
between the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, and another, or by an alteration of
the place out of which the tithe does come, or by an Act of Parliament, and by
a unity of possession, Cook 1 Part 33. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 13. 32 H. 8. 7. Cook 44.
Or by privilege, as certain Religious Orders, Templers, and others, of which
there are none with us. And therefore no such discharge can be amongst us at
this day. Brownlow's 2 Part 33. Or they may be suspended for a certain time,
and revived again. Of all which see examples in the cases that follow.

A man may be discharged of payment of Tithe by a custom or prescription.
Wherein these things are to be known.

1 Custom and Prescription do differ but little; custom By custom or
prescription. And what is good or not.
goes to a place or Country, and prescription to a person.

2 A custom applied to a Country to pay no tithe in some cases, as the custom
for the Wild, being forty Parishes in Sussex, to pay no tithe, is good. But
generally such a custom is not good, and a Prescription to pay no tithe, nor
any thing in lieu of it, is not good, nor will it discharge, though nothing can
be proved to be paid within the time of memory. D. and St. 171. 167. Broo.
Prescrip. 92. Cook 2. 44. And yet one may show a discharge of his Land another
way which will amount to the payment of no Tithe, nor nothing for it.

3 But any man may prescribe de modo decimandi; i. e. to pay money or other
thing in lieu of the Tithe in kind for a Manor, Farm, or piece of Land; and if
he can prove this time out of mind, this will discharge him. Cook 1. 44. 45.
And therefore a Prescription to pay 4 d, or any other sum of money for all his
Tithe whatsoever, or all his tithe hay, or all his tithe corn in such a Farm or
such a Close, is good. If one prescribe that he is to put the corn of the
ground in hillocks or cocks, etc. and that for this the Parson is to have no
tithe corn every second year, or is to have no Tithe in some part of the
ground; this is good. So if he prescribe to pay the tenth fleece of wool, and
for this to be discharged of the tithe of the locks; this is a good
Prescription. 36, 37. Eliz. Co. B. Jesops Case. But if one prescribe, that
because he does pay tithe hay, he is to pay no tithe corn; or because he pays
tithe corn, he is to pay no tithe of his cattle; this is not good. Smiths Case
Hill. 8. Jac. B. R. So if one prescribe to be discharged of Tithes in one
place, because he pays Tithes in another place; or to be discharged of Tithes
of Lambs, because he pays tithe of wool; or to be discharged of tithes of
other cattle, because he pays 12 d for a Cow; these are not good
Prescriptions. Fleetwoods Case, 7 Jac. Co. B: If a custom be alleged, That the
Parson shall have but the tenth sheaf of wheat for the tithe of all manner of
corn and grain; this is not a good custom. Mich. 11. Jac. Co. B. Jacks Case.
38 Eliz. Co. B. Adjudg. So a custom was alleged, That the Owners of a Farm
had been used time out of mind to take back 30 sheass of their Tithe corn again
after it was set out, to their own use. This was disallowed.

4 A Prescription to pay a shoulder of a Buck or Do, when they are killed, in
lieu of all the Tithe of a Park, is good, and will discharge the Park. 3. 7 and
37 Eliz. Shipdams Case. And although after the Park be discharged, and
converted into tillage or hop ground, yet it is held that the Parson shall not
have Tithes in kind, but the discharge shall continue. M. 5. Jac. Co. B.
Adjudg. M. 11. Jac. Co. B. Cowpers Case.

5 A Prescription to pay a less part then the tenth part, Sect. 2.
may be good and binding.

6 A Prescription that if one have less then seven Lambs, he shall pay but 1 d a
piece sor them, is good. Curia. 7. Jac. B. R. Patches Case.

7 A Prescription to be discharged of Tithes for every house in London. in lieu
of 12 d of the rent made of the house, is good. Cook 11. 16. And so for any
other thing that may be conceived to have a reasonable Commencement, the Law
will admit it.

8 One may prescribe, That he, and all those whose estates he has in the Manor
of Dale in Dale, time out of mind, have paid to the Parson of Dale for the time
being a certain Persion yearly for the maintenance of Divine Service there, in
satisfaction of all the Tithes arising and growing within the Manor of Dale;
and prescribes further, That he and all those whose Estates he has in the said
Manor, time out of mind, have been used in regard of the said pension so paid
to the Parson, to have all the Tithes happening and arising within the said
Manor or any part of it; viz. of all the Lands held of the said Manor or any
parcel of it; this is a good Prescription, and may have a reasonable beginning
thus, That the Lord was seized of all the Manor before the Tenancies derived
out of it, and by some good Composition or Grant between him, the Parson,
Patron, and Ordinary, it was granted to him in lieu of this money, which must
be intended because time out of mind it has been so paid. Cook 7 45. But
without some special matter alleged, a Lord cannot prescribe after this manner
in him and all those, etc. generally.

9 Also a Parishioner may be discharged of Tithe by an agreement with the
Parson; if he be a Spiritual Person, he may discharge it for his life; if he be
an Impropriator, he may discharge it for all the time he has the Parsonage.
But a spiritual Person cannot by his agreement bind his successors. And payment
of a sum of money in lieu and recompense of tithes for sixty years, or
thereabouts, is held a reasonable time to make a Prescription. Cook upon Litt.
14. Crompt. Jur. 77 Dyer 7. 9.

Tithe may be discharged by the alteration of the place or Sect. 3, By an
alteration of the place or thing out of which the tithe does come, or by other
alteration. Whether gone or not.
thing out of which the tithe is to come. For the opening of which take these
things.

1 If one prescribe to be discharged of payment of tithe hay for such a ground,
or the tithe corn of such a ground, and the owner change the nature of the
ground, the pasture into tillage, or tillage into pasture; in these cases the
Prescription is gone. Hill. 7. Jac. B. R. Shipton's Case, adjudg. But if the
Prescription be general, 4 d for all manner of tithe arising in such a ground,
there the alteration will not hurt the prescription. So it is if one prescribe
to pay the shoulder of every Buck and Deer of his Park for all manner of Tithe
of the Park, and the whole Park be after disparked and sown to corn, it is
said the Prescription is gone, and that Tithes must now be paid in kind; but if
any part of it remain a Park, and the rest only be sowed, it is otherwise. 36
37 Eliz. Shipdams Park in Norfolk. So it is said, if all the Parks be suffered
to fall down, which is a disparking in Law of the Park, yet the same does not
destroy the manner of tithing, for the same may be a Park again: But some doubt
of this. And a difference has been taken, where a Prescription runs to so many
Acres of Land certain, for in that case the modus continues: and where to the
Park in the name of a Park, in which case it is gone if it be disparked. Pasch.
19. Jac. Co. B. Pools Case. and in Brownl. Rep. 1 Part Pasch. 10. Jac. Co. B.
35. It is doubted whether the Tithes be not gone in both cases; and held, That
if a man can prescribe for so many bucks, that this Park is discharged, and if
it be disparked, that the prescription is not gone.

2 And if two Fulling mils be under one roof, and a rate Tithe be paid for the
mils (which is a kind of prescription) and after the mils are altered, and made
into one corn-mill, in this case the prescription is gone, and tithe shall now
be paid in kind. So if there be but one pair of stones in the mill, and after
there is another pair of stones put in the mill; now tithe must be paid in
kind, and the manner of tithing is gone. Brownl. Rep. 1. Part. Pasch. 10. Jac.
31.

3 If I have the Tithe of the hay of a close, or all manner of tithe there, and
the owner of the ground turn it from Meadow to tillage, or to hops, or the
like, or turn it from tillage to pasture, the tithe is not gone, but shall be
paid in kind as it falls. So if one turn wood ground into meadow or tillage,
the owner shall pay Tithe in kind, and tithe is not lost hereby; only if it
fall out to be within the case of barren heath, he shall pay for seven years no
more then was paid formerly for it. See it before. Pasch. 18. Jac. B. R. Court
in Baxters Case.

4 If one be to pay a sum of money for the Tithe of a piece of ground, and the
ground be after turned to houses and gardens; in this case the manner of
tithing does continue. Cook 11. 16.

5 If one turn his pasture into a Coniger, and make coney-borrowes in it, the
Tithe will not be gone. But I conceive, it does continue as it did for the
manner of Tithing as before, and no new manner of Tithing. See before Tithe of
Coneys. M. 13. Car. B. R.

6 If the Vicar keep the Glebe in his own hands, it is said, That so long he is
to pay no Tithe to the Parson impropriate. But if he lease it to another, then
the Lessee must pay tithe to him, and if he sow the Land, that he must pay
tithe as other men. Brownl. Rep. 69.

7 If a Parson impropriate keep his Glebe in his own Suspension.
hands, he cannot pay tithe to himself. But if he sell or let it to another, he
shall pay lithe as other men. And if a Parson purchase Land within his Rectory,
no Tithe is to be paid for this whiles it is in his own hands. But if he after
leasethe Parsonage; his Lessee shall have tithe of this new purchased Land. And
if he make a Feoffment or Lease of the purchased Land, his Feoffee or Lessee
must pay tithe again. Cook upon Litt. 139. 11, 14. Broo. Dismes 17. Dyer 43

And if one purchase a Parsonage and a Manor in the parish discharged of
Tithes, and then lease part of the demeshes of the Manor; it is said the Lessor
shall have tithe of this part. Breo. Dismes 17. Sed quare of this.

8 If Land lie in a Forest in any parish, and is tithe free, and the Forest be
disforrested, now it shall pay Tithe in kind. Crompt. Jur. 52. Lord Chapter Baron
at Sarum Assizes.

The alteration of payment (as if in stead of the money to be paid, another sum,
or Tithes in kind have been paid for twenty years past) will not destroy the
Prescription. Cook upon Lit. 14. Dyer 7.

Lands may be discharged from payment of tithes by a unity Sect. 4. By Act of
Parliament and unity of possession together. Whether gone or not.
of possession of the Parsonage, and Lands which did pay Tithes, by an
Appropriation or otherwise, in the hands of Religious and Ecclesiastical
persons, (as they were called.) So that now at this day by the Statute of 31.
H. 8. 13. Such a unity in the said Religious houses and persons will be a
discharge to all Patentees from the payment of Tithes of Lands, that came to
the Crown by the same Statute. But then this unity in the said Religious
persons must have been Justa, obtained by Right; for if either the Parsonage,
Vicarage, Tithes or Lands had come or been united to their houses by
disseisins, or other tortious and unlawful Acts, this had not been a good
discharge within the Statute. 2 It must have been aequalis, there must have
been a Fee-simple both in the Lands out of which the Tithes were to be paid,
and in the Parsonage or Vicarage in them; for if the Abbots, Pryors, or other
Religious persons had held but by Lease, that had not been such a unity as the
Statute intended: 3 It must have been libera, free from the payment of any
Tithes, for if their Farmers or Tenants, at Will or years, had paid tithes, that
had not been a sufficient unity to have discharged the Land. 4 And lastly, It
must have been perpetua, time out of mind. And then for the infinite
impossibility, and impossible infiniteness that such Immunities and
discharges, that such religious persons and houses had before time of memory
could not be known; such a unity had been a good discharge of the Lands in
their own hands. And if the Monastery were built in the time of memory, or
appropriated within the time of memory, and tithe were paid before this, it
will not serve turn to discharge it. And at this day such an unity is a good
discharge for the Kings Patentees, with the Statute of 31. H. 8. But such Lands
as came to theCrowne by the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Dissolution, must at this
day pay Tithes, although the Lands in the hands of such Religious persons or
houses were discharged from the payment of Tithes; for the privileges being
personal privileges, were extinguised by the Statute of Dissolution, and there
are no words in that Statute to save them. Sta. 31 H. 8. 13. 7. H. 4. 6. 32. H.
8. 7. Cook 11. 14. 2. 42. Dyer 278 349. 277.

CHAP. X.
Of other Profits which the Parson and Vicar does claim.

THere are some other small profits which Parsons and Vicars claim as belonging
to their Parsonages and Vicarages beside Tithe and money in lieu of Tithe, as
Mortuaries, Oblations, Obventions, etc. And as to Mortuaries Mortuaries.
these things are to be known. 1 That no Mortuary is to be paid, but where it
has been used to be paid. 2. There shall be but one Mortuary paid, and no
more, 3. No person that does keep house must pay them. 4 No woman that has a
husband shall pay them. 5 No children must pay them. 6 Where they are to be
paid, they must be paid after this proportion; viz. he that dies having goods
under Ten Marks shall pay nothing; for Goods above that value, and under Thirty
pound, but three shillings four pence; for Goods above Thirty pound, and under
Forty pound, six shillings eight pence; for goods above Forty pound, how much
ever it be, but Ten shillings. 7 All this account must be made only out of the
Goods remaining after debts paid. 8. The Parson of the place where the party
dwells, no of the place where he dies, must have it. Stat. 21. Hen. 8. 6. 26.
Hen. 8. 15.

There is no more to be said for Obventions, Oblations, Oblations, Obventions,
and Ofterings
and Offerings, which seem to be all one, but that they by the Law now in force
are to be paid as formerly they have been: Stat. 32. H. 8. 7. 27 H. 8, 20. 2
and 3 Ed. 6. 13. Cook 11. 16.

FINIS.

