A Brief RELATION of some of the unjust Sufferings of RICHARD SIMPSON, by a
False Brother and his Accomplices.

Whose Letter or Libel let the Reader observe as follows.

Printed for the pure innocent Truths sake, which with the pure holy Seed
suffers, being burdened and oppressed by the wicked, and much reviled and
reproached by lying tongues, and slanderous mouths.

Given forth by one who is a daily mourner in SION, and who has given him to
eat Manna which is hid, wherein is a white stone, and a new name written which
no man can read, neither any man know, saving he that gives it and he that
receives it; And he which has received this, his name is written with R. S.

Printed in the year, 1661

R. S.
OF letters from the which are Raileings I have hard of many: so that in the he
half of my Frend^ and naibores her to the is an answer thou foel why do thou
Judge others and art seen with great oaks in thin onn eyes and weell may thou
complain of dimnes of sight and of being so burdened whenn foner great oaks
thou have puled donn upon thy self at ones be sides other horabele Crines
Remember the fatherles Children that thou hadest goott into thy lionns pans but
thy hold one them was of no morvallon to the then tow strans seas wrigting
with thy pekockes quiles for thou art senn writing in thm onne will o that thou
would look donn upon thy leges and be as much a shamed as the peCook is when
he see his a Word to the wise is a nofe the rod is for thy fonles back thy
stripes thou canest not hid All though thou starest never so wide thou profese
thy selef to have mor knowleg then other mean and yeet thou dged apitt and fell
ento it thy self and when thou artt holppen outt thou artt stille proud and
stoutt and Cales thy friends thy focs be for thou Railst a nie more take thy
self by the nos thou artt not so wise as the Cravin Cook for be fore he
Chantes his nottes to others he beeatts well upon himself O whatt Counsele
shall thou have geven thee thoue dron that by desaitt would gain the honey
from the be o fle fle en to sum kane whear thou may not hear all mean Call
the vaagbone or k k. at this letter it may be thou may laff and vaper if
thou doste let it not make the kapper I have writ this to the ought of good
will so that thou may not no mor com at the Castle hill I would have the know
thou ar a tresper to me everi day and take your turkies a way and learn to
Fell oaks in the month called may and n more lous the bodies and the bark

The 8 M. the 20 day. I. B.

To the Mouth of Richard Simpson let these be givene for to be swallowed done
if it may may do him good it shall make me glad if not I think if he mend
not it will be a great whille ear he be for goott R. S. k k.

I do appoint my Tenant Richard Simpson to come to the Court and pay the rent
for the half year, I being not in health to come my self, I desire that I may
be remembered, according to that promise that was made me when I paid so great a
Fine, that it should be considered me in the selling of the Timber, and that
this my Tenant Richard Simpson may have the lowest price, my self considered
therein for what I shall be allowed, and I appoint him in my stead, and what
agreement you make with him I shall allow of it.

The 12 day of the month called October, 1659. Waybrid. John Barber.

IN consideration of 4. pounds to me paid by Richard Simpson, and of 2. pounds
which he promises to pay to my Copy hold Tenant John Barber, I do at the
request of the said John Barber License the said Richard Simpson to cut down
three oaks and one small shrub oak now growing upon the Copy hold Land of the
manner of Shelton, and do give him one whole years time for the converting of
them.

October. 14. 1659. Wm. Blois.

This is the License both of him called the Lord of the Mannner, and the owner
of the Land, whose words were masters of both the acts of their hands; but my
word is not yet my master, and though it be thine I. B. nor I hope never shall
so long as I abide faithful to the Lord in my measure; but that I shall be
always master of my word whether it be yea or nay,

R. S.

VVOe, woe, woe be unto thee W. B. for acting so much cruelty against me which
never did any evil unto thee, for it was thy abominable letter and thy cursed
Baily that abominable branch which bare the greatest false Testimony against
me, and which has made me to suffer so much both in body, goods and good name;
For I was imprisoned both in the Country Goal, and Castle of Norwich, in that I
was arrested again at Barbers suit, but had not freedom to answer it, and so
was imprisoned above four weeks, where I suffered more then a little, and had a
beast stroyed prized at 7 l. which was upon that occasion, and a Cow taken away
from me which was prized at 4 l. 10 s. besides money out of my purse, which was
to satisfy one of thy brethren in evil I. B. and so I being departed from
iniquity, and refrain my self from evil is become a prey to the wicked, so that
upon the account of the 4 Trees which I bought of thee at the first for 6 l.
has now cost me about 22 l. and I had suffered much more if some Friends in
the City had not been more then ordinary kind to me; but the Truth of God is
like to suffer much more then I or me, in that the gap is made wider and bigger
then it was before; for the wild Boars and the wild beasts of the wild
forest, which is this wild and rude World, to come in and wrett and root up,
and root out too (if it were possible) the Lords new Plantation, for the which
thing the curse of God hangs over thy head, and over the head of J.B. who has
acted his cruelty over me ever since he began with me, under, or with a
pretense to have authority from thee, and the curse of God hangs over the head
of his cursed Lawyer, which was the cursed ringleader of this great mischief,
and Souls misery, and upon bodies too, and the curse of God hangs over the
heads of all his false witnesses, which bear false witness, and gave false
Testimony against me, of whom there was not a few; And the curse of God shall
rest upon thee and all that thou have, and upon I. B. and all that he has,
until you repent and confess your sins to God, and make restitution to me R. S.
whom you has most wickedly wronged; For cursed is be that smites his
neighbor secretly, and let all the people say, Amen; And cursed is he that
hinders the right of the stranger, and let all the people say, Amen; And
cursed is he that takes away the right of the innocent, and let all the people
say, Amen; And vengeance of flames of fire is prepared for you, where both your
torments shall be, if you do not speedily repent, and make your peace with God,
and come and satisfy me who am innocent in the sight of God, even in this
thing wherein or whereof both you two and many more has so much slandered and
accused me, my own conscience not condemning me, and Blessed is he that is not
condemned of or in his own conscience, nor fallen from his hope in the Lord;
Then cursed is he that is condemned in his own conscience, and whose hope is
not in the Lord, and this is your condition W. B. and I. B; And much more I
cold say, but the time is short, and I have now no Beast to ride upon to come
unto thee; And woe be unto them which gave away the right of the innocent,
through the false Testimony of them that bear false witness against me,
unjustly and falsely accusing of me, contrary to the light of God in their own
consciences; And now I say that God has warned you both again by me, as you
have been often warned before both of God and me, and repent and prize the time
whilst you have it, for the time is but short before time shall be no more;
And now I am clear of both your bloods, but I spare thee a little; And every
letter which I have sent to thee shall be as so many Characters engraven in thy
conscience with a red sear hot iron pen, which shall much increase thy torments
in hell, if thou do not now repent. And now I wish thee a good farewell who
art out of the farewell; For there is no welfare nor well being neither, out
of Christ Jesus, who is both the Fountain and Wel-spring of every good thing,
and of life, light and of glory, and the fear of the Lord is the glory as well of
the rich and the noble as of the poor Ecles. 10.23, and pride was not created
in men neither wrath in the generation of women, ver. 19. And the fear of the
Lord is an holy knowledge, chap. 1. ver. 16. And now I could be a friend to thy
soul, if thou would live a heavenly life with me.

Richard Simpson.
From Freshingfield in Suffolk the 22. day of the 7. Months, 1660.
This is the Copy of a Letter sent to him called the Lord of the Manor, but
the manner of the Lords actings are no way like the actings of these Lords of
Manors; Some of them threatening to seize men's lands, because they cannot swear
at their Courts to maintain their Diana, I being one of the men: Others taking
away men's Timber off their Ground, and grudges to allow the owner thereof
either the old rotten poullings or the tops of their own Timber Oaks, I being
one concerned in this thing; But this was the worst Act of all of him who took
my money for four oaks, and then afterward sent his letter to the owner of
the Land to encourage him to carry them away off the Ground, after much of them
were converted, and that much within the Cumpass of the time which I had under
both their hands for the converting of them; And now if this be fair-play, then
let both Rooks and Cheats play the same game. But in the mean time, let all
such as have thus dishonored God, and abused both themselves and me henceforth
cover their faces with shame, as says, R. S.

And as some Lords of Manors have made havoc and spoil of our Lands, even so
have many of Baals blind guids made havoc and spoil of our goods and bodies,
under a pretense of recovering their petty Tithes, which are now no better then
bribes, though Baal by them pleads for Baal, so that Baal is daily pleading for
himself: Therefore let the looser have leave to plead for himself who is now at
London, being buffited up thither by Satan, and by a Subpena is to appear there
at Westminster the twenty fifth day of the ninth month called November, about
Baals bribes, one of Baal and Molechs Chamarims who wears black, having both
his hands stretched forth to receive bribes, and his mouth opened for me to put
therein; but the mark which I am now pressing so hard too, is not the mark in
the mouth.

John Barber,
THine own wicked heart will not let thee Conseal thine own wickedness, but
thine own hand must make it manifest, as by thine own Confession, I have lost
both the bodies and the barks of the four Oaks, which I bought honestly both
of W. B and thee, and paid for them too, four or five months before I feld
them; So that the loss of the bodies without the bark, will be heavy enough to
weigh thee down to the depth of the Pit of Hell, if thou do not repent, and
cause hell to vomit them up again to me, and thou and he of whom I bought them,
will both make an equal balance, yet it is like thy scoale will go down;
First, because thou caused him, through thy lying tongue, to commit this
horrible sin, and could neither thy Master nor thy Lawyer help thee to indite
thy letter no wiselier, nor no truer, nor with no better sense then ryme and
riddle? but take heed how thou and thy Lawyer goes to him again for Counsel,
who is thy Father, as cursed Cain did thy elder brother, for sure I am that he
was the first man of strife; I say again take heed how thou and thy Lawyer goes
any more to him for Counsel, who is both your Father and Grandfather, I mean he
that is the father of lies, least he that is now both your Father, Master and
Counselor, ere long become your greatest tormenter; And though thou call me
foell in stead of fool, and so threatens hell fire unto thy self; and thou
say that a word to the wise is a nofe, in stead of a enough; So that I say
a word to the wise from the wise is enough, and ought to be received, but the
word or words of a fool from a fool, ought not to be regarded; And thou say
that the rod is for the fondless back, in stead of, for the fools back, then
the rod is prepared for the back of thee, who art not only fondless or a fool,
but a clown also, (according to the worlds language; And there shall need no
other Testimony then thy head and own hand writing; and thou puts k. k. for
knave, knave upon me, as it was interpreted by thine own messenger; But not to
answer a fool in his folly, least I should be like unto him, in calling him
either knave or fool, as he did me; Yet I will answer a fool according to his
foolishness, and a knave according to his deceit and wickedness, least he be
wise in his own conceit, and boast himself in his knavery, as J. B. has done
already; But to be short, the much muck which thou have got of late, as it has
made thy soil fat, so it has made thy Soul lean; and thy wallowing so much in
the mire and dirt, has so much polluted both thy body and thy Soul, that all
the water in the Sea will not wash thee clean; And that libel or pamphet which
thou sent me of thine own hand writing, the which thou directs to my mouth, and
no marvel because thou hadest it from the Devils mouth, for if thou hadest had
any thing from the mouth of God, then thou would have directed it to the
hands of me as a letter of love; but he that guided both thy heart and hand, so
blinded both thy eyes without and the eye within, that thou could not see to
write but little either of truth or true English. And as for the fatherless
Children which thou upbraidest me with, if it had not been for such unclean
spirits as that which possesses thee, that raised an evil report of me, I had
by this time been as a Father unto them. And Much more I might write to answer
thy foolish Libel or Pamphlet, but it is such stinking nasty stuff that it is
not worth the looking on, then much less the answering, but thou have writ
enough to render thy self odious to all sober and Godly men, who are but able
to discern a hypocrite from an honest man; but in that thou have laid open thy
deceit and wicked heart thy self both to me and Friends, and to some of the
wise men of the world besides, I shall not need to answer a deceiver any more;
yet I am a friend to thy soul, but a bitter enemy to thy deceit, and to him
that Rules and Reigns in thee, I mean the Father of Perdition, thou being one
of his Sons or Bastards, which has not yet received chastizements of my
Father, to make thee become a child; And as one scabbed sheep is enough to
infect a flock, if it be not turned out in time, even so must I.B. be turned
out of the flock

(...) And now let all wise and sober people take notice of this one foolish
passage among many more in his Libel, For says he, I would have thee know thou
art a trespar to me every day, and take your Turkies away, and learn to fell
Oaks in the month called May, and no more lons, meaning lose the bodies and
the bark. The 8 mth 20 day, J.B. The which Turkies were but 7, for the which I
was much threatened to be sued at the Law, until my wife put one of them into
his own hands, both to stop his mouth and fill his belly, for he said they eat
up his grass, and yet I made it appear that I lost near 20 s. by his grass,
besides the loss of my Timber; but most of the grass that the Turkies left, he
covered thick with muck; and now I shall leave him even as I have found him, a
bitter envious spiteful enemy, and a fearful, and abominable liar and an
hypocrite, out of the hands of whom I pray to be delivered,

R. S.
Fressingfield the 11 day, and the 9 month, called November, 1660.

ANd now J. B. I shall leave a short lesson with thee, which both Christ Jesus
and other wise, and godly men have left for thee, And first hear the words of
Solomon, who says, he that hides his sins shall not prosper, then how do
thou think to prosper, which has not only hidden thy sins, but has also
Fathered them upon me, who is innocent in the sight of God, even in this thing
whereof thou have accused me, and so much slandered and reproached me; And hear
the words of Christ himself, who is the true Solomon, which says, if thy
Brother sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn
again and say it repents me, thou shall forgive him; And hear the words of
the Apostle James also, who says, confess your faults one to another, and pray
one for another; but unless thou confess thy faults to me, I can neither
freely forgive thee, nor yet pray h^artily for thee; And blessed is he that is
not condemned in his own conscience, nor fallen from his hope in the Lord, and
I am he; Then cursed is he that is condemned in his own conscience, and whose
hope is not in the Lord, and thou art he J. B. except thou repent; and what I
say unto thee, I say unto all those false witnesses which thou produced against
me, except they repent.

Omne been quod finet been, All is well that does end well, But he that never
begins well, can never end well, as says,

R. S.

FINIS.
TO the ears of John Barber who is of a Barbarous nature, but not to his hands,
least he burn it, as it is like he din a writing of mine, by which he bound me,
and witness to it, to take the Trees at the same price as I bought them at, and
not to turn them into his hands, the which writing he confessed, but not
produced, the more shame for the wards-men which made the Cause pass on his
side, which altered if not forged one writing, and fordid another; but what his
sweet wine in their mouth, and his sweet words which he stingled in their ears,
which my sell did see in private; he like a cunning Colt, and not like a craven
Cook, instead of a craven Cook, as he writ to me in his libel, so chanted
(that he made them quite forget) both truth and true judgment, and justice too
that day, so that truth was let fall, and equity could not enter through the
malice of the Tempter.

D.I.D.V.D.E.D.L.


