A SHRILL CRY in the Ears of Cavaliers, Apostates, and Presbyters, for the
Resolve of XIII QUERIES Touching The Primitive state of this Nation, since the
Conquest: The late proceedings of the Army, the Covenant, and other weighty
matters, tending to the public Peace of the Nation.

By a well-willer to Peace and Truth.

O England, England, that thou did know in this thy day, of blessed
Visitation, those things that concerns thy Peace.

February 5. 1648.
Imprimatur

THEODORE JENNINGS.



LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1648.

A Shrill Cry in the Ears of Cavaliers, Apostates, and Presbyters, for the
Resolve of XIII Queries, touching the Primitive State, of this Nation, since
the Conquest.
THe various changes both of Governors and Government in this Kingdom is not
unknown to those who have read our English Chronicles, the last of which was
by William Duke of Normandy, who though he pretended claim to the Crown, yet
found his Sword his best title, which yet was a Right not only uncertain, but
inferior to those immediately anointed, or those hereditary elected Kings,
chosen and consented too by the people, he thought it therefore wisdom not long
to Rule the Nation, by that wherewith he got possession, but rather to gain
their consent granting many immunities, and yielding to such laws as they
should propound for their quiet and peaceable Government, for the managing of
which Agreement: doubtless there was by consent a Representative elected and
entrusted, not only to consult, but by a deliberate Result, propose to the King
what they conceived necessary to the well-being of the Nation, Taking such
security from the King by oath or otherwise, in the behalf of himself and
Successors, that he will grant and maintaina each particular agreed, and upon
security so first given, he had power to bind the people by oath for ends
expressed, to maintain the honor and greatness of him whom they had so
entrusted: Yet was not this power so absolute on the Kings part, but that
provision was made by a mutual consent, that he should frequently call and
consult, with these Feoffees touching the State of the Kingdom; that with their
advise, as they saw cause, old Laws might be repealed, and new made: And this
appears by the Coronation Oath, binding the King to what the people shall
chose. And that the Parliaments trust was more absolute is evident, in that
they put by some succeeding in the same line, which they conceived unfit for
such a trust; and deposed others though Crowned, that were found unfaithful.
This being then the primitive state of this Kingdom, from or near that time,
the right of the Conquest, being dissolved into the right of agreement, I shall
propound a few Queeries, to be resolved by any rational man.

I Query whom he is to be advised, in the weighty affairs of the Kingdom,
shall either not call, or if call them, use sinister, and indirect ways to
corrupt them, or if not so; immediately dissolve them, thereby rendering their
meetings fruitless, because to them he would not be accountable for the
trust reposed in him; Whether such a King is not only perjured, but has
justly forfeited his trust to the Kingdom, and is worthy for it to be deposed?

II Query.

III Query. That is to say, the Kingdom of Scotland, which opposed their
natural King against his introducing of an Arbitrary Power both in Church and
State, not only in their own, but coming in an hostile manner against the King
of England, and his evil Coutcell, pleading no other law, but that of
Necessity.
Nation, shall at last be enforced to call a Parliament, which upon their
meeting, find the cause to be his contempt of the great Council, and following
those that he had corrupted to carry on his intendded design, they being yet
so indulgent to him, as to excuse his fault, desiring only to bring them to
justice, if then he shall so ill requite them, as not only to defend such
Delinquents, but set up his Standard against the Parliament, murdering his best
Subjects, compelling them in their own defense to take up Arms, and shall in
that defense get an absolute Conquest over him, and make him their Prisoner,
shall not they betray their trust, if they make him not an example of justice
for the same?

IV. Query.

V. Query. God) subdue the open and known enemies thereof, should not betray
his trust, if he do not, being informed, and having sufficient matter, bring a
charge against the chief actors in those designs, that they might answer the
same, and that without the least breach of privilege?

VI. Query. Some of the Members observed to give those Mutiners public thanks.
of Tumults against those that have opposed them in the same, by which the
Speaker, with the Members, were violently forced to unvote what they had before
resolved; some of them being likewise threatened to be murdered: whereupon the
Speaker and many more, were forced to fly to the Army for refuge, whilst they
in the mean time were moulding their Faction into a Which doubtless would have
been acknowledged so, by those persons that oppose this present supreme Power,
which is conceived upon better grounds undisputable
Parliament, choosing a new Speaker, that so in the absence of those who stood
in their way, they might carry on their destructive Counsels by a
Parliamentary Authority. Now whether the General should not betray his trust,
if he did not restore these Members, although with the hazard of much
bloodshed, these men having to their power engaged both City and Country to
oppose him in the same? And whether it was not a great provocation to the
Soldiery of the Army, who were embarked and engaged in the same public
interest, and have ventured their lives in the Conquest of the common Enemy, to
seize upon the person of the King, to prevent the carrying on of corrupt
interest by these homebred Enemies?

VII. Query. Militia settled in the hands of those of the same Faction: The
Scots answered in their unreasonable demands, presented in their Commissioners
Papers, the Army to be disbanded, the only rub in their way, and such
Propositions to be sent to the King, as might best promote their designs: Upon
which, the House before framed for the purpose; the eleven Members were
recalled and restored, without any inquiry into those crimes charged against
them, who no sooner come, but the Kingdom is suddenly in a new flame. Some
Members publicly acting in the same.
Insurrections in many parts of this land, the Scots upon our borders with a
potent Army, whilst the City was endeavoring with the Parliament, to recall
the Generals Commission, for pursuing the Rebels in Kent, and other places;
themselves refusing to give any assistance either of men or money, though the
Enemy were at the very walls of the City, and in that very nick of time,
violently pressing for a personal Treaty, which was not only granted, but
covertly carried on Who durst not publicly own these Rebellions.
by those Members in the House in the pursuance of the same design, whilst
many of the faithful Members were employed abroad to quench that fire which
was almost in every place kindled: I demand then, God having by the General,
and those under his Command, so miraculously delivered this Nation again from
a second War, whether they were not engaged by all the bonds, both of Nature,
Religion, and right reason, upon the cognizance of some of these Members, and
the apparent defection of others, appearing by their Votes, to seclude such
from the great Council, acknowledging them only fit to be confided in (though
the lesser number) who have continued faithful, until orderly provision shall
be made by them, for a free and unbyassed election of new members?

VIII. Query. England are not to rest quiet in their determinations, and are
not bound to maintain them in the same?

IX. Query.

Whether it is not the undoubted privilege of this Supreme Power, upon the
observation of interchangeable occurrences, as they shall see cause, alter
their Resolutions, since their power is such as to repeal Laws, and make new;
the Kings refusing to consent, or by treasonable practices make himself
incapable of trust, it being in their power, upon good grounds so to declare?

X. Query. England?

The Eleventh Query.

The Twelfth Query.

The Thirteenth Query. Who Machivilian-like following the Example of Strafford
and Canterbury by his pretended Innocence, and resolute dying, has
endeavored to act a greater revenge by sowing the seeds of Discord amongst the
Ignorant people, then ever he did in all his life.
, and other Delinquents although it should be promoted by them, who by their
pretended holy function, and perverted Scriptures, may think to escape
punishment for the same.

These Queries I leave to be resolved by any impartial man, not doubting of
any but those who are in a spirit of slumber, and will neither hear, see, nor
understand, and they are King, Cavalier, Apostate Parliamentarians, and the
malicious waspish Presbyter, who endeavor to set the whole Kingdom on fire,
because a brat of their own begetting will not be received for a child of
Truth, such as by their false glosses, pervert the very Letter, together with
the end of that which they call the holy Covenant, breaking every part of it
themselves, and yet audaciously charging it upon others: For is not our
engagement to the King conditional, upon keeping the Laws, and other things
therein expressed, upon breach of which, he proving a Delinquent, as indeed he
did the chief? Are we not bound by the same Covenant to bring him with others,
to condign punishment? and for that part that is for the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, Heresy and Schism, I know none more guilty of breach in this
particular then themselves; for is not this Popery to compel men in matters
of Faith, implicitly to believe and obey what they impose? and this Prelacie
to exercise dominion, and reign as Kings over their faithful Brethren in
Christ? And has not these been formerly acknowledged by themselves Heretical?
Besides, is not this Heresy to tie the Priesthood of Melchisedech to any
learned Tribe whatsoever, since it was one main end of Christ's Ascension to
give gifts according to his measure without respect of persons? and whether it
be not blasphemous to the holy Spirit to confine his unction and illumination
of the Saints in the saving mysteries of the Gospel, more to the learned then
others, as if such gifts were to be bought with such money; which pretended
holy Simonie, doubtless was the cause why so many of them had no part nor
share in this matter, yet am I no enemy to learning, neither allow I any
pretended Illumination, that agrees not with Scripture, and the Anallogie of
true Christian Faith.

And is not this Schism in the Church, to endeavor to separate those that
hold the head, and other fundamental truths, though they agree not in those
that are of doubtful disputation, crying out and petitioning against them as
men not fit to be trusted in a civil Commonwealth, yea and for dissenting but
from their Presbytery if they follow the practice of Scotland, as doubtless
they would, for such a dissent; their Families shall be ruined and left in a
worse condition then a Heathen and a Publican.

And is not this Schism also in the State, to alienate the Peoples hearts from
their Superiors, and one from another, stirring up their brethren in Scotland
in unity with us to invade their own native Country.

Is this also to keep the Covenant, out of their place or way allowable by God
or man, to force the three Kingdoms into a Uniformity of Doctrine and
Discipline, as if God were delighted in a constrained obedience, And other
Heresies which for brevity sake are not here recited.
or the Kingdoms thereby being free from intestine Rebellions? or can this
government, found guilty of such abominations be a Government nearest to the
word of God, or the Kingdom of Scotland, the best Reformed Church, or does the
Covenant express conformity to a National Church, or the Word of God
acknowledge any other, since that of the Jews, but that one visible Catholic
Church which is in all Nations dispersed into Congregations and Families,
called (by Peter) A holy nation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, That
Congregation or family then wheresoever it be, that in matter, form, doctrine,
or discipline, shall conform to the Primitive Institution, that must needs be
the purest Church, which we are bound by the Covenant to hold forth in these
Kingdoms, and that is conceived to be this: When at the first by the preaching
the sincere word of the Gospel, so many as heard it that were convinced of
their lost estate, by reason of sin, were incited thereby publicly to profess
repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, through the Lord Jesus,
desiring thereupon to be baptized into the body of Christ's visible Church, and
under his Government to obey, both in Doctrine and Discipline; what they shall
clearly be persuaded to be his Will, and for that end frequently meet in
their several Assemblies, and there orderly and decently exercise each others
gifts, for the edification one of another, in their most holy Faith, that so
upon very good experience had of such gifts, they might out of themselves, and
for themselves successively choose, as they stood in need, Pastors, and other
Officers, as they conceived necessary to the well-being and governing those who
had voluntarily submitted themselves thereunto. So that then doubtless this
constitution would have continued as a pattern to all succeeding Congregations,
those extraordinary And th^ugh this Government by reason of darkness is not
received in the Nations, yet I doubt not but the time will come that the Kings
and Rulers of the Gentiles shall being their glory to it.
Messengers, only excepted, that by their Miracles showed their authority from
God, to lay this first foundation, and prescribe the form for this spiritual
building.

But Antichrist has darkened this primitive luster, confounding and razeing up
the foundations thereof, setting up instead thereof his Babilonish H^erarchy,
and wordly glory, and now the Presbyters, sons to the same father, and eggs
of the same Cockatrice, following his steps, persecute those as heretical, who
endeavor to build again this Tabernacle of David, that is thus ruinated,
which for so doing, they shall ere long be to Christ responsable, as Rebels
to that his peculiar interest.

And as for the National or worldly Kingdom, included also in the Covenant,
we therein engaging to preserve the peace thereof, it is a Kingdom so distinct
from the former, that it differs both in matter, form, laws, and discipline So
then that which God has joined ought not to be separated, nor that separated
that ought to be joined or mixed, which has been the cause of all
Antichristian consusion, which both considered destinctly may reside together
in one Nation, each being helpefull to the other
although both under one and the same supreme King, Christ Jesus, who as a
mighty Monarch rules over all Nations, by one municipall law, which is that
called Morrall; the first and second Table thereof, requiring only such a
worship, and obedience, both to God and man, that was fixed in, or terminated
on the things of nature, that is to say. First to acknowledge God, Creator,
and Preserver of the World; that no Image be made of him, that his name is
holy, the time appointed for his worship sacred. And then secondly, that all
Superiors Which are variously styled, and set over the people according to the
customs of Nations, or the interchangea^le occurrences of divine providence,
under him, in the making or execution of good laws over Nations, Cities, or
Families, are to be reverenced, and obeyed, and that the preservation of each
man's propriety in the things of this life; expressed in the following branches
of the same Tables, is the supreme end of all Civil Government. Those
Magistrates then, suppose Christians, that propound to themselves this end, and
pursue those things in the Law expressed, punishing all those that transgress
from the plain letter thereof, keeping also within their bounds not intrenching
upon the Prerogative of God, are good Magistrates: And those that do otherwise,
shall be unto God accountable; yea, and to the Magistrate if there be any other
more supreme to whom they may appeal, and if not, the people with their
assistance may endeavor to compel the same, Scotland b^ing a president in
their first coming into England to oppose the King and his evil council, the
same people also opposing their own last coming in though it were by
Parliamentary authority.
and those inseriours, suppose Christians, yea, officers in the Church, that
obey not such Magistrates, but entrench upon their power in civil things, do
not preserve the unity and peace of the Kingdom; and in so doing they are not
only responsable to such Magistrates, whose Authority they despise, but to God
also.

These things seriously considered, it will evidently appear whose counsels
and practices in these times of difference are faithful to their Covenant, and
who are the breakers thereof. O thou Presbyterian, or other, thou that boastest
of the Covenant, by breaking of the Covenant, dishonorest thou God? and thou
that say another should not steal, committest thou sacrilege? and thou that
judge another, and do thy self worse things, think thou to escape the
judgment of God? Repent therefore, and change thy mind from such destructive
practices, and unite against the common Enemy, lest that Scripture be verified
of you that is spoken by the Apostle to the rebellious Scribes and Pharisees,
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away, for I work a work in your
days that you will not believe, although it shall be plainly told you. And
that other Scripture, When thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they
shall see and be confounded, because of their envy to thy people: Then shall
the righteous rejoice, and be exalted in Christ their King, which has taken to
himself his great power, and will reign* maugre the malice of all opposers,
that has delivered his people in this Nation by his outstretched Arm, not
only from Egyptian darkness, but from sore bondage, destroying hard hearted
Pharaoh and all his host as it were in the midst of the Sea: And he that has
delivered us, will also yet do it; and although the Enemy shall yet be
gathered together against us, like a flood, yet the Spirit of the Lord shall
drive them away; let us not therefore only sing the Song of Moses, our
deliverance agreeing to that of Egypt, but of the Lamb (who alone is the
Deliverer of his Church in these Apostate times) saying, Thou only art worthy
to receive honor, and glory, dominion, and power, for thou have redeemed us
out of all nations, kindreds, and tongues, and have made us Kings, and Priests
unto God. Who doubtless according to his promise will once more, not only
shake the earth, but the heavens also, that those things that can never be
shaken, may remain to his people.

FINIS.

