Sir Tho. Soame vindicated By a Vote of the late Parliament, of March 12. 1659.
for the discharging of two former Votes of June 1. 1649. With a recital of the
said Votes so discharged.
For the information of the people concerning the pretended Crimes occasioning
the same.
WHereas there was published in print the 12 of March 1659. a Vote concerning
the discharging a Vote against Sir Tho. Soame Knight, the substance of which
Vote being unknown to most; wherefore nothing being expressed therein, and
being generally conceived that some great Crime is contained therein, which
occasioned those Votes, in regard the punishment thereby inflicted was so great
and heavy; therefore it is thought very necessary, as well for information of
others, as for Sir Thomas his just vindication, to make a true relation
thereof, by publishing the three Votes together, as in the Journal of the House
does appear, Book numb. 15. fol. 1090, and 1091. viz.

Mr. Alderman Pennington reports from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, their
proceedings in the proclaiming of the Act for abolishing the Kingly Office;
That Sir Tho. Soame being in Town, did not attend.

Die Jovis 31 May.
Resolved, Thomas Soame be commanded by the Sergeant of this House to attend to
morrow, to answer his offense in not publishing the Act by Order of this House.

Die Veneris, June 1. 1649.
The House being informed that Sir Tho. Soame did attend at the Door according
to the Order of the House, he was called in; and being come to the Bar, Mr.
Speaker, by the command of the House, demanded of him several Questions, viz.
Whether he was not made acquainted with the Order of the House, whereby the
Aldermen were to attend the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs at the proclaiming of the
Act entitled, An Act for abolishing the Kingly Office; did acknowledge that he
had notice of it on Tuesday; and acknowledged the Lord Mayor gave him notice
the same should be done the next day, and that he had a Letter from the Lord
Mayor to require his attendance on that service; and acknowledged that he was
not there on that day; and gave the Reasons why he was not there; and the main
Reason being, that it was against his Judgment and Conscience, because it was
contrary to many Oaths of Allegiance that he had taken: etc. Tho. Soame be
discharged from being a Member of this House during this Parliament.

Resolved, etc. Thomas Soame be discharged from being an Alderman of the City
of London, and from bearing any Office of Trust that he now holds in the
Commonwealth.

Upon Mr. Prynnes Report, March 12. 1659
Ordered, That the Votes touching Sir Tho. Soame of the first of June 1649. be
and are hereby discharged, and that they be also obliterated.

Whereupon he stands restored to his right place of Aldermanship as well as
Membership to all intents and purposes, and is made capable of bearing any
Office of Trust he ever held in the Commonwealth.

Lex, Lux, London.
Printed at London, by James Cottrel. 1660.


