DIATPI. Wherein the Judgment of THE Reformed Churches AND Protestant
Divines, is showed, Concerning PREACHING By those who are not Ordained
MINISTERS.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

Concerning Preaching by those who are not Ordained Ministers.
A Man may lawfully Preach the Word, who is not called to be a Minister. For,

1. He may Preach who is sent; But one may be sent who is not sent
Ministerially as an Officer, as appears Romans 10.14, 15. How can they preach
except they be sent? etc. The sending, is not a Ministerial, Ecclesiastical
sending, for then none could be an instrument to convert another but a
Minister; For its said, None can believe but by hearing a Preacher sent. And
again in the 18. Verse, The sending is expressed by the going out of the Sun,
as appears by Psalm. 19.4. Where the same words are: Now the course of the Sun
is natural and by providence. Yea lastly, Whereas the Apostles scope is to take
away doubting from men, as appears by Verse 6, and 7. Say not in thy heart, who
shall ascend, etc? He had by this laid the greatest ground of doubting that
could be, for every man must doubt whether he have Faith or no, and whether he
shall be saved or no by that Faith, till he be sure his Faith was wrought in
him by a Minister lawfully called into office (and that he cannot be, unless he
be sure he that made him Minister was lawfully called, etc.) For says the
Text, That is not saving Faith which comes not by hearing of one sent. It
remains therefore that the Apostle speaks of a providential sending, by giving
men gifts, and working with them in their use and exercise.

2. The Prophets might preach, 1 Cor. 14.3.31. But they were neither such as
were immediately inspired with prediction, for women that were so inspired
might deliver their Prophecy in the Church, but there women are forbidden to
speak, Verse 34. Nor were those Prophets Ministers, for Verse 23.26. he speaks
of Prophecy as a gift in all or most of the members of the Church, and forbids
it to none but women, Verse 31.34. Lastly, Those gifts which are required in a
Prophet, Verse 3.26. are such as men ordinarily may attain by industry and
study, Verse 1. and do attain unto in the Church.

3. Ruling Elders may preach (who are not accounted Ministers) They must, 1 Timothy 3.2. be apt to teach. To make this out to be meant of Ruling Elders:
Consider, that either those qualifications mentioned in that Chapter, are the
qualifications of Ruling Elders, or not. If not, then is there an office of
Ruling Elder appointed, without showing what a one he should be, which is not
likely, seeing the qualities of the Deacon (an inferior officer to him) are
punctually set down there, Verse 8. As Timothy could not tell how to behave
himself in the Church about other officers, 1 Timothy 3.14.
unless it had been set down what kind of persons they should be; he could
not, much less can we tell how to behave our selves in the Church of God about
them, without such direction. Certainly Ruling Elders are not of Christ unless
they be described; described they are not, unless where the Teaching Elder is
described: If they be described there, they must be apt to Teach, that is, be
able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and convince the gainsayer, as it is
expounded, Tit. 1.9.

4. Its granted on all hands, that such as intend the Ministry, though not yet
in the Ministry, may Preach: Therefore Preaching is not an adjunct belonging
only to the Ministry, or an act formally flowing from it. As it implies a
contradiction that a formal act should be before the form be introduced; so it
does, that none but one in Office may Preach, and yet one may Preach to get an
Office. Has the intention of being a Minister begotten this power, as fire
makes the wood smoke before it flame? No; For the intention is but conditional,
if he Preach well: Yea and not only so, but if he be otherwise fitted. As a
Minister is so necessary to the Sacrament of Baptism, because its an act of
Office, that though the child should dye without Baptism, yet it may not have
it without a Minister; upon the same reason none may Preach in order to the
Ministry, if to Preach be an act of Office, whatsoever may be pretended for it.

5. If is also granted, that men that are not in the Ministry may write
Commentaries on the Scripture on any Text or Book, and write more
Contionatotio, sermonwise. if they may Preach by their Pen, they may by their
Tongue also.

6. Of this mind are the Reformed Churches. Not only Prophets in Orders, but
the Common people, who sit in their seats, may lawfully speak that of the word
of God in the Church, Non solis per ordinem Prophetis, sed vulgo in subselliis
sedentibus, in Ecclesia de verbo loqui licebit, quod spiritus revelasset. Qui
nos si nu^quam remisisset nunqua^ tot errores in christi Ecclesiam fuissent
inducti. Sunt enim semper qui per Spiritum coelestem deprehendunt, affectuum
docentis fraudem, qua deinde patefacta, liberaret verbum a violentia
depravatione. Paulatim vero huc ventum est, ut quicquid perversissimus quisque
Nugator pro suggestu, in loco Prophetae effutiret, pro Oraculo haberetur, and
quisquis non haberet, sed vel contra mutiret, crudelissime vapulacet. Tom. 1.
p. 196. ad Emserum.
which the Spirit has revealed to them, says Zuinglius. And if that custom
had never been laid down, there had never been so many errors brought into the
Church: For there are always some who by the heavenly spirit do take notice of
the deceit of the affections of the Teacher, which being laid open, the word
would be free from violent depravation. By little and little it is come to
this, that whatsoever every, the most corrupt Babbler shall utter unadvisedly in
the Pulpit in the Place of a Prophet, must be counted for an oracle, and
whosoever does not esteem it so, or whispers the least thing against it, shall
suffer from men's Tongues most cruelly. The like he says in his Commentary,
Tom. 2. p. 45. li. Ecclesiastes.
on 1 Cor. 14.29. Let the rest judge: And professes that they would in a short
time take up the practice in the Tigurine Churches.

Aretius. Aretius.
The Church of God of old did not lay all on one man as now it does: Vetus
Ecclesia non uni omnia imponebat, ut hodie fit; Minister hodie solus agit, and
omnia fere in caetu, orat, legit, interpretatur, revelationes profert, docet
linguas explicat, cantum exorditur. Olim non ita, sed alius legebat locum
Scripturae, alius interpretabatur, aliud addebat suum judicium, alius preces
habebat, alius canebat, alius acclamabat Amen, and similia. Sic nemo videbatur
otiosus in toto coetu. Aretius in 1 Cor. 14.26.
Now the Minister does all almost in the meeting, he prays, reads, interprets,
brings forth what God has revealed to him; He teaches tongues, explains,
begins the Psalm. It was not so from the beginning, but one read a place of
Scripture, another interpreted, another gave his judgment, another prayed,
another Sung, another said Amen, and the like. And by this means no man in the
assembly was idle.

Iterum apparet olim in coetibus officiu^ docendi multis in cubuisse, nec enim
unus omnia praestabat ut hodie. In ver. 28.
And upon the 28. verse, It again is evident, that of old the duty of teaching
lay upon many in the Assemblies, and one did not do all, as we do it now.

Peter Martyr, who was sent for to help on the Reformation in the time of King
Edward the 6. upon those words [you may all prophecy one by one] When he says
[All] he seems to exclude none of the common sort of Christians; Cum dicit
Omnes, Nullos ex Plebe Christiana videtur excludere. Sed quia putant obliqui
hoc tantum ad ordinem Prophetarum pertinere, and quia nos dicimus ad Plebem
quoque hoc referendu^, and absurdum existimant and contra Patrum sententiam
dici: Operae pretium fuerit audire Ambrosium, quid hoc loco, de re hujusmodi
statuat. Triplicem ordinem eorum qui sunt in Ecclesia facit, Aliqui Seniores in
Cathedris sublimioribus sedent atque hi sunt Presbyteri: Alli occupant
subsellia in inferiori loco: sunt posteremo qui sedeant in pavimento super
Mattas. Quibus si revelatum fuerit, dandus est locus, non enim despicendi sunt
cum membra corporis habeantur. Et supra visus est sententiae hujus rationem
afferre, sicut enim minime conceduntur uni omnia; sic etiam nullus est tam
parvo loco. Et aliquid impertiatur, ut nemo sit vacuus Dei gratia. Pet. Mart.
in 1 Cor. 14.31. which he also dedicated to K. Edw. 6.
But because some think that this belongs only to prophets in orders, and think
that its both absurd, and contrary to the judgment of the Fathers to refer
this to the Common sort of Christians, it will be worth the while to hear
Ambrose, and what in this place he determines in this case; he makes three
ranks of them who are in the Church. Some sit in higher seats, and those are
Elders; Some on seats in a lower place: Some sit on the ground upon Mats: Place
must be given unto them if any thing be revealed; for they are not to be
despised, seeing they are accounted members of the Body. And he gives this
reason for his opinion, Because as God has not given all to one, so there is
none of so mean place, but something is imparted to him, that no man may be
without the grace of God. This he goes on to say was an ancient custom amongst
the Jews, which being good and laudible, the Apostle disdains not to bring
into the Church of Christ, seeing it is not a legal Ceremony, It Is no legal
Ceremony.
but conducing to the Reformation of the Church. That it was a Custom amongst
the Jews in their Synagogues, appears by Story of the Evangelists, where Christ
being yet a child was admitted to hear the Doctors, to ask questions of them,
and to answer: Whereby you see that neither was he rejected for his age, being
young, nor for his condition, being accounted a Carpenters son. And afterward,
when Christ was elder, there was a Book given him in the Synagogue to read and
interpret.

It differs from Anabaptists.
This Peter Martyr distinguishes from the Anabaptists, thus, That the
Anabaptists give all leave to speak, without making any difference, and they
acknowledge no order of Ministers in the Church; Whereas the Apostle only, does
not lay this only on them. As every man (says he) may speak in the Parliament,
though the Law be made by the better part, so etc. And he persuades to use this
upon holy days, and complains of the Churches loss in not having it. Ibid.
Conventus hujus modi maxima cum jactura amisimus.

In omnibus Ecclesiis, sive nascentibus, sive vegetis, propheticae ordo ex
Pauli instituto observetur. Ad hoc Collegium cooptentur non modo Ministri sed
etiam Doctores ac ex senioribus and Diaconis, atque adeo ex ipsa Plebe si qui
sint qui donum suum a domino acceptum in communem Ecclesiae utilitatem confer
velint. Ita tamen ut prius Ministrorum atque aliorum probentur judicio. Vbi
autem is cujus erunt parts vices suas expleverit, licebit iis qui subselliis
eum insequuntur, siquidem visum erit adjicere quod ad edificationem pertineat.
Ac cum demum concepta oratione ab eo cujus erunt parts coetus claudatur.
Harmonia Synod. Belgic. Cap. 5.
The Synods of Embden and Wesel, determine thus; In all Churches, whether
growing or grown up, the order of Prophecy is to be observed according to the
appointment or institution of Paul. To this company do belong not only
Ministers, but Doctors, and out of the Elders and Deacons, yea of the common
sort of Christians, those, who have received a gift from the Lord, and will
bestow it to the common benefit of the Church: Yet so as they be first tried by
the judgment of the Ministers and and others. And when he has done his part
to whom it belongs, it shall be lawful for them who sitting in their seats go
on after him (if it be thought good) to add any thing which may edify. And
at last, he having prayed by conceived prayer, to whom it belongs, the meeting
is to be ended.

Church of Scotland.
This also was the practice of the Church of Scotland. At that time we had no
public Ministers of the Word, History of Reformation of Church of Scotland,
printed 1644. in 4. lib. 1. p. 127.
only did certain zealous men (amongst whom was the Lord of Dun, David
Forest, Mr. Robert Lockhart, Mr. Rob. Hamilton, William Harlow, and others)
exhort their Brethren, according to the gifts and graces granted unto them. And
page 130. they make this particular demand of the Queen, That if it shall
happen in our said Meetings, any hard place of Scripture to be read, of which
without explanation, hardly can arise any profit to the hearers, that it shall
be lawful to any qualified persons in knowledge being present to interpret and
open up the said hard places, to Gods glory and the profit of the auditory. And
if any think, that this liberty should be occasion of Confusion, Debate or
Heresy, we are content that it be provided, that the said interpretation shall
underly the judgment of the godly and most learned within this Realm at this
time. And it is to be observed, that this was after Paul Methuen and John
Wilcocks, Ministers, were come to them, page 127. But it seems they yet wanted
more to teach them.

Cartwright, Cartwr. in 1 Cor. 14. sect. 5. p. against Rhemists.
Notwithstanding the use of extraordinary gifts in tongues and Revelation of
things to come be ceased: Yet the exercise of conference of their gifts whom
God has bestowed such knowledge of, as may serve to edifying, exhortation and
comfort of the Church, remains still, for those gifts remain yet whereby
those ends may be achieved, etc.

The Apostle commands the Church of Thessalonica, that it should not despise
Prophecies, where (speaking in the plural and not in the singular, as Romans 12.
where he specifieth the ordinary Ministers) he seems to include their
exercise also, which being judged fit to handle the Word, were admitted to
speak, although they had otherwise no Public Function in the Church. And
having spoken of this exercise by those who have been trained up to the
Ministry of the Church, he adds out of Act. 13.15. That the Rulers of the
Synagogue, offering after the reading of the Law, unto Paul and Barnabas to
speak (whom they knew not, not could (for Paul's person) know that they were
Levites or Priests ordained for the public Ministry of the Church, Not only
those who are to be Ministers.
) it appears that they made this offer unto them as unto men, whom although
they esteemed private, yet judged that they might have some good gift of
opening the Scriptures to the instruction of the Assembly. It appears also
that this exercise was upon the Sabbath day; and therefore, if not at the same
time, yet at the same Meeting or day at least when other the public Ministers
of the Church executed their office of making prayers, and administering the
Sacraments of Circumcision (in the Jews Synagogue) and of Baptism and the Holy
Supper in the Christian Church. In use in the Christian Church.


Praedicare aliquo modo ex occasion, atque etiam eodem modo, quo Stephanus and
Philippus hoc fecisse narrantur convenit cuilibet fideli, secundum mensuram
illam donorum quam accepit. Omnes Discipuli dispersi Euangelizabant Sermonem
Dei. Act. 8.4. Bellarm. Ener. Tom. 2.
Dr. Ames. To Preach (in some sort, upon occasion, and in the same sort that
Stephen and Philip preached) does belong to every believer, according to the
measure of the gifts which he has received. Act. 8.4. They which were
scattered Preached the Word of God. A captive woman Preached to the Iberians.
So did the King, being appointed by that woman, though he was not baptized. And
this he urges against Bellarmine, to prove this an opinion of the Protestants,
that though Stephen who was a Deacon Preached, yet it belonged not to that
Office, but he might do it though he were a private man.

And in his Cases of Conscience, he opens himself further thus: Case of Cons.
lib. 4. cap. 25. 1, 2, 4, 4.
A special and singular calling is not required to Teach and Preach the gospel
upon occasion, Act. 8.4.11.19.21.18.24. And he gives these reasons: 1. Because
its the duty of all Christians as much as in them lies, to promote the Kingdom
of God, and therefore to teach one another. 2. Sometimes its necessary that men
be convinced of their error, and instructed in the truth, before a calling can
be orderly gotten. 3. Sometimes the people want a Minister. And farther, he
says, that one may not only Preach privately, but publicly, without a
special or particular calling, and that not only in a Church Reforming, In
Ecclesia instituenda, in Ecclesia etiam constituta.
but Reformed; and this tends to edification if order be observed, though none
may take the Minstery on them without a particular calling.

Object. If it be said, that Act. 8.4. Those who Preached the word were
Officers, because its not barely said (...) they Preached, but they Preached
the Word, which is a peculiar speech of those who are in Office.

Answ. 1. Learned Ames takes it otherwise, and the Leyden Professors.

2. If it be granted they may (...) its enough, for (...) (as appears 1 Cor
1.17.) is no more then (...) alone. And therefore the Translators of the Bible
do well render it To Preach the Gospel, though Gospel, which is as much as [The
Word] be not added in the Text. That speech [To Preach the Word] is a
Pleonasme, and usual in Scripture, as to Eat meat, dream dreams, Joh. 1.3.
Without him was nothing made that was made; the latter words are necessarily
included in the former: and the like necessity there is to include (...) in
(...); for what else is that they could Preach to men's Salvation? Act. 2.38,
39, 40, 41. And (...) is and may be said of such acts as are not acts of
Office, as appears by Romans 10.15. Act. 8.35. and especially in the Septuagint
(which Luke is observed by Divines to follow most in his phrase and speech, yea
to straighten himself to keep their words for the Gentiles sake, when as he
could have otherwise uttered things in better terms then they did) as is
obvious to any one. Cart. on Act. 14.22.


I might add unto all these, Melancthon, who says, Those that are not ad
publicum vocum vocati, have an express grant to write or teach, by the Apostle,
saying, You may all interpret, 1 Cor. 14. ad locum, and therefore excuses them
who do it from running before they be sent.

Dudley Fenner says, The Prophets are the chief of the Brethren appointed by
the Elders to teach or exhort according to their gifts: And he distinguishes
them from those who intended the Ministry, Theolog. l. 7. c. 7. p. 156, 157.

The same opinion he also defends against B. Bridges, page 129.

I might also quote Mr. Bates, p. 133. Musculus, etc.

Voetius Professor of Vtricht.
I shall add in the last place Voetius, who in defense of the Belgic Churches
against Jansenius, who it seems laid such men's preaching to their charge, says
this: Some few who before they had any calling by the Church, did in any place,
by writings, Pauci aliquot qui ante omnem vocationem Ecclesiasticam alicubi
Scriptis, disputationibus, adhortationibus, lectoribus, imo and praedicatoribus
privatis, homines ab errore and peccato revocare studuerunt, non usurparunt
sibi ministerium Ecclesiasticum sed tantum illud egerunt quod omnibus licere
Janscnius concedit. Desp. causa Pap. page 71.
by writings, disputations, exhortations, lectures, yea and by private
Preachings seek to recall men from their error and sin, did not usurp to
themselves an Ecclesiastical Minstery, but did that only which Jansenius grants
is lawful for all men.

By all this it appears at least that godly and learned men zealous for
Reformation and Presbyterial Government in the Church, judges it lawful for
private men to open the Scriptures publicly, and that it will be no means of
Error, Confusion or Heresy (as it is slandered) but of Edification and
Preservation of the Truth.

FINIS.
Published by Authority.


