WHen the Lord Jesus came to Jerusalem, he beheld the City* and wept over it,
with this lamentation: Oh that thou had known in this thy day the things that
belong to thy peace! The same tenderness is witnessed now in them which the
Lord has enlightened. I cannot but mourn over you, to see how you lie wallowing
in your filth, and join hand in hand, and smite with the fist of wickedness,
and yet lean upon Christ for salvation: Know you not that many shall say in
that day, Lord, Lord? but remember what will be your answer; Go you cursed into
the lake, I know you not. Oh that thou would but stand still a little, and
turn thy eye inward; Sit down a little, and consider thy poor soul that lies
in death: What will become of thee, thou murderest the just in thee, there is a
Talent to be improved in thee, how will thou give an account of it; the Steward
is now come: in the cool of the day, then Adam heard the voice of God, and
then he saw his nakedness, and so may est thou; If thou will turn in thy mind
to the light of Christ in thee, the light will discover to thee thy fallen
state, and how thou art turned out from the presence of God, and art in the
gall of bitterness, and the earth is cursed for thy sake: Now if thou will
mind the light, and wait in it, which is the grace of God that has appeared
to thee, there is the first step to pure redemption: And if thou take diligent
heed to this light in thee, thou shall find it checking thee continually for
all thy evil deeds, and it will teach thee to be sober minded and upright in
all thy dealings as in the sight of God: and so thou will come to see the
straight gate and narrow way that leads to life; but thou will say, Christ has
done all this for me, I have nothing to do but believe: but it will be said
unto thee, when thou think to sit down with thy Lord; Friend, how came
thou hither without a wedding garment? then know what thy portion will be.
Faith is another thing then thou take it to be; He that has Faith, if it be
never so little, shall witness Christ's words to be true, he shall remove
mountains: Now in the still silence, in the light that shines in darkness in
thee, thou will come to relish that little grain of Faith which is held in a
pure conscience, and so feel the mountains remove, which presses down thy
soul: but ye will not come unto me that ye may have life, says Christ Jesus;
It is thy will that hinders thee, for in thy will the Devil lodges. Adam when
he disobeyed the mind and will of God, then he entered into his own will, and
so was turned out into the Devils Kingdom. Now Christ Jesus the second Adam,
who is God manifest in flesh, condemning sin in the flesh, if thou live in
him in thee, and believe in him in thee, then thou shall witness his power to
the cutting down of thy will; for thy will must come to death, that the will of
God may be done, and so that Scripture comes to be fulfilled in thee, which are
the words of Christ; Lo I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me
to do thy will O God, which is the book of conscience in thee, there the will
of God is to be done: And as thou come to love the light, and live in it,
thou will come to see the righteous law of God fulfilled in thee, Death reigns
in thee. Now Death reigned from Adam till Moses, and when Moses came, then was
the Law given forth; and so Moses and the Prophets till John: But thou will
say, thou art not under the Law, but under Grace? let the light search thee,
and it will ask thee, how came thou to be under Grace? Is not the law for
cleansing; When wast thou cleansed? or where do thou think to be cleansed?
Does not Christ Jesus say, that he is come to fulfill the Law, and that one jot
nor tittle shall pass unfulfilled, and will thou speak of his words, and not
believe him? Yea, thou shall know, that for that very end is there a measure of
Christ given unto thee; that if thou deny thy self, and yield obedienc^ to his
will, thou shall witness the whole Law fulfilled in thee, but it is through
judgment, and through burning, for through judgment is Zion redeemed: but
hearken a little, and consider, hear and thy soul shall live. If thou be
willing to take up the Cross of Christ, and despise the shame, thou shall
witness pure peace of conscience: and though it may seem hard to the world,
yet there is living refreshments: Yea, glorious is the work of redemption, but
none can see it but those that come through it: And now the way of eternal
life is laid before thee, if thou slight it, it shall lie at thy door: and
therefore take heed what thou do; for when the book of conscience is opened,
thou shall witness thou have been warned in thy lifetime.

Martha Simmonds.


