ILLUSTRISS: DN9. ROBERTUS CECILIUS COMES SARISBVRIAE* ANGLIAE THESAURIUS. ETC.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

The right honorable ROBERT CECILL Earl of Salisbury Viscount Cranborne,
Baron of E^inden: late Lo: Treasurer of England Knight of the most noble Order
of the Garter* and one of his Maties most honorable privy Counsel. Are to
besould by John Hind



THE State and Dignity OF A SECRETARY OF ESTATES PLACE, With the care and
peril thereof, Written by the Right Honorable ROBERT LATE EARL OF SALISBVRY.
With His excellent Instructions to the late Earl of BEDFORD, for the
Government of Barwick.

A work worthy of memory.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

The State AND DIGNITY OF A Secretarie's Place, with the peril thereof,
written by the RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, LATE Earl of SALISBVRY, With his
requested Instructions to the Earl of Bedford for the Government of Barwick,
Worthy of memory.
ALL Officers and Counselors of Princes have a prescribed Authority by
Patent, by Custom or by oath, the Secretary only excepted, but to the
Secretary out of a Confidence and singular affection there is a liberty to
negotiate at discretion at home and abroad with friends and enemies in all
matters of speech and intelligence.

All Servants of Princes deal upon strong and wary authority and warrant in
disbursements as Treasurers, in conference with enemies as General, in
Commissions in executing Offices by Patent and instructions, and so in
whatsoever else, only a Secretary has noe warrant or Commission, noe not in
matters of his own greatest particulars, but the virtue and word of his
Sovereign.

For such is the multiplicitie of actions, and variable motions and intents of
Foreign Princes, and their daily practices, and in so many parts and places,
as Secretarie's can never have any Commission, so long and universal as to
secure them.

So as a Secretary must either conceive the very thought of a King, which is
only proper to GOD; or a King must exercise the painful Office of a
Secretary, which is contrary to Majesty, and liberty, or else a Prince must
make choice of such a servant of such a Prince, as the Princes assurance must
be his confidence in the Secretary, and the Secretarie's life his trust in the
Prince.

To deal now with a Prince tanquam infirmum futurum, cannot be a rule for a
Secretary, for all that he has to trust to is quite contrary, which is that
his Prince will be semper idem.

All strange Princes hate Secretarie's, all Aspirers, and all Conspirers,
because they either kill those monsters in their Cradles or else tract them out
where no man else can discern the print of their footing.

Further more this is manifest that all men of war do malign them except they
will be at their desires.

Their fellow Counselors envy them because they have most easy and free
access to Princes, and wheresoever a Prince has cause to delay or deny to
search or punish, none so soon bear so much burden.

Kings are advised to observe these things in a Secretary.

First that he be created by himself and of his own raising.

Secondly that he match not in a factious family.

And lastly that he have reasonable capacity, and convenient ability.

On the other side the place of a Secretary is dreadful, if he serve not a
constant Prince, for he that lives by trust ought to serve truly, so he that
lives at mercy ought to be careful in the choice of his Master that he be just
and de bona Natura.

If Princes be not confident on those, whom they have made choice of, they
shall ill trust the work of a strange hand, and if the rule has failed in some
of those that have sinned in ingratitude to those Princes, it is in those of
the highest order, Ero similis Altissimo.

But for those of private quality who have no other consistance nor can ever
look for equal blessedness, there the jealousy of a Prince has never beheld
suspect but mere contempt.

As long as any matter of what weight soever is handled only between the
Prince and the Secretary: Those Counsels are compared to the mutual
affections of two lovers, undiscovered to their friends.

When it comes to be disputed in Council, it is like the conference of
Parents and solemnization of Marriage, the first matter, the second Order, and
indeed the one the act, the other the Publication.

If there be then a Secretary whose State can witness that he covers not for
profit, and if his careful life, and death shall record it, that love is his
Object, if he deal less with other men's suites, whereby Secretarie's gain,
then ever any did, if he prefer his Majesty, and despise his own.

If such an one should find that his hope could not warrant him, no not
against the Slanders of those wicked ones, whom he must use only, then surely
that Secretary must resolve that the first day of his entry is the first day
of his misery, for if he be not worthy of trust, he is less worthy of life;
and a suspicion of a Secretary is both a trial and Condemnation and a Judgment.

Master SECRETARIE'S ANSWER, to the Earl of Bedford.
Sir,
I Am very sorry, that I find in my self, that I am neither able to satisfy
your Lordships request, nor my own desires; and yet your self perchance will
better accept my doings, then I shall my self allow them. Your Lorship, would
have me (by your Letters) give you advice, for your affairs and service there.
It comes of your two much good opinion of me, that your Lordship thinks me
able thereunto, which surely I am not: and though my desire be to do this, as
you would; yet cannot I satisfy my self, as I would; and if I should spend
any words to declare my own unabilitie, your Lordship would not like them; and
to enterprise to do that which I know not, I am not therein like my self. Yet,
notwithstanding, I had rather please your Lordship with my folly; then
altogether my self with silence; if I write foolishly, or unseasonably, the
lack is mine, but the occasion of my fault is your Lordships. I heard so good
report of your doings, the best is, I can give you, to go forward, and
countenance your own example; and the next advice thereunto is, that when you
see one day coming, to amend the day past; my meaning is, to have you in all
your action do, as all other natural things do, and most plainly. Things
growing which daily from time to time do Increase, whose example, if a man
would follow; he should as his body grows in age, so see his wit with
knowledge, his conditions with virtues should amend; and, as we do live, we
grow toward death, by moments of time, so should we grow toward heaven, by
multiplying of virtues, and good gifts. You see, I am at the first step in
Divinity; and so might I seem to many other of your Estate, to be of small
discretion to fall in Preaching to him, that must be occupied in Musters, with
looking to fortifications, and such like worldly affairs. But my Lord, I know
to whom I write, to him, which considers between things worldly, and
heavenly, to him, that knows the fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom;
and therewith I end.

Now, to your External care; where certainly, God is served, and pleased with
them, that accomplish the same to their powers; and, if wisdom lack, they may
ask it of him, who has the treasure of Wisdom and Goodness. Your Lordship
has there a great charge of Government, I know, you think your self unmeet
thereunto, especially, in knowledge; and surely to know that, amendeth your
ability; for more hurt comes of men's securities, and presumption of wisdom,
then in mistrust. It is a good thing, for you to be think your self, of some
Noble man, whom you have either read or heard, whose doings have bin worthy of
commendations, in such service as this.

And to make a Pattern, and example to your self, daily in your doings,
practicing the imitation of him throughout all your life, and in this point,
may you choose many noble properties of your own natural, good Father, to
follow; whereunto, nature shall bend, and make you soonest inclinable. If you
have heard of any Noble man famous in Justice; not being led by affection on
the one side, or on the other; nor being strict, in severenesse of Law; it were
good, to follow him. If also you have heard the same to be merciful, to have
had compassion of others in adversity, and willing to end all causes with
quietness and charity; the example will be good. You may also propound to
your self the example, to follow such a one, as has liberality in expenses
without prodigality, remembering that the property of virtue is, to continue
in well doing, and therefore to hold the mean is hard. As certainly in these
or other like virtues, you shall see the fault on both sides so nigh standing
to the virtues, that unless you keep your self in your doings very upright,
it is easy to err on the one side or the other; as for example; in your
expenses if you keep not a measure in your giving, you shall fail on the one
side; and shall lack to give* when most gladly you would give: on the other
side, if you forbear to give, where you may, and when you ought, then do you
as the Scripture says, heap up stones for your Grave. The like is in the
virtue of Justice; wherein, it shall suffice to remember of one Byas, that when
he had given Judgment on one, wept himself; and being asked of the cause, he
said, in weeping he satisfied nature: in my sentence the Law: his pity was
natural and hindered not Justice, his Justice was lawful and not unnatural.
Thus, I might spend your Lordships time, in reading a long, and weary Letter,
if I would continue in that Moral advertisement; I will therefore draw more to
particulars of your charge, and as I guess thereby, more aptly to satisfy
your Lordships request. The foundation of your services there is your
commission, and under seal of discharge, the force thereof is the end of your
charge. wherefore, you shall do well; by frequent reading and consideration
thereof, to understand it well, and keep it in memory; for which purpose, it
shall be expedient, to have some conference with some learned man in the Law
for the behalf in Law; and of some other discreet men, for the execution of
the same. In like case this know as you see time convenient, so may you
perform the commandments.

But me thinks you will say, I took upon me, the easiest parts of
advertisement, that is, to do discreetly, but I show you not how, but remitt
you to others, and then will you think, that I do, as one that may bidd a
sick man be whole, be quitt, shake of your sickness but how to do, he
teaches not.

Forsooth my Lord, my excuse is too ways: first, I know not your Commission,
and that you know is true; next, if I did know it, yet J have no such
knowledge, (specially in Law) to inform you withal more particularly, then J
do; but these J think contenteth you not, for you will (according to your old
mirth) call this, a reason that comes from Colliweston, and therefore to
keep you occupied with scribbling, J will follow on with a hotchpotch of
sentences.

Jn your Commission, J think, many things be committed to your discretion,
which makes the burden greater, then if you had been expressly commanded
what to do. Therefore, must you needs consider, what is meant, by discretion;
which, as we term it in our language; seems to be a knowledge, to discern
and judge one thing from another. And this part truly is properly pertaining to
wisdom; for before a man can discern, he must know it, and he that will
perform this part, must measure and judge of these things; and therefore
before you shall conclude of any thing of weight, you must discern often
thereupon; and before you can do that, you must know the thing that is
discerned; and then for the election of these it is very profitable, to imagine
a pair of Balances, and in the one to lay reasons on the one side, and in the
other to lay the contrary, and then judge which is the heaviest, I mean which
Balance has the best reasons, nor the most

And touching your own person, see things pertaining thereto, be meet for the
place which you keep; neither too negligent, neither too curious; to the one
of these peradventure you are more subject then to the other, and therefore,
you must regard your self the more.

Your household, must be Governed as it may be an example of virtue to others,
and an ornament to your Office, let your Officers have good ancient Rules for
order, and see they be not neglected; you must your self so with the same, as
your servants may know you acquainted with their doings; and yet not seem to
strangers, to meddle therewith. If you have cause to blame your Officer, and
have a mind to keep him, do it secretly, that he may know his fault, but not
be known to the servant, underneath him: in any wise cause not idleness to
remain among your people, let not your servants exceed in Apparel their
degree, for the charge at length will be to your purse or estimation: let them
understand, that you love them best who live best in order; them next, who live
nearest order, and them nothing at all; which live far from order; let them
which do well in your house, feel both your love and reward.

At your table, let no matter of Princes affairs or Princes regiments, be
disputed; nor of Religion: for meat and drink requires meaner talk; to
keep men occupied of the Common talk of the Country, or other honest merry
talks. Lastly note, let Job serve in his degree, your Lordship can well
enough, with a few questions, set men occupied in talk.

For your fare, (your Lordship must give me leave to be bold) I can very well
like, that in respect of your degree, that your service be both in order, and
service honorable: and in substance plenreous, and in art curious, but
considering the pronesse of this age to excess; J can best allow the first
without the last: and in any wise whatsoever you shall like, do in other
places, let not your Orders belonging to your Estate (especially in Common
assemblies) at your table be neglected: and if your table be also plenteous, it
is also serviceable for the poor: but the last, to have many devises of
counterfeit meats, and also spiced, makes wast in the household, gains
little, gives ill example to be followed, and is not wholesome to your guests,
and in the end, serves small to hospitality.

Now for the usage of men there in those parts, as you find them at your
coming, so as little as you may, seek to alter their estate, (unless you see
some cause:) let it not appear, you use any man, with singular affection,
above the rest; and yet you may use (indeed) as you see cause, men either for
wisdom, credit with respect of others envyes, not them whom you shall make
choice of.

Jn your Consultations give every man leave to speak and bear with their
lackes, so that you make choice of the best; do what you can, to make every one
live according to his own estate: the Gentlemen to live of their own without
reproach, and if you see any young Gentlemen toward wasting, conferr with his
friends, for the stay thereof: especially, if his be of any continuance:
likewise see, that poor men have their right, not for importunity of clamor,
but for pity and truth.

Touching the Lawyers of the Country, esteem them of learning, see they lack
not too much honesty, but in no wise seem to favor these Demy-Lawyers,
except you see perfection of honesty, for in all Countries they have least
kill, and do most harm.

Do what you can, to make the Gentlemen accord amongst themselves; and to
extinguish old factions, either by some devise of marrying, or by redemption of
titles of Lands, or such like encumbrances, which commonly be the seeds of
discord. For termination of poor men's suites, remit them, (as much as you may)
to indifferent Arbitrators to end: do not intermeddle therewith your self: for
so shall your labor be bottomless.

Whilst you be in that Country, (if you take any servants) let them be
Gentlemen's sons, and if you may their heirs, that by their education with
you, they may know you and yours.

Set up artillery, and neglect not the game of wrestling, let there be
frequent games, as shooting, running on horse and foot, and wrestling: in my
Country have been used all ways for such purposes, and in this behalf I
mean, not to have you induce new devices in that Country, if they have other
of their own. But some might ask me this, is this the true use of Holy days
forsooth? touching that part of the day, where the Civil Magistrate has
power, I think it not much amiss, but for the time the Ecclesiastical
Minister does appoint to pray, and teach a Sermon, I think it not meet, to be
put to this use. But therein I will not much dispute, for it belongs to
Divinity, whereunto your Commission extends not; for hereof the Bishops and
others, have their charge.

Surely my Lord, it would be time now to leave my scribbling least I shall be
like the s ingers, which are dainetie to begin, and know not when to leave: I
think your Lordship shall be weary of reading, wherefore J will leave with a
few lines, like to my beginning

Your doings here have deserved praise, see you continue your distance: so
far of your acception here J mean, as J know. You were wont, and have
professed unto me that is to serve uprightly and truly, and to do therein as
you can, and then may you be bold of praise: and if you miss of that, yet, of
no dishonor: for nothing indeed is honorable, but well doing; the weal of
your Country (J mean the quietness of such, as you have authority to
govern) is your mark, shoot thereat: guiding your purpose with the fear of
God, and so shall you gain the love of God, and Man. Jf you do some time (as
you see cause) advertise the Queens Majesty of the good Estate of that
Country, and of the Gentlemen there, (so it be by short Letters) referring (if
you have any long Declaration of things to your Letters) to the Privy
Counsel: if any thing be to be misliked or tedious to be advertised, procure
others also to write thereof, and in no wise write thereof alone: for you know
fortunate things are welcome from any man but how the contrary may come from
you, you may doubt.

It is full time for me to end my folly, and your Lordship to end your labor,
beseeching you, to make my will in satisfieing your request, answer the other
lack fault: and that J may be humbly remembered to my lady, to whom J
acknowledge much duty, and am ashamed of my small deserving of her great
goodness to me wards.

From my poor house at Wimbelton, WILL. CECILL.

FINIS.

