Judgment and Mercy: OR, The Plague of Frogs inflicted, removed.

Delivered in Nine SERMONS, By that late Reverend and Learned Divine, Mr.
JOSIAS SHUTE, Archdeacon of Colchester, and Preacher at St. Mary Woolnoth, in
London: With his usual Prayers before and after Sermon.

Whereunto is added A Sermon Preached at his Funeral, By Mr. EPHRAIM VDALL.

Eccles. 12. 10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that
which was written was upright, even words of truth.

Imprimatur.

Ja. Cranford.
October. 29. 1644.


London, Printed for Charles Green, and are to be sold at his Shop in Ivy
Lane at the sign of the Gun. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
TO commend persons, or things of worth in a perfunctory, slight manner, is
little better then to dispraise them; therefore I shall forbear Encomiums of
this worthy Author, or his Labors, lest I run that hazard; Let his own Works
praise him in the gates: Prove. 31.31.
only lengthen thy patience to the through perusal of these ensuing Sermons,
and thou shall find that that may heighten thy esteem both of him and them,

I am confident that those who were his usual Auditors will herein find his
own vestigia, both for matter, and phrase. And my hope is, that by the
blessing of God, many honest hearts may reap benefit by these his Labors,
Heb. 11.4.
(whereby he being dead yet speaks) that had not opportunity in his life time
to partake of his indefatigable Ministry. As for others, as this worthy man
once said of the chief in Magistracy, (upon occasion of the death of King
James, that when the body turns traitor, it is just with God to behead it) so
may I say for the Ministry, when God in Mercy shall set up such burning and
shining lights, and men in stead of walking by them spit at them, God is justly
provoked to extinguish those lights, Jer. 13.6.
and leave men to stumble upon the dark mountains. But I shall no longer
detain thee from the work it self, but commit it and thee to the blessing of
God.

H. W.

Morning Prayer before the SERMON.
MOst glorious Lord God, and merciful Father in Jesus Christ; we poor
wretched and miserable sinners do here prostrate our selves before thee,
humbly acknowledging that to thee belongs all honor and glory, whose pure eyes
can behold no iniquity; and to us nothing but shame and confusion of face, for
our manifold transgressions committted against thee.

If we look upon our selves as we lie in the loins of our first parents, we
are a part of that tainted seed that might justly inherit thy wrath: our
understandings are darkened; and our wills instead of conformity to thine, are
grown rebellious; in as much as that by nature, there is not one good thought
in us; but a pronenesse to all evil whatsoever.

And if we consider our selves in our actual transgressions by our sins of
ignorance, our sins of infirmity, and of doubting, our sins against our
own knowledge, and against our vows and purposes, and promises of better
obedience; We have greatly dishonored thy glorious name, and grieved thy good
Spirit, and weakened thy graces more and more within us, and have justly
exposed our selves to thy eternal curse.

Even at this time, Holy Father, in the midst of thy Temple, we come before
thee clogged with so many imperfections; that if thou should be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, the best of us were never able to abide it. It is
thine infinite mercy that we are not consumed; and therefore do we live to
put up this poor imperfect prayer to thee, because thy compassions fail not.

But, O God, though in our selves we be miserable, and weak, and forlorn;
suffer us to cast up our eyes to the hills from whence comes our help, to
importune thee by the Gracious Name of Father, and to entreat thee for the
merits of the Son of thy love, to be merciful to us. Remember thine own
promise, that if we confess our sins, and leave them, and come to thee in
the Son of thy love, we shall find mercy. Lord we renounce our former
sins; it grieves us that we can be no more sorry for the same. By the blessed
assistance of thy holy Spirit, we intend to live more conscionably for the time
to come.

And we come to thee for Christ's sake, desiring thee to speak peace to our
souls through his blood, bury all our sins in his grave, that they may never
rise up in this world (to shame us, and to be a reproach unto us, to terrify
our consciences to desperation, to intercept thy blessings, or our prayers) or
in the world to come everlastingly to condemn us.

And because the foundation of all our comfort stands in the assurance of this.
Lord multiply to every one of our souls the blessed evidences of this thy
reconciliation. Send the holy Spirit of thy Son into every of our hearts to
renew us to that glorious Image of thine from whence we are fallen, and that
may work every saving grace in us; True faith in thy promises, that though
thou kill us we may trust in thee, resolution in all good causes, fear and
reverence of thy glorious Majesty; a groaning and daily mourning under our own
imperfections that ever we offended so good a God, and so gracious a Father: a
good use making of all the afflictions, and chastisements upon others. And
teach every one of us, upon whom these days of our peace and prosperity, and
health are renewed (who know not how soon we may be drawn to a reckoning) to
prepare our selves, that whenever thou shall come near us, either by that
general, or more particular judgments, we may be able to stand in the day of
our visitation.

And because thou of thine infinite wisdom have set apart the Ministry of thy
Word to fit us for that time. Lord bless it at all times, and at this time;
enable me that am to speak it, the most unworthy of all the sons of Levi:
Lord cover all my sins and manifold imperfections, in that mercy of thine
that has no measure; and be pleased so to assist me by thy more particular
help, that I may deliver thy word boldly, truly, feelingly, and sincerely.
Circumcise the hearts and ears of this people, that they may hear
attentively, treasure it up in their hearts carefully, and bring forth the
fruit in their lives and conversations conscionably, to thy glory, and the
assurance of their own salvation in the day of Jesus Christ. To whom with
thee, O Father, and thy Blessed Spirit, be ascribed, as due is, all honor, and
glory, both now, and for evermore.

Amen.
Evening Prayer before the Sermon.
O Lord our God, great in Majesty, and infinite in Power; and in Jesus Christ
our most merciful and loving Father: we poor, and wretched sinners are here
again by thy providence assembled in thy Sanctuary, to be made partakers of the
good of thy house. But Lord what are we that we should tender any petition to
thee? unworthy we are to behold this blessed light that shines to us much more
unworthy to enjoy these conveniences, and opportunities of meeting in thy house
to know the way and means to a better life: But most worthy of all thy plagues
to be powered down upon us, both in this life, and that which is to come.

For besides that original corruption, wherein we were borne and conceived
and which like a leprosy has over spread all the powers and faculties both of
soul and body;) we have heaped up a numberles number of actual transgressions.
There is not any of thy holy Commandments, but in thought, word and deed, most
grievously, and frequently we have violated. And which advances our iniquity,
and heightens our rebellion, these evils have not only escaped us in the times
of ignorance, but even since it has pleased thee to inlighten us with the
knowledge of thy truth: so that notwithstanding thy mercies, thy judgments,
the motions of thy good Spirit; the blessed light of thy Gospel afforded to
us, we have continued the course of our rebellion against thee: yea that we may
be yet more vile in thy presence, even at this time when we come before thee,
we are clogged with so many imperfections, that if thou should be extreme
to mark what is done amiss, how might thou plague us in our bodies, in our
goods, in our good names? how might thou fill us with the fury of an
unpacified conscience, and write bitter things against us, and a wounded spirit
who can bear? How might thou give us up to a reprobate sense to commit
sin with greediness, and punish one evil with another; and after all this
cast us into that place of torment, to suck out the dregs of thy vialls? O
God, in all this thou should be justified, and clear when thou are judged,
and we deservedly punished.

Our sins, our sins, O Lord, call to heaven for vengeance; the pit is ready
to shut her mouth upon us, if thou were not the Lord of mercies. But thou have
opened a way for poor distressed sinners to come to thee through thy Son. We
fly to the horns of the Altar, and entreat thee for Jesus Christ sake to be
merciful to us.

And thou sweet Savior of the world, whose name imports mercy, and whose work
brought salvation for the sons of men; thou know that we are but flesh, and
remembrest that we are but dust. Thou that art a High Priest touched with our
infirmities, that know the power, and strength of old Adam how it leads us
captive to sin and wickedness; stand between us, and the wrath of thy offended
Father, mediate our cause with thy Father, that all our iniquities may be done
away by thy sufferings, that we may ever find to our comfort, that though we
have done ill, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
And do thou, dear Father, every day more and more assure and persuade our
souls that thou art reconciled to us in thy Son, by sending his Spirit into our
hearts to renew us to that glorious Image of thine from whence we are fallen;
and which may enable us to perform every good duty: that as heretofore we have
given our bodies and souls to be weapons of unrighteousness; so in every part
and power of them we may glorify thee our God and Savior, and as much time as
remains in the flesh, work out our salvation with fear and trembling.

And be cause thou of thine infinite wisdom have set apart the Ministry of
thy Word for this purpose; good Lord bless it to us at all times, and at this
time. Enable me that am to speak, the most unworthy of all the sons of Levi:
Lord cover all my sins and manifold imperfections in that mercy of thine that
has no measure; and be pleased so to assist me by thy more particular help,
that I may deliver thy word, boldly, truly, feelingly, and sincerely.
Circumcise the hearts and ears of this thy people, that they may hear
attentively, treasure it up in their hearts carefully, and bring it forth in
their lives and conversations conscionably, to thy glory, and assurance of
their own salvation in the day of Jesus Christ; to whom with thee, O Father,
and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed, as is most due, all honor and glory, both
now, and for evermore.

Prayer after Sermon.
WE return unto thy Majesty, O Lord our God, most humble and hearty thanks
for all thy mercies most plentifully bestowed upon us, as election creation,
redemption, preservation, vocation; for the time and means thou have given us
of repentance, whereas thou might have took us away in the midst of our
sins. O God, what are we, or what is our fathers house, that thou should be
thus merciful to us, to prevent and to follow us with thy kindness? we are
less then the least of thy mercies; yet suffer us to take the cup of
salvation, and to praise thy Name: accept of our poor acknowledgement; add one
mercy more, dear God, to the common heap; grant that we may express our
thankfulness in a godly care of all holy obedience.

Bless that part of thy word that we have heard delivered at this time; Good
Lord, make it effectual to our souls to salvation, grant that it may bring
forth fruit, in some twenty, in some thirty, in some sixty, in some a hundred
fold; though in some more, and in some less yet in all some, to the henour of
thy Name.

Bless with us thy whole Church, wheresoever dispersed, or howsoever
distressed on the face of the earth; and prosper O God, the cause of the same
where ever it is maintained in all the world, as may be for the confounding of
the Kingdom of Sin and antichrist, and for the encouragement of all such as
profess thy Gospel in sincerity.

Bless us in these Kingdoms; continue to us our liberty, forgive our crying
sins, turn away thy judgments, open our eyes at last to see the day of our
visitation. Bless thy servant our Sovereigne, Charles, by thy Grace, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, in all causes, and over all persons, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediately under thy Son supreme
governor. Bless the Queens most excellent Majesty, Prince Charles, the
Princess Palatine, and her issue. The Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council. The whole Nobility. Bless thine own inheritance, the Tribe of
Levi, by what names or titles soever they be called. And for a supply of David's
Towers with Worthies, bless all Schools of Learning, the two Universities of
this Land, Cambridge and Oxford. Bless all Congregations, this committed to my
charge.

Remember all that are in affliction in mercy, whether outwardly in body, or
inwardly in mind, or for the testimony of a good conscience. Lord draw near
to every of them according to their desires. Receive us, Dear God, and all
ours, and all thine into thy love and favor, and protection, therest of this
day, and for ever. Let thy holy hand protect us, let thy blessed Spirit direct
us; vouchsafe, good God to go in and out before us. Keep in us a purpose
never to sin; confirm it more and more: and upon every suggestion to sin, let
us call to mind our vows, and promises of better obedience; and though we
have dealt falsely before, now make them more powerful to restrain us. If we
fall by infirmity, let our hearts smite us speedily; restore us by repentance
immediately; evermore keep us from impenitencie, hardness of heart, and
presumption, the power of Satan, and a downfall into sin.

Grant us all other things that thou in thy wisdom know better that we
want, then we to ask; not for any merits of ours, we disclaim them; nothing
belongs to us but shame and confusion: but even for thy Names sake, for thy
promise sake, for Jesus Christ's sake the Son of thy love, and our Savior, in
whose Name, we further call upon thee, as he has taught us, saying, Our Father
which art, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 1.2. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him,
Thus says the Lord, Let my people go that they may serve me.

And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with
frogs.


THis Chapter has three parts according to the three judgments here remembered.

The first judgment was the frogs from verse 1. to verse 16. The second was of
lice from verse 16. to verse 20. The third of flies, noisome flies, to the end
of the Chapter.
In this first judgment which is of frogs, we are to observe these three
things. First, the denunciation of it. Secondly, the execution of it. Thirdly,
the event of it.


The denunciation of it in the first 4 verses.

The execution, in verse 5.6.

The event of it is threefold.

First, the Magicians do the like verse 7. Secondly, thence there is a
remoovall of this judgment, and the means of the same, from the beginning of
verse 8. to the end of verse 15. The third event is the obduration, and further
hardening of the heart of Pharaoh, verse 16.


Come again to the denunciation, there are two things in it. First, Moses from
God makes a motion to Pharaoh, to dismiss his people, verse 1. Secondly, he
tells him upon his refusal of a judgment, and there is,


First laid down what the judgment should be, frogs.

Then the amplification of it, from the generality, in all his borders, in his
bedchamber, in their troughs, their baking-troughs, and their ovens, they shall
be a vexation to them night and day.

And then for the noisomeness of them, that they should crawle about in all
these places.

Now for the motion, which is laid down in verse 1. that I may not reciprocari
serram, as Tertullian speaks, I will not draw my saw the same way again; I
willingly omit many things that might be observed in this verse.

First, Gods manner of speaking to Moses. Secondly, Moses going in to Pharaoh.
Thirdly, his manner of speaking to Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord: Whereby he
would persuade him that he was sent by God; therefore he that sent him would
not brook a refusal.
Likewise in the fourth place, how equal the motion of God was, Let my people
go: he requires his own of Pharaoh: And how they were said to be Gods people
above all other people in the world.

To the end that they may go and serve me. The relation that is between God
and his people, it ties the people of God to serve him, to observe him.

Again, how God would have them go out of Egypt to serve him; that is, to
offer sacrifice. For he would not have them serve him there, where the
Egyptians (instead of joining with them) would deride them, nay not only so,
but mischief them: for such was the zeal of the Egyptians against sacrifice.
All these I willingly, and purposely omit.

Now, (my beloved) in this verse as it is a transition to that that follows, I
will only remember you of three things.

The first is the obstinacy of Pharaoh. The second is the longanimity, and
longsuffering of God. The third is the piety, and obedience of Moses: all which
are implied in this first verse.
First, the obstinacy of Pharaoh, he had seen signs already: the Rod turned
into a Serpent; and the rod of Moses devouring the Serpents of the Egyptians.
He had likewise seen that fearful judgment, the water turned into blood. In
which judgment both he, and the prime of the land, it may be might escape
more easily. It is likely they might quench their thirst, by wine, or by some
juice, or liquors: but we must needs conceive that it went hard with the
generality of the people, that either must dye for thirst, or drink blood: if
they forbear they dye; if they drink, in probability they perish; blood being
so incongruous drink for the body of man.

Besides this, though he had seen the Magicians do the like, yet they could
not remove the judgment: the Lord in his mere mercy, without any suit of
Pharaoh or of his people put an end after seven days to that great affliction:
yet notwithstanding this, see the obduration of the wicked man's heart, he had
need of a new judgment to rouse him. My observation is this, How many blows a
hard heart will endure, before it break, or be mollified. See it in Balaam, he
was not warned by the Asses turning out of the way; nor yet by the Asses
rushing against the wall to the bruising of his foot; nor yet by the Asses
lying down under him, and opening his mouth against him, his heart was set, he
loved the wages of unrighteousness, on he goes. So with Balack the King of
Moab whom he served. The first time he builds seven Altars, and sacrifices on
them, and the second time seven, and the third time seven with more
opportunity: and though he saw that every time it was like a piece charged
against another, that recoyled upon himself; though he saw how frustranious,
and empty all his intendments, and purposes were, yet for all that he goes on
in the hardness of his heart. God sought means to reclaim him, he defeated
his purposes, but he would not yield; as if he had held it an honor to be
tenacious of his resolution against God.

Thus it was with Saul, what a number of blows did God give that hard heart of
his, before it would melt? Every time he disappointed him in his pursuit of
David, it was a blow given to molifie his heart (if it might have been) yet he
goes on to a greater degree of iniquity, and impiety, and he reinforceth, and
renews his cursed endeavors against an innocent man.

If the heart of man be but of a metal, that is hard enough God knows; yet
it may be melted though it be iron, as Gregory Nazianzen says, it will melt in
the fire: but if the heart of man be that heart of stone, Ezekiel. 11.19. well may
it be broken, but melt it will not. And it is not easily broken neither, many
blows will go to the breaking of it. If the heart of man were only as wine,
or water, it were easily powered out: but if the heart of man come to be as
lees, and those settled, nay frozen, there is no way to empty them but to break
the vessel, Ierem. 48.11.

The Use of it in a word shall be to us all, to fear this fearful judgment
of obduration and hardness of heart. It is found in a degree in the best of
Gods children; therefore I say let us all fear it. Peter in this was Petra, a
piece of a rock; for it was not the first time that the cock crowed, nor the
second time, that could rouse him; he was feign to crow the third time; and
then he did not listen neither, but that Christ looked back: Christ looked
back, and then Peter wept, the cold heart of Peter was thawed by the eyes of
Christ, that are indeed as a flaming fire, Rev. 1.14. And how many dear Saints
of God complain often of the stupidity and hardness of their hearts? This I
confess, there is some softness that makes them feel that hardness, yet
they complain of some hardness and obduration.

Let us ever pray to God that he would give us tender hearts, that our hearts
may smite us as David's did upon the very cutting off of the lap of Saul's
garment, and upon his numbering of the people, as appears in those books of
Samuel. And that when God smites we may yield; that we do not lead our selves
so in our own ways to stand out with God. O let our sins ever find us, as
Austin speaks, judges, but not patrons of them, accusers, but no defenders of
mischief. And upon the first summons let us yield, be sure of that; for
standing out will but increase our sorrow. A senselessenes, and astonishment of
heart, Deuteronomy. 28.28. A reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. To be past feeling, Ephesians.
4.19. To have a seared conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. O God if it be thy blessed will
keep us from. For, Beloved, such a conscience is that that Bernard calls Malum
and tranquillam, an evil conscience, but a quiet one; and where such a peace
is, the Gospel tells you who holds possession. Therefore I say again, and
again, whom God loves he chasteneth, and whom he chasteneth, he makes him
feel his blow, and indeed by their present yielding in his mercy prevents
their future suffering. That is the first thing, the obstinacy of Pharaoh.

Secondly, the longanimity of God. Surely if we wonder at Pharaohs obstinacy,
we have need as much to wonder at Gods longsuffering: for he having provoked
God as he had done, by his itterated acts of cruelty and blood, and oppression
upon the poor Israelites, having twice or thrice rejected Gods warnings, he
having stood out not only a sign, but a judgment; that God should admit him
to a parley, that God should vouchsafe him yet another admonition, and not cut
him off that he should be no more a burden to the earth, certainly it was an
argument of

The long-suffering of God. And thus patient is God, and long-suffering toward
the vessels of wrath, Romans 9.22. We find it in Cain, and in the old world,
and in the Amorites, and in Sodom. We find it in Gods own Israel, he bore
with their customs in the wilderness, Act. 13.18. and not only in the
wilderness, but elsewhere; and so long till he was as a cart pressed under
sheaves, as Amos speaks: yea, till there was no remedy; for so himself says,
2 Chronicles. ult. God bears so long with wicked men oft-times, that as Tertullian
says, men are apt to question his providence, and his justice.

And the Use of it (being a common point) let it be this: Let not the sons
of Belial be encouraged to go on in evil; for though God defer, and suspend
the execution of wrath, according to their merit, yet certainly though God be
long, yet he is not eternally patient. Justice must have a turn: surely the
further the blow is fetched, the heavier it will light. God was not more
frequent in warnings to the old world, then he was full in his judgments when
he came.

Take but one instance upon Israel; he waited long for them; he patiently
expected, he stood still looking when they would return, and if his feet had
been feet of brass, as he described, Revel. 1. surely he would have been
weary of standing.

Well, when it would not be, then he buckles himself; and for their Metropolis
that was the glory of the whole earth, not one stone was left upon another; for
the rivers that ran with milk, and honey, they were turned into blood: And for
the surviving people and posterity, they were vagabonds upon the face of the
earth, and to this day for 1600. years are under a miserable dispertion. So
will God do with other sons of wickedness, that shall provoke him, though
judgment be not presently executed, and that Pharaoh do not smart yet in his
own person; afterward God made him to know his long-suffering, and patience
to the full. At last he will punish: there will be bitterness in the
conclusion.

This same cruel Tyrant Pharaoh, when he saw the former judgment removed he
began to be bolder to sin. And as Philo the Jew says in his first book of
the life of Moses; he carried himself as if justice had left the earth; as if
it had been impossible (says he) that he should be punished the second time.

So it fares with many Agags in the world, when either judgment is deferred,
or has been inflicted, and he is rid of it; O says he, The bitterness of
death is past: but the next news that we hear is, that the sword of Samuel
thrust him through, 1 Samuel 5. So God deals with those that abuse his lenity
and long-suffering, that abused patience turns to fury.

Secondly, here is an item to Gods people, they may be comforted hence; if God
be so long-suffering to the vessels of wrath, surely, he will not be hasty, and
inexorable toward his own children. If he be so good to those that regard not
his works, that grieve not for their sins; what will He be to those that
mourn for their iniquities, that tremble at his word, and seek his face? I
appeal to your consciences, you that hear me, if you have not found God thus
long-suffering, and gracious, has he taken the advantage of every slip? nay
has he took the advantage of every grosser sin of yours that you have
run into through frailty? has he not spared you as a father spares his
son? As I would not encourage you upon the long-suffering of God, to make a
probate, and trial of his patience, and so to sin: So on the other side, I
would not too much deject you, and cast you down: for surely God will yet
call, and God will yet speak admonitions, and speak louder, to recall those
that have a mind to know him; and will spare yet a little longer, as David
speaks, before they go hence, and be no more seen. That is the second thing,
the longanimity of God.

The third thing is the piety of Moses; Beloved, I gather it hence. Moses is
now to go in to Pharaoh. It is like enough, God knew well enough his temper,
or else he would not have put him upon this service. Moses obeyed, and his
obedience is the more remarkable in that he was so averse from this employment
in the beginning. For when God would send him, O by no means, he must send by
whom he would send, and he makes many excuses only to subterfuge this
employment: when God had taken away all his objections, then he comes to him,
and when he comes there, he soon droopt, because the people would not believe
him for the anguish of their souls, and they were more afflicted: then he
comes, and says to God, How shall Pharaoh hear me, I am of uncircumcised
lips? And yet this man that was so averse and fearful to take the employment
upon him: Now God no sooner speaks, but he goes in to Pharaoh. My observation
shall be this,

What difference there is between men when they enter into a calling, and after
when they have made some progress in it. What a difference there is between a
man when he enters into good ways, and after they have made a progress in
it. Noah was commanded of God to build an Arc, to condemn the world, and to
save himself: you must think he had many thoughts in his mind, and cast a
thousand difficulties; yet he set on it, and by that time he was well entered
into it, he goes on amain, and neglects all the reproaches of the unjust
world. So it was with Gedeon in the beginning of his employment, he was a man
wondrous fearful, but afterward being commanded to ruinate the Altar of Baal,
he does it readily, Judge. 6. and after puts himself upon employment; he grew
to that resolution that when his Army did fall from 32000, to three hundred, he
dares meet the Madianites hand to hand, though they were spread upon the ground
as Grasshoppers. See how courage increases in the imploymen:

I knew a man that had good gifts that was afraid to enter into the Ministry,
and he forecasted the trouble and the labor, but after he was entered, and had
accustomed himself that way, he found much comfort and cheerfulness, and was
wondrously enabled to do above all that he conceived. And so in the course of
Magistracy.

I will use no more instances but that of regeneration; the entering into the
spiritual state, as a man does in conversion. The new birth is not without
many pangs, and throws, and convulsions, and the door to it is wondrous
strait; for you must know that our nature is so far from being disposed to
good, that it is infinitely prone to ill. And then a man has much ado to take
his leave, and to bid adieu to the delights and pleasures that he inured and
accustomed himself to.

And then the Devil opposes the entering of a man here as Pharaoh did the
Israelites when they were to go out of Egypt: he multiplies all his forces
against him. So he did with the man in the Gospel when he was to be cast out,
he tore him, and rent him, and laid him for dead.

Again, he will raise storms against a man from the world, disgraces, and
reproaches, and trouble, which are as untimely frosts to nip the buds of
goodness. All these make the entrance into the ways of God wondrous
difficult; but when a man has entered, and spent some time in goodness and
godliness, and the exercises of piety, how sweet and comfortable does that way
appear? how joyful, what enlargement does a man find in it? Indeed such that
he repents himself that he was no sooner there. We find it in Austen when the
scales were fallen from his eyes, and so in Paul. And take the example of
Nichodemus for all, he was fearful at the beginning, he comes to Christ by
night, some say out of shame; because he that was a teacher would not be
thought to learn; some say out of wisdom, because the night is the fittest
time to learn. But the truth is, as Eusebius has it, it was out of fear,
fearing the Jews lest he should be cast out of the Synagogue: well, he that
came so fearfully by night, he was after so bold that he durst appear in
public to speak for Christ. So Joseph of Arimathea he went boldly to ask
the body of Christ, and took it down when it was contemned of all the world,
and prepared costly odor for his burial.

The way of Religion is called a yoke, Mat. 11.29. and Gregory says well of
it, Grave cum tollis etc. It is grievous when ye take it up, but after it is
borne a while it is sweet: My yoke is easy, and my burden is light, says
Christ. Says the Poet, A heifer that is not used to the yoke, struggles, the
yoke pincheth the neck, but after a while she carries it more gently. Even a
new suite of clothes though they be made never so fit for a man's body, it is
not so easy the first day as after it is worn a while. Two milstones, though
they be made fit, do not grind so well at the first as afterward. The Heathen
man could say, Ever choose the best course, and what by custom, and use, it
will be made pleasant. What says Solomon by way of encouragement to men that
enter into the waves of God, Prove. 4.12. When thou art entered thy feet shall
not be straightened, that is, thou shall find more and more enlargement. And it
is the speech of Austen, Entertain the service of the Spirit of God, and thou
shall not be straightened, but more enlarged: and he spoke out of experience: for
says he, Before thou did come, O God, I complained of straitness; but when
thou did fill my soul, thou did exclude not me, but that anxiety, and
perplexity that I was in.

The Use of it is this, That seeing men are apt to be discouraged in the
beginning, and yet find a great deal of latitude after, and the way more
broad; It should teach us in the fear of God, not to be troubled too too much
with the difficulties that we meet with in the entrance of good works and
business, digest the difficulty in the threshold of the business; for after it
will be more easy.

Says some man, when he is to be converted, and is told what will be requited
of him. What! pray so constantly: What! hear the word of God so exactly: What!
mortify a man's lusts, and bid adieu to his old pleasures: What! fast, and
abstain from the use of the creatures, and other things that are required; this
is a hard speech, who can endure it? O, in the name of God, try it, put in to
the way, my soul for thine after thou art entered into it thou shall find it
every day more comfortable. Moses, that was fearful at the first, takes after
any business without reluctation; so shall thou.

In the way of sin there is oft-times a great deal of pleasure in the
entrance, and it may be there may be a seeming sweetness in the progress;
but the further a man goes, the more perplexities offer themselves, and then
he apprehends the trouble and danger, and what will the reckoning be? It is
otherwise in goodness, though a man be straightened in the entrance, after he is
accustomed to good ways, he begins to be free, and empty and vacant of fears,
and still there is more light grows till the perfect day; and that that was
burdensome becomes lightsome, That it is his meat and drink to do the will
of his Father: he longs after the hearing of the word, and after the time of
prayer, and he is never so well as when he is so employed, that he is as
nimble in the performance as a man is in carrying one of the jovnts of his
body, and there is no man does that with difficulty.

O let us labor to have the habit of good, enter into the ways of God, and
make it a custom, let it once be so natural, and we shall have joy enough.

I will not say, but that clouds may sometimes come between us and our Sun.
What of all that; as they said concerning Julian, It is a cloud that will soon
pass away, and there will be joy and consolation, and comfort afterward. As we
see it is with a man when he goes into the water in a hot season, there is a
trembling of his body when he first puts in; but after he has drenched
himself he is not sensible of the cold; so the way of piety is irksome at the
first, but after it gives great comfort and contentment.

In the second place, Moses may here be an example to all those that God
imployes to great persons, though they be wicked, and profane, and hard
hearted, they should not refuse to go: If Samuel be employed to Saul, if Elias
to Ahab; and if Ezekiel go among briers, and thorns, and scorpions, as God
tells him in the beginning of that Prophecy. If we be sent to sow seed among
stones, we must be contented with the work: For God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham. Though their hearts be as Adamant, Zach. 7.12.
it may be broken, Adamant is said to be so hard that it cannot be broken: But
Pliny in his Natural History says, that as stiff as it is to endure the
fire, and all the blows, yet it may be broken with goats milk. Beloved, it is
possible for the hardest heart in the world to be broken, even by the blood of
him that was set out by the Scapegoat: if he sprinkle it by our Ministry upon
any, he can break them. If otherwise, if men block up their own way, yet a
man that is obedient to the message of God, he has freed his own soul; he is a
savor, and a good savor to God in those that perish. So I have done with those
three things; The obstinacy of Pharaoh; The longanimity of God; And the piety
and obedience of Moses, who though he were refractory at the first, now at the
last goes on with a great deal of courage.

I come to the commination laid down in the second verse.

But if thou refuse to let them go, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
God speaks not to Pharaoh immediately, but he will have Moses commend this
message to him. And indeed this has been Gods manner of dealing, to acquaint
his messengers with his mind, and they to deliver it to the people he sends
them to. Thus he acquainted Noah with what he purposed against the old world,
that he meant to bring a flood, Genesis 6. Thus he acquainted Abraham with what he
would do with Sodom. Thus he acquainted Samuel what he would do with Saul,
and the house of Eli. Thus he told Elias what he would do with Ahab and
Iezebel, and their family, and thus he has dealt in all times. Nay, as it is
Amos 3.7. The Lord will do nothing but he will acquaint his servants the
Prophets with it. Non quod faciat in Coelo etc. says Jerome, not with every
thing that he does in heaven, but with what he does upon the face of the earth,
God is pleased to reveal it to his Prophets, and they must make it known to the
sons of men.

And this God does out of respect to his servants; for they being his
favorites, and dear to him, he communicates his purpose to them. Shall I hide
from Abraham the thing that I do? Genesis 18. Why? he was the friend of God; he
knew that he would instruct his family.

And then he commends them to others therein, he shows his great prudence and
providence that he fits men with messengers like themselves, Job 33.6. says
Elihu, I am a man like thee, fit for thee, God has appointed me to speak etc.
We are not able to endure God speaking to us; we see it in the Israelites,
Exodus 19. We are not able to endure not an Angel to appear; for it was a
cause of trouble to them that they appeared to; as we see in the father of
Sampson, and the father of John the Baptist. Therefore God has fitted us by
condiscending to our weakness to speak to us by men.

Again, God will make trial of men whether they will receive messengers like
themselves, and so receive their message; whether they will reject the treasure
because it is brought in a leather purse; whether we will receive it as the
word of man, or as the word of God that is able to save our souls, as Peter
says.

Hence it is (for the use of it) that we denounce to you the judgments of God
upon occasion. The Ministers now are full of judgments oft-times. How come we
by this? You must not say to us, as they did to Moses and Aaron, You take too
much upon you ye sons of Levi: And who has known Gods mind, or has been his
counselor? Isay 45. We arrogate not to our selves to know the mind of God;
we say not as the Prophets that God communicates himself to us as he did to
them; we abhor the enthusia's of the Anabaptists. But we say this, That
revealed things belong to us, and to our children. God has punished such
sins with such judgments, and still he threatens the same judgments to
such iniquities, and we denounce in the name of God such judgments to such
sins.

We that are Ministers observe the sins of this land to grow to a fearful
height, as for quality, for nature, and proportion; they are of the first
magnitude, and so are grown up to heaven. We have observed a long time the
pride of the land, not only in diet, but in apparel excessive. We have
observed the Idolatry that is creeping in among us. We have observed the
uncharitableness in people; the ignorance as dark as hell; the foul lusts,
the gross excess in men, as if the Devil were entered into a company of
swine; we have observed these, and other sins that provoke Gods wrath. And
these, and the like we have seen impenitently committed; and we have spit in
the face of these abominations, not only seven times, but seventy times seven
times. And now we see no reformation, we are bold, in the name of our God, to
denounce judgments, and we have told you that plague and famine would come for
the sins of the land; and has the Lord suffered one jot of the words of his
servants to fall? I, and yet we must tell you that continuing in your
iniquities, will provoke God to further wrath; and we may boldly say, If we be
deceived, God has deceived us, and though heaven and earth perish, there is
not one word of God shall perish.

If thou refuse to let them go. Says Tostatus upon this place; The common way
of men that are suppliants to others is to entreat a thing, but never to seem
to distrust them that they ask of, and to question it: for though they be
persuaded that they shall be denied, yet they will not intimate so much for
fear they should be thought to distrust the goodness of the giver. And indeed
if a man find himself distrusted, though he had a prompt mind to satisfy
the request, he is ready to fall back again.

But if a man go so far as to manifest his distrust of the performance, yet
it is not the fashion of suitors to threaten: therefore says my Author; See in
what manner Moses comes, not in his own name, but in the name of God, and
though he spoke to one that was above him, yet he says, Let them go, for God
will not brook a refusal.

Thus we that are Ministers, as we call to men for obedience, and threaten them
for their disobedience; and we speak it out of the dominion, and authority,
and power that God has invested us with, we speak it home.

For the business does not lie between God and his people, as between man and
man that are reciprocal, that may be equal; but it is between God and his
People, as between a King and his Subjects, where there is a wondrous
disproportion. Therefore Moses might speak, and speak imparatively, and with a
commination, If thou refuse, etc. But I will not stand upon that:

If thou refuse to let them go. He does wisely premise this, before he
speak of the judgment, that Pharaoh, and all the world may take knowledge,
that God never punishes without a cause.

If thou refuse to let them go, I will smite thy Country with frogs. God
forbid that the judge of all the world should deal unjustly, says Abraham,
Genesis 18. Ezekiel. 14. ult. And says the Lord, When these things are done, you
shall know that I have done justly, that what I have done was not without a
cause.

Never did God punish any man without a cause. Was there not cause for our
first parents punishment, even that we have heard? they refused to hear the
command of God, and to obey it. Was there not cause of the punishing of Cain?
Yes, he refused to hear God when he spoke to him fairly to prevent a
wickedness. Was there not cause of punishing the old World? Yes, they were full
of lusts, and of cruelty, and refused to hear the Preacher of righteousness,
so Noah is called. Was there not cause of punishing Gods people, and of the
destruction of Jerusalem? God, says he, sent his Prophets early, and late, and
they refused to hear them. We have not hearkened to the voice of thy servants
the Prophets acknowlodging the sins of the people, Dan. 10. And Christ himself
when he gives the reason of the destruction of Jerusalem, He would have
gathered them as the hen gathers her chickens under her wing, but they would
not. Certainly as St. Austen says, Judgment never knew the way into the world
without Sin; Sin ushered it in: therefore God must be justified in all things.
For the very child that is newborn, that never committed actual iniquity;
nay that was prevented in the birth, must justify God if it be sent to hell;
for in the rigor of Gods justice it is condemned before it be borne.

Therefore let no man say when he is afflicted, as Rebecah said, Why am I thus?
upon the struggling of the twins in her womb: reflect on thy self, and thou
shall find cause enough of the judgment of God, and greater then thou can
conceive. It cannot possibly be but thou shall find a cause, yet this is a
certain rule, Gods judgments may be secret, but they cannot be unjust.

I will smite thy land, and all thy borders with frogs. Much might be said
concerning that party smiting; that all the world might know, that none but he
has done it.

Much might be said concerning that word, I will smite, as if he should say, It
shall not be a sign, it shall now be a plague, a stroke on thee, thou shall
be sensible of it: I will not now deal with signs, but will come nearer then
before: but these I pass, and come to speak of the judgment.

I will smite thy land with frogs. Though it be true that God has all
creatures to serve him; He being the Lord of Hoasts, they are at his beck. The
fire comes down to burn Sodom. The water drownes the Egyptians. The earth
swallows Corah, Dathan and Abyram. The Lion consumes the disobedient Prophet.
The Bears destroy 42 children that mocked Elisha. The Serpents sting the
disobedient in the wilderness. Which by the way, will be a shame to man at the
last day, that all creatures are dutiful to God, and man only rebels. As one
said, That beasts shall give evidence at the last day against man, that they
serve him, but he does not serve God; to show that they are dutiful to their
maker: but man is refractory, and a rebel.

But now though God have all creatures at his beck, to command them, and that
he can send one disease, and one judgment as well as another; yet here he
sends frogs. And why frogs?

Reverend Calvin gives two reasons, why frogs rather then any other judgment.

First, says he, Ignominio causa, etc. He would shame Pharaoh that proud
monster, that cried out, Who is the Lord that I should obey him. The Lord takes
down the pride of him by base contemptible creatures. Certainly you must needs
think, that it troubled Pharaoh much, and he would say with himself, when he
saw the abundance of frogs (that after, God willing, we shall speak of) What!
if we had been overcome by power: If a for rain Prince had invaded my land,
and thrust me out, it had been some honor; but to have my land overrun with
frogs, that I cannot eat my meat, or lie in my bed with comfort for these
contemptible creatures, what a vexation is it? It must needs vex the heart of
that proud King. God would take him down in his insolency, by this poor,
base, contemptible creature.

Thus God has done oft-times; he punished the Egyptians afterward by lyce,
the poorest, and basest creature of all. So, he punished Herod by worms; he
that was so proud that he entertained the applause of the paraziticall people,
The voice of God and not of man. And we read of a Bishop in the Ecclesiastical
story that was punished by rats, after he had called the poor people rats and
mice. So, that insolent Pope Adrian the fourth, our Countryman: God used no
other thing to take him away, but a fly to choke him. Poor things God has to
humble great men of the world, and to take down their pride. This the Apostle
has, 1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the mighty, and foolish things to confound the wise, and base and mean things,
and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are. Things that are of
no name nor number among the sons of men, God has chosen to control the
great men of the world, that think it an honor to them to fight against God.

You see how contemptuously and scornfully Goliath looks on David, Come, and I
will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the
field. Yet God ordained that poor stripling to strike down that great
monster; and so he did to the honor of God, and to the rescuing of the glory
and Israel of God.

Therefore whenever God lays shame and disgrace on us, and punishes us by
creatures that we contemn and scorn: reflect on the pride of thy heart, that
is the reason that God has inflicted it to abate thy pride; the more base the
punishment is, the more is thy pride that God uses that to bring thee down.
The more lofty a man's thoughts be, the more base shall the means of his
humiliation be.

Secondly, Calvin gives another reason, why God sent frogs, that Pharaoh, and
his people might understand that all this while they led their lives, and
enjoyed the latitude of their health and livelihood by Gods mere favor. That
though they contemned him, or at least did not think of him; yet they should
know that he was the God of all the world, and that it was he that preserved
them all the while: for Egypt being a place of a puddle and a standing poole,
and Nylus but a lake, it was apt to breed frogs. And there being so much water
and innundations, and such slime left, it might breed frogs in abundance; there
might be abundance before: But God restrained that fertile Country of frogs, so
that all this while they were not chastised by this judgment; they might
acknowledge that from God they received this immunity. And certainly,

It is a great mercy for men to be free from the calamity of brute creatures.
It is a great mercy of God, we must acknowledge it his work and blessing, that
we are kept free from them. For when man was fallen he did not only make God
his enemy, but every creature; that every creature is ready to take the part of
God against man for sin, and would fall upon man to revenge the wrath of God,
but only God restraines them.

Therefore you shall sinde among the judgments that God threatens against
wicked men, Ezekiel. 14.21. He threatens them with be ests, wild and noisome,
that they should come and do mischief to the people, as well as the plague,
and famine, and sword. So we find it promised as a blessing, Job 5.23. The man
that fears God shall be at peace with the beasts of the field. And Hos. 2.18.
I will make for them a covenant with the beasts of the field, and with the
fowls of the heaven, and with the very creeping things of the earth. As if he
should say, they will not be at peace with those that are sinful, except I
restrain them, and keep them in, or else they will be sure to show their wrath
against man for his disobedience against God. It is Gods restraining that keeps
them in, that else would fly upon man for sin. The Lion devoured not the
Ass that devoured the Prophet; God would have him go no further but
restrained him from killing him, that he was as apt to fall on as the man.

Therefore, in the dangers that we escape from beasts, and brute creatures, let
us give praise to God. For as St. Austen said, He thanked God not only for the
sins that he had remitted, but those sins that he had kept him from. So I
tell thee we are bound to thank God for privative favors, I mean not only
for those afflictions that we are delivered out of; but those crosses and
calamities that we are kept from that come not into the conceit of a great
number of you, when you have armed all the creatures against you by your
sins; and yet you go on free, and they do not that that they would, but God
restraines them. You think it is no mercy.

But we must acknowledge Gods goodness and favor that he keeps in the
creature that else would revenge him, give the glory to God. How often have you
known people, some goared with Oxen, some killed with Horses, some stung with
Serpents, some torn by Dogs. Why has not all this fallen upon you or me? Is
it not Gods mercy?

That the frogs did not do this to Egypt before, was it not Gods mercy? And
that these creatures are kept from us, is it not Gods favor? Therefore, if
others be slain, and touched, and smitten, let us keep a Passover; let us
give glory to God, in whom we live, move, and have our being: and let us live
to his glory, and according to his commandments, without whom we cannot live
one moment.

THE SECOND SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 2.3. I will smite all thy borders with frogs. And the river shall bring
forth frogs abundantly, which shall come up into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed etc.


NOw we come to the amplification of this judgment.

First, from the generality of it, in regard both of the persons, and the
place: the King and the Subjects: The bedchamber, as well as the common rooms;
the pastrie and kneading trough, as well as other utinsells.

Secondly, from the place from which this mischief should come, from the River.

Thirdly, from the manner, the noysomnesse and irksomeness of it; they should
crawle and creep upon them in that manner as was fearful to behold.

These things being woven one within another, I will not tie my self to this
strict method I have laid down; but I will gather observations as I go along,
and as the clauses present themselves; and I will begin where I left. It is
said here,

I will smite all thy borders with frogs. It is well known that Egypt is a
large place, and full of inhabitants. All places and persons that were in Egypt
God threatened to smite with this judgment, yet you shall find that Pharaoh
was the maine offender; it was he that used his power to mischief, to plague
Gods people, so as he provoked God to plague all Egypt: And my observation
shall be this,

Multitudes are punished oft-times for one man's sin. The borders of Egypt all
of them, all the places and inhabitants were plagued for Pharaohs offense.
Examples in Scripture are frequent to prove this. Abimelech was the faulter,
the party that faulted, and behold all the wombes in Abimelechs family were
shut up, Genesis 20. So in Ios. 7. Ay was besieged, and some were to go up
against it: but some of the men come out of Ay and slay 36 of the Isralites: It
troubled Joshua, and the Elders, and they fall down before the Lord, and he
satisfies them presently, There is an accursed thing among you, seek it out or
else you shall not prevail: So there was one Athan that had stolen a
Babylonish garment, and a wedge of gold. Says Salvianus, One man's sin, was
many men's misery. Saul was the man that sinned against the poor Gibionites,
you see how all Israel was plagued with three years famine, 2 Samuel 21. So we
find David, whether out of curiosity, or vainglory, he would needs number the
people, yet seventy thousand were slain by the pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. Jonah
was the man that faulted, and all the ship, and the people in the ship were in
danger; and he himself ingeniously confessed that it was for his sake that the
storm came, and that they should prosper and do well, if they were
disburthened of him. Therefore the heathen could say, the whole City must
suffer for one man's ill. And another of them observed of the Greeks unius
obnoxa and furia etc. one man's wickedness, is all men's trouble.

Now will some man say (if it may be lawful to ask the question) what justice
is there in this, that one man should sin, and other folk be punished? will
not this justify the cavil of the old Atheists, That one man was sick, and
another took the physic? Does not God say in Ezekiel, The soul that sins
shall dye? and would he not have that cursed proverb suppressed, The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? And does not
St. Paul say, Gal. 6, Every man shall bear his own burden. Why then if
Pharaoh sin, let Pharaoh alone be punished; why should God smite all the
borders of Egypt? David said, when he saw the Angel forage the whole Army,
and the people, What have these sheep done, 2 Samuel 24.

Now for the answer to this, there must be one ground necessarily laid in the
first place, and that is this, That however things appear to us, God neither
is, nor can be unjust, as in nothing else, so not in punishing: God forbid,
that the judge of all the world should be unjust, Gen 18.25. Is God
unrighteous, Romans 3.5. when he executes vengeance? It is true the ways of God
are far beyond out apprehension, beyond the possibility of our attaining, we
may as well empty the Ocean into a cockle shell. The righteousness of God is a
high mountain; the judgments of God is a great deep, Psalm. 36. The well is
deep, and we have not wherewith to draw, Ioh. 4. But this is ever certain,
though we do not always see the reason, there is a reason that we cannot see,
That God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm.
145.17. That is the ground that I lay in general.

More particularly now for the answer; some will say, That a King and his
People make but one person, or one body; therefore it is free for God since
Pharaoh sinned, to plague all Egypt, since they were his dominion and people;
it was free for him for a pain in the head to open a vein in the arm. As men
take liberty when the hand is faulty, to put the feet in the stocks. But this
comes not home sufficiently; though it may hold in regard of Pharaoh, and his
people making one body, or in regard of a Master and his family that make but
one body, or of a Father and his child; because as Aquinas says, The child
is part of the parent.

But how does it hold when men are in the same rank and condition, and
multitudes of them are punished for one man's sin?

Therefore to salve it fully; know that there is a double impulsive cause of
punishment.

First, that that is called pro (...). Secondly, pro (...).
Not to perplex you with the nycities of the Schools, thesetwo causes differ
thus, as the cause and the occasion. To put an instance. A man that has fed
full a long time, comes to have a pletory fullness of crude, and raw humors in
his stomach. It falls out that this party riding after in the wet, taking cold,
he begins to shiver and shake; and after he falls into a durable lasting
Fever. If the Physician be a wise and understanding man, ask him what was the
proper cause of this sickness? and he will tell you the inward ill humors of
the body, and the abounding of them: yet it is like enough, that it had not
turned to a Fever so soon, if he had not took cold of his feet, or been
some way troubled in his journey. So when God brings punishment upon people,
the proper cause is in every man's self. There are personal sins inevery man
to make him obnoxious to the curse of God; yet may the sins of the father, or
parent, or neighbor be the occasion that God will punish sin.

So that we say, the personal sins of men, are the primary, internal,
antecedent dispositive cause of Gods judgments; but the sins of other men,
they may be the external irritating, exitating cause of Gods judgments; for
these are the terms of the Schoolmen.

And this helps to salve that great question, Why the children are punished
for the fathers sins? For God in just judgment oft-times gives up the chile
to follow the steps of the father. There is something in nature: for especially
those sins that are sensual, that symbolize with the predominant humor in
the body, may prove often as diseases in the body, hereditary.

Secondly, sometimes example, that works much vitius corrumpunt vitia etc.
examples that are so near us often corrupt sooner, and taint deeper.

Sometime education may help; the father may instruct his child in Idolatry,
in the rudiments of covetousness, and the like. So, many beggars bring up
their children to idleness, and theeving.

But suppose the child be free from the fathers iniquity which he has
committed; yet he has sins enough of his own that may justly cause the wrath
of God toward him; yet it may be when he shall be punished in such a time, in
such a measure, and manner, and other circumstances, the sins of the father
may be the occasion of the child's punishment; the remembrance of that may cause
God to punish him at that time, and with those circumstances.

Now for the use of this to our selves; it lets us see, Beloved, (if a
multitude may be punished for one man's sin) what a mischief a wicked man is
to the place he lives in. For as it is with the child of God, he is a great
blessing wheresoever he comes, as God said of Abraham, Thou shall be a
blessing, Genesis 12. So was Lot, he was the party that bare the Sodomites all the
time that he was among them, Genesis 19. So you shall find that had there been
ten good persons in all those Cities they had been spared. The innocent man
delivers the Island, Job 22.30. and reprieves it from the sentence that is gone
out against it. Abab has so much sense that he thinks he shall be the better
by Ieboshaphats accompanying him to the battle. And all the people fared the
better for St. Paul's going in the ship, Act. 27. Says St. Ambrose, Good men
are the wall of the Country, and St. Chrysostom says, They are the marrow of
the Country.

On the other side, a wicked man is a plague, and a curse to the place he lives
in; let him be never so noble, never so honorable, or potent, or wealthy; if
he be a prophase man he labors to hasten Gods judgments on the place he is
in. We read of one Byas the Philosopher that traveling in a ship in a tempest,
with a great number of odd fellows; some of them very rakeshames and naught;
they began in the tempest, in that extremity (as men will do) to call upon the
gods: he comes to them, and says unto them with some jest, not in earnest,
says he, Hold your peace, lest the Gods take knowledge that you are here, and
not only you, but we suffer for your sakes. And the History says, That John
the Evangelist when he came into the Bath where Cerinthus was, he got out
presently; his reason was lest the Bath should fall for that man's sake.

Many a wicked man, being challenged for his impiety, and not able to excuse or
justify it any way; yet he has thus much to say; What need you trouble your
self about me, I hurt none but my self?

Alas, God knows, if it were no more, it were too much that a man with Saul,
should fall upon his own sword. Vtinam vel sic etc. as St. Austen says, I
would to God it were no more; but if thou be a wicked man, thou hurtest not
only thy self, but more; (I speak not of thy example so much) thou ingagest
the place thou live in to the wrath of God, thou pullest it down.

The City of Abell entertained Sheba, 2 Samuel 20. It had like to cost them all
their blood: for if the head of that Traitor had not been thrown over the
wall, the edge of Ioabs sword had fallen upon the whole City. And if the people
had not separated themselves from the Tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, they
had been involved in the same judgment, Number. 16.

Therefore it behooves the children of God nearly to take heed what company they
consort with; not only in regard of suspicion, that they may not be suspected
to be such as they converse with; but in regard of infection: for sin is as
taking as the plague. Thirdly, in regard of the malediction. Therefore in
Revel. 18. God says, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

There is a humor in some people in the world; if the seat be pleasant, or
extraordinary commodious and profitable, they will cast themselves into the
place though the inhabitants be as full of sin as may be. It was the humor
of Lot, he liked the plain of Jordan well, and thought Sodom as the garden of
Eden; thought he, My lot is fallen in a good ground, he looked not to the
inhabitants: but he rued it after. So, all those that for pleasure, or profit
cast themselves among the wicked, certainly they shall be scorched with those
flames that the wicked are apt to kindle where they dwell.

The second Use, since God takes occasion by one man's sin to punish many, and
yet those not without fault; It should teach us to acknowledge when God
punishes us that it is just, and that we our selves deserve it what ever the
occasion be. Seneca tells a story of Pison a Roman General, he commanded a
Soldier to be put to death; because he returned without his fellow that went
out with him to the Camp, and said he killed him because he mist him. The
Captain that had order to put the fellow to death, espying the man coming
that was missing stayed the execution: Therefore Pison put all three to death.
What was his reason? Says he to the first, I have condemned you already, I
will nor reverse my judgment. Says he to the second man you shall dye,
because of your going away, and exposing your fellow to death. And to the
Centurion, you shall dye, because you know not what it is to obey a General.
So says Seneca, he busied his head to find some cause, because there was
none. But it need not be so with God, he need not busy his brain to find
cause to punish any of us that can pretend the greatest innocence: for our own
thoughts, words, and deeds (God knows) minister hourly occasion and knowledge.

Therefore I say, whenever it pleases God to lay his hand on us, though
another may be the occasion, yet justify God in his sayings, and clear him
when he is judged. All the difference is but this, as you see it is with a
company of fellons, that have committed robberies in several places of the
County, they are all brought to the same Gaol; they are all arraigned at the
same bar, they all perish at the same tree: so God gathers the sins of men, it
may be upon some occasion, and punishes them all together; but they have sins
enough of their own in particular that expose them to wrath; therefore let us
ever acknowledge that God is just.

I have heard and read of that saying of Prince Henry in the time of his
sickness, that same delitiae humanae, as it is said of Titus (whose death was
to this Kingdom as so much of the best blood let out of the veins of Israel)
when it was told him that the sins of the people caused that affliction on
him. O no, says he, I have sins enough of mine own. So should we all confess,
though God take occasion by another man's sin, and by the neglect of another
person to fire my house, yet God has just cause to bring it on me. God had
cause against the seventy thousand that dyed of the plague, though David's sin
were the occasion; yet there was a meritorious cause in them. So, though
Pharaoh sinned, yet all these Egyptians were not without faust; for they hated
the Isralites, and without doubt were glad of the hard measure of the people of
God; therefore they justly suffered. Though the hardnese of Pharaohs heart were
the occasion, yet there was cause in the people. All the borders and confines
of Egypt were smitten. So much for that.

The next clause is, The river shall bring forth frogs.

Mark it well: The river, why must this abundance of noisome creatures come
out of the river rather then other places? God by his word, could have brought
infinite thousands more then here were; yet God will make the river the
instrument of the vengeance; for two causes, says Theodoret upon my Text.

First, for the confidence that the Egyptians had in their river. Secondly, for
the cruelty that they exercised in the river. I will touch both these briefly.
First, for the confidence they had in the river: for my Author says, That
Nylum pro Deo etc. they accounted the river Nylus as a God. And indeed Solynus
in Pliny, and others say, they afforded divine honor to this River, and
worshipped the Crocodiles that were found in it. Certainly they were very proud
of it: for in Ezekiel. 29.3. the Prophet brings Pharaoh in thus; he compares him
to a Dragon lying in the midst of the river; and saying, The river is mine, I
have made it for my self: proudly and insolently. So Lucan speaks of it,
Egypt, says he, non indigam, mercis etc. Egypt needs no commerce with other
Nations; it needs not the heavens, they have such confidence in Nylus that
river. I, in the time of the Romans, they were so proud of their river, and the
benefit by the same, that they stood not to say that the plenty and famine of
the world, depended on them. And Herodotus says of one of the Kings of Egypt,
that he said he thought that neither God nor man could take away his Kingdom.
Therefore it was just with God to punish them in the staff of their
confidence. My observation is this; That In that that a man is most troud of,
and bears himself most on, and is confident in, in that usually, God sends
his judgment.

I will prove it to you. What confidence had the Philistines in Dagon,
especially after they had surprised the Arc? they attributed the conquest to
that Idol: what said they, Shall any Nation stand out now the God of Israel is
conquered? No: God let them sleep in their confidence, but the next morning
they may read their folly in the floor. How confident were the Philistines of
Goliath; they outbraved all the host of Israel for that monster? you see what
became of them; how God punished them in him. How proud and confident was
Sennacherib of his Army, as we see in the Kings and in Isaiah; see how God met
with him, and debased and disabled him, he ruined 185000. in one night, that in
the morning he found he reckoned without his host.

In experience is it not found that many a man has been proud of his wealth?
David speaks of the scornful of their wealth, and the spite of the proud; so
hard it is for a man to digest his felicity. God has plagued him in that he
has been proud of; either he has taken his wealth from him, or him from his
wealth. Nay, it may be his eyes have seen thieves and robbers take them by
violence.

Another has been proud of his dwelling as the Philistines were of their
rock, God punished them in that, and made their palace, and habitation a
flame over their ears.

Many men have been proud of their honor, and outbraved the world for their
greatness, as we have seen of late: God has made that to sink them, God has
so caused the people to envy them that their honor has been laid in the dust,
and they have not had common pity. Many have been proud of their wit: God has
made it as Vriahs letter the instrument of their destruction; and their plots
have been their ruin. Many have been proud of their memory, God has smitten
them in that. Many have been proud of their legs, God has made them bedred.
Many have been proud of their eyesight, God has punished them in that with
blindness.

Many have been proud of their beauty; see how God has dealt with them: it
may be he has made them exposed to spiritual temptations; and they have
confessed, if they had been less fair, they had been more safe. It may be
he has brought some foul disease on them that has taken away their feature.
Some people have been proud of their children, and doated on them in an
extraordinary manner; and that child that they have most loved has proved the
greatest cross. There was the sootsteps of this in Jacob (no doubt but he rued
it after.) No man can deny, but that it is lawful to love him in whom he
sees, as Ambrose says, the greatest tokens of virtue; yet the expression of
it to excite emulation in the other brethren was not justifiable. So David
doated upon Adoniah, he was the child that rebelled in his old age.

There is great reason for this: for when the Lord sees men power out
themselves upon these things of the world; it cannot be without diminution of
the respect that we owe to him; and he being jealous of his honor, who can
wonder if he smite them in that thing that rises as a rival (...) him? If a
man be smitten as Absalom was in his hair, who will wonder if he were proud
of it? If a poor bird come to a bough, and hope for rest, and find it self
limed to its undoing; who will wonder at it when things prised, and loved, and
overloved, and God neglected, if they prove our ruin?

Therefore take heed of setting your heart and confidence on the things of the
world; and being proud of them: for God will make them so far unserviceable;
he will make them as the reed of Egypt, not only to fail, but to run into
your hands and hearts. Whatsoever in the world if thou pride thy self in it,
and prize it too high, look for a cross in it.

Nay, let me go further, if it be grace it self, I would not have thee proud
of it, and presume on it: for certainly, God can bring a cloud quickly between
thee and thy sun, and bring thee to those distractions, and dissertions, that
thou shall be punished for thy pride. On the other side; if a man love God
first, and trust things in, and for him. First, he will be pleased with it.
Secondly, it will be a means to keep these things to us. Thirdly, if God take
them we shall digest the miss of them easily: For when God removes them, we
are infinitely distracted: Why? because we were fond in the use of them; nay,
we make Idols of them. If we would afford God the first place, and not pride
our selves in these things, we might have had more comfort, I am sure less
sorrow.

The second reason why this river must bring forth these frogs, because of the
cruelty they exercised in it: So says Theodoret: Ebulierunt etc. It abounded
with frogs even for the poor children that were cast into it. And the same
Author says, There was some sutablenesse between the sin and the
punishment: for says he, The poor children that were cast into it, they were
like frogs; for the children were not able to stand alone, therefore they were
feign to go upon all four. I follow him not upon that. My observation shall
be this; That In that way, and in these things, wherein men have showed
cruelty, God punishes them usually.

Adonibezek cut off the thumbs both of the hands and feet of seventy Kings,
himself was so punished (and he confesses) justly, for he had served others
so, Judge. 1. Agags sword had made many a mother childlesse, and he was punished
by the sword, 1 Samuel 5. you may think that Goliahs sword had been bathed in
blood, his own sword cut off his own head, 1 Samuel 17. In the same place where
Naboth was stoned to death, the dogs licked the blood of Ahab. So you find
that Haman upon the same Gibbet was executed that was intended for Mordecai.
The same Lions that Daniel was thrown unto, consumed his accusers. Eusebius
tells us, That the river, and that false bridge that Maxentius thought to have
trapped Constantine by, was that upon which his Army suncke to the bottom. And
the Tripartite history tells us of one Eutropius, under Arcadia the Emperor,
that because he had a mind to punish those people that did fly to the
Temples; he desired the King to make a law that none might be privileged by
flying to the Sanctuary; and he being obnoxious to the Kings displeasure was
slain, though he did fly to the Temple. Optatut says of the Donatists, they
gave the Eucharist to dogs, and they tore them. Plutarch says of Cassius, he
stabbed himself with the dagger with which he had stabbed another. And St.
Austen observes, that in Jerusalem, and and at the Passover, was the
destruction of the Jews by Titus the same time and place, where they crucified
Christ.

The Use therefore is thus much:

First, that we abstain by this means from sin; let but a man think
beforehand, would I be served in such a manner? let me not do it to another,
lest I look for the same sauce. Would I have another man to violate my bed? why
should I be injurious to him? would I be content to have my children
disobedient hereafter? why should I being a child, be disobedient to my
parents? would I be content to have theeving servants, when I am for my self?
why then should I for the present be unfaithful to my Master? would I be
content to have dead flies thrown into my ointment? why should I slander other
men in their reputation? would I be content to have my possession took from me,
or my children by violence? why should I do so to others? we love our selves
so well that we will not suffer these things: let us take heed of doing them:
for Gods word, and experience makes it good, that God usually pays men in
their own coin.

In the second place; let it be as an antidote against private revenge: does
God punish the same way? then whenever we suffer injuries, let us reflect
upon our selves, whether we have been wrong doers in the like kind or no. And
if it be so that God does not only lay judgments on us, but makes them so fit,
and so pat for our old offenses; be content and submit to the will of God.
Solomon says, Thou should not hear every word they servant speaks against
thee; It may be thou also have slandered others. As if he should say, Be
satisfied if it be so. But if a man reflect on his former course and be not
guilty, that he have not done that to others, that he would not have others
do to him; yet revenge not, usurp not Gods right: for what says the Spirit
of God in Revel. 13. They that lead into captivity, shall be led into
captivity: this is the patience of the Saints. That is, herein the patience of
the Saints is exercised, that they wait on God till he right their quarrel,
that he will do in his time to his glory, and the confusion of their
adversaries. These poor Israelites, all the time that their children were cast
into the river, they resisted not, they freely remitted their cause to God; and
you see now, though it were long after, God comes, and that very river that
choked these children, was made the matter of so many frogs to infest Egypt;
not only to putrify the river, but to annoy the Country, and all their
borders. So much of that clause.

The next clause is, The river shall bring forth frogs abundantly that shall
go up or ascend.

Pliny, in his Natural history tells us of two sorts of frogs. There were
those that were called Rubedi, that have their name, because they live in
bushes, and briers among the brambles. The other sort were called Calamits,
because they live among reeds and such things, that usually have a watery
foundation, that grow in the waters. These kind of frogs here, were those that
came out of Nylus, and such as had the water for their proper element. Yet it
is said here, They shall come up: They shall leave their place before that was
proper, and natural to them, and against their kind and nature, come out to
dry land to annoy Gods enemies. Whence observe The overruling power that God
has over all creatures, to make them obey his will contrary to their own
natural inclination, and common course.

It is the property of the fire to ascend; yet the fire descended upon Sodom
to consume them. It is the property of the fire to burn, yet in obedience to
God, he commanded the fire not to burn; but to the three children it was as a
cool arbor to walk in, says Basile. The water it self is so liquid a
nature, that it was strange to see it contrary to nature to run upon heaps,
to make way for the Israelites to pass, Exodus 14 Josephus may talk of the
Pampillians sea dividing; he injures the work of God to compare it with a
fabulous discourse. It is contrary to the nature of the waters to run on
heaps, and to be a wall as it was then to them. And so Jordan when the people
of God were to pass it ran upon heaps; What ayled thee, O Jordan, that thou
rannest back? The waters saw thee, O God, and fled. It was the overruling
power of God.

So in Elias, what a thing above nature, and against it was it, that a Raven
must feed Eliah? The Raven is such a creature, as is not indulgent to its own:
nay if God should not provide for them, Psalm. 145. He feeds the young ravens,
she would not regard them. Aristotle and Pliny both, say of her, that she
casts her young out of her nest, let them shift for themselves if they will;
yet this creature must bring Eliah meat. That whereas it is so ravenous, that
it would rather snatch from men their meat, then bring them any; yet they must
do it, and so obey God.

So, that Elias should be carried to heaven in a whirlewind. They that know the
nature of a whirlewind know that it moves not regularly, much less upward; it
runs round in a tumultuous manner. But against the nature of it, God makes it
carry him up to heaven. So the viper that lighted upon Paul's hand, against the
nature of it, it hurt him not. What is more natural for a viper then to bite
and sting? yet it did not hurt him, but he shakes it off free, Act. 28. So
wicked men, what is more natural then for them to play the beasts with the
children of God? for those are the beasts that St. Paul fought with; yet
sometimes God, contrary to their corrupt nature, makes them do good offices to
Gods children. Nay, the Devil himself, that roaring Lion; all the world
knows that he desires to do nothing but mischief; for when he is doing good
he finds no rest, Mat. 12. yet God overrules him, and makes him contrary to
his nature to depart and dispossesseth him.

For the Use of it: Let us first tremble at the great power of God, and stand
in awe, and not sin. God has a wonderful power, he can command all
creatures; and whatsoever their natural inclination be, and we think them
harmless, God can make them hurtful, contrary to their common course. God is
able to bring creatures from the place where their proper element is, to those
places where they never were before, to plague his enemies.

Secondly, I would we could learn obedience from the creatures: they contrary
to their natures obey God. It is not so with men: for if things run not in
their own strain, but are contrary to their inclinations, by no means they
will do it; let God say what he will.

Hence it is that the yoke of God is so heavy: hence it is that the
Commandments of God, because they are against corrupt nature, are grievous.
Hence it is that mortification is so severe a task. Hence it is that suffering
of affliction in a good cause is so troublesome, that the flesh says as Peter,
Master be good to thy self: but we should remember who has said, If you will
be my disciples, you must deny your selves. Nature must be subdued, and
suppressed, and all the fond reasons of the same, and a man must captivate
himself in obedience to God Almighty.

This blind obedience is lawful, as Abraham followed God, not knowing whither
be went. Shall I leave my fatness, says the Olive? Shall I leave my
sweetness, says the Fig Tree? Shall I leave all to obey God? Shall I leave my
Country as Abraham did; and sacrifice my Isaak? Shall I cut off my hand, and
sacrifice my life, so I may be obedient to God? I know nature is strong, it is
hard for a man to conquer it: but let me tell you the truth, Flesh and blood
cannot enter into heaven: Therefore all private respects must be neglected that
God may be obeyed. I hasten to an end. And they shall come up into thine house,

In the former Chapter it is said, that when Pharaoh saw the waters turned into
blood, he returned to his house. Mark, how God follows him; God says, The
frogs shall come into his house. It is like enough for the judgment that was
before inflicted, though it were seven days together; he might have wine and
other juyces to quench his thirst, and he was not so sensible of the calamity
as the common sort: but God comes close, he follows him to his house, that
would not be warned abroad.

How hard is it for a man to fly from the judgments of God. It is so
impossible for a man to fly from the judgments of God, that the Lord says to
Elia, 1 King. 17.19. He that flies from the sword of Hazael, shall Iehu slay,
and he that flies from the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay. So a man cannot
fly from judgment, if God have marked him for vengeance. In Isay 24.16, 17.
says the Lord, There shall be a fear, and a pit, and a snare unto you, O ye
inhabitants of the earth. He that escapes the noise of the fear, shall fall
into the pit; and when he is come out of the pit from the bottom, he shall
fall into the snare. So here is a succession of judgments; a man can never get
out if God have marked him for vengeance. So in Amos 5.19. The Prophet
describes a man hunted out by Gods vengeance thus, He shall be as if he did
fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him; and as if he escaped the Bear, and were
got to his own house, he should lean upon the wall, and a Serpent should bite
him. So there is no freedom wheresoever. If he get into his own house, and
shut the door, a Serpent in the wall shall bite him. So he that flies shall
not escape, if he fly to the top of Carmel, and hide him there. No, though a
man go to the bottom of the Sea and hide him, there is an eye of providence,
a Serpent to bite him: there is no flying from the judgments of God. Adrm may
fly among the bushes, but God will pull him out to his deserved punishment.
Cain may fly from place to place, and build Cities, and think to keep
himself from being a vagabond, but he must be a runnagate. So Jonah may fly
from the presence of God, but God has a messenger to dispatch after him, that
was a tempest, with a shrewd message in its mouth. And mark what the Barbarians
said of Paul, Act. 28. See, though God has suffered him to escape the sea,
vengeance has followed him to the land. Though a man may escape this, and that
judgment; he shall one time or other be caught: God will follow him to his
own home.

God has many hands, therefore a man cannot escape him; it is not distance
that can save him; he has a long hand, and a heavy hand, there is no escaping
from God; God can dispatch a message wheresoever a man goes. If Pharaoh be in
the field there is blood; if in the house there are frogs. I told you of a
Bishop that flouted the poor Christians, and called them rats; the rats
followed him, and at last got into his Castle in the midst of the Sea, and
there they smote and consumed him. God will not suffer a man to be free, let
him use all the means of safety he can.

Let us make our peace with God; there is no security but in being reconciled
to God Almighty, let us ever seek to him. We have known those that have lived
out of the favor of God, and in defiance to him in profane courses; that have
prospered in nothing, vengeance has hunted them, they could be quiet no where.
They say there is one of the furies called Ichma that follows men step by
step, and makes every thing unprosperous. Other men have escaped from time to
time, but God has found them out at the last. As Moses says, There is no
flight from God Almighty.

David took a good course, I would we could do so, Psalm. 143.9. I fly to
thee, O God, to hide me. Fly to God, not from God, make him thy protection,
under his wings thou shall be safe; live in the fear, and obedience of his
holy Name; and then the field, and the house, and the chamber, and the desert
shall be all one; thou shall not fear though thou walk in the shadow of
death. But if thou live in a contemptuous course against God, it will be just
with God that thou should fear where no fear is. And if the Lord suspend
the execution of judgment for a time; at last all thy fears shall be put
together, when thou shall be summoned to judgment, and then it will be in
vain to say, O let the hills and mountains fall upon me. Says the Father, It
is impossible to hide, and intolerable to appear; For every man must be
brought forth to give an account for what he has done in the flesh whether it
be good or evil.

THE THIRD SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 3. And they shall come up into thine house, and into thy bedchamber,
and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people; and
into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs.


WE go on now in the further amplification of the judgment. It is said here,
They shall come into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed. They shall not only
come out of the river, and come into a strange soil; but they shall come to
annoy thee, not only into thy house, the lower parts of it, but into thy
bedchamber; and they shall not content themselves with the floor, but they
shall climb up to thy bed; that even then when thou should rest, thou shall
be annoyed with these base creatures. How ever some translate the word here
bed, for such beds as they used to eat their meat upon; yet this word signifies
such beds as men rest on: and being joined here with bed chamber; bed, and bed
chamber I make no question, but it was such a bed as Pharaoh used take his rest
on in the night.

And this aggravates the judgment extremely: If he might have been quiet in
the night, which is the time that nature has allotted to rest; and the time
where in a man hopes by rest, and sleep to forget the cares and sorrows of the
day, and to be refreshed and comforted; yet God tells him, that these creatures
shall come in this place where he means to repose himself, and shall disturb
him where he would take rest.

Do you but judge what a kind of judgment this was; if the chamber you lie
in should be full of toads and frogs, that you were scarce able to step besides
them; that they should continually leap upon your bodies, and upon your beds,
as if they would enter into your bodies; for so the Jews think that the frogs
entered into the mouths of many of them as they slept: but I stand not upon
that. I note and observe that God threatens this disturbance in the night to
Pharaoh when he should rest. It may be observed not only that, Ged is able to
punish in the night as well as in the day: But that God makes his judgments so
much the more terrible by bringing them in the night. For this circumstance of
time adds wondrously to the weight of this judgment. When God would bring
that fearful judgment upon Egypt, the last and greatest, that decimus
fluctus, the tenth wave that was the mightiest of all other, The slaughter of
the first bourne; God did it in the night, in the dead of the night. The text
says Exodus 12.31. Pharaoh, and all his servants arost, and there was acry
through the land of Egypt: for there was not a house where there was not one
slain. O fearful! a man to be awaked out of his dead sleep with such a cry,
and such a general cry; and such a cry for which there was such a cause, a
general lamentation of the land of Egypt; and Pharaoh himself was not free:
this made the wound deep. In 2 King. 7. the Assyrians were slain in the night,
for by break of the day they were all gone; they heard noyses in the night.

You know if a man be awaked out of his sleep with a noise of fire, and hear
a general cry in the street, it amazeth him, and sends his blood back to his
heart to nourish that, it makes his hair stand an end. So it was with them to
hear a noise of chariots. So when God would aggravate his judgment against
Sennacherib, though all his people went well to their rest; yet before morning
there was so many slain: They were all dead corpses in the morning. David in
Psalm. 91.5. speaks of the terrors of the night. I will not tell you what they
are, they are different and various, as one reckons up a great many of them.
Terrors of the night there be, and fearful affrightings, and therefore the
greater, because they are in the night.

It has been the opinion of no mean men of the Church that Christ shall come
at the last judgment in the night. Lactantius says so, more then once; that
he shall come in the dark night; and he cites a verse of the Sibills to that
purpose, Amids the dark night. Jerome inclines to this opinion. And Casidor
upon the 118. Psa. says, That it was commonly received among the Christans
that it should be so. They build upon the time, because the firstborn in
Egypt were slain in the night. And (it may be) because our Blessed Savior was
apprehended in the night to be brought to judgment, therefore his last
judgment shall seize upon men in the night, and they build it upon the Parable
in the Gospel: Christ shall come as a thief in the night. And two being in a
bed, one shall be taken, and the other left. And so of the Bridegroomes
coming, There shall be a cry at midnight, Mat. 25. But this is no firm
ground, and therefore I dare not stand upon it. Certainly Christ has made that
uncertain, whether it shall be at evening or at midnight, or at Cock crowing,
or at the dawning of the day, as himself says.

Again, it is against the principles of Nature; for it is not midnight to all
the world at one time: for when it is midnight to us, the Sun to other people
is in the verticle point, at noone day. Therefore except the judgment shall be
at several times, this will not hold.

And if we go by probability, as Scotus says, why should we not think it
shall be at that time when Christ rose, that is, in the morning? or when he
ascended; or when he expired and gave out his last breath on the cross?

But it may well be that Christ would show us the uncertainty of his coming.
And I may add withal (to come to the point I observed) to show the terror of
his coming to judgment in the night; it is more terrible.

I appeal to any of you that have had an accute Fever, if the night has not
more troubled you? The day is comfortable, the night is unpleasing; and there
are variety of objects, and intercourse of friends, and talking one with
another, that mitigate the pain that a man is deprived of in the night. I will
not draw the thread of this loope further, but come to make use of it.

God makes his judgments fearful to Pharaoh in his bed chamber, in the night.
Let us night and day fear God. Let us ever know that he is able to afflict
us, not only (as he did them) in our bodies: but as in Deat. 28.67. They shall
fear (says the Holy Ghost) and in the evening shall say, would God it were
morning, for the fear that shall be upon them. God is able to bring frogs into
a man's bed as he did to Pharaohs to disturb him, faith Job: When I said my bed
shall comfort not, then thou did terrify me, Job 7.13. And in verse 3. he
speaks of wearisome nights. And what says David, Psalm. 77. In the night season
my sore ran and ceased not. The night was a trouble to him as well as the day,
and more too, Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, says Christ, Mat. 6.
I would God the day were sufficient for the evil, but even in the night season
griefs are continued and improved. The safe mantle of the night, that covers
much wickedness. Those sons of flarknesse rush upon Christ at midnight.
Thieves rise in the night and do mischief: Aulus Gellius, says, They do
their wickedness in the dark. Licentiousness marches in the night. Solomon
saw the young man go to the whore in the dark. Job says, The drunkards watch
for the twilight. Paul says, They that are drunk are drunk in the night. I
confess the times were more modest then they are now; for now that fin is
become Demon meridianus, a noon day Devil; for men can make indentures in the
streets, by the third hour of the day.

But now if men would consider that as they take liberty to sin in the night,
so God is able to punish them in the night as well as in the day, it would be a
means to restrain them. God is able to make the night more uncomfortable by
far then the day. He can take thy rest from thee that thou shall tumble, and
toss upon thy bed, and that many nights together till thou grow wild, and
speak as frantickly, and as distempered as a man in Bedlam. God can make thy
bed thy rack; he is able to send thee such a disease as is able to be improved
in the night, and thy torment shall increase. When other men take their repose
thy pain shall keep thee waking.

Therefore in the name of God, be fearful of offending him: think upon God in
the night; think thy self always in his presence, and in his eye; not only in
the day, when civil honesty may keep thee good; but in the night when none
but the eye of God looks on thee.

And that I may not make another point of it because it falls in with this; As
thou must think of God in the night, and stand in awe of him; let thy
bedchamber be privy to it at all times.

God plagued Pharaoh in his bed chamber: It may be because he would show that
his judgments can penetrate the greatest privacie; for the field, and the
hall, and the bed chamber, and the closet, are all one to God.

It may be also in some proportion to the sin of Pharaoh. I will not speak
of his lust in his bedchamber, because I have no ground for it; but it is more
then probable that in his bedchamber he hammered those cruelties against the
Israelites; therefore God might make this place uncomfortable to him.

The bedchamber has been noted to have been guilty of foul finnes. It was
guilty of evil counsel in the King of Assyria against Israel, 2 King. 6.12.
Elisha discovered it. And in Mica 2.1. There are those that imagine mischief
upon their beds.

It has been guilty of licentiousness, Reuben clymbed up to his fathers bed,
and so alienated his affection. And you know the trick of Amnon, that
counterfeited sickness, 2 Samuel 13. and persuaded his father to send his sister
to make him cakes, and she coming to his bed side, he drew her and forced her.
Solomon Prove. 7. speaks of the harlot that had decked her bed, and says to
the wild young man, Let us take our fill of love till the morning. And St.
Paul puts chambring and wantonness together, Romans 13. Chambering: The Syriack
translate it, unclean sleeping places.

Nay, let me go further, in the state of matrimony and fair wedlock, the bed
chamber may be made a place of sin. I may not, I dare not tell you how, lest
when I reprove sin I teach it. As we challenge the Popish Casuists, that have
brought sin to an Art; by discovering iniquity, they teach men that that
they never minded. This I may be bold to say, That it is a shame to speak of
the things that are done by some men in secret, Ephesians. 5. It is possible for a
man to be drunk with the wine of his own Cellar.

The bedchamber is guilty of much uncharitableness: for though they have so
much civility as to draw themselves far enough from the hearing of their
family, yet man and wife abuse one another upon their beds, by disgraceful
speeches, and so sleep in uncharitableness ofttimes. So also it has been full
of slandering of others; there is the place of censure. Therefore Solomon was
cautious and wise, Eccles. 10.20. when God said, Curse not the King in thy
bedchamber.

Well, let me renew my Exhortation. The bedchamber as private as it is, let
it be a sanctified holy place; and let a man think, God may smite him there as
he did Pharaoh. Ishbosheth was wounded and slain upon his bed, 2 Samuel 4. And
God says, The sword shall enter into the chamber, Ierem. 21.14. Let a man
think, the bed he goes up to, may be the altar he shall be offered on. When
he lies down to sleep, he commends himself to his elder brother death; and he
may sleep and sleep his last: let him recommend himself to God. If he have
vacancie from sleep that he cannot rest, let him reflect on his own ways, and
examine his heart, and be still; spend the time in prayer to God, that that is
his dormitorie, may be his or atorie.

Surely David considered these good thoughts when he made his chamber his
chapel, and so should every man; Gods judgments seize on him there, as we
see it besell Pharaoh, he visited him in his bedchamber.

It is like enough that it would not move Pharaoh much that his borders were
filled with frogs; but they must come into his house, and into his bedchamber.
My observation is, The greatest Princes in the world if they offend God, are
not exempted from judgments. Thy bed chamber. It is not the greatest honor,
nor potencie, nor power that can privilege them from judgment, Psalm. 76.12.
Says David there, God will be terrible to the Princes of the earth. And Psalm.
82. Te shall dye as men, and fall as one of the Princes. We have instances enough
of this in Scripture. Abimelech sinned, and was punished, a great Prince. So
Adonnibezeck. So likewise another Abimelech was slain by a piece of a
millstone, Judge. 9. So we read of Ahab, and Saul, and Iezebel, great Princes,
mighty in their times. We find it in Sennacherib that came against Jerusalem
with such as host, a great Commander. And Nebuchadnezzar that walked upon his
Babel, he had a great and large command; a great latitude of dominions. So in
the third Herod, and all those persecuters of the Church, that as wild Bores
of the Wood, labored to root out the Vineyard of God.

Beloved, if there were no more that we did meet with of God making them the
objects of his judgments then that they sicken and dye, it were no great
thing. For surely they consist of the same principles that other inferior
persons do. When Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, Live for ever, he meant
another life; for in regard of his temporal life, he knew he was like his
Image; though the head were of gold, the feet were of clay. Surely as they
consist of soul and body, as well as others; they have no stronger ties and
ligaments to keep soul and body together then meaner men; they have no more
power over their breath then other men; they are subject to sickness and
casualties. But we speak of them as they are the objects of Gods displeasure.
What may be the ground of this, that those who are so great in the world, that
the Lord should get the conquest over them, and make them instances of his
wrath?

There may be diverse reasons given of it.

First, their sin, and not simply their sin; but as their persons are
advanced, so usually their sins are of the first magnitude. Those that are
great sin with a high hand, they think they may sin with privilege: And
they are apt to hear parasiticall flatterers as Alexander had, that what likes
them they may do. As Iulia told Bashiana, It was for them to give laws, and
not to take them. Therefore the Lord meets with them to humble the proud, to
pull down these arrogant ones, as in Job 40. He pulls down the mighty from
their seat: As it was with Pharaoh here, that was in his ruff before, Who is
the Lord? But now he finds a God higher then he.

Secondly, Princes, and great persons, are usually exempted from the reproof
of men. As for the Laws, oft-times they are as cobwebs, the great flies break
through them: who dares say to a Prince, Thou art wicked? Nay, one says
concerning the Pope, it is not lawful to say, Why does he so? Now when they
are not within the compass of humane reproof, God strikes them. In Levit. 20.
when the people wink at such offenses, Then will I set my face against him,
and cut him off, says the Lord; he will take the matter into his own hands.

Thirdly, the punishment of great persons makes more for the glory of God: for
the greater the instances of Gods judgments be, the more remarkable is his
justice, the more legible characters are read in the world of his impartiality.
Therefore in Romans 9.17. it is said concerning Pharaoh, I have set thee up that
I might magnify my power, and that my name might be known to the ends of the
earth. He set him up; as he would sin, so he made him an instance remarkable
of his displeasure, that all the world might fear and tremble. And indeed it
went far and near; for the Priests of the Philistines when they consulted
about the Arc, says, 1 Samuel 6. Harden not your hearts as Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians did.

For the Use of it, it should teach all great ones in the world to be wise, to
kiss the Son last he be angry, and so they perish from the right way. I know
they are apt to know their eminency: Herod can easily entertain the voice of
the people, The voice of a God, and not of a man. And the stomach of the Pope
is not so squemish; but he can digest that speech, Thou art another God on
earth. But they shall know that if they use their power to injustice, and do
that that is dishonorable to the Prince of Princes, the Lord of Lords; the
hand of God will be upon them, as well as upon the meanest subject. Nay, the
more mighty they are, the more grievously they shall be afflicted; and though
they be Gods before men, yet they are but men before God.

Let the Lord put them in the balance, and sinde them too light, He will blow
them away with the breath of his displeasure. Certainly, he will get him honor
by the confusion of those that stand up in contumacy against him. To the
greatest of them all, it may be said, as it is Hest. 4.13. Think thou to
escape, though thou be in the Kings house, more then the rest of the Jews? So
may I say, If thou be a Monarch of the whole earth, if thou irritate Gods
displeasure, think thou to escape? I will build my nest in the mountains,
says the Edomite, who shall pull me down? He that sits in heaven shall laugh
thee to scorn. He binds Kings in chains, and Robles in fetters of Iron. He
that threw down Lucifer from being a Prince of light, so he shall serve thee.

In the second place, it should teach men of inferior condition, and yet have
something to bear themselves out with in the world. Be not proud, though thou
have wealth, it may be honor above thy brethren; and art as Saul, higher by
the head then thy fellows, presume not too much; think not to be free from
judgments if thou offend: For if thou would give ten thousand rams, and a
thousand rivers of oil; the fruit of thy body, for the sin of thy soul, it
will not do. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, but righteousness
delivers from death, Prove. 11.14. Here an under officer, or Sheriff may be
feed to forbear the execution of his office; but it is not so with the arrest
of God. If God say to the rich fool, This night shall they take away thy
soul: the Subpaena will not be answered but with his appearance, if he would
give all his full barnes to be released.

Thirdly, it is an item to all to admire Gods justice, and impartiality, and
equity; that sinites the tall Cedars, as well as the low shrubs and thistles.
Should God avenge himself upon the common people that are called, Cursed, and
connive at the sins of Princes, there might be some cause of wonder: but
when God shall punish one as well as another, who shall dare to say, but his
ways are equal?

Fourthly, stand in awe to please him, if he punish Princes, he will pesants;
if he smite the high Towers, he will the inferior. Zeph. 1.8. I will visit the
Princes, and in the same day, I will visit all that leap upon the threshold. If
I begin with the Princes, I will go lower, I am no excepter of persons, I am
impartial; if they sin they shall be punished. All before me are as the
stubble from him that sits on the Throne, to her that grindeth in the mill;
they shall taste of my wrath, they shall be sure to drink of the cup of my
displeasure according to their sins, that do not repent. So Samuel tells the
people, If ye do wickedly, ye and your King shall dye, 1 Samuel 13.25. So much
if that.

And into the houses, and on the beds of thy servants. What were these
servants? They were either such as attended upon the body of Pharaoh, that were
near to him; or such as were officers of State, to whom the administration of
public business was committed. Whether the one or the other, it is more then
probable they were such as applauded Pharaoh in his ill courses against the
Hebrews, out of an inbred hatred against the Hebrews; for every Hebrew was an
abomination to the Egyptians. And likewise they were subservient to the King in
the execution of his wicked designs. And now, beloved, you may justify God in
his proceedings; that as he punishes the Master, so he punishes the servants.

It is just with God when men serve others in wickedness, to punish the
instruments as well as the principal. The servants as well as Pharaoh. In Genesis
12. Abraham comes to Pharaohs Court, (another Pharaoh of Egypt) and it seems
his wife being beautiful, he was afraid that injury should be offered him for
her, and you know what he put into her mouth; and after it fell out that
Pharaoh and all his house were plagued. Chrysostom makes the question, Pharaoh
took the woman into his house, Why should his household be plagued? why should
his servants suffer? The Father, as he makes, so he answers the question: let
men consider what went before; how the Princes of Pharaoh commended the woman
to him; they looked and surveyed her excellency, and commended her to the
King. He that considers this, says Chrysostom, shall find them (...), that
they played the trick and part of Panders and procurers, base people that were
servile and officious to the lust of their Prince. So he says, they did
further and give their hand to help forward the wickedness to be committed;
therefore says he, they justly and deservedly suffered for that fact: so being
agents and instruments of satisfying the Kings lasciviousness, it was just
with God to wrap and involve them in the same judgment.

There is a lively instance in Judge. 9. the men of Sechem did further the
wicked design of Abimelech, and lent him money to strengthen him in his
usurpation. Now because they were so officious in that wicked way that he was
in, it was just with God that afterward they were punished, and a fire did
break out of the house of Abimelech against Sechem, he slew them, and rased
their City, and sowed it with sait. As himself afterward was punished, so were
they that were instruments.

Those Captains with their fifty that attempted to apprehend Elija, 2 King. 1.
A man would think they came upon a fair message; when the King sent for them
they must come. But says Tostatus (for the justifying of God) they were
Idolatrous; and it is likely they were such people as were at the beck of the
King, to serve him in base services, therefore it was just that they were
consumed.

So Ioab, you know he served the turn of David in setting Vriah in the front,
the time came that his own blood was shed; and though the cause be made by
David for the slaughter of Abner, yet without doubt God put in the murder of
Vriah; for therein he served the Kings lust: for when the deed was done, and
he was to give an account, says he, If the King be angry, tell him that Vriah
is slain; as if he had said, that will salve up all; he thought the King will
think he is true in the great matter, therefore I will pass by the lesser;
that the King might see he was officious to him in that.

So in Zedechiah, that he might show his officiousness to him that he knew
hated Micaiah, he strikes him upon the face. Was it not just with God according
to the Prophecy of Micaiah, that he should run into a chamber to hide
himself, and find no security?

So those that were so officious to Nebuchadnezzar to throw the three children
into the fire, it was just with God that the flame should lick them in, and
consume them. St. Austen in one of his Sermons de tempore, has a conceit that
those children that called Elisha Bald-pate, were set on by their parents; and
if it were so, it was just with God that those that were set on by their
parents should be punished. So if Nicephorus say true, it was just that
Herodias daughter should dye as she did; he says that she slipped into the
Ice, and the Ice closed and cut off her head: Being an instrument of so foul
an act, it was just with God that she should suffer. It is just indeed that the
instruments should suffer as well as the principal upon this ground: For many
a wickedness would find its own grave, if there were not some instruments
officious for fear, or favor, or gain, to execute those purposes. The lust
of David might have easily been swaged perhaps if his servants had not been
so ready to fetch Bathsheba. And those high Priests had not so soon wreaked
their malice upon Christ, if Judas had not been so ready to betray Christ. So
that because instruments are so ready to being forth wickedness, that else
would perish, and come to nothing; it is just with God that the instruments
should suffer.

For the Use of it. In the name of God let us all fear to serve any other
whosoever that has power over us in regard of sin, let them be what they
will; if conscience tell us it is unlawful, take heed we serve them not in it:
For it will not serve another day for Doeg to say, Saul bid me fall upon those
that wore linen Ephods. It will not serve the Task masters of Pharaoh to say,
He enjoined us to lay great burdens upon the Israelites. It will not serve
Absaloms servants to say, Our master commanded us to kill Amnon. It will not
serve Herodias daughter to say, My mother bid me ask John Baptists head in a
platter. O no, Beloved, father and mother, and master, and Prince, and all,
must be obeyed in the Lord, as the Apostle says, and no further. If therefore
we shall wave God, and his Commandments to serve them in ill, we draw upon us
judgments in this world, and in the world to come. And how many can you
remember, perhaps in your experience, that have cursed the time that ever they
were instruments to others sins? Some that have been base Panders and
procurers in furthering others lusts. Some that have made a trade of wicked
ways, but many times have been ingenious, in whom there have been some seeds
of good left, that have cursed the time that ever they officiated for other
people in wickedness.

Not only out of sense of neglect of those that have employed them (though that
have been just with God, and it has often fallen out that they have been
shaken off that have been instruments to others; and when they have been
troubled in conscience, they have been shaken off as Judas was by the
Pharisees, not only thus) but in the apprehension of the judgments of God,
before whom all must appear; they know that every man must stand upon his own
bottom; and the master shall not then answer for the servant, or the servant
for the master. The servant shall then look on his master, and behold him that
is engaged in the same wickedness; says Austen not as a patron for his cause,
but as a companion in his punishment: for it is the speech of old Ely, that is
truth it self, If a man sin against his brother the judge shall judge it: but
if he sin against God who shall plead for him? Master, and father, and
mother, and all to whom thou art tied by strict relation, that have used their
power to command thee to sin, they cannot keep thee from judgment then;
thou must answer for thy self, and receive according to that thou have done,
whether it be good or evil. Therefore I commend to you the resolution of
Joseph, that when his mistress solicited him to evil, he said, How shall I do
this great wickedness and sin against God? As if he had said, I may content
thee, and thou may think that I do the part of a good servant to give thee
satisfaction in this; but how shall I answer God, and my conscience? I may not
do that that I may not do with the preservation of my peace, and the
salvation of my soul. So much for that, Pharaohs servants were punished. I go
on.

And they shall come into thine ovens, and into thy kneading troughs; or into
thy lump of dough: For so the word signifies, and so it is used, Exodus 12. The
Septuagint has it, into thy pastrie. And here there is another aggravation of
the judgment, a fearful one. Before God disabled this people in regard of
their drink, for he turned their water into blood, that they could not drink
of the river without noy somnesse and danger too; for blood is no congruous
drink for man's body. Before he deprived them of their rest: for how could they
rest when the frogs skipped upon them in their beds, and filled their chambers,
and crept there? So now he disables them in regard of their diet; that though
they had provided food, and made it into dough, yet there should be frogs in
it, and in their pastrie, and in their troughs; nay they should go into their
ovens, to consume, at least to defile. As Josephus says, every thing, bread
and meat had frogs. Nay in their drink too, they did not only eat, but drink
frogs. Nothing but filth, and noysomnes, there was nothing to invite them to
eating but defilement. So now see here a fearful aggravation. Thirst before
had like to have killed them, and want of rest, and now want of food; as if God
meant to sterve them. Observe, I beseech you, How able God is for the sins of
men to disable those Pulchra natura, those common supports, and stays of
humane nature. He can prevent us in taking food, though it be ready; he can
send such judgments in it that we shall not be able to take it: if we provoke
God there shall be frogs in our dough, and in our dish, that that shall make us
justly distaste it, that we shall be afraid to eat it. That the Lord threatens
in Deuteronomy. 28. You shall be plagued in your basket, and in your store, in your
dough. In those things that are serviceable for sustentation. Sometimes God
makes things that they are not eatable, though of themselves they be provided
for nourishment. Sometimes, though of themselves they be eatable, yet there
shall come a loathing and fastidiousnesse upon the sight of it. And when it is
taken into the body, God sometimes restrains the work, and operation of it
that it shall not nourish. For as in the creation God infused a quality and
faculty into the creature; so in the exercise of it, God is able to dispend
them. If God enlarge not himself, and give a word of blessing, those creatures
will not do that that we would have them. It is admirable to think how many
ways the Lord can prevent the use of the creature that that should sustain us
in the way of food.

Sometimes he prevents men from having food by unseasonable weather that they
cannot sow their seed.

Sometimes if they sow their seed, God suffers it to rot under the clods that
it comes not up.

If it come up, and be in the blade, God smites it with mildew, and nips it
with untimely frosts. If it be in the ear, God has other judgments for it.
If the time of reaping come, the weather may be so unseasonable that it cannot
be got in. If it be carried into the barn, God can make it mould in the mow.
If it be threshed in the floor, God has judgments for it there. If it be
ground in the Mill, and brought to be bread (as it was here) the frogs shall be
in the trough, that they cannot eat their bread unless they will eat frogs
with their dough. Nay further, if it be baked, and taken into the bodies of
men, yet God reserves the power of making it nourishable to himself, It is he
that gives the staff of bread; bread is the staff of our strength: but bread
it has a staff, that is the word of Gods blessing; as Christ says to Satan,
Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. That is it that gives it soul, and life, and makes it
nourishable. If God restrain this, Pharaohs seven lean kine may eat up the
seven fat ones, and not be the fatter. As a man that has the Boulemia, a
dog-like appetite, he may eat, and eat, and is not the fatter. As one in the
Poet, that the more he eat, the more he might. Gods blessing upon food, that
must be taken in to make it beneficial.

To make use of this: you see God prevented them, though they had dough, and
provision they cannot eat it. God has this power over the creatures to prevent
us altogether, or else in making use of it.

What is the reason that we first ask leave for the use of Gods creatures, and
beg a blessing? There is great reason that when we come to take the creatures
of God we should call upon him, and invocate his name for a blessing, that he
would sanctify them: for if it be the provision of the King, such as was for
the captive children, it will not nourish without Gods blessing.

This has been the practice of holy people in all times. Samuel blessed for
the people; they did not eat till he had blessed, 1 Samuel 9.13. So it was with
our Blessed Lord himself, he never eat before he gave thanks; and Paul in a
great tempest at sea, Act. 27. he brings them together, and defires them to
take meat, but they did not touch it before he gave thanks. Plutarch says,
that the Heathen did it. And the Turks now are observant of giving thanks.
Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians, showing the course that
Christians used in their feasts, and ^^ting of their meat; they never sat
down to the table before prayer was made to God that he would sanctify the
creatures.

Secondly, as it is meet that we should ask Gods blessing; so when we have
found that they nourish us, and our spirits are refreshed and enlivened, and
quickened by them, and we are made more nimble, and agile for employments; then
we have reason to give God thanks, to return thanks. When thou have eaten,
and art full, remember (says Moses) the Lord thy God; thou shall bless him,
Deuteronomy. 8.12. And as it is said of Christ, after they had eaten their supper,
they sang a Psalm before they went out of the room, Mat. 26. And Athanasius
speaks of some people that were wont as soon as ever they had done supper or
dinner, to turn themselves upon their knees to give God thanks. The Pharisees
were so strict this way, when a Pharisee had forgot to give God thanks at
table, though he were in the field, he must return to the place where he had
eaten to do it.

And he is no less then an Atheist that habitually omits the giving of thanks
to God. I will not say, but a man may forget it, and against his purpose; but
if it be habitual to sit down, and rise without giving thanks, he is a brute
beast; and let him look, and he may expect the next time he eats to have a
frog in his dish, that is, to have some judgment. For the Lord will not endure
such wretches.

Lastly, since sin lets the judgments of God loose, especially in this
particular of restraining a blessing upon the creatures. Take heed of gross
sins; those that the Father calls fearful pressures, such as waste
conscience, and so provoke God not only to cut us short in that which is
superfluous, but to maime us, and lame us in necessaries; in food that is the
support of this tabernacle, without which it cannot stand, more then the lamp
can continue without the supply of oil.

And because it may be the wickedness of this people in gluttony of meat
caused this judgment upon them; for they were given to that; and because in
experience God restraines men of their meat for that; take heed of gluttony. I
confess at this day intemperance in drunkenness is now more then that of
eating, and the more general sin; but intemperance of eating is of too great
a breadth, and as great a sin as the other. And judge you now how many
thousands there be in the world, that eat above their means and ability.
Though they pinch their backs their dainty tooth must be satisfied. I read of
old that they were wont to feast openly in the streets. If it were so with us,
there would be many observed to spend that that they had reason to spare.

Again, how many thousands are there, that though they eat not above their
ability, yet above their condition and calling? for nothing will please them
but rarities, such as are congruous for Kings, mean men must have. All their
pretense is, they are able to do it, what of that? I tell thee, and I tell
thee as a Minister of God, that the rule of our apparel, and our meat, it is
not our ability, but next to Gods word; it must be thy calling, and estate thou
art in: That is not lawful for a mean man, that is for a noble man; this
would bring attaxie and confusion into the world, and blend those things that
God has digested so sweetly.

Again, for the manner, how many thousands eat unjustly? I mean are content
to eat well, and to lie soft, and in the mean time never pay their debts? They
are so far from that that the Apostle speaks of eating their own bread, that
other men's goods must furnish their tables.

How many eat unseasonably? That is, when the Church is under persecution, and
judgments are upon them, and the places they are in, they are most prone to
feast; a fearful sin, God said it should not be purged from some till they
dyed, Isay 22.

How many eat uncharitably? without respect to the poor; That stretch
themselves upon their beds of Ivory, and are not touched with the afflictions
of Joseph. So the rich man in the Gospel, he fared deliciously every day, and
did not respect the poor man at his gate, though he asked but a crum.

How many eat immoderately? I may say as Austen says of them, They eat not
daily bread; but as much at one time as is fit for them for three or four
meals, what a fearful thing is this?

Nay, Beloved, how many are there in the world that eat impiously? that not
only disable themselves from the works of their ordinary calling; but from the
performance of any act of Religion toward God; as if there were no God to
serve but their bellies. They are far from the practice of the Primitive
Christians, as Tertullian says in the former place, that did always eat so as
that they remembered that God was to be worshipped. They would not for all the
world indispose themselves in regard of those holy performances.

Is there any of you that hear me, that can deny this to be a truth? I know
you confess it is a truth; I know your righteous souls grieve that there is
such just cause of complaint; and I know you fear the harvest that this feed
will bring out. What was the sin of the old world? was not this one among the
rest? Mat. 24. they ate and drank as brute beasts; and did not God bring a
deluge upon them? What was the sin of Sodom? was not one of them fullness of
bread? and did not God bring a fiery shower from heaven and burn them? What
was the sin of Esau? was it not gluttony, when for a morsel of meat he sold
his birthright; and so after was deprived of the blessing? he was profane, as
it is Heb. 12. And what was the sin of the Israelites? among others this,
they lusted, and were gluttons, therefore when the meat was in their month,
wrath fell on them. And does not wise Solomon threaten men that are gluttons in
their diet, as well as those that are drunkards, that they shall come to rags
and poverty? All this is true.

And what, do we think to gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles? or
are we conceited as some that Austen speaks of in his time, that God punished
the murders of Troy, but loved those of Rome? That God punished the distempers
of former times, but will not now? That there shall be no fregs in our dishes,
though Pharaoh had them? Is not he the same God? and our sins as foul as
theirs? and do they not provoke God to wrath? We have found it by some
experience, if we go back a little way. What spued out those Abbeylubbers,
but gluttony? What has been the ruin of many great families, but this? What
was the cause that God punished us the last year with famine? Many sins we
have, but I cannot ascribe it to any more properly, then to gluttony; God
punishes such licentiousness with penury, and scarcity. And if we go on, and
provoke God as we have hitherto; God will plague us in our basket, and in our
store, and that that before was but a rod, he can whip us with scorpions.

God be thanked, though we had it dear, we had it for money; but God will
cause the earth to deny her strength that it shall not be to be had; and then
we may eat our flesh for bread, and our bowels shall sound as a shalme. And
this may be the cause of the plague, for famine and the plague go together.

Thus the Lord can curse us in our basket and in our store, and send frogs into
our kneading troughs, and into our chambers. Therefore in the fear of God, let
us be ashamed of our former intemperance, and let us now labor to honor God.
I bridle not men up to necessity only; Religion gives a fair way as any
reasonable man in the world can desire: but take heed that we dishonor not
God, abuse them not; if we do, penury will be the reward of abused plenty.

THE FOVRTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 4. And the frogs shall come up, both on thee, and upon thy people, and
upon all thy servants. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, say unto Aaron, stretch
forth thine hand, etc.


IN this fourth Verse, there is yet a further amplification of the judgment.
These frogs should not only be in the high ways, but in the houses; not only
in the common rooms, but in the bedchambers. And they should not stay here
neither, but should crawle upon the bodies of men, they should get up upon
them, and there should be no possibility to brush them off. Galerius upon this
place, observes, That the Egyptians were punished in this plague upon all the
five senses. The sight was punished, that was offended with the multitude, with
the greatness, with the hideous form and color of these frogs. Their hearing
was offended with the croaking of them; for it was but harsh music to dainty
ears. Their smell was offended with the stench of them. Their taste was
offended that they came into their troughs, the places of their dough; and so
hindered them of the food that was provided for their nourishment.

And for their feeling, that certainly was exercised, for not only he, but
Tostatus upon the place, says, That many of these frogs were poysonfull, such
as we call toads, and they afflicted, and oppressed the Egyptians when they
lighted on them. But I stand not upon this, but content my self with the words
of the Text: They shall come up, and crawle upon thee, and upon thy servants.
So that thou shall not rid thy self of this annoyance, What! in their meat,
and drink, and upon their bodies! Then observe with me, Beloved: God can lay
judgments upon people, that shall not be more painful, and troublesome, then
odious, loathsome, and noisome. This you shall see in sundry respects: That of
Job, Job 7.5. he complains that his skin was broken, and he was become
loathsome. I will not follow Pineds the Jesuit, that reckons up scores of
diseases that this poor man was afflicted with, and all of them as the
Physician speaks, of the worst kind and quality. The Scripture says enough,
and tells us, that he was stricken with boyles from the top of the head, to the
sole of the foot; and was feign to retire himself from the company of men, and
to sit upon a heap of ashes, that they might receive the corruption from his
wounds, and to get a piece of a potsheard to scrape himself with, Job 2.7.8.
Such a noisome disease had David whatsoever it was as he complains, Psalm.
38.7. Thou have filled my loins with a loathsome disease. The Septuagint and
the Latin translation read it, Thou have filled my loins with delusion, and
mocking; but the Chalde paraphrase renders it better, Thou have filled me with
burning pain, and noisome: So the Hebrew word there used will bear it out,
which comes from a word to roast a thing, and it signifies to be made vile. So
that it seems it was a burning furious disease, and that also that made him
odious, and loathsome to the people, and to himself a burden.

What a loathsome judgment did the Lord send upon Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21. ult.
by which he rotted as it were piece-meale! he was wondrously afflicted, and
troubled, and tormented; and the Text says there, Ragelat bele Kemdar, he
departed without being desired. Some understand it, he was so wicked that every
body desired his death, he went away, and was not missed, every one was glad:
But it may be understood also, he was so loathsome by his disease, that people
were-glad he was gone, he was so troublesome, and he took no pleasure in
himself by the noisomeness of his disease. In 2 Macab. 9.9. we read of
Antiochus, a great persecuter of Gods people; God smote him with a loathsome,
noisome judgment, having received a bruise by a fall from his chariot; for
very torment and pain (says the Text) his flesh fell piece meal from him;
and the stench of him was grievous to the whole Army; every one wished him
gone, he was such a trouble to them.

And was it not a noisome, loathsome judgment that was sent upon Herod, to be
eaten up of worms? Act. 12.23. Josephus says, That the Great Herod the
Askalonite, was eaten up of worms also. But after him it is certain that
Maximinus, as Eusebius tells us, had a fearful, loathsome disease upon him,
and he sent out a filthy smell; he says he was a fearful spectacle to look
upon. Nay, the very Physicians, says the Story, that came near him, were
killed with the stench of his infirmity.

So we read of Scilla, that he had a loathsome fearful judgment sent upon
him. And Pliny in his Natural history says, that he died a more grievous
death then ever he inflicted upon any other. And was it not an odious,
loathsome judgment that was sent upon Arrius that scoured out his bowels upon
the stool. So Evagrius speaks of Montanus, that he had his tongue rotted in
his mouth, and he dyed miserably. I could reckon more examples, but these are
sufficient in the proof of this.

I would not be mistaken, because I gathered this from Gods judgment upon
Pharaoh in sending the loathsome frogs. I would not have it thought that every
one that has a loathsome disease is like Pharach, that he must of necessity be
profane and wicked: For in the examples before recited, we may find David had
a loathsome disease, yet he was a man after Gods own heart. Job had a fearful
disease, he was full of blaines, and sores, and boyles, yet God gave him a
great testimony for his piety and justice, above all the men of the East. I
could add Lazarus that was highly in the favor of God, yet he was full of
sores. And certainly Solomen says, Eccl. 9 All these shall fall alike to good,
and badmen, we cannot determine of affection, or disaffection; I mean of the
special love or hatred of God by these outward things. Though the Church of
Rome, and Bellarmine go too far; for he makes the end and calamities that
light upon opposers of the truth, to be a necessary argument of the Church; a
true note of it. To that purpose, he reckons strange judgments to fall on
Calvin and Luther, fearful loathsome diseases. So upon Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius; that he has from Balsicke and others, that have not more lines
then lies, railing Pharaoh like. We could answer them in their own weapons if
we were disposed, and tell them of some Popes. One says of Boniface the
seventh, that he ended his life very filthily. And John Stella says of
Boniface the eight, he entered as a Fox, he reigned like a Lion, and dyed as a
Dog. We could tell them of John thirteenth, and some say the fourteenth, that
was slain in the act of adultery by the immediate hand of God. And of Alexius
that dyed by the same potion of poison he had provided for another. Of
Dresentius, Leotomus, Nehotman, and other persecuters that had fearful ends.
We stand not upon this, because there is no argument convincing to be drawn
from the calamity of a man to show his goodness or badnesse. But that that I
intend is, that God oft-times sends not only troublesome, but noisome
judgments; as we see here upon Pharaoh.

The use of it, as David says, Psalm. 4. Standin awe and sin not. God is the
same God, His hand is not shortened. He can inflict a judgment upon thee
whosoever thou art, that besides the pain of it, shall make thee abhor thy
sustenance. The very smell, nay the sight of it; nay the hearing and sound of
it: And not only so, but he can make thee so loathsome, that even people that
should tender their attendance shall be afraid to come near thee. How loathsome
a disease is that, even that is ordinary, the small pox in the extremity? And
for that other disease that carries the name, that a man should not mention
without horror and loathing, what a loathsome disease it is, and how odious it
makes people! those that are of honest and fair condition are afraid to eat or
drink with them. So, I have known some that have been afflicted with sores,
and boyles, and ruptures, that they have been a grief to others, and a burden
to themselves. Therefore I say, Stand in awe and fear; for the Lord can do
what he has done: he can set ravenous beasts on us to tear us; he can make
frogs and toads crawle on us; he can make fiery diseases possess us; he can
bring it home to us in a fearful way if we rebel. Therefore let us labor to
serve him, and to do him honor, and evermore to praise him, not only in word
but in work for fear of an uncomfortable blow: For it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of God. So much for that.

They shall come upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon all thy people. Now
this judgment was denounced; Pharaoh might have conceived a thought, the frogs
shall come upon me, but I have somewhat to help my self by; my people, and my
servants about me, I hope will keep my person free. The Lord takes away that
poor hold, and disableth him in that he thought of; they shall not only be
upon himself, but upon his servants; that they should be so far from from
helping him, that they should not help themselves. The observation is; that
When God smites to some purpose he can make a man helpless that all succor in
the world shall fail. Let him cast upon what hope he will, and nourish
expectation of this, and that help; when adversity comes, the judgment of God
shall have a full blow.

We have read of some famines wherein one neighbor has not been able to
help another, all of them have been so generally troubled by that fearful
calamity, and vexed by it, that a man could not give his neighbor bread
without being unnatural to himself, and unmercifull to his family. When the
Sword has forradged a place, the party that should secure his wife and
children has been wounded, and not able to help them. And so in regard of
the plague, when it has entered into some families, and allowed no quarter at
all, but has stricken all down that not one has been able to help another:
God has stricken some men with such diseases that the whole College of
Physicians were never able to give them a minute of ease. Nay, it may be the
Physician himself has been so smitten that he needed as much help as his
patient. This is ordinary: I will not stand further upon the proof.

The Use concerns us a little; that is, that we never cast our selves upon any
earthly helps without God, let them seem as firm as they will, and able to
sustain us; let us never cast our selves on them without God; they will prove
as clouds without rain, as wells without water; they will prove miserable
comforters. They will be to us as the King of Israel was to the woman in the
siege of Samaria, when she complained of the fearfulness of the famine: O
(says he) if God do not help, how shall I help? Let the Philistines trust in
Goliath, when the time comes he shall not be able to save himself. Let them
delight in Dagon, he shall be so far from secuting them, that he shall be
broken in pieces by a fall before the Arc. The high Priests tell the
Soldiers, if they will tell a lie for them, and officiate in that kind for
them, they will bear them harmless; the day of affliction will come, that
they shall not be able to help themselves. Nay, David disableth the very trust
in Princes, Psalm. 146. Trust not in Princes, or any son of man, for vain is
their help. Isay 20. the three last verses. It seems the people of Israel
were confident, when they had an adversay came, and threatened them with the
Babylonian forces, they sent to the Ethiopians for help; they did not greatly
care what that great man could do. Says the Lord, Go and tell them the King
of Caldea shall take Egypt prisoner, and the Ethiopian captive; so they shall
be ashamed of Ethiopia their rejoicing, and Egypt their glory. And then they
shall say, Lo this was our expectation, and how shall we escape? As if they
had said, these people are not able to help themselves; they are made a prey
to the devourer, and how shall they be able to secure us.

Therefore I say again, Take heed of trusting in the arm of flesh. We are but
too apt to do it. We think if such an adversary should come, we would do
this; and that this friend, and that money, and policy shall do us good; and
when the time of calamity comes, we are as men that put into a Bay in a
tempest; we think we are safe, and before we are aware, we are upon a rock;
and they find not a haven, and a fair station; but matter of woe and
lamentation.

There be certain helps in the world, says a Father, by which we are more
weakened then confirmed; that prove as the reed of Egypt. And to press it on;
then we must not cast our selves upon vain hopes of another world. If in
judgments temporal, God can disable a man's friends and acquaintance; and his
own thoughts perhaps shall not relieve him, but he shall have a disturbed
conscience; what shall he do when he appears before the tribunal of God? Let
him then call to father, or mother, or friends, he shall stand naked before
that judgment; and whatsoever plea he has before thought of to subterfuge the
judgment, they shall be as fig leaves, they shall not cure or cover him.

Therefore get Gods protection by well-doing, and get into his favor by a
godly life; and then though father, and friends forsake thee, he will take thee
up, and be a sure protection to his people in the time of adversity. So much
for that.

There is a further aggravation of this judgment; that is, from the newness
and the strangeness of it. Though I find in stories that this judgment of
frogs was after inflicted upon the world. As Pliny tells us of a Town that was
unpeopled in France formerly by frogs: And Paulus Orosius says, that the
people of the City Abdera were so molested by frogs, that they were feign to
entreat Cassander the King of Maceden to get them another place to inhabit. And
Athenius tells us a strange story like this: he says, in Onia, in Barbania,
there fell a rain of frogs, and filled the high ways so abundantly, that
people could not step besides them; and for a time they shut their doors that
they might be quiet, but it would not do, the frogs came into their baking
troughs, into their meat and drink, and molested and infested every part. And
not only so; but they crawled upon their bodies, and were so noxious to them,
that they determined to leave their Country. Now I say though afterward God
sent his judgment, yet for ought I know, this judgment of frogs was the first
that ever was laid upon the world in that kind. And this added to the terror
of it: For to suffer new terrors is a great aggravation of any judgment.

Isay 64.4. When thou did terrible things that we looked not for, then
thou came down. They were terrible things indeed, that they never looked
for, or dreamed of, or heard of in former times, those terrible things. So in
Micah 5.15. The Lord says, he will execute judgment upon the heathen in such
a manner as was never heard of. Dan. 12.1. He speaks of troubles, and such as
there never was since there was a Nation to that time. These strange unheard of
judgments, uncouth punishments, add much to the terror of the plague. Do
you think it was not fearful to those of the old world, to see it rain forty
days together, and not to cease till the very Arc mounted? And to those of
Sodom to see it rain fire, who had ever heard of it before? And mark that in
Number. 16. when Moses would aggravate the judgment that God meant to send upon
Corah, says he, If these men dye the common death, or if they be visited with
the common visitation of all men, think as you will; but if God make a new
thing, and cause the earth to open, and swallow them quick in the pit, then
say they have provoked God to some purpose. A new, strange, and not a common
visitation, and death; for that was never heard of before, that the earth
should cleave and swallow them into hell. These judgments that were laid upon
Egypt, were made patterns for after times, I will punish you after the way of
Egypt. So that it seems that the Egyptians were the first instances of those
great calamities; God begun with them in this way, they were the first.

So, in this case it falls out, as in examples of good, so in the punishment of
evil. We say the way to heaven is short by example, though it be long by
precept. The reason is this; because when a man is commanded to do a thing,
and is told that another does it before him, he is comforted, he persuades
himself it is in his factivity, because another has done it: so in the
punishment of sin, if it be somewhat that another has suffered before, it is
some comfort. If it be such a thing that never any suffered, that a man can say
that truly that Job spoke passionately, that God had made him a Butt, for such
remarkable judgments as never were before: This is a great aggravation.

Now you must know, that these strange, extraordinary judgments are for foul
and extraordinary sins; for when men will exceed their scantling, and
transcend in iniquity; the Lord will make his plagues wonderful. In Deuteronomy. 28.
And there are strange punishments to the workers of iniquity, Job 31. Wondrous
strange plagues to those that have new sins.

For the Use of it; it may satisfy us to the full, for those judgments that
God brings upon the world in these last times. We still say that there are
diseases grown among us that we have not heard of before; sure I am they put
the Physicians past their books many times: let us not wonder at this; for
Africa is not more fertile of monsters, then these our times are fruitful in
iniquity; I, and in new sins.

I dare appeal to your own observation what new strange oaths have been
minted of later times that our forefathers never heard of? the foulest
blasphemies against heaven not to be mentioned. What new strange ways of
epicurianisme and gluttony? how wity is that sin in this age, as if the
spirit of Sardanapalus were in men; who when he was satiated with all that was
in use, gave encouragement to any man by a crier to invent new? I dare be bold
to say, that god, the belly, was never served with such uncouth service as now.
What strange ways of drinking, that were never heard of in the time of our
forefathers? the days then were more modest, and free from that foul,
abominable corruption. What strange unknown fashions in apparel! how
prodigious is this last age grown in that? A man can as soon make the Moon a
coat, as find people a month in one dressing. It is fearful to consider the
abominable luxury. And for fraud, and cheating, and tricks of legerdemaine,
they are fresh and new, and frequent every day; that the vigilancie of all
authority, and the wariness of all laws are not able to prevent them. He is
accounted but a fool and a sot that has not a trick more then ever yet was
practiced.

O, Beloved! has not God then a just controversy with his people? If the Lord
draw out judgments that were never heard of before, and make us signs and
wonders to the world, and an astonishment to all adjacent Nations, may we not
justify his proceedings? If we exceed our forefathers sins, what wonder is
it, if we feel judgments that they were never sensible of? If we be
inventers of the evil of sin, Romans 1. what wonder is it, if the Lord deal
with us as he did with the Gentiles, to give us up to a reprobate sense, to
desperate hardness, that after we have committed sin with greediness, we
may be made a by word to all Nations?

But before I leave this denunciation of the judgment, I cannot but acquaint
you with the mystical signification that diverse of the Fathers have of this
judgment of frogs.

Origin says, The frogs here, signify lascivious vain Poets: says he, a
frog is of no profit, he gives offense with his croaking, and with his filth:
so says he, It is with the Poets, they are as frogs, they have no goodness:
the lascivious Poets in their libidinous discourses, and their fables, that
tend to nothing but to corrupt unstable men: Yet to see how many people are
taken with them (says he) how they suck this poison, and drink these puddles
with the neglect of those living waters.

And Rupertus goes further: They be frogs that croke dishonor to God when they
attribute a deity and divinity to Jupiter and Venus, and those that were
mortal men, and make as many as their own fancy thinks fit, using the
fecundity of their understandings this way: Yet these people (says he) as
frogs, creep into the favor of great persons, as appears in the story, they
are made much of by the great Emperors of the world: but says he, though they
delight in them for the present, they infuse a great deal of poison, more then
ever they could be cured of.

St. Austen, and with him Prosper; they understand mystically by these frogs,
Philosophers, that were wedded only to natural knowledge. These are they,
says Austen, that have a sound of words, but not true wisdom: says he,
sometimes they croke out filthy blasphemy against God. He is not utterly
against Philosopy, nor no wise man ever would: for as it may be as Hagar
against Sara; if it grow petulent and saucy as she did, out goes the handmaid.
So this Heathen, having her nails pared, and her hair cut, she may be a wife
for an Israelite. He is against vain Philosophy (as Paul speaks) those things
that are contrary to truth; when they would make it impossible for any thing to
be made of nothing, against the creation of the world: when they deny that
several species can be united in one subject, against the incarnation of
Christ: when they deny that there can be any return from a privation to a
habit, against the resurrection: These are crokings and distastefull to
Christian ears.

The same Father says further: These croking frogs set forth Heretics; and in
Rev. 16.13. the Spirit of God calls them frogs that creep out of the mouth of
the Beast, the false Prophet, and the Dragon. And these run up and down, and
crawle upon people, and do a great deal of prejudice. And he might well put
them after Philosophers: for Tertullian says, Philosophers are the Patriarchs
of Heretics. And he says elsewhere, when they cannot fly of themselves, then
they take shelter among the bushes of Aristotle. These Heretics are as frogs,
filthy, creeping up and down, and creeping over places, even into the chambers
of Princes: as may appear to you in the Arrians that made themselves so firm
in the Emperor Constantius. That is the trick of them to make themselves
great with great persons. It is said of Constantius sister Constantine, she
commended one of them to him. They get into the chambers of Princes. We need
not have these croking frogs in these days, with their Jesuiticall spirits: If
Princes would be more cautelous of them, it would be more for their peace.

Gregory Nycene, in the life of Moses, says, That the frogs are voluptuous
persons, that are given up to all wanton luxury that is carnal: For, says he,
think of a libidinous licentious life, and then think of the frogs of Egypt;
for that same licentiousness grows from a filthy heart; so these frogs from
the slime of Egypt. And as it was with those frogs, so it is with these; they
possess all places. In the street take a voluptuous man, and you shall
discover him by his public carriage. Follow him to his house, he is
voluptuous in his meat; as these frogs came into the baking-troughs. Follow him
into his bedchamber, he is wicked there. Follow him to his closet, the greatest
privacie, still there are signs of voluptuousness. And he begins to
complain, how full that time was of these frogs.

His complaint fits our times: It is a fearful thing; the filthy frogs of
covetousness, base, sordid covetousness; of excess, and of distemper, of
lust, and licentiousness, that may be followed by their slime from the places
they pass. These are fearful, and those that expose the land to the curse of
God. Take heed of these; separate your selves from this uncleanness: in such
impure hearts God will not dwell. They may taste of his vengeance, but shall
never taste of his favor till they have purged out this filthy corruption. So
I have done wholly with the denunciation of the judgment.

Now I come to the execution of it, and in the transition to it (because I
cannot enter on it at this time.) It will be demanded what effect the
denunciation of this judgment had with Pharaoh? There is nothing said, the
judgment is denounced, and is presently executed; what effect had it?

The speedy execution of it, tells us what effect it had: For surely Pharaoh
was not a whit wounded, his wicked heart continued obdurate, and impenitent. It
is like enough, he conceived that this was but a scar-crow; and he thought it a
poor spirit, and a base disposition, to yield to words; he would not appear
to be pusillanimous to be frighted with words, therefore he stands it out.
Observe: The wicked disposition of profane persons; they will never fear,
till they feel. Pharaoh, all the words would do no good, he was fearlesse
till he feels. Thus it was with the old world, Mat. 24. Christ says, They did
eat and drink, and were merry, and knew nothing till the flood came. Blessed
Lord, did they know nothing? Had not Noah, that preacher of righteousness,
told them by word of mouth? Had he not preached in making the Arc? For, says
Basile of Selucia, it was a preaching, and every knock was an urging of that
point; did they not know? without doubt they did. How is it said, They knew
not? Chrysostom says, he shows their insensiblenesse, and security, when
he says, They knew not: and he says, They were taken with a kind of
drunkenness in their sins: As a man that sleeps upon a Mast, knows not that
he is in danger. So it was with them: judgment was at the door, yet they knew
nothing till Noah entered into the Arc.

So those of Sodom, were in the same predicament; Lot told them, and bid them
fear: It would not be; and as judgment drew nearer, he was more fervent in
his exhortation; all would not do, he seemed to his own sons as if he had
mocked, Genesis 19. for they thought with themselves, what news is this? Fire
from heaven! Why shall not to morrow be as to day? Who ever saw it rain fire?
or if it do, must this valley burn alone, and none else? What ground is there
for this?

Thus God lays out the humor of wicked men, Deuteronomy. 29.19. He that hears the
curses of this book, and says I shall have peace, though I continue
stiffenecked, etc. This is the very conceit that a wicked man has, he may go
on in his sins; he needs not fear the judgment to come, he shall have
peace, though he continue stiffenecked. Was not this the humor of Achab? did
not Micaiah tell him of the dissipation of his Army? Nay did he not plainly
say, If he returned in peace, the Lord had not spoken by him? yet he pursued
his resolution, and went on in his way; he would not fear till he felt, 1
King. 22. Mark, in Isay 5.19. The Lord brings wicked men, saying, Make haste,
let him hasten his work that we may see it. A wicked, profane speech as ever
came from the mouth of man. They mocked the judgment that God had told them
of. Does God say he will bring judgments, let him make haste, we would feign
see it: these are but words, we would feign see deeds. Thus wicked men hasten
to their ruin. So, in Jeremy, they tell the Prophet flatly he lies, when he
said, The King of Chalde shall come and take Jerusalem; they would not be
persuaded till they felt it. So in Ezekiel. 12.22. There was a Proverb grown in
Israel, Every vision fails. As if they had said, Shall we give heed to the
dreams of the Prophets? They say they have had visions, but all fail, there are
none come to pass; they would not believe them. And what better were those
mockers in Peter; they mocked, and said, Where is the promise of his coming?
As if they should say; We will not give over our pleasures, and the prosecuting
of our sinful lusts; we will take time while we may, and crown our heads with
rose buds, and make as much of our selves as we can; for, for ought we see all
things are in a stay, there is nothing to come.

For the Use of this: I desire from my soul, that all of us, you, and I, and
every one, would take heed above all, of security, of fearlessenesse of God.
Our Blessed Savior said long ago, that it should be the sin of the last
times. As it was in the days of Noah, and of Lot, so shall it be in the day of
the son of man. And they shall nourish their hearts as in the day of
slaughter. And they shall have a conceit that judgment is far off, and that it
shall not come at all; and so be given up to voluptuousness, to commit sin
with greediness.

I dare appeal, and let your consciences answer, and echo the truth; have not
we a thousand times told you of plague, and famine, and judgment great and
small? Have we not rung in the ears of the blasphemer that the flying book
with curses would come into his house? Have we not rung in the ears of the
bloody man, that he should not live out half his days, and that he should not
dye a dry death? Have we not spoken loud enough over and over, to the
licentious person, that that sin would eat out his posterity, and consume his
increase? Have we not told you, that the oppressor should have his goods
invaded by violence, and taken out of the mouths of his children? Have we not
told the curser that it should come into his bowels as water? Have we not told
him that is excessive, that he should reap nothing but shame, and dishonor,
and beggary, the judgment of God, and untimely death? Have we not said all
this? But with what success? People persist in the same ways, in the same
impieties every day. Witness the renewing, and the improving of these sins.
Some are as deaf Adders; or if they hear, they give us the hearing, and that
is all; they are still in the same course of impiety. What is the ground of
all? Security, fearlessenesse of judgments; they think these things are
bug-beares to fray children, those things that shall never take effect. These
are the things that the Devil puts into the hearts of people to cosen them of
their salvation.

O let us take heed: Let me tell you, and out of the truth of Gods Word, that
men are never nearer judgment then when they are most secure, 1 Thessalonians. 5.4.
When they shall say, peace, peace, sudden destruction shall come. Chrysostomes
observation is, when they shall say, peace, peace; he says not that there is
peace to them: For what peace as long as the whoredoms of Iezebel remain? As
Iehu said: But when they shall say peace, and all is in tranquillity. Those of
Sodom, they had a fair morning that day they were consumed; but how soon
were the heavens clouded with fire and brimstone! So likewise Belteshazer was
in all his jollity, and his ruff, with his concubines, and Princes quaffing in
the vessels of the Temple; in the height of that security, the handwriting on
the wall makes his knees knock together, and the joints of his body loosed. So
Nebuchadnezar his grandfather, when he was strouting upon his Babell, and
bragged of his power, then God turns him among the beasts. The people of
Laish, when they were buried in security, the children of Dan fall upon them to
destroy them. Amnon when his heart was merry with wine, little thought he of
any mischief; all on the sudden he was slain. So Agag, O, says he, the
bitterness of death is past now; there was no fear then of judgment as he
thought: the next news that he heard, the sword of Samuel was thrust into his
bowels, 1 Samuel 7.

I might show many instances that when men are most secure, God comes with his
judgments, and has taken them away. Therefore take heed of being fearlesse of
the judgments of God. Believe what God has said to us; and as we believe, so
let it urge us to prepare, and if we be prepared, either we shall be hid in the
evil day, or the affliction shall be so sanctified, that we shall find honey
in that Lion.

Another thing I would commend to your consideration, something of kin to this
point in hand. Pharaoh holds out, God sends a message, it will not be, God now
executes.

Where words will not serve, blows must. I shall not need to give instances of
this, there are enough in Scripture. And there is great reason that God should
do it.

For if he should only content himself with words, his truth would be called
in question, as if he had said that that he meant not to perform, if that word
that he has spoken shall not take effect.

Secondly, his Justice would be questioned that he hates not sin with that
hatred that the world is persuaded of.

Thirdly, his Power would be questioned, that though he hate sin, and threaten
it; yet he were not able to punish it.

Lastly, his Wisdom and Providence would be questioned; for it is not the part
of a wise man, where there is desert for blows, to content himself only with
words; for this makes reproof contemptible, and all speeches ridiculous, and
turn again upon him with disgrace.

For the Use of it, it should teach us to justify God in all his proceedings,
ever give glory to God, whatsoever falls: for certainly God for the contempt of
ordinary proceedings is feign to go to a more severe reckoning with men: they
justly deserve it: therefore God is to be justified.

Secondly, since God is so leasurely, and treatable in his pace to vengeance;
Let us all make use of the deliberate proceedings of God: fear Gods word, and
we shall never fear his blows, that is true. It is a speech of Chrysostom,
to good purpose; Let a man fear Gods word, and he shall never need to fear
those acts of vengeance. Let them fear in Egypt, and Rome: let him fear and
stand in awe that offends. If a man be careful to lead a holy life, he need
not be afraid, though the hills tumble into the sea, and the foundations of the
earth be rased, he shall stand unappaled in the midst of all dangers. So that
speech of Gregory, and it is good counsel that he gives, Let us fear when we
hear, lest we come to fear when we feel, which is worst of all. For,
beloved, it is hard to be put to the tutorage of that School-mistris,
experience. If a man fear not till he feel, then wrath will fall the
heavier. The Wise man takes another course, Solomon says, A wise man sees the
plague, and hides himself; but a fool goes on, and is punished, he will not
be warned and admonished.

God comes to many men; nay to all by the dispensation of his word, he tells us
what is due to sin; what he will inflict: he sometimes by less
chastisements, as his lesser ordnance plays upon us: does not God expect
profit by this? If we do not he will enlarge punishments upon people, and so
much more the blows shall be, because of the contempt of his gracious
proceedings; and then men shall have no body to complain of but themselves,
and curse the time a thousand fold that they did not obey the word of God, but
would needs stand it out till it came to blows, now the fearful hand of God
is fallen upon them. It was the complaint of Daniel, Dan. 9. We hearkened not to
the voice of thy Prophets, now therefore thy wrath is stretched upon us to the
full: As he says there.

Therefore my counsel shall be, to fear the word of God, and we shall not
need to fear his judgments, tremble at his threatenings: Get the heart of
Josiah to melt when he read the Law of God, he had respect to the Word, that he
trembled at his word, and was contrite in that manner, that he was deeply cast
down with the consideration of his menacies and threatenings. God will be
merciful to such a one, and he shall escape in the day of vengeance; whereas
those that are refractory and contumacious, that care not for words till it
come to blows, they shall be sure to suck the dregs of Gods vialls.

THE FIFTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 5. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod, over the streams, over the rivers, over the ponds, and
cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt, etc.


HAving spoken of the denunciation of this judgment, I come now to the second
thing, The execution of it, which is laid down in verse. 5.6. where there is,

First, the injunction.

And then the performance of that injunction.

The injunction verse 5. God said to Moses, say to Aaron, stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod, etc.

The performance of this, verse 6. Aaron did so.

In the former of these, the injunction, God spoke to Moses, say unto Aaron.

A man might say; Why did not Moses take the rod as well as Aaron?

There are diverse reasons given why Moses did not do it, but Aaron rather.

The Hebrews, they, (according to their fabulous manner) say, it was not fit
for Moses to smite the river; because he was preserved in the water when time
was, as we read in the story, Exodus 2. when he floated in an arc of bulrushes,
Pharaohs daughter took him up. He should have been ungrateful to those
streams to have smitten them with a plague that were the means of his
preservation.

It is true, beloved, that gratitude works not only toward men, but toward the
brute creatures, even to the place where, and instruments by which a man is
benefited; but this is no solid reason. Suppose Moses received never so much
good there; thankfulness to the creature would not bear him out in
disobedience to the Creator.

Another says, that Moses was not to do it, because the Egyptians then would
have been persuaded that he had done it by sorcery, and so they would have
been less moved, and persuaded by it: They were so unjust that they conceived
of Moses that he was a sorcerer. The truth is, that he had all the learning of
the Egyptians, and it is likely that many of them used that Art; yet we know
nothing of Moses, but that he was exercised in those sciences that were
justifiable.

Again, if this were the reason, Aaron might have been suspected; for he
lived among them a great age, and without doubt Pharaoh would have brought it
out.

Calvin gives a third reason, God would not have Moses strike the streams, and
bring the frogs, but Aaron; that Pharaoh, in regard of his pride and
insolency, might be handled more contemptibly. As if Moses would let him see
that be would not trouble himself, but his servant that was to officiate for
him, he should do it.

There is a fourth reason; God has set down an order; he gives Moses
direction what to do, and from him Moses directs Aaron, and he executes it.
Therefore God having appointed and ordained it, he looks that every one should
perform his office; and that shall be our observation: When God has
distinguished men in several places, and given them several spheres to move
in, he requires that they should walk in their places. It is said of the Tree,
he shall bring forth his own fruit. It is said of the Sun Psalm. 19. he
rejoices like a Giant to run his own course. And you shall find Romans 12.7.
the Apostle charge the man that has an office to attend it, to look to his
own employment without interloping in another man's affairs. So in 1 Cor.
2.24. every man is charged to abide in the place that God has set him in. That
intimates, not only faithfulness and diligence, but wisdom and conscience, in
a man to do that that belongs to his place. So the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.
wishes every man to do his own business.

In the body, as there are several parts, so every part has a several
employment that it is to attend. See in a Family, the Master has a several
place from the servant. It is not fit for another man to step into the place
of a Steward; nor for the groom of the stable, to come into the place of the
Gentleman of the chamber. So in the Church of God, it is an army with banners:
the Apostle would have it without scandal. It is a well ordered Army. Now in
an Army when men are digested into several ranks; it is not for a Pike man to
thrust himself into a file of Musketeers, every man must keep his own place,
or else he is disordered, and that may prove mortal. So, in the Church of God
all the company must be ordered, there must be discipline, and every man must
know what belongs to his place. If a man go out of his rank, and do that that
belongs to another man, though with never so good intention; it may be said to
him, as Christ said to Peter when he solicited him about John, What is that to
thee? Vzzah had better have adventured the falling of the Arc, though it
tottered, 2 Samuel 6. when he knew that no hand must meddle with it but that
which was holy. You see how God was avenged on Vzziah that would do the work
of another man's calling, and neglect his own, when he usurped the Priests
office, God smote him with leprosy, he made him live a retired man all his
life.

In the Ancient Council, the 60 Canon, it was provided, that those people that
were Christians, that suffered death for pulling down the Images of the
Heathens, they should not be enrolled for martyrs. The ground was good.

First, there was indiscreet ambition of heart in it. Secondly, they did that
that belonged not to their place. And those that suffered in the time of Peter,
as busy men in other men's matters, they had no comfort in their sufferings.
In the 26 Oration of Nazianzen, there the holy Father speaks so much
concerning order, and every man possessing his own place, that if I could
repeat it wholly to you, you need no other Sermon. Says he, all things are in
order; the Heavens above, the Sun, Moon, and Stars; yea when they fought
against Sysera, they fought in order. So the things below; the very times and
seasons in the year are ordered; the day and night are ordered, says he.
When we read of thunder and lightning in heaven, and those shaking commotions
in the bowels of the earth; of shipwracks by sea, and wars by land, and
diseases in men's bodies, and sins in their souls; these are the beams of
trouble and confusion, and not of order. Says he, What shall the dissolution
of the world be at the last, but a confusion? Who ever saw the Ox swim over
the sea? or the grass grow on trees? does the eye of man perform the office
of the foot? or the foot the office of the eye? The eye walks not but leads,
and the foot does not see, but walk, it does that that is fit for it. The ear
does not trouble it self to speak, or the tongue to hear. Order is the
mother of security to all things. So he goes on a great way, and concludes, Let
every man keep his rank, and do his duty in his place, especially in the
Church, wherein above all things, men are said to be in order.

For the Use of it, it meets with the Pope of Rome: If he had learned this, he
would have cast away his keys before he had received them; or if he had meddled
with it, he would not do two men's works; he would have said, Who made me a
judge?

The doing of two men's works is common in these times, we know not what
belongs to our selves, we meddle with other men's affairs. Lay people will
preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments. You shall have a Cobbler above
his Last, and take upon him to expound Scriptures, and not stick to inform
the Minister how he should preach. Do you not see a great number of people of
inferior rank take upon them to reform evils? If a man should say to them,
as they did to Moses, Who made thee a judge? They would reply, It is their
zeal. I tell them their zeal is not according to knowledge; for if their
judgments were rightly informed, they would know that God has appointed a man
the work of his place, and no man should extend himself beyond the latitude
of his own calling.

And whereas they have pretended, they have Samson and Phineas, and many more;
they may well add Elias, and James, and John, those sons of thunder that
lightened shrewdly when they called for fire from heaven; for such they pretend
all these, and well they may. It is ill reasoning from things ill done, to that
that should be done; or if they did it immediately we must not bring them to
an example.

Secondly, learn every one to do that that is right in his place; the Master
of the family in his, the father in his, and the children in theirs; and all as
God has disposed of them. If they go out of this, it is an unseemly thing. Is
it not an unseemly thing to see the streams run over the banks? to see the
fire off from the hearth? to see a man out of his place? to see the glove
drawn on the wrong hand, how ugly is it? Therefore the former Father
Nazianzen, puts disorder, and deformity together; and he might well say it. The
Apostle puts order and beauty together; Let all things be done decently, and in
order.

Secondly, a man does not need to meddle with another, if he look to his own
charge, God will be pleased well enough with that: whereas if a man neglect his
own, and meddle with others, he may have that said to him, that he is skillful
in other men's affairs, and ignorant of his own.

In the last place, when a man has done that that belongs to his place, it may
be he sees other people defective, it is not for him to leap out of his
calling; he may well mourn for it, and as occasion serves, and his calling
will afford, he may advise, and pray to God to incline the hearts of those that
have power to redress these things; let him not think he shall suffer for
other men's defects; for every man stands or falls to his own master. So much
for that. The next thing I note, Say unto Aaron, take thy rod, etc. Some may
say, What needs this? when God with a word could have done this, what need he
stretch out his rod?

It is true, there is none that doubts of the power of God, what God could have
done: But the point is this; Where God has appointed means, he will have them
used, and not have miracles expected. He stretched out the rod. It was that
that God had sanctified for this purpose, God will have the means used. All
the world knows, God could have preserved Noah without an Arc: He meant to
drown the world beside; and he had fixed this way; Noah must work in this
means. Every man will conceive that easily God could have preserved Lot in the
midst of Sodom, though all the City were burned about him; but since he had
appointed Zear for a refuge, there he must fly, and take the course that he
had appointed.

There is no doubt but God could have recovered Hezechiah to health by a word;
but since God said a bunch of figs should be used, that must be applied, or
else he could not amend. Do you think that God was impotent, and unable to
cure Naaman of his leprosy? with a word he could have done it; but having
appointed Jordan the place to wash him, and to wash seven times, except he had
gone, and performed it, whatsoever he did think of Pharphar, and the rivers
of Damascus, unless he had washed there he had not been clean. God could
have hid the Virgin Mary in Judea, maugre the malice of Herod; but having
appointed Egypt to be the place, thither they must fly.

Musculus upon John, says, that Christ caused the stone to be taken away; he
that could raise his body, why would he not raise the stone? God will not work
miracles for ordinary things, where the labor of man will serve.

For the Use of this, I desire you to remember it for your spiritual, and
corporal condition.

For the bodily condition, it is well known that God has appointed labor to
be the means of sustentation of these tabernacles of ours; yet this means is
not used. There are a great number of men that look to be fed as Eliah was by
the ravens, by miracle; they think to lie, and have the meat fall into their
mouths; no pains will they take. These kind of people that will be idle, and
like the door on the hinges that will not use the means; they will not put
their souls a foot out, as it is in the fable; they sin against the general
order of things. The heavens stand not still, but by miracle. And they sin
against pure nature; when man was in his innecency God provided him labor,
Thou shall dress the garden: Surely that God that appointed a Sabbath,
intended not man to be idle. They sin against corrupted nature; since the
fall, Man is borne to labor as the sparks fly upward. And man must eat his
bread with sweat: And the Heathen had this light to call them flow bellies.
Lastly, they sin against the store of nature. It lies on Christians mainly,
they are so far from the using the means of labor to effect that that God
has appointed, that they must withdraw themselves from men that live
inordinatly; He that will not labor must not eat.

Therefore, let no man love his ease so well, that he refuse labor, that his
sides should ache; as that man in Seneca, because he sees another man take
pains, this is odious.

And let not men be carried away with a private spirit, as a great number are
that except their employment be generous, they will rather do nothing. If the
employment be never so poor, if it be honest, it is better then to be idle ten
thousand times. The idle man dishonours God, he transgresses his
commandments; he wrongs many besides himself: his Country, the Church, his
family, and the poor; all challenge a part in him. When a man shall ask his
conscience, what profit has the Church, or thy family, or the poor, or the
State by thee? If he say nothing; it is a pitiful thing.

Again, when a man does nothing, he is exposed to all temptations. The Devil
entered when he found none at home. The Iron rusts with lying. The Field
unplowed overgrowes with weeds. Standing puddles stink: therefore it was
Ieromes counsel to Rusticut, Always to be employed.

Again, it is a reproach to the world: there is never a generous man, if he
see another that labors not, but he accounts him an unprofitable burden to
the earth.

Lastly, it draws upon a man the misery of another world. Shall such a man
live? If he do, he has but his soul to keep him out of hell: and St. Paul
says, such people are dead while they live. How shall they live when they be
dead, that are dead while they live? What says God? Bind him hand and foot,
and cast him into utter darkness, to the unprofitable servant.

Therefore hearken to God, take pains in that course that God has appointed
in his word: let us rather eat our own bread then to live at another man's
finding.

If this seem a digression, I desire you to pardon it; for it may be of
purpose I turned out of my way to turn some idle ones into it.

In the second place, for our spiritual estate, God will have means used
there: The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with observation, as it is said in the
Gospel. Many profane men say; What! cannot God save us without all this
preaching? What! nothing without that rod, that Scepter of God, his Word; the
rod of Aaron?

It is dangerous to dispute what God can do; far be it from us: But when God
has appointed means ordinary, he shows that he will not save without them.
The Eunuch might have said to Philip, and Paul to Ananias, and Lidia to Paul,
God can do this without you; but God must be served that way that he has
appointed.

Therefore if a man think to be saved by a miracle, he shall fall short of
salvation. The rich man in hell had a strange desire to save his brethren by
one that rose from the dead; but says Abraham, If they will not hear Moses
and the Prophets, they will not hear them. So much for that. Says he: Stretch
forth thine hand with thy rod, and cause the frogs to ascend. What! must Aaron
bring frogs out of the river? What man has power to make one hair of his
head, white or black, Who can add one cubite to his stature? Must Aaron bring
these frogs? So in the original it is an imparative, Make or command them to
ascend. So the Septuagint is, Fetch thou them forth. We must acknowledge the
power of God to be infinite: Yet observe, The works that are his own he
attributes to men. Aaron is said to bring them. The bringing of Israel out of
Egypt, it was the work of God, with a mighty Arm, none but God could do it.
He assumes it oft-times, I am the Lord that brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. So, those holy people acknowledged Nehemiah and Daniel; O God that
broughtest us out of Egypt: Yet this act is attributed to Moses and Aaron. So
God says to Gedeon, Iud. 6. Go and deliver Israel; yet it was God that must
do it. So it is said of Samson, and Shamger, and Othoneele, and Samuel, that
they delivered Israel. And God says to Moses, Sanctify to me the people
against the third day; yet God must sanctify them. So, we see in the New
Testament, that conversion is attributed to Ministers, and remission of sins:
Whose sins ye remit are remitted: Nay, and the saving of men, 1 Timothy 4.11.

This is the honor of Gods Saints: God not only uses them, but attributes to
them what is done. To arm them against discouragements, though many things
obstaculous to them lie in the way, and confront them, and be impediments to
them; yet let them be comforted in this, the issue and effect that is wrought,
God will please to honor them with it; he will part with some of his own to
give them: he will put a splendor on Moses, and make him glorious in the eyes
of all the people. God is content to give Iehu honor: The sword of the Lord,
and of Gedeon.

Though indeed we must take heed, if we be sensible of the honor that God puts
upon men when he imployes them, that we do nothing to diminish the glory of
God. The Devil is so subtle, and the corruption of man's heart is so great,
that he desires praise to himself. So that oft-times the chief Lord suffers
by the unfaithfulness of his Steward. Let us take heed, if God honor us for
doing good things by him; assume not so much to our selves, whereby Gods glory
may be diminished.

Let me apply it to those of the Church, God has honored them exceedingly,
that he has made them fellow workers with himself, to dispense the great
mysteries of the Kingdom. And it is the observation of Chrysostom, when the
Prodigal returned, the father does not bid him go to the wardrobe, and take
the best robe; but he said to the servants, Go and fetch it. He would have the
servants employed for the benefit of the son, that the means might be
brought in credit.

That shows how much the world is beholding to the Ministers of the Word: We
are co-workers with God; which as it may comfort us for the present, so it
shall add to our crown afterward.

But let us take heed that we give the glory to God, and not take to our selves
any thing that may diminish Gods honor: Let us be of the spirit of Paul, I
labored more then all, yet not I, but the grace of God in me. Says Austen,
Nos mandamus, etc. we do not give the increase, we do but help; and this,
that we can help is not of our selves, but the grace of God: Paul may plant,
and Apollo may water, but it is God that must give the increase. Not unto us,
not unto us, but to thy Name be the praise given: So should be the speech of
every one. We are Stars, but we are Stars in the right hand of our Blessed
Lord, and he is the Sun of righteousness. So, we have it by derivation from
him; we shine in a borrowed light.

Secondly, for people, since God has advanced Ministers, know the necessity of
their calling; though God made you without them, he will not save you without
them. Know that you must reverence them for their works sake. Show your
respect by doing that which is commanded; for therein lies the especial
respect to a Minister, when that is practiced that he teaches.

In the last place; since God reckons things done by his servants as theirs,
when he does it: Let all people that do any thing for God, take heed of
stroaking their own heads. It is the error of Rome, in doctrine, and in
practice, they make men's good works meritorious, and make themselves saviors:
When we have done all we can, we are unprofitable; and God works all good
things in us, and all our works for us. That as Austen says, It is certain, O
God, he that reckons up his own merits, what does he reckon but thy gifts?

We may have comfort and contentment in our consciences, and may glory in those
things that God has given us in the temptations of Satan, but let us not
ascribe that to our selves, that belongs to God; for God begins the work, and
perfects it to his own praise. So much for that. Now we come to the execution.
Aaron did so, and upon the doing of it there came an innumerable company of
frogs that covered Egypt: here observe, The wonderful power of God, how
speedily and easily, and at what a distance he can work. Aaron no sooner
stretches forth his rod, but this was done; he does it speedily. And he does
but stretch out the rod, and all these creatures come abundantly. And he does
but put forth the rod toward the river. Says Tostatus, he was now in the Court
of Pharaoh, yet all this was done; therefore he works at a great distance.

Thus is the power of God remarkable in working quickly and easily, and at a
great distance. I will not stand long on these things, because in many passages
we meet with it. God at the first made the world, and with a word; He spoke the
word, and all was made. Therefore those Epicures and Atheists, that ask what
ladder and engine he had to raise this goodly frame? they may be answered by
that in the Psalm, He made them by his word: For as he speaks in his works;
The heavens declare the glory of God; so he works in his speeches. Nay, the
very will of God, not only his word, but his will: I will, be thou clean; not
only speak the word, and my servant shall be whole; but I will. How soon and
how easily, and at what a distance did the Lord destroy the Army of Pharaoh in
the red Sea? Exodus 14. So I might tell you of Sodom. Says Tully the heathen,
God can do all things without labor and defatigation. Says the old Poet, All
things are easy to God; he knows how to work when he sits still.

Therefore for the Use of it in a word: Let us stand in awe of God; if the Lord
can so easily, and quickly, and speedily, and at such a distance work, it is
in vain to contend and strive against his power. God does not need to fetch an
Army of men to overthrow poor sinners, he can do it by frogs, by the least
creatures; by his word he can drown the whole world. Well may we incline his
mercy by our repentance; but certainly we can never do our selves good by
resisting.

Secondly, never measure the work of God by any distance. It was a fault in
Naaman the Assyrian when he was to be cured of his leprosy, Elisha said, Go
wash in Jordan; says he, I thought he would have come out, and have laid his
hand upon the sore; as if it could not be wrought without touching. So, it was
some infirmity in the Ruler, Go down before my son dye: As if Christ could
do nothing without he were present. So Ioh. 11. says Martha, Lord if thou
had been here my brother had not dyed: As if God could not have prevented it
at a great distance. The Lord is able to show mercy from heaven, and to execute
wrath as far. Why do we speak of distance when the Lord is every where, and
fills all places. No man is able to get out of the circumference where God is
not. The Lord is present in all places, and does what he will in heaven and
earth; where, and how he will: there is no flying from his presence; if a man
go to heaven, or to hell, or to the utmost parts of the sea, there shall the
hand of God find him out. We come to another thing.

And the frogs came up, and covered all the land of Egypt. Mark how God
inlargeth the judgment; not one part of the land, but all the land was covered
with these vermin. God sometimes smites a whole family, as we see in the family
of Abimelech, Genesis 12. And God threatens to smite whole families head, and
foot, Deuteronomy. 28. God smites sometimes whole Cities, as we see Samaria had a
famine, a fearful one: and Jerusalem was vexed by famine, that as Josephus
says, The children were taught a new way into their mothers womb again, they
were feign to eat them for hunger. I, God smites diverse Cities together, as the
sisters of Sodom. Nay, God sometimes proceeds to smite a whole Country. The
sin of Saul was punished in the days of Ahab, for three years the heavens
were shut up till the bridle of heaven Eliah unloosed them. So God visited the
whole world. I will not speak of that great plague, that Evagrius says, in
his time there was a plague that continued in the world fifty years together;
though it possessed not all the world at one time, yet successively it went
over all. We have examples in Scripture, God overthrew the whole world by
water; and will he not when he shall bring a deluge of fire at the last.

The reason why God makes his judgments so general, is the generality of
sin. Look in all the instances I mentioned, Pharaoh and Abimelech. So in the
City of Samaria that was punished, it was full of sin; the greatest sins of
all Israel were in that Metropolis: The sin of Israel is Samaria. The Prophet
makes a sad complaint against Jerusalem, being the worst. So that City of
Sodom, you may easily see how ill they were that solicited God for vengeance,
that there were not ten righteous men found there, if there had, they had
secured all. It was an epidemicall complaint, a general disease. So we may say
of the days of Saul, when there was such a general famine, it was for a foul
sin. Nay, all the whole land was tainted. So in the days of Ahab, they were
full of Idolatry and wickedness: Eliah complained that there was such a
general defection, that he saw none besides himself to serve God; though God
told him of seven thousand that bowed not their knees to Baal, yet what were
these to all Israel? And in the days of the Prophets; and in the old world,
the blood and stain of sin, was so bad, that God knew not else how to wash
out that stain. So at the last day, Iniquity shall abound; therefore God will
bring fire to consume them.

For the Use of this: Solomon says, He went by the field of the sluggard, and
received instruction. Let us see how Gods judgments have spread. The
destroying Angel has been in all places, he has not stricken all places at
once; but he goes further and extends himself. Surely there is a generality
of sin. I would God, I had nothing to accuse mine own Nation of, as Paul
says: But why should I hold my peace when the sins of the land proclaim
themselves as the sins of Sodom? Who shall censure me or any Minister, for
laying down the cause of the plague? Look on some sins; how general is the
sin of pride? A common sin that fills the land from Dan to Beersheba, in
every corner, even to her that grindes at the mill. Nothing will keep people
from vanity this way. How common is the sin of excess? The sin of the
Court, of the City, of the Country; and among the base Gadarens this Devil is
entered into a herd of swine. It is come into the Country, and every room
smells of it. Nay, how does this sin reign in this City, that the Lords day
is divided between the Tavernes and the Church? Nay, will you not say, that
the Devil goes with the better part. So for swearing, for oaths the land
mournes. A common, general sin, that unnecessary vain sin. The oaths of
men, are like Ioabs sword ever drawn out; men can scarcely speak, but they
must swear. A man can come into no company, or place, but his righteous soul
will be vexed with this blasphemy against God. Nay, I would to God we could
say, that perjurie were not grown to a great height, men have no care of
oaths, though it were held sacred among the heathen.

What shall I say of uncharitableness? It is a crying, gross, common sin;
and a great number that seem to profess Religion, that are most forward and
zealous this way. The truth is, they are brinish salt lights, that spit, and
burn, and scald; they care not what dead flies they cast into this ointment.
It is far from the power of Religion, and the holy fire of charity.

I could instance in a great number; but what should I trouble you? By these
you may gather that God has a just controversy with this Nation of ours, and
the sin being so general; these frogs creeping in every corner, and croaking
in every nooke; when God sends his judgments in every coast, we must not but
say, He his righteous.

The last thing which I will conclude with, is this: This judgment, as it was
the second, so it seems to be much greater then the former: for in the former
judgment there was but the turning of the nature of a thing, the turning the
water into blood; but here, there is a creating of an innumerable company of
frogs. Again, there some might escape; there is no other likelihood, but the
Noblemen, and the King himself, and many of ability might have wine, and
other juices, and waters to satisfy their thirst: but here, there was not a
man in the Kingdom, but had frogs leaping upon him, and was annoyed by them in
bed, and board. And as I told you the last day, the waters turned into blood
annoyed but some senses, as the taste, and the sight; but these annoyed all.
They were ugly to the eye by their deformity, to the ear by their croaking
sound; and to the smell they could not endure them: They spoiled their taste,
they came among their victuals; and for their feeling, as I told you, both
Tostatus, and others, say, they were such frogs as were poysonfull, and would
do mischief, such as our toads that we are afraid of. From all this, this
being a greater judgment then the former, observe this; that Where God sees
not amendment, he will make the second judgment greater then the former. God
does not so punish, but he can punish a man more, Levit. 26.18. says God, I
will yet punish you seven times more. Vesichius upon the place, says, It
signifies that God would magnify his power in laying the judgment more upon
them. In Psalm. 78.38. the people of God it is said angered him, but he suffered
not his whole displeasure to arise. Psalm. 2. If his wrath be kindled but a
little, blessed are they that trust in him. But if his whole displeasure arise,
and break down in wrath, who shall stand? Rev. 6. He can make his jealousy
smoke, and break out in a flame, and burn to the bottom of hell. There are
degrees of Gods wrath; so in Psalm. 9.12. David prays against the enemies of
the Church, that God would punish them seven fold more, to lay more upon them.

There were a great many judgments upon Job; first, he heard of his goods
taken, and then of his servants, and then of his children, all oppressed by the
ruin of a house. And was it not so with Elie? how did the stood rise on him to
a great height? First, he hears of the discomsiture of Gods people, and then
of the death of his children, and then of the taking of the Arc; which I know
not whether it brake his heart or his neck soonest. Can Nebuchadnezzar heat
his oven seven times hotter then before? and Rehoboam make his little finger
heavier then his fathers loins? Shall those Lions that were so restrained, be
the more furious? And cannot God greaten his plagues, and inhance his
judgments to the full? he can add still.

It is said by the Schools, of the damned in hell, nothing can be added in the
extention of time; but for intention, God could add more, but that all his
ways are in mercy. Therefore if we be afflicted, say not that it is too much
that God has laid upon us, but wonder that it is no more. Do not say with
Rebecha, Why am I thus? as if God had dealt unjustly. Job, he in a passion
said, O that my grief were weighed; but in cool blood, he laid his hand upon
his mouth. He knew, that God was just and true in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. Does thy head ache? God could make thy heart ache. Have thou the
tooth ache? God could have afflicted thee with the strangurie, or with a violent
burning fever, that should have put thee to nothing but frenzy and madness:
This God could do: nay, it is Gods mercy that we are not consumed, therefore
do not wonder why it is so much.

Secondly, ever beware of continuance in sin. One judgment had passed
Pharaoh, and now another is on him. So all wicked sinners if they stand out,
and oppose God, and will not bow, God will increase their judgments more and
more. There are a great number in the world that think, if they have escaped
the stocks once, and have got free from some disease, they have a Supersedeas
for a long time. It is a vain persuasion, God deals gently, he first gives a
jerke or two, the next time twice as many; and if that will not do, the third
time he sets it on to purpose. God gives a sippe of the cup, if that will not
weane us from sinful pleasures, then God gives us a great draught; and if that
will not do, we shall suck out the dregs. Thou can not conquer him, he
will bow thee, or break thee. Think thou that because thou have escaped one
judgment, God cannot bring another? Oh, what treasures of wrath has God!
Suppose now thou art freed from a disease, and do not make good use of that,
God can give thee up to spiritual mischief, to add one sin to another.
Thou would not think this a judgment (it may be) but it is the worst of
all; for when God gives up a man to run further into sin, it is a pit that they
fall in that hate God: God is angry with such people out of all question. And
David had better have had the sword in his family, then to have been given up
from the committing of one sin to another. And the sin that the Israelites
run into, it was worse then the sword of Balaak. You see in Romans 1. when God
would punish the heathen to the full, He gave them up to their own hearts
lusts.

Again, if God give thee not up to this, cannot God smite thee with horror of
soul, with terror of conscience, those tempests of mind, as Jerome calls
them? As one calls Christ's sufferings, those unknown sufferings that none is
able to relate but he that knew them. O, if God leave thee to dismayed
thoughts, and terrors, and hellish cogitations, that sometimes the soul has;
what will become of thee?

But suppose God quit thee of this, that thou come not into these brakes when
thou offendest, if thou come to eternal torment, and God is able to do that;
all the afflictions of this life are nothing in comparison of that, they are
shadows, that is the substance of all, for extention of time. The afflictions
of this world are but things that pass too and again; and if it be foul now
and then, it may be clear again; but that judgment is a standing poole, and
a lake that continues firm, and shall for ever, when time shall be no more.
Therefore now judge whether it be good to fall into the hands of the living
God? He can smite thee with new plagues and diseases, with new torments; or
else he can give thee up to a reprobate sense; or else he can visit thee with
horror of conscience. And if thou escape all these, he can let thee go on in
thy way till thou come to the place of torment; when thou shall curse the time
that ever thou neglectedst the day of thy visitation. Therefore now let me be
Peter's Cock to crow, that if thou have forgotten thy salvation, and thy God
hitherto: Now forsake thine iniquities, and thy evil ways; or else look for
the improvement of judgments upon thee; and the plagues that come after, shall
be greater then those that went before. And no wonder if God heighten his
plagues, when men advance in their sins.

THE SIXTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 7.8. And the Magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of Egypt.

Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat the Lord that he
may take away the frogs from me, etc.


WE come now to the event of this judgment. The event is threefold.

First, here is the like done by the Magicians, verse 7.

Secondly, the removal of this judgment, to the end of verse 14.

Thirdly, the further obduration of Pharaohs heart, verse 15. that determines
this judgment.

In the first of these, the practice of the Magicians; we may observe here,

The work men; the Magicians:

And their instrument (as I may so call it) their incantations, and
enchantments.

And then the effect of their work, and operation: They did so; they brought
frogs.

But concerning these Magicians, and their enchantments, I spoke somewhat
formerly; therefore I shall say the less now.

I showed then, how the Devil has made use of Magicians, and inchanters in
all times of the world, and that for his own mischievous respects.

For first, hereby he has perverted many noble and worthy Sciences; such as
Natural Philosophy, Astronomy, Astrology, Arithmaticke, and Music; and
turned the edge of them against God, that founded and ordered them for his
glory.

Secondly, the Devil has wronged hereby, that that is the Queen of Sciences,
Theology, while he has diverted men's minds from necesary truths, and lead
them captive to foul errors.

Thirdly, the Devil, by means of magic, and enchantments, has fomented
heresies in the world. Therefore it is no vain observation, that the great
heretics of the primitive times, they were most of them Magicians, upon
search it will prove so.

Simon of Samaria, called Niger; he was held to be the great power of God; he
made the people believe, he could fly in the air, and that no army of men
could apprehend him; and he could make trees grow on the sudden.

After him came one Menander, that Justin Martyr speaks of, he professed great
matters: When he came to Antioch, he gave out that he and his disciples should
never dye; he had power to preserve himself from mortality.

Ireneus speaks of a foul heretic that was a Magician, that would show
tricks; that would turn the wine in the Eucharist, when it was white, he would
make it red, and fill a greater vessel with a lesser; diverse of those pranks
he played.

So the History says concerning Basilidas, and Martion, he was a Magician.
Eusebius speaks the like of Montanus, in whose heresy Tertullian (though else
a good man) was tardie. The people when they saw such great works as these,
they thought the doctrine must needs be of God.

Fourthly, the Devil has gained much by this practice in the world; for he
not only got admiration, but adoration. When such kind of works as these have
been admired in a wondrous and unlimited manner, adoration has followed to the
person. The Devil would give all the world to Christ to fall down and worship
him, Mat. 4. And he prevailed so far with people as to sacrifice their
children to Devils, Psalm. 106.37. And it is well known by stories of the
Indian parts, that most of those people sacrifice to the Devil, and worship
him.

Lastly, the Devil, by magic, and sorcery, and witchcraft, has not only
begotten, but nourished, and perfected many foul sins in the world in
practice. As lust has been perfected through magic spells, enchantments
have been used for the abusing of poor people. Revenge has been perfected
through magic. I think you will say by your own experience, that most of the
witches that ever have been discovered, have been so by malice. So sometime
it has served as a bawd to covetousness to bring wealth.

All that I will say (because I will not draw my Saw the same way again) is to
advise you in all things to keep moderation; for it is easy for a man to go
too far. Even in natural Philosophy, some people have so pored on the
creature that they have turned Atheists. And in Astrology, men have so
oversotted themselves, that judiciously, and conclusively, they have turned the
courses of men, calculated their nativity, and they will tell what death a man
shall dye; as if they were of Gods privy Council. Nay (Beloved) in Divinity
it is possible for a man to transgress his bounds, if he be not wise to
sobriety. Therefore it is good advice, let there be humility and sobriety. A
man may easily in the great deep of Divinity, pass beyond his depth, his feet
being carried away by the stream. It is easy for the fly that flutters about
the candle to burn her wings. Says Nazianzen in his sixteenth Oration, It
were better for a man to be sluggish a little, then too curious, to seek into
those retired secrets that God has kept secret. So much for that.

I will say no more of the persons, and of their enchantments, but only one
thing. It seems that Pharaoh soon sent for these people, when the judgment
was on him. These were the men that he trusted in, and he thinks to have ease
by them; he will see what can be done. A man would have thought, he should go
to God, and make his peace with him, to take off the edge of the judgment that
way. But will you have it?

Carnal minds in distress when the judgments of God are upon them, their
first course is to seek carnal means and comforts. That is the first thing:
God is sought in the last place. When Cain received his judgment from God, to
be a runnagate over the face of the earth, to find consistence in no corner,
he will see if he can disappoint the judgment by building of Cities; as if he
could lenifie his inward torment by his outward employment. So we see it was
with Saul, when he was troubled with an evil spirit; those that were about him
suggested that it was fit for him to seek a man that was excellent in music,
that he by his skill that way might help to condole his disturbed thoughts.
There was no looking up to God to make his peace with him that sent that
judgment on him. So in 1 Samuel 28. when he was in distress he runs to the
witch at Endor, and she must tell him the success of the battle. Thus it was
with Ahaziah, he sends to Baalzebub the god of Ekron, to consult if he should
recover of his sickness. Thus it was with those people in Jeremiah, when they
were told that the Caldeans should invade them, they cast themselves upon the
hope of Ethiopia, and Egypt, and made account that they should sustain them in
their adversity, and raise the siege of the other Army. So we see in the New
Testament, when Judas was stricken with horror of soul, he comes back to the
high Priests, thinking to find some comfort there. Like to Belteshazer, when
he saw the handwriting upon the wall; he sends for his Astrologians, and other
people that he put confidence in, and thinks that they could help him out of
the brakes. Nay, we find this true by experience; let Gods hand be upon a man
by a disease that is of an ill kind, and threatens the life, what does he
do? In the first place says Austen, the Physician is called for, and many
great rewards are promised if he be restored to his former latitude of health
again. In the last place, God is sought unto, and it may be the Minister sent
for, and it may be that means would not be used, if the other were not
despaired of.

Nay, it falls out so in regard of the terrors on men's souls. Men that are
troubled this way, what do they? Not seek to make their peace with God, they
seek for humane comforts, worldly means. It may be they will puzzle
themselves in a great number of business. In ancient time, when their children
passed through the fire to Moloch, they would drowned their cry with loud
instruments; so they think to silence the disturbance of conscience by
business. Others give themselves up to all recreations when they have
disturbance of soul, to reading of stories that are pleasant, and to riding
abroad, and whyling away the time with telling of tales, and by putting
themselves into company, and going to houses of gaming. All these are thought
to be excellent receipts against spiritual qualmes. Some would feign lay these
cares asleep by drinking, and drown them there. Thus there is no care had of
peacemaking with God. Men are not so sensible of the curing of the wound, only
they desire to help the aching of it. As a man that is in debt, he takes not
care for the discharging of his engagements; but all his study is, how he may
keep out of the hands of the officers.

For these, let them know that this is a very preposterous course, that only
becomes such as Pharaoh; For there is no evil in the City, but the Lord has
done is, therefore he must be sought unto; and in the first place, it is well
known, without him, all other outward comforts are unavailable. Let Pharaoh
send for his Wisemen, and do what he can, all shall not help him till God be
entreated. If we have all the comforts in the world, they will prove
insufficient, if God put not warmth and life into them; therefore let us seek
him.

Look in all the examples before, and see how unsuccessefull all those
comforts were to wicked men. Did Cain find rest when he had built his City? he
could not rest, he was a vagabond for all that. Did Saul find comfort in his
music? The evil spirit had the insulting upon him now and then, and was
fiercer. Had he comfort by the witch of Endor? No, he made his wound deeper.
And Ahaziah never came from his bed. So we see what poor comfort Judas had, he
was turned off with a Look thou to it. So, those that neglect to seek God in
their sickness, they trust to the Physicians like Asa, and they never recover
of their disease. And those horrors of conscience, when men seek to silence
their cares with delights and pleasures, and recreations; it falls out as with
a man in a hot fever that has taken a draught of cold water, when he has
drank it, he thinks he has abated the inward fire; but the cup is scarce from
his mouth, but he complains of the improvement of the burning disease. As
money that is taken up for the satisfying of an arrest it satisfies for that
time, but it bites deeper after. A man that is near drowning will catch at any
reed, or straw that floats upon the water, and thinks to help himself by it;
but they prove matter of entanglement.

Therefore the way for a men to escape this, is to go to the Lord; get some of
the blood of Christ, that he may speed better; one drop of that is enough to
satisfy the soul, and to cover all the heat, and fervor of it. Now let us
take it into consideration, and ever seek God in the first place; but wave all
comforts and contentments in the world till God be pacified.

It is an Ironie that God bestows upon those, Deuteronomy. 32.37. Where are their
gods, the rock of their strength? Let them rise up and help them, and be
their protection. So the Prophet says, Call upon your gods now, those that ye
worshipped, and see if they will help you in the time of distress. None but
God is a sure refuge; and all the things of the world shall say to a man then,
as the King of Israel said to the woman in the famine in Samaria, If God do
not help, how shall I help thee? So much for that.

Now we come to the third thing, the work it self, They did so, with the
enchantments they wrought. Here some questions must be resolved; every one of
which, will yield some observations as we pass along.

The first is this, made by Austen in his questions upon Exodus, Can they fetch
frogs? when fetched they them? for all Egypt before was spread over with frogs,
and by the touching of the waters, and the waters crawled abundantly, whence
had they these frogs?

Certainly says Hugo de sancto, the Magicians must do it in other waters, or
else it had been no glory, for that abounded with frogs already.

Austen for the resolution of it refers us to that he had said before. It is
said they were furnished with water out of Goshen, that was not touched, and
thence they raised those frogs by smiting of Goshen water.

But some may say; would God suffer Goshen to he troubled? and the Magicians
to have their will upon that place?

I answer, not that it was any disturbance to the people of Israel; for without
doubt their waters were kept sweet, though they were touched by the Magicians.
If frogs crawled out of them, it was to Pharaoh, to molest them; but in Goshen
it was done. We may observe this; that God sometimes suffers the Devil to play
his prizes upon his ground for his further confusion. As we see here. The
Church, the assembly of Saints are holy, we know what reaks the Devil plays
among them oft-times. The Altar of God was a holy place, yet Melitius brought
his Idol, and set it upon the very Altar it self. As holy as our Lord himself
was, yet he was carried by the evil Spirit from the pinnacle to the mountain:
But God suffered it so to be for the further confusion of that adversary. God
gives the Devil liberty, not only to invade the goods but the person of Job, a
holy man; that was high in Gods affection; yet God gave him power against him,
only preserve his life. So we see he suffers sometimes his dearest Saints to
be a kind of Theater for the Devil to play his prises upon. As we may
observe sometimes in blasphemous thoughts cast into the hearts of Gods dear
children; not those that are ascending cogitations from the corruption of man's
heart; but injected, cast in by the Devil; darted into the soul like
lightning, and come as thick as hail: But these are to terrify only, not to
persuade, as we may know by the experience of them, for they are against sense
and reason. Now all those that suffer them may well be said to sustain them,
and not to do them; they are merely passive; whatsoever is done, is rather
done upon them then by them: that must be their comfort, though they be
exagitated in this kind and troubled: God gives the Devil leave to play his
prises in his own ground; it is for their greater comfort, and for the Devils
confusion: For I have ever observed those people that have felt them in the
greatest measure have had tender consciences, and have been more sanctified in
their lives and conversations ever after.

So then (beloved) we must not think strange if God suffer sometimes this
wicked one to play his prises, he does it for the further confusion of him; as
for Job, as Austen says, Job was proved, and the Devil confounded.

The second question will be this, Why Pharaoh was so earnest to have frogs
brought? had he not enough of that judgment yet by that that Aaron and Moses
had done? All the land crawled, and they came up upon the body of Pharaoh, and
into his bedchamber, and molested him to the full: what! would he have more
frogs? Know, It is the property of way ward froward minds, not to be so
sensible of the smart of the judgment, as they are willing to illude it. If a
wicked man could, he would not see God in a judgment, and take knowledge of
him. Surely this was the humor of them in the days of Noah; when it rained
abundantly in that manner, they were rather ready to impute it to natural
causes, then to see God in it; or else they would have waded to the Arc even
to the middle, and have entreated entertainment there, rather then have stood
out. So you shall find it was with those Philistines, when Dagon was fallen,
and broken in pieces, that they saw apparently, he was not able to help
himself; he was fallen in the presence of the same Arc, the victory over
which they ascribed to their god; yet they impute it to mischance, and to want
of attendance; they would not see God in it. And in the same Chapter, when they
were smote with Emerods for keeping the Arc, they continued seven months
before they would see God in it, till there was an outcrie among the people,
none will acknowledge that God was the cause of that fearful judgment. So we
see the Assyrians had a great defeat by the people of Israel, 1 King. 12. yet
rather then they would acknowledge God to be the cause of it, they think it
was the advantage of the place; if they fought with them in the valley they
should overcome them; for they thought God was only the God of the mountains.

So it was with the very Pharisees, rather then they would acknowledge Gods
work, in our Blessed Saviors great Works of casting out of Devils, (because
they can do somewhat that way) they blaspheme, and say, He cast out Devils by
the Devil. So often in the world if a man have sickness, and disease, he thinks
of the meat he has eaten, and imputes it to the house, and to the air; but
never looks to God. So in distress of conscience, when a man comes to trouble,
and horror of soul; he is loath to think other a great while then that it is
melancholy; and thus he nourishes himself in that vain and idle conceit.

Again, you may observe, how A wayward, froward mind by his own courses,
hasteneth his own woe. Pharaoh would have conclusions tried by the Magicians,
and behold, they bring more frogs then there were before. So a perverse mind
will ever do mischief enough to it self. Sarah will be trying conclusions,
because the Lord did not grant her a child in her own time; but she prayed
for it; for she was wonderfully troubled by the pettulancie, and insolency of
her maid, and by the flearing and jearing of Ishmael: Nay, and all her
posterity fared the worse, for the Hagarens were great enemies to Israel. So it
was with those Israelites, they were passionate, they must have a King; nothing
will serve them but the satisfying of their own desire, they were confident of
their own purpose; though they were forewarned of the difficulty and
inconvenience, yet they must have it, though they repented at large. So David's
heart was set upon numbering of the people, Ioab modestly, and faithfully
disswades him; it will not be; he reaped to himself a great measure of
repentance: so I might show in other particulars. Let a violent mind alone to
it self, and it will be torment enough to it self. Says Austen an inordinate
mind is always a sufficient tormenter.

Let us ever take heed of perverseness and frowardness; these are ill guides,
we follow that that will lead us to fearful precipices. A man that is
distempered, is ever apt to go out at the wrong door. Pharaoh had more need
to have desired the Magicians to remove the judgment then to bring more frogs:
But he desired to have his humor satisfied this way, though it tend to his
further woe. So much for that question.

A third question is, What kind of frogs these were.

Some say that they were true frogs, and that the Devil brought them from
other places secretly, and invisibly, and so laid them there before Pharaoh.
Beloved, there is no impossibility in this; for it is well known the Devil is
of great power, he can transport the body of a man from place to place; then he
can bring creatures quickly from one place to another. Many strange things are
told: Albertus Magnus, tells us of the rayning of many great creatures, that
might be by the Devil: The story tells us of Gigas, that was invisible to
people: It might not be so much by virtue of the ring as by the Devil. So he
made Images to move, and to speak. Arius Maximus tells us of the Image of
Ionia, that when it was asked whether it would go to Rome or no? answered, I.
That Image of Fortune, that when they spoke to it, she answered, You
consecrate merightly. Certainly the Devils power is great, and he is able to
do more then we are able to express.

Therefore (by the way) I would not have people slight his power too much.
There are a great many people in the world, that make a tush of the Devils
power. We have heard in former times of Fairies and Hobgoblins, and walking
Spirits; and they have learned so to contemn those, that the Devil is no way
terrible to them. But let them know what the Scripture says concerning him, He
is the Prince of the air, and is able there to make storms, and fearful
noise; he is able to make the sea swell and roar, he is able to demolish the
greatest building, to pull down trees, and plants that are fetled; he is able
to afflict the bodies of men in a fearful manner; you know how he possessed some
in the time of Christ; he made them cut themselves with sharp stones; be made
them rent their flesh, and tear and foame in a fearful manner; he cast them
into the fite and water, that if you have seen them distracted creatures in
Bedlam, the case of those that were possessed in Christ's time was far worse.
This is the power of the Devil. There is no tush to be made of it.

Let us make better use of it, to bless God for our preservation by his power,
that he has kept his good hand over us, that he could not have his will
against us. For know, if the Devil might do as much hurt as he would, it
would be woeful for many of us; nay for all of us. This is our comfort says
Chrysostom upon Mat. 12. he that tells us he is the strong man, tells us that
he is bound, God has him in a chain, he cannot do more then he permits him,
shall I say against Job? nay not to the swine he cannot enter into them without
our Lords leave, Mat. 8.

Therefore let us bless God that has kept his blessed hand of protection over
us, and kept us from the violence of this roaring Lion.

And (Beloved) as God has graciously kept us from the power of the Devil, at
least from feeling the effects of his power; let us take heed of betraying our
selves to him. This is an ordinary fault in regard of the souls of men. There
is no sin in the world, that the Devil can ever fasten upon a man, if a man
do not give him entertainment. It is a certain truth that the Fathers deliver
unanimously. Says Issidore Peluciota, the Devil may deceive, but he can never
compel us. So Austen, The Devil hurts not by compelling, but by persuading;
and he makes a resemblance of him there to a fell dog, or a filthy creature
that is tied up in a chain; he may bark, but he cannot bite without a man
come within his reach. If a mad dog be bound up, if a man be bitten he may
thank himself, why did he come so near? Says the same Father, he cannot
extort consent from thee, but request, and entreat it. So Bernard to the same
purpose, he does not overthrow us, he only moves us, and we give way, and so
are authors of our own woe.

Therefore God having so graciously restrained him, we should not cast our
selves into his clutches, to exercise his power and malice against us, and
against the hope of a better Kingdom.

But I tell you in the next place the more common opinion is, that these frogs
were but such in appearance. Thus the Father say, many of them. Justin Martyr
speaking of these things that the Magicians did, says directly, they were only
the work, the tricks of the Devil that abused the sight of men, and deluded
them. So Gregory Nycene in his book of the life of Moses, he says, as their
serpents were nothing but very shows, so these other things that were done by
the Magicians, were done by legordemaine, by cousenage. Austen speaking of
Iannes and Iambres, he says, that all that these Magicians did was a fained
emulation of that that was done by Aaron, and not in truth. So Jerome says,
they imitated those works that Moses and Aaron did, but they were not in
truth. Now if we pitch on this, we shall have a good observation, and that is
this; you see the great Mountebanke of the world; The Devil for the more easy
conveyance of wickedness into the minds of men, you see how be imitates God
in all his ways.

God makes a covenant with his people; so the Devil he makes a covenant with
Witches, and Sorcerers, and Magicians; there is either an open or a secret
contract ever. God has his Sacraments, so the Devil has his; he furnishes
them with spells, and incantations, and other ceremonies, at the use whereof he
binds himself to appear. Thirdly, God spoke to his servants by dreams; so
does the Devil, and instructs people in strange visions and apparitions.

Fourthly, God has his Temples, and Oracles so had the Devil, one at Delphos,
and in other places to abuse people by doubtful answers.

Again, God had service, and sacrifice; so the Devil has sacrifices, what
were all those sacrifices that were tendered to an imaginary godhead by the
heathens? there was no solemnity spared. Nay, the Devil knowing, that God had
commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son, he caused some to make their children
to pass through the fire. Still he continues to imitate.

In the primitive times, he made the heretics to imitate the orthodox in their
teaching, and conversation, and so under a show of holiness soured the world
with their leven. Nazianzen says of Julian, that he was an Ape; for as an Ape
imitates the man, so did he the Christians in a humor. He would build Schools
and Hospitalls, places for the receipt of the poor; and places for Nuns and
Virgins, and all for the imitation of Christians: whereas he was a Camelion,
one that had no truth, nor sincerity in him. And still the Devil has done the
like.

The author of that imperfect work of Chrysostomes, says, that there is
never a child of God, that has that in truth, but there be hypocrites in the
world that have it in the counterfeit. If a man had seen Absalom pay his vows
in Hebron. If he had seen Iezebel proclaim a fast; and Herod talk with the
Wisemen, that as soon as they heard where Christ was, they should come and
bring him word, to go, and worship him; who would have thought but that these
had been themselves? It was the Devil that painted these mud walls.

So now, there is somewhat that goes for prayer in the world that is
lip-labor. There is somewhat that goes for repentance that is not worthy the
name of it, but is a sorrow that is to be repented of. There is somewhat goes
for zeal that is not a holy earnestness, but a fiery fury. There is somewhat
that goes for fasting, that will not pass current in Gods Chequer, Is this the
fast that I have chosen? There is somewhat that goes for faith, that is
presumption, that is counterfeit: Yea there is somewhat goes for charity, and
is nothing less; for Paul says, a man may give all his goods to the poor,
and yet have no charity.

Then for the Use of this, (Beloved) what reason is there to get knowledge, to
be able to discern of spirits, to discern of things that differ, to separate
between the precious and the vile. We must not receive every spirit; all the
spirits that come out are not of God: How shall this be done but by a good
measure of knowledge? For the Devil can write upon the boxes, medicine, that
have poison indeed in them. The Devil can set a fair gloss upon false wares,
no question of that.

Again secondly, in regard of our selves, how ought we to labor for
sincerity? for if the Devil set men to counterfeit the best things, as he
counterfeits the works of God, how should we labor for fincerity?

And this will difference us from all the hypocrites in the world. The Painter
can paint the color of flame, and the bowing form, but not the heat. So an
hypocrite may go as a Saint in outward performances; he may fast, and pray,
and communicate, and give alms, and what can he not do? but when it comes to
sincerity of soul there is a broad difference; they are wide the whole heavens.

Therefore let us labor to have our hearts upright, and then God will pass by
many infirmities, where he sees sincerity. Far be it from us of being
ambitious of so much holiness as may make the world only believe that we are
religious. It is the fault of many that resort to the congregations to get an
opinion. Let us not desire to please men, but to love God, and to please him;
our care being always to please God, and not to deceive the world and cosen
them. We may draw a mist before their eyes easily to cosen them, they judge by
our words, and works, and cannot go further, but God judges the heart. If he
see us as the apples of Sodom, as a fair glove on a foul hand, and like the
Sepulchers that Christ speaks of, that within are full of rottenness, we
shall have the greater judgment.

There be too many of these braggers, as Basil calls them, those that make a
show of what they are not. The time will come when God will wash off this
seeming with rivers of brimstone. An hypocrite, certainly if there be any place
lower in hell, he shall have it. So I have done with the third question.

One observation more (before I leave the verse) that shall be profitable. These
Magicians resembled the rod, and brought serpents, and after turned the water
into blood; and now the third time they satisfy Pharaoh so far that he
thinks that they were true frogs that they brought; so he seemed to stand out
against the judgment of God for the time.

See how far God suffers wicked practices to prosper, and succeed the first,
second, and third time. There are many examples of this in Scripture. Joseph's
brethren, you know what they did to their brother, and how clean they carried
it away, after they had dipped his coat in blood, and brought it to their old
father; the poor credulous old man, he thought indeed a wild beast had
devoured him; and so they stand as upright in his opinion as before. This slept
twenty years, they went clear.

David himself had a mind to Bathsheba, he sends for her, she comes, and
becomes pregnant by him; he desires to enjoy her without a rival, her husband
stands in the way, he sends a letter, and causes him to be slain, every thing
prospers according to his desire. So Ahab and Iezebel she gets letters
written, and sends to the Judges, they entertain them, and subborne false
witnesses, Naboth is convinced, condemned, and stoned; Ahab comes and takes
possession; there is not a rub in all these smooth paths. So the accusers of
Daniel, they get the King to make an edict, to trap the good man, every thing
succeeds; they have not a rub till he comes, and was cast into the den.

We see in experience, the lustful man, here he lays a bait, and sees a base
fellow to be officious to him; his mind is satisfied as Amnons was upon his
sister. So with the covetous man, he that sets it down with a full resolution,
that he will be rich; he takes these, and these unjust courses, they prosper
and succeed; his ships come home, his merchandise come in, he attaines that
he would have. So the ambitious man, he is officious with this courtier, and
flatters, and soothes; with that he ascends up by degrees all the rounds of
honor, till he come to be the only man. So the avengefull man, he attaines
his purpose as we see Absalom, he makes no question, all is done, and he
himself shall not be detected by any body; they were willing to punish Amnon,
and so he continues without repentance.

Some man may ask the reason, how it comes to pass that these wicked
businesses should succeed, and prosper, and go on with encouragement?

First, God will show mercy to the vessels of wrath, Romans 9. that wicked men
may be inexcusable when he shall rise to judgment, God shall say, I was long
before I pulled my hand out of my bosom.

Secondly, the Lord does it in just judgment, because wicked men contemn his
grace and favor, for the further obduration of them. As in Rom, 1. when they
turned the glory of God into the similitude of a beast that eats hay. God
turned them up to their own lusts, to be transported with their own
affections, and they received thereby the recompense of their sin.

Thirdly, God does this for the trial of his children. To go no further then
this instance; Was it not a wondrous probate of Moses and Aarou to see these
men prosper? what! the first, second and third time to be successful. Moses
comes with this persuasion to the land of Egypt, that he should do those
signs in the fight of Pharaoh, that should not only convince them, but incline
them to a dismission of the people, and now to be matched with a company of
Inchanters. All their glory and authority lay upon these works, and now for
these to do these, the first, second and third time, how did this set back
the work of God? For if Pharaoh were fomented in his obstinacy, how could
they expect deliverance? this was a great probate of them, and God intended it
for that purpose.

For the Use of this, remember always, that success is a poor ground to
justify an action upon. The heathenman could say in his time, Felix, etc. If
one have success in wickedness it is accounted a virtue. Dionysius after he
had robbed Esculapius Temple, and had a fair wind, he thought that the Gods
loved sacrilege. And it may be Jeroboam loved Idolatry the better, because he
heard of the Prophets punishment that was seduced, that spoke against the
Altar. And those in Ier. 44. thought well of offering cakes to the Queen of
heaven, because they had all abundance. Like the argument that one makes for
the restitution of the Idolatry of Rome, because it is a flourishing
Commonwealth. Among Bellarmines arguments, one of his notes of the Church is,
External felicity. The success of things is but a poor ground to go upon;
yet many men reason so in these times. As the worldly man will say that the
Minister says often that God will plague such and such sins as I know my self
guilty of; yet I find no check of conscience, no man is able to control me,
I prosper in my bames as well as another man, and my come is as thick, and my
line holds, my business prospers; I think that God is not so offended with me
as some ministers talk of. Many a man nourishes his heart as in a day of
slaughter, because of success.

Poor deluded soul, that art conscious to thy self that thy ways are naught,
and yet justifies it because of success. God is a patient and long-suffering
God, and suffers people to go on as he did Pharaoh into the middle of the sea,
and there cut off his chariots. He suffers them to go a while, not that they
shall always prosper, but to make the cup more bitter after long prosperity.

See it in all the examples before, see if they did not repent themselves of
that peace that they enjoyed. Joseph's brethren carried it away smoothly; but
God comes to a sharp reckoning in the conclusion; they were in a great agony,
they knew not how to extricate themselves. So David, he went smoothly for a
time; but after it cost him many a tear, he made his bed to swim. So Ahab, he
wished a thousand times he had not meddled with the vineyard, the sauce was so
sharp with the meat. So Daniels accusers they reaped the judgment they
intended against him, the Lions had power over them, they repented that ever
they stirred that stone. So many covetous men in the world that have gathered
goods by oppression; his line holds for a time, it may be for his own life;
but who has not seen the judgment of God on his posterity, that a man may
read the fathers sin in the childs punishment?

So the revengefull, the lustful, the ambitious man, God comes home to them,
and so he will to others. Men may laugh, and rejoice, because of success, take
heed, when the reckoning is paid; God will rise in judgment, and then woe to
those that thrive in wicked ways.

It is the observation of a Father; all things are said of the rich man, Luke
16. in the time past, There was a rich man, and he fared deliciously every day,
and he was clothed in purple, and thou have received all thy good. So these
people, the time will come, when they shall be forced to say they had their
profit, and their pleasure here, according to their desire, and so they have
had all that good that ever they shall have; they must be content with it,
there is no more now, but an expectation of wrath, and mischief, the cup of
the Lord is full, it is mingled, the wicked of the earth shall suck the dregs
of it.

In the second place, censure not Gods providence, nor justify the wicked
because they thrive, and prosper in their ways, and courses, and designs,
Fret not thy self for the wicked, Psalm. 37. David was much taken with it,
Psalm. 73. he says, That his foot had nigh slipped when he saw the prosperity
of the wicked. Jeremiah desired to dispute with God upon this theme. The broad
spreading baytree of the wicked moves emulation in the children of God; they
think they have cleansed their hands in vain. But go into the Sanctuary, and
there you shall see that God has set them in slippery places. Though their
line hold here, yet those lines tie them to judgment; they shall be tied as
the vulture to the heart of Titius. Pity them, their woe is to come: Where is
the children of God having had hardship in this world, shall have a blessed
compensation in the world to come.

I should come to the second event, the removal of this judgment, I will only
touch one thing in the front, and so commit you to God.

It is like enough that Pharaoh sent to the Magicians to know if they could
remove the judgment, he found them unable, or else he would not entreat Moses
and Aaron to do it. Here is that that will make Pharaoh unexcusable; for it
has been questioned, whether Pharaoh were not excusable in holding out
against the command of God, and the commission of Moses, because he was thus
deluded by his Inchanters? For say they, how could he be persuaded that Moses
came from God with a special command, when his own Inchanters did the like?
so they extenuate his sin.

But suppose they did it by as great power, and divine virtue as Moses and
Aaron, and he had no reason to think that Moses and Aaron were any better; yet
this is unexcusable that they could not remove the judgment.

So let men have never so many pretenses, there is somewhat that will hold
conscience still that it will never give out of the hands of it: The conscience
will be hampered with something; let the wicked man have ten thousand
Apologies, there is somewhat that will hold conscience whereby it will be
snared to judgment. Joseph's brethren can say much for themselves for the
slaughter of the Sychemites, that they did it in a way to vindicate the honor
of their family; Should he use our sister as a where? but there is one thing
that makes it hold sin, the abuse of the ordinance of God, to make it a
midwife to deliver them of their sin. So Saul may make a fair gloss that he
had spared the goods of the Amalekites for sacrifice; but there is one thing
that holds him; what is that? that he had gone expressly against the command
of God; for he bad him spare none. So Ahab had much to say for himself, he
came upon fair terms to Naboth for his vineyard, he offered him money,
besides he knew what Ahab was. But there is one thing that will have power over
him; what is that? that his wife should have power over his seal, to frame a
letter to undo the man. So the Scribes and Pharisees, they put it off, Did we
persecute this man? Will thou bring this man's blood upon us? we did it in
zeal, he seemed to oppose the law of Moses; but one thing will hold them to
judgment, because it was malice in them against Christ, because he reproved
them so plainly that they could never claw it off.

For the Use of it: Never think when you come to Judgment, of Apologies, and
fig leaves, that will be too narrow for your nakedness; away with these
subterfuges and starting holes. God never brings a man to judgment, but he
has enough to judge him for, by the testimony of his own conscience, as
Pharaoh here, that when he knew it must be of God, yet he was hardened. The
conscience as it is a register in man, at the day of Judgment, it will be an
accuser of man, and justify Gods most severe proceedings against him. So much
for this time.

THE SEVENTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 8. Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat the Lord that
he may take a way the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the
people go that they may do sacrifice to the Lord.


NOw we come to the second event, that is, the removal of the judgment. We
must consider,

First, how it is motioned, and entreated for in verse 8.

Then how Moses engages himself to perform it, verse 9, 10, 11.

Thirdly, how he acts and performs it in deed, and puts it in execution, in
verse 12, 13, 14.

The first of them is in verse 8. And there are two things in it briefly:

A petition, and

A promise.

Pharaohs request is, That they would entreat God that he might be freed from
these noisome, fearful frogs.

His promise is, That he will let the people go, and sacrifice to the Lord.
But first I will speak of that that leads them in; that is, Pharaoh called for
Moses and Aaron.

It is like enough that when the Inchanters had to his apprehension brought
forth frogs, that he slighted Moses and Aaron, and dismissed them, as if they
were not the servants of a greater God then he worshipped; for sure he thought
that these people that brought frogs to his appearance, could also remove them.
But now he begins to feel the smart of the judgment; it is likely, having
consulted with these Sorcerers, they cannot fit him this way. Now he cannot get
from under the wrath of God, he calls for them. Our observation shall be this;
that The time will come, that godly men shall be in request with those that
despised them.

God will bring it about, that good, and godly people shall be in request with
those that formerly despised and slighted them. Thus it was with Abimelech,
and his Philistines, Genesis 20.29. they vilified Isaac, they hated him and
maligned him, and the wrath of them was so fierce that they drove him out of
their Country; yet he was no sooner gone, but the King and his Courtiers, they
come after him, and desire to make a league with him, and that he would be
pleased to swear to them that he would do them no harm; for they saw that he
feared God, and that the hand of God was with him. The like we see in Joseph's
brethren; how did they contemn and despise Joseph, and called him in scorn,
The dreamer? as if he had befooled himself in those presages of his
advancement; yet God brings it about that this man that they had so scorned,
they were feign to sue to him, forgive the trespass of the servants of thy
fathers God, in that we have done foolishly, Genesis 50.17. The like we see in
Moses, Exodus 32. how he was slighted and contemned by the Israelites; As for
this Moses, we know not what is become of him. But they spoke of him in a low
style; yet after a while, when the judgment of God was upon them, they were
feign to fly to him as their best refuge on earth, and desire him to mediate a
peace. So in Exo. 12. Aaron joins with Miriam in emulation against Moses, and
speak of their brother in diminution; but after Aaron entreats him not to lay
that sin to their charge that they had committed foolishly, and suffered his
sister to be a reproach to the world. The like we see in Iephtah, he was put
out of his fathers house, and contemned, because he was the son of an harlot,
Judge. 11. yet when they were infested by their enemies, they were feign to
seek to him, and entreat him to be their Captain. So we see in Saul, you see
how he scorned David, he would not so much as call him by his right name: Where
is the son of Isha that he does not come to meat? And will none of you tell
me that my son, and the son of Isha have conspired against me? Yet he that
he contemned he bowed to when he had him in the cave, and gave pregnant proof
of his loyalty, he desired him that he would be good to his posterity, and not
cut them off. So it was with Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. he stretched forth his hand
in contempt and hatred (I join them together) against the Prophet, and that
hand that he stretched out, he could not draw in again; and then he was feign
to entreat the Prophet that he would entreat the face of God that his arm
might be restored.

So we see in Hester, Haman put her in the same Bark with all the Jews; and
it is like enough in that respect and name, because she was a Jew he
disesteemed her; after he was feign to sue to her for his life, that she would
mediate with the King that the edge of his wrath might be taken off, Hest. 7.
And Jeremiah that was so much despised by Zedechiah and his Princes; that
Zedechiah was feign to sue to him that he would pray for him, Ier. 37.3. And
not to multiply more, you know how much the rich man scorned the poor beggar;
yet the time came that being in hell, in torments, he begged a boon of him,
that is, that he might be sent with a little water to cool his tongue, Luke
16.24. And this is that Solomon has Prove. 14.19. The bad shall how before the
good, and the wicked at the door of the righteous. There is a bowing that
wicked men make sometimes to the good, that David speaks off, Psalm. 10. they
crouch and creep, and humble themselves, and all to impose upon the credulity
of the righteous, and the sooner to ensnare them. But Solomon his son,
speaks of another bowing, when the wicked are forced by Gods overruling
providence to supplicate and sue to the children of God to desire their
friendship, and mediation, and intercession, that they despised and maligned
before.

What may be the ground of this?

First, God has planted an awfulnesse, and majesty in his children that makes
them venerable to the wicked sometimes. I speak not of such a splendour as Moses
had that the Jews could not look on for the glory of his countenance. I speak
not of such a glory as Christ had, that Hierome says was starre-like, that
drew the people to see him. Nor such as he speaks of Julian, that had such a
splendour that Maximianus was afraid to look on him, lest he should make him
turn Christian. Nor such as Steven had, God made that Diamond so sparkle in the
dark, that they beheld his face as the face of an Angel.

But I mean, there is an awful authority that God has put upon his children,
that makes the wickeds eyes dazzle. Solomon says Eccles. 8.1. Wisdom makes
the face of a man to shine: Cajetan understands it of that authority that God
has planted in his Children that makes them awful to those that are wicked.
All the people feared Samuel exceedingly, 1 Samuel 12.18. and it is said that
wicked Herod feared John, because he was a holy and a just man, Mark. 6.14.

Again, secondly, God does this to make his word true: for he has said, He
that humbles himself shall be exalted, and he that exalts himself shall
be humbled. Now the children of God often put their mouths in the dust; they
are low, and humble, therefore God will take a time to exalt them. As David,
he carried himself humbly, and how ever some detracters dis-figured him to his
Prince, he never spoke of him without reverence: therefore God exalted him, and
so exalted him that he did bring the proud spirit of Saul to sue to him. So
Mordecat, he was a humble man, he sat in the gate, he was content with his
condition: God exalted him, and how did he make that proud spirited Haman to
stoop so low as to advance him?

Thirdly, God thinks fit to make his Children a compensation in the sight of
men; They are brought to that strait sometimes that they are feign to sue to
the wicked. Jacob was so perplexed for want of bread, that he was feign to
send to Egypt for corn, and was feign to pacify his brother and to send
present before him, to humble himself, and to fall to the ground so many times
before he came at him. And in Lam. 5.6. they gave their hands to Assyria, and
Egypt, for bread: those that were their mortal enemies, they were fain to
comply with them for bread. As I said of Hester before; she sued for her life.
Now then the good God that they serve, to make them co^pensation, brings the
wicked to sue to them. As they are forced to sue to the wicked sometimes for
relief in their necessities; so the wicked shall sue to them.

It may be showed in all the examples before alleged. And likewise in Jobs
kinsmen, though they insulted over the miserable poor man, and censured him at
their pleasure, yet after they were feign to sue to Job, and God would not be
reconciled to them till he had sued for them.

For the use of this. First, me thinks it might take off the edge of wicked
men, in regard of the persecution of those that fear God. For a man has so
much understanding that he will not irritate, and provoke such as he thinks
he shall be beholden to after, for fear the suite of his need be repelled
with the error of his prosperity; yet such is the madness of the wicked, to
be discourteous, and injurious most to those that they are like most to be
beholden to. I know their proud spirits scorn the thought of ever being
beholden to the children of God. Yet so God brings it about, though it may be
they will not sue to them; yet though their blindness will not let them see,
or their unthankfulness to acknowledge it, yet they be beholden to them. For
Lot bayled Sodom, while he was with them. If Moses stand not in the gap,
fierce judgments come among the proud people. If these pillars bear not up
the house, it will fall about their ears. If these stakes do not hold the
hedge, they are laid open to all misery Augustine in lib. de Civ. Dei. He
wonders that a company of people that escaped in the sacking of a City, by
professing themselves to be Christians, that they should persecute Christians
afterward, when they had been beholden to the name of Christ for their escape.
And who would not wonder at the madness of the world, that persecute those
that they may be, and are beholden to daily? and those be the people of God,
by whose intercession they escape judgments.

Secondly, it should teach the people of God,

First, Direction, and

Then Comfort.

First, Direction; let them make much of goodness, and love it with the inside
of their hearts: for this is that that will not only commend them to God, but
make them awful to the wicked. This is that that will make one of the Children
of God weigh down a thousand of the sons of Beliall. This is that that will
make them gold, when the wicked shall be accounted dross. It will make them
good Come, when the wicked of the earth shall be chafe, it will make them
herbs, and flowers when the wicked shall be weeds, fit for nothing but to be
burned.

Secondly, for their comfort, though they be contemned by a great number of
profane ones, the time will come that God will exalt them: he will make the
wicked to bless their condition, and it may be seek to them. For if ever God
bring a wicked man to terrors of soul, he magnifies the estate of a good man,
and thinks he is the happiest man in the world; he wishes a thousand times
that he were in his estate: and when the Angel of God meets him as he did
Balaam between two walls, that he can go no way from him, (I mean when
death comes) he desires to die the death of the righteous, and that his last
end may be like his. And then he sues to the righteous man to pray for him, and
intercede at the throne of grace.

If this be not enough for comfort, know that you shall judge these wicked
ones, 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? If
that be not enough, the wicked shall see the Children of God exalted, and
shall gnash their teeth, and consume away; and shall speak as they in Wisdom,
We tho ught his life madness, and his end horror, and lo he is preferred
before us.

Lastly, to spread it further, let it be a comfort to all ministers, that are
to the people as Moses and Aaron here were messengers to Pharaoh. It is likely
they may receive disgrace and disparagement, as if the work were but an unjust
work. Who is so forward to persecute the sons of God as the sons of
Belial? Let this comfort them, for if they continue in their course, and preach
sound doctrine, and live an unblameable life, God will make these stoop one
day. The people for all their contempt of Samuel, they were feign to entreat
him to pray for them, 1 Samuel 12. And those that flouted them in Act. 2. they
were feign to come for direction, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And the
Jailer that clapped the Apostles in Irons, when there was an earthquake, and the
doors of the prison flew open, and every man's bonds did fly from him, he
comes trembling, and will do any thing. And as Theodoret reports of Ambrose
his passage to Theodotius; though the Courtiers bad him slight that he did,
he could not put it off; he was feign to send, he was feign to submit to the
penance. So the world, let them slight the Ministers of God as they will, the
hour will come, they will be caught in their month, and then it may be they
will desire direction, and their prayers. At the last, Pharaoh must call for
Moses and Aaron. So much for that.

Now I come to his Petition, Entreat the Lord that he may take away the Frogs
from me, and from my people.

It seems then that Pharaoh was enlightened to know these three things.

First, that God must remove the judgment.

Secondly, that he must be entreated for the removing of it.

Thirdly, that he must be entreated by his servants; these are but ordinary
points, therefore I will pass them over the more briefly.

First, he understood that God must remove this plague, the Lord Jehovah must
do it; indeed it is his work. For as no judgment can seize on men without a
commission from him, Thou could have no power, says Christ to Pilate,
unless it were given thee from above: So it is not in the power of flesh to
move the least Fly from a man's body, till God please. It was he that stayed
the waters and abated them on the face of the earth when the deluge ceased. It
was this God that opened the wombs of Abimelechs family, Genesis 20. It was this
God that said to the Angel when he forraged the Camp of Israel, It is
sufficient, 2 Samuel 24. It is this God that stays the famine, and causes the
Sword to return into the sheath, that would still eat flesh, if it were not
for his command. That God that has said to the Sea, Hither shall thou come,
and here thou shall stay thy proud waves, Job. 30.11. it is that God that
remits, and restraines, and abates, and takes away, and removes all judgments
whatsoever. The roaring Lion he takes off, and puts an end even to spiritual
temptations.

The Use shall be double:

First, To teach us to whom to have recourse in the time of trouble; not to run
with Saul to the witch of Endor, or with Ahaziah to Baalzebub the God of Ekron,
from the living to the dead. This will not help; he that wounded must heal,
and he that smites must bind up, and that is the Lord himself: it is he only
that must take away the judgment. Rachel may be froward, and chide her
husband, and be discontented; it is all one: God must remember her and open her
womb. The woman in the Gospel may spend all upon Physicians: but God must
stint her infirmity, she must touch the hem of Christ's garment. If God do not
help, says the King of Israel to the woman in the Siege of Samaria, how shall
I help?

Secondly, It should teach us to whom to give thanks for deliverance from
trouble, even to the Lord. To this God Noah built an Altar for the ceasing of
the deluge. To this God Jacob built an Altar for his preservation from the fury
of his brother. To this God David built an Altar in the threshing floor of
Araunah, for the cessation of the plague. To this God let us give thanks, and
ever glorify his name, that has ceased the famine; and has put a period to
the plague that formerly did break out in this City. To thee, O God, the praise
is due, give us leave to take the cup of Salvation, and glorify thy name.

Even the heathen have done thus much, they had their gifts, that they offered
to these, and these deities, that they imagined were the means of their
preservation, and their pillars have this inscription upon them. Freelier must
this be acknowledged therefore by Christians, if not, it is the next way to make
the judgment the same, or greater, to forage them with greater fierceness,
and bitterness. If Gods favor be not acknowledged, no wonder if judgments
afflict us. If Isaac be spared, it is reason a Ram should be offered.

Secondly, he supposed that God must be entreated. The Religion of Pharaoh
taught him that those deities that he served must be supplicated. And you shall
find in profane writers that the Pagans thought there was nothing to be had of
their Gods without supplication, and sacrifice. Therefore it must ever be
acknowledged by Christians, that God having sanctified prayer, and ordained it
to be the bucket of grace to let down to the overflowing fountain of Gods
favor; to be the key of the treasure that opens to those precious things; to
be the dove that fetches the Olive leaf of peace, surely spare to speak,
spare to speed.

What though God know our necessities before we utter them? we are not
informers of God, but petitioners. Thou do not speak to God, and tell him
thy wants to teach him, says Chrysostom: but that thou may incline him to
hear thee. Our blessed Lord has said, ask and it shall be given you. Saint
Paul has said, though he knew Gods propensitie to give, Let your requests be
made known with supplication, and giving of thanks, Phil. 4.16. Therefore,
though God know our wants, yet in obedience to Gods ordinance, let us tender
our prayers.

What though God determine before we ask to give it? this keeps not us from
praying: as God has ordained the end, so he has ordained the means, Jer.
29.11.12. God says, I know the purposes and the thoughts I have for you, the
thoughts not of trouble but of peace. But what follows? yet, says he, they
shall pray and cry to me. As if he had said, though I have determined, I will
have you to testify your dutifulness in prayer: so in Ezekiel. 37.36. God says
how he will determine the Captivity of his people, but for this I will be
entreated of the house of Israel. He will be called on. See an example in
Daniel, that though he knew somewhat out of Jeremiahs prophecy that the
captivity should be determined at 70. years, yet he prays to God, and
solicites that he would please to remember it.

Thirldly, whereas some people say, if we must pray for the removing of
judgments, how shall we make good our patience under the cross?

I answer, patience, and prayer are compatible enough. See in the example of
David, who though he were a man full of patience, and said, Here I am, let God
do with me what he will: yet for all that, he desired God to take away his
stroke. And that great example, and pattern of all patience, our blessed Lord,
yet he cried out, Let this cup pass from me.

For the use of it, if God must be entreated for favors, be sure to take that
course, be ever willing to put into that way that God has chalked out for the
obtaining of his favor. Prayer is an admirable thing, and Luther does not
stick in one place to call it omnipotent: it is very acceptable to God, Let me
hear thy voice, for thy voice is sweet, says the Husband to the Spouse, Cant.
2. And the prayers of the Saints are Odours, Rev. 5.8. And to sum up all, it is
that that God has appointed to be the means to convey blessings: therefore
he that waves Gods direction, undoubtedly, may well fall short of his
expectation.

Thirdly, he understood that God must be entreated by his servants, he desires
them to pray for him. God says to Abimelech, Abraham is a Prophet, and he
shall pray for thee; So Job prayed for his friends, so the man of God for
Jeroboam, and Samuel for the people, and Moses must entreat for those that had
offended against God, and had been contumacious; God loves the prayers of his
own, God hears not sinners, that is, those that wallow in wickedness, and
lie profanely in the same, with resolution, God indures not such that they
should take his word into their mouths, because they hate to be reformed, their
very sacrifice is abominable.

But how far forth the children of God have interest in him, and sway with
their petitions, we shall further show when we come to that passage, where
Moses ingageth himself that the judgment shall be removed upon his prayer. And
so I come to another observation.

Entreat for me, that the judgment may be removed from me, and from my people.
Why Pharaoh, why do thou not entreat that the judgment of hardness of heart
may be removed? O why do thou not pray to Moses to entreat God to give thee
a supple spirit, that may be apt, and fit, and pliable for the impressions of
grace? do thou not yet confess thine iniquity? do thou not yet repent
that thou have stood out so long against the Lord of Hosts? If thou were
sensible of this judgment of obduration, it is greater then the turning of the
waters into blood, and then these Frogs, or any judgment that was after
inflicted. Well, Pharaoh was not troubled with this; Therefore to come to the
observation; you see what the humor of wicked people is, they are more
affected with the punishment then with the sin. Remove the judgment, O let
the Frogs be gone; he says not, Remove my sin, take away this heart, and
give me a new heart.

The wicked are more affected with the punishment then with the sin, and desire
more that their bodies should be eased then their souls cured. See it in Cain,
Genesis 4. he cries out, My punishment is greater then I can bear. The word there
used signifies often in Scripture, sin; yet sometimes also punishment: diverse
of the Greek, and Latin Fathers took it as if he complained of his sin,
that it was greater then could be forgiven, and so make it an evidence of his
distrust, and diffidence, and despair; but our translation renders it, My
punishment is greater then I can bear.

Surely, he that observes the words following shall easily conceive that it was
not the sin that troubled him: but the sense of this; I shall be a vagabond,
and a runnagate, and every man that meets me shall kill me. That troubled and
disturbed him, not that he had offended God, and exposed, and made himself
obnoxious to the curse of God; that was not it, his sin did not trouble him,
but that this judgment should fall upon him.

So the like we see in Esau, he mournes, and weeps, and howles, and keeps a
stir, but it was only in the sense of loss; not for the profaneness of his
heart, but for the loss he thought he should sustain, in that his brother
was preferred before him; it was some disparagement, and disgrace to him.
Surely he mourned not for his sin, because at the same time he resolved to
kill his brother. If he had mourned for his sins, he would never have
resolved on so cruel an act.

So in Saul, Samuel expostulates with him, he was not so troubled with his
finne, as with the renting of the Kingdom from him, and the shrinking of his
reputation in the world, Honor me before the people, says he. So Ahab, he
puts on Sackcloth, and makes a humiliation, God knows, for the judgment more
then for the sin; for we see after how ready he was to imprison Micaiah: So
Simon Magus in Act. 8. after Peter had threatened him severely, O pray for me
that none of these things come to me that you have spoken. Says Oecumenius, a
man would think that this were a man that ingenuously confessed his sins:
but says he, it came not from a good resolution. And says Chrysostom, it
came not from his heart: for he was still polluted in the gall of bitterness,
and the bond of iniquity. Therefore the thing he feared was judgment, Pray
that these things may not come upon me; meaning the judgment that Peter had
threatened.

And this is that spirit of bondage, that servile spirit that the Apostle
speaks of, Romans 8.15. You have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again. This spirit of bondage is in the wicked the fear of a slave, that is
not so much troubled with the offense of his master, as with the whip, and lash
that shall light on him. A wicked man is not so much troubled with the
displeasing of God, as with burning with the devil in hell.

I deny not but there may be great use of this servile fear, even in Gods
own; for when God converts a man, he makes use of this servile fear to
break down those strong holds, those fortifications that the devil has
built in a man to keep out God: by improving the Law that is as Cannon shot,
he breaks down this strong building. Therefore Austin says, this servile
fear is good and profitable; like the bristle, or needle, that though it sew
not the cloth, it makes way, it keeps the heart supple for the impressions of
grace; and out of doubt, God terrifieth before he comforts.

Nay, in grown Christians, there is great use of these servile fears, (I
mean) to fear the judgments of God: for I find it in Gods Saints, Josias
heart melted at the threatenings of the Law, and David was afraid because of
Gods righteous judgments. Habakkuk says that his belly trembled, and his lips
did shake, and rottenness entered into his bones, when he thought of the
judgments of God: And I desire that the remembrance of hell may keep my self
and others from sin.

But I say, that is not only the work in Gods children; I know that
punishment makes them not good. But there is likewise the love of God, which
though it appear not so fully to every body, God discernes it. And out of
doubt Gods children though they were in hell they would be afraid to offend
God out of love. And when judgments are inflicted on the Children of God,
their chief care is to make their peace with God: for the putishment they
respect it not so much; they are content to have the judgment lie still, so
they may receive peace, and assurance of reconciliation. As David, when the
hand of God was upon him for numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24. O says he,
forgive the trespass of thy servant. That is the first thing he deals with
God for, to forgive his iniquity, his impiety; for the judgment he was
indifferent, Let thy hand be on me, and on my fathers house.

For the use, it is a note of trial, and examination. There are diverse losses,
and crosses fall upon us: sometimes we suffer one way, sometimes another. It
may be God visits us with sickness, and lays us on the bed of sorrow, what
does presently, and principally touch us? what do we spend our tears and
sighs and prayers on? Is it to make our peace with God? Is it sin that
troubles, and disturbes us? Is that it, or is it only to get from under the
flame, and to get, as Jerome says, from the furnace of tribulation, as
Chrysostom calls it? Is the trouble of the flesh only a vexation to us? Is it
so that when we run our selves into courses that may make us shameful, that
all our chief care is to patch up our credit with the world, with the neglect
of our peace with God? If it be thus, it is fearful, for what are all the
torments and diseases of the body to the maladies of the soul? What are all
the good words, and honors of the world to the peace of a man's own conscience?

The Prophet speaks of such in Hos. 7.14. that howled on their beds, and cried
to God for Corn and Oil, but rebelled against God. So there are a number of
people that are very passionate if they want provision, but they care not for
their transgressions, if they could get from under the trouble their sins
would never afflict them.

But in the fear of God, let us labor to come to this; to fear to sin,
rather then to smart for sin. And if it were possible to come to that height
that we might say, if there were sin on the one side, and hell on the other,
and torment; we had rather fall into hell then to commit sin; it is a great
pitch.

Let us labor when the hand of God is on us at any time, though it disturb
flesh and blood, let us know that the maine thing that should trouble us is our
sins, and presently make our peace with God: and if we have done that, we
shall have the outward affliction removed, or sanctified, we shall find honey in
that Lion; we shall have the waters of Marah made sweet to us; and it may be
God will bring it about that we shall rejoice in tribulation. So much for that.

Remove this plague from me and my people. Though there were many bad things in
this wicked Pharaoh; yet here is one Berry, which though it be in the utmost
bough, I will not neglect.

From me and my people. The care he had that his people should be free as
well as himself: Surely, It is that that becomes Princes and Governors, to be
sensible of the necessities in which their people are.

There be many resemblances used that prove to us the truth of this. Kings are
called sometimes fathers, not only in divine, but in profane writers. The
Senators of Rome, and chief Governors were called fathers of their countries.
The common names of the Kings of the Philistims was Abimelech, My father the
King: And David says to his Subjects, Come my Children, hearken. And Solomon
uses that phrase, my son. It is the speech of Philo the Jew, that it is fit
for him that rules to carry himself as a father toward his Children. Now you
that God has blessed so far as to be fathers, you know what the affection of
a father is, what bowels he has, what care he shows, what sense of sorrow,
for the least infirmity of his child.

Again, secondly, Princes are called Shepherds: not only in Homer Agamemnon
is called the pastor of the people: but Cyrus my Shepherd, Esaias 45. And God
led his people as sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 78. ult. And he
took David from the Sheep to feed his people. Now we know in the Shepherds
vocation, there is both diligence and love. The Shepherd considers the state
of his flock; if there be any more infirm then others, he is touched
presently with compassion toward them, he binds them up, and he does well. So
it should be with those in authority, they should ever be respective of that
flock that is committed to them, and deal gently, and fairly by them: for
Rehoboam, if he drive on furiously, will lose 10. parts at one time.

Again, thirdly, a governor is said to be a head: now what respect there is
in a head toward the members, every mere natural man knows.

Again, a governor is said to be the husband, and the Commonwealth his wife:
what respect a true husband carries to his true yoake-fellow, it is easily
discerned; now willing he is to keep her from danger, and to be the veil of
her eyes, as it is said of Abraham. And you see in good Jacob when danger was
toward, he put his wives in the rear, that all others might suffer before
them. And Seneca says that a governor is anima, the Prince is the soul of
the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth is his body. Now as the soul is
careful for the body, so the Prince that is pious is careful of those that
belong to him. As the Eagle is the King of all Birds, so it is usual to
resemble Princes by that bird. And one property of that bird Moses tells us in
Exodus 18. she carries her young upon her wings: and mark the care of that
bird, says Lipomen, for she will be sure if there be any danger from below,
that her body shall be between her young, and the danger she will be first
sensible of it.

Now if you require instances of this care, and good of the people, you have it
in David: when the Angel forraged among the people; O what have these sheep
done? he interposeth himself, and desires that the hand of God might turn
upon him, and his fathers house, that the people might be spared. And Moses in
Exodus 32. God says, if he will not stop him in his wrath, he will make him a
mighty Nation. But Moses though the people could be merry without him, he
would not be happy without them: the truth is, if God would not be merciful
to them, he would be blotted out of the book of life.

I need not after these honorable examples add the heathen; of Codrus that
threw himself into the Army; and Curtius that cast himself into the gulf of
Rome, and Adrianus, called Titus, by name, the delight of mankind, in regard of
his gracious comportment. Or tell you of the 12 Tables for the good of the
people. All in authority should be careful of those that are under them,
should be sensible of their grievances, that every disturbance to them should
reflect upon themselves.

Abominable is that spirit that is in some men. It is said of Tiberius, When I
am dead let the world be mingled with fire. And Nero that would correct it,
turned it much worse, Nay while I live let it be so. So that Speech of
Caligula, Let them hate me, so they fear me. He complained sometime in his
time that he was not made famous by some calamity; and wished that all Rome had
but one neck that he might cut it off. And Vitellius posie: It is was a good
smell from the Carcass of a soldier that was killed, but better from a
Citizen. These words befit not the mouth of a Prince, no, not of a man: they
do not relish of that clemency that is the chief stone in the Crown of a
Prince; but of that brutishness that these men were guilty of. And God met
with them in their kind: for there was none of them did die a dry death.

Secondly, If a Prince must be solicitous of the good of his people, so must
they be for him. From me and my people, says Pharaoh; so the people must say,
for my King and me. If the Commonwealth be a wife, she must be obedient, if
they be children, they must be dutiful. If it be a body, it must be pliable to
the soul. If they be members, they must be guided by the head. If they be
sheep, they must submit to the government of the Shepherd. That as Justinian
the Emperor says, there may be a sweet harmony between Prince and people,
that no string may be too high or too low; that is the best music in the
ears of God. If Pharaoh desire for his people, how should they beg of God in
the behalf of their Soverain? Paul when he wishes that Prayers. should be
made for all men, in the first place he puts Kings. And it was the practice of
holy people of God in former time. Cyprian when they were charged with some
rebellion, We are far from that, we wish well to the King, says he: And his
Master before him, for so he calls Tertullian, he professes concerning the
Christians, that they begged of God in the behalf of the Emperor, they
desired long life, a secure regiment, and reign, a safe house, worthy
Counselors, strong and valiant Soldiers, etc.

Let not this be forgotten by us, we are too defective in this: many of us pray
in private for our selves, but when do we remember our Governors? O the light
of our eyes, and the breath of ournostrills, is deprived of our prayers. If it
be a sin to forget a natural father, certainly it is no less to forget our
political father.

The next thing to be observed (which is the second general) is the promise
that he makes.

I will let the people go. I will but touch one thing and so conclude, you see
here that now he cannot get from under the judgment, what evapourates from
him: he will let the people go that they may sacrifice. If god reserve us, God
willing we shall observe that he did fly off from this. But in the mean time,
somewhat he says, and promises; and It is no strange thing, that the worst of
men have good motions sometimes.

This Pharaoh says another time, I have sinned. And the sorcerers say after,
It is the finger of God. And Balaam says, Let me die the death of the
righteous, Number. 23. And Saul may say he has sinned, and Ahab may humble
himself, and Felix may sometimes tremble, and Agrippa will cry out, he is
almost made a Christian by Paul. And it was never known, of the most desperate
adulterers, the most bloody men, or oppressors, or excessive persons, but some
time or other they did think ill of their own courses, and did think that
another way was better, and it may be have had motions and resolutions tending
to reformation.

The ground is, the light that God puts into the consciences, and the power
that he has endued it with, that will sometimes put a man in mind of his
abberations from the right way, that this is not the course he should take.

Again, there is a general illumination in the world, that enlightens every
man, by this they come to have some notions. But as Bernard says in another
case, they come in frequently, and pass away as speedily. They are like the
morning dew, or the morning cloud, soon dissipated, not so good as Ephraims
cake that was half baked, they are soon gone, as Tertullian says of the
flower it is a thing to look on, and breath on, and smell to, and it is gone.
So it is with these motions of the wicked, they pass away as smoke.

Therefore, for the use of it; Let us not be confident of the motions, and
flashes of the wicked, unless they persist and continue in them there is
little hope.

Nay, let us not please our selves for motions that are like flashings of
lightning in the soul, they are not worth the talking of. When motions come
that are good, cherish them, keep them on foot, that they may be actuated and
perfected. Thus God would have us to do, it is a spark of the divine fire,
therefore the Lord would have it blown till it come to a flame. If at any time
we find it dying, (as like enough the dear Saints of God may do) we must stir
it up, and excite the grace of God by the use of the Ordinances of God, as the
Apostle speaks. And likewife by reflecting upon our many omissions and neglects
(and it may be suppression of motions by the cons^^^^^tion of the fearful
account we must give one day for these neglects, stir it up, and keep it fresh,
and by the blessing of God there may come great matters. That that is now a
spark may be a flame, that that is like a cloud no bigger then a hand, it may
after mask the whole heavens. That that is now as a grain of mustard seed, it
may be a great tree, wherein the fowls of the air may make their nests.

Of all take heed of quenching and suppressing this Spirit, of putting it out,
and that is done by wilful, gross sins. When God gives good motions, if men
would cherish them and keep them alive, there might be much good in them: but
when they run into foul sins that waste conscience, the graces of God die, and
all good motions are as far to seek as if they never had been. This will add to
a man's judgment, when God shall put these things in his heart, and he by
untimely frosts nipps them in the bud, whereas if he would cherish them, they
would come to great perfection and improvement.

THE EIGHTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 8.9. And I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the
Lord.

And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I entreat for thee, and
for thy servants, and for thy people, etc.


THere is one thing that remains of the eighth Verse remaining that I will
speedily dispatch, and so go on; Pharaoh says here,

I will let them go that they may sacrifice to the Lord.

Ubi potentiae? Ubi superbiae? says one upon my Text. How now Pharaoh, what is
become of thy power? what is become of thy pride? not long since thou wast in
thy ruff, and said, Who is the Lord that I should sear him? or let Israel
go? Thou were so far from dismissing them, that thou eldst more intensively
hate them, and multiply their sorrows. Thou did contemn Moses and Aaron
that came with a Commission from God: and now behold thou art under a
judgment, and know not how to extricate thy self from this perplexity,
now thou will let the people go, now thou acknowledgest God, now thou suest to
Moses and Aaron, now thou art glad to dismiss the people. Even thus it was,
and in that it was thus, my observation must be concerning The necessity of
afflictions.

All fair means would do no good with this man; God was feign to take the rod
in his hand, and then we see the issue: so great is the necessity of
afflictions. And it drives at diverse things.

First, afflictions make a man see his sins, as we see in the brethren of
Joseph, Genesis 41.21. In their trouble in Egypt they reflect upon their
unnaturalness to their brother: they confess that the cause of this trouble
and distress was, because they did not hearken to him, when he cried in the
anguish of his soul. You may gather so much from the speech of the widow of
Sarepta, when her child was dead, she comes to Eliah, and says, Art thou come
to call my sins to remembrance and to kill my child? Affliction is that that
will call a man's sins to remembrance. And out of all doubt, next to the Law
of God, there is no glass wherein a man's sins are more impartially
represented to him then the glass of afflictions: Therefore Elihu says, Job
36.8. When the Lord has a man in the cords of affliction, he shows him his
sins, and transressions, then he can talk with him, and tell him from point
to point what he has done, and set his sins in order before him.

Hence it is that the ancients compare afflictions to the smiting of the Flint
that fetches out a spark of fire that gives the good man light. They compare
them to the wood that Elisha cast into the water, by which he raised the head
of the hatchet that was sunk. Those sins that are sunk to the bottom, that
lie buried in the mud, and there is no notice taken of them, afflictions will
raise them up, and discover them. They have compared it likewise to the clay
and spittle that Christ anointed the eyes of the blind man with that he
restored to sight, Joh. 9. This is that that Gregory has oculis culpa, etc.
that eye that was shut with sin, is opened by punishment; and he has it
from David, Afflictions give understanding.

The trouble that was upon the host of God urged them to scrutiny Achan that
was the cause of that discomfiture. And the tempest that the mariners were in,
caused them to find out Jonah that was the author of the tempest, of whom the
ship must be discharged.

Secondly, afflictions, as they are necessary to bring us to the sight of
sin, so to humiliation for it; and the wicked of the world, if the hand of
God be on them will confess their sins. So you see in Saul, so in Achab, so
in Judas, when terror of soul was on him, he cries out, I have sinned in
betraying innocent blood. The spirit of a man will be took down by
afflictions, be he never so great; for in the time of prosperity we are apt
to be proud, In regard of God, In regard of Our brethren, In regard of The
things in our selves.


We are apt to be proud in regard of God, as we see in Nebuchadnezzar, in
Psalm. 10. God is not in a wicked man's thoughts, men think not of God in
prosperity, Nebuchadnezzar thought not of heaven: but when the Lords hand was
upon him, he saw whom he had provoked, and how vain it was to lift up himself
against God.

Secondly, a man in time of prosperity is apt to be proud in regard of his
brethren: David while he was in prosperity, he greatly cared not for that
wrong that he did to his servant faithful Uriah: but when the hand of God was
upon him, he was afraid to do the least harm to his mortal enemy, as
appears in that instance between him and Saul in the Cave. And he would not
suffer the railing dog Shimei to be punished when he came barking fearfully, 2 Samuel 16.11. affliction upon him, mortified his spirit, and killed his pride.

Thirdly, when we are in prosperity we are proud of those things that are in
us: people sometimes are proud of beauty, sometimes of strength, sometimes of
apparel, sometimes of wealth: Now all these things are laid low; therefore it
is very necessary, the woman that was proud of her beauty, if the hand of God
seize on her by a sharp acute fever, when her feather is brought to a
Kercheife, there is no more talk of the pride of her beauty, that is taken
off. So, the strong man that bragged of his strength, when a fever has
grappled with him, and laid him all along, and took him off from his feet,
then he acknowledges the vanity of this house of clay: this body of
humiliation, as the Apostle calls it, Phil. 3.21. So for apparel, when Gods
hand is upon people, they more desire an easy pillow then gay cloths. And for
wealth, it does but little comfort in a sharp sickness; a man would give all
for one nights rest, for one days ease.

Thirdly, (beloved) affliction is necessary to work a man to good resolutions
and purposes: So Nebuchadnezzar being in affliction and trouble, he will have
none acknowledged but the God of heaven. So likewise the prodigal son being
in trouble, he resolves to go to his father, and say, Father I have sinned
against thee. To go no further, when the hand of God was upon Pharaoh and his
people, he cries out, I will let the people go. And I will be so charitable
that for the present he might speak uprightly.

For the use of this; It should teach us: First, to justify God, when he
inflicts judgments; for how should God make good his justice to the world, if
he should not punish sometimes, if offenders should go always free? How
should God make good his power to the world, if he should not show himself
able to subdue the contumacious? how should he make good his wisdom to the
world, if having used many fair invitations, and plausible means, and those
contemned, he should not draw out the sword against rebellious ones? Solomon
makes it a part of wisdom to use severity in the right place.

Secondly, we should justify God in inflicting of judgments, because they
are so necessary for us: for we have proud hearts of our own, and God knows
they are not easily subdued; before they be brought down, the flesh must
smart to some purpose. And this smoke is not only found dwelling in the
wicked, but in the habitations of the righteous. Look on Hezekiah: after God
had added a lease to his life of 15. years more, the Text says, his heart was
lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32. And this sin of pride is so natural to us, that when
all other sins decrease, this is improved. Nay the Devil will watch us such
a turn to continue the sin of pride, that rather then we shall not be
proud, he will make us proud because we are humble. Therefore the Lord lays
his hand on us, by spiritual, and temporal, and corporal visitations, that
he may bring us to be humble.

I beseech you observe that place, Jer. 9.7. the Lord says there, that he will
melt, and try the people for says he, what else should I do to the daughter
of my people? As if he had said, I know no better way to cure them then to put
them into the melting pot of affliction, there I must purge them from their
dross; certainly they must have some sharp medicine for the purging out of
the malignant humor.

Secondly, since afflictions are so necessary, labor in the fear of God that
they may be profitable. And then afflictions are profitable, when they bring us
to a sight of our sins. There is never an affliction that God sends upon a
man, but it says to him as Ehud said to Eglon, I have a message to thee from
God. In Micah 6. we are bid to hear the rod. O that men could hearken to it,
it would teach them many good lessons. It would take them from the love of the
world, and teach them to repose the confidence in God. It would teach them to
search and try their ways, to find out the Achan that troubles the host.

Again in the second place, affliction is useful, and profitable to men, when
it makes them humble, and low, not only to confess that God is just, as
Bernard says, Lord it is hard in regard of that strength that I have, that
poverty of ability that is in me: but it is just in regard of my desert. Not
only so, but to mourn for sin. We have put God out of his gracious way of
clemency, and mercy into a strange path of justice, Esaias 28. It is Gods
strange work.

Thirdly, then affliction is useful, when it makes us fly to God; when like
the corn that is winnowed we fall down at the feet of him that winnoweth, and
not like the chafe fly in his face. When we make our peace with God, and
give him no rest till God be reconciled to us; For, for a man in affliction to
do as Absalom, to run three years together from his father, it is a poor use
of the rod that God sends.

Lastly, then affliction is useful, when God works in the heart, a resolution
and purpose of doing better then before: as David, Psalm. 66.14. He speaks of
vows that he made, and words that he uttered with his mouth in his
affliction. And you may gather from that of Hezekiah, he desired the Prophet
to tell him what sign he should have that he should go up to the house of the
Lord, 2 King. 20. As if he desired his recovery upon no other terms but that
he might serve the Lord better: felix necessitas. O blessed affliction that
makes a man better! when a man comes to this Bethesda, and is cured of his
disease, blessed man he that ever the hand of God was on him: that man may say
with David, It is good for me that I was afflicted. And God of his exceeding
goodness caused me to be troubled; when the Arc thus moves upward by the
water, it is well. When the flesh sinkes, and the spirit floates, it is a sign
that these waters of Marah are made sweet; though the body lose, the spirit
gains: so I have done with that.

Now I come to the entertaining of this motion by Moses, and the course was
this.

First, Moses bids him appoint his own time when this should be done.
Secondly, Pharaoh appoints it. Thirdly, Moses entertaines it.
First, he bids him appoint his time;

But here in the first place it may be demanded, how it came to pass that
Moses was so ready to gratify Pharaoh in his request; that he is so sudden,
and quick in it?

There may be two reasons given.

First, in regard of Pharaoh. Secondly, in regard of the people.
First, in regard of Pharaoh: this was a spark, and Moses thought fit to
nourish it. This resolution was good, and there shall be nothing wanting in
Moses to cherish it. The wicked must be followed, and held to it, and plied,
for it is but seldom that we get them at advantage of good resolutions. And
when they are there, stant in lubrice, they stand in slippery places, they are
in danger of recidivation, and relapse. Therefore they must be plied and
followed, and fomented, that if it be possible their promises may come to
performances. Their Iron must be stricken when it is hot, and softened by the
fire, says Nazianzen, or else after a while it will come to its former
hardness, and be less malleable. Do you remember that place, 1 King. 17.
when the servants of Benhadad came with ropes about their necks? they watch for
every word that falls from the King to catch it. Therefore he had no sooner
said my brother Benhadad, but they clap in thy brother Benhadad. So we must
with those that are coming to good, get ground on them, to bring them to
performances. As Ezra when he had brought the people to mourn for their
sins, he leaves not till they had entered into covenant with God. This is the
reason in regard of Pharaoh.

A second reason is in regard of the people. That is given by Tostatus; says
he, Moses was so quick in answering Pharaoh, because he conceived that
Pharaoh would be ready to let the people go: and this he rejoiced in. Now
thinks he, my labor will be profitable for those people that I love so well,
and whose welfare I tender: so now I shall see an end of my tedious employment:
now the people of God shall be beholding to me, to be their leader out of
captivity. Thus the good man rejoiced when there was but the least hope of the
success of his labors.

So all Gods messengers are affected, when they see their endeavors prosper,
how do they rejoice? Much pains had this good Moses endured for love to the
people, and many injuries had he swallowed and digested, and all out of a
desire to do them good, that they might thrive under him. Nay, he pawned his
salvation one time for them, that if God would not be merciful to them, he
would blot him out. If they thrive, he rejoices, if otherwise he mournes, and
laments, and betakes himself to God for redress.

It is the case of all Gods messengers that are well affected: do you think
it was not a grief of soul to Esaias, Esaias 49 to say, I have spent my, strength
in vain? he complains that he had labored in vain. Was it not a grief of
soul to Jeremiah when he found such ill success of his labors that he
resolved to speak no more in the name of the Lord? Jer. 20. And can any wonder
that Ezekiel should go in the bitterness of his soul upon his employment,
when God tells him before, that he should meet with a contumelious people? The
very fear of being unsuccessefull made Jonah run to Tarshish, and wave the
command of God, and subterfuge the employment.

Therefore on the other side think what a joy it is to those that see their
labors thrive. The gardener has not so must joy in his plants, and the
husbandman in his crop, or the indulgent father to see the welfare of his
child, as the husbandman of God has to see his people thrive in grace. I would
this were taken to heart. Shall I speak freely to you? It is not your civil
courtesies, it is not your countenance, nor your liberality; if all your
gains should flow into our purses, it would not so much rejoice our souls, as
to find you profit that our work may prosper, that we may fit some building
for the Temple. For when you thrive, we advance Gods glory, that is, or should
be the end of all our doings; we confirm the seal of our ministry. Thirdly,
we are instruments of doing the greatest good in the world, of converting of
souls. Lastly, we procure to our selves the hope of eternal glory: for those
that turn others shall shine. Therefore give us leave to say as John says, We
have no greater joy then to see our Children walk in the truth; And to say as
Paul says, Ye are our crown, and our glory, and our joy.

Therefore in the name of God, even for his sake, and for your own souls
sake, and for the comfort of those that are employed among you, and that take
pains in the word and doctrine, do not make the hearts of Gods messengers
sad. Give them not cause with Jeremiah to desire to lodge in a garden of
Cowcumbers, to wish that they had never seen your faces, because of your
improfitablenesse. But commend their labors to God by your fruitfulness; and
carry your selves so, that they may give account with joy, and not with sorrow:
so much for that. Now for the words; Glory over me, when shall I pray.

The words in the original Behoth pergnali, glorify thy self upon me;
expositors are very various in laying out the meaning of these words.

Glory over me. Shall we take it in this sense, as if it were an ejaculation
of Moses, or a kind of exclamation of this man? O the glory that God has put
upon me! here is glory upon me indeed, that this great King, this proud
Tyrant, should sue to me, and entreat! he that poured contempt upon me
before, and for my sake vexed the people of God the more, that now he should
entreat, O what an honor and glory is over me!

Surely (beloved) Peter speaks of a spirit of glory resting on Gods Children,
and it shines in this, that the very wicked sometimes petition to the godly.
Remember the instances I gave the last day. What an honor was it to Isaac, to
be sought unto by the Philistines, that hated him before? What an honor was it
to Joseph, that all his brethrens sheafes should bow to his, according to the
presage of his dream, and that he must nourish them that maliced him? What an
honor was it to David, that Saul should desire his favor when he had him in
the cave, and gave a pregnant instance of his loyalty? What an honor was it
to the Prophet, that Jeroboam should sue to him to restore his arm? And to
Job, that his friends that were so deeply uncharitable in censuring him, must
be beholding to him for his intercession? Surely whenever Gods people take
knowledge in it, they are bound to magnify God for this great favor. But the
words will not endure this sense: for both the Conjugation, and the Mood
wherein they are used, will not admit it. Therefore we must seek another
sense. Glory over me.

Reverend Calvin takes them by way of Antithesis in this manner, as if he
should say, Thou have little reason to glory in the Magitians, they abuse thee
with shows, but now it comes to the removal of the plague, they cannot help
thee; I make no question, but thou have found how waine they are, Glory over
me, that is, in my help for I am able, if thou will hear the motion that I
make I will remove this from thee.

The Wicked are no security to a man, the godly must help. Well may they be
fuel to the fire, but never able to quench the flame. He were a mad man that
to secure himself from the Fire, would pile a many Billets between him and
the flame; such are the wicked. No; in the day of trouble and vexation, one
Moses to stand in the gap is worth a thousand of others. Ten men in Sodom
would have saved those Cities from that conflagration: Nay Lot bayled them, all
the time he was in it; One man should save a City; One Micaiah is worth four
hundred false prophets.

There is a third sense that is commonly hearkened unto, and I listen to it;
Glory over me. That is, take thou the glory of appointing the time when I shall
pray: Though it be true that I that thou suest to, to remove the plague, should
have my own time, yet take thou the glory to appoint the time, and I will do
it. That I take to be the full sense and meaning of the phrase.

Now it will be demanded, why Moses did gratify Pharaoh thus far, that he
should appoint the time when the judgment of God should be removed, why he was
so favorable in this particular? diverse reasons may be given of it, and each
of them will yield an observation.

First Moses well weighed that Pharaoh might have a conceit, (having heard
that Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians) that he might work
by constellations, and other Astrologicall practices: he might take advantage
of the position, and aspects of the planets and presently do it, and so gull
Pharaoh with natural causes, and make him believe it was a supernatural
miracle. Because Moses conceived this might be in Pharaohs imagination, he
gives him leave to prescribe his own time.

This has ever been the care of Gods people, and instruments, for the greater
glory of God, ever to do their works after that manner that they might be
free from exception. That it might not be imputed to natural causes; but that
the virtue, and power of God supernaturally might ever be acknowledged. Mark
it in some instances. When Eliah was to confound the Priests of Baal, he
caused the sacrifice to be put upon the Altar, he caused the wood to be
laid, and when he had done, he caused four barrells of water to be cast upon
the wood and the sacrifice, the first, second, and third time; and when he had
done he caused a great trench or ditch about to be filled with water. All
these things served to make it improbable that ever fire should come to consume
it, unless it were brought by the hand of man: he did it on purpose, that
they might see the work of God, and so they acknowledged when the fire came to
consume the wood, and the sacrifice, and to lick up all the water in the
trench; in so much that the people being absolutely satisfied cried out, The
Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. The like we see in the proceeding of Elisha
with Naaman the Assyrian, when Naaman came to be cured of his Leprosy; He did
not speak with him; he did not come out, and lay his hand on the sore, as
Naaman expected; why? This might have lessened the glory of the Miracle; he
would have imputed it to connaturall causes; to some virtue or skill in him;
but when he sends him word, Go and wash in such a place, and never saw him nor
spoke to him, he must needs acknowledge it to be a miracle.

The like we see in the works of Christ in the Gospel, how he freed them from
all exception, and just question in the world. When he was to turn the water
into wine at the marriage, he did it not presently, he stayed till all the wine
was spent, and there was general notice almost taken of the defect of it, then
he causes the water pots to be filled with water, and bids the men draw and
carry to the governor; all these seemed to set back the work, but they set it
forward, for it caused all men to magnify it, and acknowledge it to be the
immediate power of God. So he dealt with the man at Bethesda; all the people
took notice of him, he was a man that had been 38. years together, and would
feign have been put into the poole, but he had never a friend to help him, you
see what Christ did, he did but only speak to him, and so many of them
acknowledged the wonderful power of God. So that man that was cured of his
blindness, John 9. our blessed Savior was pleased to pitch upon a person,
that all the world took notice of, and none could cure him, he was borne blind.
So the man at the Beautiful gate Act. 3. there was a work wrought on him that
was free from all exception, therefore the Elders, and the high Priests, they
confessed that not only it was a great work, but a miracle, a great miracle,
and there was no exception against it. Thus Gods people in all times labor to
do their works that may be free from all exception, and prejudice.

I would to God it might be so with us that in all the works that we do, we
might be free from all carnalitie, and self-respects. For the devillalies in
the wind, and puts into the hearts of those that are his own, to take exception
at any thing that is done well in the world. If they do good works, it is out
of hypocrisy (will he say,) or vain glory, or respect to a man's own profit.
Thus they slander godly peoples practice.

Therefore let us have a care to do our works so, as they may be free from all
just exception. Let us be careful to do them in integrity of heart, to
approve our hearts to God Almighty, and that will bear us out against all men's
exceptions. Art thou to do a work of charity, and the devil will slander
thee for vain glory? shun the applause of the world, spite the devil in that.
Again, does the devil say, thou make charity a matter of profit from men?
Make them the objects of thy charity that are notable to recompense thee, (as
Christ says) that the world may say, it is not a benefit put out to interest,
but make it a work of mercy.

Again, does the devil slander thee, that in the works of God thou do them
that God may prosper thee in thy basket, and in thy store? Make the devil a
lier, serve God in adversity as well as in prosperity. So Job, the devil
slandered him so, does Job serve God for naught? Therefore let us do as that
holy man did, when God frowned on him, he served him, and was patient under
that hand of God that lay on him; So much of the first reason.

A second is this; Moses might think that Pharaoh might hold it for an
advantage to prescribe the time. He might think, surely I shall now distress
Moses, and put him by that he thinks of; he thinks he shall presently go upon
it; no, I will do what I can to hinder his thoughts and purpose; he shall do
it in my time. Pharaoh might think this an advantage to himself: Moses is
willing to yield, that he might see he was able to do it: And God sometimes
gives advantage to the wicked that his own glory might be the greater.

A man would think there was a great advantage against the people of God,
Judge. 7. when the Army of Gedeon was defalked from 32000. to 300. and the other
did lie as Grasshoppers upon the earth, yet you see what was the issue, the
barley cake that tumbled down, (as the man had it in his dream) overthrew the
Tents of Midian: God was willing they should have the advantage in regard of
provision, and number, yet you see what became of it. Was it not a great
advantage that Saul had against David, when he required an hundred foreskins
of the Philistines for a dowry with his daughter? he thought it a great
advantage, and would puzzle him exceedingly; thought he, is it not more
probable, that one David should die then a 100. Philistines? yet you see for
all this advantage David comes off with honor, and in stead of an hundred he
gives him two hundred.

Was there not a great advantage on the part of Goliath against David? I, all
Israel thought so: for the very presence of that uncircumcised monster did
work terror in their hearts, and palenesse in their faces. Was it not a great
advantage, he was tall, and as the sons of Anak, and David was a little man,
if it be true as he is described? What was a poor sheephook to a spear that
was as a Weavers beam? was it not a great advantage to have a glittering
sharp Sword; and the other but a few stones out of the brook? That he should
be armed Cap a pe, and come against a naked man? all the world gave him for
lost: yet you see, though he had all this advantage, and he thought so himself:
for he says in scorn, Come, and I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the
air: for all this David laid him along, and cut off his head.

The like we see in the Army of the Assyrians, 1 King. 20. They thought the
children of Israel had advantage by fighting on the Mountains; therefore if
they did fight in the valleys they thought they should be victorious: God is
willing to give them the advantage; into the valleys they come, but have they
better success? Nay, though they have the advantage of the place, and of the
number too: for it is said the people of God did lie before them as two
companies of Kids, and they were an infinite company, yet we see what was the
issue.

So we may say of that great Army that came against Jehosaphat, he says, We
are not able to stand before this company: So in the Army that Senacherib
brought against Jerusalem; railing Rabshakeh bid them submit, for all Isreal's
dust was not enough for every man a handful; yet for all they had that
advantage the Lord overthrew them by a few. So God did give the Devil
advantage against Job, as much as he desired: he did but desire to touch him;
he gives him leave to touch his goods, his children, his body, that he made him
the most fearful spectacle that ever the sun beheld: yet when all this was
done, for all that Job was proved, and the devil was confounded.

And our blessed Lord himself gave great advantage to the devil for his
greater glory. He suffered him to tempt him in the Wilderness, that wild
place, where there was nothing but beasts; the place was enough to have filled
his heart with horror; and to tempt him after forty days fast, and when he
was an hungry; and to tempt him with that that might soonest move a hungry
stomach, with provision of bread: all these advantages God gratified the devil
with, that his glory might be the greater, and the confusion of the devil more.

So afterward, he suffered himself to be apprehended, and nailed to the
cross, (and then they thought they had advantage enough) nay to give up the
ghost, and to die and to grapple with death in his own trenches; yet his glory
was greater by giving the devil that great advantage.

It was a great advantage the Philosopher had against that poor man in the
Counsel of Nice; the cunning Sophister came upon him with many arguments. The
other man in the plainness of his spirit so answered him, for all his
advantage in learning the poor man bunged up his mouth, and converted him to
the Christian faith. What an advantage had the Pope against Luther when he rose
up? What an unequal combat was between them! The one a poor, Monk, and
against him all of the Church, of Rome: Lather had temporal, and spiritual
authority, all against him to bury him under, yet the work of God was made
more glorious by this, and he lighted a candleithat by Gods blessing shall
never be put out.

Well, for the use of this. Let us not be too much dejected when God gives
some advantage to the wicked, though they have advantage, of number, and
provision. There is not the greatest man in the world but God has a hook for
his nostrills. It may be God gives them these advantages for their greater
ruins: he racks them high that they may fall into the greater mischief. God
is able to send an Angel that in one night shall kill so many in the Host of
Senacherib: God is able to send a Panick fear among the Assyrians that shall
make them run away as if they were mad men, and leave their furnished tents to
their enemies. God is able to make the Midianites turn their of words into
each others sides, God is able by looking our of the pillar to confound the
Egyptians in that manner, that there shall not be one man left to earry the
news of the oyer throw.

And give me lewe to tell you, we of the protestant faith have occasion to
glorify God: God of late has abated the pride, and pulled down the insolency
and presumption, and met with the mighty in their devises, and left those to
loss that were proud of their own number and provision, Blessed be the Lord
for his goodness. It is the Lords doing, and it ought to be mervaitous in our
eyes: and that heart that is not affected with it, I dare say it, has not the
power of Religion in it. And that is the second Reason.

A third reason may be this, Moses gives leave to Pharaoh to pitch his time,
Why? It may be Pharaoh would have held it some disparagement, and dishonor, if
he should not have constituted his own time; therefore Moses does not stand
with him in this, but gratifies him; he could as easily do it in his time, as
if he himself had appointed it. Though he were a man of great command, he will
not vie with Pharaoh now, but if he think it an honor to appoint the time he
shall. Indeed the children of God, so God may be glorified, they do not
greatly stand upon pre-eminence. He will not vie with Pharaoh now for matter of
appointing a day.

Gods Children, so God may be glorified stand not upon terms of dignity or
pre-eminence. The Lord says to Cain in the case of Abel, if it be pre-eminence
that thou look for, his desire shall be subject to thee, he shall not stand
with thee for it. Aaron, though he were the elder, he does not stand upon it,
but is willing that Moses should have the pre-eminence. And David, though he
were anointed King in reversion after Saul, yet he used Saul with all respect,
he would not invade any of his honors, he would not envy him the glory that
God had put upon him: he would stay the time, and tarry the opportunity that
God was pleased to accommodate for his advancement, and when he was moved with
the taking of the daughter of Saul in marriage, he was not greatly moved with
that. So our blessed Lord himself did not stand upon titles of the world; when
he might have been made a King, he would not, he fled away. Why? The Fathers
give diverse reasons.

Chrysostom says that same humor of the people for the making him a King, it
grew from their gluttony; they thought he was a fit man to be their King that
could fit their Epicurious palate: he goes away rather. Says the same Father,
he would give us an example to despise the dignities of the world and the
honors of the same. So Gregory to the same purpose, he fled to give us an
example of contemning the honors of the world. Cyrill says, he did go away,
because he would show that his Kingdom was not of this world.

But Austin in his 25. tract upon John, hits upon this reason, he would not be
made a King, that he might give no way to any sedition, or rebellion against
the Romans; as if he should have said, I live under authority, I content my
self to be as I am, I desire not to invade the privileges of Princes; in the
name of God let them enjoy them, you shall not oppose me to their power, to
contradict their greatness; I will not do it. So he always carried himself
as one that cared not for the dignities of the world, and was willing to leave
them to those they belonged to. So he counseled his Disciples, Matthew. 23. The
Rulers of the Gentiles rule over you: leave those authorities to them, it is
not fit for you to exercise them. And Paul was not much moved with the great
breadth, and train that the false Apostles carried, though they exalted
themselves by great titles. He grieved for the dispersing of their leaven, but
for himself he was content to be accounted as nothing, so God might be
glorified.

For the use of it. It should teach us all as Moses here to be indifferent in
matters of honor and pre-eminence, so we may always preserve Gods glory that
that be not impeached, leave them to those that desire them, and hunt after
them, as Haman that could endure none at the banquet but himself. As Pompey,
and Caesar, the one would not endure an equal, the other not a superiou^. As
the Pharisees that did all to be seen of men; ^^ery creatures of vain glory.
And Diotrephes, a man that loved pre-eminence, 3 John 9. Let us in the fear of
God approve our selves to God, to have our consciences upright to him. And if
once we know Gods favor toward us, we will slight all the dignities of the
world, and leave them to those Camelions that live by that air. And to come to
the point intended, they are not commended that men commend, but that God
commends: One word of approbation from him is worth a thousand Encomiums, and
large panegyricks of men: Surely, God will honor those that honor him. And
such honor have all his Saints.

When shall I pray for thee? Some out of this clause of Moses observe these
three things.

First, Moses fitness to pray, if he will have it done presently, he is
content to do it instantly if he will. Secondly, Moses confidence in prayer;
any time when he will, he makes no doubt but God will hear him. Thirdly, Moses
charity, when shall I pray for thee? and thy people, and thy servants? Though
he were an enemy to him, and used him discourteously, yet he would pray for
him.
First, when shall I pray? as if he were ready to pray always.

Godly people are always in a good disposition for prayer. They keep in
themselves a readiness for the performance of that duty. We have a rule in
divinity, that affirmative precepts bind semper, but not ad semper, that is, a
man is not tied to the continual performance of them, to do nothing else. A
man is not tied all day to pray, and continually to give alms, or to hear the
word of God. But he is bound semper, that is, to have always a readiness of
disposition to holy duties: so here it was in Moses. It is fitly said by our
blessed Savior, pray always, and by the Apostle, pray continually, 1 These.
5.17. There were those that grossly understood this: for they thought the
strength of that counsel and admonition was, that a man should wave preaching,
and receiving of the Sacrament, and all parts of Gods worship, merely for that
duty of prayer. Nay, they thought a man should intermit the works of his
ordinary calling and vocation, merely to be given to prayer: Therefore those
Euchites, those men that pervert this place, of whom Austin, and others speak,
they employed all the time they could gain from their sleep, and meat, to
pray.

It would but squander away the time, and ravell it out unprofitably to bestow
a large confutation of these people. For certainly, God never intended that one
of his ordinances should justle out another. There must be a time for hearing,
and for praying, and for working in a man's calling. That Apostle that says,
pray continually, says, be instant in season and out of season to preach, and
hear the word, and wishes them to give to the poor, and to work in their
callings. God never intended his ordinances should enterfere, or exclude each
other; but they must be sorted out in due time and in fit opportunity.

But others have not well agreed about these words for praying continually.
Some understand that this consists in a man's good life: he that lives a holy
life prays continually. Truly as the Greek father says, good works have a
loud voice in the ears of God, and that man prays still that is doing good
still. Chrysostom sticks not to say that good works have the place of prayer
with God, and impetrate. But I think not that that is the meaning of the
Apostle. If therefore we understand it, pray continually; that is, at set
times, and observe them with a non obstante. So Austin understands it.

Others understand it, Pray continually, that is, upon all fit occasions lift
up your souls to God, though but in short ejaculations.

Others understand it, pray continually, that is, without fainting, though you
have not the return of your petitions presently, yet pray without weariness.

Lastly, Austin lights upon another for our purpose, Pray continually, that is,
ever be disposed, and fit to pray. That we may say as David, O God my heart is
ready. Surely that David that could pray seven times a day, and that Daniel
that could pray three times a day in a solemn manner, retiring themselves from
all occasions to perform that duty to God; we may well think that these
people kept themselves in a fit disposition, in a readiness to perform that
duty: they were ready upon all occasions that God offered to turn themselves
to God.

I desire for the use of it that according to the example of Moses, and of
these people, we would be always ready. There is a great defect, and it is the
worse because it is so necessary a practice for us. There be some that are so
buried in the cares of the world, and so taken up with worldly occasions, like
Martha they are busy about many things, that they have no time with Mary to
intend the best things. They are so unsettled by worldly occasions that it is a
long time before they can put themselves into a course to pray: their hearts
are untuned, they can hardly put them into a way of prayer, and supplication.
And when they come to it, as that old father said, their bodies are at Church,
and their minds are at home. Others are so taken up with pleasures and
recreations, that they have no mind to pray. There are other Epicurious, filthy
people that outslip the morning prayer, and before the evening sacrifice comes,
they drown their devotion in drink, that they have more need of sleep then
mind to pray.

There are others that put themselves from a preparation and readiness to
prayer by malice: they are so sour of that leaven that they know not how to
pray. It is not fit they should come to God for peace without peace. They make
God bind their sins, because they will not forgive their brethren.

We should so live, as they that look daily to die, and if so, then we should
be always fit to pray. It is the best preparation for death, O there is none
like that. A spirit full of supplication, a soul that is still sending holy
ejaculations to God Almighty, and that keeps it self in a fitness for holy
duties, that soul is fit to be a sacrifice to God, that soul can say, So come
Lord Jesus.

Therefore I beseech you in the name of God, take heed of worldliness, of
Epicurianisme, of wantonness, of gluttony, and surfeiting, of malice, and all
gross sins: For these gross sins that men accustom themselves to fall
into, hurt the foot of prayer, and lame it, that it cannot go to God, keep
your selves from these: be ever careful in holy ways to walk in the presence
of God, and then you shall have encouragment to go to the throne of grace, and
that with boldness, and confidence, which is the next thing in Moses prayer,
he comes to God with confidence, but so much for this time.

THE NINTH SERMON Upon EXODUS CHAP. 8.
VERSE. 10. Be it according to thy Word, that thou may know that there is
none like the Lord our God.


PHaraoh having pitched on the morrow, says Moses, according to thy word be
it. In the first place he yields, then he gives the reason why he so yields.
He yields, Be it according to thy Word, that is, I will observe thine own
time. Then he gives the reason why he does so, that thou may know that there
is none like the Lord. It shall appear in the removal of this judgment, thou
shall see all the Frogs confined to their proper element of water. For the
first, the yielding.

Be it according to thy word. Some man may think, it would have been more fit
for Moses to expostulate then to yield to Pharaoh, and he might thus have said,
Do thou request a courtesy at my hands, and limit me my time? surely if I
do the favor, I will observe my own season, Beggars must be no choosers: if a
man give freely, all circumstances are left in his discretion to his own
liberty. But to answer these people, surely Moses had much disparaged himself,
if having once yielded to Pharaoh, the power of prescribing the time, he should
have eaten his word. First, it had been unworthy of Moses to have gone back.
Pharaoh might have replied and said, what inconstancy is this? to give with one
hand, and to take away with the other? thou either distrustest the cause, or
art diffident of the power of thy God that thou would fear me with.

Secondly, it would have appeared a great neglect in Moses of Pharaoh, he had
given liberty to Pharaoh to prescribe the time. Princes are not to be dallied
with: if he should have fallen off now, and not have observed the time when
Pharaoh had set it, certainly he had provoked Pharaoh, he had done wrong to the
cause, the usage of Pharaoh had been course, and unworthy of so great a
Majesty. But to come to the observation, it is this.

It has ever been the manner of Gods people in all times, fairly to entreat
and easily to deal with, and respectively to use and not to irritate others
that have been of place and quality, though they have been strangers to them,
both in judgment and affections. In Genesis 4.7. says God to Cain, in the behalf
of Abel, his desire shall be to thee, and thou shall rule over him. As if he
should say, if thou think that my acceptance of his sacrifice will puff him
up, fear not that, it shall not swell him so as that he shall forget that
respect, that is due to thee as the elder brother, and the first borne. God
will provide that his desire shall be subject to his brother in all things that
are lawful, and he shall rule over him as the Elder. In Genesis 33.3. when Esau
met Jacob, he bowed seven times to the ground, and in the course of his speech
calls himself his servant: which was not a vain, light complement, but
seriously spoken: yet far was it from betraying of his birthright (as some
have thought,) by giving that away; but he did it showing respect to him as he
was a great Prince, for so was Esau at this time. For the promise he knew
should be performed to his posterity, the Idumeans served Israel from David to
Joash 120. years, but the Israelites served not the Idumeans; he respected him
though as a great Prince. The like we see in the carriage of Moses toward Edom
in Number. 20. when the Israelites passed through their country, Moses sent a
fair embassage, and desired a peaceable, and free way, and urges him by many
arguments, and moves it the second time, when he found him so stiff that he
would not incline to the motion, they turned another way, so respective was he
to that great man, though he were averse in his affections. So in David toward
Saul when he has him at a great advantage as may be, there is not one
unrespective word comes from him: if he have occasion to speak to him
himself, or to speak of him to others, his words and carriage were ever loyal
and faithful, and full of reverence. How ever some people disfigured him to
him, certainly there was no passage of his life that had the least touch of
disloyalty to him. He knew he was the Lords anointed, and it was not a private
injury that could wash off his duty that he ought him as his Prince.

The like we see in our blessed Lord, how respective he was in all his carriage
toward those in authority; how fairly he speaks in regard of Caesar, as
unwilling to infringe any right or privilege of that Prince: nay, paying
tribute that he need not, because he would not give offense. And how soon did
Paul retract that word that he sent out hastily, and sharply against Ananias,
God shall smite thee thou whited wall? Act. 23. he ingenuously professed that
he did not know him to be the ruler of the people. And Cyprian taking occasion
to speak of that place, says he, they were Sacerdotes, etc. men unworthy of
the place that they held, yet Paul was of that mind, that the very shadow of
that honor he would not neglect, he would do that that was due to the place
they maintained. As our blessed Savior himself, for all the priesthood was so
depraved in his time, he diminished none of the right, and due of it: but when
he had healed the man, he bid him go away, and show himself to the Priest.

The use of it meets with such in these times that spy imperfections in the
practices of men to dispense with themselves in the duties due to their places.
Moses could have so reasoned here; Pharaoh was a wicked man, and a persecutor
of Gods people, and Moses had a great commission himself: but he loved not to
irritate and provoke him, and use him unbefitting a Magistrate: no more should
other men. Let me tell you, Religion and piety, eat not out good manners and
Civilitie. It is not the greatest zeal of a man against sin that will bear
him out in rude unmannerlinesse. Even men that are wicked are to be used
according to their place they maintain; if they be never so profane, if they
have dignity it must be reverenced and their persons respected, Moses kindly
condescends to Pharaoh.

But some may say, Did not Elisha the prophet forbid his man to salute any?
Therefore there is a time when men may let down these actions of common
courtesy.

Let not that be pretended. The meaning is he should make such expedition that
he should not delay, as men in complements: for that would hinder the work.

And although Saint John say, that there are some men that we should not bid
God speed: It intimates only an intimate familiarity that is forbidden.

Or else secondly, such salutations as carry approbation of the evil ways
that a man is found in. But for common offices of humanity and kindness they
are not forbidden. Christ would have his Apostles when they came to any place,
to salute the house. If a man be never so flagiciously wicked, nay if he be
excommunicated, which is the highest curse that can light on him; for all that
civil courtesies must not be denied. Ambrose used Theodosius with all respect,
though he were excommunicated. And he that is excommunicated is not more then a
heathen, but as a heathen, and if so, the heathen must be used fairly and
kindly, and not irritated and provoked, contrary to the dignity they
maintain. Therefore whatsoever men except against the persons of men, give the
place the honor that is due. So did Moses with Pharaoh, he would not go back
from that he had said, lest he should impair the honor of so great a
Magistrate. So much for that. Be it according to thy Word.

A second thing I observe, that is, the cheerfulness of Moses undertaking this
business; for mark, in common speech when we yield to a man's motion, what say
we? Be it so, I am content, your word shall stand, I will do as you have said:
this argues a cheerful and willing performance. And Moses being about a work
of mercy, to remove a judgment, this cheerfulness sets out the work. Paul
says if a man show mercy, he should do it cheerfully, with hilaritie, with a
kind of pleasantness. The same Apostle, he forbids the contrary: for he would
not have men do it out of sorrow or grudgingly, inforcedly, 2 Cor. 9.2. and he
gives a very good reason: for God loves a cheerful giver. If it be in that
service that God requires for himself; if it be an office of love to our
brethren, cheerfulness has ever a special commendation, 1 Timothy 6. rich men
are wished to be ready to distribute. That is the cheerful affection that is
spoken of. And works of mercy are compared to sowing in the Scriptures. Every
man desires a fair seed-time: so every man should give chearefully, for the
more cheerful the seed-time, the more expectation there is of the harvest. It
is said in Psalm. 112. The good man is merciful; the old translation reads it,
the pleasant, the merry man is merciful. And Austin reads it, the sweet man.
And why? he gives a very good reason for it: for says he, it maks a man sweet
in the nostrills of God, when he is cheerful in doing that that is good;
Whereas on the other side, if it be necessitated, and extorted from him, says
Austin, God will pour him out of his mouth as a man does that that is unsavory
and unsweet that troubles his tongue, that is fit for nothing but ejection.

Now this cheerfulness when a man is to do good, should appear three ways.

First, a man should find in his heart: Deuteronomy. 15.10. says the Lord, thou shall
give him in his need, and thou shall not find thine heart grieved, when thou
give. Thou shall not find thy bowels locked up, so the word signifies in the
Epistle of John, the locking up of a man's bowels. A man must not find his heart
straightened, but be so cheerful in his disposition for this purpose, as if he
rejoiced in the opportunities that God offers for the exercise of his charity.

Secondly, there must be cheerfulness in a man's countenance: for if a man do a
work of mercy with an austere look, and a clouded brow, he puts gravel into
that bread he gives, and soures the favor he would bestow, so as it is
unacceptable. Therefore Solomon speaks of a man with an evil eye, and bids
eat not his bread, that when he sees a man eat his meat, wishes him choked,
that when he gives a penny he casts an eye after it as if he wished it in his
purse again: such a man's charity would not be had, if a man could be without
it.

Thirdly, there must be cheerfulness in a man's words. Thus it is said that
Joseph spoke comfortably to his brethren. And so Boaz to Ruth, and David to the
poor Egyptian servant; And so our blessed Lord to the woman that came
trembling before him, and was afraid of being checked, he did not only comfort
her, but perfect the work of mercy on her.

For the use of it, it meets with many in these days, there be those that
their hearts are dead in them, as Naballs, like a stone, there is no
cheerfulness in their inward man, they will do but so much as the Law
compells them, and there is an end. Or it may be when it is racked out with
importunity, and extreme solicitation that is done, and nothing else, which as
Ambrose says is to give, not out of judgment, but out of a desire to be free
from importunity; there are a number of these sponges in the world that suck a
great deal, but you must squeeze them before you can get any thing from them.
How do these ever think to have thanks of God? he loves a cheerful giver; or
of men? when Seneca says a man that receives a benefit from him, he does not
receive it, but it is wrung from him: therefore he thinks not himself so
obliged to requital, or to be responsary for such a favor.

Secondly, you have those, that if they enlarge themselves to any matter of
bounty, and charity, they brow-beate the poor, those that need them; they
look so austerely and sullenly, and superciliously as if they would eat them,
as if as the Baziliske they would kill them with their looks.

Thirdly, you have those, that if they do any thing, they do it with such
language and so rate the poor man as if he were a dog rather then a man, and
bore Gods Image as well as he. The son of Syrack gives better counsel,
Blemish not thy good deeds with evil words, for sometimes a good word is
better then the gift, and so it is.

Therefore in the second place, it is a use of instruction to us all to find
our hearts cheerful upon the occasions that God ministers for the exercise of
our charity. We are about to commemorate the greatest favor that God ever
did, in sending his Son to take our nature, and to die. If our hearts be
open, it is well: O let us bless God for the opportunities he ministers to
us; for the ability he has given to us to refresh the bowels of those that
are necessitated. And let us thank God that we are not in a condition of want,
but that God has given us some ability to give. Secondly, let us be cheerful
in our countenance. And thirdly, in our words, let us speak Gnaleb, to the
hearts of those that are in necessity, as the Hebrew is; give them the comfort
that is fit for them, for with such sacrifice God is pleased. So much for the
yielding of Moses.

Now he comes to the reason, That thou may know that there is none like the
Lord our God.

And now beloved, while Moses assigns this reason, let all men be satisfied
that thought Moses indiscreet in yielding to the motion; Now you see his aim,
he intends the glory of God, he intends to teach Pharaoh such a lesson as he
never learned before. If he had done it in his own time, he had not promoted
the glory of God so much; therefore now it makes him justifiable, and makes him
an example to us, which shall be the observation.

In all our actions to aim at the glory of God. It is the Queen of all
causes, the end of all things, the glory of God. Joshua persuades Achan to a
full and free confession from this way, to give glory (...) God, though he knew
that he should expose his life to danger, yet let him give glory to God, Jos.
7. It is the counsel of David, Psalm. 22.23. O ye of the seed of Israel
glorify the Lord. And it is the practice of David if you mark it, Sam. 6.
when he brought the Arc, and danced before it, and was reproached by his wife
that relished not those good things, says he, I have done it before the Lord,
which Tostatus interpreting says, I have done it to the honor of God, thou
say I am vile, I care not if I were more base, so God may be glorified, I
will be more vile. It is that that God himself indents with man for, Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify
me. There is a supposition of a day of trouble; and an imposition of a duty,
we must call upon God: and Gods composition, Man must glorify him, and God
will hear. So you shall find it is the counsel of our blessed Savior, Let
your light so shine before men that others may see your good works and glorify
your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5.16. It is that that our blessed
Savior sets down in the first petition of the Lords prayer, hallowed be thy
name; It is that that our blessed Lord in his practice had respect to, Joh.
17.4. Father (says he) I have glorified thee on earth. It is that that Paul
would have to be remembered in all our actions, whether you eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. The children of God
have been so sensible of Gods honor that they have not dared to do the least
thing whereby they might impair ir. The sense of Gods honor made Abraham
compose that jarre between Lot and him. This is that that kept Joseph from
satisfying the lascivious desire of his mistress. This kept Mordecai from bowing
to Haman: he would not have stood to give that proud Persian reverence but for
this. First, it was more then civil that he required. Secondly, he was an
Agagite that God had cursed, in both which respects he should have diminished
the glory of God. It was respect to this that kept Daniel from eating his
portion of meat, and the three children from bowing to the Image. This made
Paul and Barnabas so zealous, that they flew in among the people when they
would have sacrificed to them, because it entrenched upon the honor of God,
Act. 14. This made Peter refuse the honor that Cornelius would have done; and
the Angel refuse it from the hands of John, because they knew they should wrong
God in his glory. And this was the reason that the fathers of the Church, when
there was a motion made for the composing of differences between them, and
some Arian heretics that stood up: a little would have done it, the least
letter in the Alphabet, Iota, in the words (...), they would not lend a word,
not a syllable, not a letter; why? because they were jealous of giving away the
honor of God, and that that belonged to his glory. And what is the reason that
we join not with those in the Church of Rome in giving such unlimited honor
to the Virgin Mary, and to other Saints, but that we are afraid to take from
God, and give to the creature? we must be jealous of his glory. Why do we not
pray to Saints as they do? because it is due to God, and it is an impeachment
of his honor since invocation is proper to him.

The children of God are so zealous of his glory, that they regard not their
goods, no not their lives to set it forward; Paul says, Phil, 1.20. I rejoice
whether by life or death God shall be glorified, he cared not for his life. So
we see in our blessed Lord himself, Joh. 12.27. Father, what shall I say?
free me from this hour: but yet I came into the world for this hour, glorify
thy name. As man, he desired the cup might pass from him: but when he
considered that God intended his glory in his suffiering, Father (says he)
glorify thy name what ever come.

Nay the Children of God have been so zealous to promote Gods glory, that they
have not regarded their own salvation. It is a notable instance of Moses, who
was conceited that if God should destroy the people now, part of his glory
would be impaired, says he, Lord if thou will do this raze me out of the
book of life. Rather then Gods honor should be impaired among the heathen that
were apt to take occasion to blaspheme God, Moses was willing to forfeit his
own salvation. So Paul for the same Israel, he was content to be Anathema for
them. The glory of God in their salvation was so dear to him. Thus respective
the children of God have ever been to bring glory to God in all their actions.

But one thing will be questioned, what man can give glory to God? As John
Baptist said of Christ, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to
me? God had need to give us glory, and honor, and he must give it us if we
have any true honor. Are we like to bring glory to him? to set forth his
glory? Was not God glorious and happy before ever there were Angels or men to
praise him?

Says Ambrose, God is not the better if we praise him, or the worse if we
dispraise him: what can this worthless filme of flesh that tumbles up and
down our mouths, add to the glory of God.

The schoolmen answer, God accepts it to increase his glory ad extra, though
ad intra there be no increase, or diminution.

Therefore for the use of it, it meets with a number in the world of whom the
Apostles speech will be verified, they seek their own, but not the glory of
God; men build, but as the builders of Babel, to get themselves a name. Mark,
says Chrysostom, to get themselves a name, not God the glory. So Calvin
observes concerning that passage out of the mouth of Nebuchadnezzar. Is not
this great Babel that I have built for my honor, etc. Mark, all is for
himself, not for the glory of God or the good of the State. So there are a
number that do alms, they perform the work, but as the Pharisees, not for
the glory of God, but for their own praise, they do their works that they may
be seen of men. So there are a number that make profession of Religion; what!
for the glory of God? No, to build up themselves in the opinion of the world,
that men may conceit of them to be religious. So there are those that do good
works sometimes; Is it for the glory of God? No, for their own temporal ends;
or it may be as the Papists to merit by them, that they may be said to be their
own Saviors: So Gods glory is made the last, man sets his own ends first;
Take heed, if God have not his first end in his glory, our glory shall be our
shame.

Therefoae let us take heed ever, that first our intentions be the glory of
God, whether we eat or drink, do all to his praise and honor, and whatsoever
we can do by any means promote it. Art thou a Magistrate? respect Gods glory
in that. Art thou a Minister? preach not thy self, but have a care to advance
the glory of God, and build up the body of his Son. Art thou a father of
children and a master? in the nurturing of them look to the glory of God. Do
thou desire issue? look not so much to have some to perpetuate thy memory, but
set ke it as a holy seed, whereby God may be glorified. Art thou a rich man?
honor God with thy substance. Art thou honorable? improve thy honor to the
glory God. What estate soever thou art in, look principally to promote the
glory of God; It is the end of all things. God has made all things for his
own glory, and should it not be the end of our actions? Secondly, In him we
live, move, and have our being, should not we live to his glory? He is our
Alpha, from him we came; should he not be our Omega, to whom we should tend?
Therefore as all the Rivers come from the Sea, and pay all their tribute to
that great Lord, so let all our actions tend to him.

Thirdly, while we glorify God, we honor our selves, as Austin observes
upon that in the Lords Prayer, hallowed be thy name, says he, understand it
well, and thou prayest for thy self: for when thou prayest that Gods name may
be hallowed, thou prayest that thy self may be sanctified, when thou
honorest-God thou honor thy self, and those that honor him, he will honor.

Let us look to it, and seriously intend it, and be far from doing any thing
whereby we may dishonor God. It was the fault of David, he did that, whereby
the enemies of God blasphemed. It was the fault of those in the time of Christ,
they dishonored him. It is that that Paul lays to the charge of the Jews,
they caused Gods name to be evil spoken of among the heathen. It is that that
I fear many of us are guilty of, that by our lewd carriage we cause Religion,
and the name of God to be evil spoken of in Gath, and in the streets of
Askalon.

Every ingenuous nature is sensible of the house he springs of, and would by
no means blemish it: Shall he abuse our sister as a whore? say the sons of
Jacob to their father. Every good child is sensible of the honor of his
father, and every subject of the honor of his country, and shall not we be of
the honor of God? He is jealous of his honor, and if we suffer it to fall in
our hands, we shall smart: for God can glorify himself in our confusion. So
much of that. Now for the words themselves.

There is none like the Lord our God.

A most true saying, you have it every where in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.26. There
is none like the God of Jeshurun, 2 Samuel 22. O Lord thou art great, and there
is none like to thee, 1 King. 8.23. says Solomon. There is none like thee O
Lord either in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, Psalm. 86.8. There is none
like thee O God, neither are the works of others like thine, Esaias 46.9. I am
God, and there is none like to me, Jer. 10.6, 7. twice over, There is none like
the Lord, there is none like the Lord, Micah 7.18. Who is like to thee? So
every where the Scripture says, there is none like to God.

The Maccabees were called so from Judas Maccabeus, and he was called so from
the letters he carried in his Ensign, and they were Mem, Caph, Aleph, and Jod;
The meaning of it is this, who is like thee O Lord? among the Gods there is
none. So he that strove with the Dragon, Rev. 12. Michael, the signification of
his name is, who is like as God? There is none like God. I could instance in a
number of particulars: take these four.

There is none like him in verity, and truth: for he is the only true God. So
you have it, 1 Thessalonians. 1. The Idols of the heathens were but Idols, and an Idol
is nothing, 1 Cor. 8. that is, nothing to that a man conceits him to be. The
Hebrews call them Elilim some say, quasi al elohim, because they are not Gods,
but it is better from another word Elili, that signifies nothing. God is the
only true God.

Secondly, none is like him in unity; The Gods of the heathens were infinite,
every City, every Town, every Hamlet had their Gods. Ambrose calls them, The
brood of Gods: and that Polytheisme brought Atheism into the world. It is not
so with God, Hear Israel, the Lord thy God is one.

Thirdly, there is none like him in purity. The Gods of the heathens, were
good follows. Who can endure to hear of a God that sometimes would thunder,
and sometimes commmit adultery? The Idols are called sometimes in Scriptures,
dunghill Gods. So the Idols of the heathen were so obscene, and filthy and
abominable, that they might well be so called. It is not so with God, he is the
holy one of Israel. Holy and reverend is his name. And the Angels themselves
call him Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; and his pure eyes can endure no
iniquity. So he is a holy God.

Lastly, none is like him in power. The Gods of the heathen, and those that
worshipped those imaginary deities that men set up, they could not defend those
that trusted in them, nor defend themselves. How often were they carried captive,
as we read in stories? Jacob when he was gone from Laban was pursued with a
great deal of hostility; and his first cry is, why have thou stolen my Gods?
Proper Gods that might be stolen. So it is a good speech, Judge. 6. Let Baal
plead for himself. What! is his Image demolished? is he not able to revenge
his own quarrel? Let him plead for himself. So Dagon though the great God of
the Philistims, yet he could not keep himself from being broken by a fall.
Senacherib found a difference between the Gods of those countries that he had
subdued, and the God of Israel: he found he was such a one as could not be
stood against.

Not to multiply more, see the power of God acknowledged in that place, 1 King.
18. where the contestation was between Elias, and the Priests of Baal, whose
sacrifice should be accepted first. The Priests of Baal leaped upon the Altar,
and as a company of madmen, and bedlams, cut themselves with knives till the
blood gushed out, they cried and roared till their throats were dry, and all
would not bring a spark of fire. Eliah prays to God, and it was done, and the
fire comes, and consumes not the sacrifice only, but licks up all about it; so
the people cry out, The Lord he is God, not Baal, but Jehovah, for he exceeds
all. But this is not a thing that we need stand on; we must come nearer. For
surely Moses intended that Pharaoh must know God to be the only Lord. How
could this be? Moses no doubt understood that by this judgment on him, and by
the removing of it his eyes would be so in lightened, that he should see there
is none like God.

God is known in afflicting of judgments.

And that especially, first, when it is a strange judgment, when it is a
fearful judgment. As that judgment of Sodom, when there came fire from
heaven. Says Salvianus, when God sent hell out of heaven, fire and brimstone.
So when the earth swallowed Corah, and his company, it was a strange and
fearful judgment.

Secondly, sometime a judgment is remarkable, when it is unseasonable in regard
of the time; as the eclipse, and darkness at Christ's suffering, for it was not
a natural Eclipse: God showed his power, he made the Sun withdraw his light,
and left the earth wrapped in obscurity.

Thirdly, Gods power is more remarkable when it is sudden, such as that that
Samuel brought upon the people, that in the midst of harvest at his word
there came thunder and lightning, and abundance of rain, that spoiled their
endeavors. For as Tostatus says upon the place, he looked not Astronomically;
he stayed not till there was a meet time of bringing things about; but
presently, and that made it more fearful to the people.

And as in the inflicting of judgments Gods hand may easily be seen, and is
remarkable, so in the removing of it, and that I think Moses intends. For when
a judgment has been long upon a people, and they have smarted soundly, and
have used all means they can devise, and yet it is not removed: in the end
turning themselves to God, and he removing it, this makes them know the Lord to
be God. This was Pharaohs case, to which Moses had respect when he said this,
That thou may know that there is none like the Lord. For you know the hand of
God was heavy upon him by the Frogs, they were such annoyance to him and his
servants, that they could have no meat dressed, or be quiet in their beds, it
was a terrible encumbrance, no question he consulted with the Magicians to
remove them. They could not do it: God gave them leave to bring them, but they
had neither leave, nor power to take them away. God uses the devil sometimes
in the execution of justice: but never to do a work of mercy. The bringing of
the Frogs was a judgment, the taking of them away was a mercy. It was not for
the devil to do that. It is like enough that Pharaoh supplicated God: all will
not do, till Pharaoh desire Moses. So that now when all is gone by the prayer
of Moses, he must needs know the Lord to be the God, that there is none like
him. When Eliah told Ahab that there should be no rain in Israel but according
to his word, and that the drought should continue three years, and six months:
you may think this, that Ahab sought means for the preservation of the
Cattle, and consulted with his great God that he worshipped to remove this
judgment, it would not do, it must be the God of Elias that must do it: and
that Elias that was the bridle of heaven, as Basil calls him, he must unlock
heaven, and pour out rain abundantly. So the obduracie of the Philistims was
so great, that having took the Ark of God among them, they endured seven
months vexation of hemeroids, and many people died, yet they held out till at
last they saw no time could cure it. They consulted with their Priest, and he
said, go, and make such an offering, and says he, give glory to the God of
Israel: as if he had said, it is not your Dagon, nor all the means you can use,
that can free you from this judgment, but acknowledge that it is Gods judgment,
and that there is none like him Jonas r^ns away from his commission, and a
whirlwind follows him, and seizes upon the whole ship, they were all in
danger through him. They were not wanting to use all means to secure
themselves, every man called upon his God; they unladed the ship, and cast away
whatsoever might be an encumbrance, and hurt to them, they left nothing
unattempted, they rowed with all sedulitie to bring it to land. All would not
do, it must be the God of Jonas that must do it, all their Gods could not do
it. There is none like the God of Israel.

So it was with Paul, Act. 27. he was in a great storm, for three days they
never saw Sun nor Star; at the last, Paul having revealed from God that they
should all be safe, he bids them take a good heart to themselves, for none of
them should perish: but it was the God that Paul served that must do it, and
must help them in this extremity, and so he did. Eusebius in the fifth book of
his history, Chap. 5. tells, that under Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, there was
a Legion of Christian Soldiers. The army was in great distress: for the enemy
came close to them, and they were exceedingly pinched for water. The company of
Christians betook themselves to prayer, thereupon the Lord sent such a thunder
and lightning as discomfited the enemy, and such abundance of rain, that
satisfied their thirst: so that Army was after called the thundering Legion.
All that the Pagan Gods cannot do, the God of the Christians must do it: there
is none like him.

Therefore for the use of it. Let this teach us when it pleases the Lord to
send us deliverance to acknowledge his power; to see Gods hand in it. Though
there may be some subordinate means used, give God the praise, let him have
all the glory. I will but turn any of you back to some extremity you have
been in by sickness of body: some desperate case you have been drawn to, was
it thy wealth that would abate thy pain? was it thy friends that could keep
off thy fit? was it thy former pleasures could give thee comfort? Nay did it
not increase thy vexation, thy guiltiness in the misusing of them, and in the
distempered abuse of them? did it not increase thy dollour? could the
Physicians help thee? did not they give thee for lost? thy case was to be
deplored, till it pleased this God to whom none is like to rescue thee from the
jaws of death. Have thou been left to tempests of mind; to terrors of soul?
then tell me, and speak true from thy heart, did all those carnal receipts
of gaming, drinking, and business, and whatsoever, did all help? were they not
miserable comforters, Physicians of no value? till God spoke to thy conscience
peace, and said to thy soul, I am thy salvation, thou had no comfort nor
joy. It is impossible it should be otherwise. There is no God like our God, he
alone will do it, all things else are as reeds of Egypt, nothing can help,
there is none like him. As that woman was answered by the King, O woman, if God
do not help thee, how shall I help thee? There is no help from man unless God
strike in. Therefore see God in thy deliverance, acknowledge his power; share
it not between the creator, and the creature: for it is the Lords doing that it
might be mervailous in our eyes.

That thou may know that there is none like the Lord. Mark here.

The works of God so enlighten the wicked that though they convert them not,
yet they convince them.

Thou shall know that the Lord is God, and confess that there is none like
him, if it do thee not good, it shall further thy condemnation. So the works
of God convince the judgments of wicked men, though they convert them not. And
that is enough to make them inexcusable, Romans 1. Jeroboam, when his hand was
restored, he could not but say, there was no God like the God of Israel, and
that the Prophet was a true Prophet. So Manasseh when he was humbled by
affliction, he knew the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33. So Nebuchadnezzar when God gives
ability to Daniel to interpret his dream, and to tell him what it was
without, being informed of it, he says, there is no God like thine. So
afterward when he saw the deliverance of the three children out of the furnace,
he says, there is no God like him.

I say not that he became a good man afterward: yet so far the light beat
upon his eyes, that though it enlightened him not, it dazeled him. So Darius
acknowledged the God of Daniel to be the great God when he preserved him in the
midst of the ravenous Lions. So Antiochus, 2 Maccab. 9. though he stood out a
great while in the obstinacy of his heart, at the last he submitted, and
acknowledged the great God, that no flesh could stand against him.

For the use of it, it is this; to labor for more then this; for fince this
befalls wicked men, to be convinced in their judgments, we should make further
use of it then so. It is pity but we should go further then the sons of
Belial. Nay Beelzebub himself goes thus far, the devils believe and tremble.
And there was a time when the devil confessed our Lord: and it is good for us
to go further then they: therefore when the hand of God is against thee,
acknowledge not only Gods power, but go forward, humble thy self before God,
find out that Achan, find out thy finne, protest against it: and when this is
done, take thy leave of thy finne, divorce thy self from thine iniquity, and
never more renew thy acquaintance with it. This is the fruit that ought to be
of Gods deliverances, not only to see that God delivers, but to what end,
that thou might be more holy afterward.

O it grieves my soul to think, that many people, though they be not so
atheistical but they will acknowledge Gods hand in smiting, and in delivering
of them: yet God knows they make no good use of it. I will go back but to the
great plague, when our waters were turned into blood: did not the destroying
Angel that marched furiously as Jehu, make the stoutest heart to tremble? No
question. And the retreat was as sudden as the increase. Every man can say,
God was to be magnified for that, and it was a very great mercy; but what use
do we make of it? God looks for fruit. If we acknowledge it to be Gods work,
we are convinced of Gods power: but what fruit is there? The devil is
convinced of Gods power: but have we brought forth fruit? Oh, some fruits we
supererogate with God in. If it be blasphemy, or lust, or oppression, and
uncharitableness, God shall have more then he desires: but these are not the
fruits that God looks for. Are not we as ambitious, as proud, as excessive, as
fraudulent as ever we were? What one finne in this City (shall I say) is
removed? nay I would it were abated. Nay beloved, I fear, and I fear to speak
it; we are again ready, and white to another Sicle. O, it is a fearful thing
when the coming of Gods judgments shall make us humble, and the removing of
it shall make us unthankful: for this shows that that humiliation was
enforced, and not ingenuous. Therefore let us look that the next cup be more
bitter; look to it, there will worse things befall us, because we acknowledge
the power of God and have not brought forth fruit worthy of so great a blessing.

Lastly, to shut up all, there is one thing more, and that is this, Our God.

There is no God like our God; In what a near relation God stands to his
people, I showed before. All that I will do is by way of application, to work
upon us to a holy recognition of Gods favor that he has drawn us nearer to
him then many thousands in the world. There is a great deal of divinity in
Pronouns, says Luther: I am sure, there is a great deal of comfort. For God
to be the God of all the world in a general latitude, it is not so much, but
to be our God; to enclose, and impropriate this God to us, that we should say
he is our God, and we are his people, this is a wondrous comfort.

Now then what is required of us? As we draw this God near our selves, and
say as Thomas did, my God, and my Lord, Joh. 20. As we draw near to him: So
let our conversation be worthy of so near a relation. For God will be honored
in all that come so near him. He can better endure the wickedness of those
that are out of the Church, and the pales of it, then the profaneness of
those that are in it. He will have those that he has taken so especial a
charge of it, that they be holy, and plous, and that their conversations be as
becomes the Gospel.

Therefore as often as we reflect upon our relation, let it be ever a motive to a
holy conversation. For to say our God, and to be full of gross sine, as we
are, it is a foul soloecisme. It is that that God most abhorres, for he is a
pure God, and his pure eyes cannot endure iniquity. We must live to his glory,
and honor him that has drawn us so near him; and then we are sure that he
will not leave us till he have perfected us in glory; Christ shall be ours, and
God through Christ shall be ours; and God through Christ being ours, all things
shall be ours.

FINIS.

