THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from EXETER, By a Gentleman of quality, to a worthy
friend of his dwelling in London.

SHOWING, How the Enemy have besieged the said City, and how they lie quartered
about it: With a true Relation of a Fight between the Citizens and the
Gavaliers, wherein the Citizens took 80. Prisoners from them.

Moreover how the Earl of Warwick arriving at a place called Apsom, sent to the
high Sheriff to raise the County, which he denied; whereupon the Earl sent 3.
or 4. small Ships, who battered down a Fort where the Cavaleirs harbored, to
the ground, and slew 60. or 70. of them.

Together with other Remarkable matters, of special Note and consequence.

This is entered into the Register Book of Stationers Hall, and Printed
according to Order.

Aug: 11th London, Printed for Bernard Alsop. 1643.

The true Copy of a Letter sent from EXETER.
SIr,
the miserable estate and condition of our City I conceive is sufficiently
known, yet there has not any ways, or means, been neglected by our Major,
Aldermen, and the rest of those worthy Citizens, who have been both vigilant
and watchful for prevention of danger; and although some part of this our
City is surrounded (and by those blood thirsty people which seek to destroy
us, our lives, liberty, and Religion) yet we hope in due time to assuage their
malice, and confound their devices.

There was lately a hot fight between us and our Enemy, and Cannons played on
both sides, but little or no hurt done, onel^ we took eighty or thereabouts of
them prisoners. Since which time, Sir William Courtney Commander in chief,
Colonel, Actland Colonel Eulford, and the rest of the Kings Party, have laid
at ease, eating and drinking up the sweat of poor men's labors, the Cavalleres
with their number amounting near upon three thousand horse and foot, lies at
Apsom, Saint Thomas his Parish, Affington, and the passage between Kirton and
Exeter. As for the East and Southern part we have free passage, and have daily
great supplies of provision from Tiverton, Silferton, Collompton, and Bradinch,
but for how long this will so continue, God knows, we fear not long, but
suspect that a greater force will shortly environ us from Bristol, and so
besiege all parts. We stand only upon our guard, and think it not fit to
sally out to raise the siege, for fear of being put to retreat and disorder we
should not have sufficient to manage our works; as our enemy lies upon
advantage, so we expect aid from Plymouth and Dartmouth, till which time here
can be no issue of the business. The Earl of Warwick at his arrival near
our Castle at Apsom, sent a message to the high Sheriff, commanding him to
raise the Country upon the posse Comitatus, that thereby he might land men and
ordnance, commanding him in the name of King and Parliament to assist him to
keep the peace of the County, but the Sheriff obstinately refused it, saying
he would not obey his command, pretending he had a Proclamation from his
Majesty to the contrary: then my Lord sent three or four small ships which
battered down a great Fort level to the ground where the Cavalleres
harbored, but left their freehold, as the Cavalleres term it, with the loss
of sixty or seventy of them slain: the Malignant prisoners, both Gentlemen and
Clergy now in durance, were upon the Cavaliers besieging our City very deboist,
and mutinous, swearing they would burn and fire the houses over their heads,
and although I call them prisoners, yet they had too much liberty, going and
coming when and where they pleased, such ungrateful parsons are worthy of
restraint, and are rewarded since accordingly. At Ratford house, where the late
Judge Dodderidge lived, we have mounted 3. Pieces of Ordnance, and fifty or
sixty Musketeers, to keep the enemy from coming over the River, yet such is
their desperateness, that they attempt it daily, and come over robbing and
stealing our horse, sheep, and cattle, and make such spoil, that neither they
nor their Commanders have any fear of God, or rule of good manners. Sir John
Barkely a great Commander of the Cavaliers, has done very great spoil amongst
us, posting to and fro with 150. horse, imposing upon the subject such heavy
taxations, that the subject cannot bear; their horses and goods plundered,
their persons threatened, and imprisoned, and I think it is no news to the
world, that this County has had its share of troubles. For since the siege of
Sherborn Castleful 14. months, when first Sir Ralph H^pton took his flight in
the North part of Somerset, and so along the Sea coast till he came to
Pendennis Castle, we have not been free of soldiers, and no small number, but
by thousands, sometimes 4 5 6 8. and 10000. still in pay of our own party, and
at length came the rabble of Cornish, and they swept the Country clean where
they went, yea, and forced men to carry Arms, but they have done them as little
service as they did us at Modbury, when they all run before they came near the
place.

This distraction amongst us we have justly deserved, and indeed it was ever
contrary to my desire, that young Chidley, who is the chief cause of our
troubles, should have such a place of authority, Sergeant Major General, a
place of too much honor for a giddy youth; but such is the wisdom of many,
that they think if a man spend a month, two or three in the wars of a
foreign Nation, none like such for experience: but give me leave, honesty is
the best policy: we have been in all parts thus treacherously dealt withal,
and I think no County suffered the like as we have by Chidleyes revolt. It was
not for his good conditions or experience we esteem the loss, but the number
of brave horse, yea and most of the Earls own horse, which indeed is the
only ruin of the Western parts. Yet God is all sufficient, and we doubt not
but he will strengthen us, as daily he does; for since the surrendering of
Bristol, where within 24. hours after we heard the truth thereof, how the
matter was carried, and upon what terms the soldiers and inhabitants should
depart, as in the Articles of agreement is largely expressed, none of which
being performed, but the City rifled, yea, and all both fri^nd and so, though
the Malignants to be known from others stuck green boughs at their doors,
and wore them in their hats; yet being all pillaged, the Malignants amongst us
knowing they shall taste of the same sauce, if the like occasion happen to us
as in Bristol, begin to be well affected, and encourages the rest, and at this
present do voluntarily as hard duty as a common soldier; so that those
Malignants amongst us that are of strength and ability, I am persuaded, will
show themselves more forward in this wrong Cause, as they term it, for the
love of their goods, then any other man amongst us Therefore if any assistance
come to us speedily, we doubt not but to remove those ill neighbors about us,
and be at liberty. I cannot certify you with more then I have said of the
proceedings amongst us, but we have had lately intelligence from Bristol, that
there is a Regiment or two upon their march, or ready to march at Dorchester
and Waymouth, I see not how, or who should resist them; neither is it expected
that there can be prevention given, unless some considerable force be sent
down to join with the Country, and to resist and make head, there being no
more in these parts but only those small forces we have under the command of
Sir Walter Earl, which are more then sufficiently matched with the Captain of
Corfe Castle: and certainly if there be not a sudden course taken, the enemy
will be exceedingly strengthened, and all the Western parts ruined and spoiled.
Squire Rogers of Blanfora, one of the greatest disturbers of the peace in this
County, is lately dead; he died of the small pox, coming from Oxford. Thus
praying to God to deliver us out of the hands of our oppressors, I rest,

Your affectionate friend, I. S.
Exeter, Aug. 3. 1643.

