SIONS CHARITY TOWARD HER Foes in misery.

IN A DIALOGVE Between a Citizen of LONDON, and a Country-Gentleman,
concerning the Offenders of these times.

Mat. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not Judged.

1 Cor. 13.6. Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth.

Repint




London Printed by R. H. for I. D. 1641.

SIONS CHARITY.
GEntleman. Well overtaken Sir.


Citizen. You are very welcome Sir.


Gent. I pray you Sir how far travail you this way.


Citt. As far as Nottingham, if the Lord permit.


Gent. And whence come you Sir I pray you.


Citt. From London Sir.


Cent. Indeed I thought by your habit you were a Citizen of London, and to tell
you truly, I am glad I met with you, for that I much desire to hear what news
at London this Parliament time; therefore if I can entreat so much favor at
your hands, as to accept of my company a mile or two of your way, and to relate
unto me some of your news at London, I shall think my self much bounden unto
you.


Citt. Sir, you seem to be an honest grave country Gentleman, and therefore
your company to me is very acceptable, and I should be glad that you had
further to go on in my way, and shall be willing to pleasure you in telling
you any news I know at London.


Gent. Sir, I thank you very kindly, and first of all I pray you tell me, is
the Parliament like to sit still, and not be dissolved.


Citt. Yea, I make no doubt of it, for thanks be to the Lord there is an Act
for that purpose.


Gent. Blessed be the Lord for it, I rejoice to hear it, assuring my self, if
they sit without disturbance they will amend many things that are amiss both in
the Church and Commonwealth.


Citt. God grant it, say I; for in my judgment there is great need.


Gent. Yea doubtless, and I pray you Sir what hear you concerning those that
have been the troublers of this our Israel.


Citt. Concerning them, this I say for certain, that some of them are fled,
and one is dead, and others are yet alive.


Gent. And who be they I pray you that are fled.


Citt. Finch, Windebank, and diverse of that wretched crew, whose names I cannot
now remember.


Gent. And who is he I pray you that is dead?


Citt. The Deputy of Ireland, that traitorous wretch, and murdering caitife.


Gent. And who are they I pray you that are yet alive.


Citt. Great Beelzebub, that Prince of devils, who though he is fast chained up
in the Tower, yet many others of his infernal Spirits are yet at liberty.


Gent. Sir, by your favor, I must make bold to tell you before we proceed any
further, tha I think you do very ill in giving them such titles, you seem by
your civil habit to be a man professing the fear of God, and therefore I
think it meet for me to tell you that these are unchristian like speeches.


Citt. Why Sir, I pray you, can a man speak too ill of them that have been
enemies to all righteousness, Acts 13.8.
did not the Apostle Paul call Elimas the Sorcerer as ill as I call them *.


Gent. It is very true indeed, the Apostle Paul called him as ill, yet
doubtless it is not lawful for you to follow his example therein, except you
be full of the holy Ghost, as the Text says Paul was, and thereby was able to
discern him to be the child of the devil: and besides, as I hope, you know
our best Divines M. Dent.
do forbid us to speak evil either of them that are absent, or of the dead;
yea, Tit. 2.2.
the Apostle Paul goes further, speak evil of no man.


Citt. But if you were in London, you should not only hear bad men, but also
many good men speak as ill of them as I have done: yea, you shall see diverse
writings, yea, and Books printed, lying on many Booksellers Stals to be sold,
that give them as bad language as I have done.


Gent. The more is the pity, I am sorry to hear it, being assured that this
is not the language of Canaan, which every Christian ought to speak. Do you
not remember the Apostle Jude writes, that when Michael the Archangell strove
against the devil, and disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him
with cursed speaking, or give him any railing accusation, but only said, the
Lord rebuke thee: and to tell you truly, though I my self be one whom they
call a Professor, yet do I utterly dislike this disposition which I have
observed in many, who are called by that name, in uttering such bitter words
against gross offenders, and much more if they write or print Books in that
nature, to tell you truly, I like not such Satyricall spirits.


Citt. Why, but Sir by your favor, I conceive that such Books do much good,
for first, thereby it is possible that such as have offended may come to see
their offense thereby, and so be brought to shame, and afterward to
repentance: and then secondly, hereby it is made apparent to the world, what
they are, and so they come to be detested, and at last cut off from troubling
this our Israel; as one is, and I hope more will follow.


Gent. Sir, I pray you conceive that it is not the matter of such Books that I
do simply condemn, but the manner or style of them; for I conceive if such
matter as is in some of them, were composed after a sober, pitiful, and
Christian-like manner, without tart or bitter speeches, then it were possible
they might be a means to work shame and repentance in the hearts of
offenders. Let the sin be shamed rather then the sinner, the particulars
offensive, then the persons offending, says a godly man: but this tart manner
spoils all; for first it makes the offenders conceive, that the authors and
approvers of them do hate their persons, and so speak out of malice, or
desire of revenge, and so by that means they do but exasperate them, or
harden them, and rather keep them from repentance, then bring them unto it, and
besides, without Gods preventing grace, they will occasion the readers, or
hearers of them, either to hate their persons, or jeere them, or both; it is a
most intemperate zeal M. By field
says a godly Divine, that spends it self in the vain and bootlesse censure
of the estate of those that are without: those censures have in them much of
provocation, and nothing of edification; it were happy for some Christians if
they could with the Apotle say often to their own souls, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
what have I to do to judge them that are without.


Citt. Well Sir, one thing I can assure you of upon my own knowledge, that the
printing and selling of such Books has been a means to help many a poor man
in London these dead times of trading.


Gent. That may be indeed, and yet the Books never the more lawful or
warrantable for that, you know we must not do evil that good may come
thereof.


Citt. Well Sir, let us leave off this discourse concerning the Books, and let
us proceed a little futher in our discourse concerning the persons who are the
subject matter of such Books, and I pray you tell me how you conceive a
Christian man is to stand affected toward such persons?


Gent. Without question he ought to love their persons as they are men, you
know whose words they are, Mat. 5.44. But I say unto you, love your enemies.


Citt. Indeed I grant, if they were my private enemies I ought to love them,
yea, and so far forth as they are so, I ought to do it; but these men are
public enemies, yea, Gods enemies, such as oppose and hate the truth of God,
and persecute it in the professors thereof, yea they are such as are enemies to
any good course, and godly proceedings.


Gent. Though they be Gods enemies, and public enemies, yet for ought you know
while they are alive they may be curable, and therefore though you may hate
their sins, and pray against their devices, yet must you love their persons.


Citt. But did not Paul and David hate the persons of such, and pray against
them, and may not we imitate them therein?


Gent. It is true indeed, Paul prayed against Alexander the Copper-smith, 2 Timothy 4. Psalm. 139.32.
that God would reward him according to his works; So David says, Do not I
hate them O Lord that hate thee? etc. and so in many other Psalms he prays
for the final and utter destruction of his enemies, which indeed is a sign of
utter hatred, yet this was because they were not only Gods enemies, but
desperate and irrecoverable ones, which they saw by the Spirit of God, being
extraordinarily and infallibly informed thereof, and therefore their prayers
were but prophecies of the final destruction of these men, as Psalm. 63.9. and
54. and 5. But for us, because we have not the like measure or gift of Spirit,
we have no such warrant either to hate, or pray directly against any man's
person.


Citt. Well Sir, I tell you truly I did not consider these things before now,
and I begin to fear my heart has not been so rightly affected toward these
men whom I have named, as it ought, therefore I pray you proceed further in
this matter.


Gent. I will, as the Lord shall enable me, and first as touching them that are
yet living, I conceive it is the duty of a Christian, and that which does most
express a Christian-like spirit, to express our love to them in being sorry,
yea, and in mourning for them, yea, and the more we hear their faults
discovered, the more we are to sorrow for them: and this I am confident has
warrant from Scripture, do you not remember what the Apostle said to the
Corinthians touching the incestuous person, and you are puffed up says he, 1
Cor 5.2.
and have not rather sorrowed. It is a place that I have often thought upon,
and to tell you truly, I have found such a disposition in my own heart as was
in these Corinthians, and that is, when I have heard-of others that have
committed some gross offenses, I have as it were found my heart glad within
me, or rather puffed up with pride, because I have not been guilty of the like
transgressions, when as it is clear by the Text, that I should rather have
sorrowed for them, for want of which disposition, the Apostle blames the
Corinthians; it was well said therefore of one, in the Book called the Lives
of the Fathers, when it was told him that one of his brethren was fallen into
whoredom; he fell yesterday says he, and I may fall to day; to this purpose
Luther has an excellent saying, we must not says he, measure our own
holiness by other men's sins, therefore let him that stands, take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.
and have ye not considered when it was revealed to Elisha by the Spirit of
prophecy, what gross crimes Hazael should commit hereafter? the Text says,
that he looked upon him steadfastly, and wept; now if that the Prophet of God
wept when he considered the evil which that wicked man should commit
hereafter, ought not we, think you, to do the like when we consider what
wickedness men have committed heretofore, and indeed Sir, if we did well we
should make this good use thereof unto our selves, that is, when we hear what
transgressions others have committed, we should therein as in a glass behold
our own natures, we being the very same by nature as they are, and if we had
the same temptations which they had, and the Lord should leave us to our selves
as he left them, we should certainly commit the like transgressions which they
have done. To this purpose I remember a story which I heard a godly Divine
relate in the Pulpit concerning a certain man, who being distressed in
conscience by reason of the apprehension of the greatness of his sins, one of
his Christian friends laboring to comfort him, willed him to consider that his
sins were not so great as Manasses were, who yet notwithstanding were forgiven,
whereupon he replied, if I had lived in Manasses times, and had had the same
temptations as Manasses had, I should have committed as great sins as Manasses
did. We cry out says another godly Divine, against Cain for murdering his
brother, and against Judas, for betraying his Master, when as we our selves
have the same murderous and traitorous disposition in us by nature; to this
purpose Austin speaks well saying, There is no sin which any man has done,
but another man might do the same; yea, says Luther, God by such examples
does show unto us our own weakness, that we should not wax proud, but stand
in fear, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 6.2.
Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.


Citt. Truly Sir, it would be very well if we could be thus affected toward
them, and that we could make such good use thereof as you have spoken, for then
should we pity them, and pray for them, as I now persuade my self it is our
duty.


Gent. Yea surely, whilst they are alive it is our duty to pray for them, the
faithful, says Calvin, desire as much as lies in them, that the wicked should
return to a perfect mind, and so they seek their salvation, that they should
not perish, thus then we must pray to God to pardon them, and to turn their
hearts, and to move us hereunto, Mat. 5.44.
let us first consider that our Savior commands it. Secondly, let us consider
that they are our own flesh. Esaias 58.7.
Thirdly, consider they have some part at the least of Gods image in them, but
alas this duty is contrary to the nature that is in us, and the practice of the
world, and therefore contrary to this duty, they do hate them, rejoice at
their fall, speak all ill both to them, and of them, and interpret all things
against them.


Citt. Well Sir, you have fully satisfied me how we should be affected toward
the living, I pray declare likewise how we should be affected toward the dead.


Gent. As we must pray for them whilst they are alive, so must we pity them
being cut off, because they have brought misery upon themselves.


Citt. But may we not lawfully rejoice when wicked men are taken away, are we
not bidden to rejoice at wicked men's destructions, Psalm. 52. and Psalm. 58.10.


Gent. Indeed thus much I do grant, that though we know not men's final
estate, yet if we see any notorious enemy of the Church and Gospel, and good
men taken away, we may give God thanks, and in some sense rejoice, as namely,
for that God has showed himself careful of his Church, and has provided for
his own glory, the comfort of his people, and passage of goodness, and for
the terror of other bad ones left behind, but we must no ways rejoice as it
is the destruction of the person: but I being now come to my journies end, must
of necessity break off, though abruptly, except you will be pleased to light
and refresh your self, and your horse with such provision as our Country
affords.


Citt. Truly Sir, I am heartily sorry that you are so soon come to your own
home, and that I cannot by any means stay any longer with you, for I desire to
reach to Nottingham to night, and you see the day is far spent, so that if I
should stay, I fear I should be benighted, wherefore Sir I give you most
hearty thanks for your good company, and especially for your Christian-like
discourse, the which I hope I shall never forget, and if it please the Lord to
bring me to London again, I purpose to acquaint my friends with these things,
who have as well as I been heretofore too harsh in judging and speaking against
these men.


Genesis Sir, I should have been right glad to have heard more news from London,
but seeing you cannot conveniently stay, there is no remedy, I thank you for
your company, and so the Lord be with you, and send you well to your journies
end.


Citt. The Lord be with you also I beseech him, Amen.


FINIS.

