A DECLARATION OF Sundry Grievances concerning Tin and Pewter, worthy the
serious Consideration of the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, in the behalf of
the Pewterers, and People of the three KINGDOMS.
By I. S. A desirer of his Countries Freedoms.
Humbly shows,
THAT Tin the Native and Royal commodity of this Nation, has formerly set
on work many thousand Families of English men in their own Land, who by the
Manifacture thereof have been enabled to support themselves, to the Honor of
the Nation, the comfort of their Families, and useful to the Public where
they have lived; But of later years by reason of Oppression they are much
decayed, and greatly impoverished, by which the whole Nation and Kingdom is
much dishonored and abused; the working our Native Commodity almost wholly
become the Trade of Strangers, as will clearly appear by the Particulars
following. Viz.

First, by the covetousness of a few particular men, who to make themselves
rich though in the Kingdoms Ruin, have by indirect means procured Patents to
themselves to have (like the Soape-men) the sole Trade in their own hands, and
have hereby not only advanced the price near one half upon the Nation, but
limiting and binding the Free People in the use, buying, working, and selling
their Native Commodities; so as by these means they have been forced to leave
their Calling ore; else to follow them in other Countries, sometimes to their
utter undoing, and Kingdoms dishonor.

Secondly, whereas former PARLIAMENTS have taken great Care that all liquid
Measures should be made of Pewter, according to the ancient Standard of the
Kingdom, the dearness of the said Commodity enforced the poorer sort of
People to buy whited Iron; a deceitful Outlandish commodity, French Juggs,
Flanders Cans, etc. So by the poverty of some, but fraudulency of most, all
sort of People are deceived in their Measure, especially the poor and
Traveller in things of near concernment, as Ale, Beer, Milk, Oil, etc. Yea,
the Strangers that live amongst us have great cause of complaint to the great
dishonor of our Nation.

Thirdly, although Tin is at this great price, it is presumed, not in any
City or Town in England out of Cornwall is one block of Tin to be bought
for any Money; When in Amsterdam, Roan, Paris, Constanstinople, Legorn etc.
there is very great quantity of English Tin in the custody of English
Merchants supposed Tinne-Patentees; so as those whose Livelihood has depended
upon the foresaid Commodity, have been forced to buy it in Holland or
elsewhere, and it is at present sold in LONDON at 18 pence a pound, having
never been sold at the Mines for above 3 l. per a hundred weight, little more
then 6 d. a Pound, a sad thing to consider that a free People should be so
abused in their own Native Commodities.

Fourthly, Whereas in most part of the World English wrought pewter has been
in very great esteem, as many Merchants can testify, till now of late years,
since they have been supplied and encouraged with Tin unwrought in great
abundance, and the Patentees having gotten a power did prohibit without their
License the transportation of wrought Pewter: which License could not be
attained for any part where their unwrought Tin, sold; to the great
discouragement of the Merchant, and the undoing the Manefacture of this
Kingdom.

Fifthly, Foreign States having supply of Tin, in their wisdom for the good
of their own people; As Holland, part of France, and Flanders, etc. prohibited
the bringing in of wrought Pewrer as formerly. Excepting for private use do
set on work their own Nation, and supply many parts of the World with debased
false mettle: bringing without Controwle great quantities into Scotland and
Ireland striking the Kingdoms Rose and Crown upon it. A known Mark in
foreign parts to testify the just goodness of Pewter, according to the
Laws of this Land. By means whereof, Our English Nation is greatly abused,
and if not timely prevented, the Manifacture will come to nothing.

It is therefore humbly desired and conceived for the prevention of the
forementioned evils, or worse for the future; The supporting of many thousand
Families whose Livelyhoods depend upon the Manefacture of the aforesaid
Commodity, The maintaining the Ancient Esteem of English Pewter, which is made
to a perfect Standard of goodness, and the Honor of the Nation; These few
things amongst many other may prove very worthy the serious Consideration of
the Honorable House of PARLIAMENT, Of whose Care for the freedom and good of
the Commonwealth, The Experience of this Age (to their Praise) will tell
Posterity.

1. That Provision may be made that the Kingdom of England be furnished with
Tin as formerly, and that any English man may be free to trade in the said
Commodity from the Mines in Cornwall etc: to any part of this Kingdom.

2. That all Tin may be wrought into Pewter, or cast into Bars before it be
transported, which will be a good means to uphold the Manifacture, and to
keep the Tinner from falsifying it: which otherwise may easily be done, and
has been much used, as may be clearly proved by many Returns of false
Mettle from beyond the Sea, and Experience at home.

3. For the benefit of the State at least 20 shillings in every hundred weight
may be paid by way of Custom; Kings Revenue or otherwise upon Tin
transported unwrought more then wrought Pewter.

4. That wrought Pewter may be prohibited from being brought into any part of
the three Kingdoms from beyond the Sea.

5. That Excise upon Tin may be paid by the first buyer, from the Tinner in
Cornwall etc: which may be done with ease by one Office to prevent Many. So the
Commodity will come alike to all men.

Lastly, It is desired after so many years bondage, and for almost five
years, this Commodity has been kept out of the PARLIAMENTS Power by the
Enemy, but now at last by the Blessing of God, and Vigilancie of our Armies,
both the Tin and the greatest part of the west Country is under their
Command, and having for a long time waited, do not know but this may be the
blessed Opportunity that the Honorable PARLIAMENT in their grand wisdom will
think upon some way of Redress in this Particular for the Honor and Credit
of our Nation, the Weal, and Comfort of all Sorts of People, from the greatest
to the least, that they being delivered from those Taske-Masters the Patentees,
may be free men to get their bread, by the working of their Native Commodity,
and have measure according to Laws provided in that behalf. For the effecting
whereof, the Peoples eyes are upon Your Honors, for whom they are in Duty
bound to pray, etc.

LONDON Printed for JOHN SVVEETING at the Angel in Pope's Head Alley. 1646


