THE GLORIOUS FEAST OF THE GOSPEL. OR, Christ's gracious Invitation and royal
Entertainment of Believers.

Wherein amongst other things these comfortable Doctrines are spiritually
handled: Viz.
1. The Marriage Feast between Christ and his Church. 2. The veil of Ignorance
and Unbelief removed. 3. Christ's Conquest over death. 4. The wiping away of
tears from the faces of Gods people. 5. The taking away of their Reproaches.
6. The precious Promises of God, and their certain performance. 7. The Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures. 8. The Duty and comfort of waiting upon God.


Delivered in diverse Sermons upon Isai. 25 Chap. 6, 7, 8, 9 Verses, BY The late
Reverend, Learned and faithful Minister of the Gospel* RICHARD SIBBS, D. D.
Master of Katharine-Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher at Grayes-Inne, London.

Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Wisdom has builded her house; she has hewn out her
seven Pillars.
She has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine; she has also furnished
her Table.
She has sent forth her Maidens; she cries, etc.
Who so is simple let him turn in hither, etc.
Come eat of my bread, and drink of my wine that I have mingled, etc.
Perused by those that were entrusted to revise his Writings.

London, Printed for John Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-doore. 1650.

TO THE READER.
SO much of late has been written about the times, that Spiritual Discourses
are now almost out of season. Men's minds are so hurried up and down, that it
is to be feared, they are much discomposed to think seriously as they ought,
of their eternal concernments: Alas! Christians have lost much of their
Communion with Christ and his Saints; (the heaven upon earth) whilst they have
woefully disputed away, and dispirited the life of Religion and the power of
Godliness into dry and saplesse Controversies about Government of Church and
State. To recover therefore thy spiritual Relish of savory pradicall Truths,
The principal subjects handled in these Sermons.
these Sermons of that excellent man of God, of precious memory, are published:
Wherein thou art presented, 1. Of the Marriage Feast between Christ and his
Church.
1. With an invitation to a great and wonderful Feast; the Marriage Feast of
the Lamb. An admirable Feast indeed, wherein Jesus Christ the eternal Son
of God is the Bridegroom, where every Believer that has put on the Lord
Jesus, (the wedding garment) is not only the Guest, but the Spouse of Christ,
and the Bride at this Wedding-supper. Here Jesus Christ is the Master of the
Feast, and the Cheer and Provision too. He is the Lamb of God, the Ram caught
in the thicket. He is the fatted Calfe; Prove. 9. 2.
when he was sacrificed, Wisdom killed her beasts, Matthew. 22. 3.
Prove. 9. 2. At his death, the Oxen and Fatlings were killed. (...).
His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. And that thou may
be fully delighted at this Feast, Christ is the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of
the Valley; he is a bundle of Mirrhe, a Cluster of Camphire, his name is an
ointment poured out, and his love is better than Wine. In Christ are all things
ready, for Christ is all in all. And great is the Feast that Christ makes for
Believers; for it is the Marriage Feast which the great King makes for his
Son. The great design and aim of the Gospel being to exalt the Lord Jesus
Christ, and give him a name above every name. Great is the company that are
bid, Luke 14. 6. Jews and Gentiles. God keeps open house; Hoe every one that
thirsts, Isai. 55. 1.
come, Rev. 22. 17.
and whosoever will let him come and freely take of the water of life. Genesis 49.
20.
Great is the cheer that is provided; every Guest here has Ashers portion,
royal dainties, and bread of fatness. Here Is all excellent, best wine, wine
upon the Lees well refined. Here Is fat things, yea fat things full of marrow.
Here Is the hidden Manna, the water of life, and the fruit of the tree of life
which is in the midst of the Pa^^dise of God. All that is at this Feast is of
the best, yea the best of the best. Here Is variety and plenty too, here is bread
enough and to spare: Caligula and Heliogabalus their Feasts, Super omnia vultus
accessere boni.
who ransacked the earth, air, and sea to furnish their Tables, were nothing
to this. And above all, here is welcome for every hungry thirsty soul; he that
bids thee come, will bid thee welcome, he will not say eat, when his heart is
not with thee: the invitation is free, the preparation great, and the
entertainment at this Feast, suiting the magnificence of the great King, is
full and bountiful. All which is at large treated of in these excellent
Sermons, which are therefore deservedly entitled, The Marriage Feast between
Christ and his Church. We read of a Philosopher, that having prepared an
excellent Treatise of happiness^, and presenting it unto a great King, the K^^^
answered him, Keep your Book to your self, I am not now at leisure. Here is an
excellent Treasure put into thy hand, do not answer (...) I am not now at
leisure. Oh do not let Christ stand knocking at thy heart, who will come and
sup with thee, and bring his cheer with him. Oh let not a deceived heart turn
thee any longer aside to feed upon Ashes, feed no longer with swine upon Husks,
while thou may be filled and satisfied with bread in thy fathers house.

But this is not all, if thou will be pleased to peruse this Book, thou will
find there are many other useful, 2. Of the vail of ignorance and unbelief,
and the removal of it
seasonable, and excellent subjects handled besides the Marriage Feast.

2. Jesus Christ has not only provided a feast, because he is desirous that
all those for whom it is provided should come to it, (which only they do that
believe) he takes away the veil of ignorance and unbelief from off their
hearts: and here you shall find this skillful Preacher has excellently
discoursed, what this veil is, how it naturally lies upon all, and is only
removed by the Spirit of Christ. And if the Lord has destroyed this covering
from off thy heart, we doubt not, but the truth of this heavenly Doctrine will
shine comfortably into thy soul.

3. Jesus Christ to make his bounty and mercy further appear in this Feast; 3.
Of Christ's conquest over Death.
he has given his Guests the Bread of life, and has secured them from the
fear of death: They need not fear, there is no Mors in olla, at this Feast we
may feast without fear: Jesus Christ by his tasting of death has swallowed it
up in victory. Christ does not make his people such a feast as it is reported
Dionysius the Tyrant once made for his flatterer Damocles, who set him at a
Princely Table, but hanged a drawn sword in a small thread over his head. But
Christ would have us triumph over the King of Fears, who was slain by the
death of Christ, Heb. 2. 14, 15.
and we thereby delivered from the bondage of the fear of death. (...).
At other Feasts they were wont of old, to have a Deaths head served in amongst
other Dishes, to mind them in the midst of all their mirth of their mortality:
(which practice of the Heathens condemns the ranting jollity of some loose
professors in these times.) But here, Christ serves in Deaths head, (as David
the head of Goliath) the head of a slain and conquered death. Our Sampson by
his own death has destroyed Death, Hos. 13. 14.
and has thereby ransomed us from the hand of the grave, and has redeemed us
from Death, and the slavish fear of it: All which is at large handled in these
following Sermons for thy comfort and joy, that thou may triumph in his love
through whom thou art more than Conqueror.

4. Because it is a merry heart that makes a continual feast, 4. Of the
Christians tears, and the wiping them away.
and that this feast might be a Gaudy-day indeed unto thy soul, Christ does
here promise, to wipe away all tears from off the faces of his people. The
Gospel has comforts enough to make glad the hearts of the Saints and people of
God: the light of Gods countenance will refresh them with joy unspeakable, and
glorious in the midst of the valley of the shadow of death. A truly godly
person can weep for his sins, though the world smile never so much upon him;
and though he be never so much afflicted in the world, yet he can and will
rejoice in the God of his salvation. In these Sermons thou have this
Gospel-promise sweetly opened and applied; wherein thou shall find directions
when, and for what to mourn and weep, and the blessedness of all true
mourners, whose sorrow shall be turned into joy.

5. In these Sermons you shall further find, 5. Of the Rebukes and Reproaches
of Gods people, and the taking of them away.
that though Jesus Christ respect his people highly, and entertain them
bountifully, yet they have but course usage in the world, who are wont to
revile them as fools and madmen, as seditious Rebels, troublers of Israel,
proud and hypocritical persons. But blessed are they that do not stumble at
this stone of offense, that wear the reproaches of Christ as their Crown, and
by well doing put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: for let the world
load them with all their revilings, yet the spirit of glory rests upon them,
and in due time he will roll away their reproach, and bring forth their
judgment as the light, and their righteousness as the noonday.

6. And because a Christian here has more in hope than in hand, 6. Of the
Promises.
more in reversion than in possession, walks by faith rather than sense, and
lives by the Word of God, and not by bread alone, Thou shall have here
(Christian Reader) a sweet Discourse of the precious promises of Christ which
he has left us here to stay the stomach of the soul, till we come to that
feast of feasts in heaven; that by this glimpse, we might in part know the
greatness of that glory which shall be revealed, that the first fruits might
be a pawn of the Harvest, and the earnest of the Spirit a pledge of that full
reward we shall have in heaven, where we shall be brim-full of those pleasures
that are at Gods right hand for ever. Christ has given us promises to uphold
our faith and hope, till faith be perfected in fruition, and hope end in
vision, till Jesus Christ, who is here the object of our faith, 7. Of the holy
Scriptures, and the divine Authority of them.
be the reward of our faith for ever.

7. Now because the comfort of the promises is grounded in the faithfulness of
him that has promised. This godly and learned man, has strongly asserted the
Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, proving that they are (...), that they
are the very Word of God, that they are (...), and (...), worthy of all
acceptance, and belief, for their own sakes. A truth very seasonable for
these times to Antidote thee against the poysonfull errors of blasphemous
Antiscripturists.

8. Lastly, 8. waiting upon God.
because that God often takes a long day for performance of the promise, thou
shall find herein the Doctrine of waiting upon God excellently handled. A duty
which we earnestly commend unto thy practice, as suitable to these sad times
-- Say, Oh say, with the Church, Isai. 26. 8.
In the way of thy judgments, Oh Lord, we have waited for thee: and with the
Prophet, I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of
Jacob, Isai. 8. 17.
and I will look for him. And rest assured, that none of the seed of Jacob
shall seek him in vain; he will not disappoint their hope, nor make their
faces ashamed that wait for him.

Thus we have given you a short prospect of the whole, a brief sum of that
treasure which these Sermons contain. We need say nothing of the Author, his
former labors sufficiently speak for him in the gates, his memory is highly
honored amongst the godly-learned. He that enjoyes the glory of heaven, needs
not the praises of men upon earth. If any should doubt of these Sermons, as if
they should not be truly his, whose Name they bear, let him but observe the
style, and the excellent and spiritual matter herein contained, and he will
we hope be fully satisfied. Besides, there are many Eare-witnesses yet living,
who can clear them from any shadow of imposture. They come forth without any
Alteration, save only some repetitions (which the Pulpit did well bear) are
here omitted.

The Lord make these, and all other the labors of his Servants profitable to
his Church: And the Lord so destroy the veil from off thy heart, that thou
may believe, and by faith come to this Feast, the joy and comfort whereof
may swallow up all the slavish fear of death, dry up thy tears, and roll
away all reproach: and the Lord give thee a waiting heart, to stay thy soul
upon the name of the Lord, to believe his Word, and his faithful promises,
that in due time thou may rejoice in the God of thy salvation. This is the
earnest Prayer of

London: Apr. 19. 1650. ARTHVR JACKSON. JAMES NALTON. WILL: TAILOR.


AN Analyticall Table of the Princicipall Contents in these Sermons, upon
ISAIAH 26. 7, 8, 9.
The TEXT.
Page. Verse. 6. ANd in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined. 1 V. 7. And he will destroy in
this mountain the face of the covering cast over all People, and the veil
that is spread over all Nations. 33 V. 8. He will swallow up death in victory,
and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of
his people shall he take away from off all the earth, for the Lord has spoken
it. 55, 97. V. 9. And it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our God; We
have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for
him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. 111 Coherence between the
judgments threatened in the former Chapter, and the comforts promised in this
Chapter. 1, 2 The Text opened. 3 The Church is an excellent society. 3 Is a
Mountain, 1. Has strong foundations. 4 2. Is in some measure visible. ib.
Of the Marriage feast between Christ and his Church. 5 The Lord of Hosts is
the founder of this feast. 6 Some of all sorts invited to this feast. 1. Jews.
2. Gentiles. 7
Christ is the chief dish, and greatest cheer at this feast. 8 Christ and his
benefits fitly compared to a feast. 8 1. Because all we have in Christ is of
the best things. 8 2. Much variety in Christ. 9 3. Fullness and sufficiency is
to be had in Christ. 10 4. Because there is much company here. 11 5. There is
rich attire worn at this feast. 12
This Gospel-feast was typed out 1. By the Paschall Lamb. 12 2. By Manna. 12 3.
By the Rock. 14 4. By the Jewish festival. 15
A comparison between Christ and Manna. 13 The sacrament of the Lords super is
this feast specially. 15 We ought to be prepared for this feast. 1. Get large
hearts. 16 2. Spiritual appetite. 16
Means to get spiritual appetite to this feast. 17 1. Sense of sin. 17 2.
Purge the soul from sinful corruptions. 18 3. Spiritual exercise and
activenesse for God. 19 4. Holy company. 20 5. Consideration of the danger of
Spiritual famine. 20
We must get a spiritual taste and spiritual senses. 21 1. To relish what is
good. 22 To disrelish and reject what is evil. 22 We must get a spiritual
Digestion. 23 and wait in the strength of this heavenly feast. 23 Consequents
of the Gospel-feast are, 24 1. Cheerfulness. 25 2. Thankfulness. 25 3.
Justifying of the ways of God and Religion. 25
Religion does not make people melancholy. 26 A Christian at his worst
condition is better than a worldlings best 27 We must labor to have a part and
portion at this feast, and to honor Gods bounty. 28, 29 We must bring empty
souls unto this feast. 32 Connection between the sixth and seventh verst. 33 Of
the Veil that is over men's hearts. 35 All men naturally have such a Veil. 35
There is a Veil over spiritual things, for they are hid. 35, 36. Natural men
1. Want spiritual sight. 36 light. 36
2. Are ignorant. 3. See not spiritual things spiritually. 38 4. Have light
without heat. 39 5. Are unbelievers. 40
Ignorance and unbelief acts in every sin. 41 God only can take away this
veil. 42 Men nor Angels cannot remove it. 42, 43, 44 Only Gods people have
this veil removed. 44 Where this veil is removed there is a Feast. 45 We
ought to use means to have this veil taken off. 46, 47 1. By attending upon
Ordinances. 48 2. By practicing what we know. 49 3. By praying unto God. 50
When the veil is taken off from the heart, then 1. A Christian will wonder at
the things of faith. 51 2. Desire more and more to know them. 51 3. This veil
has been removed by the Word. 51 4. A Christians knowledge is a transforming
knowledge, 52
Of Death, and Christ's victory over Death. 55 Death is, 1. The King of Fears.
56 2. Spares none. 56 3. Is let in by sin. 56 4. Is attended on by Hell. 56
Christ swallows up death in victory. 1. By satisfying for sin. 57 2. By his
suffering death. 59, 60
We ought to believe that death is conquered to us. 60 We ought to be one with
Christ crucified. 61, 70 We must be thankful unto God, 1. For victory over
death. 62 2. For benefits by death. 62
The slavish fear of Death is unbecomming a Christian. 62, 63, 67. Death is
conquered to a Believer though he die. 63, 64 Death is terrible to wicked men.
64 Duellists foolishly out-brave death. 65 Death to Gods children not only a
conquered enemy, but is made a friend. 66, etc. Of Christians Tears. 72 Good
men are apt to weep 1. For sin of others. 74, 75 2. Miseries of others. 74, 75
We ought to weep, 74 and yet to rejoice. 76 God will wipe away all tears. 77,
78 God is a God of tender mercy. 79 Christians are not to be judged by
appearance, and by their sufferings. 81 Christians have a mixed condition and a
mixed disposition. 82 There was no sorrow in Paradise, and shall be none in
heaven. 84 Sin is the greatest cause of sorrow. 85 Mourning accepted from
them that cannot weep. 86 Then a Christians tears are right, when, 1. They
spring from the love of God. 86 2. When we weep for our own sins. 87 3. When
they are secret. 87 4. When they are reforming. 88
Of the Rebukes and reproaches of Gods people. 89 Christ and his members
subject unto reproaches. 89, 90 Wicked reproach the godly from the enmity of 2
seeds. 91 We must not be scandalls to Religion -- nor scandalized at the
reproaches of it. 92 Christ will take away reproaches from his people: and will
vindicate them. 93 Directions how to carry our selves under Reproaches. 94 1.
Be patient. 94 2. Innocent. 94 3. Courageous. 95 4. Sincere. 95 5. Pray much to
God. 95 6. Rejoice and glory in them. 96
Of the Holy Scriptures. 99 God is the Author of them. 99 The scriptures sole
and supreme judge of controversies. 100 The Scriptures may be known to be Gods
Word by 1. The Majesty of them. 101 2. Their mysteriousnesse. 101 3. From
Reason. 103 4. From Experience. 101 5. From the witness of the Spirit. 102 6.
From their efficacy. 101 1. In warning the soul. 101 2. Changing the soul.101
3. Casting down the soul. 101 4. Searching the soul.102 5. And comforting the
soul.

The holy Scriptures are and have been preserved from Corruption. 103 We ought
to hear the word as the word of God. 104 God will make good all his promises,
if we believe. 105 We must pray for the Spirit that indicted the Scriptures,
that so we may relish them. 106 Of Gods Promises, and the performance of them.
107* to 112 Gods Promises are full and free, and spring from his bounty, and
are our greatest treasure. 111, 112. We ought to be ashamed of infidelity in
Gods promises. 105 It is sometimes long between the promise and performance. 113
1. To exercise our faith. 113 2. To waine us from creatures. 113 3. To indeare
the things promised. 114 4. And to fit us for the enjoyment. 114
Of Waiting upon God. 115 We have but a taste here of what we shall have
hereaft. 115 Waiting carries with it all other graces. 116 1. Patience. 117 2.
Long-suffering. 117 3. Contentment. 118 4. Silence from murmuring. 118 5.
Watchfulness. 118 6. Faithfulness. 118
Want of waiting cause of much wickedness. 119 All is overcome with waiting.
120 God will perform his word to all true waiters. 121, 152 God keeps the time
of performance in his own hands. 121 God fully performs his promises in
heaven. 122, 123, 124 The things hoped for uphold the heart in waiting. 125 God
will have his people continue waiting. 150 1. That we may live by faith and not
by sight. 150 2. When we are fitted for what is promised, we shall then enjoy
it. 151 3. God will have us have the best at last. 251
As there is a time of our waiting, so there will be a time of Gods
performance. 152 The present grace we have is an earnest of what we shall
have. 152 Encouragements to wait upon God. 153 1. Gods time is best, and it is
set. 154 2. God will effect the thing promised, though by contraries. 154
What we should do when God has performed promise. 1. Be thankful to the
Lord. 156 2. Be joyful in the Lord. 158, 159,
Interest in God is the cause of all our joy. 160, 161, 162
THE Marriage Feast, BETWEEN CHRIST and his CHURCH.
ISAIAH 25. 6. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a
Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
Marrow, of Wine on the Lees well refined.
IN the former Chapter the holy Prophet having spoken of the miseries, The
connection of the Text.
and desolation of the Church, in many heavy, sad, and doleful expressions; as
the Vine languisheth, the earth is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof,
because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, and broken the
everlasting Covenant, therefore the earth shall be accursed, and they that
dwell therein shall not drink Wine with a Song, etc. Here you see all
sweetness and rejoicing of heart is departed from them; yet even in the
midst of all these miseries, God (the God of comforts) makes sweet and
gracious promises to his Church, to raise it out of its mournful estate and
condition. And therefore the Prophet in the former part of this Chapter speaks
of blessing God for the destruction of his Enemies, and for his great love to
his Church. And when he had spoken of the ruin of the enemy, he presently
breaks out with Thanksgiving, breathing forth abundant praises to his God; as
it is the custom of holy men (guided by the motion of the blessed Spirit of
God, upon all occasions) (but especially for benefits to his Church) to praise
his Name, not out of ill affection at the destruction of the Adversaries, but
at the execution of Divine Justice for the fulfilling of the truth of his
promise; as in the first Verse of this Chapter; O Lord, thou art my God, I will
exalt thee, I will praise thy name, for thou have done wonderful things, thy
Counsels of old are faithfulness, and truth. When the things that were
promised of old were brought to pass, the Church was ever ready to give God
the glory of his Truth. Therefore rejoice not when thine enemies fall; but when
the enemies of the Lord are brought to desolation, then we may, nay, we ought
to sing Hallelujah to him that lives for ever and ever.

I will now fall upon the very words of my Text. In this mountain shall the
Lord of Hosts make unto all people a Feast of fat things, etc. These words they
are Prophetical, and cannot have a perfect performance all at once; but they
shall be performed gradually. The promise of a new heaven and a new earth shall
be performed; The conversion of the Jews, and the bringing in of the fullness
of the Gentiles shall gradually be brought to pass. All the Promises that ever
God has made, before the second coming of Christ to Judgment, shall be
accomplished. God has made his peace with us in the Gospel of peace, and when
all these Promises shall be fulfilled, then all imperfection shall be done
away, and we shall never be removed from our Rock, but our joy shall then be
full; nay even in this life we have some degrees of perfection, we have grace,
and the means of grace, the Ordinances of Christ, and a testimony of
everlasting glory.

In this Mountain will the Lord of Hosts make a Feast. In these words ye have
set down a glorious and royal Feast; and the place where this Feast is to be
kept is Mount Syon; the Feast-maker is the Lord of Hosts; the parties invited
are all people; the issues of it, and the provision for the Feast, are fat
things, and wine of the best; a Feast of the best of the best; a Feast of the
fat, and of the Marrow, a Feast of wine on the Lees well refined.

Here you may see that God does veil heavenly things under earthly things, and
condiscends so low as to enter into the inward man by the outward man; for our
apprehensions are so weak, and narrow, that we cannot be acquainted with
spiritual things, but by the inward working of the Spirit of the Almighty.

This mountain is the place where this Feast is made, even Mount Syon, which
is a type and figure of the Church, called in Scripture, the holy Mountain;
for as Mountains are raised high above the earth, so the Church of God is
raised in excellency and dignity above all the sorts of mankind; 1 Observe.
As much as men above Beasts, so much is the Church raised above all men. The
Church the most excellent of all societies.
This Mountain is above all Mountains, the Mountain of the Lord is above all
other Mountains whatsoever; Thou O Mountain shall stand immovable, when all
other Mountains shall smoke, if they are but touched; this is the mountain of
Mountains: The Church of God is most excellent in glory and dignity, as ye may
see in the latter end of the former Chapter, how the glory of the Church puts
down all other glories whatsoever; The Moon, says the Prophet, shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously: So that the
brightness of the Church shall put down the glory of the Sun and of the
Moon. Thus you see the Church of God is a Mountain.

Reas. First, Because God has established it upon a stronger Foundation than
all the world besides; The Church built upon the strongest foundation.
It is founded upon the goodness, and power, and truth of God. Mountains of
Brass and Iron are not so firm as this Mountain; For what sustains the
Church but the Word of God? And being built upon his Word and Truth, it may
very well be called a Mountain, for it shall be as Mount Syon, which shall
never be removed; it may be moved, but never removed. Thus in regard of the
firmness, and stability thereof, it may rightly be termed a Mountain.

Again, 2 Obs. Of the visibility of the Church.
we may here speak in some sort of the visibility of the Church; but here will
arise a quarrel for the Papists, who when they hear of this Mount, they
presently allude it to their Church. Their Church, say they, is a Mount, so
says the Scripture. I answer. 1. We confess in some sort their Church to be
a Mount (though not this Mount) for Babylon is built on seven Hills; but if
this prove her a Church, it is the Antichristian Church. Secondly, That the
Catholic Protestantiall Church had always a being, though sometimes
invisible. The Apostle writing to the Romans, exhorts them, not to be
high-minded, but fear, for says he, if God has broken off the natural
branches, perhaps he will break off you also. And indeed for their pride and
haughtiness of mind they are at this day broken off. Christ that walks
between the seven golden Candlesticks, did never say that the Church of Smyrna
or Ephesus should always remain a visible Church to the eyes of the world,
neither were they; for to this very day, they lie under bondage and slavery to
the Turk. The Mount has bin always visible, though not always alike
gloriously visible; for there will be a time when the Church shall fly into the
wilderness, where then shall be the glorious visibility of the Church? there
is a time when all shall follow the beast; the Papists themselves confess that
in Antichrists time the Church shall scarce be visible. The essence of a thing,
and the quality of a thing may differ: The Church is a Church, and visible, but
not always equally, and alike gloriously visible; yet those that had
spiritual eyes, and did look upon things with the spectacles of the
Scripture, they could always declare the Church was visible; for from the
beginning of the world the Church had always luster enough sufficient to
delight, and draw the elect, and so shall have to the end of the world, though
sometimes the Church may have a mist before it, as Austin speaks; It is no
wonder that thou can not see a mountain, for thou have no eyes. But the
Papists have seen this mountain; as they have always bin bloody persecutors
of the Church, they have seen enough to confound them: For we have nothing in
our Church, but they have the same; only ours is refined, and freed from
Idolatry; We have two Sacraments, they have seven; We have Scripture, they
have traditions, which they equal with it; We have Scriptures pure, they
corrupt. So that our Church was in the midst of theirs, as a sound and more
incorrupt part in a corrupt body.

This mountain is the Church, The Mountain is the Church.
Rev. 14. 1. The Lamb stands upon Mount Sion, and with him a hundred forty
and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. Christ
stands in the Church, and standing in Mount Sion, he is accompanied with
those that his Father has given to him, before the world was; God makes a
Feast for his people.
therefore those that belong to this holy Mountain they are Christ's. And in
this Mountain shall the Lord of hosts make a feast for all people. And this
feast is a royal feast, a marriage feast, wherein the joy and comfort of Gods
people are set down by that which is most comfortable among men. The Lord of
Hoasts the founder of the Feast.
The founder of the feast is the Lord of hoasts; It is only he that is able to
prepare a table in the wilderness, that is mighty, and of ability to feast his
Church with a spiritual, and holy banquet. We all live at his table for the
feeding of our bodies, but much more in regard of our souls; He can make a
feast for the whole man, for he is Lord of the conscience: and he is to spread
a table for the whole world; nay more, (if there were so many) he can furnish a
table for ten thousand worlds; he is the God of all spiritual comforts, and
the God of all consolation; He is infinite, and can never be drawn dry, for he
is the fountain of eternal life. All graces and comforts in the Scripture are
called the comforts and graces of the holy Spirit, because God is the giver of
them by his Spirit. Who can take away the wound of a guilty conscience, but he
that has set the conscience in the hearts of men? He (if he pleases) can
take away the burden of a grieved conscience, and supply it, instead thereof,
with new and solid comforts. He knows all the windings and turnings of the
soul, where all the pain and grief lies, and he cannot but know it because
he only is above the soul: He is therefore the fittest to make the soul a
feast, he only can do it, and he will do it.

In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hoasts make a feast. Why is he called the
Lord of Hoasts?

It is an usual term, to set forth the glory of God, to make his power, and
the greatness of his Majesty known amongst the children of men.

He shall make a feast for all people. Those that are invited to this glorious
feast, This Feast is for all people.
are all people, none excepted, none excluded, that will come in to Christ;
some of all sorts, of all nations, of all languages; this has relation to the
time of the Gospel. The Church at first had its being in particular families,
but afterward more enlarged. The Church at the first was of the daughters of
men, and the sons of God; the children of the Church mingled with a
generation of corrupt persons, that would keep in no bounds; but after
Abraham's time, there was another generation of the Church, that so it was a
little more enlarged. Then there was a third generation, a divided generation,
consisting of Jews, and Gentiles; So that when Christ came into the world, the
bounds of the Church began to enlarge themselves more and more; so that now it
is in this happy condition, Come ye all unto me, all that are heavy laden; both
Jews and Gentiles, all are invited whosoever they are, nothing is now
unclean. Act. 10. 15. Christ is come, and has made to all people a feast of
fat things, it must be a feast, and of fat things, for all the world shall be
the better for it. The Jews shall be converted, and the fulness of the
Gentiles shall come in. And yet it is no prejudice to any particular man,
because the things ye are to taste of are spiritual. Go to all the good things
in the world, the more one has of them, the less another must have, because
they are earthly and so are finite; but in spiritual things, all may have the
whole, and every man in particular. Every man enjoys the light of the Sun
in particular, and all enjoy it too; So the whole Church, and only the Church
injoyes the benefit and comfort of this feast; but under the name of this
Church, come all the elect, both Jews and Gentiles; and therefore it must be
the Lord of Hoasts that can make such a feast as this is, a feast for all
people. No other is able to do it.

This feast, Christ the chief dish in the Feast.
is a feast of fat things, full of marrow, and of wine on the lees well
refined, the best that can be imagined, the best of the best; A feast is
promised, a spiritual feast. The special graces and favors of God are
compared to a feast made up of the best things, full of all varieties and
excellencies; and the chief dish (that is all in all) is Christ, and all the
gracious benefits we by promise can in any wise expect from him; All other
favors and blessings whatsoever they are, are but Christ dished out (as I may
so speak) in several offices and attributes; he is the original of comfort,
the principle of grace and holiness, all is included in Christ. Ask of him
and ye shall obtain, even the forgiveness of your sins, peace of
conscience, and communion of Saints. Ask of Christ as of one invested with all
privileges for the good of others, but yet this is by his death; he is the
feast it self, he is dished out into promises; have you a promise of the
pardon of sins, it is from Christ; would thou have peace of conscience, it
is from Christ; justification, and redemption, it is from Christ; the love of
God is derived to us by Christ, yea, and all that we have that is good, is but
Christ parcelled out.

Now I will show why Christ with his benefits, Why Christ with his benefits is
compared to a Feast.
prerogatives, graces, and comforts, is compared to a feast.

First, 1. Because the favors we have by Christ are choice ones.
in regard of the choice of the things; In a feast all things are of the best,
so are the things we have in Christ: whatsoever favors we have by Christ, they
are choice ones, they are the best of every thing; pardon for sin, is a pardon
of pardon; the title we have for heaven, through him, is a sure title; the joy
we have by him, is the joy of all joys; the liberty and freedom from sin,
which he purchased for us by his death, is perfect freedom; the riches of
grace we have by him, are the only lasting, and durable riches; take any thing
that you can, if we have it by Christ it is of the best: All worldly
excellencies and honors, are but mere shadows to the high excellencies, and
honor we have in Christ. No joy, no comfort, no peace, no riches, no
inheritance to be compared with the joy, peace, and inheritance which we have
in Christ; whatsoever we have by him we have it in a glorious manner: And
therefore he is compared to fat, to fat things full of marrow, to wine, to wine
on the lees that preserves the freshness of it; the best wine of all, that is
not changed from vessel to vessel, but keeps its strength; And indeed the
strength and vigor of all flows from Jesus Christ in covenant with us.

The love of Christ is the best love, and he himself incomparably the best,
and has favors, and blessings of the choicest.

Again, 2. There is variety of favors in Christ.
as in a feast, besides choice, there is variety; so in Christ there is variety
answerable to all our wants. Are we foolish, he is wisdom; have we guilt in
our consciences, he is righteousness, and this righteousness is imputed unto
us; are we defiled, he is sanctification; are we in misery, he is our
redemption. If there be a thousand kinds of evils in us, there is a thousand
ways to remedy them by Jesus Christ; Therefore the good things we have by
Christ, are compared to all the benefits we have in this world, in Christ is
choice and variety. Are we weak, he is meat to feed us, that we may be strong,
he will refresh us, he is the best of meats, he is marrow; so are our spirits
faint, he is wine: thus we have in Christ to supply all our wants, he is
variety.

There is a plant among the Indians called by the name of Coquus, Christ like
the Indian plant Coquus, good for all things.
the fruit thereof serves for meat and drink, to comfort and refresh the
body: It yields that whereof the people make apparel to cloth themselves
withal; and also that which is physical, very good against the distempers of
the body: And if God will infuse so much virtue into a poor plant, what virtue
may we expect to be in Christ himself? He feeds our souls to all eternity,
puts upon us the roabes of righteousness, heales the distempers of our souls;
there is variety in him for all our wants whatsoever. He is food, physic, and
apparel to cloth us; and when we are clothed with him, we may with boldness
stand before the Majesty of God; He is all in all, He is variety, and all.
There is something in Christ answerable to all the necessities of Gods people,
and not only so, but to their full content in every thing.

Again, 3. There is sufficiency and fullness in Christ.
as there is variety in a Feast, so there is sufficiency, full sufficiency. We
beheld the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. And being full of
grace, He is wise, and able to furnish this heavenly banquet, with enough of
all sorts of provisions fit for the soul to feed upon. There Is abundance of
grace, and excellency, and sufficiency in Christ; And it must needs be, because
he is a Savior of Gods own sending. Labor not therefore for the meat that
perishes, but for the meat that the Son of God shall give you, for him has
God the Father sealed. That is, sent forth for this purpose to feed the Church
of God. As there is an all sufficiency in God, so in Christ, who by the
sacrificing of himself was able to give satisfaction to divine justice.
Therefore (says he) My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
That is, spiritually to the soul he is food indeed, and can satisfy Gods
justice. If we consider him as God alone, he is a consuming fire; or as man
alone, he can do nothing: But considered as God-man, he is meat indeed, and
drink indeed. And now the soul is content with that, which Divine justice is
contented withal; though our consciences be large, yet God is larger, and
above our consciences: Therefore as there is variety of excellency, so is there
sufficiency, and fullness in Christ; what he did, he did to the full. He is a
Savior and he fills up that name to the full. His pardon for sin, is a
full pardon. His merits for us are full merits. His satisfaction to divine
justice, a full satisfaction. His redemption of our souls and bodies, a full
redemption; thus all he did was full.

A Feast is for company, 4. As a Feast for many, so Christ is a feast for the
community of Saints.
it is convivium, there is converse at it; So Cicero preferres the name of
convivium among the Latins, before the Greek name (...). And this Feast is
not for one, we are all invited to it; the excellency of Christ's Feast
consists in the Communion of Saints; for whosoever takes part of it, their
spirits must agree one with another: Love is the best, and chiefest dish in
this Feast; the more we partake of the sweetness of Christ, the more we love
one another. Christ by his spirit so works in the hearts of the children of
men, that bring a thousand together of a thousand several nations, and within
a little while you shall have them all acquainted one with another; if they be
good, there is agreement of the spirit, and a sympathy between them, there is a
kindred in Christ. He is the true Isaac; the death of Christ, and the blood of
Christ, is the ground of all union and joy and comfort whatsoever; the blood of
Christ sprinkled upon the conscience, will procure that peace of conscience,
that shall be a continual Feast unto the soul. This Feast must needs be
wonderful comfortable, for we do not feast with those that are like our
selves, but we feast with God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, sent by Christ,
procured by the death of Christ; the Angels at this Feast attend us, therefore
it must needs be joyful, no joy comparable to the joy of a Feast; this is not
every Feast, this is a marriage Feast, at which we are contracted to Christ.
Now of all Feasts, marriage Feasts are most sumptuous; this is a marriage Feast
for the Kings Son, for Christ himself, and therefore of necessity it must be
full of all choice varieties, and of the sweetest of things, of the most
excellentest of things, and of the quintescence of things. Here is all joy that
belongs to a feast; Here it is to be had with Christ; what acquaintance can
be more glorious then that which is to be had between Jesus Christ and a
christian soul? when we have hope of better things to come, then we find the
sweetness of this communion. No harmony in the world can be so sweet as the
harmony maintained between Christ and the soul. When we have this, and are
made one with God in Christ, our joy must needs then be unspeakable. When the
contract is once made between the soul and Christ, there cannot but be
abundant joy; when the soul is joined with Christ by faith, it cannot but
solace it self in a perpetual jubilee, and a perpetual feast in some degrees.

Again, 5. Because we have the glorious attire of Christ, as men put on choice
garments at Feasts.
for a Feast ye have the choicest garments, as at the marriage of the Lamb,
White and fine linen, which is the righteousness of the Saints. When God
sees these robes upon us, and the spirit of Christ in us, then there is a robe
of righteousness imputed, and a garment of sanctity whereby our souls are
clothed: so this is a Feast that must have wonderful glorious attire; and
when this marriage shall be consummated, we are sure to have a garment of glory
put upon us. 6. Because he was resembled by the Paschal Lamb which was choosen
four days before out of the flock.


This was signified in old time by the Jews, in the Feast of the Passover;
not to name all resemblances, but only one or two. The Lamb for the Passover
(you know) was chosen out of the flock from amongst the rest, four days
before the time appointed for that Feast: So Christ is the true Paschall Lamb,
chosen of God, before the foundation of the world was laid, to be slain for us.

Again, 2. By Manna, to which Christ answers in many particulars.
Manna was a type of Christ, it came from Heaven to feed the hungry bodies of
the Israelites in the wilderness; even so came Christ, sent from God the
Father, to be the eternal food, and upholder of the souls and bodies of every
one of us. Manna was white and sweet; so is Christ, white in righteousness and
holiness, and also sweet to delight the soul. Manna fell upon the tents in
the night; And Christ came, when darkness was spread over all the world. God
gave Manna freely from Heaven; so Christ was a free gift, and he freely gave
himself to death, even to the cursed death of the cross for us: All, both
poor and rich, they gathered Manna. Christ is a common food for King and
subject; all take part of Christ, neither Jew nor Gentile are exempted, but all
may come* and buy freely without money. Of this Manna he that had least had
enough: so here, he that has least of Christ, though he take him with a
trembling hand, yet he shall have enough, for Christ is his; whosoever has the
least grace, if it be true and sound, has grace enough to bring him to
eternal life. The Jews wondered at the Manna, saying what thing is this? So it
is one of Christ's names to be called wonderful, Isaiah 9. 6. Grace and favor
from Christ is true spiritual Manna to the soul. Manna fell in the
wilderness, even so musst we remain in the wilderness of this wretched world
until we come to Heaven. Christ is Manna to us, and very sweet in the
conveyance of his Word and Sacraments. When the Israelites came into the Land
of Canaan, the Manna ceased, not before: so when we come to Heaven (the Elects
purchased possession) we shall have another kind of Manna for our souls; we
shall not there feed on Christ, as in the Sacrament, no, but we shall see him
face to face, and know as we are known. In the wilderness of this world it is
fit God should convey this Heavenly Manna to the soul whatsoever way he
pleases. Manna could not fall until the Israelites had spent all the
provision they brought with them out of Egypt; and we cannot taste of that
heavenly Manna of our Father, until our souls are drawn away from all
worldly dependencies, and carnal delights, then indeed Manna will be sweet and
precious.

What is this heavenly Manna, Surely those that are spiritual taste Christ.
what is Christ and his Father, what is the word and Sacraments, to a depraved
vicious heart stuffed full with earthly vanities? alas, it loatheth all these.
As none tasted of Manna, but those that came out of Egypt; so none shall taste
of Christ but those that are not of the world, that are come out of Egypt, out
of sin and darkness. Manna fell only about the tents of Israel, and in no
other part of the world, but only there, that none might have the privilege to
eat of it, but Gods peculiar chosen ones. Christ falls upon the tents of the
righteous, and none shall taste of this blessed spiritual food but such as are
the Israel of God, such as are of the Church, such as feel the burden of
sin, and groan under it; oh the very taste of this heavenly Manna is sweet
to their souls, and to none but them. Thus ye see the Feast that Christ
makes for us in Mount Syon; and that this Manna does typifie Christ with all
his benefits.

Again, 3. By the rock in the wilderness.
the hard rock in the wilderness, when it was stricken with the rod of Moses,
presently water gushed out in abundance, which preserved life to the
Israelites: so Christ the rock of our salvation, the strength of his Church,
the rock and fortress of all his Saints; when his precious side was gored
with the bloody lance upon the cross, that the blood gushed out, and in such a
manner and such abundance, that by the shedding thereof our souls are
preserved alive. He is both Manna and the rock of water; Manna had all in it,
so had the rock, and all necessities are plentifully supplied by Christ. The
Church of God has always had bread to satisfy spiritual hunger, it never
wanted necessary comfots. It is said, Rev. 12. When the Church fled into the
wilderness, God fed her there; alluding to the children of Israel, fed by
Manna. The Jews did not want in the wilderness, nor the Church of God, never
wanted comfort, though in the midst of the persecution and oppression of all
her enemies. When Elias was in the wilderness he was fed. The Church of God
shall not only be fed in her body, but in her soul, for Christ has hidden
Manna for his Elect; this does typifie the exceeding joy of the Church, the
hidden Manna, that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard of, neither can it
enter into the heart of man to conceive of those joys that the Church of God
shall have when the marriage shall be consummated. Joy in the Holy Ghost, and
peace of conscience, they are hid from the world, and sometimes from Gods
people themselves, though they shall enjoy them hereafter.

All the former Feasts in times past were but types of this. 4. By all the
Jewish festivalls.
The Feast of Tabernacles, the Feast of the Passover, the spiritual Manna,
and all other holy Feasts, were but to signify and to show forth this Feast by
Christ. But there is this difference between the type, and the thing signified;
by the type, the Passover Lamb was quite eaten up, but this Passover Christ,
that was slain for sin, can never be eaten up: We feed upon him with our
souls, he cannot be consumed as the Passover Lamb, nor as Manna, which was
gone when the Sun arose; yea that Manna that was laid up for a remembrance
before the Arc, became nothing, but Christ is in heaven for evermore for the
soul to feed upon. Though these were resemblances, yet these failed, as it is
fit resemblances should fail; that is, come short of the body of the thing it
self. Thus you see the spiritual comforts of a Christian, may well and fitly
be compared to a Feast.

Thus you see God provideth a Feast, 5. By the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
and inviteth all. In the Sacrament you have a Feast, a Feast of varieties, not
only bread, but wine, to show the variety and fulness of comfort in Christ:
He intends full comfort. As for our Adversaries the Papists, they have dry
Feasts, they give the people the bread, but the wine they keep for themselves,
but God in Christ intends us full comfort; whatsoever Christ did, it was
full, his merits are complete, and his joy was full. He is fullness it self,
and therefore whatsoever comes from him, must needs be as he himself is, Use.
both full, and sweet. He intends us full consolation; Be prepared for this
Feast.
Therefore we ought to be prepared to partake of this Feast, in such a manner,
as that we may have full joy, and full comfort; for there is in Christ enough to
satisfy all the hungry souls in the world, he himself being present at this
heavenly banquet. All fulness dwells in him, from which we have all received,
and grace for grace. 1. Labor for large hearts to receive much.
Therefore let us labor to have large hearts, for as our faith grows more
and more, so we shall carry more comfort, and more strength from this holy
Feast. As the poor widow, if her vessels had not failed, the oil had not
ceased; if there had bin more vessels, there had been more oil; our souls are
as these vessels, let us therefore labor, and make it our great business to
have large souls, souls capable to drink in this spiritual oil of
gladness; for as much faith as we bring to Christ, so much comfort we shall
carry from him. The favors of God in Christ being infinite, the more we fetch
from him, the more glory we give unto him; but if they were finite, we should
offend his bounty, he might soon be drawn dry, and so send us away with an
uncomfortable answer, that he was not able to relieve us. But Christ is
infinite, and the more we have from him, the more we may have: to him that has
shall be given; the oftener we go to Christ, the more honor and glory we bring
unto him; this is a banquet to the full.

We are now come to the banquet, and Christ is the founder of it; nay, he is
the Feast it self, he is the Author of it, and he it is that we feed upon.

Let us labor not to be straight receivers of the Sacrament, 2. Labor for
spiritual appetite.
but suck in abundance from Christ, with a great deal of delight; That we may
come together not for the worse but the better, considering what a great deal
of strength and grace is required as very necessary for the maintaining of
spiritual Life.

THE Second Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 6. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a
Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
Marrow, of Wine on the Lees well refined.
I Have showed that Christ and his benefits are compared to a Feast, and in
what respects they are fitly resembled by a Feast, and have pressed that we
should prepare for it, first by getting large hearts. Now in the second place
that we may have comfort at this Feast, we must labor for spiritual appetite;
First means to get appetite sour herbs, sense of sin and misery.
for to what end and purpose is that man at a Feast, that has no stomach? I
shall therefore show what means we are to use, to get eager stomachs and holy
appetites after this Feast.

1. The Appetite is raised with sour things, as anguish of Spirit, and
mournfulnesse of heart for sin, if we will ever relish Christ aright we must
labor to have a quick apprehension of our sins; we must do as the Jews did
at the Passover, They eat it with sour Herbs, that they might thereby have
the sharper stomachs: So must we, we must cast our eyes into our own hearts,
and consider what vile wretches we are, how full of sin and vanity, and this
will be as sour Herbs to the Paschall Lamb. We must join the sweet benefits
and privileges that we have in Christ with the consideration of our own
wretched and miserable condition, and then this heavenly ordinance cannot but
be sweet and comfortable to our souls. I beseech you enter into your own
souls and consider seriously under what guilt you lie, and this will whet your
appetite. A full stomach despises the honey comb: but in this appetite there
is sense of emptines, and from that sense of emptines pain, and from pain an
earnest desire of satisfaction; thus it is in spiritual things, we want Christ
and all the spiritual comforts that flow from him: There is an emptines in us,
and we see a need every day to feed upon the mercies of God in Christ. There is
an emptines in our souls, and there must be a sense of that emptines, and pain
from that sense, which must stir up a strong endeavor to follow after that
that we do desire. Then Christ indeed is sweet, when we find our souls
hungring and thirsting after him.

Again, Second Means
if so be we would have that appetite of Spirit that is fit for this Feast,
we must purge our souls from the corruptions of Flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God; we must cleanse our souls from those lusts and
passions that daily cleave unto them; all crudities must be taken away that the
edge of the stomach may not be flatted: for while these earthly carnal
Corruptions lie upon the soul, we can expect no spiritual appetite to
heavenly things. Let us therefore examine our selves what filth lies upon our
souls, and what corrupt inclinations are there, that so they may be purged,
and our desires be carried fully after Christ in the Sacrament.

Another means to get appetite is to consider thoroughly what is required of a
Christian well to maintain the trade of Christianity. Third Means.
Its another manner of thing than we we take it for to entertain Communion
with God, to perform holy Duties in an holy manner, to bear the yoke as a
Christian should do. Here is a great deal of strength required: And because
corruptions will mix themselves amongst our best performances, there must be a
great deal of mercy from God to pardon them. And whence is all this but by the
death of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ? for his sake God has a forbearing
eye. Now if we consider what a degree of spiritual strength and vigor we
should have to go through with these duties, this would sharpen our stomachs
and spiritual appetites, to furnish our selves with grace from Christ to go
through with these holy Services. There must be an exercising of all the duties
of Christianity, which is an estate, that must be maintained with a great deal
of charge, and labor. A man can do no service acceptable to God, but by
grace, and grace must feed the soul with fruitful knowledge in the power of
Faith, and when the soul feels a necessity of grace, oh then beloved, it
hungers, and earnestly thirsts after the love of God in Christ. We need to
every Trade a great deal of knowledge, then surely the calling of Christianity
needs a great deal. A Christian must expect much both in Prosperity, and
Adversity, as the Apostle says, I have learned to want and to abound, to be
in honor, and to be in disgrace, and I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me. Now because there is so much goings out for the maintenance of
Christianity, we must also bring in much grace, and faith, and love, and
holiness, or else we shall never be able to uphold this condition. Where there
is an exercise of Christianity, there willl be an appetite to heaven: that is
our best calling, for when that we have done all that we can, that that we
must have comfort from, is Christianity, therefore labor with all labor, to
be holy and able Christians. All other Callings are but for this present life,
but that that is for eternity, is this Calling of Christianity: And this is
only to fit us here in this world for an everlasting condition of glory in the
world to come.

Again, Fourth Means, Acquaintance with those that are good.
if we would have a desire and appetite to heavenly things, we must labor to
get acquaintance, and constantly converse with those that are good. The old
Proverb is, Company will make a man fall to, especially the company of those
that are better than our selves, for very emulation men will be doing as others
do. When men live amongst those whose hearts are framed this way, they must be
equal. Conversation with those that have good relish of spiritual things, and
show forth grace in their lives, sets an appetite upon our desires, to
desire the same things that they do. Thus St. Paul writes to the Gentiles to
stir up the emulation of the Jews. Therefore receive this likewise for the
procuring of a spiritual appetite.

To go on. Fifth Means, We know not how long we have to live.
The next thing that may stir up our desires to get an appetite to the best
things, is seriously to consider, That we cannot tell how long we have to live,
or may enjoy the benefit of the means of grace. Those that sit at Table and
discourse away the greatest part of Dinner time in talk, had need at last to
fall to so much the faster, by how much the more negligent they had been before
in eating. We cannot tell how long we may enjoy this spiritual Feast that God
makes for us; therefore be stirred up to get spiritual appetites, for we know
not how long God will spread a Table for us; we know not how long we shall
enjoy our lives, and if we be surprised on the sudden, we may suffer a
spiritual Famine, a Famine of the soul if we have nothing to comfort us
before hand: And of all Famines a spiritual Famine is most grievous, We
should hold out against hunger to come.
most fearful. Therefore do as Joseph did, and be wise. He in the seven
years of Plenty, gathered for seven years of Famine that was to come upon the
Land of Egypt. Alas, if we have nothing laid up before hand, what will be our
end? we shall lie open to Gods wrath and anger; nothing can support our souls
in the evil time: wherefore as you desire at that day to have comfort of those
things ye shall stand most in need of, labor to get a good appetite: for to
perish and starve at a Feast is a shame; to famish in the liberty of the
Gospel, and plenty of spiritual meat is shameful, and dishonorable. Thus
you see, beloved, (not to be large in the point) how you may procure such an
appetite, as is fit for such an holy Feast. First, by getting a sense of sin:
Secondly, by seeing a necessity of Christ: Thirdly, by purging out those Lusts
that lie upon the soul: Fourthly, by conversing with those that are spiritually
minded: And lastly, by considering the time to come.

It is not enough to have a stomach, ^. 3.
but we must have a spiritual disposition of soul to heavenly things, Get a
spiritual disposition of soul to heavenly things.
as we have to outward things. Labor to have a taste of good things, and a
distinguishing taste of heavenly things from other things: God is the God of
nature, and has furnished us with five senses, and as he has given us sense
to apprehend* so he has furnished the Creature with varieties of excellencies,
suitable to all our several senses; he will not have objects in the Creature
without sense, nor sense in man without objects: The soul has her senses.
He has furnished man with senses, and variety of senses, and given fit and
proportionable objects for those senses: The soul also has her sense,
wheresoever there is life there is sense. God having given spiritual life to
the soul, he does maintain that life with spiritual food. As in a Feast there
is sight, and the eye is not only fed there with rich furniture, but with
variety of dainties; the ear likewise, and the smell is satisfied, the one with
Music, the other with sweet savors. So in this Feast there is to delight both
the ear, and the smell of the soul, the one with hearing the gracious
promises of Jesus Christ, and the other in receiving the sweet savor of that
sacrifice, that was offered up once for all; nothing so sweet to the soul as
the blessings of Christ; he is sweet in the word, as the vessel that conveyeth
him into our souls. Thus you see in this feast all the senses, the sight, the
smell, the taste, and hearing, all are satisfied: and a great care had in the
provision for the Feast, that our outward man may be pleased. And shall the
Lord of Hosts make a Feast, and not content the whole man? he is for our sight,
if we have spiritual eyes to see; the ear, if we have ears to hear; all the
senses are exercised here: What is the reason why carnal men cannot relish a
pardon for sin, and justification, and sanctification, and holiness, nor go
boldly to God? It may be they have good sweet notions of these, but they have
no spiritual taste or relish of them, and all, because they want spiritual
life; None but a Christian can have spiritual taste answerable to a spiritual
life. Taste is a kind of feeling, one of the most necessary senses, and a
Christian cannot be without relish and feeling; yea it is the very being of a
Christian to have a taste of spiritual things: Of all other senses there is a
stronger application in taste; the other senses fetch their objects afar off,
but as for taste there is a near application in it, and therefore most
necessary: every life is maintained by taste. Taste and see how good the Lord is.

Now taste does two things, Two things in spiritual taste.
it does relish that that is good, and disrelish the contrary; there must be a
spiritual taste to discern of differences. There can be no spiritual taste,
but it must know what is good and profitable for the soul, and what is not:
because God will not have our tastes to be wronged, ye see what course he
takes. First the eye sees what things we taste on, and if the eye be
displeased, so also is the smell. Thus God lays before us spiritual things,
knowledge of good and bad, and gives us many caveats, and all because he would
not have us to taste things hurtful for the soul, nor poison instead of
meat. Now when we have tasted that which is good, let us take heed it be not a
taste only, lest we fall into the sin against the holy Ghost.

Again, Use. 4.
beside taste, there must be a disgesting of what we taste, We must labor for
a digestion of spiritual things.
and that thoroughly, in our understandings, when we apprehend a thing to be
true and good it must be disgested thoroughly into the affections. Love to the
best things, must be above all other love whatsover, yet this must be
disgested. Men oftentimes have sweet notions, but alas they are but notions,
they do not digest them into their affections. It is the last disgestion that
nourishes, and when any spiritual truths are understood thoroughly, then comes
in spiritual strength, and hereupon the soul comes and suckes in that virtue
which is for the nourishment of it, thus it is in the soul, upon disgestion,
there is nourishment.

Again there must be a faculty to retain what we have received, that it
maybe disgested; ye have many that love to hear, but they do not digest. If
there be nothing in the soul, nothing can be extracted, and therefore we must
learn to retain necessary truths, that so upon occasion they may come from
the memory into the heart; though indeed they are not in their proper place
when they are in the memory only, yet notwithstanding if they are there, they
may with ease be brought down into the soul.

Then we must labor to walk in the strength of spiritual things. Use. 5.
For what is the use of this Feast, We must walk in the strength of spiritual
favor.
but to cherish both soul and spirit? the use of spiritual things which we
have through Christ, is to cherish and enliven. It conveyeth strength to us,
that we may walk in the strength of Christ, as Elias did forty days in the
strength of his food. And consider, though in our consciences and conditions we
have variety of changes, yet in Christ we have several comforts suitable to
all our several conditions. If so be our sins trouble us, we should watch
over our selves, that we be not overmuch cast down, but feed upon spiritual
things in consideration of pardon for sin in the blood of Christ; this is the
grand issue of all that Christ has traced out in the forgiveness of sins.
He is not, he cannot be divided; where he pardons sins, he sanctifies; where
he sanctifies, he writes his law in their hearts, so that there is a chain of
spiritual favors, where the first link is, all the rest follow; where
forgiveness of sin is, there is the spirit, and that spirit sanctifies, and
comforts, and is an earnest of everlasting life; therefore feed especially upon
the favors of God, and get forgiveness of sins, and then all the rest of
the chain of grace and spiritual life will follow.

Sometimes we stand in need of present grace and comfort, and we are undone if
comforts and grace are not at hand, never considering the promises that are to
come; as that promise of Christ, I will be with thee to the end of the world,
fear not; No temptation shall befall us, but we shall have an issue out of it,
and it shall work together for the good of all those that fear God. This is
Aquavitae ^o the soul of man, therefore the gracious promises of Christ and
his holy Spirit we should ever remember to get into our souls, for when all
other comforts fail, then comes in the comforts of the Spirit, who will be
with us and uphold us in all extremities; if we had nothing in this world to
comfort our spirits, yet let us rejoice in hope of glory to come. Our life is
hid with Christ, we have the hidden Manna, in him we rejoice in hope of glory,
Romans 5. 2. And the way to maintain a Christian holy life, is to make use of
all the privileges of christianity, and of those promises that convey these
privileges to our souls.

Now that we may the better do this, observe continually what it is that
hinders us, that we cannot feed upon spiritual things as we should do,
whatsoever it is, we must labor constantly to remove it.

Now what must follow after this Feast? Consequents of this Feast is spiritual
cheerfulness.
why spiritual cheerfulness; if we find this in our duties of Christianity,
it is a sign we have fed upon spiritual things; the nature of a spiritual
Feast is to empty the foul of sin, and to fill it full of gracious thoughts
and actions; instead thereof it moderates all things, it makes us use the world
as if we used it not: when we can do this, we may certainly know that our
souls have tasted of abundance of benefit by this Feast.

A man that has no spiritual joy, is drowned, for the most part, in the
contentments of the world; drowned in riches and honors, and these are like to
strong waters immoderately taken, instead of chearing the spirits, exhaust and
kill them: He that has the joy of heaven here by faith, is mortified to all
other base delights, he only minds the things above, where Christ is, Col. 3.
1. And therefore the exhortation, or rather command, Seek the things that are
above, has this promise in fit method annexed unto it, and then all other
things shall be cast in upon you: Riches and honors in the world; and if not
them, yet so much as is necessary, and mortification of our sins, and the
lusts of the flesh.

Again, 2. Thankfulness.
if we have fed upon spiritual things for our souls, we shall be thankful;
that man that has tasted how good and gracious the Lord has bin to him in
this world, and how full of joy and comfort he will be to him in another world,
in consideration of this, his soul cannot choose but be thankful to God.

Here we see how to make this spiritual food fit for our souls, that Christ
provideth for us: And if there be such joy as we have said there is in
spiritual things, 3. Justify the ways of God against carnal slanders.
what use should we make further of them, but labor from hence to justify the
ways of godliness against our own false and carnal hearts, and against the
slanderous imputations of the world; when our hearts are ready to be false to
us, and hanker after the contentments of the world, and are ready to say the
best contentment that they can enjoy, is in the things below: Let us answer our
base and false disputing hearts, that the ways of wisdom, the ways that God
directs us to, they only are the ways of pleasure. And Religion is that that
makes the hearts of the children of men joyful, and a good conscience only
makes a continual feast, so long as man lives; but especially at the hour of
death, when all the comforts of the world cease, then conscience stands our
friend. Object.
But the worlds objection is, Religious people are melancholy.
that of all kind of men in the world, those that profess Religion are the
most melancholy: But if it be so, it is because they are not religious enough,
their sins are continually before their eyes; Answ.
they have pardon for sin, Its because they are not more religious.
and freedom from the guilt of sin, but know it not; they have good things,
and do not know them. And so in regard of spiritual comforts, Gods people may
have spiritual joy, and inward consolation, and yet not know of it: there may
be such a time when they may be sad, and droope, and that is, when they
apprehend God does not look pleasantly upon them; but the true character of a
Christian is to be cheerful, and none else can be truly cheerful or joyous:
Joy is usurped by others, there is no comfort in them that can be said to be
real. All the joy of a man that is a carnal man, is but as it were the joy of
a Traitor, he may come to the Sacraments, and feast with the rest of Gods
people, but what mirth or joy can he have so long as the Master of the Feast
frowns upon him? Where Christ is not, there God is not reconciled; no joy like
that joy of him that is assured of the love of God in Christ. A man may
sometime through ignorance want that joy that belongs to him, A man may be
ignorant of his comforts.
Rejoice ye righteous, and be glad; it belongs to those that are in Christ,
and to the righteous to rejoice, for joy is all their portion: They only can
justify the ways of God, against all reproaches whatsoever; but the eyes of
carnal men are so held in blindness, that they can see no joy, no comfort in
this course. As it is said of Austin before his conversion, he was afraid to
turn Christian indeed, lest he should want all those joys and pleasures that
the world did then afford him; but after he was converted, then he could cry,
Lord I have stayed too long from thee, and too long delayed from coming in to
taste of the sweetness of Jesus Christ.

Take a Christian at the worst, A Christian at the worst, is happier then a
worldling at the best.
and he is better then another man, take him at the best. The worst condition
of Gods children far surpasses the very best condition of graceless
persons: The issue of things shall turn to his good, that is a member of
Christ, a child of God, an heir of heaven; The evil of evils is taken away
from him; take him at the worst, he is an heir of heaven, but take the wicked
at the best, he is not a child of God, he is a stranger to God, he is as a
branch cut off, and as miserable a wretch as ever Belshazzer in the midst of
his cups, trembling and quaking with fear and astonishment when he saw the
writing on the wall. When a man apprehends the wrath of God hanging over his
head, though he were at the greatest feast in the world, and amongst those that
make mirth and jollity, yet seeing vengeance ready to seize upon him, it cannot
but dampe all his joy and all his carnal pleasures; and therefore only a
Christian has a true title to this feast.

I beseech you let us labor earnestly to have our part and portion in the
things above; Labor to partake of this Feast. All invited.
but what shall they do, that as yet apprehend no interest in Jesus Christ?
why, let them not be discouraged, for all are compelled to come in to this
Feast; both blind and lame, the servants are sent to bring them in: The most
wretched people of all, God does invite them; all are called to come in to this
Feast, that are sensible of their sins; and that God requires at our hands,
or else we can have no appetite to taste of this feast. God says, come all; I
but says the poor sinful soul, I have no grace at all: why but yet come,
buy without money; the feast is free, Gods thoughts are not as thy thoughts
are, but as heaven is high above the earth, even so are his thoughts above thy
thoughts. Poor wretch thou think thou have led a wicked life, and so thou
have; I but now come in, God has invited thee, and he will not always be
inviting thee: therefore come in, and study the excellencies of Christ. When
such persons as these see they need mercy, and grace, and reconciliation, and
must either have it, or else be damned for ever; now they are earnest to study
the favor and love of God in Christ; now they bestirre themselves to get peace
of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; now they see salvation to be founded
only on Christ, and all other excellencies belonging to Christianity; and
therefore he goes constantly provided with grace and holiness, so in this
life, that he may not lose his part in glory in the life to come. Think of this
and pray for it, as they in the Gospel, Lord evermore give us of that bread;
here is hope that thou may be saved, because thou art invited to come in: to
what end is the ministry of the Gospel, but to entreat thee to be reconciled?
Oh let this work upon our souls, when we hear of the excellencies of these
things, and together with them consider of the necessity that is cast upon us
to obtain them, and that we must have them or else be damned eternally: We
must do as the Leapers did, We are sure to perish without Christ.
who said one to another, Why sit we here till we die; if we say we will enter
into the City, why the famine is in the City, and we shall die there, and if we
sit still here, we shall also die, now what course took they? They said one
to another, let us enter into the camp of the Syrians, there is meat to feed
us. So says the soul, if I go into the City of the world, there I shall be
starved, if I sit still, I shall also perish; what shall I now do, I will
venture upon Jesus Christ, he has food that endures to eternal life, and if I
perish there, I perish; If I have not Christ I must die, the wrath of God
hangs over my head, and I cannot escape. Alas poor soul, now thou see thy
wretchedness, cast thy self upon him, and come in: If thou venturest, thou
can but die, adventure therefore, put thy self upon Gods mercy, for he is
gracious and full of compassion.

Those that have given up themselves to Christ, Honor God by taking allotted
comforts.
let them study to honor God, and Christ, by taking those comforts that are
allotted to them. When any man inviteth us to a Feast, he knows if we respect
him, we will fall too: God has bestowed his Son upon us, and will he not
with him give us all things? let us not therefore dishonor the bounty of our
good God, but come in, and labor to have our hearts more and more enlarged
with the consideration of the excellency of these eternal comforts. The
fullness of Christ is able to satisfy the soul, though it were a thousand
times larger then it is. If it were possible that we could get the capacity of
Angels, it could not be sufficient to show forth the fullness of pleasures that
are provided for a Christian; let us therefore labor with all labor to open
our hearts to entertain these joys, for we cannot honor God more then of his
bounty to receive thankfully what he freely offers. To taste plentifully in the
covenant of grace, of these riches, and joy, and hope of things to come,
glorious above all that we are able to think of: I say, this is the way to
honor God under the Gospel of hope, of things that are infinite, the more we
take, the more we may take, and the more we honor him that gives. Let us
therefore enter deeply into our special sins, there is no fear of despair;
think of all thy wants, and of all thy sins, let them be never so many, yet
there is more to be had in Christ, then there can be wanting in thee. The soul
that thinks it self full of wants, is the richest soul, and that that
apprehends no want at all, no need of grace or Christ, is always sent empty
away; grieve therefore for thy sins, and then joy that thou have grieved, and
go to God for the supply of all thy wants. The seeds of joy and of comfort are
sown in tears, and grief in this world, but yet we know we shall reap in
joy in the world to come.

Remember this, we have we know not what to go through withal in this valley
of tears. That speech of Barzillai was good and excellent, who being by David
himself invited to the Court, answered, I am now grown old, I am not fit for
the Court, for my senses are decayed and gone; even so the time will come when
our sense of relishing earthly pleasures will utterly be lost, we are sure to
go to our graves, and we know not what particular trouble we may meet with in
this world, and go through, if we live to a full age. Alas, what are all
comforts here, to the comforts of eternity: when our days are spent on earth,
then comes in the eternity of pleasure, or everlasting sorrow. Oh then, if
(when we shall leave all behind us) we have the joy of the holy Ghost in our
hearts, it will advance us above all the suggestions of sin or Satan, and
bring us chearefully above to the tribunal seat of Christ. Labor therefore to
have a spiritual relish of soul, to grow in grace and comforts of the holy
Ghost, for the time will come when we shall wish that we had had more then we
have, every one will repent of loosenes and slacknes in the ways of holiness:
Therefore let us labor earnestly to be good husbands for our souls for the
time to come.

THE Third Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 6, 7. And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
people a Feast, etc. And he will destroy in this Mountain the face of the
covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations.
I Have heretofore spoken of the Feast that God makes to his Church, specially
in the later times, which was specially performed at the first coming of
Christ, when the Gentiles came in: But the consummation and perfection of all
will be at the day of judgment, then God will spread a Table for his to all
eternity.

We have spoken heretofore at large of the resemblance of spiritual good
things, by this comparison of a Feast, God sets out spiritual things by
outward, because we cannot otherwise conceive of them: the best things in
grace, by the best, and sweetest things in Nature. And thus God enters into our
souls by our senses, as we see in the Sacrament. The Spirit of God must work
us to a relish of spiritual things.


But we have spoken at large of this: Our care must be to have a special
taste, a spiritual appetite, to relish this Feast that God provides; naturally
we are distasteful, we relish not spiritual, and heavenly things, we savor
not the things of God. And the spirit of God must alter our savor, and taste as
he does; wheresoever there is spiritual life, there is spiritual relish of
heavenly truths.

Now let me add this further, We must bring something to the Feast, though not
of our own.
that though it be made by God, yet we must bring something to this Feast:
Christ feasteth with us, as ye have Rev. 3. he sups with us, not that we have
grace from our selves, or can bring any thing, he brings his own provision,
with him when he suppeth with us; But yet by the Covenant of grace whereby he
enters into terms of friendship with us, we must sup with him, we must have
grace to entertain him, though it is at his own cost; yet we must have
something: he does not require us to pay our debts, but he gives us wherewith,
secretly he bids us come, but gives a secret Messenger to draw us; he sends
his spirit certainly; certainly he will have us bring something when we come
to feast, but it is of his own giving: And that we are to bring, is humble and
empty souls, (wherein we are to delight our selves in sense of our
unworthiness,) We must bring empty souls, and a spirit of Faith, and a
spirit of Love.
and the spirit of faith to believe his promises; that pleases him when we can
honor him with a Spirit of Faith, and then a Spirit of Love, and new
Obedience, springing from a Spirit of Faith and Love: these be the things
Christ requires we should have. Our souls must be thus furnished that Christ
may delight to dwell with us: And therefore it is a good importuning of God;
Lord I desire thou should dwell in me, and prepare my soul as a fit
Temple, vouchsafe me the graces thou delightest in, and delightest to dwell in.
So we may beg of God his Holy Spirit to furnish our souls, so as he may
dwell, and delight in us.

But we have spoken largely of the former Verse, I will now speak of the next
that follows.

And I will destroy in this Mountain the face of covering cast over all
people, and the veil spread over all nations, to swallow up death in victory,
the Lord will wipe away tears from all faces, and the rebukes of his people
shall be taken from the earth, for the Lord has spoken it.

These depend one upon another, being the several Services of the Feast. The
services of this Feast.
He promises a Feast in the sixth Verse. And what be the several Services. He
will destroy in this mountain, this Church, the face of covering cast over all
people, etc. He will take away the veil of Ignorance, and unbelief, that
they may have special sight of heavenly things, without which they cannot
relish heavenly things, they can take no joy at this Feast.

And then, because there can be no Feast, where there is the greatest enemy in
force and power, he swallows up death in victory. Death keeps us in fear all
our life time, that that swalloweth up all Kings and Monarchs; the terror of
the World Death shall be, and is swallowed up by our head, Christ, and shall
be swallowed up by us in victory. In the mean time we are subject to many
sorrows which cause tears; for tears are but drops that issue from that
cloud of sorrow: And sorrow we have always in this world, either from our
sins, or miseries, or simpathy in tears of that kind. Well, the time will
come that tears shall be wiped away, and the cause of tears; all sorrow for
our own sins, for our own misery, and for simpathizing with the times
wherein we live. Our time shall be hereafter at the day of the resurrection,
when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes: God will perform that office of
a mother to wipe the childrens eyes, or of a Nurse to take away all cause of
grief whatsoever, else it cannot be a perfect feast.

I but there is reproaches cast upon Religion, and religious persons, it goes
under a veil of reproach, and the best things are not seen in their own
colors, nor the worst things, they go under vizards here.

But the time will come, that the rebukes of his people shall be taken away.
The good things as they are best, so shall they be known to be so: And sin,
and base courses, as they are bad, and as they are from Hell, so they shall be
known to be; every thing shall appear in its own colors, things shall not
go masked any longer. And what is the seal of all this? The seal of it is, The
mouth of the Lord has spoken it; truth it self has spoken it, and therefore
it must needs be, Jehovah that can give a being to all things, he has said it.

We have heard why the Church is called a Mountain. He will destroy, or
swallow up, as the word may signify, the face of covering, or the covering of
the face; the veil which is the covering of the face, and particularly expressed
in that term, always, the veil that is spread over all Nations.

God will take away the spiritual veil that covers the Souls of his people,
that is between them and divine truths. It has allusion to that of Exodus 34,
about Moses when he came from the Mount, he had a veil, for the people could
not behold him, he had a glory put upon his face, that they could not look
upon him with a direct eye, and therefore he was feign to put a vail upon his
face, to show that the Jews could not see, as Paul interprets it, 2 Cor. 3. 15.
To this day, says he, when Moses is read, there is a veil put upon their
hearts; they could not see that the Law was a Schoolmasters to bring to
Christ, the Ceremonial Law, and the Moral Law. God had a blessed end by the
curse of it, to bring them to Christ: They rested in the veil, their sight was
terminated in the veil, they could not see through to the end and scope of it.
Nevertheless, when they shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away.





God, and spiritual joy, and delight in the best order: And where it is taken
off, there is none of it.

First of all by nature there is a veil of covering over all men's spirits. Obs.
To understand this better, There is a vail over all men's spirits by nature.
let us unfold the terms of veil a little. There is a veil either upon the
things themselves that are to be seen, or upon the soul which should behold
them: A twofold veil.
The veil of things themselves is when they be hidden altogether, or in part,
when we know part, 1. Of the things themselves.
and are ignorant of part. And this veil upon the things arises from the weak
apprehension of them, when they are not represented in clear expressions but
in obscurity of words, or in types. When we see them only in types, or obscure
phrases, which hides sometime the sight of the thing it self; The manner of
Speech sometimes casts a veil on things; for our Savior Christ spoke in
Parables, which were like the cloud dark on the one side, light on the other,
dark toward the Egyptians, light toward the Israelites: So some expressions
of Scripture have a light side, that only the godly see, and a dark side,
that other men good wit (as natural men) see not.

Again, 2 Of the souls not seeing, or not believing.
there is a veil upon the Soul, and upon the Sight; if the things be veiled,
or the sight veiled, there is no sight. Now the soul is veiled, when we be
ignorant, and unbeleeving, when we are ignorant of what is spoken and revealed,
or when we know the terms of it, and yet believe it not.

Now this veil of ignorance, and unbelief, continues in all unregenerate
men, until grace takes away the veil. Besides, before a thing can be seen,
the object must not only be made clear, and the eyesight too, but there must
be Lumen deferens, 3 There must be a light to make things visible.
a light to carry the object to the eye: If that be not we cannot see. As the
Egyptians in the three days of darkness, had their eyes, but there wanted
light to represent the object; And therefore they could not go near one to
another; it is the light and not sight; if there be sight, and no light to
carry and convey the object, we cannot say there is sight.

That which answers to this veil, is the veil of Scripture, whereby
heavenly things are set out by a mystery; a mystery is, when something is
openly showed, and something hidden.

When something is concealed, All things in religion are mysterious.
as in the Sacrament, they be mysteries: we see the bread, we see the wine, but
under the bread and wine other things are intended; the breaking of the body of
Christ, and the shedding of his blood, and in that the love and mercy of God in
Christ, in giving him to death for us; and Christ's love to give himself to
satisfy Divine Justice: these be the things intended, which only the soul
sees and apprehends. And so all things in the Church indeed are mysteries,
the incarnation of Christ, the union of both natures, that Christ should save
the world by such a way as he did, that he should bring us to glory by shame,
to life, by death, to blessing and happiness, by being a curse for us; it is a
mystery to bring contrary out of contrary: That so glorious a person as God,
should be covered with our weak and sinful nature: it was a mystery, the
Jews stumbled at it; light came, and the darkness could not comprehend the
light. And as Christ was a mystery himself, so the Church is a mystery, that
God should so much delight in a company of poor men, the off-scowring of the
world, to make them temples of his holy Spirit, and heirs of heaven, men that
were under the scorn of the world: this is a mystery, so all is mystical, the
head, the members, the body, the Church, and every particular point of
Religion; there is a mystery in repentance, no man knows what sorrow for sin
is, but the true gracious person; no man knows what it is to believe, but he
that has an heart to believe; no man knows what peace of conscience and joy
of the holy Ghost is, but those that feel it; so that is a mystery. And
therefore great is the mystery of godliness, says the Apostle, not only in
the points themselves, but even the practice of Religion is a mystery too.
Repentance, and Faith, and new obedience, and love, and the comforts of
Religion, are all mysteries; there is a veil upon them in all these points,
that a carnal man cannot see them.

You see then in what sense there is a veil of the things, and in what sense
there is a veil on men's hearts; that is, either the things themselves are hid,
or if the things be open, they want sight, and light of knowledge, and they
want faith to believe. Beloved, we live in times that the object is clear to
us, the things themselves are made clear: as who knows not what Christ is,
and the notion of the incarnation, and of the union with him; we know them
notionally, they be opened and revealed to us very clearly, all the articles
of faith, and mysteries of Religion; so that there is no obscurity in the
object, the things are clear, specially in these places of knowledge: But yet
notwithstanding there is a veil upon the soul. The soul of every man that is
not graciously wrought upon by the spirit of God, has a veil of ignorance,
and unbelief.

First of all, of Ignorance. There is a veil of ignorance in many, 1. There Is a
veil of ignorance on all natural men.
and in all men naturally a veil of ignorance of spiritual things; for
unless they be revealed, they can never be known to Angels themselves: The
Angels themselves know not the Gospel till it be opened, and therefore they be
students in it continually; and the best men in the world know nothing in the
Gospel further then it is revealed; but there is a veil of ignorance upon
them that know these things notionally, Natural men know not spiritual things
in their proper species.
because they do not know them as they should know them; they do not know them
in propria specie, spiritual and heavenly things as spiritual and heavenly
things: they do not know spiritual things as spiritual things, they have a
humane knowledge of spiritual things. Those that want grace, they know the
Grammar of the Scripture and Divinity, and they know how to discourse as
Schoolmen do, from one thing to another, and to argue; they know the Logic
and Rhetoric of the Scripture, but they stick in the style, there is
something they are ignorant of: That is, they have not an eye of knowledge, as
we call it; they do not see the things themselves, but only they see things
by another bodies spirit, and they have no light of their own: And so no man
knows naturally but the children of God what original sin is, what
corruption of nature is, nor knows sin in its own odious colors, to be
filthy, and to be dangerous as it is; to draw the curse and vengeance of God
upon it, this is not known, but by the spirit revealing the odiousness of
sin, that the soul may apprehend it, as Christ did when he suffered for it,
and as God does. A gracious man sees it as God sees it, because by the spirit
of God he sees the filthiness and odiousness of it, and the danger it
draws after it.

And so in any points of Religion naturally, a man sees not them spiritually,
as they are, and as God sees them, but he sees them by a humane light; he
sees heavenly things by a humane light, notionally, and merely to discourse
of them, he sees not intritively into the things themselves, he sees them sub
aliena specie, under another representation then their own; only a godly man
sees spiritual things as the spirit of God, A godly man sees spiritual
things intritively.
and sees them as they are, knows sin as it is, knows grace to be as it
is, and knows faith; what it is to believe, what it is to have peace of
conscience, and the pardon of sins: he knows these things in some sense
intritively, though not so as he shall do when he shall see these things in
heaven, when he shall see face to face. There is a great difference in it, he
sees them intritively, in respect of the knowledge of other men, though he sees
but in a glass, in regard of the knowledge he shall have in heaven: As Saint
Paul says, for we see but as in a glass; but he that sees in a glass sees
more life, then he that sees the dead picture of a man: So though we see but in
a glass heavenly things, yet we see them better then those that see them in a
dead notion; though it be nothing to the knowledge we shall have in heaven,
yet it is incomparable above the knowledge of any carnal natural man upon the
earth.

Again, naturally men have vailes of ignorance upon the most divine things; of
spiritual things, such as is union, and as is the communion between Christ and
us, and the mystery of regeneration in the new creature, such as is the joy in
the holy Ghost, the inward peace of conscience. I will not name the particulars
to insist on them, but give you only an iustance; though they know the notion
of these things, yet they are altogether ignorant of them: their knowledge is a
mere outward light, it is a light radicated in the soul; It is not as the
light of the Moon, which receives light from the Sun, but it is a light
radicated and incorporated into the soul, as the light of the Sun is by the
spirit, it is in the soul; it is not only upon the soul, but in the soul;
the heart sees and feels, and knows divine truths: there is a power and
virtue in the sight and knowledge of a gracious man, there is none in the
knowledge of a carnal man. The light of a candle has a light in it, but no
virtue at all goes with it; The light of the godly is a light with influence,
the light of the wicked is without it.
but the light of the Sun, and the light of the stars, they have a special
virtue, they have heat with them, and they have an influence in a special
kind on inferior bodies working together with the light; So it is with
heavenly apprehension and knowledge, it actually conveyeth light but with the
light there is a blessed and gracious influence, there is heat and efficacy
with that light. But though a carnal man know all the body of divinity, yet it
is a mere light without heat, Simile.
a light without influence: It is not experimental. As a blind man can talk
of colors, if he be a Scholar, and describe them better then he that has his
eyes, he being not a Scholar: but he that has his eyes can can judge of
colors a great deal better. Simile.
Oftentimes by book a Scholar can tell you foreign countries, better than
he that has traveled, yet the traveller that has bin there, can tell them
more distinctly; So he that is experienced in that kind, though a stranger, can
measure another man's ground better then himself, he can tell you here is so
many Acres; Simile.
but he that possesses them knows the goodness of them, the worth of them,
and improveth them to his own good. And so it is with many, they can measure
the points of Religion, and define, and divide them; I but the poor Christian
can taste, can feel them, can relish and improve them: his knowledge is a
knowledge with interest, but other men's knowledge is a knowledge with no
interest or experience at all: So that there is naturally a veil of ignorance
on the heart of every natural man.

Christianity is a mystery; till conversion there is a mystery in every point
of Religion: none know what repentance is, but a repentant sinner; all the
books in the world cannot inform the heart what sin is, or what sorrow is. A
sick man knows what a disease is better then all Physicians, for he feels
it; no man knows what faith is but the true believer: there is a mystery also
in love. Godliness is called a mystery, not only for the notionall, but the
practical part of it; why do not men more solace themselves in the
transcendent things of Religion, which may ravish Angels. Alas, there is a
veil over their soul, that they do not know them, or not experimentally they
have no taste or feeling of them.

And so there is a veil of unbelief; There is a veil of unbelief over the
unregenerate.
there is no man without grace, that believes truly what he knows, but he
believes in the general only, he believes things so far forth, as they
cross not his lusts. But when particular truths are enforced on a carnal man,
his lusts do overbeare all his knowledge, and he has a secret scorn arising
in his heart, whereby he derideth those truths, and goes against them, and
makes him think certainly these be not true, and therefore he believes them
not. If a man by nature believed the truths he says he knows, he would not
go directly against them: But the ground of this is, there is a mist of
sinful lusts that are raised out of the soul, that darkens the soul, that
at the present time the soul is atheistical, and full of unbelief; for there
is no sin but ignorance and unbelief breaths it into the soul, and makes
way for it; For if a man knew what he were about, and apprehended that God saw
him, and the danger of it, Ignorance and unbelief act in all sins.
he would never sin. There is no sin without an error in judgment, there
is a veil of ignorance and unbelief; what creature will run into a pit when
he sees it open? what creature will run into the fire, the most dull
creature? Man will not run into that danger that is open to the eye of the
soul, if there were not a veil of ignorance, at least unbelief, at that time
upon the soul. All sin supposes error.

And this should make us hate sin the more, whenever we sin, specially
against our conscience; there is atheism in the soul at that time, and there
is unbelief: we believe not truth it self; no sinner but calls truth into
question: when he sins, he denies it, or questioneth it; and therefore
there is a veil on every man naturally over his heart by ignorance and
unbelief. The truths themselves are clear, God is clear, and the Gospel is
light, Men's, Lux, you know they know things in the object, but in us there is
darkness in our understandings; and therefore the Scripture says not, we
are dark only, but darkness it self. The clouds that arise, are like the
mists that do interpose between our souls, and divine things, arising from
our own hearts; and the love of sinful things raise such a cloud, that we know
not, or else believe not what is spoken.

To proceed, 2. Obser.
God only can reveal and take away the veil of ignorance, God only can take
off the veil of ignorance and unbelief.
and unbelief from off the soul: I will speak specially of this veil. The
reason is, there is such a natural unsuitablenesse between the soul and
heavenly light, and heavenly truths, that unless God opens the eye of the
soul, Reas.
and puts a new eye into the soul, Because of the unsuitablenes between the
soul and spiritual things.
it can never know or discern of heavenly things; there must be an eye
suitable to the light, else there will never be sight of it. Now God can create
a new spiritual eye to discern of spiritual things, which a natural eye
cannot; who can see things invisible? Divine things are invisible to natural
eyes, there is no suitableness: he that must reveal these, and take away the
veil, must create new light within, as well as a light without; now God, and
only God, that created light out of darkness, can create light in the soul.
Let there be light. He only can create a spiritual eye, to see the things
that to nature are visible.

There be four things in sight. Four things. required in sight.
1. The object to be beheld. 2. The light that conveyeth it. 3. The organ that
receives it. 4. And the light of the eye to meet the light without. So it is
in the soul together with divine truths, there must be light to discover them;
for light is the first visible thing that discovers it self and all things
else: And then there must be a light in the soul to judge of them, and this
light must be suitable. A carnal base spirit judges of spiritual things
carnally, like himself, because he has not light in his own spirit: The
things are spiritual, his eye is carnal, he has not a light in his eye
suitable to the object, and therefore he cannot judge of them; for the
Scripture says plainly, they are spiritually discerned. Therefore a carnal
person has carnal conceptions of spiritual things, as an holy man does
spiritualize things by a spiritual conception of them. Four degrees of
discerning things.


There be degrees of discerning things. The highest degree is to see things
face to face as they be in heaven; The next to that is to see them in a glass:
for there I see the motion and true species of a man, though not so clearly, as
when I see him face to face; therefore We soon forget the species of it in a
glass. We have more fixednesse of the other, because there is more reality:
We see things put into Water, and that is less; but then there is a sight of
man in Pictures, which is less than the rest, because we see not the motion.
It is even so, a carnal man scarce sees the dead resemblance of things. In
Moses time, they saw things in water as it were blindly, though true: but we
see things in a glass of truth, as clearly as possibly we can in this world.
In heaven we shall see face to face, shall see him as he is: And then will be
the joy of this excellent Feast, and the consummation of all sweet promises,
which here we can but have a taste of.

So that is the first reason of it, Reas. 2.
that God is only the taker away of the veil, which arises from the
unsuitablenesse between the soul, and divine Truths. There is nothing in the
heart of man, but a contrariety to divine light. The very natural knowledge,
that is contrary, natural Conscience that only checketh for gross sins,
but not for spiritual sins: Obedience and Civil life, that makes a man full
of pride, and armeth him against selfe-denyall, and against the righteousness
of Christ, and Justification. There is nothing in the soul, but (without
grace) rises against the soul in divine things.

Again, Reas. 3.
there is such disproportion between the soul being full of sin, And a
disproportion also.
and guiltiness, and heavenly things, that are so great, that the heart of man
will not believe, unless God convinces the soul, that God is so good and
gracious, though they be great and excellent, yet God will bestow them upon our
souls, and therefore he sends the Spirit, that over-powers the soul, though
it be full of fear, and guilt, that sin contracts.

Though we be never so unworthy, he will magnify his grace to poor sinners,
and without that the soul will never believe, there is such an infinite
disproportion between the soul and the things, between the sinful soul and
the spirit, so that God must overpower the soul to make it believe.

The Scripture is full of this: As we are naturally ignorant, and full of
unbelief: so God only can overpower the soul, and take away the veil of
Ignorance.

All the Angels in heaven, Reas. 4.
and all the Creatures in the world, No creature, Angels or men can bring light
into the soul.
the most skillful men in the world cannot bring light into the soul, they
cannot bring light into the heart; they can speak of divine things, but they
understand them little, but to bring light into the heart, that the heart may
taste of them, and yield obedience to believe, that they cannot do. And
therefore all Gods children they be Theodidactoi, taught of God; God only
has the privilege to teach the heart, to bend and bow the heart to believe.

So that God only by his Spirit takes away the veil of ignorance and
unbelief.

Now the third thing is, 3 Obs.
that this is peculiar to the Church, Its peculiar to the Church to have the
veil taken away.
and to the Children of God, to have the veil taken off. In this Mountain,
says the Scripture, the vail of all Faces shall be swallowed up, or taken away.

I partly showed in the former point, that it is peculiar to Gods Children to
have the veil taken off. There is a vailin all things, either the things be
hid from them, as amongst the Gentiles, or if the things be revealed, there is
a veil upon the heart, their lusts raise up a cloud, which until God subdue
by the holy Spirit, they be dark, yea darkness it self. Goshen was only
light, when all Egypt was in darkness: so there is light only in the Church,
and all other parts in the world are in darkness: And amongst men in the
Church there is a darkness upon the soul of unregenerate men, that be not
sanctified, and subdued by the Spirit of God. And all godly men are lightsome,
nay they be lights in the world. As wicked men are darkness, so gracious men
by the Spirit of God, are made lights of the world from him that is the true
light, Christ himself.

It is peculiar to the Church to know the greatest good, Its peculiar to the
Church to know the greatest good, and greatest evil.
and the greatest evil. It is no where but in the Church, who are the people
of God. None but Gods Elect can know the greatest evil, that is sin, which
the Spirit of God reveals: And the greatest good, that is Gods mercy in
Christ, and sanctifying grace. The same Spirit does both: As light does
discover foul things, as well as fair; so the same Spirit of God discovers the
loathsomenesse of sin, and the sweetness of grace. Where the one is, there
is never the other; where there is not truly a deep discerning of sin, there
is never knowledge of grace; there is none but in the Church, those that have
the Spirit of illumination, they have sanctification likewise.

We shall make use of all together. You see then what naturally we are, and
that Gods grace must take away the veil, and this is from all them within the
Church, and in the Church those whom God is pleased to sanctify.

In the fourth place. 4 Obs.
Where this veil is taken off from any, Where the veil is taken away, there
is spiritual joy and feasting.
there is with it spiritual joy, and feasting, as here he joyneth them both
together. I will make a feast of fat things, and will take away the veil.

The reason of the connection of this, is that same Spirit, Reason.
that is a Spirit of Revelations, is a Spirit of Comfort: The same Spirit is a
Spirit of Revelation and consolation.
And the same Spirit that is the Spirit of Comfort, is a Spirit of Revelation:
All sweetness that the soul relisheth, comes from light, and all light that
is spiritual conveyeth sweetness both together. Beloved, there is a
marvailous sweetness in divine Truths, in Christ is all marrow, and in
Religion forgiveness of sins, and inward peace, and joy, and grace, fitting
us to be like to Christ, and for heaven, they be incredibly sweet, they be all
marrow. I but they are only so to them that know them; now Gods Spirit that
reveals these things to us, does breed a taste in the soul. The Spirit of
illumination of Gods Children is a Spirit of sanctification likewise; and that
sanctification alters the taste, and relish of the will and affections, that
with discovery of these things, there is a taste, and relish of them. It is
sapida Scientia, a savory knowledge they have: And therefore where he makes a
Feast, he takes away the veil; and where he takes away the veil he makes a
Feast: what a wonderful satisfaction has the soul, when the veil is taken
off, to see God in Christ reconciled, to see sin pardoned, to see the
beginnings of grace, which shall be finished, and accomplished in glory, to
discern that peace which passes understanding, etc. What a mavelous
sweetness are in these things?

They cannot be revealed to the knowledge spiritually, but there is a Feast in
the soul, wherein the soul does solace it self; so both these go together.

And therefore we should not rest in that revealing that does not bring a savor
with it to the soul; undoubtedly, that knowledge has no solace and comfort
for the soul that is not by divine Revelation of heavenly truths.

We see the dependence of these one upon another: Then let us make this Use of
all.

Since there is a vail over all men by nature, Use 1.
the work of ignorance and unbelief, To labor to have this veil taken off.
and since God only takes it away by his Holy Spirit, and since that only
those that be godly and sanctified have this taken off: While this is, there is
a spiritual feast, joy, and comfort, and strength; then let us labor to have
this veil taken off, let us labor to have the eyes of our understandings
enlightened to have our hearts subdued to believe, let us take notice of our
natural condition. We are drowned and inwarpt in darkness, the best of us
all: It is not having knowledge what we are by nature, it is not any knowledge
that can bring us to heaven, there must be a revelation, a taking away of the
veil. How many content themselves with common light of Education and
traditionary knowledge; so they were bred and catechized, and under such a
Ministry, but for spiritual knowledge of spiritual things, how little is it
cared for; And yet this is necessary to salvation. There is great occasion to
presie this, that we rest not in common knowledge. If Religion be not known to
purpose, its like Lightning, which directs not a man in his way, but dazles
him, and puts him quite out of his way. Many have flashes of knowledge that
affect them a little: but this affection is soon gone, and directs them not a
whit in the ways of life; and therefore labor that the will and affections
may be subject. Beg of God a fleshy heart, an heart yielding to the truth. We
know eare-truths will harden; as none is harder than a common formal
Christian. A man had better fall into the hands of Papists, than into the hands
of a formal hypocritical Christian. Why? they pride themselves in their
profession. No Persecuters worse than the Scribes and Pharisees, that stood in
their own light. They were more cruel than Pilate: And therefore if we be
informed, but not truly transformed; to love the truth we know, and hate the
evil we know, it makes us worse.

And then it inrageth men the more: The more they know, the more they be
enraged. Men when truths be pressed, which they purpose not to obey, they fret
against the Ordinance, and cast stones, as it were in the face of truth. When
Physic does raise humors, but is not strong enough to carry them away, they
endanger the body; And where light is not strong enough to dispell corruption
when it raises corruption, it inrageth it. When men know Truth and are not
molded into it, they first rage against it, and then by little and little fall
from it, and grow extreme enemies to it. Its a dangerous thing therefore to
rest in naked knowledge. Beg then of God that he would take away the veil of
ignorance and unbelief, that light and life may go together, and so we shall
be fit to feast with the Lord.

Now that we may have true saving knowledge, first we must attend meekly upon
Gods Ordinances, which be sanctified to this end to let in light to the soul.

Will we know sin and our state by nature, Means.
and how to come out of it, For this we must attend on Ordinances.
then together with this Revelation must come an heavenly strength into the
soul, a heavenly taste, and relish, and therefore attend upon the Ordinances;
And labor for an humble soul, empty of our selves; And do not think to break
into heavenly things with strength of parts, God must reveal, God must take
away the veil only by his holy Spirit in the Ordinance. The veil is taken
away from the oject, in opening of Truths; but the veil must be taken away
from the object, and from the heart too, there must be knowledge of the
object, as well as an object; the object must be sanctified, and fitted to the
persons, else divine Truths will never be understood divinely, nor spiritual
Truths spiritually: Labor to be emptied of your selves. In what measure we are
emptied of our self-conceitednesse, and understanding, we be filled in divine
things: in what measure we are emptied of our selves, we are filled with the
Spirit of God, and knowledge, and grace. As a vessel in what measure it is
emptied, Smile.
in that measure it is fit to be filled with more supervenient liquor: so in
what measure we grow in self-denial, and humility, in that measure we are
filled likewise with knowledge. He will teach an humble soul that stands not
in its own light, what it is to repent, to believe, to love; what it is to be
patient under the Cross, what it is to live holily, and dye comfortably. The
Spirit of God will teach an humble selfe-denying soul all these things, and
therefore labor for an humble empty soul, and not to cast our selves too much
into the sins, and fashions of the times; As the Apostle Romans 12. Be not
conformed to this world, 3. Fashion not our selves after the times.
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, etc. When a man casts
himself into the mould of the times, and will live as the rest do, he shall
never understand the secrets of God, and the good pleasure of God; for the
world must be condemned. The world goes the broad way: And therefore we must
not consider what others do, but what God teaches us to do. And add to this;
4. Be careful to practice what we know
What we know, let us labor to practice, John 7. 17. But he that does the will
of my Father, shall know of every Doctrine whether it be of God or no. We must
do, Quest.
and we shall know: But can we do, before we know? Answ.
The meaning is this, that we have first, breeding and education, and some
light of the Spirit turns it presently to practice, by obedience to that
knowledge. And then you shall know more, he that does these things, he shall
know all: They shall know that do practice what they know already. To him that
has shall be given; That is, to him that has some knowledge, and puts in
practice what he has, God will increase the talent of his knowledge; he shall
know more and more till God reveals himself fully in the world to come: And
therefore be faithful to our selves, and true to the knowledge we have, 5 Love
what we know.
love it, and put it into practice when divine truths are discovered, let the
heart affect them, lest God gives us up to believe lies. We have many given up
to this sin, because when truths are revealed, they give way to their own
proud scornful hearts, they know not the love of the truth. God knows what a
jewel the Truth is, and since they despise it, God gives them up to believe
lies: and take heed, practice what we know, and love what we know, entertain
it with a loving affection.

A loving affection is the Casket of this jewel, if we entertain it not in
love, it removes from us its Station, and being gone, God will remove us into
darkness.

And remember it is God that takes away the veil of ignorance and unbelief:
And therefore make this use of it, Use 2.
to make our Studies, and Closets, Oratories, not to come to Divine Truths,
Make our studies and closets Oratories for the getting of knowledge.
to out-wrastle the excellency of them with our own wits; but to pray to God,
as you have Psalm. 119. Open mine eyes, and reveal thy truth. And St. Paul
prays for the Spirit of Revelation, 1 Ephesians. 19. And so desire God to
reveal, and take away the veil from us, that he will open divine Truths to
our souls; that since he has the Key of David, that opens, and no man
shuts, that he would open our understandings, to conceive things, and our
hearts to believe. He has the only Key of the soul, we can shut our souls,
We can shut, but not open our hearts to divine truths.
but cannot open them again: so we can shut our hearts to divine Truths, we
can naturally do this, but open them without the help of the Spirit we cannot:
He can open our understandings, as he did the Disciples: He can open our Hearts
to believe, he can do it, and will do it. If we seek to him, he will not put
back the humble desires of them that fear him; And therefore for heavenly
light and heavenly revelation, all the teaching of the men of the world cannot
do it. If we know no more than we can have by Books, and men that teach us,
we shall never come to Heaven; but we must have God teach the heart, as well
as the Brain, he must teach not only the Truths themselves, as they be
discovered, but the love of them, the faith in them, the practice of them, and
he only can do this, he only can teach the heart, he only can discover
the bent of the heart, and Satan's wiles that cast a cloud upon the
understanding, the Spirit only can do it; and therefore in all our endeavors
labor to get knowledge, and join holiness and divine grace, and pray to God
that he would reveal the mystery of salvation to us.

But how shall we know whether we have this heavenly light and revelation,
Quest.
or no? Whether the veil be yet upon our hearts or no? How shall we know that
we have heavenly light.
I will not be long in the point. We may know it by this: The Apostle Peter
^aith to express the virtue of Gods power, he has called us out of darkness
to his marvelous light. Answ.
The soul that has the veil taken from it, 1. By a marvelling at the things
of faith, and the goodness of God in revealing them to us.
there is a marvelling at the goodness of God, a wondering at the things of
faith: And the soul sets such a price upon divine things, that all is dung and
dross in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ. Wherefore is
it that thou will reveal thy self to us, and not unto the world? as admiring
the goodness of God. What are we? what am I? that God should reveal these
things to me, and not to the world? that many perish in darkensse and shadow of
death, though they hear of divine things; yet they teaching rebellion and
unbeleife, are not molded to them, and so perish eternally. There is a secret
admiration of the goodness of God to the poor soul, and a wonderment at
spiritual things. Oh how sweet is thy law says David. And teach me the
wonders of thy law, and joy unspeakable, and glorious, and peace that passes
understanding: these things be high to the soul; by the taste of what they
have, they wonder at that little, and at that they look for, and are carried
with desire still further and further, which is a farther evidence; they that
have any spiritual knowledge, they be carried to grow more and more, 2. By
being carried with desire to know more and more.
and to enter further and further into the Kingdom. Where there is not a
desire still till they come to the full measure that is to be had in Jesus
Christ, there is no knowledge at all: certainly a gracious soul when once it
sees, it desires still to feel the power and virtue of Christ in it, as Paul
counted all dung in comparison of this knowledge to know my self in Christ,
and feel the power of his death in dying to sin, and virtue of his
resurrection in raising me to newness of life; 3. When the veil is taken off
by sanctified means, which we can justify by our own experience of them.
it was Saint Paul's study to walk still to the high price of Gods calling, and
where that is not, no grace is begun.

And again, where divine light is, and the veil taken away, it is the
sanctified means; for God works by his own instruments and means, and they
be able to justify all courses of wisdom, Wisdom is justified of her
children. By experience they be able to say the word is the word; I have found
it casting me down, and raising me up, and searching the hidden corners of my
heart. I have found Gods Ordinances powerful, the word and Sacrament. I have
found my hope, faith, strength, and spiritual comfort, and therefore I can
justify them; for I have found, tasted, and relished of these things; which
works that upon the soul which Christ did on the body. I find mine eyes, I
find my deaf ears opened. I can hear with another relish then before. I
find a life and quickening to good things, though it be weak; I had no life at
all to them before. I find a relish which I knew not before; So that there be
spiritual senses whereby I am able to justify that these things be the things
of God: So that they that have divine truths, can justify all the ordinances
of God, by their own experience. As Peter answered when Christ asked him, will
you be also gone? be gone said Peter, Whether should we go, thou have the
words of eternal life.

I have found thy words efficacious to comfort and strengthen, and raise, and
shall I depart from thee, who have the words of eternal life? And so take a
soul that the spirit of God has wrought upon; ask whether they will be
careless of means of salvation, not to pray, or hear, or receive the
Sacrament, by these have I eternal life conveyed; God has let in by these,
comfort and strength, and joy, and shall I leave these things? no, I will not;
whether shall I go, thou have the words of eternal life? Are we able to
justify these things by the sweetness we have found in them? then certainly
God has shined upon the soul, and together with strength and light, Fourthly,
When our knowledge works upon us.
conveyed sweetness to the soul.

A godly man sees things with life, his sight works upon him; it is a
transforming sight, as the Apostle says, we all behold the glory of God and
are changed. Sight of light and life goes together with a christian; as Christ
says, he is the light of the world, and the life of the world. First light,
for life comes with light, and light conveyeth life: All grace is dropped into
the will through the understanding; and wheresoever Christ is life, he is
light, because true knowledge is a transforming knowledge; but if religion be
not known to purpose, it hardens and makes worse.

We are now by Gods good providence come to farther business, Application of
this to the Sacrament.
to partake of these mysteries; yet it should be the desire of our souls that
our eyes may be opened, that in these divine and precious mysteries he would
discover hidden love, which is not seen with the eyes of the body; they may see
and taste, and relish his love and goodness in Jesus Christ: that as the
outward man is refreshed with the elements, so the inward man may be refreshed
with his spirit, that they may be effectual to us; that we may justify the
course God takes so far, as to come charitably, and joyfully to them.

THE Fourth Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 7, 8. I will destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations. He will
swallow up death in victory, etc.
WE have heretofore at large spoken of the spiritual and eternal favors of
God, set out in the former Verse, In this Mountain will the Lord of Hosts make
a Feast of fat things. While our soul is in the body it is much guided by our
fancy: spiritual things are therefore presented by outward, and conveyed to
the soul that way; only we must remember that there is a far greater
excellency in the things themselves, than in their representation; for what is
all Banquets, fatness with Marrow, Wine on the Lees, to the joy and sweetness
of Religion, begun here, and accomplished in the world to come.

In Christ there is nothing but all Marrow, and sweetness in Religion, that
may refresh a man in the lowest condition, if he can but have a taste of it.

Now because the spiritual things of Christ do us no good, as long as they
are hid, therefore the Holy Ghost sets down a Promise, That God will take
away the covering cast on all people, and the veil spread over all Nations.

But there be some things that will dampe all mirth: Now here is security
against them, that our joy may be complete; and this in the next verse to
which I now come; He will swallow up death in victory, he will wipe away
tears from all faces. The Prophet having spoken of a great Feast before, an
excellent Feast, sets forth here the services of that feast; what is it that
accompanies it.

First of all there shall be light to discover the excellency of the feast, the
veil is taken away, and a knowledge given to know divine things in a
spiritual manner.

Then (which will damp all feasts) the fear of death is taken away; He will
swallow up death in victory, and wipe away all tears, that is all sorrow, the
effect is put for the cause: This is an excellent promise, an excellent Service
in this spiritual banquet. Suppose a man were set at a Feast furnished with
all Delicates, royally attended, Clothes suitable, and had a Sword hung over
his head ready to fall upon him, it would cast such a dampe on his spirit, as
would spoil the joy of this feast: So to hear of Spiritual excellencies, and
yet death, and hell, and damnation coming along, alas where is the comfort you
speak of? And therefore to make the feast more perfect, there is not only
light and knowledge, but removal of it ever may dampe the feast. So this must
needs come in to comfort all the rest; He shall swallow up death in victory,
and wipe away tears from all faces. Death is here represented to us under the
word victory, as a Combatant, as one that we are to fight withal, a Captain.

And then here is the victory of him, Christ overcomes him, and overcomes him
gloriously: It is not only a Conquest, but a swallowing of him up. Usually God
uses all sorts of enemies in their own kind; he causes them that spoil, to
be spoiled; them that swallow up, to be swallowed up: So Death the great
swallower shall be swallowed up.

Beloved, Death is the great King of Kings.
Death is the great King of Kings, and the Emperor of Emperors, the great
Captain, and ruling King of the world; for no King has such Dominion as Death
has, it spreads its government and victory over all Nations; he is equal,
though a Tyrant. As a Tyrant spares none, he is equal in this, he subdueth
young and old, Death spares none.
poor and rich, he levels Scepters and Spades together; he levels all; there
is no difference between the dust of an Emperor and the meanest man; he is a
Tyrant that governs over all; And so there is this equity in him, he spares
none.

He has continued from the beginning of the world to this time; Death has
continued from the beginning, let in by sin.
but he is a Tyrant brought in by our selves, Romans 5. Sin let in Death, it
opened the door: death is no Creature of Gods making; Satan brought in sin,
and sin brought in death: So that we be accessory our selves to the powerful
stroke of this prevailing Tyrant; And therefore sin is called the cause of
death. Sin brought in death, Sin armeth Death.
and armeth death; the weapon that death fights with, and causes great terror,
it is sin: The cause is armed with the power of the wrath of God for sin,
the fear of hell, and damnation; So that wrath, and hell, and damnation,
arming sin, it brings a sting of it self, and put as venom into death. All
cares, and fears, and sorrows, and sicknesses, are less and petty deaths,
harbingers to death it self; but the attendants that follow this great King
are worst of all: As Rev. 6. I saw a pale horse, Hell the attendant of death.
and death upon it, and after him comes hell: what were death, if it were not
for the Pit, and Dungeon that follows it? So that death is attended with
hell, and hell with eternity. Therefore here is a strange kind of prevailing.
There is no victory where there is no enemy, and therefore death must needs be
an enemy, yea it is the worst enemy, and the last enemy: Death is not planted
in the forlorn hope, but it is planted at last for the greatest advantage, and
is a great enemy; what does death? It depriveth us of all comfort, pleasure,
communion with one another in this life, callings, or whatsoever else is
comfortable. The grave is the house of oblivion; Death is terrible of it self,
even to nature, as Augustine says, where it is not swallowed up of Christ: for
it is an evil in it self, and as I said, armed with a sting of sin, after
which follows Hell.

Now this death is swallowed up. When the Scripture puts a person upon death,
it is not uncomly for us to speak as the Scripture does: The Scripture puts a
persouupon death, and a kind of triumphing spirit in Gods children over death:
Oh death where is thy sting, oh grave where is thy victory; death is the
greatest swallower, and yet it is swallowed up by Christ; death has swallowed
up all, and when it has swallowed up, it keeps them; It keeps the dust of
Kings, Subjects, great and small, to the general day of judgment, when death
shall be swallowed up of it self. It is therefore of the nature of those that
Solomon speaks of, that cry, give, give, and yet is never satisfied, like the
grave, yet this death is swallowed up in victory.

But how comes death to be swallowed up? Christ swallows up death in victory,
for himself and his.
Christ will swallow up death in victory, for himself and his. First of all,
because sin brought in death, our Savior Christ became sin, a sacrifice to
his fathers justice for sin; Reas.
he was made sin for us, he was made a curse for us, Because he has
satisfied for sin.
to take away the curse due to us: and sin being taken away, what has death
to do with us, and hell, and damnation, the attendants on death? nothing at
all; Therefore Coll. 2. upon the cross Christ did nail the law, and sin,
and the devil; there he reigned over principalities and powers, which were but
executioners let loose by reason of our sins: And God being satisfied for
sin, the devil has nothing to do with us, but to exercise us, except it be
for our good: So that he has swallowed up death, because by his death he has
taken away sin, and so the power of Satan, whose power is by sin. And
therefore it is excellently set down Heb. 2. 14. He also took part of flesh
and blood, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil: So Christ by death overthrew Satan, that had the power of
death; because by death he took away sin, the sins of all, and bare our
sins upon the cross, and was made sin for us that knew no sin; he is
ours, if we believe: For then Christ is given to a particular man when he
believes. Beloved, Christ upon the cross did triumph over all our spiritual
enemies, sin, and death, and all; It was a kingdom of patience. A double
kingdom of Christ.
You know there is a double kingdom of Christ; a kingdom of patience, and a
kingdom of power: Christ on the cross suffering punishment due to sin, 1. A
kingdom of patience.
overcame the law, and the devil, and sin, which is the kingdom of
patience; the kingdom of power he has in heaven. 2. A kingdom of power.
If Christ were so able in his kingdom of patience to conquer our greatest
enemies, what will he do in his kingdom of power? As Paul reasons Romans 5.
If by his death we are saved, much more now he triumphs in heaven, and appears
for us, is he able to convey greater matters to us.

If Christ in the days of his flesh did conquer, Christ conquereth for us and
in us.
how glorious will his conquest be at the day of judgment. Now Christ has
conquered all in his own person, as our head, then he will conquer for us in
his mystical body; what is now done in his person, shall be done in his
members. In the mean time, faith is our victory, his conquest over death our
victory, his victory over all our spiritual enemies, is our victory; every one
that believes, is a conqueror of death, though he die, because he sees it
conquered in Christ his head: and as it is truly conquered in him, so Christ
will conquer it in all his members; For as Christ in his natural body is gone
to heaven there to appear in our behalf, so shall mystical Christ be wholly
in glory; he will not leave a finger, we shall all triumph over all our
spiritual enemies; as Christ's natural body is glorious in heaven as our head,
so shall also his mystical body be.

You see then how death is swallowed up by Christ as our surety, as the second
Adam upon the cross; and truly swallowed up in him, and by faith this victory
is ours, and time will come when in our own persons it shall be swallowed up
in victory.

This might be enlarged, but I haste to make use of it.

Mark I beseech you how death is swallowed up by Christ in his own person for
our good, Death was conquered by Christ when he had given way to be under the
power of it.
he gave a great way to death, for death seized on him upon the cross, death
severeth soul from body, death had him in his own cabinet, his grave for
three days; nay this great King and tyrant death, had a great conquest over
Christ himself; but here was the glory of this victory; when death this great
conqueror of the world had Christ upon the cross, and in his own dominion,
in the grave, where he rules and reigns, consuming and swallowing up all,
death was feign to give up all, and Satan thought to have had a great morsel
when he devoured Christ; but there was an hook in his divine power that
catched him, that when he thought to have swallowed up Christ was swallowed up
himself, his head was then broken; he never had such a blow, as by Christ on
the cross, when he was overcome being a scorn of the world visibly, yet
invisibly in Gods acceptance of that sacrifice, and in a spirit of faith:
Christ triumphs over Satan, death was subdued even in his own kingdom, and
that makes the victory great.

Death by seizing on Christ without right, Christ has freed us from the evil
of death when it had right to us: Death has lost all its right by fastening on
Christ, and so is become as a Drone without a sting; so the great swallower of
all is swallowed up it self at last by Christ.

Now for comfortable use of it. Use 1.
First, let us consider that God oftentimes gives a great deal of way to his
greatest enemies: First, we see God gives way to his enemies for a time, when
he will give glorious victory.
God uses a stratagem of retiring, he seems to retire and give liberty to his
enemies, but it is to triumph and trample upon them with greater shame, he will
tread them to dust afterward; Christ gave death a great deal of liberty, he
was crucified and tormented, then had to the grave, and there he lay: And this
was to raise a greater triumph over this great prevailer, over the world and
death it self.

It is continued so in the Church: Does not he give way to the enemies of the
Church, they may come to say ahah, ahah, so would we have it. Now the poor
children of God are where we would have them, but then comes sudden
destruction: God to make his victory more glorious, and more to discover their
cruelty, comes upon them when they be in the top of pleasure, and the Church in
the bottom of abasement; then God swalloweth up all in victory, as Christ did
death when it seemed to have bin it self victorious.

This is a very comfortable consideration, for if death be overcome when it
seemed to overcome Christ, what need we fear any other enemy? Christ has
broken the net as an Eagle or great bird, and the rest escape by him.

You may enlarge this in your own meditations: he will swallow up death in
victory, this is said for the time to come, Death is already swallowed up to
faith.
he will swallow up death; but Paul says it is also past, and swallowed up
already; faith says it is done, and so it is in our head. Were it not
comfortable now to all true hearted Christians, to hear that the Church fares
better, and that the enemies were swallowed up, for they be but the instruments
of this inferior death; let us get the spirit of faith and see them all
conquered, for certainly they shall have the worst at last. He that has
swallowed up death in victory, will swallow up all that be the cause of death:
And therefore the Scripture speaks of these things as past, Babylon is fallen,
as a millstone cast into the bottom of the Sea.

Get a spirit of faith, and we shall never be much troubled with Babylon; for
all the enemies of Christ, and adherents to that man of sin must down, and
partake of the judgment threatened in the Revelations; Heaven has concluded
it, and all the policy of Rome and hell cannot disanull it: they be already
swallowed up to faith, and Christ will rule till he has put them all under
his feet; which shall be done, not only to destroy them, but to raise himself
higher, in giving them up to their confusion.

Again, if death be swallowed up in victory, labor to be one with Christ
crucified, Use 2.
for union with him; begin with union, Labor to be one with Christ crucified.
with Christ crucified. The first union is with Christ abased, and then with
Christ glorified: And therefore labor to see sin that brought in death,
subdued by the power of Christ's death in some measure, and then we shall have
comfort in his death glorified. For in my holy mount death is swallowed up,
that is, the true Church of Christ, labor to be members of Christ, otherwise
death will come as a tyrant indeed, armed with a terrible sting, in his full
force to assail you. It is the most terrible thing to see death come armed
with the wrath and anger of God, and attended with hell and damnation. Labor
therefore to be one with Christ crucified, to get our sins crucified, and our
selves partakers of his death: and then no damnation, no fear of death to them
that are in Christ: they may die, but they are freed from eternal death, and
they shall rise again even as Christ's body rose to glory.

Get therefore into Christ and desire the power of his death subduing sin: In
what measure we grow in that, we grow in boldness and joy, and whatsoever
privileges follow Christ.

Again, Use 3.
when we be in Christ, true members of him, Be thankful to God for this
victory in Christ.
then let us be thankful to God for this victory, thankful to Jesus Christ
that has given us victory; when we think of death, of sin, of judgment,
of hell, of damnation, let us be framed as a Christian should. Now let him
(that has the most terrible and fearful things in the world as conquered
enemies) say, oh blessed be God for Christ, and blessed be Christ for dying for
us, and by death disarming death of his sting; that now we can think of it in
our judgments quietly; now we can think of all these as conquered enemies:
this is the fruit of Christ's death, they are not only enemies, but friends in
Christ: Sin, the remainder of it, the guilt of it, that binds over to
damnation, is taken away, the remainders of it serve to humble us, make us
feel the power of pardon, and to desire another world, where we shall be all
spiritual; so that death is a part of our jointure. All things are yours, The
benefits of death to a person that is in Christ.
life, and death; death does us many excellent services, it is a door and
passage to life; death is the death of it self, destroys it self: We never
truly live, till we die, and when we die, we are past fear of death. So that
sin dies, misery dies, death dies; though it takes us from comforts, and
employments, and friends here, yet it is a change to a better place, and better
company, and better employments, and better condition, to be in a glorious
condition to eternity; and therefore we have cause to bless God in Christ,
that took our nature, and in our nature disarmed our greatest enemy, sin,
and so disarmed death, and freed us from the wrath of of God, Use 4.
and hell, and damnation. Oh we can never be thankful enough for this. Let
those that are in Christ be ashamed of the fear of death.


Again, if death be swallowed up in victory, let us be ashamed of the fear of
death, because Christ says he will swallow him up, as he has already in his
own person: Shall we be afraid of an enemy that is swallowed up in our head,
and shall be swallowed up in every one of us? If we cherish fear, we show we
look not for an interest in this promise; for it is a promise, that in this
holy mountain death shall be swallowed up in victory, and why should we fear
a conquered enemy, none will fear an enemy that is conquered.

Object. But how came Christ to fear death, and we not to fear?

Answ. Christ had to deal with death armed with a terrible sting, with sin,
and the wrath of God for sin: And therefore when he was to die, Father let this
cup pass from me. But death is disarmed to us: He had to encounter with sin
and the wrath of God, and death in all its strength. But we are not so: we are
to deal with death like the brazen Serpent, that has the shape of death, but
no sting at all; Its become a drone ever since it lost its sting in Christ.
(Life took death, that death might take life) as he said. The meaning is,
Christ's life it self took death, that we that were so subject to death, that
we were death it self, might take life. Oh blessed consideration, nothing
comparable to the consideration of the death of Christ, it is the death of
deaths.

And then again we are sure of victory, it is conquered in our head, and
shall be in us. But you say we are to conflict with the pangs of death, and
many troubles meet in death. It is true, but it is conquered to faith, and in
Christ our head; we must fight, Christ traineth us to overcome death our selves
by faith, and then we are sure of victory. Join these two together, it is
conquered in Christ our head, and shall be conquered of us; death keeps our
dust, and must give them all again.

Obj. But in the mean time we die.

Ans. It Is so, but we are sure of victory; he will protect us in our combat,
that has conquered for us: we fight against death and the terror of it, in the
strength and faith of his victory; join these three together.

He that has been our Savior in life, will be so to death, and not
exclusively, then to leave us but to death, and in death for ever, yea most
ready to help us in our last conflict. Death terrible to the wicked.
Indeed to wicked men death is terrible, for he sends the devil to fetch
them out of the world: but for these that be his, he sends his Angels to
fetch them, and he helps them in their combat: we must not therefore fear
overmuch. There is a natural fear of death, death wrought upon Christ
himself God-man; not only death, but such a death, he was to be left of his
Father, and lie under the sense of the wrath of God, the separation of that
soul from the body he took upon him was terrible; and therefore he says, If
it be possible let this cup pass from me; that was nature, and without it he
had not bin true man. But that I say, is, that grace may be above nature; death
is a time of darkness, it strips us of earthly comforts, friends, callings,
employments, but then comes the eye of faith to lay hold on the victory of
Christ in time to come, when death shall be only swallowed up in victory, and
then the glorious state to come, to which death brings us; so that here faith
must be above sense, and grace above nature, and therefore I beseech you let us
labor for it.

There be two sorts of men to whom I would speak a little.

First, They are fools that in a carnal bravery contemn death before disarmed
in Christ.
those that in a kind of bravery seem to slight death; men of base spirits as
we call them, fools, vainglorious spirits, empty spirits. Is there any
creature unless in Christ, able groundedly to slight so great an enemy as
death, armed with a sting of sin, and attended with hell and damnation? The
Romish and divellish spirits are terrible; but if thy sins be not pardoned,
it is the most terrible thing in the world to die, for there is a gulf
afterward: what shall we say then, of single Combatants that for vainglory
are prodigal of their lives, Of Duellist.
that for a foul word, a little disgrace, will venture on this enemy, that is
armed with sin, and if they dye, they dye in sin: And which is the
miserable condition of him that dies in sin, his death opens the gate to
another death which is eternal. They say they have repented, but there is no
repentance of a sin to be committed. Can thou repent of a sin before it
be committed? that is but a mockery of God. And what says the Scripture? Is
it not the most terrible judgment under heaven to dye in our sins? A man
that dies in sin, dies in hell, he goes from death to hell, and that
eternal.

I wonder therefore that the wisdom of flesh and blood should take away men's
wit, and faith, and grace, and all, so much as to slight death, and repentance,
as if it were so easy. Now beloved, death is a terrible thing, it has a
sting, and thou shall know it, if thou have not grace to feel the sting of it
whilst thou live, when thou dyest the sting will revive, then thy Conscience
shall awake in hell: Drunkenness and jollity takes away sense of sin; but
sin will revive, and conscience will revive, God has not put it into us for
naught: death is terrible, if not disarmed before hand. And if thou go about
to dye without disarming it before, it will not be out-faced. It is not an
enemy to be scorned and slighted; and therefore be Christians in good earnest,
else leave profession, and perish eternally; for we must all dye; and it is a
greater matter than we take it: but if we be true Christians, it is the
sweetest thing in the world, an end of all misery, a beginning of true
happiness, an inlet to whatsoever is comfortable; blessed are they that are in
the Lord by faith, and them that dye in the Lord, their death is better than
the day of life: Our Birthday brings us into misery; and therefore let me
speak to true Christians, and bid them be ashamed of fearing death too much,
which of an enemy is become a reconciled friend.

This may in the next place yield great consolation to those that are in Christ
Jesus, Us
that death by Christ is swallowed up in victory; Of consolation to those that
are in Christ.
and the rather, because the holy Ghost means more than a bare victory over
death: Death is not only subdued, Death is not only subdued, but made a friend.
but is made a friend to us. As Psalm 110. it is said his enemies shall be
his footstool. Now a footstool is not only trampled upon, but an help to
rise: And so death is not only subdued, but it advances Gods Children, and
raises them higher. It is not only an enemy, but a reconciled friend; for he
does that which no friend in the world can do; It ends all our misery, and is
the inlet into all happiness for eternity: And whatsoever it strips us of
here, it gives us advantage of better in another world. It cuts off our
pleasures, and profits, and Company, and Callings here; but what is that to our
blessed change afterward, to our praising of God for ever, to the Company of
blessed souls, and the profits, and pleasures at the right hand of God for
evermore? And therefore it is not only conquered, but to show the excellency
of his power, he has made it a friend of an enemy, and the best friend in the
world. It indeed seperates soul from body, but it joyneth the soul to Christ;
so that the conjunction we have by it, is better than the separation, if the
Conjunction makes us partake of our desire. I desire to be dissolved, says St.
Paul, but that is not well translated; I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all: so that it is not only, not an enemy, but a
friend; and therefore the Apostle makes it our joyncture, part of our portion,
all things are yours. Why? you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: what are ours?
things present, things to come, life, death: And well may death be ours,
because sin is our enemy; that remainder that is kept in our nature to
exercise us, and humble us, and fit us for grace, as Austin says, I dare be
bold to say, it is profitable for some to fall, Its profitable to some to fall
to make them more careful and watchful, and to prize mercy more: so that not
only Death, but sin and the devil himself is ours; for his plots are for
our good: God over-shooteth him in his own Bow. He will give them over to
Satan, says the Apostle, that they may learn not to blaspheme: yet though
they have a spirit of blasphemy by the humbling of their bodies, they be taught
not to blaspheme, so that not only death, but sin, and he that brought
sin into the World, the Devil, are become our friends.

This being so, Satan has advantage by our fearing death.
it may be for special comfort, that we not fear the King of Fears. The
Devil has great advantage by this affection of fear, when it is set upon
this object Death: Overcome death, and all troubles are overcome; who will fear
any thing that has given up himself to God? Skin for skin, and all that a man
has, will he give for his life. The Devil knows that well enough; Therefore
fear not, says Christ, them that can kill the body: fear causes snares,
says Solomon, snares of Conscience: But if a man has overcome the the fear of
death once, what more is to be done? What if they take away life, they cannot
take away that that is better than life, the favor of God. If we dye in the
Lord, we dye in the favor of God, which is better than life; and we shall be
found in the Lord at the day of judgment, and shall be for ever with the Lord
in heaven; and therefore this is a ground of resolution in good causes,
notwithstanding all threats whatsoever, because death it self is swallowed up
in victory.

The worst the world can do, The worst the world can do is to take away life,
and in that they do the godly a pleasure.
is to take away this Nature of ours, when they have done that they have done
all they can; and when they have done that, they have done a pleasure. That is
not to be feared, says Tertullian, that frees us from all that is to be
feared. What is to be feared in the world? every sickness, every disgrace;
why* death frees us from all. We do see every day takes away a piece of ones
life, and when death comes it overthrows it self; for the soul goes
presently to the place of happiness, the body sleeps awhile, and death has
no more power.

He that believes in me, says Christ, he shall not see death, but is past
from death to life. He shall not see spiritual death; but as he lives in
Christ, shall dye in Christ, and rise again in Christ: He that has the life
of grace begun, shall have it consummate without interruption. Its a point of
wonderful Comfort, that death is so overcome that we be in heaven already:
And it is no hard speech, but stands with the truth of other points; for are
not Christ, and we all one, his body is there, and is not he the head of his
mystical body? he that carried his natural body, will not he carry his
mystical body thither too? will he be in piece-meale in heaven? Therefore we
are in heaven already the best part of us: We are represented in heaven, for
Christ represents us there as the Husband does the Wife. He has taken up
Heaven for us.

Christ cannot be divided, Christ will draw his mystical body to him into
heaven.
as Austine says; we sit in heavenly places already with Christ. And what a
comfort is this, that while we live we are in heaven, and that death cannot
hinder us from our Resurrection, which is the restoring of all things. And
therefore, as the Apostle says, Comfort one another with these things. These
things indeed have much comfort in them.

Let us labor then to be comfortable, (this use the Apostle makes of it,) Our
comfort by Christ should make us fruitful to Christ.
and fruitful in our places, upon consideration of the victory we have by
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. It is an excellent Chapter that largely proves Christ's
victory, as the cause of our victory, because he is the first fruit that
sanctifies all the rest. Finally my brethren be constant, immovable,
always abound in the works of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. He raises that exhortation of fruitfulness and constancy,
from this very ground of the victory Christ has gotten by death: O Death where
is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? thanks be to God through Jesus
Christ. And therefore be constant, immovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: Make that
use the Apostle does of fruitfulness to God for Christ, that we can think of
death, and sin, the devil, and all his malice, and not be afraid, yea think
of them all with comfort, that we be not only freed from their tyranny, but
they be our friends.

Christ has the Key of Hell and Death; a saying taken from the custom of
Governors that carried the Key: he has the Government and Command of Hell and
Death. Now if Christ has command of Death, he will not suffer Death to hurt
his Members, or triumph always over them, he will keep them in the grave. Our
bodies are safe in the grave, the dust is fitted for a heavenly, for another
manner of body than we have now, and Christ that has the Key will let them out
again: Therefore trust awhile till times of restoring come, and then we shall
have a glorious soul, and glorious body, as the Apostle says. I beseech you
think of these things, and get comfort against the evil day: And to that end,
be sure to get into Christ, that we may be in Christ, living, and dying, and
be found in Christ: For what says the Scripture, Blessed are they that dye in
the Lord. Its better to dye in the Lord, than for the Lord.
It is an argument of blessedness to dye for the Lord, but if it be not in the
Lord, it is to no purpose. If there is granted this happiness of dying for the
Lord, it is well: but blessed are they that dye in the Lord. Why? they rest
from their labor. Death takes them off from their labors; All their good
Works go to heaven with them: So says the Spirit, whatsoever the Flesh
says; and there is no resting till that time, their life is full of troubles
and combers, and therefore labor to get assurance that we are in Christ, that
we be in Christ, and dye in Christ, and then, there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ.

How besotted are we to put away preparation of Death till it comes; Prepare
for death, by getting into Christ.
he that forgets Christ, and getting into Christ all his life time, it is Gods
just judgment that he should forget himself in death. We see how a villain
that has no care of his own life, may have power of another man's life.

And therefore labor to be ingraffed into Christ by faith, and that we may
know it by the Spirit of Christ prevailing in us over our natural Corruptions
more and more. As the Apostle says, There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ; for the spirit of life, the Law of the Spirit of life which is in
Christ, has freed me from the Law of sin and death, the condemning law of
sin. If the Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ the head be in us in
any measure, it frees us from the condemning law of sin, that it carries us
not whither it would; then we may say with comfort, There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ; for the law of the spirit of life in Christ, has
freed us from the condemning, tyrannizing law of sin and death.

Sin has no Law; Sin has no Law in us to rule by.
It is in us as a subdued Rebel, but it sets not up a Throne. Some hope to be
saved by Christ, and yet they set up sin a Throne in the soul: Sin bids
them defile themselves, and they must obey it; This is a woeful estate, how can
they expect to dye in the Lord? but such as are freed by the Law of the Spirit
of life. New Lords new Laws: When Kings Conquer, they bring fundamental
Laws; and when we are taken from Satan's Kingdom into the Kingdom of Christ,
the fundamental Laws are then altered. Christ by his Spirit sets up a Law of
believing, and praying, and doing good, and abstaining from evil: the Law of
the Spirit of life frees us from the Law of sin and death.

I beseech you enlarge these things in your thoughts; They be things we must
all have use of beforehand, against the evil day. It should be comfortable
and useful to us all, to hear that our enemy, our greatest enemy Death, is
swallowed up in victory. And yet there is more comfort in the Text.

THE Fifth Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 8. And all tears shall be wiped away from all faces.
NOt only death shall be swallowed up in victory, but God will wipe away all
tears from all eyes; Religion shall be religion, good things shall be good
things, nothing shall go under false notions, all tears shall be wiped away; we
have now many causes of tears. In the world there is continual raising of
clouds that distill into drops of tears; had we nothing without us to raise a
vapor to be distilled in tears, we are able to raise up mists from our own
mists, from our own doubts and conflicts within.

As we should weep for our own sins, so for the sins of others; as we
may see in Jeremy, where the Prophet says, Oh that my head were a fountain of
tears, that I might weep continually for the sins of my people. Good men
easy to weep.
And indeed good men are easy to weep, as the heathen man observes; they are
easy to lament, not only for their own sins, but the sins and misery of
another.

Our blessed Savior himself, we never read that he laughed, we have heard
that he wept, and for his very enemies, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem; He shed tears
for them that shed his blood. Tears were maine evidences of Christ's sweetness
of disposition; as that he would become man, and a curse, and die for us, and
that he would make so much of little children, and call all to him that were
weary and heavy laden; that he never refused any that came to him. He that
wept specially for the miseries and afflictions; this showed his gracious and
sweet disposition: And that in heaven, he is so full of sympathies in glory,
that when Paul persecuted the Church, Why do thou persecute me? So though he
is free from passion in heaven, Christ in heaven not without compassion.
he is not free from compassion, from sympathy with his Church. And so every
child of God is ready, not only to grieve for his own sins, and the misery
that follows them, but the sins and miseries of others. Psa. 119. 136
Mine eyes gush out with rivers of tears, says the Prophet David, when he
saw that men brake the law of God, whom he loved.

A true natural child takes to heart the disgrace of his father; if we be not
grieved to see our father disgraced, we are bastards, not sons. They that
make a sport of sin, what are they? Alas, they have not one spark of the
spirit of adoption: they are not children, who rejoice at that at which they
should grieve.

So Saint Paul, Phil. 3. 18,
I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, there be many enemies of the
cross of Christ; When he saw some men preach against, and others enemies of
the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, he tells them of it weeping.

We have cause therefore to mourn for the sins of others, We have cause to
weep for the sins of others.
and for the miseries of others; whether we respect God, or the Church, or our
selves.

First, the love of God moves us to weep when we see him dishonored: 1. From
our love to God.
If we love the Church, we should mourn for any sins that may prejudice
their salvation. 2. From love to the Church, and our brethren.
Does it not pity any man to see an Ox go to slaughter; to see a man of parts
otherwise, by sinning against conscience, going to slaughter; to see an
ordinary swearer, an unclean person, a profane wretch, covering himself with
pride as a garment, scorning God, and the world, and all. Can a Christian look
upon this, see flesh and blood, like himself, under the Gospel, under a cursed
condition unavoidable, without serious repentance, Simile.
and not be affected with it? Can a man see a poor Ass fall under a burden,
and not help to take it up, and yet see man falling to hell, and not be
affected with it? Thus we see we have cause enough of tears: And as there is
cause, so we should be sensible; we ought to take to heart the afflictions of
Joseph; he is a dead man that has not sense in this kind. If we go to the
body and state, or any thing about a man, there is cause of grief; has not
every member many diseases? and is not our lives a kind of hospital, some
sick of one thing, some of another? But as there is cause we should be
sensible of it, we are flesh and not stones, therefore it is a sottish
opinion, to be stockish and brutish; as if to outface sorrow and grief were a
glory.

When our Savior was sent into the world, Use.
Christi dolor, To condemn Stoicisme.
dolor maximus, there were no patience without sensiblenesse; away then with
that iron, that flinty Philosophy, that thinks it a virtue to be stupid: And as
the Apostle says, Romans 1. 31. without natural affections: He counts it
the greatest judgment of God upon the soul, yet they would have it a virtue.
Why should I smite them any more says God Isa. 1. 5.
? they have no sense, no feeling.

The proud Philosopher thought it was not phylosophicall to weep; a proud
stoicall humor, but Christians desire it.

And therefore we ought to labor to be more sensible, that we might make our
peace, and reverence the justice of God, and be more sensible of him
afterward. It is most true, The best men aptest to grieve.
that Sapiens miser, plus miser; the more wise any man is, the more sensible of
misery: And therefore of all men, the best men have most grief, because they
have most quick senses, they be not stupefied with insensibility, and
resolutenesse, to bear it bravely as the world; but they apprehend with
grief, the cause of grief. And as they have a more sanctified judgment than
other men, so they have a more wise affection of love, and a quicker life of
grace; where life is, there is sense: and where there is a clear sight, or
cause of grief, there is most grief. Therefore the best men have most grief,
because they be most judicious, most loving.

Then they have most grace to bear it out of all others; therefore considering
there is cause in our selves, and in others of grief continually, we ought to
labor to be sensible of it, else it were no favor to have tears wiped away.

So that there is cause of tears, and tears is a duty of Christians, sensible
of the cause both of sin and misery, upon one, and another.

And as it is an unavoidable grief, Use 2.
so it is good we should grieve: Its good we do grieve.
we must stoop to Gods course, we must bring our hearts to it, and pray, (that
since our necessities and sins do call for this dispensation, that we must
under correction, he will make us sensible of his rod) that he would make good
his Covenant of grace, to take away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of
flesh, that we may be sensible.

Most of graces are founded upon affection; and all graces are but affections
sanctified: what would become of grace, if we had not affections? therefore as
there is cause of grief, and tears from grief, we ought to grieve. It is a
condition, and a duty; a condition following misery, and a duty following our
condition.

Take heed of that which hinders sensiblenesse of troubles and judgment, Avoid
what hnders sensiblenesse.
that is, hardness of heart, forgetfulness, studying to put away sorrow with
sin: For we ought to be sensible, and ought to labor to be sensible, to know
the meaning of every cross in our selves, and others.

But suppose we have crosses, and we must be sensible of them, then it
follows, God will wipe away all tears from our eyes. Is there nothing for
the present, no ground of comfort? yes. As we ought to be sensible of grief,
so we ought to be sensible of matter of joy for the present, specially if we
consider the time to come. The life of a Christian is a strange kind of life;
The life of a Christian is a mixture of joy and sorrow.
he ought to grieve, and he ought to joy; he has occasion of both, and he
ought to entertain both: for that that we ought to aim at specially is joy;
and if we grieve, it is that afterward we might joy. We must be sensible of
any affliction, Uses of joy in Christians.
that we might joy afterward, and we ought to labor for it: For is not the
joy of the Lord our strength? Are not we fit to do service, when our spirits
are most enlarged? And is it not a credit to Religion, when we walk in comfort
of the holy Ghost? Is it not a scandal, when we droope under the cross? We
ought to be sensible, yet not so, as to forget matter of joy and comfort. And
therefore as we ought to grieve, so we ought when we have grieved, to keep up
the soul with consideration of joy for the present as much as we can, We
should pick matter of comfort out of grief.
yea, to pick out matter of comfort from the very cross. That is the heart of
a Christian, not only to joy in other matters, but to pick comfort out of
grief. God suffers me to fall into this or that condition, it is a fruit of
his fatherly love; he might suffer me to run the broad way, to be given up to
a reprobate sense and hard heart, but he does not do so. Pick out matter of
comfort from grief.

Then consider the presence of God in it; indeed I have matter of grief, but I
find God moderating it: It might be far worse, it is his mercy I am not
consumed: I find God by it doing me good, I find my self better by it, I
cannot well be without it. Who would not labor to be sensible of a cross,
when he looks up to Gods cross, and justice, and mercy, he has rather cause
to joy, than to grieve in the very cross it self.

But specially mark what the holy Ghost says here, we ought not to be cast
down overmuch with any cross, considering God will wipe away all tears from
our eyes, that is, all natural tears, and the miseries of this life. There
shall be no more misery, no more sickness, no more trouble.

And then all tears that arise from consideration of sin, and misery
following sin. Death is the accomplishment of all mortification. It is a
comfort we shall not always lead this conflicting life, but the war
between the flesh and spirit will be taken up; the sense will be removed, All
causes of sorrow shall be removed.
we shall be out of Satan's reach, and the worlds reach one day, which is a
great comfort to consider: Whatsoever the cause is, the cause shall be removed
ere long. If the cause be desertion, for that God leaves us comfortless, we
shall be for ever hereafter with the Lord: If the cause be separation from
friends, why we shall all meet together ere long, and be for ever in heaven:
If the cause be our own sins, we shall cease hereafter to offend God, and
Christ will be all in all; Now sin is almost all in all, sin and corruption
bear a great sway in us: If the matter of our grief be the sins of others,
and the afflictions of others; there is no sin in heaven, no unclean thing
shall enter there. The souls of perfect men are there, and all are of one
mind, there is no opposition to goodness, there all shall go one way, there
(howsoever they cannot agree here) all shall have mutual solace and
contentment in one another; they in us and we in them, and that for ever; you
cannot name them, or imagine a cause of tears, but it shall be removed there:
Nay, the more tears we have shed here, The more tears here, the more joy
hereafter.
the more comfort we shall have. As our troubles are increased here, our
consolation shall increase: That we suffer here, if for a good cause, will
work our eternal and exceeding weight of glory: we say April showers, bring
forth May flowers; It is a common speech from experience of common life. It is
true in Religion, the more tears we shed in the April of our lives, the more
sweet comfort we shall have hereafter: If no tears are to be shed here, no
flowers are to be gathered there. And therefore besides deliverance from
trouble, here is comfort, God will take away all cause of grief, and all
kinds of grief whatsoever.

And therefore thus think of it.

The next thing to be considered is the order. The Order, First shed tears,
and then have them wiped away.
First, we must shed tears, and then they must be wiped away: After a storm,
a calm; after sowing in tears, comes reaping in joy. What is the reason of
that order? The reason is our own necessity: we are in such a frame and
condition since the fall, that we cannot be put into a good frame of grace
without much pain. Reason 1.
The truths of God must cross us, Our own necessity.
and afflictions must join with them: For the sins contracted by pleasure,
must be dissolved by pain: Repentance must cost us tears; we may thank our
selves if we have brought our selves to a sinful course. Simile.
For the necessity of this order, a diseased person must not be cured, till
he feel some smart of the wounds.

Again, consider it is for our increase of comfort afterward, Reason. 2.
that God will have us shed tears; and then to have our tears wiped away, For
the increase of our comfort.
because we be more sensible of joy, and comfort after sorrow. We cannot be
sensible of the joys of heaven, unless we feel the contrary here: And
therefore of all men, heaven will be the most heaven to them that have had
their portion of Crosses, and afflictions here. First therefore shed tears,
and then they must be wiped away, because joy is most sensible. Simile.
As it is with the wickedest of all men, they be most miserable that have been
happiest, because their soul is enlarged by their happiness, to apprehend
sorrow more quickly and sensibly; so they that have been most miserable here,
shall have most joy hereafter.

Now for Use: Use. 1.
Here is not only the mercies of God in Christ, Take notice of the tender
mercy of God in this, that he will wipe away tears.
but the tender mercy; that whereas our life is full of tears, which we have
brought upon our selves, yet God stoops so low as to wipe our eyes, like a
father or mother, his mercy is a sweet and tender mercy: And as the Psalmist
says, When we are sick he makes our beds in our sickness. Christ will come,
and serve them that watch and serve him; nay he will attend them, and sup with
them. He is not only mercy and goodness, but there be in him bowels of mercy;
he not only gives matter of joy and comfort, but he will do like a tender
hearted mother, wiping away all tears from our eyes; we cannot apprehend the
Bowels in Gods love, the pity and mercy of God toward them that be his, and
afflicted in the World, specially in a good cause: though they be never so
many, if they be penitent tears, he will wipe them all away.

And whereas we must shed tears here, Judge not by sight, for the godly here
mourn most.
that we may be comforted hereafter, take heed that we do not in this life
judge by sight, but by faith: if we live by sight, we are of all men most
wretched. In the world the Children of God are most miserable, and of the
Children of God, the best Saints. Who has more cause of tears than the best
Saints? It is but seed time here; while seed time continues, there be tears.
The Husbandman while it is seed time cannot do his office but with trouble:
the Minister cannot do his office, but he is forced to take to heart the
sins of the times, to see his work go backward: Governors of Families and
such, they carry their seed weeping; yea, the best men cannot do good
sometimes, but they do it with trouble in themselves, and with conflict of
corruptions. There is no good sown here, but it is sown in tears: yet take
no scandal at this, God will wipe away all tears.

The head of the Church our blessed Savior, and all his gracious Apostles,
what a life did they live? The glorious Martyrs that sealed the truth with
their blood. And therefore as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 19.
If our happiness were here only, we were of all men most miserable. If we
judge by sight, we shall condemn the generation of the righteous: we live by
sight; when we see any cast down with sight of sin, sense of temptation,
distress of conscience, we think him forlorn; Oh take heed of that: For
those that shed tears here, God will wipe them all away. Woe to them that
laugh now, for they shall mourn hereafter: Though we weep here, yet matter
of joy enough shall spring up hereafter. Afflictions will yield a quiet fruit
of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11. we may not
see their fruits presently, but afterward: And therefore be not discouraged
for any thing we can suffer here, or for the Church, if we see her under
pressure. As darkness is sown for the wicked, Be not discouraged for our own
or Churches causes of grief.
the foundation of their eternal torment is laid in their joy: so the ground
and foundation of all a godly man's joy is laid in tears. Mat. 5. 4. Christians
have more cause of joy than grief, and they ought to eye both.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Yet for the present
there is more matter of joy than grief, if we look with both eyes: as we
ought to have double eyes, one to be sensible of our grief as we must be, the
other of our comfort, that we may not be surprised with grief. There is a
sorrow to death, an overmuch sorrow; it is unthankfulness to God to forget our
comforts, as it is stupidity to forget our sorrow: Take us at the worst, have
not we more cause of joy then sorrow? Mark Romans 5. Being justified by faith,
we have peace with God, and rejoice under hope of glory; Nay afterward, says
he, we rejoice in tribulations: And why? upon what ground? Knowing that
tribulations bring experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed. Now we rejoice in God reconciled in Christ: So that as we ought to
look with one eye upon the grief, that we may have ground to exercise grace,
which we are not capable of without sensiblenesse; so we must look to grounds
of joy. Our life is woven of matter of sorrow, and joy; and as it is woven of
both, affections should be sensible of both, that they may be more apprehensive
of the grounds of comforts.

When the day of persecution approaches, This is comfortable while we live and
when we die.
this will make us comfortable, for our life is a valley of tears; and shall
not we go through this valley of tears, to this mount where all tears shall
be wiped away from all eyes? When we be dejected with the loss of any friend,
they say as Christ said to the woman, weep not for me: they be happy, and all
tears are wiped away from their eyes. And therefore as it is matter of comfort
while we live, so ground of comfort when we die; for there is occasion of
sorrow in death, parting with friends and comforts of this world, then tears
are shed in more abundance, and then we bethink our selves of former sins,
and there is renewing of repentance more then at other times; yet then are we
near the time of joy, and nearest the accomplishment of the promise, that all
tears shall be wiped away.

And so you have the whole state of a christian life, an afflicted condition, I
but it is a comfortable condition: The more afflictions here, the more comfort
here, but specially hereafter. The life of a carnal man is all in misery; A
carnal man is all joy, or all sorrow.
if he falls to joy, he is all joy, if to sorrow, he is all sorrow, he has
nothing to support him, he is like a Naball, he sinketh like a piece of lead to
the bottom of the sea, like Achitophell down he goes; when he is upon the
merry pin, he is nothing but joy: But a Christians state and disposition are
both mixed, he has ground of sorrow for his own sins, and for the sins and
miseries of the times; So he has matter of comfort for the present, in the
favor of God, in the pardoning of sins, in the presence of God, in
delivering him from trouble. He has special ground of joy in hope of glory in
time to come. The godly have a mixed condition, and should have a mixed
disposition.
Therefore as we have a mixed state, labor for a mixed disposition, and labor
to be in a joyful frame, so to grieve, as out of it to raise matter of joy:
And when we would joy, grieve before, for joy is sown in grief. The best
method of joy is for to take away all that disturbeth our joy; search the
bottom of the heart, see what sin is unconfest, unrepented of, spread it
before God, desire God to pardon it, to seal the pardon. When our souls are
searched to the bottom, then out of that sorrow springs joy: and out of
these sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed, comes joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. If a man will be joyful, let him labor to weep first, that
the matter that interrupteth his joy may be taken away. Those that will be
joyful, and not search to the bottom, must needs with shame be brought back
to sorrow. When we will joy to purpose, let us judge our selves, that we may
not be judged of the Lord; mourn for our sins, and then lay hold upon the
promise, that all they that mourn for sin shall be comforted. And blessed
are they that shed tears here, for all tears shall be wiped away.

We are subject to wrong our selves both good and bad; for the good think if
they be in misery they shall be ever so: the bad if they be in prosperity they
shall allwaies be so, and they bless themselves in it. Now the the joy of the
hypocrites is as the crackling of thorns, and the grief of the godly is but
short; and therefore let not the wicked fool themselves with groundless
hopes, nor the godly vex themselves with needless fears; but put off
conceitednesse of the long continuance of troubles: time is but short, and ere
long God will wipe away all tears from our eyes. No mists, no clouds, shall be
extended to heaven; the state in heaven shall be like the state of heaven,
Ways are to be esteemed by their end.
and there is no cloud there, but all pure, all serene. Therefore in
Christianity consider not their beginning but their ends. Mark the end of the
upright, for the end of the upright is peace, Psalm. 37. 37. Ways have their
commendation from the term in which they end. If by any means I may attain
the resurrection of the dead says Paul, Phil. 3. 11. Through thick and
thin, fair and foul, rugged winds, dry, or bloody death. If by any means
I may come to the resurrection of the dead, the first degree of glory, all is
well; its a good way that ends well. Non qua, sed quo, consider not what way he
brings us to heaven, but whither he brings bs. If he bring us to heaven through
a valley of tears; its no matter, for in heaven all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes. And therefore Christianity is called wisdom. Mat. 11. 19.
And this wisdom is justified of her children. What is the chiefest point of
wisdom? To look home to the end, and to direct all means to that end: He is
wise that is wise for eternity. The wicked will have their payment here; But
woe to them that laugh, for they shall mourn says Christ, Luke 6. 25. They
will not stay for ground of joy hereafter, but will have present payment. But
though the ways of Christians be foul, and wet with tears, yet blessed are
they, for God will wipe away all tears from their eyes; comfort one another
with these words.

THE Sixth Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 8. And he shall swallow up death in victory, and God will wipe away
tears from all faces, that the rebukes of his people may be taken away from
off the earth, for the Lord has spoken it.
YOu have heard heretofore of a feast provided for Gods people, the founder of
it being God himself, who only can indeed comfort (that which is specially to
be comforted) the soul and the conscience, he being above the conscience. The
place where the feast is kept is Mount Syon, the Church of God; the delicacies
are described by fat things, wine refined on the lees, etc. The best of the
best that can be thought of, which is Christ with all his benefits; who is
bread indeed, and drink indeed, that cherishes and nourishes the soul to
life everlasting. And because there should be nothing to disturb the solemnity
of the feast, he promises to destroy the face of covering, to take away the
veil spread over all nations, the veil of ignorance and infidelity, to shine
upon the soul, and fill it full of knowledge, and heavenly comfort. And
because there can be no comfort where death is feared, being the greatest enemy
in this life; therefore he will swallow up death in victory, and all that makes
way for death, or attends death: and when this is taken away, all the
attendants vanish with it, God will wipe away all tears from all faces.
Because the best things have not the best entertainment in the world, nor the
best persons, God promises that the rebukes of his people shall be taken away
from off the earth; what they are they shall be known to be. These be very
great matters, and therefore there is a great confirmation, they have a seal,
and what is that? The Lord has spoken it.

The last day I showed that Gods children shall shed tears, Man since the fall
subject to sorrow.
and that they have cause to do it. I will now enlarge it a little.

It is the condition of men since the fall, No sorrow in Paradise, nor shall
any be in heaven.
in Paradise, before there was no cause of tears, nothing was out of joint,
all inframe; there was no sin, therefore no sorrow, therefore no apprehension
of sorrow. And so in heaven there shall be no tears, because no cause of it*
they shall be as far from heaven as the cause. This life is a valley of
tears, a life of misery, and therefore we shed tears here: And we want no
cause of it as long as sin is in the world, and sorrow, and misery that
follows sin. Our own sins, and the sins of others, our own miseries, and
the miseries of others. And surely a child of God finds this the greatest cause
of mourning in this world, The greatest cause of the godlies mourning, sin
within him.
that he has a principle in him always molesting him in the service of God,
he cannot serve God with that cheerfulness, his unfeelingnesse that he cannot
be so sensible of God dishonored by himself and others is his burden; he is
grieved that he cannot grieve enough; he can find tears for other things,
matter of this enough, as the heathen man could say. A man loses his estate,
and has tears for them, but forces tears for other things, which are the
true ground of grief; a child of God has a remainder of corruptions which
puts him on to offend against God, and hinders him in his service, in the
liberty and chearfullnesse of it: And this he complains of with Paul and
others, Miserable man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
not for his affliection though that was much; but, who shall deliver me from
this body of death.

I will here add a case. 1. A case about tears.
Some say they cannot weep, but they can grieve, whether then is it necessary
or no to weep? Tears are taken for the spring of tears, grief, all grief
shall be taken away. Tears are but the messengers of grief; and often times
the deepest apprehension that takes things deeply, cannot express it in
tears. In some the passages fetching the conceit to the heart are made more
tender that they can weep. Now the grief of a Christian is a judicial
grief, a rational grief, not only sensible tears must have sensible
grief, but a Christians grief is a sensible judicial grief; he has a
right judgment of things that cause sorrow, wills it, and tears are only
an expression of it.

But how shall I know whether grief be right or no? There be tears God has
no bottle for: Psa. 56. 8.
Thou put my tears into thy bottle, he makes much of them, they be Vinum
Angelicum as he says, God has no bottle for some tears.
God is an Angel to his people to wipe away their tears: but some tears God
has no bottle for, hypocritical tears, Dalilahs tears, tears of revenge
and anger, Esaus tears. And therefore the true tears that God will wipe away,
are such as first of all follow our condition here, our misery, God will wipe
them away. Marks of good tears. 1. When their spring is the love of God.
If we speak of tears from a judicial ground; the spring of true tears is
the love of God, and of Christ, and of his Church, and the love of the state of
Christianity. Tears spring from love, these tears specially.

O a Christian takes to heart that God should be so ill used in the world, that
Christ the Savior of the world should find such entertainment, that he
should have any thing in him that should offend such a Savior: this
unkindnesse stingeth him to the heart, he takes it grievously that God should
be abused. Laetitia habet suas lachrimas, there is not only grief that is the
immediate cause of tears, but another cause before hand, that is love. Joy
likewise has its tears, though they be not here meant specially.

Again tears are good and sound, 2. When we weep for our own sins, and sins
of others.
when we weep for our own sins, as well as the sins and miseries of
others? And I will add more, we must weep for the sins of others, as well
as for our own; For it is a greater sign of the truth of grace to take to
heart the sins of others, Truth of grace appears more in grieving for others
sins then our own.
more then our own. You will say this is a kind of paradox, for often a man
may take to heart his own sins, as matter of terror of conscience; not his
sins, as contrary to God, having antipathy to him, being opposite to the
state of the soul, not as sin is properly sin, but to be grieved and vexed
for sin, as it has vexation and terror of conscience. When a man can take to
heart the sins of another, and that truly as it is an offense of his good
God, and a crucifying again of his sweet Savior, these be true tears indeed:
It is more sign of grace, then to weep for a man's own sins.

Some are taken up with terrors of conscience, that let their children, family,
and friends alone, their heart is eaten up with self love, and they be near
eaten up with their own terrors of conscience: but here is true grief and an
hatred of sin in a right respect, when it exercises it self upon others, as
well as upon our selves.

Again tears arise from the right spring, 3. When our tears are shed in
secret.
from true grief, when we can weep in secret. O says Jeremy, if you do so,
Jer. 13. 17.
and so, My soul shall weep in secret for your pride; here was a good soul
indeed: many will have tears of comfort in public, etc. I but when they can
weep in secret for their own sins, and the sins of others, it is an
evidence of a right spring of grief.

Again, 4. When they tend to reformation of what they are shed for.
when tears tend to reformation of what they grieve for; for else they be
Steriles lachrimae, barren tears: do they tend to reform what we weep for?
do they tend to action? Affections are then good when they carry to action; as
grief, love, joy, they are all for action: when we weep and grieve, and
reform withal, it is a good sign. I will name no more; you see then, that
grief is sound, when it springs from the love of God, and is for the sins
of others, as well as our own, and our own, as well as others; when it
stirs up to reformation; when it is in secret; and therefore let us examine
our grief by these and the like evidences, it will be a good character of a
gracious soul. Then God will carry himself as a sweet nurse, or loving mother
to her child that sheddeth tears; God will wipe away all these tears. O the
transcending love of God, his love is a tender love; the love of a mother, the
love of a nurse! it is not love, but the bowels of love, the bowels of mercy
and compassion: how low does he stoop to wipe away the tears of his children!
God will wipe away all tears.

I will propound one question more, and then proceed. But we are bid to
rejoice always; why then is it required that we weep and mourn? can two
contraries stand together?

I answer, 2. Case.
very well; for we may grieve, as we have matter of grief, and are in a
condition of grief: And we may rejoice, How can a Christian joy and grieve
together.
and ought to rejoice, as we look to the promise that God will wipe away all
tears. When we think of the present cause we cannot but grieve, but when we
look beyond all troubles, we cannot but joy, it has influence of joy into our
heart: nay for the present we may joy, and grieve, without looking to eternity
sometimes. If we consider that we have offended God, done that that grieveth
his spirit, that is matter of grief: but when we consider we have Christ at
his right hand, that speaks peace for us, and makes our peace by virtue of
his mediation, that gives comfort; So that we have cause of joy, and cause of
grief, about the same things at the same time.

We are never in such a state of grief here, but if we look about us, look
foreward, look upward, A Christian, that is, a good Christian, is a person
that has many things to look after, that he may manage his estate of
Christianity wisely: He is to look to himself and his sins, to the mercies
of God in Christ, to the constancy of it, that it is answerable to the fruit
of it in peace and joy here, and happiness hereafter, which are constant too;
his grace, as himself is constant, the fruits of it constant: Phil. 4. 4.
Therefore rejoice evermore. And (says the Apostle: I know what I say, I am
well advised) evermore rejoice. So that the life of a Christian is a mixed
life; nay the ground of our joy, is our sorrow, and grief, and joy is sown in
grief. If we will rejoice indeed, let us mourn indeed; true joy arises and
springs out of sorrow.

I proceed to the next. And the rebukes of his people shall be taken away from
of the face off the earth. Another benefit that makes the Feast sweet and
comfortable is this; He will take away the rebukes of his people. Gods people
here are under rebuke and reproach.
And here is the same method to be used: that Gods children, his Church and
people, are under rebukes, and under reproach.

We need not stand to prove the truth of it. It is true, First, the head of the
Church, and the Church it self, and every particular member, they go under
rebukes. For the head of the Church, we should spend the time to no purpose to
prove it; what was Christ's life? it was under a veil, he appeared not to be
what he was; you know he was esteemed the chief of Devils, an enemy to his
Prince, to Caesar. I will not spend time in clear truths.

For the Church it self you see in the Book of Hester 3. There is a strange
people that acknowledge no law, they be against the laws of the Prince; they
pass under the imputation of rebels: the poor Church that had thoughts of
peace, the meek Church of God, they counted as enemies of the state; as Christ
the head was. And so the Church in Babylon, under what rebukes was it? Psalm.
137.
they reproached them, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when
they said sing us one of the songs of Syon. The Church sits by the waters of
Babylon all this life: The world is a kind of Babylon to Gods people, and then
sing us one of your songs; where is now your God, say the hearts of wretched
people? when they saw the people of God in disgrace. Tully could say of the
nation of the Jews; It shows how God regards it, it has bin so often
overcome. Thus the heathen man could scorn the state of Gods people. You see
how the Psalmist complains in the name of particular Christians, Psalm. 22. 78.
where is his God, he trusted in him, let him save him. Oh this was daggers to
David's heart, Psalm. 42. 10. It peirced to my heart, when they said where is thy
God. To touch a Christian in his God, as if God had no care of him, it is more
then his own grief and affliction. So when a child of God is rebuked and
affronted, when religion must suffer by it. So that the head of the Church, the
members of the Church, are under rebukes, as it may be proved, if I carry you
through all stories.

At this day, the Church of the Jews you see what it is come to: the nation of
the Jews under what reproach it is. And surely this Prophecy aims partly at
the conversion of the Jews; This text points at the conversion of the Jews.
it shall be accomplished at the resurrection, when all tears shall be
perfectly wiped away: But it has relation to the conversion of the Jews. In
what state are they now? are they not a word of reproach? Moses speech is
verified of them; They shall be a hissing to all Nations, and is not it a
proverb? Hated as a Jew.

But what is the reason of it? Reas.
Not to stand long upon the point; There be two seeds in the world. 1. Of the
Serpent. 2. Of the woman.
you know there be two seeds in the world, the seed of the serpent, and the
seed of the woman; and the enmity between them is the true ground, and the
antipathy in the hearts of carnal men to goodness. There is a light shines
in the life of them that be good; and them that be ill hate the light, as
discovering themselves to themselves, and to the world, not to be that they
seem to be. There is a saltness in the truth; it is savory, but it is tart,
whether in the word preached, or howsoever truth lays open, Carnal men would
have all men thought of alike.
what is cross to corruption: and hereupon pride and self-love in carnal
men, studyeth how to overcast all they can, the names of those that be better
then themselves, with a cloud of disgrace. It is the property of vile men, to
make all others vile, that they may be alike: men cannot abide distinctions of
one from another. The Scripture distinguishes the righteous man, more
excellent then his neighbor, but they will not have that. The hatred of
distinction is the cause they make all as bad as they can: Men put a false
veil both on godliness, and wickedness.
And hereupon it is that good things were never clothed in the right habit,
nor ill things neither, but do pass under a veil: take away the true garment
of grace, and holiness and goodness, and put a false veil upon it, it
passes not under that, that it is in this world, because wicked men will not
suffer it, but will raise up the credit of other things, of empty learning, or
empty things, or vain courses, and cry up the credit of worldly things, that
they may seem to be wise and not fools, that are carried to those things. The
best things had never the happiness to pass under their own names; but they
had other coverings. Truth goes always with a torn and scratched face; it
is a stranger in the world, and has strange entertainment.

If this be so, Use 1.
we ought to take heed of laying a scandal or reproach upon religion; Take
heed of laying scandal on religion.
Salvian complains in his time, that wickedness had gotten that head, that
those that were good and honorable, mali esse volunt, ne a malis*
abhorreantur: They that were good, studied to be vile, that they might not be
villified of others. Oh says he, how much is Christ beholding to the world,
that those that own him, and own goodness, and own his cause, should be
therefore base, because they be his friends; take heed of taking scandalls.

Use 2. Use 2.
We had need be wise, that we be not taken in this snare of Satan, To study
to be wise, that we be not misled by the misrepresentation of things.
to mistake error for truth, and good for evil; Satan and his agents make
things pass under contrary representations: Superstition goes for Religion,
and Religion for superstition* Schism, and Heresy. It has always bin so;
therefore seek wisdom to discern aright. The devil a liar, that he may be a
murderer.
The devil has two properties, he is a liar, and a murderer; the one makes
way for the other, for he could not murder unless he did lie. The devil
himself will not be an open murderer, if he can help it: The fraudulent
persecution is worse than the violent. If he can bring to hell by fraud, and
lying, he will never do it by violence. He is a liar, that he may be a
murderer: for when he can raise an imputation upon the Church and children of
God, that they be Rebels, enemies of state, then he may cum privilegio be a
murderer: when he has tainted Gods people in the conceit of the world, then
they find that entertainment not which they deserve, but which they be
apprehended to deserve, when the conceit of other men toward them is poisoned.
Why its the course of the world to slander.
Oh this Sect is spoken against every where, say they to Paul, Acts 28. 22.
Therefore we had need be wise; for if the instruments of Satan* led with his
spirit, had not hoped that slanders should take, they would never have bin so
skillfull in that trade. But they know they shall find some shallow fools,
that will believe them without searching into the depth of them, and take up
persons and things under prejudice. It is enough for them, that this is said of
them, they have neither wit nor judgment, nor so much patience, from following
their lusts, as to examine them: And that makes them so mad as they are.
Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit, Slander stoutly, something will stick
they are sure of it. That which has raised, and ruined many a man, is that of
Hamans casting of jealousy upon those that are better then themselves. That
was Hamans trick, and so will be the practice of the wicked, as it has bin
from the beginning, so to the end of the world. Thou art not Caesar's friend say
they, and its enough to Pilate; thus it has bin and will be to the end of the
world. Therefore we had need to be wise, that we be not misled: Men will never
leave to speak ill, till they have learned to speak better, till the spirit of
God has taught them.

Now it is said that Christ will take away the rebukes of his people. Things
shall be known to be as they ar^.
That is the promise; as they are, they shall be known to be; he will set all
in joint again. Harmony is a sweet thing, and order is a sweet thing: time
will come when things that are now out of order to appearance, shall be all set
in their due order again: Those that are basest, shall be lowest, and those
that be excellent, shall be highest; this is a working and framing now. In this
confusion we must look to the catastrophe, the conclusion of all; he will
take away the rebukes of all. God is the Father of truth, and truth is the
daughter of time; time will bring forth truth at last. And those that be
honorable indeed, shall be honorable. Reason
It is as true as God is just; for goodness and holiness are beams of God;
From Gods justice.
and will he suffer it always to pass under a falfe veil. There is not an
attribute of God, but shall shine forth gloriously; even all his excellency and
dignity: There is nothing shall be above him and his excellency; noe, though he
seems for a a while not to rule in the world, or have power, but fers them to
go away with it, that are his enemies; he is working another thing by
suffering them, he is working the glory of his children, and confusion of his
enemies. There is nothing in God but shall gloriously shine, and nothing in his
children, no beams of God, but shall gloriously shine to the confusion of the
world: They that are good, shall be known to be good, God will bring their
righteousness to light. The Witnesses that vexed the world, Revel. 11.
and had base entertainment, they were slain and disgraced, but they rose
again and were carried to heaven, as Elias. So there will be a resurrection of
name, a resurrection of reputation: That that is good shall be good, and that
that is bad shall be bad; it shall be known to be as it is. This is for
comfort.

You hear therefore what course to take under disgrace; Use 1.
what shall we do, To direct what course to take under disgrace and scandal.
when the Church passes under disgrace? as it is now: A Protestant is worse
then a Turk or a Jew, amongst the railing Papists. Among our selves we see
under what reputation the best things go, it is too well known to speak of:
And the scandal taken from hence does extremely harden, it keeps men from
religion, it draws many from religion that have entered into it, because they
have not learned so much self denial, as to venture upon disgrace. And surely
where no selfe-denyall is, there is no religion. Christ knew what doctrine he
taught, when he taught self-denial in this respect.

What shall we do therefore? 1. Labor to be innocent.
Labor first of all for innocence; that if men will reproach, they may reproach
without a cause.

Then labor for a spirit of patience to serve Christ with; 2. To be patient.
great is your reward when men speak evil of you for a good cause. It is the
portion of a Christian in this life, to do well, and suffer ill. Of all,
certainly they are best that out of love to goodness, are carried to
goodness without looking to rewards, or disgrace, that follows, with a single
eye. Labor therefore for patience, and not only so, 3. To be courageous.
but for courage; for the Moon goes its course, and lets the dog bark: We
have a course to run, let us keep our course constantly; pass through good
reports, and bad reports, be at a point, what the world thinks, we seek
applause at another theater then the world.

Again then, 4 To be sincere.
labor for sincerity under rebukes, that we have a good aim, such an aim as
Paul had: If I be mad and out of my wits; 2 Cor. 5. 13. 14
he being earnest for his Master Christ, they count him out of his wits; If I
be out of my wits it is for Christ. If I be sober it is for you, the love of
Christ constrains me to be so. Get the love of Christ, and that will make a
man care for nothing. If I go beyond my self, it is to God: As David said,
when he was mocked by Micholl: 2 Samuel 6. 20. 21.
It is to the Lord, when he danced before the Arc. Bonus ludus a good dance,
where Micholl scoffeth, and David danceth; where gracious men magnify God, and
have Micholls to scoff at them, it is bonus ludus: God will look upon them,
for it is to the Lord. Labor that our aims be good, and it is no matter what
the world judges of them.

And when all will not do, 5. Commend our credits to God by prayer.
commend our credits to God by prayer, as we commend our souls and
conditions, so or reputations; that he would take care of them, that he would
bring our righteousness to light, that it should shine out as the noone day.
So David does, he complains to God, and commends all to him, prays him to
take part against his enemies, to right his cause; and when we have done that,
Comfort your self in your own true worth.
we have done our duty: yet with all hope for better things; be content to
pass under the world as unknown men, and to be inwardly worthy, and pass as
unknown men. Rich men if truly rich, they will applaud themselves in their
bosoms, though the world disgrace them, yet at home I am thus furnished. And
so a Christian that knows his worth, that he is a child of God, heir of
heaven, that he is attended upon by Angels, that he is a jewel to God in his
esteem, to be absolutely the best thing in the world. He knows the worth of
a Christian, and his own worth as being a Christian; he applauseth and
comfort himself, in that he knows he has a hidden life, a state of glory
hidden in Christ. Now it is covered with disgrace, and disrespect in the world,
scorned and reproached, but what is that to him? it is an hidden life, and for
the present he knows his own excellency, and therefore can pass through
good report, 1 Cor. 4. 3.
and bad report. I care not for man's day says Paul, there is another day to
which I must stand.

And thus if we do, 1 Pet. 4 14.
as Peter says, There is a spirit of glory shall rest upon us. The ground we
have of comfort under rebuke, and disgrace, there is a spirit of glory, what is
that? a large spirit enlarging our hearts, with inward comfort, inward joy,
inward love of God. A spirit of glory shall rest upon you, and shall continue
with you, as long as disgrace shall continue: he opposes this to all disgrace
he meets with in the world.

God puts sometimes a glory and excellency upon his children under disgrace,
God puts a glory upon his children under disgrace.
and ill usage in the world; that he will daunt the world, as Stephens face did
shine, as the face of an Angel, which came from a spirit of glory that rested
upon him, and expressed himself to be the servant of God, He that takes away
from our good report, if we be good, he adds to our reward: Our Savior
Christ says as much. Mat. 5. 11. 12.
Blessed are you when you be ill spoken of, for great is your reward.

THE Seventh Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 8. And the rebukes of his people shall he take away from all the
earth: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
THis is a great promise, Use 2.
and I pray you be comforted with it. For comfort to the godly, their rebukes
shall be taken away.
For of all grief that Gods people suffer in the world, there is none greater
than reproach, disgrace, and contumely, Movemur contumeliis plus quam injuriis:
We are more moved with reproaches than injuries. Injuries come from several
causes, but disgrace from abundance of slighting. No man but thinks himself
worthy of respect from some or other. Now slanders come from abundance of
malice, or else abundance of contempt; and therefore nothing sticks so much as
reproaches, specially by reason of opinion, and fancy that raises them over
high.

Our Savior Christ endured the Cross and despised the shame. That shame that
vain people cast upon Religion, and the best things, they despise that, and
make that a matter of patience: They knew the Cross would not be shaken off,
Persecution and Troubles must be endured, and therefore they endured the
Cross, and despised the shame. Now to bear Crosses take the counsel of the
Holy Apostles, look up to him, consider Christ, and whatsoever disgrace in
words or carriage we shall endure, we are sure, (though we shall never know
it, till we feel it by experience) The spirit of glory shall rest upon us,
and rebuke shall be taken away.

Ere long there will be no glory in heaven and earth, but the glory of Christ,
and of his Spouse, for all the rest shall be in their own place: as it was
said of Judas, that he went to his place. Their proper place is not to
domineere, but to be in hell, and ere long they shall be there. Heaven is the
proper element of the Saints, that is the place of Christ the head. And where
should the body be, but with the head? where the Spouse, but with the Husband?
I say this shall come to pass, that all the wicked shall be in their place,
and all the godly in theirs, with Christ, and then shall the rebukes of Gods
people be taken away. A great matter, and therefore it is sealed with a great
confirmation, The Lord Jehovah has spoken it; therefore it must, and will be
so: The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. This is not in vain added, for the
Lord knows well enough we need it, to believe so great things that there is
such a Feast provided; And that there is such a victory over death our last
enemy, God is the author of promises.
and that there will be such glory, that all the glory shall be Christ's, and
his Spouses, that the wicked that are now so insolent, shall be cast into their
proper place with the Devil, by whose Spirit they are led: They be great
matters; and there is great disproportion between the present condition, and
that condition in heaven, and infidelity being in the soul, its hard to fasten
such things on the soul, that so great things should be done; but they are no
greater than God has said, and he is able to make good his Word, The Lord
has said it; and when God has said it heaven and earth cannot unsay it; when
heaven has concluded it, earth and hell cannot disanull it; The mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, That is* truth it self has spoken it, that cannot lie. A
man may lie, and be a man, and an honest man too, he may sometimes speak an
untruth, it takes not away his nature: But God who is pure truth, unchangable
truth, truth it self, cannot lie.

When we hear of great matters, Use.
as matters of Christianity be great matters, Consider God in the Promises to
help our faith.
they be as large as the capacity of the soul, and larger too; And yet the
soul is large in the understanding, and affection too; When we hear of such
large matters, we need a great faith to believe them. Great faith needs
great grounds, and therefore its good to have all the helps we can. When we
hear of great things promised, great deliverances, great glory; to strengthen
our faith, remember God has spoken them; He knows our weakness, our
infirmity, and therefore helps us with this prop, The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Let us therefore remember, those great things are promised in the
word of God, in the word of Jehovah, that can make them all good, that gives a
being to all his promises: He is being it self, and gives being to whatsoever
he says; he is able to do it. Set God and his power against all opposition
whatsoever from the creature, and all doubts that may arise from our own
unbeleeving hearts; The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

But ye will say, Quest.
the Prophet Esaias says it, whose words they were. How is it the the word of
God, since Isaiah spoke it.
I answer, Isaiah was the Penman, God the mouth; the head dictateth, the hand
writes; Christ the head dictates, and his servant writes: So that holy men
write as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, Answ.
a better spirit than their own. Why do ye look on me, He did but write, God
did dictate.
says Isaiah? think not it is I that say it, I am but a man like your selves;
but the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

We should not regard men, We should not so much look on the Ministers, as
from whom they speak.
nor the Ministry of men, but consider who speaks by men, who sends them,
with what commission do they come: Ambassadors are not regarded for
themselves, but for them that send them. And therefore Cornelius said well; We
are here in the presence of God, to hear what thou will speak in the name of
God, Acts 10. 33. And so people should come with that reverend expression, We
are come in the presence of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the
presence of the blessed Angels, to hear what thou shall say in the Name of
God, by the Spirit of God. We are not to deal with men, but with God: And
therefore he says, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Hence may this question be easily answered; Quest. 2.
Whence has the Scripture authority? Whence has the Scripture authority?
Why from it self: it is the Word, it carries its own Letters testimonial
with it. Answ.
Shall God borrow Authority from men? No, the Authority the Word has, From its
self.
is from it self* It has a supreme authority from its self: And we may
answer that question, The Spirit of God in Scriptures Judge of all
controversies.
about the Judge of all controversies; What is the supreme Judge? the Word,
the Spirit of God in the Scriptures: And who is above God? It is a shameless
ridiculous impudency of men, that will take upon them to be Judges of
Scripture, as if man would get upon the Throne, and as a Judge there Judge. The
Scriptures must judge all ere long, yea that great Antichrist. Now an ignorant
man, a simple man, that perhaps never read Scriptures must judge of all
controversies, Quest. 3.
yea, that that is the Judge of all, and of himself, How may we know it is
the Word of God, but by the Church?
the Word which is from the very mouth of God.

You will ask me, how shall I know it is the Word of God, if the Church tells
us not?

A Carrier shows us these be Letters from such a man, Answ.
but when we open the Letter and see the hand and seal, As we know a Letter
from a friend.
we know them to be his. The Church knows the Word and explaneth it, Simile.
and when we see and feel the efficacy of the Word in it self, The word
known to be of ^od.
then we believe it to be the Word; for there is that in the Word, that shows
it to be the Word; the Majesty that is in it, the matter that is mysterious,
1. By its Majesty.
forgiveness of sins through a mystery, 2. Mysteriousnesse.
forgiveness of sin, victory over death, life everlasting in the world to
come; great matters, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into
the heart of man. If it had not been revealed it could not have entered into the
heart of Angels: It contains such glorious transcending mysteries.

And then again the Word to all them that belong to God, 3. Witness of the
Spirit.
has the Spirit of God* by which it passes, rightly accompanying it,
witnessing to the soul of man that it is so, 4. Divine efficacy.
and by a divine efficacy it is mighty in operation. What does it in the heart?
1. In warming
It warmeth the heart upon the hearing, and speaking, and discoursing of it. As
when the Disciples went to Emaus. It has a heat of Spirit going with it to
affect the heart with heavenly joy and delight: 2. Comforting.
it has power going with it by the Spirit to raise joy unspeakable and
glorious: It has a power to pacify the soul amidst all troubles. When
nothing will still the soul, the Spirit of God in the Word will do it, by its
divine power.

Yea it will change a man from a beastly or devilish temper, 3. Changing.
to a higher, and happier estate, as you have it Isaiah 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. It
makes Lions Lambs, Leopards Kids; And what is the ground of all? In that very
place, the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord. The knowledge of
God reconciled, is such a powerful knowledge, that it has a transforming
virtue to alter men's dispositions. What was Paul before Conversion, and
Zaccheus? Therefore it is the Word, because it has divine operation, 4.
Casting down the soul.
to heat the soul, and raise the soul, and change the soul, and cast down
the soul, as low in a manner as hell, in sense of its own misery. It will
make a Foelix to tremble; a man that it does not effectually work upon. The
Truths of it are so moving, that it will make a carnal man to quake. When Paul
spoke of judgment to come, of giving account of all that is done in the flesh,
when a possibility of it was apprehended, it made Foelix to quake; It makes
mountains level, and it fills up the valleys: The Word can raise up the
soul; when man is as low as hell, and looks for nothing but damnation, the
Spirit with the Word will fetch him from thence: Acts 16. 31.
as the Jailer, Acts 16. there was little between him and hell, What shall I
do to be saved? Why believe in the Lord Jesus. And with these words there went
out an efficacy* he believed, and he afterward was full of joy.

The first Gospel ever preached in pardon was by God himself: Adam nearest
damnation.
never was any creature so near damnation as our first Father Adam, cast from
the greatest happiness; Miserrimum est fuisse faelicem; for he that enjoyed
before communion with God and his Angels, having sinned, and having conscience
of his sin, considering his great parts, and apprehension of the state he had
been in, this must needs affect him deeply; and being in this condition, the
promise of the seed of the Woman to break the Serpents head revived him.

There is a strange efficacy in the Gospel: The Roman Empire was the greatest
enemy that the Church ever had. The ten Persecutions you see what they were,
and yet notwithstanding the Word grew upon them and never rested, the
spreading of the Gospel, and the Spirit with it, till the Cross got above the
Crown, as it did in the time of Constantine, and so it continues.

And must not this be a divine word which has this efficacy, to revive,
comfort, change, cast down, raise up again, 5. Searching.
search secrets, search the* heart to the bottom. A poor Idiot that comes to
hear the word of God, when he hears the secrets of his heart laid open by the
word, he concludes certainly 1 Cor. 14 25.
God is in you, and you are Gods Ministers. The word Heb 4. 12.
divides between the marrow and the bone, it arraigneth the heart before Gods
Tribunal Seat. Those that are saved, it has these effects in them that I have
named. 5. The word proved to be of God from our experience.
And if you ask how they know whether the word be the Word? A man may answer, I
have found it to be so, raising me up, comforting me* and strengthening me: I
had perished in my affliction if the word had not raised me. Principles are
proved, you know, from experience, for they have nothing above them. There is
no other Principle to prove the word, but experience from the working of it.
How know you the light to be the light but by it self? and that fire is hot,
but by it self. Principles prove themselves only by experience. And this
Principle is so proved by it self, that there is no child of God but can say
by experience, that the word is the word.

If a man might go to reason, 6. By reason.
one might bring that which could not be easily answered for the satisfaction
of an Atheist. Let him but grant there is a God, he will grant one thing in
Religion or another. But let him grant there is a God and a Reasonable
Creature, then there must be a service, a Religion; and this service must be
according to some Rules prescribed; for the superior will not be served as the
inferior pleases: he must discover what good the superior intends, and what
duties he expects: this must be revealed in some word; God and the Reasonable
Creature, and Religion, make a necessity of a word, and that must be the word
we have, or another; and what word in the world is probable to be the word but
this?

You will say it may be corrupt. Object.
The Jews looked to the old Testament, The word may be corrupted.
that it should not be corrupted; for they knew every syllable in it and
preserved every letter. It is one part of their superstition, Answ.
and God blesses that superstition to take away all such cavills. The Jews
looked to the Old Testament.
For the New Testament the Jews cared not for: but Heretics on their side
watch over it that there should be no corruption, Heretics over the new.
they will so observe one another. But what are these reasons to those which
the soul of a gracious Christian knows by the operation of the Word upon the
heart?

And therefore let us regard it as the word of God, Use 1.
hear it as the word of God, Let us regard, hear Scriptures as the word of God.
read it as the word of God. A company of profane wretches you shall have, the
scums, and basest of the people, that will discourse, and to grace their
Discourse, they must have Scripture phrases: but whose word is it? it is the
word of the great God. Eglon was a Heathen King, and yet when a Message came
from God, he arose up and made obeisance. We should never read the Word but
with reverence, considering whose book it is, and that we must be judged by it
another day.

If it be the word, Use 2.
I beseech you consider what we say, and know that God will make every part of
it good, Know, 1. God will make every part good. Every threatening in it is
ratified in heaven.
there shall not a jot of it fail, nothing of it shall miscarry; God speaks
all these words: And therefore if you be blasphemers you shall not carry it
away guiltless, God has said it; if you continue not to obey you are under
Gods curse, unless you repent you shall perish; every threat God will make
good; you must repent and get into Christ, else perish eternally: God has said
it, and we may confirm it in the unfolding and reading of it, the time is
coming for the execution of it, and then God is peremptory. Now God waits
our leisure, and entreats us, but if we will not repent, we shall have that
Arrow in our sides that will never be gotten out till we dye in hell: whose
sins are condemned in Scripture, they are condemned by God; and whom we shut
heaven to, by opening the Scriptures, God will shut heaven to. The opening of
the Scriptures is the opening of heaven: If the Scripture says, a man that
lives in such a sin shall not be saved, heaven shall be shut to him, he is
in a state of death, he is stricken, and remains in danger till he repents.
How many live in sins against Conscience, that are under the guilt and danger
of their sins, they be wounded, they be struck by the word; there is a threat
against their sins, although it be not executed; and they be as much in
danger of eternal death as a condemned Traitor, only God suffers them to
live, that they may make their peace, they have blessed times of visitation. O
make use of it, it is the word of God, and know that God will make every part
of his word good in threats, as well as in promises.

Take occasion from hence likewise to shame our selves for our infidelity in
the promises, Use 3. Let us take shame to our selves for our infidelity in the
promises.
when we are in any disconsolate estate, we are in Jobs case, being in trouble
the consolation of the Almighty seemed light to him; These be the comforts of
God. When we come to comfort some, though the sweet promises of the Gospel be
opened, yet they do not consider them as being the word, the consolations of
the Almighty, and therefore they seem light to them. But it should not be so.
Consider they be the comforts of the word, and therefore we should hear them
with faith, labor to affect them, and shame our selves. Is this Gods word that
gives this direction, that gives this comfort, and shall I not regard it? Is
it the consolation of the Almighty, and shall not I embrace it? Therefore we
should be ashamed, not to be more affected with the heavenly sweet things
promised of God, than we are.

A man that refuses heavenly Comforts to embrace comforts below, how should
he reflect upon himself with shame? Has God promised such things, God that
cannot lie, and shall I lose my hope of all these glorious things, for the
enjoying of the pleasures of sin for a season? I profess my self to be a
Christian, where is my faith? where is my hope? A man must acknowledge either I
have no faith; for if I had faith believing God speaking these excellent
things, I would not venture my loss of them to get the enjoyment of poor
temporary things here, for the good things promised in another world. Labor
therefore to bring men's hearts to believe the word, and desire God to seal it
to our souls, that it is so.

I will give one direction: Means.
Labor for the Spirit of God that writ the word, To regard the word, labor
(...) spirit that indicted them.
that indicted the word. Beg of God to ^eale to our souls that it is the word,
and that he would sanctify our hearts to be suitable to the word, and never
rest till we can find God by his Spirit seasoning our hearts, so that the
relish of our souls may suit to the relish of divine truths, that when we
hear them we may relish the truth in them, and may so feel the work of Gods
Spirit, that we may be able to say, he is our God. And when we hear of any
threatening, we may tremble at it, and any sin discovered, we may hate it:
For unless we by the Spirit of God have something wrought in us suitable to
the word, we shall never believe the word to be the word. And therefore pray
the Lord by his Spirit to frame our hearts to be suitable to divine Truths, and
so frame them in our affections, that we may find the word in our joy, in our
love, in our patience, that all may be seasoned with the word of God. When
there is a relish in the word, Relishing the word makes a man a Christian
indeed.
and in the soul suitable to it, then a man is a Christian indeed to purpose;
till then men will Apostatize, turn Papist, turn Atheist, or any thing,
because there is a distance between the soul and the word; the word is not
ingraffed into the soul, they do not know the word to be the word by
arguments fetched from the word, and therefore they fall from the power of the
word. But if we will not fall from divine truths get truth written in the
heart, and our hearts so seasoned by it, and made so harmonious and suitable to
it, that we may embrace it to death, that we may live and dye in it.

To go on:

In that day shall it be said, lo this is our God we have waited for him. Here
is a gracious promise that shuts up all spoken before. He spoke of great
things before: And now here is a promise of a day, wherein he will make all
things promised good to the soul of every believing Christian.

In that day it shall be said, this is our God, we have waited for him, he
will save us. It is an excellent portion of Scripture to show the gracious
disposition that the Spirit of God will work in all those that embrace the
gracious promises of God. The time shall come when they shall say; Lo, this is
our God, we have waited for him, and now we enjoy him.

The points considerable are these. The points considerable.


First of all by supposition that there be glorious excellent things? promised
to the people of God; Rich

Secondly, these have ha^ day when they shall be

The next thing is, that God will stir up in his

And as they wait for them, while they are in performing, We shall so enjoy
them, that we shall joy in them: Good things when they be enjoyed, they be
joyed in.



Then there is a day, as for the exercising of his people here by waiting: So
there is a day of performing promises. In that day. That is, a day of all
days: When that day comes, then all Prophecies and Promises shall be
accomplished to the uttermost.

But before that great day, there is an intermediate performance of Promises
assisted by waiting, to drop comfort to us by degrees: He reserveth not all to
that day, there be lesser days before that great day. As at the first coming
of Christ, So at the overthrow of Antichrist, the Conversion of the Jews,
there will be much joy; but that is not that day, these days make way for that
day. Whensoever Prophecies shall end in Performances, then shall be a day of
joying and glorying in the God of our salvation for ever. And therefore in the
Revelations where this Scripture is cited, Revelations 21. 4. is meant the
Conversion of the Jews, and the glorious estate they shall enjoy before the
end of the world: We have waited for our God, and now we enjoy him. I, but what
says the Church there? Come Lord Jesus come quickly: there is yet another come
Lord, till we be in heaven. So that though intermediate, promises be
performed here, yet there is another great day of the Lord to be performed,
which is specially meant here.

The last thing considerable in the words is the manner In that day it shall be
said, this is our God, we have waited for him, he shall save us: He brings
them in speaking these words of affection.

Indeed when we come to enjoy the performance of Gods gracious promises, if we
should live to see the fullness of the Gentiles come, and Jews called, we
should speak of it again, and again: Affections are large, and few
expressions will not serve for large affections. It will be no tautology to
say, This is our God, we have waited for him.

Beloved, times are yet to come which may much affect the hearts of the
Children of God. Howsoever we may not live to see the performance of these
things, yet we shall all live to see that day of Judgment, and then we shall
say, This is our God, we have waited for him. We now see God in the
Promises, and then we shall see him face to face whom we have waited for in
the Promises, and we shall see him in heaven for ever.

Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him. While we live here we are in
state of waiting, we are under Promises, and a condition under promises is a
waiting condition; a condition of performance is an enjoying condition. We are
in a waiting condition till our bodies be raised out of the grave: for when we
dye we vvait for the resurrection of our bodies. We may say as Jacob when
he was dying, I have waited for thy salvation. We are in a waiting condition
till body and soul be joined together at the day of judgment for ever.

And therefore we should labor to have those graces that are suitable for
this condition. The things we vvait for are of so transcending excellency, as
glory to come, that they cannot be vvaited for, but the spirit by the things
vvaited for, fitteth us to wait for them. A man cannot vvait for glory of
soul and body, but the Spirit that raises up faith to believe, and hope to
vvait, will purge, and fit, and prepare him for that glorious condition. He
that has this hope purifieth himself, as he is pure. Oh it is a quickening
waiting, and a purging waiting; it is efficacious by the Spirit to fit, and
purify his soul suitable to that glorious condition he waits for. Where that
is not, it is but a conceit; a very slender apprehension of the glory to come
will make men better. He that has hope of heaven and happiness under glory,
it will make him suitable to the place he looks for.

THE Eighth Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 8. He shall swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe
away tears from off all faces, and the rebukes of his people shall he take
away from off all the earth: for the Lord has spoken it.

And it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have waited for
him, and be will save us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be
glad and rejoice in his salvation.


TO come closer to the particulars. It shall be said in that day, lo this is
our God. The mouth of the Lord has spoken gracious things before, has
promised a Feast, and an excellent Feast. Gods manner is first of all to give
promises to his Church; Promises of God, flow from Gods goodness.
why? his goodness comes from his goodness, his goodness of grace comes
from his goodness of nature: He is good, and does good. Now the same goodness
of disposition which we call bounty, that reserveth heaven and happiness for
us in another world; the same goodness will not suffer us to be without all
comfort in this world: Because the knowledge and revelation of the glory to
come has much comfort in it. Therefore in mercy he not only intends
performance of glory, but out of the same fountain of goodness, he intends
to reveal whatsoever is good for his Church in the way to glory. So that
promises of good, come from the same goodness of God by which he intends
heaven: For what moved God to come out of that hidden light, that no man can
come into, and discover himself in his son? The word in his promises to
reveal his mind to mankind, and make known what he will have us to do, and
what he will do to us? but only his goodness is the cause of all. And
therefore the end of promises in Gods intention is to comfort us in the way to
heaven, that we may have something to support us; they are promissa, quasi
praemissa: They are promises and premises, and sent before the thing it self.

Now here it comes that the glory to come is termed the joy of heaven, and
the glorious estate to come. You have need of patience, that you may get the
promises; heaven and happiness is called the promises, because we have them
assured in promises. The blessings of the New Testament are called promises; as
the children of the promise, yea the heirs of glory; because all is conveyed
by a promise, therefore all happiness is conveyed by a promise.

Now the promises are of good things. Promises free and full.
They are for the spring of them, free, from Gods free goodness; for the
measure of them, full; for the truth of them, constant, even as God himself
that promises. And therefore we may well build upon them.

Before I go any farther, I beseech you let us account the promises of the
good we have to be our best treasure, Use.
our best portion, Let us count promises our best treasure.
our best riches, for they be called precious promises; not only because they
be precious in themselves, but because they are from the precious love of God
in Christ to us. They are likewise for precious things, they are laid hold of
by precious faith, as the Scripture calls them, and therefore they are
precious promises. Let us not only account of our riches that we have; for
what is that we have, to what we speak of, to that we have in promise. A
Christian is rich in reversion, rich in bills, and obligations: Christ has
bound himself to him, and he can sue him out when he pleases. In all kinds of
necessity, he can sue God for good; he can go to God and say, Remember thy
promise Lord, wherein thou have caused me thy servant to trust; and can bind
God with his own word.

But I take this only in passage as the foundation of what I am to speak.

From the mouth of God you see the great promises delivered: and now we have
waited for them. That which answers promises, is expectation and waiting.

The second thing therefore between the promises wherein God is a debtor, God
takes a long day for performance of promises.
and the performance, is, that there is a long time, a long day: oftentimes God
takes a long day for performing of his promise, as 400 years Abraham's
posterity went to be in Egypt. And it was 4000 years from the beginning of the
world, till the coming of Christ, which was the promise of promises; the
promise of the seed, a great long day: And therefore Christ is said to come in
the latter end of the world. Abraham had promise of a son, but it was not
performed till he was an old man: Symeon had a promise to see Christ in the
flesh, but he was an old man, ready to yield up the ghost before it was
performed. God takes a long day for his promises; long to us, Reas. 1.
not to him; for to him a 1000 years are but as one day. To exercise our faith.


The promises of God are long in performing; for to exercise our faith, Reas. 2.
and our dependence to the full, to take us off from the creature, To waine
from the creature.
and to indeare the things promised to us, Reas. 3.
to set the greater price upon them when we have them. To indear the things
promised.
Many other reasons my be given, if I intended to enlarge my self in that
point. A Christian has a title to heaven, as soon as he is a Christian, he is
an heir to heaven; perhaps he may live here twenty, or forty years more,
before God takes him up to glory; why does he defer it so long?

The reason is, Reas. 4.
God will fit us for heaven by little and little; To fit us for enjoyment.
and will perfume us as Esther was perfumed, before she must come to Ahasuerus:
there were many weeks, and months of perfuming: So God will sweeten and fit
us for heaven and happiness. It is a holy place, God a holy God: Christ is
that holy one; and for us to have everlasting communion with God and Christ in
so holy a place, requires a great preparation. And God by deferring it so
long, will mortify our affections by little and little, and will have us die
to all base things here in affection, before we die indeed. David had title to
the Kingdom as soon as ever he was anointed; Simile.
but David was fitted to be an excellent King indeed, by deferring the
performance of the promise till afterward: So in our right and title, and
possession of heaven, there is a long time betweenl

Our Savior Christ was 34 years before he was taken up to heaven* Simile.
because he was to work our salvation: And he was willing to suspend his
glory for such a time, that he might do it; to suspend his glory due to him,
from the first moment of his conception: For by virtue of the union, glory was
due to him at the first; but because he had taken upon him to be a Mediator,
out of love he would suspend his glory due to him, that he might suffer. And
so God by way of conformity, will suspend the glory due to us, that we may be
conformed to Christ. Though we have right to heaven, as soon as we are borne,
yet God will suspend the full performance of it; because he will by correction,
and by length of time subdue by little and little that which makes us
unconformable to our head.

And can we complain for any deferring of heaven when we are but conformed to
our glorious head, who was content to be without heaven so long.

But to go on. As there be gracious and rich promises, and they have long time
of performance to us, and hope deferred makes the soul languish. A condition
of waiting, is a mixed condition of imperfection, and perfection.
So God vouchsafes a spirit to fit that expectation of his, a spirit of hope
and waiting: And this waiting has something perfect in it, and something
imperfect; it is a mixed condition. There is good, because there is a promise;
for a promise is the declaration of Gods will concerning good: But because it is
a promise of a thing not performed, there is an imperfection. So there is a
mixture in the promise, and a mixture in the grace, hope, and expectation, and
waiting, is an imperfect grace. That there be glorious things, it is perfection
of good; that we have them not in possession, that is the imperfection. So that
hope is something, but it is not possessed; a promise is something, but it is
not the performance. A seed is something; but it is not the plant.

Thus God mixeth our condition here of perfection and imperfection; he will
have us in state of imperfection, that we may not think our selves at home in
our Country, when we are but in our way: Therefore he will have us in a state
of imperfection, that we may long homeward; yet he will have it a state of
good, that we may not sink in the way.

And not only promises; We have a taste here of what we shall have hereafter
to support us.
for in the way to heaven, God keeps not all for heaven, he lets in drops of
comfort oftentimes in the midst of misery, he does reveal himself more
glorious and sweet then at other times: there is nothing reserved for us in
another world, but we have a beginning, a taste, an earnest of it here, to
support us, till we come to the full possession of what remains. We shall
have full communion of Saints there; we have it here, in the taste of it: We
know what it is to be acquainted with them that be gracious spirits: We have
praising of God for ever there; we know the sweetness of it here, in the house
of God, which made David desire this one thing, that he might dwell in the
house of God, to visit the beauty of God, etc. There we shall have perfect
peace; here we have inward peace, unspeakable and glorious; a peace that
passes understanding in the beginning of it: There we shall have joy without
all mixture of contrariety; here we have joy, and joy unspeakable and full of
glory. There is nothing in heaven that is perfect, that is sweet and good, and
comfortable, but we have a taste, and earnest of it here. The spirit will be
all in all there, there is something of it in us now: more light in our
understandings, more obedience in our wills, more and more love in our
affections, and it is growing more and more.

And therefore all is not kept for time to come: we have something beginning
here, besides promises; there is some little degrees of performance; so that
the state between us and heaven, is a state mixed of good, and imperfection.

Now God has fitted graces suitable to that condition, Waiting is a grace
whereby God sits us for an imperfect condition.
and that is expectation, or waiting, a fit grace, and a fit disposition of
soul from imperfect condition, that is afterward to be perfected; for
fruition is the condition of perfect happiness, not of waiting: for waiting
implies imperfection.

This waiting carries with it almost all graces, Waiting carries with it all
graces.
waiting for better times in glory to come, it has to support it. It is a
carriage of soul that is supported with many graces. For first we wait for
that we believe, we have a spirit of faith to lead to it: And then we hope,
before we wait, and hope is the anchor of the soul that stays the soul in
all the waves and miseries of the world; it is the helmet that keeps off all
the blows: This hope issues from faith for what we believe, we hope for the
accomplishment of it.

So that all graces make way for waiting, 1. Patience.
or accompany it. The graces that accompany the waiting for good things in time
to come, are patience, to endure all griefs between us and the full possession
of heaven. 2. Long suffering.
Then long suffering, which is nothing else but patience lengthned, because
troubles are lengthned, and the time is lengthned: So there is patience, and
patience lengthned, which we call long suffering; and then together with
patience and long suffering, there is contentment without murmuring at the
dispensation of God; 3. Contentment.
something in the soul that he would have it to be so. He that has a heart
to rise, because he has not what he would have, he does not wait with that
grace of waiting, that issues from a right spring.

God reserveth joy for the time to come, for our home, we should be content to
have communion with God and the souls of perfect men; and not murmr though
God exercises us with many crosses here. And therefore the Scripture calls
it a silence, 4. Silence from murmuring.
In silence and in hope shall be your strength. The soul keeps silence to
God in this waiting condition, and this silence quells all risings in the soul
presently: As David, my soul kept silence unto the Lord. It will still all
risings of the heart, issuing from a resignation of the soul to God, to do as
he will have us to do: So it implies patience and long suffering,
contentment, holy silence, without murmuring and repining.

And then it implies watchfulness over our selves, 5. Watchfulness.
(till we come to the full accomplishment of the promises) that we carry not
our selves unworthily in the mean time: That we should not spend the time of
our waiting in wickedness, to fetch sorrow from the devil, and the world to
comfortus, or to be beholding to Satan. This is no waiting, but murmuring, and
rebellion, when in crosses and discomforts we cannot be content, but must be
beholding to the Devil: so there must be watchfulness; 6. Fruitfulnes.
and not only so, but fruitfulness in waiting. For he waits, that waits in
doing good, that waits in observance; he waits for his Masters coming,
that is, doing his duty all the time in a fruitful course of observance and
obedience; else it is no waiting: waiting is not merely a distance of time, but
a filling up of that time with all gracious carriage, with obedience, and with
silence, with long suffering and contentment, and watchfulness we take not
any ill course, and observance, and with fruitfulness, that we may fill up
times of waiting, till performance, with all the graces, that we may have
communion with God.

It is another manner of grace then the world thinks. Want of waiting the cause
of wickedness.
What is the reason of all the wickedness of the world, and barrenness, and
voluptuousness, but because they have not learned to wait? They hear of good
things, and precious things promised; but they would have present payment, they
will have something in hand. As Dives, son, son, thou have had thy good
things here; they will have their good things here. And what is the reason of
wickedness, but because they will have present pleasures of sins. We must
prefer the afflictions of Christ before the pleasures of sin. Now that
shortness of spirit to have reward here, is the cause of all sin: They have
no hope, nor obedience, nor expectation to endure the continuance of
diuturnity; where then is patience, and hope, and contentment?

The character of a Christian is, that he is in a waiting condition, and has
the grace of waiting; others will have the pleasures of sin, their profits and
contentments, else they will crack their consciences, and sell Christ, God,
heaven, and all.

A Christian as he has excellent things above the world, so he has the grace
of expectation, and all the graces that store up, and maintain that expectation
till the performance come. Many rubs between us and heaven.


And therefore it is an hard thing to be a good Christian, another thing then
the world takes it to be: For mark I beseech you, what is between us and
heaven, that we must go through, if ever we will come there: Between us and
heaven, the thing promised, there be many Crosses to be met withal, and they
must be borne, and borne as a Christian should do; Through many afflictions we
must enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Besides crosses, there be scandalous
offenses, that be enough to drive us from profession of Religion without grace.
Sometimes good men by their failings, and fallings out, they fall into sin,
and fall out; and that is a scandal to wicked men. Oh say they, who would be
of this Religion, when they cannot agree among themselves: This is a great
hinderance and stop. It is a scandal and rub in the way, not so much in
themselves; we are full of scandal our selves, catch at any thing, that we
may except against the best ways; there is a root of scandal in the hearts of
all, because men will not go to hell without reason.

Now because we are easy to take offense, rather then we will be damned
without reason, it is not easy to hold out. Besides this, Satan plies it with
his temptations from affliction, and from scandal; he amplifies these things
in the fancy: who would be a Christian? Ye see what their profession is; And
so he makes the way the more difficult.

And then again, We are of unsettled dispositions.
look at our own disposition to suffer, to hold out, to fix; there is an
unsetlednesse, which is a proper infirmity in our natures since the fall: we
love variety, we are inconstant, and cannot fix our selves upon the best
things, and we are impatient of suffering any thing. We are not only
indisposed to do good, but more indisposed to suffer any ill; the spirit must
help us over all this, which must continue all our life long, till we be in
heaven, something or other will be in our way: now the Spirit of God must help
us over all these afflictions. We shall never come to heaven to overcome
afflictions, and scandals, and temptation, which Satan plies us here withal.
Its hard to overcome tediousness of time.
And then to overcome the tediousness of time; this needs a great deal of
strength: now this grace of expectance does all. And therefore it is so
oftentimes stood upon in Scripture; All to be overcome by waiting.
in Isaiah, and in the Psalms, how often is it repeated, Psalm. 77. last, Wait
on the Lord, if he tarry wait thou. The Lord will wait for them that wait for
him; and it is the character in Scripture of a Christian. Moses, he says, such
as waited for the consolation of Israel before Christ came in the flesh, such
a one, is one that waits for the consolation of Israel. To have a gracious
disposition, and a grace of waiting was the character of good people. Now since
the coming of Christ, the character of the New Testament, is, to wait for
Christ's appearance. There is a Crown of glory for me, and not only for me,
but for all them that love his appearance. That is an ingredient in waiting,
when we love the thing we wait for. And so Titus 2. last, The grace of God that
teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live holily, and
justly, and soberly in this present evil world, looking for, and waiting for
this glorious appearing of Jesus Christ.

So that looking with the eye of the soul, partly on the first coming of
Christ, which was to redeem our souls, and partly upon the second, which is
to redeem our bodies from corruption, and to make both soul and body happy,
it makes a man a good Christian: For the grace of God on the first, teaches us
to deny ungodliness; and looking for Christ's appearing, makes us zealous of
good works. You have scarce any Epistle, but you have time described for
looking for the coming of Christ; As Jude, Preserve your selves in the love of
God and wait for the coming of Christ. So that as there be gracious promises,
and a long day for them, God vouchsafes grace to wait for the accomplishment
of them.

Now as God gives grace to wait, so he will perform what we wait for; As
they say here, we have waited, that is the speech of enjoying. God will at
length make good what he has promised; and what his truth has promised, his
power will perform. Goodness inclines to make a promise, truth speaks it,
and power performs it. As you shall see here.

We have waited, etc. In God there is a mouth of truth, a heart of pity, and
an hand of power; these three meeting together, make good whatsoever is
promised: He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him. The desires that
God has put into his Children, they be kindled from heaven; and he will
satisfy them all out of his bowels of pity and compassion: he will not
suffer the creature to be allwaies under the rack of desire, under the rack
of expectation, but he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. And
therefore learn this for the time to come.

Though we wait, God will perform promises to them that wait.
God will perform whatsoever we wait for; And therefore, lo, we have
waited for him. As there is a time of promising, so there is a time of
performing; as there is a seed time, so there is a time of harvest. There is a
succession in nature, and a succession in grace; as the day follows the
night, and the Sabbath the week, and the Jubilee such a term of years; and as
the triumph follows the war; and as the Consummation of Marriage follows
Contract; so it is a happy and glorious condition, above all conditions here on
earth. Therefore in this text you have not only the seed time of the
Christian; we may sow in tears, and an expectation, as in sowing: But here is
likewise the harvest of a Christian; as there is time of sowing, so there is
time of reaping; as time of waiting, so of enjoying. We have waited, and now
lo, we have what we waited for.

But why does not the Holy Ghost set down a certain time, God keeps times and
seasons in his own power.
but leaves it indefinite, In that day. God keeps times and seasons in his
own power; the point of time in general he leaves it, There is a day; but
the point and moment of time he keeps in his own power. It is enough to know
there is a day, and a day that will come in the best season; Gods times is the
best time. When judgments were threatened upon the wicked, they say, Let us
eat, and drink, for to morrow we shall die. So Saul, to morrow thou shall
die, and was he the better? So where there is a certain time of Gods coming in
judgment, godly men would not be the worse, and wicked men never the better.
Thetefore God reserveth it indefinite, In that day.

There is a day, There is a glorious day yet for Christians.
and it is a glorious day, a day of all days, a day that never will have
night, a day that we should think of every day; That day, by way of
excellency. There be particular days of performance in this life.
And before that day there be particular days in this world, wherein God
shows himself, and fulfills the expectation of his children, to cherish the
grand expectation of life everlasting. As in times of trouble they expect of
God, and wait for deliverance in Gods time, and they must be able to say, Lo,
we have waited Because it is a beginning and pledge of the great performance
that shall be consummate at that great day, and of all the miseries that shall
then be removed: So there is a day when the Jews shall be converted, and the
fullness of the Gentiles brought in, and the man of sin discovered, and
consumed by the breath of Christ. And when the Church of God sees them, they
may say, Lo, we have waited for the Lord, and lo, he is come, that we looked
for is now fulfilled: So that God reserveth not the fulfilling of all the
promises to the great day of all days, but even in this life he will have a
that day.

And it were very good for Christians in the passages of their lives, Good to
observe what days of performance God gives in.
to see how God answers their prayers, and delivers them. Let them do as
the Saints in the Old Testament, that gave names to places where they saw God;
As Penuell he shall see God, and Abraham, God will be seen in the Mount. So
Sampson and others they gave names to places where they had deliverance, that
they might be moved to be thankful. A Christian takes in all the comforts of
this life to believe the things of the last great day. Lo, we have waited for
him.

That shall be a time of sight, and fruition, of full power, and full joy,
which is reserved for heaven; then we shall say, Lo, behold this is the Lord.
The more we see God here, the more we shall see him hereafter. There be many
ways of seeing, so as to say, Lo, this is the Lord. We may say from the
poorest creature, Lo this is the Lord, here are beams of his Majesty in the
works of his Justice and Mercy, Lo here is the Lord. The Lord has brought
mighty things to pass, the Lord is marvailous loving to this Children. Behold
and see the salvation of the Lord. We may say, Lo here, and see something of
God in every creature, no creature but has something of God. The things that
have but mere being, have something of God; but the things that have life have
more of God: And so in some there is more, in some less of God.

But in the Church of God specially, we may see his going in the Sanctuary;
Lo this God has done for his Church. And in the Sacraments we may say, I have
seen the Lord, and felt the Lord in his Ordinance by his holy Spirit. We do
all this before we come to see him in heaven: but that is not meant specially.

We shall say, Lo, this is the Lord, when we shall see him in heaven, all
sight here leads to that sight. Faith has a sight here, but it is in the
Word and Sacrament, and so imperfect; but the sight in heaven is immediate and
perfect, and therefore opposed to faith. We live by faith, and not by sight,
in heaven we shall live by sight; not that we live not by sight here in some
degree, for the lesser sight leads to the greater sight, But in comparison of
sight in heaven, there is no sight. A sight of God comparative here.
The Scripture speaks of sight of God comparatively: Moses saw God, that is,
more than any other: And Jacob saw God, that is, comparatively more than
before, but not fully and wholly. We can apprehend him, but not comprehend
him, as they say; we may see something of it, Absolute in heaven.
but not wholly: but in heaven we shall have another sight of God, and then we
shall say, Lo, this is the God we have waited for; we shall see Christ face
to face.

Beloved, that is the sight indeed. And if ye will ask me whether we shall
see God then or no; Consider what I said before, this is the God we have
waited for in obedience, and fruitfully.

If we shall be ravished with the sight of God, surely if we see him here we
may see him there: We see him with the eye of faith, we see him in the
Ordinance, we have some sight of God that the world has not, God discovers
himself to his children, more than to the world, And therefore they say, thou
revealest thy self to us, not unto the world. A Christian wonders that God
should reveal his love, and mercy, and goodness to him, more than to others.
And therefore if we belong to God, and shall see him hereafter, we must see
him now, as we may see him, we must have some knowledge of him: And if we see
God any way, all things in the world will be thought of no request in
comparison of the Communion of God in Christ. As Isaiah 14. We have seen the
Lord, and what have we to do with Idols? The soul that has seen Christ,
grows in detestation of sin, and loatheth all things in comparison.

And then again, if we shall ever see God in glory, in this glorious and
triumphing manner, This is the Lord, This sight is a changing sight. There is
no sight of God, but it changes, and alters to the likeness of God. When he
calls to look up to him, and he looks on us in favor and mercy. The best fruit
of his favor is grace, of peace, and joy, for these be beams that issue from
him, grace, as beams from the sun. But wherever God looks with any
favor, there is a conformity to Christ, a gracious, humble, pitiful,
merciful, obedient disposition, which is an earnest of the Spirit of Christ.

And there is a study of purity, of a refined disposition from the pollutions
of the world; The pure in heart shall see God, they that hope to see God for
ever in heaven, will study that purity that may dispose, and fit them for
heaven. And there is such a gracious influence in it that they that hope for
heaven, the very hope must needs help to purify them.

As there is grace suitable to waiting, There Is an influence from the thing
hoped for to uphold graces in waiting.
so there is an influence from the things hoped for, to give vigor to all
grace: As all the graces of a Christian fit and enable him for heaven; so hope
of heaven yields life to all grace. There is a mutual influence into these
things. God vouchsafes discovery of these glorious things, to help us to
wait, to be patient, and fruitful and abundant in the work of the Lord. Simile.
And the more we wait fruitfully and patiently, and silently, the more we see
of heaven. So that as in nature, the seed brings the tree, and the tree the
seed; so in the things of God one thing breeds another, and that breeds that
again; so that waiting and grace fit us for heaven, and the thought of heaven
puts life and vigor into all the graces that fit us for heaven. What is our
faith to those glorious things we shall see hereafter? what is patience, but
for consideration of that? what is hope, but for the excellency of the object
of hope? And what were enduring of troubles, if something were not in heaven to
make amends for all? They help us to come to glory, and the lively hopeful
thoughts of those things, animate and enliven all the graces that fit for
heaven. If ever we shall hereafter possess heaven, and say, Lo, this is he we
have waited for, we must see him here so, as to undervalue all things, to see
him with a changing sight, for the object of glory cannot be revealed, but it
will stir up a disposition suitable to glory; if this be not, never hope for
a sight of him in heaven.

And therefore let me entreat, We should look to the last end, to fit us for
it.
and beseech you, with the Apostle Paul, to look to the end, look to the maine
chance, that can come in this world, and that shall come hereafter. It is
wisdom to look to the end. A man that builds an house, will think of the
end, that is, dwelling, and habitation, that he propounds. We are for
everlasting communion with God; we are to be perfect, as in grace, so in glory.
Heaven is our element, we rest not till then, we are in motion till then, that
being our station. Then think often of this, never to rest in any intermediate
Condition, because we are in waiting, till we come to that condition. Let us so
carry our selves, that we may say, this we waited for, it is the glory we
expected. It is our wisdom often to have the end of our lives in our eyes that
we may be helped to wait patiently, cheerfully, and comfortably, till the
consummation come when all promises shall end in performance, when all that is
ill, and imperfectly good shall be removed, a consumption of ill, and a
consummation of all good.

Oh have that day in our eyes, that day of all days, and the very thoughts of
it will fit us for the day. The thoughts of our end will fit and stir us up
to all means tending to that end. Physic is good, if it tend to health: The
very thoughts of that prescribes order, and means. We read, Seek the Kingdom
of Heaven first, and all other things shall be added to you. The thought of
the end prescribes order to all means, and it prescribes measure, How to use
the World, as though I used it not: for the thoughts of my end stir me up to
use all courses suitable to that end. And therefore the best wisdom in
Christians is often to prefixe the end, and to be content in no grace, nor
comfort, as it is in a way of imperfection, but to look upon every grace, every
comfort, every good, as it tends to perfection. David desired not to dwell in
the House of God for ever, because he would terminate his desire in the house
of God here, but he aims at Heaven. And so when the Saints of God bound and
terminate their desires and contentment, it is with reference to the last day,
the rest of a Christian, beyond which they cannot go, even communion with God
himself.

THE Ninth Sermon.
ISAIAH 25. 9. And it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him,
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
IN the worst age of the Church, that the Church may not be swallowed up with
fear, in the worst times, God does prepare promises for his people. It was the
case of our blessed Savior himself to his poor Disciples, that they might not
be overwhelmed with sorrow. Therefore he adds Sacraments to Passover, and
the New Testament to the Old, and all to confirm faith, knowing that our
hearts are very subject to be danted.

The Lord promises here a feast of fat things, and all things pertaining to a
Feast, the best of the best, and removal of all that may hinder joy, as taking
away the veil, which hinders them from the sight of it. And then death is
swallowed up in victory, as it is already in our head, who is gloriously
triumphing in heaven: And then all tears shall be wiped from all faces. There
is a vicissitude of things, they are now in a valley of tears, but it will not
be always thus, time shall come when all tears shall be wiped away; and the
cause of all tears are sorrow. The rebukes of his people shall be taken away,
the scandal that lies upon the best things shall be taken away. The worst
things go under a better representation, and the best things under a veil,
but one day as things are, they shall be. The God of truth will have truth to
be clear enough; And all this is sealed up with the highest Authority that
admits of no contradiction. The Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

We came the last day to these words; Lo this is our God, etc.

Wherein we may consider first of all, That God has left to his Church rich
and precious promises, such as is spoken of before. A feast, and removal of
all hindrances whatsoever. He not only vouchsafes heaven when we dye, and
eternal happiness, but in this world in our way he vouchsafes precious
promises to support our faith, that we may begin heaven upon earth. What these
promises are, we showed the last day.

The second observation was, in that Gods people are here in a state of
expectation. It shall be said, lo we have waited for him. We are in a
condition of waiting while we live in this world, because we are not at home;
our state requires waiting, heaven requires setlednesse and rest: There all
appetites, all desires shall be satiated to the full: Our estate here is a
passage to a better estate, and waiting is a disposition fit for such a
condition.

And in this there is good, and imperfection; good, that we have something to
wait for, imperfection, that we are to wait for it, that we have it not in
fruition, and till we be in heaven we are in a state of waiting. In the
Revelations, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, there is a glorious state of a
Church set forth, but while all is done, it has not what it would have. We
cannot be in such a state in the world, but there is place for a desire, namely
immediate and eternal communion with Christ in heaven. And therefore it shall
be said in that day, lo this is our God, we have waited for him.

I will add a little to this state of waiting before I go farther. God will
have us continue in a state of waiting.
God will not have our condition presently perfect, but have us continue in a
state of waiting.

First of all, Reas 1. Its his pleasure we should live by faith, not by sight.
it is his pleasure that we should live by faith, and not by sight. We have
sense and feeling of many things, he reserveth not all for heaven; how many
sweet refreshments have we in the way? but the tenor of our life is by faith,
and not by sight. God will have us in such a condition.

Again, Reas. 2. We are not yet fitted for sight of Glory.
we are not fitted for sight of the glory to come here: our vessels are not
capable of that glory. A few drops of that happiness so overcame Peter in the
transfiguration, that he knew not himself.

God is so good to us that he would have us enjoy the best at the last; Reas.
3. Because God would have us enjoy the best at last.
the sweeter is heaven, by how much the more difficult our way thither is:
Heaven is heaven, and happiness is happiness, after a long time of waiting;
For waiting enlarges the capacity and desires of the soul to receive more, it
commends the happiness afterward. And therefore God keeps the best for
the last, because he will never interrupt the happiness of his children, when
they be in heaven, there is a banishment of all cause of sorrow. He will have
a distinction between the Church-militant and Triumphant: He will train up his
children here, before he brings them to heaven; he will perfume his Spouse,
and make her fit for an everlasting communion with him in heaven.

The third thing is, Waiting not an empty thing.
that as there be promises, and these promises are not presently fulfilled,
which put us in a state of waiting: so God gives grace to uphold in waiting.
Waiting is not an empty time, to wait so long, and no grace in the mean time;
but waiting is a fitting time for that we are to receive afterward.

We see in nature, Simile.
In the winter, which is a dull time to the spring, and harvest, and the times
are very cold; yet it ripens and mellowes the soil, and fits it for the
spring. There is a great promotion of harvest in winter, it is not a mere
distance of time: so between the promise and heaven it self, it is not a mere
waiting time, and there is an end; but it is a time which is taken up by the
spirit of God in preparing the heart in subduing all base lusts, and in taking
us off from our selves, and whatsoever is contrary to heaven. The time is
filled up with a great deal of that which fits us for glory in heaven. The
gracious God that fits us for heaven, God fits heaven for us, and us for heaven.
and heaven for us, fits us with all graces necessary for that condition. As
faith to believe, patience to wait for, and to depend on that which he sees
not to be above sense; a grace of hope to wait for that which he believes to
be an anchor to his soul in all conditions whatsoever: And then a grace of
patience to wait meekly all the while: And then longsuffering patience
lengthened out. As the tediousness is long between us and heaven, so there be
lengthening graces. We would have all presently, How long Lord, how long. We
are so short, even David and others, and therefore God gives grace to hold out
and lengthen our spiritual faith, and hope and perseverance, and constant
courage to encounter with all difficulties in the way. When the spirit of a man
beholds heaven, and happiness, and God, it makes him constant in some sort, as
the things he beholds, for the spirit transformeth him to the object. Now he
beholds a constant Covenant: And as faith looks upon a constant God, constant
happiness, and constant promises, it frames the soul suitable to the
excellency of the object it lays hold upon.

And then the spirit of God in the way to heaven, subdueth all evil
murmurings, and exceptions, in suffering us not to put forth our hands to any
iniquity, though we have not what we would have, he keeps us in a good and
fruitful way; for to wait, is not only to endure, but to endure in a good
course, fitting us for happiness, till grace end in glory.

In the fourth place, God will perform all his promises in time. As the Church
says here, This is the Lord, we have waited for him. Now he has made good
whatsoever he has said.

To enlarge this point a little. As there is a time of waiting, so there will
be a time of performing.
As there is a time of waiting, so there will be a time when Gods people shall
say, Lee this is the Lord, we have waited for him. Why God is Jehovah, a full
and pregnant word, a word of comfort and stay for the soul, 1 Reas. God is
Jehovah.
in this word Jehovah. He is a God that gives a being to all things, and a
being to his word, and therefore what he says, he will make good: He is Lord
of his word. Every man's word is, as his nature, and power, and ability is, the
word of a man, or the word of an honest man, but being the word of a God, he
will make all good.

And then he will make all good, Reas. 2. God is faithful.
because he is faithful. Reas. 3. He has bowels of compassion toward his
people.
God, he says it, and he will do it, you need no more reason then pity to
his people, his bowels of compassion; the hearts of people would fail, if he
should stay too long. And therefore out of his bowels in his time, which is the
best time, not only because he is faithful, but because he is loving and
pitiful, he will make good all his promises. And then he will do it; for
what is grace, but an earnest of that fullness we shall have in heaven? Reas 4.
Because the grace we have, is but an earnest of what we shall have.
What is peace here, but an earnest of that peace in heaven? And what is joy
here, but an earnest of fullness of joy for evermore? And will God lose his
earnest? Therefore we shall enjoy what God has promised, and we expect, because
we have the earnest. It is not a pledge only, for a pledge may be taken away,
but an earnest which is never taken away, but is made up in the full bargain.
Grace is made up in glory, as beginnings are made up with perfection. Where God
lays a foundation, he will perfect it. Where God gives the first fruits, he
will give the harvest.

But it will be a long time before, because he will exercise all grace to the
uttermost. You see how Abraham was brought to the last. In the mountain God
provideth for a sacrifice, when the knife was ready to seize on Isaacks throat.

We should answer with our faith Gods dealing, Our faith should answer Gods
dealing.
that is, if God defer let us wait, yea wait to the uttermost, wait to death.
He is our God to death, and in death, and for ever. If God perform his promise
at the worst, then, till we are at the lowest we must wait.

And therefore one character of a child of God from others is this. Waiting the
character of Gods people.
Give me the present, says the carnal beastly man, the world, but Gods people
are content to wait, he knows what he has in promise is better then what he
has in possession. The gleanings of Gods people are better then the others
harvest. The other cannot wait, but must have present payment: Gods child can
wait, for he lives by faith. And therefore we should learn patiently to wait
for the performance of all Gods promises.

And to direct a little in that, Directions to help waiting.
remember some rules, which every man may gather to himself, 1 Gods time is
the best time.
as Gods time is the best time. Deus est optimus arbiter opportunitatis, The
best descerner of opportunities. And, in the mountain will God be seen. Though
he tarry long, he will come, and not tarry overlong, and then all the strength
of the enemy is with God: Robur hostium apud Deum, The strength of the enemy is
in his hand, he can suspend it when he pleases.

Then though God seems to carry things by contrary ways to that he promises,
2 God will effect things, though by contraries.
which makes waiting so difficult, yet he will bring things about at last. He
promises happiness, and there is nothing but misery; he promises
forgiveness, and opens the conscience to cry out of sin. I but Luthers rule
is exceeding good in this case; Summaars, the greatest art of a Christian is,
credere credibilia, etc. and sperare dilata, to hope for things a long time,
and to believe God when he seems contrary to himself in his promise.

But though God does defer, yet in that day he does perform, it is set down
indefinitely, for it is not fit we should not be acquainted with the particular
time. And therefore he says, Times are in Gods hands.
in that day, he sets not down a particular time, but in that day wherein he
means to be glorious in the performance of his promise. There is a time, and
a set time, and there is a short time too, in regard of God, and a fit time. If
the time were shorter then God has appointed, then it were too short, if
longer, too long. My times, says David, are in thy hands. If they were in the
enemies hands, we should never be out: If in our own, we would never enter: If
in our friends, their good will would be more then their ability. But my times,
he says not, my time, but my times are in thy hands, that is, my times of
trouble, and times of waiting. And it is well they be in Gods hands, for he
has a day and a certain day, and a fit day to answer the waiting of all his
people.

And when that day is come, you see how their hearts are enlarged, they will
say, This is the Lord, we have waited for him.

When God means to perform his promise either in this world, or in the world
to come, the world to come specially, when there shall be consummation of all
promises, God shall enlarge the hearts of his people. This is the Lord, we have
waited for him, This is the Lord; he repeats it again and again.

Our soul is very capable being a spiritual substance, and then God shall
fill the soul, and make it comprehend misery, or comprehend happiness, when
every corner of the soul shall be filled, and then having bodies too, it is
fit they should have a part; so the whole man shall express forth the justice
or mercy of God.

For the nature of the thing it cannot be otherwise, every member of the body
shall be fit to glorify God. What the Psalmist says of his tongue, Awake my
glory, he may say of every member, do thy office in glorifying the Lord, and
rejoicing in the Lord: Pectus facit disertos, The heart makes a man eloquent
and full: so the performance of any promise fills the heart so full of
affections, the affections are so enlarged, and therefore we must not have
affections to a Court-kind of expressions, as they in old time, and the like
Court-eloquence, when men might not speak fully. But when joy possesses the
heart to the full, there be full expressions. This is the Lord, this is the
Lord, let us rejoice in him. And therefore there seems so many tautologies in
the Psalms, though they be no tautologies, but mere exuberancies of a
sanctified affection.

Oh beloved what a blessed time will that be, when this large heart of ours
shall have that that will fill it! When the best parts of us, our
understanding, will and affections shall be carried to that which is better and
larger then it self, and shall be as it were swallowed up in the fullness of
God! And that is the reason of the repetition of the word, This is the Lord,
this is the Lord.

And it follows, We will rejoice and be glad in his salvation. When a
gracious heart is full of joy, how does he express that joy! A wicked heart,
when it is full of joy, is like a dirty river that runs over the banks, and
carries a deal of filth with it, dirty expressions. But when a gracious heart
expresses it self being full of joy, it expresses it self in thanks and
praises, in stirring up of others: Lo this is our God, we will rejoice and be
glad in his salvation. There Is suitable action for every affection.
Is any merry, says the Apostle Saint James, Let him sing. God has affections
for any condition: Is a man in misery? let him pray. This is a time of
mourning. Does God perform any promise, and so give cause of joy? let him
sing; there is action for every affection, affection for every condition; And
this may stir us up to begin the employment in heaven, on earth here. We
shall say so in heaven, Lo this is the Lord, we have waited for him.

For every performance of promises, In performance of promises, be much in
thankfulness.
be much in thankfulness. Our conversation is in heaven, says the Apostle:
And what is the greatest part of a Christians conversation, but in all things
to give thanks. Here the Holy Church says, their matter of praise was too big
for their soul, and therefore they brake out in this manner. And so oftentimes
a child of God, his heart is so full, that it is too big for his body in the
expression of matter of praise. But it is his comfort, that in heaven he shall
have a large heart, answerable to the large occasion of praise. I will not
enlarge my self in the common place of thanks-giveing.

In this condition we can never be miserable, for it springs from joy, and joy
disposes a man to thankfulness, and upon thankfulness there is peace, and
can we be miserable in peace of consceince? Therefore says the Apostle, in all
things give thanks, and let your requests be made known to God, and what will
follow upon that, when I have made known my requests and paid my tribute of
thanks? then the peace of God which passes understanding shall guide your
mind. When we have paid to God the tribute we can pay him, then the soul, as
having discharged a debt, is at peace. I have prayed to God, I have laid my
petition in his bosom, I am not in arrerages for former favors, therefore the
peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and
minds. Hanna had prayed once, went not away but prayed again; the happiness
of heaven follows the actions of heaven, praisings being the maine employment
of heaven, the happiness and comfort of heaven follows.

And howsoever these promises be fulfilled in heaven, yet they have a graduall
performance on earth; For he speaks certainly of the state of the Jews yet to
come, wherein there shall be accomplishment of all these promises.

We have waited for him, Experience of Gods performances should stir up waiting
he will save us. Experience of Gods performance stirs them up still to wait
for him, and rejoice in his salvation. Experience stirs up hope. The beginning
of a Christian, and midst, is to hope for the end; and surely our beginning
should help the latter end; all a Christians life should help the end, all
former things should come in, and help his latter.

Beloved, We ought to treasure up experiences.
we are too backward that way to treasure up the benefit of experience; there
be few of years, but might make stories of Gods gracious dealings with them,
if all were kept; the comforts past, and for time to come, and all little
enough. It was David's course, thou art my God from my mothers womb, and upon
thee have I hanged over since I was borne, fail me not when I am old. Go
along with Gods favors, and use them as arguments of future blessings. As
former victories are helps to get the second victory. Every former favor
helps to strengthen our faith.

In the next, God an inexhaust fountain.
God is an inexhausted fountain, and when we have to deal with an infinite
God, the more we take of him, the more we offer him. It is no good plea to say,
you have done courtesies, therefore do them still. But we cannot honor God
more, then from former experience to look for great things from the great God.

We have have waited for him, he will save us, we have waited for him, and we
will rejoice in his salvation. That which a child of God gives thanks for, and
rejoices in, and labors for, is more and more experience of his salvation. We
will rejoice in his salvation. There is not a stronger word in all the
Scripture, nor in nature, he does not say rejoicing in this or that benefit,
but in his salvation, that is in deliverance from all evil; we will rejoice in
his perservation, when he has delivered us, we will rejoice in his advancement
of us, and we will rejoice in his salvation. And therefore when the wisdom of
heaven would include all in one word, he uses the word Jesus, all happiness
in that word, that pregnant full word, a Savior.

So that Gods carriage toward his children is Salvation. Gods carriage toward
his children is salvation.
He is the God of Salvation, or a saving God. And God sent his name from
heaven, and the Angels brought it, the name of JESUS. Therefore look to the
full sense of it. We have a Savior that will answer his name, as he is Jesus,
so he will save his people from their sins; And therefore we will rejoice in
his salvation. God dealt with us like a God, when he delivered us from all
misery, from all sins, and advanced us to all happiness that nature is
capable of, As he said before, he will wipe away all tears from all faces, and
take away the rebukes of all people. He will punish the wicked with eternal
destruction. And if he advances a people he will be salvation, then which he
can say no more.

And this shows that the children of God rejoice more then in any thing else
in salvation, because it is the salvation of God, and because God is salvation
it self. Heaven were not heaven, if Jesus, and God in our nature were not
there; And therefore the Apostle says, I desire to depart, not to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that is better. Our joy and happiness is
in the enjoyment of God.
The sight of God, specially in our nature, God the second person taking our
nature, that we might be happy, will make us happy for ever. In loving God, and
joying in God, and enjoying God, makes full happiness; but that is not the
cause of joy in heaven, but the cause of all, is Gods influence into us. Here
in the world happiness is mediate, in Gods revealing of himself to us, by his
holy spirit in the use of means* in his dealings and deliverances, letting us
see him by his grace, to see him, and joy and delight in him for ever. It is no
good love that rests in any blessings of God for themselves. It is an
harlottry affection, to love the gift more then the giver: So the Saints of God
they do all desire to see him as they may, and to joy in God, and enjoy God
himself, and to see God in our nature, and to be with him for ever. Before he
spoke of a feast, and if the Feast-maker be not there, what is all? In a
Funeral feast there is much cheer, but the Feast-maker is gone. In heaven
there is joy, but where is God, where is Christ, he that has done so much,
suffered so much for us, that has taken possession of heaven, and keeps a
place for us there? What is heaven without him? salvation severed from him is
nothing.

We shall say when we are there, Lo here is David, Abraham, Saint John, here
the Martyrs. I but here is Christ, here is God, here is our Savior the cause
of all, and the seeing of him in them, that he will be glorious in his Saints,
that makes us rejoice. We shall see all our friends in heaven, there we shall
see the excellency of the happiness of Christ his love, his grace, his mercy

The words are expressed with a kind of glorying, The joy of a Christian ends
in glorying.
Lo, this is our God. So that the joy of a Christian ends in glory, and in
the highest degree of glory. As you have it, Romans 5. We glory also in
tribulation, we glory in hope of glory, nay we glory in God as ours reconciled.
And if we glory in him now as a God reconciled, what shall we do in heaven?
Can a worlding glory in his riches, his greatness, his favor from such a man,
as Haman did? And shall not a Christian glory in his God? and make his boast in
his God? Begin to glory in God here.
And therefore in this world we should learn to glory, before we come to that
glory in heaven, specially when we be set upon by any thing that is apt to
discourage us, glory then in our head; perhaps a Christian has no wealth, no
great rents to glory in, I but he has a God to glory in, let him glory in him.
The world may take all else from him, but not his God. As the Church in Cant.
5. The virgins put the Church to describe her beloved, what is thy beloved more
then another beloved? My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of 10000.
Then she goes on in particulars, my beloved is thus and thus, and if you would
know what my beloved is, this is my beloved. So a Christian that has a spirit
of faith, should glory in God here, for heaven is begun here, and he should
glory in Christ is Savior, and should set Christ against all discouragements,
and oppositions; if you will know what is my beloved, this is my beloved, the
chief among ten thousands. Psalm. 115. Our God is in heaven, and does
whatsoever he pleases in heaven, and earth, and the deepes, yea we make our
boast of God says the Psalmist, when there is occasion; this is the Lord, this
is our God, we have waited for him; specially in times of afflictions, and what
is the reason? This will hold out to eternity. This is our God. As in the
Revelations, It is a plea, and a glory for ever; for God is our happiness. As
the Schoolmen say, he is our objective happiness, and our formal happiness,
he is our happiness, as he is ours. And he is ours, in life, and death, and
for ever, so there is always ground of glory, only God does discover himself
to be ours, by little and little, as we are able to bear him; he is ours in
our worst times. My God my God why have thou forsaken me? yet my God still.

He is our God to death, and he is ours in heaven. This is our God, we will
rejoice in him. And therefore well may we boast of God, because in God is
everlasting Salvation. If we boasted in any thing else, our boasting would
determine with the thing it self, but if we rejoice in God, we rejoice in that
which is of equal Continuance with our souls, and goes along with the soul
to all eternity.

And therefore we should learn to rejoice in God, and and then we shall never
be ashamed. Interest in God and Christ is the ground of all rejoicing.
It is spoken here with a kind of exalting, a kind of triumphing over all
oppositions, Lo, this is our God. Beloved, this, that God is our God, and
Christ's is ours, is the ground of rejoicing, and of all happiness. Therefore
we are to make good that interest whilst we are here.
All joy, all comfort is founded upon this, our interest in God; and therefore
we must make this good, while we live here, that God is our God, and that we
may do so, observe this; Christ is called Emanuell, God with us. 1 By Union.
God in the second person, is Godman, and so God with us, and the Father in
Emanuell is God with us too. So we are God the Fathers, because we are his. All
things are yours says the Apostle, whether Paul, or Apollo, things present,
things to come; why? because you are Christ's. I but what if I be Christ's,
Christ is Gods. So we must be Christ's, and then we shall be Gods; if Christ be
ours, God is ours, for God is Emanuell in Christ, Emanuell, God is with us in
Christ, who is with us. God is reconciled to us in God and man, in our nature.
And therefore get by faith into Christ, and get union and get communion, by
prayer open our souls to him, entertain his speeches to us by his word, and
spirit, and blessed motions, and open our spirits to him, and so maintain a
blessed intercourse. Make it good that God is our God, 2 By acquaintance with
him
by daily acquaintance. These speeches at the latter end are founded upon
acquaintance before. This is our God. Grace and glory are knit together
indissolubly. If God be our God here, he will be ours also in glory, if not
here, not in glory. There is a Communion with God here, before communion with
him in glory, and therefore make it good that God be our God here, first by
union with him. And then maintain daily acquaintance with him, by seeing him
with the eye of faith, by speaking to him, and hearing him speak to us by his
spirit, joining in his ordinances; And then he will own us, and be acquainted
with us, in heaven we shall say, Lo, this is our God. We have had sweet
acquaintance one with another, He by his spirit with me and I by my prayers
with him. Our Savior Christ will not be without us in heaven, we are part of
his mystical body, and heaven were not heaven to Christ, without us. With
reverence be it spoken, we are the fulness of Christ, as he is the fulness
of his Church. The Church cannot be without Christ, nor Christ without the
Church.
And if he should want us, in some sort, he were miserable, he having fixed
upon us, as objects of his eternal love. In what case were he, if he should
lose that object? And therefore as we glory in him, he gloryeth in us. Who is
this that comes out of the wilderness? who? his beloved. And, woman is this
thy faith? he admires the graces of the Church, as the Church admires him, This
is the Lord. The Church cannot be without him, nor he without the Church. These
words are spoken with a kind of admiration. In heaven nothing but in its
admirable.
Lo, this is the Lord, we will rejoice in him. So I say, as there is thanks
and joy, so their is admiration, lo, behold. This is a God worthy beholding,
and so he wonders at the graces of his Children. Beloved there is nothing in
the world worthy admiration. Sapientis non est admirare, It was a speech of the
proud Philosopher, A wise man will not admire, for he knows the ground. But
in heaven the parts are lifted up so high, that there is nothing but matter of
admiration, things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into
the heart of man to conceive of. They be things beyond expression, and nothing
is fit for them, but admiration at the great things vouchsafed to the Church.

And as with admiration so with invitation, that is the nature of true
thankfulness; there is no envy in spiritual things, no man envyeth another
the light of the Scriptures, but lo, behold with admiration, and invitation of
all others, This is the Lord.

Let us therefore rejoice beforehand, at the glorious times to come, both to
our selves and to others, be stiring, and exciting one another to glory, and
rejoice in God our salvation. 1 Be not offended at the meandness of the Church.


And therefore learn all to be stirred up from hence, not to be offended with
Christ, or with Religion. Be not offended, says Austin, with the parvity of
Religion. Every thing to the eyes of the world is little in Religion. A
Christian is a despised person, and the Church, the meanest part of the world,
in regard of outward glory, but consider with the littleness, 2 Nor offended
with Religion, for there is a glory to come.
and baseness, and despisednesse of the Church, the glory to come. Time will
come when we shall rejoice, and not only see, but boast with admiration, to
the stirring up of others, Lo, this is the Lord. And therefore say with our
Savior Christ, happy is he that is not offended with me, nor with Religion,
there is a time coming that will make amends for all. Who in the world can say
at the hour of death, and day of judgment, Lo, this is my riches, this my
honors? alas the greatest persons must stand naked to give account, all must
stand on even ground to hold up their hands at the great bar. We may say to
the carnal presumptuous man, lo this is the man that put his confidence in
his riches. And none but reconciled Christians can say, lo this is our God.
Therefore take heed of being offended with any thing in Religion.

Again if time to come be so transcendently glorious, 3 Be not afraid to dye,
for heaven is our rest and center.
let us not be afraid to dye, let us not be over much cast down, for it shall
end in glory. And let us be in expectation still of good times, wait for this
blessed time to come, and never be content with any condition, so as to set up
our rest here. We may write upon every thing, Hic non est requies vestra; Our
rest is behind, these things are in passage. And therefore rest content with
nothing here. Heaven is our center, our element, our happiness, and every
thing is contentedly happy, and thriveth in its Element; The birds in the air,
the fish in in the sea, beasts on the earth, they rest there as in their
center: And that that is our place for ever, it is heaven, it is God. The
immediate enjoying of God in heaven, that is our rest, our Element, and we shall
never rest till we be there. And therefore he is befooled for it, in the
Gospel, that sets up his rest here; whosoever says I have enough, and will
now take contentment in them, he is a fool. There is a rest for Gods people,
but it is not here.

Neither rest in any measure of grace, 4 Neither rest in any measure of grace
or comfort here.
or comfort. What is faith to sight? we have hope an Anchor, and Helmet, that
keeps up many a soul, as the Cork keeps from sinking. What is this hope to
the fruition of what we hope for? Here we have love, many love tokens from God,
I, but what is love to union? Ours is but a love of desire, we are but in
motion here, we lie in motion only, and our desires are not accomplished, what
is this love to the accomplishing of the union with the thing beloved for ever?
Here we have Communion of Saints; but what is this communion of Saints, to
Communion with God for ever? We have infirmities here as others, which breeds
jealousies and suspicion; I, but we shall have Communion in heaven, and there
shall be nothing in us to distaste others, but everlasting friendship; yea our
Communion shall be with perfect souls. Our Communion of Saints here is our
heaven upon earth, but it is Communion with unperfect souls. Peace we have, I,
but it is peace intermixed, It is peace in the midst of enemies; There we shall
have peace without enemies. Christ does now rule in the midst of enemies; In
heaven he shall rule in the midst of his friends. So that we can imagine no
condition here though never so good, but it is imperfect. And therefore rest
not in any thing in the world, no not in any measure of grace, any measure of
Comfort, till we be in heaven, but wait for the time to come, and rejoice in
hope by which we are saved. Wait still, and though we have not content here,
yet this is not our home, this is a good refreshment by the way. As when the
Children of Israel came from Babylon, they had wells by the way, as in Michae,
they diged up wells. So from Babylon to Jerusalem we have many sweet
refreshments; But they be refreshments far off the way. God digs many wells, we
have breasts of Consolation to comfort us, I but they are but for the way. And
therefore let us answer all temptations, and not take contentment with any
thing here. It is good, but it is not our home. Cui dulcis peregrinatio non
amat patriam. If we have eternity, 5 Be not overmuch dejected for the
desolation of the Church.
love heaven, we cannot be over much taken with any thing in the way.

And so for the Church, let us not be over much dejected for the desolation of
the Church, but pray for a spirit of faith, which does realize things to the
soul, and presents them as present to the soul, sees Babylon fallen,
presents things in the Scripture phrase, and in the words, Babylon is fallen,
for as much as all the enemies of the Church fall. Mighty is the Lord that has
spoken, and will perform it. And as the Angel says, it is down. So time
will come ere long, when it shall be said, It is down. The Church shall be
gathered, and then, Lo, this is our God.

It was the comfort of the beleeveing Jews that the Gentiles should come. And
why should it not be the comfort of the Gentiles that there be blessed times
for the ancient people of God, when they shall all cry, and say, Lo, this is
our God; We have waited for him long, and he will save us. Therefore be not
over much discouraged, for whatsoever present desolation the Church lies
under. If it were not for this, we were of all men most miserable, as Paul
says. But there be times to come when we shall rejoice, and rejoice for ever,
and make boast of the Lord, if it were not, we were of all men most miserable.
Howsoever happiness is to come, yet of all persons he is most happy, that has
Christ and heaven. The very fore-taste of happiness is worth all the world,
The fore taste of heaven is better than all worldly happiness.
the inward peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, the beginings of the
Image of God, and of happiness here is worth all the enjoyments of the world.
Ask of any Christian whether he will hang with the greatest worldling, and be
in his condition; he would not change his place in grace, for all his glory.
And therefore set heaven aside; the very first fruits is better, then all the
heaivest of the world. Let us therefore get the soul raised by faith to see her
happiness, we need it all, for till the soul get a frame raised up to see its
happiness here, specially in the world to come, it is not in a frame fit for
any service, it will not stoop to any base sin, where the affections are so
possessed they look upon all base courses as unworthy of their hope. What, I that
hope to rejoice for ever with God in heaven, that am heir of heaven, that have
the Image of God upon me, that am in Covenant with God, to take any beastiall
course, to place my happiness in things meaner than my self, that have God to
delight in, a God in Covenant that has taken me into Covenant, with himself.
So I say in all solicitations to sin, get our selves into a frame that may
stand firm, and immovable.

In all troubles let us know we have a God in Covenant, that we may joy in him
here, and rejoice with him in heaven for ever hereafter.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A. APPETITE.
page Spiritual Appetite how it may be gotten. 16, 17, 18, 19
B.
All is of the best in Christ. 8
BOUNTY.
Gods Bounty cause of promises. 111 We should honor Gods Bounty. 29
C.
Great is the Cheer at Gospell-Feast. 8 Spiritual chearefulnes. 25
CHURCH.
The Church is an excellent society. 3 Compared to a mountain. 4 Christian's
estate best. 27 Holy Company. 20 Comfort of the Scriptures. 101 Controversies
judged by Word of God. 100 Scriptures are preserved from Corruption. 103 God
can effect things by Contraries. 154
D.
Spiritual Digestion. 23
DEATH.
Death King of Fears. 56 Spares none. ib. is armed by sin. ib. attended on
by Hell. ib. is terrible to wicked men. 64 a friend to the godly. 66 Death of
Christ has conquered Death. 59, 60 Death is conquered though a Believer dye.
63, 64 Duillists their sin and folly. 65
E.
Divine Efficacy of Gods Word. 101 Emnity between two seeds 91 Emptiness of
soul fits for Christ. 32 Of spiritual Exercise. 19 Experience of Gods Word
that its true. 102
F.
Gospel is a Feast. 5 God is Founder of this Feast. 6 Christ in the Jewish
Festivals. 15 Spiritual Famine. 20 Fear of Death unbecomes a Christian. 62,
63, 67
G.
Guests invited to the Gospel-feast. 7 Christ's righteousness our wedding-
garment. 12
H.
Largeness of heart fit for this Feast. 16 In Heaven full performance of
promises. 122, 123, 124 Hopes upholds the heart in waiting. 125
I.
Ignorance on all men naturally. 35 Infidelity shameful. 105 Interest in God,
cause of joy. 160, 161, 162 Joy in God. 158, 159 Joy and grief consistent. 88
We must justify God in all. 25
K. KNOWLEDGE.
True knowledge is transforming. 52 Desires to know more. 51 Practice what we
know. 49
L. LIGHT.
Natural men want light. 36 Naturally their light without heat. 39
M.
Majesty of the Scriptures. 101 Christ compared to Manna. 13 Religion makes
not melancholy. 26 Why Christians are melancholy. 26 Christians have a mixture
here. 82 Church compared to a Mountain. 4 Mysteriousnesse of Scriptures. 101
P.
Plenty at the Gospell-feast. 11 Preparation for this feast. 16 We must purge
the soul of sin. 16 Practice of what we know. 49 Of Gods promises and their
performance. 107 Promises free and full. 112 Promises long before performed,
and why. 113, 114 Promises shall be surely performed. 121, 152 Time of
performance in Gods hand. 152 Gods time best of performmance. 154 Reason of
Gods performance. 152
R.
Of the Rebukes of Gods people. 89 Christ and his Members subject unto
Reproaches. 90 Christ will roll away Reproach. 93 How to carry our selves
under Reproach. 94, 15 How we must Relish the Word. 22 Scriptures may be
proved to be the word of God by Reason. 103 Christ a Rock. 14
S.
Sacrament of Lords Supper a feast. 15 Sense of sin. 17 Soul has her
senses. 21 Men naturally want sight. 36 We must not judge by sight. 79 Scandals
against Religion. 92 Holy Scriptures Word of God. 99 Are supreme Judge. 100
Searching power of the Word. 102 Spirit indicted and interprets the Word. 106
Sin greatest cause of Sorrow. 85 No Sorrow in heaven. 84 Comfort in
Sufferings. 81 Natural men see not things spiritually. 38 Spiritual things
are mysterious. 35, 36 Church excellent society. 3 We must walk in the
strength of Spiritual Refreshment. 23
T.
Of spiritual Taste. 22 We have but a Taste here of what we shall have
hereafter. 115
TEARS, vide WEEP.
God will wipe away Tears. 77, 78 Signs of right Tears. 86, 87, 88
Thankfulness to God, for removing veil. 25 for Christ's Conquest over Death.
62 for accomplishment of promises. 156 Gods Time of performance set, best. 154
Types of the Gospel. 12, 13, 14, 15
V.
A Veil over men's hearts. 35 Unbelief is that Veil. 40 God only can take
away the Veil. 42, 43 Means to have the Veil removed. 46, 47 There is
variety in Christ. 10 Unbelief in every sin. 41 Christ's victory over death.
55, 57
W. Of -- WAITING.
Our duty to wait upon God. 115 Its hard to wait on God. 118 Waiting overcomes
all. 119, 120 Many graces exercised in waiting. 116, 117 Why God will have us
to wait. 150, 151 Encouragements to wait. 153, 154. Good men apt to weep. 72,
73, 74, 75 Though we cannot weep, yet we must mourn. 86 Spirit witnesses
that the holy Scripture is Gods Word. 101 Gods Word is to be heard as the Word
of God. 104 God will make all his Word good. 16
FINIS.

