A SERMON PREACHED AT Bridgwater in Somersetshire, July the 17th, 1700.

AT The Opening of the ORGAN lately Erected there.

By JOHN SHVTTLEWORTH, Rector of Oborn and Lillington in the County of Dorset.

LONDON: Printed for J. Miller, Bookseller in Sherborn, Dorset; and Sold by A.
Baldwin, at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, 1700.

PREFACE.
WHen I was first desired to Preach the following Sermon, upon the occasion of
erecting an Organ in the Parish Church of Bridgwater; I was at the same time
desired to answer the Objections against Instrumental Music in Churches, which
were published some time before that, by an Anonymous Author, in a Book,
Entitled, A Letter to a Friend in the Country, etc. in Answer to Mr. Newt 's
Sermon, etc. which I have endeavored to do with the utmost plainness and
brevity I could. However I could not so fully make reply to one Objection in my
Sermon as I would have done, and therefore am willing to say something to it
here. But because I find the Learned Mr. Dodwell has done it in a Book of his,
lately published, Entitled, A Treatise concerning the lawfulness of
Instrumental Music in Holy Offices; I shall only repeat his Answer here, for
the Benefit of those who have not seen his Book, with one Remark of my own.

The Objection is, That A. N. p. 20, etc.
several of the ancient Fathers thought Instrumental Music proper to the
Jewish State, viz. Clemens Alexand. Isidore Pelusiota, St. Chrysostom,
Theodoret, and Author. Quaest. and Respons. ad Orthodox. and he quotes out of
their Works certain Sentences to justify this.

Now to this Mr. Dodwell replies, Dod. Sect. 29.
1. Those Fathers were no more able to judge what was proper to the Jewish
State than we, because though they are very ancient, yet the earliest of them
is short of the Apostolical Age a great many years; and so they were capable of
knowing the Reasonings of that Age only by Tradition, which we are in like
manner as well. And therefore in their Reasonings they are to be heeded no
farther than it appears they were agreeable to the Reasonings of the
Apostolical Age; and Mr. Dodwell shows, Dodwel Sect. 30.
That in the Apostles time they reasoned quite otherwise.

Secondly, He Ibid.
supposes this Opinion of theirs might be taken up for want of considering the
true Reason why Instrumental Music was not used in Churches in their time and
before. He supposes they might imagine (for indeed no Reason or Tradition for
this Opinion of theirs is produced) that the cause thereof was, that it was
looked upon by the Ages before them to be a legal Constitution; whereas the
true Reason might not be such an Opinion, nor any dislike of it. There might be
many Reasons assigned for that, but that which Mr. Dodwell offers seems to be
very good, which is this. Under the Jewish Economy, Instruments were used no
where but in the Temple where the High Priest presided, who had right over all
the Jews wheresoever dispersed, as in like manner he lays down the Apostolical
Church at Jerusalem had right over all the Churches in the World; therefore as
it was the peculiar Prerogative of the Jewish High Priest to have Instruments
in the Temple only, so it might be thought it was the peculiar Prerogative of
the chief Apostle to have Instruments only in his Church, which might be the
Reason why no Churches in the Apostles time did introduce them. And again, when
the Apostolical Church was extinct by the death of the last Apostle, he
supposes every Church (though they were then all equal among themselves) might
be afraid to introduce them, lest they should seem to challenge Catholic
Pre-eminence thereby, till time had worn out the Memory of the Apostolical
Prerogative. This Reason these Fathers not being aware of, might therefore take
hold of that other by conjecture. Thus far Mr. Dodwell.

To this I add, That the most ancient of these Fathers, viz. Clemens
Alexandrius, is not at all of this Opinion, for however those allegorical
Expressions quoted out of him may seem at first sight, it will be plain to any
one who reads the whole several Discourses, he means not to condemn the sound
use of Music, as I could easily show, were it material; however I shall here
present you with one Sentence out of him to confirm what I say, which because
it is delivered in plain proper Terms, by no means to be thought allegorical,
will clearly show that he approved of Instrumental Music in Devotion,
notwithstanding the other Quotations. The Sentence is in the 2d Book of his
Paedagog. some few Lines under the Quotation there, where he says, Paedag.
lib. 2. (...), etc.
And if you desire to sing and play upon an Harp or Lute it is not
blameworthy, for in that you imitate the Hebrew King, well-pleasing to God;
and he quotes the Words of the Psalmist to justify it. This is all I shall say
upon this Head, and when all is done I am sensible, if I could say as much as I
should desire, either here or in my Sermon, for the lawfulness of Instrumental
Music, those who are captious and ungovernable, will never want Arguments to
uphold their Nonconformity; as on the contrary those who are endued with a
mild, gracious Disposition, will interpret and weigh every thing with Candor.
And such I could wish all my Readers were, not only for the Good of the Cause I
here undertake take to defend, but also that I may be the more easily born with
for my Faults which may have escaped my Knowledge.

J. S.
Be pleased to take notice, in the Margin of my Sermon, or of this Preface,
these Letters A. N. do relate to the Anonymous Letter in Answer to Mr. Newt's
Sermon: Likewise all the References to Mr. Dodwell are to his Book lately
published, Entitled, A Treatise concerning the Lawfulness of Instrumental
Music in Holy Offices.



Ephesians. V. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, singing and making melody in your Heart to the Lord.


GReat and Wonderful is the Sympathy between Musical Sounds and the Passions of
Man; and there is hardly any affection of our Minds which suitable Notes cannot
excite. There is a sort of Music will make you light and airy, another grave
and severe; some kind of it is more especially apt to compose the Mind, to
render it calm, and take off that ruggedness and moroseness of Temper which
renders many unfit for Society: Upon which account no doubt it was that the
famous Lawgivers Lycurgus and Numa provided for the encouragement of it,
thinking hereby to incline Men's Minds to what their Laws could not force. These
Things Music does perform, not faintly and weakly, but powerfully. And indeed
strange are the effects which have been ascribed to it; as the driving the Evil
Spirit from Saul, 1 Samuel 16.23.
which, since the power of the Devil can be but small when the Faculties of the
Mind are composed, is to be imputed to the natural efficacy of it. See more
Dowell, p. 17. and on.
So the Venomous biting of the Tarantula, an Italian Spider, is said to be
cured by the Application of certain Musical Notes. And this is undoubted, that
hardly any thing does more strongly charm and delight the Mind than this does,
as wise Men, in all Ages, have found and testified; and besides, when suitable
Harmony is adapted to well composed Words, it imprints them the more upon the
Mind, and does both add a force and grace to the Words, and also receive from
them a greater Power of moving the Spirits, than otherwise it would have: And
hence it is that the lofty Strains of Poetry, when expressed in melodious
Songs, do so mightily delight and affect us. But that which above all does
recommend Music to us, is the suitableness of the best sort of it to exalt our
Affections in the Worship of God, and to raise our Souls to such a degree of
Love, Reverence and Admiration in our Praises of the Divine Being, as few
Things else are able to do. And this Power it appears to have, not only from
the experience of most Men, but because the Holy Scriptures both of the Old and
New Testament do prescribe it; for which no other Reason can be given, but that
it is helpful to advance Devotion: As to mention only Proofs from the New
Testament, the words of my Text, so Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in your
Hearts to the Lord. So Jam. 5.13. Is any one merry? let him sing Psalms. But
because there are two sorts of Music, viz. Vocal and Instrumental, and the New
Testament speaks only of Singing, as is thought by some, therefore an Opinion
is spread abroad, that Instrumental Music is by no means to be admitted in the
Service of God; wherefore I shall in the prosecution of this Discourse show, 1.
That Instrumental Music is not only lawful, but commendable in the Worship of
God. 2. I shall answer some Objections which are brought against it. 3. I shall
make an Improvement of what has been said.


I begin with the First, to show that Instrumental Music is not only lawful,
but commendable in the Worship of God.

This may be very probably argued from the Words of my Text, because those
Psalms which the Apostle exhorts Christians to sing, are the same which the
Jews were wont to sing to Musical Instruments in their daily Service; and it
may be reasonably concluded, that as we are to imitate the Jews in singing
them, so we may also follow their example in applying Instruments thereto.
Otherwise I cannot see how the Apostles can avoid the censure of omitting a
most necessary Caution, in not forbidding us to imitate the Jews in this
particular, since they prescribed an imitation of them in singing, a Thing so
near a kin to it, and also in regard Man's own Reason is apt to suggest the
thing to be very fit to be so applied, as appears by the general approbation of
it by so many Nations in their Worship of God, and by all Men, but those whose
prejudiced Minds and foul Constitutions incline them to think that God is to be
pleased with nothing but what is Rigid and Austere.

2. As it cannot be denied but that Instrumental Music was very lawful in the
Worship of the Jews, because it was appointed by God's Prophets, and by David,
who was a Man after God's own Heart, and because it appears God approved of it
by commanding it to be restored in Hezekiah's time according to the Pattern of
David, etc. 2 Chronicles. 29.25. So from hence does it follow, that it is very
lawfully to be used in our Worship, because we are to prosecute the same end
which the Jews were when they made use of it, viz. to praise God with exalted
Minds; and why we may not use the same means to advance that end, since it is
every whit as powerful in its own nature now to promote it as it was then,
cannot well be surmised. And I think if any one should say the nature of
Instrumental Music were changed since that time, or that the good effect of it
in the Jewish Service were owing more to an extraordinary Grace God was pleased
to conjoyn with it, than to its natural Power, See more Dodwell, Sect. 11.
he would seem like one that was put to his shift. There are some ends indeed
which the Jews were obliged to prosecute and we are not, as to typifye the
Death of Christ by a bloody representation; and as these ends are abolished, so
in all reason the means too viz. sacrificing living Creatures, upon which act
it happens that there is not the same reason for retaining Sacrificing as there
is for retaining Instrumental Music, whose end will always remain. Again, some
of the Jewish Institutions were Conveyances of Grace and spiritual Benefits
like our Sacraments, not by their own native tendency, but by a special Power
superadded to them under the old Dispensation, which now in all reason are
abolished too, because we have no proof that God will concur with them in that
extraordinary manner he did heretofore. To this purpose did Circumcision serve,
and also the bloody Sacrifices, according to which the Apostle says, They
which eat of the Sacrifices, are partakers of the Altar. 1 Cor. 10-18.
Now as for Instrumental Music, besides that we do not use it as a means of
conferring Grace extraordinarily, there is no color of reason to be brought
that ever it was so used among the Jews, seeing there is not one Word in either
the old or New Testament, or in the Writings of the Jewish Doctors to that
purpose; and seeing its natural efficacy to stir up the Mind religiously, does
therefore afford so easy an account of its establishment, as is to exalt Men's
Minds and Devotion. Neither can Instrumental Music be thought a mere Type,
because no Reason can be brought to prove it so, unless grounded upon very
slender Suppositions, which will equally prove singing of that nature; and
which does appear very improbable, when put in the balance against that which
makes its natural Conduciveness to promote pious affections the cause of its
establishment. But,

3. If Instrumental Music notwithstanding were a Type heretofore, yet since it
is effectual to promote the same end which singing is, and in the same manner,
and besides to render the singing more powerful to advance what it is appointed
for, then why should not this be as fit to be introduced as that? Certainly
there can no reason be given since the Church has both a Command and a Power
to ordain whatsoever is to edification in the external Worship of God; as may
be proved by Reason and Scripture, and will be showed in my Answer to the
Objections. For upon the Supposition, though the Apostle mentions Singing, and
not the other, yet that can make no difference as to the lawfulness of either.
Neither can it any way be proved that a Thing is therefore incapable of being
admitted among the Christian Institutions, because it was made use of as a Type
among the Jews; Although, at the same time, it will be impossible to prove that
Instrumental Music was so used. All that remains then upon this Head, is to
prove that those Properties I have laid down do belong to it, and that they do
so, appears by the consent of most Men herein who are not prepossessed or of an
untoward Nature; and I know no better Touchstone of the natural Power of a
Thing to excite the Affections religiously, than the general Judgments of the
wisest Men. But it is said, A. N. p. 16.
Singing is an articulate Sound but organical Music an inarticulate one; and
also that Ibid.
Singing expresses methodically the Conceptions of the Soul, but the other not.
But what if it be inarticulate, or do not express the Conceptions of the Mind
methodically? Must all Things of that nature be banished from God's Service?
What then will become of kneeling, lifting up the Hands, Eyes, and the like?
Although, with Submission I conceive these Things do no more belong to the
Musical Modulation of the Voice, than to the Harmony of Pipes, but to the
pronunciation of the Words which one accompanies as well as the other. It is
said too that Orginical Music A. N. p. 50. and 51.
does not better the Singing, and that A. N. p. 50. and 51.
nothing can do that but Instruction from a Singing-Master. It Is true, the most
proper way to teach People to sing well is a Singing-Master's Instructions; yet
an Organ will be of use even to the Masters themselves when they sing in Parts
especially, to prevent Discord and Mistakes, and to keep their Voices up to
their true pitch; for it is easy to observe in Cathedrals how a whole Choir
falls considerably from the Key they began in, when they sing without the
Organ. It Is true likewise that many hold Vocal Music to be sweeter than
Instrumental; yet I think no competent Judge will deny that a Consort of Vocal
and Instrumental together is sweeter than either alone. In large Parochical
Congregations this may easily be discerned, because an Organ very much hides
and covers the harshness of many Voices too often complained of there. But
farther it is urged, the Apostles and Primitive Christians are much to be
blamed if the use be so, for not using Instruments, and that therefore A. N. p.
79.
their Devotion was not so spiritual (or exalted) as ours; but indeed their
nearness to our Savior's time, and the commonness of miraculous Gifts and
operations, then among them, must needs imprint such strong Ideas of Love,
Reverence, and the like, upon their Minds, as to raise their Souls to a great
pitch of Piety; and besides the rage of Persecution which at first prevailed
and held on after miraculous Gifts were discontinued, as it rendered their state
improper to admit such ornamental Helps as this, more suitable to the
prosperous estate of the Church; which is enough to secure them from Blame
herein, in regard the use of Instruments is not absolutely necessary, so did it
most surely affect their Minds in such sort as was suitable to their condition
at least. However I Question not but in after Ages they stood in need of this
Help as well as we; and many of those who wanted it, must be thought to have
their Minds less exalted in their Devotion oftentimes, than they would have
been if they had enjoyed the sound use hereof. See the Preface.
Though much may be said to excuse their neglect in not introducing them
speedily, but as a farther Answer hereunto, since it is evident that Organical
Music was not introduced among the Jews till David's time, several hundreds of
Years after their Sectlement in Canaan, it may be said as well that the Jews
before David's time did not Worship God in so exalted a manner, as they did
after, and were therefore to be blamed; and whatsoever Answer may be given to
this will serve in our Case. But it is urged, the Primitive Christians thought
the use of Organs unlawful and several See the Preface.
Authorities are produced to prove it, which when enquired into, will hardly be
found to vote on the side they are pretended; but I have not time to examine
them here, and when all is done no humane Authority in the World is of force
against apparent Reason and Scripture; and those who are against us herein,
will take none against their Opinions.

4. Instrumental Music is lawful and commendable, because it is said, Rev.
5.8, 9. And when he had taken the Book, the four Beasts and twenty four Elders
fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harps and Golden Vials full
of Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints, and they sung a New Song; Thou
art worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain
and have redeemed us to God by the Blood, etc. Now if Musical Instruments were
unlawful in the Christian Service on Earth, then certainly the Holy Ghost would
never have represented the Worshippers of Christ in Heaven, using them in their
own Act of Worship; and then how can any one doubt but that this is a fit
Precedent for us to introduce them in ours, since this relation is no obscure
Prophecy, but plain matter of Fact? It will not follow as well that A. N. p. 30.
Incense is to be established in the Christian Service from hence (though at the
same time I shall not assert the unlawfulness of that) because the Elders are
not represented using Vials of Odors as their own Act of Worship, but to denote
the Prayers of the Saints by a visible Representation, as most Things were
delivered to John in Vision, and as it was impossible to set forth the Prayers
of others to the Eye, unless by some corporeal adumbration of them, so nothing
was so fit to set them forth by as Incense, which was a known Type of Prayers.
Neither does it follow that Altars and the like which are represented to be in
Heaven in this Book of Revelations are to be established now, because the
Angels are no where brought in using them in their own Worship, but
representing something future thereby. Nor again, because the Joy of a A. N. p.
29.
Marrriage-Feast is said to bear resemblance to the Joys of Heaven; does it
therefore follow, that Laughter, Dancing, etc. the Expressions of Joy at a
Marriage Feast, are to be introduced, because we are no ways obliged to
endeavor to possess our selves of any thing which can be compared to Heavenly
Happiness, and besides it were vain to do it. As to what is said, that it may
as well be argued A. N. p. 31.
when Antichrist shall fall the Church shall be delivered from Instrumental
Music, because Rev. 18.22. after an account is given of the fall of Babylon,
it is said, And the Voice of Harpers and Musicians, and of Pipers and
Trumpeters, shall no more at all be heard in thee, (to which is subjoined, though
not mentioned by our Adversary) and no Craftsman of whatever Craft he be, shall
any more be found in thee, and the sound of a Millstone shall be heard no more
at all in thee, nor the Voice of the Bridegroom and the like. I do not see how
the Harping here mentioned should be interpreted more of Music in Churches,
than of Music at Revellings; and if it should be allowed that Music in
Churches were hereby to be understood, I suppose it may be proved, that the
most Lawful things have See more Dodwell. Sect. 23.
been threatened to be withdrawn from ungodly People, even the Word it self by a
just consequence, Rev. 2.5. And again, if Organical Music in Churches must be
accounted Unlawful from hence, then will also by the same reason the exercise
of Trades, Marriage, etc. Because Babylon is equally threatened to be deprived
of these things.

Lastly, if a general concurrence in the Opinion of the Lawfulness of
Instrumental Music be an Argument for it, we have that to urge; as to mention
only Protestants, the Judgment of Mr. Baxter, a professed Dissenter, whose
Arguments are public: Then we find great part of the Protestant Churches in
Germany using Organs, as also in Swedeland, Denmark, Switzerland, part of
Poland, and in Holland generally.

It Is true, it was Decreed by the National Synod at Middleburg, Ann. 1581. and
of Holland and Zealand, Ann. 1594. to prohibit Organical Music, except during
Divine Service, extra cultum, post, aut ante conciones, as the Learned Durell
proves, from Schookius Exercit. 39.
Schookius Exercit. 30.9. but that was only intended to take off the abuse of
Church Music, that it might not be used as an Entertainment to Idle Persons,
but be applied only to Psalm Singing, etc. However, our Adversaries taking hold
of this, pretend A. N. p. 37.
that Organs were introduced into the Dutch Churches by some Magistrates,
against the consent of the Dutch Ministers, and in their Quotations they
deliver only part of the Decrees, viz. A. N. Ibid.
that they would endeavor to prevail with the Magistratesto Banish Organs out
of their Temples, leaving out (except during Divine Service) and for this they
quote Voet, but I think the Words of the Decree it self delivered by Schookius,
is a clearer Evidence of the approbation of Organs by the Dutch, than is the
partial Quotation of Voet, (a professed Enemy to Organs) of the contrary: thus
much for the Lawfulness and Commendableness of Instrumental Music.

2. I come to answer some Objections, which are made against Instrumental
Music.

1. It is Objected, that A. N. p. 70.
Instrumental Music is a part of the Ceremonial Law, because Moses appointed
Trumpets, which are Musical Instruments. To which I answer, they were not
appointed for those ends which Instrumental Music was, because among all the
uses which are reckoned up for them, Numb. 10. there is no mention of applying
them to Singing, or of Sounding them Harmoniously, and accordingly they were
never Sounded in the Consort of the Temple Music, but in the intermissions of
the Music, as Dr. Lightfoot shows; Lightfoot. Vol. 5. p. 920.923.
and therefore though at the 10th Verse of this Chapter, it is Prescribed the
Priests should Blow with Trumpets over the Sacrifice; yet can it not be
supposed that this Blowing was any other than making a great noise, for the
foregoing Reasons; and as Dr. Lightfoot shows, Ibid.
who tells us, the Blowing was only a Taratantara, as he calls it, which cannot
be thought Musical.

But it is urged, it was a part of the Ceremonial Law, because Instituted by
David; A. N. p. 71.
and to justify this supposition, many other suppositions are brought too
tedious to be here examined; however, to take off the pretense of the
conclusiveness of this at least; I have to say, that Singing was Instituted by
David, at the same time that Instrumental Music was; But this being a Duty now
under the Gospel, could be no part of the Ceremonial Law, according to our
Adversaries way of reasoning; and why this other institution of David's, should
be Ceremonial then, will not appear from his appointment of it barely. But
again, Vocal Music may seem more Ceremonial than Instrumental, because Moses
himself Composed a Song, Exodus 15. And besides, God commanded Moses to Teach
the Children of Israel a Song, Deuteronomy. 31. -- 19. Whereas Moses never spoke a
word concerning Instrumental Music; and if he had, I believe it would be no
easy matter to prove Singing more moral than the other. But however, if
Instrumental Music had been appointed as a Ceremony, or a Type, although no
obligation would have lain on us, to have used it merely because it was so
appointed; and though it would have been foolish to have used it as a Type,
when the thing Typified were accomplished; yet since it has a natural power to
promote a Moral end, I do not see why it may not be used by us to that end,
because our Adversaries can produce neither Scripture nor Reason to condemn
such a Practice.

2. It is objected, A. N. p. 78.
Christians are to Worship God in Spirit and Truth, without multiplicity of
pompous Rites and Ceremonies, which God has not Instituted; A. N. p. 52.
and though some may pretend the affections of their Souls are stirred up by the
Benefit of Instrumental Music, yet that does not justify its stated use, for
then a Crucifix, a Death's Head, a Skeleton and the like, the sight whereof may
by chance have the same effect, are fit to be introduced too, and likewise
Sacrificing to represent the Death of Christ past. Though at the same time Men
may mistake a cheerful agitation of the Spirits for a Religious affection, and
there are some who profess this sort of Music does Distract them. This is the
Objection in its utmost comprehension. To which I answer, the Worshipping God
with pompous Rites and Ceremonies in an ill Sense, can be nothing else but
accounting Divine Worship, to consist in the outward performance of such, or
thinking to please God merely with a gay show, which were to dishonor him. But
as I think none can deny, that by reason of the natural influence which
external Objects and Performances have upon our Souls, our Devotion may be
heightened by the suitable Application of such, so to introduce and make use of
those which apparently tend to promote Piety, only to raise our affections
thereby; though they may seem pompous to our prejudiced Adversaries, and though
Christ has not particularly specified them, will be very lawful, because this
is a means to improve our Spiritual Worship, as a pair of Spectacles is a means
to improve the faculty of Seeing. Besides, the Apostles of Christ have given us
a general Commission to appoint such things, as 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be
done to Edification; and Ver. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order.
And again, as our Lord has no where forbidden us to do thus, so has he no
where prescribed particular Institutions for the Administration of the external
parts of Religion; nor have his Apostles prescribed enough, and without a
sufficiency of such public Worship can never be performed as it ought; and so
there is a necessity for the Ministers of the Gospel to appoint them, if they
will obey the Apostles Precept, of doing things to Edification, decently, etc.
And yet Christ as some insinuate, is not to be thought to have less provided
for his Church, than Moses did for the Jewish, because Men's own Judgments where
Passion and Prejudice do not prevail, together with the general Rules left us
in Scripture, are sufficient for making provision in this respect; whereas it
was impossible for the wit and subtilty of Man to have discerned that it would
be pleasing to God to observe those Typical things of the Law, which Moses so
critically prescribed, and so there was a necessity for him to enjoin them.
Besides, the Jews had a Liturgy, a Form of Prayers of much the same nature with
ours, which they ordinarily used, and which Moses never Instituted; yet he is
not blamed for not appointing these things, nor the Jews for introducing them
without a Warrant from him, or some other of the Prophets; as appears by
Christ's communicating with them, and not Taxing them for these Innovations; So
that upon the whole, what can we think but that the Ministers of the Church are
required to provide for the Administration of public Service as the Jewish
Doctors did; and by appointing such Rites and Ceremonies as in their Judgments
they shall think most expedient, to promote the end of our assembling together?
And since the use of Instrumental Music is thought proper to this purpose, it
follows, that to introduce that will be very convenient, though Christ spoke
nothing of it. And I dare say it will be apparently sensible to every unbiased
Person who is conversant with Instrumental Music in the Church, of a grave
sound Composition, that it will not raise a light pleasurable agitation of the
Spirits, nor distract any ones Mind, but whose Temper is different from that of
the generallity of the World. It Is true, Music of an unsound Composition, may
affect the Mind with lightness and distraction, as obscene Discourses may; but
the other sort of it will no more have this effect, than a Pious Discourse or
Unedifying Sermon, upon which account the stated use of it will be very
Justifiable: And yet it will not follow, that therefore a Crucifix, a Death's
Head, Sacrificing and the like, ought to be introduced too; Because, 1. It
would be very inconvenient to institute every Thing which in its own nature
might be Edifying; we should then be overcharged with the number of them.
Again, 2. There is not that power of moving the Spirits in such little
adumbrations now mentioned, as to justify their use; for though it be said, A.
N. p. 56.
Things affect more by the sight than by the other Senses, that is true, only
of a lively ocular representation of a Thing, which those small appearances
cannot pretend to. However, I may safely say, though it cross the Proverb; there
is that power in the best sort of Music, as to exercise a Passion in us, no
way short of what the most affecting representations to the Eye are able to
raise. More may be said in respect of a Crucifix, it being a means to introduce
Idolatry in the Minds of the Ignorant, and also of Sacrificing the bloodyness
of such an usage, being no way agreeable to the Christian Character. However,
if any of these or others were thought Edifying by our Superiors, and enjoined
by them, there is no question but that their Injunction were lawful, and our
Obedience thereto a Duty.

3. It is Objected in A. N. p. 82.
one of our Homilies, viz. of Time and Place of Prayer, Part 2. Whereas a
Person is supposed to refrain our Parish Churches, because all the Saints and
goodly Sights were gone, and because he could not hear the like Piping,
Singing, and Playing on the Organs, as heretofore: It is Replied, we ought to
give God thanks that our Churches are delivered from these things, etc. From
whence it is inferred, that Organs are accounted Unlawful even by the Church of
England. Now here it is to be observed, that Singing is alike Condemned:
Besides, it is not said, he could not hear any Singing, Playing on the Organs,
and so forth, but See more Newt's Pref. to Dodwel.
the like Singing and Playing on the Organs. So that it is not the use, but the
abuse hereof, in the superstitious Service of the Papists, which is Condemned.

4. It is objected, A. N. p. 83.
If praising God with Organs be lawful, than with Harps, A. N. p. 83.
Viols, and the like, and also with Dancing. As for Dancing I shall not
consider the lawfulness so much as the fitness of it to be introduced in
Christian Assemblies; and since it does not appear that it was used in the
ordinary Service of the Jews, nor in any House of Worship, but occasionally in
the Fields, Streets, or the like, upon public Rejoycings for Blessings,
received; therefore there is not the same Reason for admitting Dancing as there
is for admitting Organs, which were used in the ordinary Service of the Jews,
in the great House of Prayer the Temple constantly, and which have a great
power of affecting the Mind as it ought to be, beyond what Dancing can pretend
to, especially now a days, which perhaps too heretofore was more an effect of
religious Joy than a cause. Then as for Harps, Viols, and the like, no doubt
they may very lawfully be used in our Service too, only an Organ must be
thought better, because it is a more comprehensive Instrument.

5. It is objected, If A. N. p. 83.
praising God with Instruments be a fit means to raise Devotion, then Christ
and his Apostles are to be impeached of want of Wisdom, for not recommending
it. Not so because Man's own understanding could suggest it: Besides it was
enough that God approved of it in the Service of the Jews, from whence
Christians might borrow it. But enough has been said to take off the force of
this, in my Answer to the second Objection.

6. It is objected, A. N. p. 84.
That to introduce Organs, without the Authority of Convocation or Parliament,
is contrary to the Act of Uniformity, it being Supra-Conformity. Now, I
suppose, because Organs are not expressly prescribed by the Common Prayer Book,
to establish them is thought a new Right, for I cannot think our Adversary will
call it a new Form; and Queen Elizabeth's Act does say, Whosoever obstinately
standing in it, does use any other Right than is prescribed by the
Common Prayer Book, shall suffer Damage. Now in the first place, Organs cannot
be thought such a Right as is forbid by this Act, because the practice of all
Cathedrals at the time of the making of it was to use Organs with their
singing; nay, in the Queen's own Chapel they were used too, and were not
disused any where upon the promulgation of it. Again, I conceive, in that the
Words obstinately standing in it are applied to make an additional Right a
breach of this Act, therefore several Modes and Circumstances of Worship, not
in opposition to the Common Prayer Book, might be used with it, though not there
expressed, provided they were not opposed by our Ordinaries, and I suppose none
of them are against Organs. Our Objector A. N. p. 84.
allows an Injunction from the King would take off the force of his Argument,
which though we cannot now plead, yet might easily have been obtained, no doubt,
if need had required it; for it is plain his present Majesty King William
approves of Organs, not only because he frequents the places of Worship where
they are used, but also because he was pleased to give an Organ lately to one
of our Churches in London. Viz. St. Anns.
But that which gives more credit to the cause in hand than his Kingly
Authority, is that he is undoubtedly a sincere Protestant, as appears by the
unspeakable Bravery he has showed, in undergoing such a multitude of
Difficulties and Dangers these many years last past for the support of the
Protestant Religion.

If any Objections are brought against Instrumental Music from the Authority
of Schoolmen, and such others, they are of force against light, trivial Music,
but not against such as I am here speaking for.

3. I come to make an Improvement of what has been said.

I know many are possessed with an Opinion that all Things which are
Ornamental, which in their Opinion appear Gay and Glistering, are to be
banished from God's House and Service, as savouring of Jewish or Popish
Superstition, and that no human Rite or Institution whatever is to be admitted
for the more orderly solemnization of Divine Worship, and stirring up of Piety,
because the simplicity of Christian Worship they think does imply thus much.
And therefore all Arguments fetched from the Example of David, the ancient Jews
or Primitive Christians, are of no force with them; we must not beautify our
Churches as the Jews did the Temple; nor make our Service edifying, comely, and
awful, with Ceremonies and Institutions not expressed in Scripture, though we
find God's own People of old did so all along; but why must we not? As to the
Jewish Temple, David's Reason for building and adorning that was taken from the
Magnificence of his own House, 2 Samuel 7.2. See, says he, I dwell in an house
of Cedar, but the ark of God remains within Curtains: And surely we have the
same Reason to argue thus, Shall we take care to build sumptuous, magnificent
Houses for ourselves, and yet not be concerned to see the House of God of a
mean Building, rough and unpolished? Surely though God cannot be said to live
in an House made with Hands, yet whatsoever is dedicated to his Service ought
to be set off in such a manner as to bespeak the Dignity of him, as far as
according to our Abilities it is reasonable we should: For he that abhorred
those who sacrificed the worst of their Cattle, saying, Offer it now unto thy
Governor, will he be pleased with thee or accept thy Person? Mal. 1.8. will
have the same Reason to say in the present Case, Is this an House fit for my
Name to be called upon in? Give it for an entertaining House to your Prince:
See if he will thank you. The Primitive Christians, as often as they had respite
from Persecutions, were very industrious in erecting stately Churches, and
adorning them splendidly; so that they were of the same mind we are in this
matter.

Then as to the Jewish Service; Since it is lawful for us to make use of a
Liturgy, Composed by the Ministers of the Church, as I showed in my Answer to
the second Objection, how can we do better than transplant those of the Jewish
Institutions into our Service, which apparently tend to promote Piety? Since
because no Reason can be given why such should be thought so abolished by the
coming of Christ, as to be made incapable of being admitted among the Christian
Ordinances; we must needs think they are as likely to be pleasing to God now,
as any other not more edifying than they; and especially too since part of the
Jewish Service, viz. Singing of Psalms, is recommended by the Apostle.

But it is said, it is contrary to the simplicity of Christian Worship to do
so. No surely, since Christians are Men, endued with Passions, whose Faculties
are to be wrought upon by impressions upon the outward Senses. I conceive the
simplicity of Christian Worship consists in a due qualification of the Heart
and Mind in the Service of God. Now the external Beauty of God's House, and
becoming Ceremonies (as I have showed before) have a natural tendency to make
such Impressions upon us, and therefore they are very consistent with the
simplicity of Christian Worship. But the Word and Sacraments are thought
sufficient to effect this. It Is true, they are the chief Causes of begetting a
good Disposition in us; but those who urge this would do well consider, that
Christ in his Institution of the Holy Supper, has ordained that the Bread
shall be broken; undoubtedly to represent how his Body was broken on the Cross,
and by such a visible Representation to excite in us the greater Sense of his
Sufferings, and thereby more effectually to raise our Devotion; and from hence
they may gather that our Lord does approve of significant Rites and Ceremonies.
Alas, our Affections are dull and heavy, there is need of all manner of Helps
to raise them up, and it is easily discoverable what an influence Impressions
upon the outward Senses have in the Mind. It Is true, if we content our selves
with the external peformance of Ceremonies, or suffer our Minds to be taken up
with an idle Contemplation of the Ornaments and Decencies of the Church, then
are we Strangers to the simplicity of Christian Worship; but if upon the sight
of these Things, and the uniform administration of the Service, we take
occasion to contemplate upon the Glories of our Heavenly Habitations, and the
unanimous Consort of Angels praising God in Heaven, and be thereby excited to
imitate the Heavenly Host with more Fervor; and if to the outward performance
of each Ceremony we suit our Affections, then is our Worship according to
Christian Simplicity; and this use may every one make of the Ornaments and
Decencies of the Church, and it is the only design of these Provisions that
they should. Our Ceremonies are not numerous like the Popish, nor burdensome
like the purely Jewish; they are not imposed as Duties in their own nature
binding, but enjoined for the sake of their fitness to promote those Affections
which should be in every Christians Breast while lei serving his God. And I
dare say, as the observance of them is no way difficult to any, and the number
of them but barely sufficient to render our Service decent and orderly, and to
preserve it from dryness and barrenness, so there is not one of our
Institutions which has not a natural tendency to excite our Affections
suitably, or which cannot plead substantial Reasons for its appointment.

To sum up all, our Ordinances are not Jewish, because we have nothing in them
peculiar to that State; nor Popish, because we have none but what are of good
use, and because we ascribe no Superstitious Efficacy to the external
performance of them; neither are they contrary to the simplicity of Christian
Worship, because by reason of their fewness they do not distract the Mind, and
by reason of their suitableness to excite religious Affections, they further
Piety in the Heart. Neither are they additions to the Word or Doctrins, such as
our Savior spoke against, Matthew. 15.9. because we ascribe no Grace to the
outward performance of them, as the Pharisees did to the washing Cups, Pots,
and the like; nor do we impose them as divine Precepts, nor do they contradict
any Command of God, as the Traditions of the Pharisees did, upon which our
Savior, in the forecited-place, pronounced, In vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrins the Commandments of Men. Therefore they are not such
Doctrins, no these are such pious Constitutions of our Rulers in obedience to
the Apostle's Precept, and our own Reason, as our Lord himself, in compliance
with Jewish Customs, observed; such as the singing a Paschal Hymn after the
Passover, Mark. 14.26. using the Cup of Charity in the Passover. Luke. 22.16.
Which was no part of the Institution; and therefore if we will imitate Christ
we must comply with such Institutions too. Nay, we have a Command, to Submit to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. And I know no
Scripture that makes an exception of such Ordinances as relate to the
administration of Divine Service, or outward discipline in the Church, nor does
Reason suggest an exception, unless of such as tend to advance Superstition and
the like, and therefore I cannot see what excuse they can have who refuse to
submit to such pious Ordinances as our Church prescribes. I heartily beg those
who are averse to our Communion, not only to consider the danger of Schism,
which they are highly guilty of notwithstanding the Tolleration, but the Reason
and Ground of all our Constitutions, and then I Question not but many will see
their Error; for I am very apt to believe that the cause why most dissent from
us, is because they do not acquaint themselves with the design of our
Ordinances, and so are ignorant of their agreeableness to the Solemnity of
public Worship. Thus I have read of one Capito a famous Pastor in Bremen, who
was accustomed to inveigh most strangly against Organs, calling them the Devils
Pipes; but afterward, when the Magistrates of the Place had erected an Organ
in his Church, then did he extol them as much, calling their Music Heavenly,
Angelical Melody, and what not? Now I ascribe his former Prejudice against
Organs to his Ignorance of the Power and Insluence of them; as in like manner I
ascribe the Prejudices of those among us, who are Enemies to them and our other
Constitutions, to their ignorance of their usefulness. Oh! what an Happiness
would it be if we were all of one Mind, if there were no Divisions among us,
but that we did with one Mind and one Mouth, glorify God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle prays, Romans 15-6. But alas! this cannot
be expected till Men can resolve to reject their prejudices and pevish humors,
till they are convinced that as it is the duty of every one to prevent Division
and Faction as much as in them lies, and to endeavor sincerely after Unity, so
there is no possibility of effecting this, except they can humbly submit to the
determination of Rulers, in matters relating to outward Order and Discipline in
the Church, comply with customary Rites, and patiently enquire into the Reason
of Things, except they can think themselves may be mistaken in their Judgment,
when some things seem unfit for the ends they are designed; and that however
their Duty is, to submit to all the Ordinances of Man, which are not breaches
of God's Law, in regard the Apostle commands it, and also in regard by doing
otherwise they shall disturb the Peace of the Church, which every one is bound
to promote. The Apostle says, 1 These. 5.21.
Try all things and hold fast to that which is good; and how shall we try? not
by our own Fancies and Humors, but by the Word of God, according as we find the
Bereans did try the Doctrine of Paul and Silas, Acts 17.11. And the Scriptures,
though they do not in particular prescribe our Constitutions, nor indeed the
Rites of any Society of Christians in the World which has the fewest, yet do
they in general prescribe Decencies (as I showed before) command Obedience to
the Injunctions of Superiors, and expressly mention many Constitutions lawfully
introduced by the Jews, (which Moses never appointed, nor God) to whom it was
altogether as unlawful to ordain Things in the Service of God as it is to us;
and farther, the Scriptures mightily set forth the Duty of Unity and the danger
of Schism; all which being weighed and considered impartially, who can conclude
but that our Governors are enjoined even from the Word of God to prescribe such
Ordinances as they have, and that we also from the fame Word are bound to
submit to them? Then what remains? But that every one be careful to preserve
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, that they frequent our Assemblies
and comply with our Ordinances, attending to the true End and Design of them;
that so our Hearts may be affected agreeably as they ought to be, that so we
may serve God with one Accord in one Place, be of one Mind, have true
Fellowship with Christ and with one another, and be enclosed in that one Fold,
over which there is one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.

Grant, good God, by the influence of thy Grace, that this Mind may be in us
all, through the Merits of Christ Jesus; to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Power and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

