SHROVETYDE
SHROVETYDE.
Jou that hate Fasting, Dearth, and sta^ling Leanes,
Spitts bright hanged up, and Teeth and Platters Cleanes
Behold your Champion Shrovetide in this fray
Would murder Lent, and every fasting day.


FAtt Shrovetyde, mounted on a good fatt Ox,
Supposd that Lent was mad, or caught a Fox,
Armd Cap a pea from head unto the heel,
A Spit, his long-sword, somewhat worse then steel
(Sheathed in a fatt Pigge, and a piece of Porke)
His bottles filled with Wine, well stopped with Cork
The two plump Capons, fluttering at his Crupper,
And's shoulders laced with Saw sages for Supper,
The Gridir'n (like a well strung Instrument)
Hung at his back, and for the Turnament
His Helmet is a brass Pott, and his Flagge
A Cooks foul Apron, which the wind does wagg,
Fixd to a Broom, thus bravely he did ride
And boldly to his foe, he thus replyde.
What art thou, thou lean jawde Anottamie
All spirit (for I no flesh upon thee spy)
Thou bragging piece of air and smoke, that prat'st
And all good fellowship and friendship hat'st,
You Will turn our feasts to fasts, when, can you tell
Against your spite, we are provided well.
Thou say thou wilt ease the Cooks, the Cooks could wish
Thee boyld or broyld with all thy froathy fish,
For one fish dinner takes more pains and cost
Then three of flesh, baked, roast or boyld, almost,
You Will take away our plays, our sports and pleasure
And give the Butchers time for ease and leisure,
Alas poor scabbe, how barren are thy hopes
The Fencers, Bears, and Dauncers on the Ropes,
Is manly sport, or lawless recreation
Which all thy sev'n weeks time, are still in fashion,
The truth is, thou aswagest few men's hunger
And have no faithful friend but the Fishmonger.
There Is Iittle danger to attend on me
When men are drowned at Sea to furnish thee,
Pease pottage, and dryde beans, by proof we find
Offends and fills men with unwholesome wind,
And ere I Will be a slave and pinch my maw
I Will break all Proclamation, rule and Law,
We Will fill our Tubs with powdered flesh, beside
By licenc't Butchers we will be supplyde
With fresh meat; so hungry Lent adieu,
We are resolved to feed in spite of you.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1660.


