A Short conference between a Scrupling Presbyterian, and a Puritan concerning
maintenance for the Gospel Ministry wherein Dialogue-wise is lovingly argued;
Whether Tithes, or any other stinted proportion of men's Estates, may now under
the Gospel be required by the Ministers, or paid by the People, by virtue of
any express Warrant, or good consequence from Scripture.

with a Letter to the Assembly of Divines

James Sempil's Sacrilege sacredly handled.

p. 2. c. 8.. 4.

The positive Law of Princes is not the fundamental ground (as many think)
tying Tithes to the Church: for at first, Tithes were either Moral or
Ceremonial. If Moral, then all Kings are but Hezekiah's commanding to pay them
according to the Law. But if Ceremonial, then it is no less Superstition now
to restore them: then it was sacrilege then to refuse them. For nothing that
typed Christ as Ceremonal, may be revived after Christ in his Church.

Rebuffas de Decimis
Decimae erant ante Legem, sub consilio; In Lege sub praecepto; Post Legem in
liberate Spiritus. (...). Sam. 2. v. 8. 12. Now the Sons of Eli were Sonns
of Belial, they knew not the Lord.

ver. 13. And the Priests custom with the people was, that when any man offered
Sacrifice, the Priests servant came while the flesh was seething, with a flesh
hook of three teeth in his hand.

ver. 14. And he struck into the Pan, or Kettle, or Caldron, or Pot; all that
the flesh-hook brought up, the Priest took for himself: So they did in Shiloh,
unto all the Israelites that came thither.

ver. 15. Also before they burnt the fat, the Priests servant came, and said to
the man that Sacrificed, give flesh to roast for the Priest, for he will not
have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

ver. 16. And if any man said unto him, let them not fail to burn the fat
persently, and then take as much as thy soul desires: Then he would answer
him, nay, but thou shall give it me now, and if not, I will take it by force.

ver. 17. Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord:
for men abhorred the offering of the Lord.



May 2d. London. 1646.

A Short Conference, between a Puritan and Presbyterian Strupling about the the
maintenance of Gospel Ministers.
Presbyterian. WHether are not the Ministers of the Gospel to live by the
Gospel?


Puritan. Yes doubtless, for we are forbid to mussle the very Ox that tre^deth
out the corn, and Gods taking care for Oxen, is to teach us that he tak^s
far ^r^^ter care for his true Ministers of the Gospel. 1. Cor. 9 9. 10.


Preby^e^^a^. Whether may not the Gospel Ministers require the same Tithes for
their Gospel maintenance, which were due unto the Leviticall Prieist*hood for
their service adout the Tabernacle?


Pur. No, for it is plainly s^id that there was no perfection by the Leviticall
Priest*hood, under which the People received the Leviticall law, and that the
Levitical Priesthood being changed, there was made a necessity of changing the
Levitical law, Heb. 7. 11. 12. 19. even the whole Leviticall law, whereof
Tithes were a part, an Article, a Cannon.


Presb. But may not the State alot or set, out a maintenance for the Gospel
Priest hood or Ministry, under some other proportion or denomination, as of
one eight, or fifteenth of men's estates, to be given them for their labor and
traveil in the Gospel. without so much as ever naming the word Tithes, amongst
us? might not this be don lawfully and without scruple?


Pur. No, because the proportioning and imposing upon the people such a
maintenance, for the Gospel Ministers, must be either by some express warrant
from God, which never was as yet, nor, can ever be produced, or in imitation of
the Leviticall Law, which would incroch too much on Judaism, and in part revive
the O^d Law which is abolished, Heb, 7. 12. or else must needs arise from a
double presumption, of I^ol^trie^ as it is pretended to relate unto Gods
wo^ship, and tirany as it intrenches upon the Subjects propriety and liberty,
if it be without their consent.


Presb. But since the Lord has ordained that such as preach the Gospel should
live by the Gospel. 1. Cor. 9. 14. If the Parishioners will not give the
Preacher maintenance, is there not a necessity for him to take it, wbether the
Parishioners will or no? Christ says the Minister must live by his Preaching,
the people will not pay him for his Pre^ching, and I find no third way to make
good that Scripture, unless he force it from them for his livelihood.


Pur. It Is true, how Christ appointed that such as preach the Gospel should live
by the Gospel, upon the effects and fruits of the Gospel, hospitality, alms,
deeds, community of necessaryes, when the Christians have wherwithall, not upon
plundring and stealing; But if the people had no means for themselves, or
would not part from it unto their Ministers, then, their living by the Gospel,
will be to work with their hands in some honest caling as Paull did, unles wec
will infet that Paul and his Disciples, did not live by the Gospel, because he
chose to work with his own hands and advised others to do the same, rather
then their Ministry should be thought chargable to any, Act. 20. 33. 34. 35.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and 4. 11. 12. They are then to live by the Gospel, on what
Gods providence shall provide them under the Gospel, whether it come in by
free maintenance from their Parishioners, or by laboring with their own hands.


Presb. But was there no command nor president for compelling the People of God
to Pay Tithes unto the Levites, nor to give maintenance unto the Gospel
Ministers?


Pur. I find no command nor President, neither in the Old, nor New Testament,
for such compulsion.


Presb. What may be the reason why God would not grant a compulsive power for
levyeing, neither the Leviticall nor Gospel maintenanc^?


Pur. There are many reasons for it, both in respect of the people, and in
respect of the Ministers; First in respect of the People; though God set out
the portion, the Tithes which the Levits, were to have, and expressly
insinuates, that temporal things ought to be given unto such as administer
spiritual, yet he would have it be given as a free gift, a matter of bounty,
not grudgingly, 2. Cor. 9. 5. which is inconsistent with a coerciue way of
levying it; Secondly in respect of the Ministers, it is expressly required
concerning them, that they be not soon angry, no strikers, 1. Tit. 1. 7. they
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men 2. Tim. 2, 24. They were, as near
as possible, to resemble Christ their Master, who was not to strive, nor to be
heard cry in the streets, a bruised reed he would not break, and smoking flax
he would not quench, until he sent forth Jugment unto victory, Matt. 12. 19.
He had no civil Jurisdiction, He said his Kingdom was not of this world,
John. 18 36. He would not devide the Inheritance between the two Brethren,
Luke. 12. 13. 14. muchlesse would he play the divider* the carver for
himself, and all this is likewise inconsistent with the Ministers using by
themselves, or so much as countenancing in the civil Magistrate any compulsive
means in or about their maintenace, or any thing else which immediately concerns
he Gospel of Peace.


Prsb. But is it not to be feared, that if the People be not compell^^ to give
maintenance unto the Ministers, that in many Parishes the Pre^chers would not
have wherewithal to live upon, but must be constray (...) to neglect their
studye^, and labor all the week long for relief of themselves and families
with food and raiment, whereby they would li^^^y become much unprepared, if not
totally disabled, to Preach unto their P^rishioners on Sundays, in such a case
as this, were it net better to compel maintenance for a Preaching Ministry,
then that there should be no Ministry, no preaching at all?


Pur. No doubtless, for since we have no warrant for levying suc^ kind of
maintenance, it can not be of faith* whatsoever is not faith is sin, R^^ 14. 23
and we may not sin, we may not do evil that good may come th^^of, Romans 6.
1: Besides, it is absolutely sinful to make such asupposition, to suppose that a
true and painful Ministry should, or can want maintenance since it cannot be
without an absolute distrust of God, ^ho^ ha^ promised to be their portion and
inheritance, Number. 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 10. 9. and since Paul said that it was better
for him to die, then that h^e sh^u^d be prevented in his bosting of not making
the Gospel chargable, 2. Cor. 9. 15. 18. 23. even so ought every conscientious
Minister to w^rk^ ^ith his own hands, and rather starve then go to law, or
compel his P^rishioners to give him maintenance, whether they will or no^; and
for the impertinent and over officious c^re, which some seem ^o have of
upholding Gods Ministers, by such indirect courses, they out^ the Constable; I^
is Gods work to send and furnish us with Ministers, and their duty to require
maintenance after such a manner only, ^s they are warranted in Christ's
Commission, which bids them give freely as they have received freely, Matt. 10.
8. and that when they were in any place, they should eat and drink whatsoever
was set before them, Luke. 1^. 7. 8.


Presb. But is there no third way, no means of ind^fferency betwi^t t^king
Tithes really or equivocally, which as you insinuate, will oblige us no l^sse
then Paul says of Circumsi^ion, to the keeping of the whole Law, Gal. 5 3 4*
that never made any one perfect, Heb. 7. 11. 1^. Is there* I say, noe medium
between such a Leviticall kind of maintenance, if you will have it so, and
becoming mere almes-men, to li^e upon the Peoples charity?


Pur. Noe doubtl^s; for as there is no third way of Government prescribed the
people of God, between, or besides the Old and new Law, or Testament, so is it
impossible there should be sound any other warrantable means of ^ay^ing
maintenance unto the Ministers of either Testament, then what God has therein
prescribed them, which under the old Law, was a stinted Proportion even the
Tyther, whether the encreas were more or less, for the Livi^ecall Preist-hood;
But for the Gospel Ministry, nothing besides the charity and free bounty of
the people, which yet through faith became a larger portion then that of
Tithes, whilst the believers at some time and place; had not only all things in
common, Ast. 2. 44. but such as had land^ and houses, sold all they had, and
laid the whole price thereof at the Apostles feet, Act. 4. 34. 35.


Presb. Tell me then deer Brother in Christ, how a conscientious Minister ought
to demean himself in his great extremity, one who hither to has l^ved on Tithe,
which you call robbery and plunder, and has not as yet faith enough to renounce
them, without a distrust that both himsele and family will be reduced to
beggary?


Pur. Dear Brothe^: If you be truly conscientious, and througly convinced, you
would quickly see as our Savior says, how disadvantagious twere to you, to
gain the whole world and loose your own soul, Matt. 16. 26. I will therefore
deal clearly with you, as in the presence of God, the most exquisite
Accountant, and severest Judge, to all such as with Ananias and Sapphira
presume to lie unto the Holy Ghost, Ast. 5. The Law, ordained such asstole to
restore five for one, Exodus 22. 1. Zacheus according thereunto, when he was
converted, restored fourfold, for whatsoever he had taken from any body upon
false accusation, Luke, 19 8. and with out restitution (to such as have
wherewithal) all Casuists presume there can be no true repentance, and
consequently deny absolution: If you be able therefore you must make
restitution of all that you have extorted from your Parishioners, under
pretense of maintenance, at lest unto such as will not freely remit the debt
unto you, and for the ^n^ur, endeavor to get faith in Gods Ordinances, without
which it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11. 6. and as the Apostle Iam^s
says, you must not, nay I may say you can not so much as think too receive any
thing of him without it, James 1. 7. But on the contrary, (if you will believe
the Scripture) If you have faith but as a grain of musterd seed. you might
remove Mountains, Matt 17. 20. and receive of God whatsoever you shall ask,
and 21. 22. Trust in him who has promised to be your portion, do what God
commands, and leave the success unto his Providence, say with Job, that you
will trust in God, though he should suffer you to starve, Job 13. 15. Rely
upon the maintenance that he has provided for you, through the free gift of
the Brethren, 2. Cor. 9. 5. which to many of the Independent way, as you may
observe, proves more beneficial then Tithes, and if it should fail you (which
yet it cannot except through your own want of faith) you have notwithstanding
your hands as well as your neighbors, to get a living by, and take this for a
parting Word, that it may leave deeper impression; God who clothes the Lil^y^s
of the field, which neither take care nor work, more gloryously then Solomon
in all his greatness, Math, 6. 28. 29. and feeds the young ravens which cannot
help themselves, any other wise then by crying unto him, Job 38. 41. Psalm.
147. 9. will not let thee only his Gospel Minister, with whom he has made a
better Covenant, and upon better Promises then with all the world besides, Heb
8 6. be put to shifts for maintenance, if thou bel^ivest, if thou reliest upon
him; and had thou been born a Potentate, or bred up to the most gainsomest
calling, in thine own imagination, wit^out this anchor of faith, thou must
needs have miscarried, and come to begga^ry, God bring it home unto thy heart,
and move thee being once converted to endeavor the convertting so many of thy
misled Brethren.


To the Divines assembled at Westminster.
TH^s short dialogue about the Ministers maintenance coming to my h^nd, I
thought good to dedicate it unto your selves, whom it most concerns, But be
cause it is argued with much mildnes and sweetness of Spirit, a thing in it self
much commendable, I am some what fearful it will not awaken your ^ul
frozen-heart^dnes, nor pierce deep enough into the putrid depth of your
unfathomable covetousnes: Bear with me then, if for your good, I give you
mine own opinion of the matter in these following lines, with a little more
tartnes of expression in some few passages thereof.

I conc^ive, we are bound by the unrepealable Law of Christian charity, and
the necessity of preserving hum in society, even mankind it self, by doing as
we would be done unto, Matt. 7. 12. to relieve the necessityes of the S^^^ts,
of our Brethen, and mankind in general, to the parting with our whole
estates, save so much only as our own necessity^s require at present: For
th^ugh charity begine at home, yet it must be so regulated that under p^^ten^e
thereof, we do^ not so lay up in store against a dear year, or pamper our
selves for the time, whilst others dye through our uncharitablenes, of penury
and hunger. In which respect, we may take up this unerring rule, that if any
bodies instant necessities be greater then our own, we are indispensibly cal^'d
upon to administer unto them of what we have: Oh the fearful account and
condemnation, which attends all sorts of people for failing in this way of
Stewardship, but principally the covetous of the Clergy, or covetous Clergy
rather, the very mass of them being plunged and drowned herein, as appears
by their compelling men of all ranks, estates, and conditions whatsoever, to
the payment of their Jewish Tithes? Do people of any caling in the world
except pretended Ministers, which were never rightly called, constrain their
Brothren to buy their merchandise, and that at what price the owners please,
beside these merchandising Clergy men? Or can any people but themselves in all
the Land escape the heavy hand of Justice, if they should force monyes from
others, under pretense of payment for sophisticated wares, which they never did
or would receive? Oh let such a suppositious Tribe of Levy, or truer offspring
of Simon Magus hear and tremble at what the Spouse says unto the Churches: Ho
every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without
Price: Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread? and your
labor for that Which satisfies not; What say you now, is Christ or Antichrist
your Lord and Master? which of them is it which you follow in denying both the
spiritual and real bread, milk or Wine of the Gospel, to such as will not
be lik^ your selves, guilty simony in purchasing them at your sacralegious
mo^opolizing prices? who have you for a President of constra^ning not only your
own, such as to you are within, but even those which are without contrary to
Paul's rule, to spend their money with such profane exchangers, deserving to be
turned out by the Church, for that which is not bread? to make poor people
which labor all the weck long to fill their bellys, disburse the price of
blood, of life unto you, for that which satisfies not, which they approve not
of? Holy David did not only refuse it even in extremity, but the very
murdering lews made conscience thereof, though they had to deal with ludas the
worst of miscreants. Paul did not only set up, shop where ever he came (oh
profane) laboring with his own hands, with whom Silvanus and Timothy did the
like, as appears by comp^ring the two last Scripturs with 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. and
2 Thessalonians. 1. 1. as also did Tytus; but Paul required the Pastors Elders of
settled congregations to do the same, giving them reason for it as well as
precept, and such a powerful one as might prevail not only with Christians but
with Infidels, saying, it is more blessed to give then to receave; professing
withal, that he kept back nothing that was profitable for them, ver. 20. and
that he had declared unto them the whole counsel of God ver. 27.

Answer for your selves the, you mercenary Merchants of your pretended heavenly
manna; who have you t^is commission from? how can you give us infalible
assurance, that God discovered to you more of his counsel the^ he did to Paul?
or why must a State or People damn themselves for your bas^ ends, to ^al^
Paul's truth in question, and not believe him when he tells the Pastors of
Mi^etus, and in them all true Ministers and Pastors successively, that it was
Gods absolute will they should labor with their hands supplying such as
wanted, as you have seen in that second of Acts a fore cited?

Phy, phy for shame, remember that they which will be rich fall into many
temptations, the love of money is the root of all evil, but godlynes with
contentment is great gain: Begin at last, to think repentace necessary, and if
you will not with Zacheus make restitution of all the Tithes you have unjustly
taken; at least disclaim them for the future and sin no more: Trust in the
Almightyes providence, and your own hands for maintenance, wait upon his
Ordinances; Christian charity will grow into a community of all things, rather
then true believers shall want wherewithal to live upon; God will teach Ravens
to administer unto you, if but Eliah-lyke you be obedient to his commands: if
you be not more idle then the ravens, which neither sow nor reap, which
neither have storehouse nor barn^, and ^^t God feeds them when they cry: If
you be not less promoters of Gods honor then Lillies, which neither toil nor
spin, and yet are more glorious then Solomon in his best array, how much more
would be have care of you, O ye of little faith? fly then to God at last, now
that you are discovered, at lest make avertue of necessity, trust in God and
not in Tithes; Such as h^^etofore adored ^ou, their eyes be now open and take
notice of your gross i^postur^; they have no longer patience to see you live
like drones, to tiranize over their consciences, to be your own carvers of all
they have, nor will be longer accessory thereto by fatning you like Swine
against the day of Slaughter.

FINIS.

