Sir Thomas Fairefax FACING OXFORD.

And our Horse skirmishing within Musket Shot of the Town.

The Enemy forced into OXFORD.

Also 70 and odd prisoners taken, and sent to Abingdon. With the relation of
the Kings marching out at the gate he passed.

Also the names of the Commissioners chosen to treat upon Articles for the
surrender of Newark, and the second summons from the Lords and Commons
Commissioners of both Kingdoms with the Army, and two several Answers
thereunto.

These being examined by the original Papers, are commanded to be printed, and
are published according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 4. 1646.

The Copy of a Letter from Colonel Rossiters Quarters at Balderton.
SIR,
WE have sent in a second Summons to Newarke, which has produced a fair
Answer from the Governor, which with other reasons gives us thoughts of having
Newarke in a short time; I have sent you (here enclosed) the Copies of the
Summons and the Answer: This day the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, meet to
consider of the Answer which they have received to their Summons, and also what
reply to draw up to send in to them again, though they flew high in their
former Answer, yet they are lower now in their thoughts, and I hope they will
be easily persuaded to surrender it upon good terms. It may be (and is very
probable) that they will make their demands very high at the first, they being
to offer terms: but however, they are in a most sad and miserable condition in
the Town, not only by reason of the sickness, which still increases, and is
very sore upon them, but they want both Money, Clothes, and Victuals,
Ammunition, no great plenty, and are in distress for (even almost) all manner
of necessaries, and the Soldiers in the Town having little pay, nor Victuals,
and yet hard duty, are every hour ready to mutiny, which some of them (for
want, have begun already to practice, and some in the Town have been
Plundered, what further happens shall be communicated by the next Post.

From Balderton the 30. of April, 1646* Your humble Servant, Y. S.

The Copy of the Summons sent into Newarke, by Order of the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms.
SIR,
WE hope you have considered that our Paper (as you term it) contained a
Summons from us, what we received from you merits no reply, we were in
earnest as to give an account to God, and many of our proceedings, and to show
that nothing from you can hinder our endeavoring, that you may see your
approaching ruin, and whilst there is time avoid it; we once more demand of
you, in the name of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and for the use
of the King and Parliament, that you forthwith deliver up the Town, and
Garrisons of Newarke into their hands, and we shall give you conditions for the
surrender thereof, which you must not expect to be such, as you might formerly
have obtained: This is the last Summons we shall send, you now accepting of
what is offered, will declare you are sensible of the total loss of your
estates, the devastation of the Country round about you of the ruin of the
Town, and of the Blood which may else be spilt: we shall expect your
possitive Answer by three of the clock to morrow in the alternoone at Balderton.

Collingham, 27. of April. 1646. Signed in the name and by the Committee of
both Kingdoms Mountague Lothian.

For the Governor of the Town and Garrison of Newarke, the Gentlemen there,
and the Major, Aldermen, a and Burgesses of the Town.
To this Summons the Lord Belasys sent the same day this Answer following, as
his own particular Answer, which he sent Colonel Rossiter.

SIR,
I Have read a second Summons from the Committee of both Kingdoms, but (by
their own directions) the business concerns so many, as they cannot expect a
sudden return: however I desire you would please to let those Lords know,
that on Wednesday I shall send my Answer, and remain

Newarke 27, of April, 1646. Your humble Servant, I. Belasys.

The Answer of the Summons, sent from the Lord Bellasys, to the Commissioners
of Lords and Commons of both Kingdoms, now before Newarke.
My L^^ds,
THe consideration of what is required in your Summons of Monday last, being of
so high concernment to His Majesty, and to the particular interests of very
many of His faithful Subjects in this Garrison; I conceive a shorter time then
Monday next, will not be sufficient to prepare Articles of so diverse natures as
are necessary to be treated on, at which time I will not fail to send such to
you, and upon your assent to them to surrender the town: In the mean time I
send you hereunder written the names of such Commissioners for the Nobility,
Gentry, Soldiers, Clergy and Townsmen, as I do entrust for the treating upon
these Articles, with an equal number of yours, whose names I shall desire by
the next, and that you will appoint such a place as you shall think most
convenient for the Treaty: and I further expect, that a safe conduct be
granted, and hostages delivered for the security of those Commissioners
employed by me.

April 29. 1646. J. BELLASYS. The Lord Lexington (alias Lackstones) that was
Knight of the Shire for Nottingham and revolted. Mr. Hen. Bellasis (that was
Knight for Yorkshire) the Governors brother.) Sir Bryan Palms (sir Guy
Palms his son) Sir Gervis Nev^^ (one pitied for being a Cavalier.) Colonel
Darsy. Major General Air (that threatened so often fire and sword.) Sir Simon
Fanshaw. Sir Gamaliel Dudley (who was servant to the old Earl of Clare.)
Colonel Gilby (who was Major to Sir John Digby.) Colonel Atkins. Doctor Marsh
(Deane of Tork.) Mr. Stand^sh (Alderman of Newark.)


SIR,
I Conceive that you desire an account from me where the King is, which I am
doubtable possibly to tell you; he went out of Oxford on Monday morning last at
the East Gate with Ashburnham, and a Priest that is well acquainted with the
North Country; yet some will have it, That he is at Worcester; others, That he
was traced 40 miles Northward; but for ought I know, he is with at London:
they have counterfeited the General Sir Thomas Fairfax his Seal, (as well as
his hand) in Oxford, and make Passes therewith. The Forces of this Garrison of
Abingdon, have fallen on a party of the Oxford Forces, taken 70 and odd
prisoners, the General hastens his designs against Oxford, and intends to
view the place to morrow God willing. This in haste, I rest

Abingdon the 30 of April, 1646. Your Servant N. T.

Kind Sir,
THe Lord has now brought us before the chief and grand Garrison of the
Enemies: Oxford was with the General faced yesterday within musket shot, but
the Enemy within are very same; and in all our skirmishes, between our horse
and them we had but three horses shot, most of their foot walk about their
Works in a drooping posture, with their Arms behind them, and with their
hands in their pockers. I hope in a short time, through Gods blessing, we shall
be masters of this City. But at present I rest

Garsiington near Oxford, May 2. 1646. Your Friend to serve you W. C.

Articles agreed upon for the surrender of the Castle of Bridge-North, the 26
of April, 1646. between Sir Robert Howard Knight of the Bath, Governor, Sir
Vincent Corbet, Sir Edward Acton, and Sir Francis Oately, Commissioners for the
King, and Col. Andrew Lloyd, Col. Robert Clive, and Robert Charlton Esquire,
Commissioners for the Parliament.
1 THat all the Commissioners, Officers of Horse, and all Captains of Foot,
shall march away to any of His Majesty's Garrisons or Army within forty
miles, with their Horses and Arms for themselves, and each of them to have a
servant, with his Horse and Sword, and their wearing Apparel, free quarter for
thirty Horses, and a safe Conduct, and not to march less then eight miles a
day; And any of the abovesaid Officers, laying down their Arms, to repair to
their habitation.

2 That all inferior Officers shall have liberty to march with their Sword,
and the common Soldiers without Arms, to any of His Majesty's Garrisons or
Armies, within forty miles, as formerly mentioned, or laying down their Arms
to live at there own habitations for a fortnight, and afterward to take the
Nagative Oath if they continue within this County, where they intend to
reside, and passes accordingly.

3 That all Clergymen, Townes-men and Countrymen, within this Castle may have
liberty to repair to their own habitations, provided they lay down their
Arms, and a fortnights time for their taking the Negative Oath, and not to
live within a mile of the Parliaments Garrisons, or otherwise, if they shall so
desire, to march to any of the Kings Garrisons or Armies.

4 That all wounded and sick prisoners within the Castle shall have liberty to
reside in the low Town or elsewere, until they be fit to travel, and to have
passes to go home, or to any of the Kings Armies or Garrisons.

5 That Sir Robert Howard, Sir Vincent Corbet, Sir Edward Acton, and Sir
Francis Oately, with each of them their Horses and Arms, and two men a piece,
except Sir Robert Howard, who is to have four, with their Horses and Swords,
and their Masters wearing Apparel. shall have liberty to march to their
several habitations, and to continue there for the space of two months, in
which time, they are to make their election, whether they will go to make
their peace with the Parliament, or go beyond Seas to any of the Kings
Garrisons or Armies, and to have passes accordingly, they engaging themselves
to do nothing prejudicial to the Parliament the mean time.

6 That M. Howard, M. Fisher, and M. Gravener, shall march away with their
Horses and Swords, and one man apeece, with their wearing Apparel and Swords,
to any place within forty miles.

7 That Lieut. Hosier and Doctor Lewin, shall march away without Horses or
Arms to any of the Kings Garrisons, or other place within thirty miles,
provided it be not within this County, and passes accordingly.

8 That M. Millard, Chaplain to the Garrison, may have liberty to go with
his Horse to his house at Reight^^ in this County, and to take with him his
Manuscripts, and there to live, taking the Negative Oath within one months
time, or else to march away out of this County with the rest.

9 That the Clerk of the Commissioners may have liberty to march at the rest
of the inferior Officers and Soldiers, and to have the same Conditions, and
to take with him all papers concerning the Garrison, and their wearing Apparel.

10 That the Lady Oately, her children, and maid servants have liberty, with
their wearing Clothes to go to Pitchford, or the Hay, and there to live
unmolested.

11 That all other women and children in the Castle, may have liberty to go
to their own or any of their friends houses, provided it be not within a mile
of any of the Parliaments Garrisons.

12 That all Gentlemen, Offices, and Soldiers within the Castle, as well
strangers as others, desiring to go beyond the seas, shall have passes
accordingly, and Letters to the Committees of the several Counties, to afford
them like conditions, as to the Gentlemen of this County, upon the surrender of
this Castle here granted.

13 That the Chyrurgions belonging to the Castle, shall march away and have the
same conditions as the inferior Officers.

14 That the Gunners and Powder-men, with their mates, may march away as the
rest of the Common Soldiers.

15 That no violence, injury, or incivility shall be offered to any that shall
march out of the Castle, but be protected in all things according to the tenor
of these Articles; and that sufficient Hostages be given on both sides for the
performance of all and every the matters here agreed upon.

16 That the Governor and the rest of his Officers shall do their utmost
endeavors to secure and preserve all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition,
Victuals, provisions, goods, bedding, and all other accomodations necessary and
belonging to the Castle, other then what is allowed to be taken by the aforesaid
Articles, and all those safe and unspoiled, to be delivered up, together with
the Castle (the 27. of this month of April, 1646.) unto the Committee, ^or whom
they shall appoint, and that these Articles be confirmed by the Governor of
the Castle.

17 That if any Officer or Soldier, who shall maliciously spoil his horse or
Arms, or misdemeane themselves on their march, such misdemeanors shall not be
extended farther then upon the parties offending, and upon them justice shall
be done according to the Discipline of War.

18 That all the Commission-Officers be certified by the Governor of the
Castle, and upon this certificate be allowed to march accordingly.

19 That Master Latham be delivered up to the mercy of the Parliament.

Pro Rege.
Rob. Howard. Vin. Corbet. Edward Acton. Francis Oatley.
Pro Parliament.
And. Lloyd. Rob. Clive. Robert Charlton.


Observation.
Those that honor God, God will most assuredly honor, and that is the chief
reason of the many successes in Shropshire by the Committee there, who are not
only a praying, but a fighting Committee likewise, both which being joined
together, do most undoubtedly make a sure foundation for these and the like
successes and victories that God does and has ever been pleased to crown them
with in all their enterprises.

FINIS.

