SINS SUFFERED FOR, But not Remitted, before they be Committed. OR, A
Confession of Faith, different from those that hold it not lawful to pray for
the Pardon of SIN.

By HENOCH HOVVET, ROBERT SMALL-BONE, And some others.

printer's or publisher's device NOLI ALTVM SAP^^^



LONDGN, Printed by E. P. for George Whittington, and are to be sold at the
Shop of Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance of the Exchange. 1645.

SINS SVFFERED FOR, But not Remitted, before they be Committed.
FIrst, We believe, Ephesians. 1.4.
that there is a People that are chosen before the world, was in Christ; that
is, in the Covenant of his peace (in him) that is, that we should in time be
in him, as new Creatures; after we were old, and should become new, 2 Cor.
5.17. And also not before Creation, but after we were Creatures; which choice,
we understand that God did foreknow, what he himself d^d intend to create
and bring to pass, and not what was made, for then he did but know; If
foreknow, then before we had a being he did know; which foreknowledge of
his, was upon all things to be, because he is the Author of all things: 1 Cor.
11.12. and nothing whatsoever could come to pass without his determination;
so, that means and ends are all ordained by him.

We believe, John 1.3.
that this people are chosen to salvation; but after this choice, many things
do intervene: their Election, and the Enjoyment of a full salvation, as
Creation, before which they were not; Sin, which is an Act, or Neglect after
they were, which is called the transgression of the Law, a washing from that
Sin, Pardon, Healing, Forgiveness, Remitting, etc. after they were, and sins
severally by them committed, by looking up to Christ, believing.

Romans 3.
We believe, that Remission of Sin is an Act that flows from the Revelation
of the righteousness of Christ, viz. as the Sun in the Firmament, sending
forth his beams, will part two things that are frozen together, Hosea 1.5
so the righteousness of the Son of God appearing, parts the guilt of sin,
and the soul; but forgiveness of sin consists of two parts, remitting of
their depravity, or disorder, that is caused in the soul by sin, whose
poisoned sting does as it were dis-joynt and benumn the whole soul, 13.2.
making it unfit for any Communion with God or Saints, causing it to run away
from God, until Christ our good Shepherd seek us up, and it is well we have
him; for were it not for him, we should never leave running from God, to Hell
and destruction, until we perished eternally; for it is not our turning, but
Christ's turning us, whereby we are delivered.

Romans 3.25.
THe second is, delivering us from the curse of the Law, which is either inward,
as Pangs, Torments, blindness of Mind, hardness of Heart, etc. or outward
Judgments for sin: in the former, man is delivered at the time of his
Justification wholly, for all that is past: But, from the last, I mean outward
Judgments, many of the dear Saints, whose sin in all other senses may be
pardoned, yet in this, I mean in delivering from outward Judgments, which are
the debts for sin (the forgiveness whereof, Christ bids us pray for) for
ought I know, may not be pardoned a great part of, or all their life time; 2 Samuel 2.10. 2 Samuel 16.22.
as David's sin pardoned, yet Gods Judgment for it, (the Sword shall never
depart, etc. and his wives layne withal in the sight of the Sun) continued.

Moses, the Servant of the Lord, yet did die upon Mount Pisga, for the sin
of unbelief, and many a redeemed Saint are yet capable of death, and outward
affliction, as Childbearing in sorrow, etc. which are the rewards of Adams
sin; so that the Childbearing woman, may cry for pardon or ease, and say in
Judgment remember mercy; Psa. 119.11.
yet these are so far from being curses, that God turns them all into
blessings, and makes the elect enjoy them as Servants, for their good: It is
good (says David) that I have been afflicted, for thereby I learned thy
statutes; Rom, 8.28.
all things being ordered by our Christ, works together for our good; and this
is brought to pass by that God, whose love cannot be taken from us, by our
sins: but as a Father shows most love, when his Children are sick, and lame;
so Gods healing mercies appear, when we are wounded: when seven Devils is in
a Mary Magdalen, they could not turn off Gods love, but he turns them out of
doors, because of his eternal love, and through his love be unmovable: yet
he never promised to keep them, that they should not sin; but when they
sin, to restore them; pardoning is the continual portion of a Child, when
the wicked shall perish.

We believe, that sin was not before the sinning person had a being, and
could not be forgiven him before he was, nor remitted before it was fastened to
the soul; the word remit, signifies to let go again, and could that be,
before it had a place?

Mark 11.24.25.^6.
We believe, that the person that has the strongest faith that can be, that
is, so knowing, that he can believe that whilst he prays, that he has the
thing he prays for, is capable to receive pardon from God; therefore not
pardoned, before he sin.

1 John 2* 2.
We believe, that the Advocate has nothing to do for us concerning sin,
except we commit it; but if we sin, we have an Advocate: which if implies,
1 John. 1.8.9.
that after sin be committed, Christ does Advocate for us; if we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness: where it is proved, that sin may be seen,
Confessed, and Pardoned, after Committed, and all from a foregoing Covenant,
for faithfulness implies the performance of what was purchased; so that we
put a difference betwixt the purchase, and the faithful performing of it,
which is forgiving sin; and the inheritance of Heaven was purchased, and they
may as well say, they have that now, as to say, that they have pardon for
sin, before it be Committed.

I confess, the Popes Bulls was in that manner; sins past, present, and to
come; and by that they pardon the murdering of a Prince, before it be done;
But the Scripture has no such language, it speaks only of sins past, Romans
3.25. Ier. 8.22. Mal. 4.2.
We mind a difference between the salve in the Chirurgians Box, and the
healing of the wound; the salve may be made, before the wound that it shall
heal be made, but the wound is not healed before it be made: therefore there
may be Balm in Gilead, and yet the health of Gods people not recovered.

We believe, that the Fountain that is to be, Zach. 13.1.
or is, set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, is, because some, whose
sins Christ bore upon the Cross, are yet unwashed.

We believe, that the same Christ, Mal 3.2.
which dyed at Jerusalem for the sins of his people, does sit as a refiner,
to do the work upon his Saints, in purifying them as often as they shall be
defiled with sin.

We believe, that Christ being yet a Priest for ever, Heb. 6.20.
there is no time contained in this ever (that is, so long as time shall be) in
which he has not something to do for Saints concerning sin; which
Priesthood, and advocation, is one and the same, which is in case of sin, and
in case of Saints sinning, that are in a Church estate: In case John, or any
other that has that experience that is spoken of, in the 1.2.3 verses, of his
first Epistle, We, says he, in the first verse of 2. Chapter, of the same
Epistle; so that the same Christ that was exalted on the right hand, does now
give remission of sins, and repentance; so that which was bought at his
death, was given after his ascension: and therefore Christ did not forgive at
his death men their sins, Acts 5.31.
that was borne and sinned after his death, but he forgives them after.

Revel* 3.19.
Notwithstanding, all this we believe, that Saints shall have no evil befall
them to destruction, but punishment for sin, from love, unto amendment: as if
he should say, thou Laodicea, thou needst nothing, but art rich (as they that
needs not pray for pardon, because of Gods love) but my love, if thou sin,
cannot excuse thee from my rebuke, look to it therefore.

Mat. 12.31.
We believe, that all the sins the Saints shall commit, shall be pardoned;
(shall be, is not) our happiness consists in being helped, Micha 7.8.
when we shall fall, and no Emunitie we have from falling; we say, Dan.
11.35.
that is Scripture phrase, to say, sin to come shall be pardoned, but not to
say, it is; if it be, then (it is true) it is a mere mocking of God, to ask
him to do that, that he has done already: And those that will not follow the
direction of Christ, in praying for the pardon of sin, are by this ground
excused, and Christ's direction is vain.

NOw, we desire to consider of some full Texts, that those that oppose this
Truth, say, is against it.

First, That of the Hebrews, the 9, and 28. to bear the sins of many; we
acknowledge it to our comfort, whilst God is glorified therefore, that Christ
did figuratively bear our sins, they being foreseen, he satisfied for all
that the Saints should commit: But there is a difference betwixt bearing them,
and giving us pardon for them; as the forenamed Text proves, Act. 5. verse. 3.
That he gave to Israel forgiveness of sins after he was exalted.

The second Text, Timothy 1, 9. We acknowledge, that our salvation was given in
Christ for us before, for it is in the hand of a Mediator; But the same Text
speaks according to his purpose and grace; purpose, implies to do something
in time to come: So that salvation, and all the concomitance thereof, as peace
with God, pardon of sin, washing from sin, Justification, Sanctification,
Glorification, was purposed to be acted aforetime, and acted in time.

A third Text, is the first of the Ephesians, the 4.5. We acknowledge,
according to this Text, that we were chosen before time, that we should be
holy without blam; there our blamelesnesse was to be when we were, to be
brought to pass in time after our choice; we were chosen to be such; to be is
not yet: And therefore all this while pardon of sin is not proved, before it
has a being.

A fourth Text is, Isaiah 53. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have
turned every one to his own way, and he has laid on him the iniquities of us
all. This Text speaks to persons in being, whose several sins is acted; We
have turned every one to his own ways: therefore this Text proves nothing
for them. However we acknowledge, that whatsoever Christ did for them, he
does the same act, and did bear the sins of all that should be on the
Cross figuratively, as aforesaid; but this is not a giving pardon to us.

A fifth Text is, 26 of Matthew, 28. This is my blood of the new Testament,
whech is shed for many for the remission of sins: That it is shed for, and
it is the whole price of our Redemption. We acknowledge the price he paid,
purchased, and the Son of Man has power to remit sins: And if a message
shall come from him, (...) 15.3.
saying, Be thou clean, then are we clean through the words that he speaks to
us, which cleansing is from a Covenant, and the faithfulness of God is tied to
perform it to his Elect, in or after Confession: first Epistle of John, 1
Chapter, 9 verse. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to
forgive us.

The sixth Text is, the 10 of the Hebrews, 10. By the which will we are
Sanctified, through the offering of the body of Christ once for all. This Text
does not prove sin pardoned, before Committed; It proves that the will of God
produced the coming of Christ and his sufferings; and that act was but once,
and for all: that implied that act satisfied God, and was all that he did
require of Christ: But still the discerning betwixt the death of Christ, which
was the purchase and the act of pardoning, which is conveyed by the spirit,
stands; the first, being no where called pardon, but the latter in many places
of Scriptures, is called the pardon or forgiveness of sins.

In the 14 verse, By one offering he has perfected for ever them that were
sanctified: We may not understand this perfecting to be the pardon of sin,
though he purchased such a perfect happiness for them, as that nothing can
change their condition, and has wholly the authority: as the 1 of Corinth. 6.
the 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but you are justified, but
you are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God:
As in the name is meant, in the power and authority of the Lord Jesus, these
persons were perfected; but not so, as to take away their sin before they
were sinners* for there you find them spoken of, that they were sinners, and
then washed.

O, but they say, Gods people cannot sin in Gods account, and therefore they
allege, Numbers 23.24. We answer, that Balaam shows Balak why they were so
blessed; and that was, because they stood guilty of no sin: But if you look
in the 25 of Numbers, you shall see that the people sinned, and God saw, and
was angry, and punished it, hanging up all the heads of the people, and caused
a great slaughter, with the Plague amongst the rest: So the Text proves no
more: but while Israel stood without sin, they prospered: but when Israel
sinned by Achan, they must fly before the men of Ai.

And also they allege, the first Epistle of John, the 3.9. and the fifth of
the same Epistle, the 18 verse. the words of both says, Whosoever is borne of
God sins not; now we also in the same Epistle allege 3 Texts that prove
they do sin; in the first Chapter, 8.9. verse. 2 Chapter verse. 1.5. Chapter
verse. 16. of the same Epistle.

Now to reconcile this seeming contradiction, John, and those that he calls
we, were borne of God; yet he says, If we say, that we have no sin: Those
that are called little Children, are borne of God; yet he implies a
possibility of their sinning, Thirdly, He that is a brother indeed is borne of
God, and that shall have life; and yet he implies, that he may sin.

And now to reconcile this, let John expound himself, and it will be plain in
the 16 verse. of the 5 Chapter; where he grants, that a brother may sin, That
is not unto death; then the result must needs be, that he that is borne of God,
cannot sin the sin that is unto death, or the unpardonable sin, that
sin that is not to be prayed for, so we shall say with Moses, the Lord
pardon our sins, as he has pardoned our former sins, Numbers 14. Chapter,
19. verse.

NOw follows certain Reasons, why we cannot have Communion with them that
pray not for the pardon of sin, nor with those that say, sin is pardoned
before it be committed.

For the first, because they that know not the posture of a redeeming Child in
Christ, and therefore though they talk of God with their mouths, John 16.26.
have life from him, and in asking and receiving, they taste not: the same God,
whose Covenant revealed rejoices the heart, does also rejoice the heart in the
continual performance of it.

The second Reason, those that do not ask Gods pardon for sin, and receive
it after they have committed it, it is apparent, that they neither felt the
sense of sin, (for if they did, they would cry to God) nor the sweetness of
pardon for they would know, that asking in faith, they do receive forgiveness
of their sins.

For the Second, they darken council with words without knowledge, Job 38.2.
saying, sin is pardoned before it be committed. Christ counsels us to pray
for the pardon of sin, and they by words, without knowledge, saying, That
sin is pardoned before it be committed, darkneth the council of Christ to
the former people, who justly say, if it be pardoned, it need not to be prayed
for: and we judge them as upright as those which say, it is pardoned, and yet
can pray for the pardon of it.

The second sort of people, that say, it is pardoned before it is committed,
add to the Word of God, for they say in Gods name, that which no Scripture
holds forth; that sin is pardoned before it is committed, and they cause the
first to take from the word; that is, to make the words of Christ of no use,
who bids us pray for the pardon of sin, and so are under a curse.

Reve. 2.14.
Thirdly, they lay a stumbling block before the eyes of the weak, and cause
them to stumble at the asking pardon for their sins.

FINIS.
GEntle Reader, I entreat you to correct these omissions escaped in Printing,
page 11. line 15. for, because they that know, read, because they know. page
ibid. line 16. for redeeming read redeemed, page ibid. line 18. for, have life
from him, and, read life from him.


