ENGLAND's Palladion; OR, BRITAIN's Naval-Glory: Expressed in a PANEGYRIC,
Beginning with a Loyal Salutation OF THE Royal Navy.

With Three Additional Poems I. A Congratulation on the late VICTORY, etc. II.
The Burning Island, etc. III. A Praemonition to the States of Holland.


By T. S.

Magna tamen spes est in bonitate Dei. Ovid. LONDON, Printed in the Year
M.DC.LXVI.

To the READER.
AS for the Candid Reader, truly I
Stand freely to his Ingenuity.
What need Apologies? This may suffice,
We know, A word's sufficient to the Wise.
But ye, Censorious Sirs, who use to find
Only what does not please your Squeamish mind;
If ye find Errors in each Infant-sheet,
Let not your Envy add to those you meet:
Or thus; If ye find those that were before,
Let not your scruples (prithee) make them more.
But if they do, it is all alike to me,
I fix my Fortune not on Poetry.
Then Critic, do thy worst; For know, that I
Pretend to nothing here but Loyalty.
Critics (I know by whom) are styled thus,
No better than the Muses, Cerberus:
Nay, he describes 'um yet more monstrous,
And says, they 're bitt'rer than Archilocus.
Let Zoilus with Envy never so sharp,
Squint then; Let poring Momus proudly carp,
And then (For (Faith) they cannot me displease,)
They Will even (like Dutchmen) fret in their own Grease.
Hor. Sat. 3. lib 1. Qui, ne tuberibus propriis offendat Amicum
Postulat; ignoscat verucas illius --
(...).

ENGLAND's Palladion, etc. BEGINNING With a Loyal Salutation of the ROYAL NAVY,
UPON Their Sailing from the Buoy in the Nore, in the Rogation Week, 1666.
SINCE men do Courtship now a days invent,
Why may n't I spend this Loyal Complement?
Since some in numbers do attend the Fleet,
I cannot but in numbers too 'um greet;
And while the Castles with broad-sides contend,
I needs must this broad side of Paper send.
Hail, Royal Fleet! May all the good that can
By God be granted, or be asked by Man,
Light on ye, May ye ever prosperous be
In good success and crowned with Victory;
May ye be blessed (if fit) with such excess
Of happinesses heaped on happiness,
Till Providence must go no further, and
Fortune her self at a non-ultra stand;
May most benign and most prosperous gales
Fan courteous winds upon your swelling Sails,
(Let our Rogation be zealous, and
For blessings on the Sea as well as Land;
And blessed Lord, by thy Ascension
Let Heavens blessings now desecend upon
The Fleet; let all Habi^iments be sent
That may be any way expedient;
That Heaven thus may all good comforts bring
To every Soul that fights for the King.)
And as ye were most gladly welcome in,
(When this brave Rendezvous did first begin.)
May ye now well go out into the Main,
And then return triumphant back again;
And (in a word) have (I can ask no more)
Blessings till Heaven has sent all its store.
May ye in pleasures swim, while Hogens sink,
And have above what I can ask, or think.
But where is my Admiral? his valor's such,
That he will time enough come for the Dutch
I Will warrant you, and soon enough to make
The Dane, the Dutch, the Devil and all to quake:
(Reader pray' for my words take my intent,
I said the Devil, but the French I meant.)
When mighty James before the Holland-Coast
Stood, (though the Hogens did so proudly boast)
There he most valourously did expose
Himself and Navy to his numerous foes,
And e're he got the Lubbies out to fight,
He did entice 'um to it and invite:
Thus may heroic George's swelling fame
Make 'um even tremble at his very Name.
And may your foes, Sir, in the Belgick-Fleet
Like Lambert's Rebels fall before your feet;
May their Commanders, may each General,
Before your face too (like proud Opdam) fall;
May you (my Lord) be far more fortunate
Than ever Scaevola or Caesar's fate
Could make them be; May you have blessings more
Than those I wished (if possible) before:
May you successful as Vespasian be
In your Sea-enterprize and Victory;
And in your Conquests be as prosperous
As ever Scipio or Curious,
That you in wealth and honor may increase
As much as ever did Polycrates;
So that your Excellency may n't be less
Than was Metellus in all happiness.
I Am but a Country Courtier (my Lord)
Without a Dam-me, You may take my word;
I am Right-down (Sir,) In good faith believ me,
Your real-humble-Servant, and conceiv me,
My Prayers are as zealous for you as
Ever for Oliver Hugh Peter's was,
And I hope more religious and just;
Their wicked Prayers were but as the dust
(Proceeding from a sacrilegious mind,
Just like their wicked selves) before the wind:
And their deluding Prayers by the Spirit
Had justice in the end for their demerit:
Noll's Soul had doubtless never gone in a storm,
Had he but loved The Set (sacred) form;
No Common Prayers, but a common life
(They say) he loved with Jack Lambert's wife;
But Jack (an under-Devil) thought no scorn
So long as Beelzebub did graft the horn.
Hugh never at Tyburn had been in the lurch,
Had he obeyed his pious King and Church.
(But hold, I think my Muse is at a lois
'Twas not at Tyburn, 'twas at Charing Cross)
Where he (oh double-grief!) forsook his life,
And that which was as dear, the Butcher's wife.
Thimbles and Bodkins now were all in vain,
Their Charms could never fetch him back again:
And though they Orphean music once did make,
They cannot fetch him from the Stygian-Lake.
May all Phanaticks that have still his heart,
Succeed him with a Halter in a Cart.
And thus much for those grand Impostors, I
(Leaving them to detested memory)
Again will to my Loyal Subject fly.
A PANEGYRIC, etc. Upon a Visit to the Royal Navy, at their Rendezvous in the
DOWNS, May the 29th, 1666.
Viewing the Navy on the Beach, etc.
BLess me! What is it I see? What things are these?
What! Are the famed Aegean Cyclades
Now sailing on the Seas? Or is a Wood
Now floating like Dodona on the Flood?
What mean ye by this most illust^ious sight?
Will ye the Dutchmen from their senses fright?
Here is a Show magnificent indeed
Above a Dutchman or Phanatique's Creed.
These are right stately May-poles, and which may
Most gloriously suit this The day of his Majesty's Restoration, etc.
glorious day;
Their altitude is like Olympus, and
Exceeds far the May Pole in the Strand.
And may they too as much of Fortune bring,
As this-day six-year brought, unto the King;
Their whifling, streaming Pendents are beyon'
The Ladies Pendents, glittering in the Sun.
(Women are termed Ships, rig'd never so well
In Silks, they cannot those silken Flaggs excel,
For noble luster) What does here belong
Too, is (as well as ornamental) strong.
And Rome's Triumphal Arches never could
For Show excel these Obelisks of Wood.
These promise Victory in their very Look,
When the French challenged doubtless they mistook;
And that our English Ships were (did suppose)
Those Mack'rel Boats which from the Belgick-foes
Indeed were able (spite of all their braggs
Proudly belcht out) to take away their Flaggs.
Had they but thought to see this Noble sight,
They would have had more mind to eat than fight.
But who is that that does the Show decrease, Prince Rupert being then sailing
out with a Squadron (as it was said) against the French.

By sailing yonder off upon the Seas?
Why? It Is Prince Rupert, I never knew I vow
His Highness was to go again, till now;
Farewell most valiant Prince, and may you thus,
As you are valiant, be victorious:
And may your share be ample, and complete
Of all the blessings that I can repeat.
Ye now appear like Clouds, Ships at a distance seem like clouds.
when ye are nigher
Unto the French, ye will appear like Fire.
But why are here such peopled throngs as these,
With gleesom Aspects looking on the Seas?
Is Jason bringing here the golden-Fleece;
'Cause Deal methinks does look so like a Greece?
No, it is not so, They come to see and greet,
Though not a golden Fleece, a golden Fleet;
No, here is no Witchraft, nor no Med'an Arts.
But yet for Those famous Worthies that attended Jason (as our Reformado's do)
were so termed.
Argonauts here is noble hearts.
Brave Kent's a Kingdom too (methinks) again,
Thus to have in her Narrow-Seas the Main
And Ocean Glory of the British-Isle,
(On which the Heavens themselves do sweetly smile.)
A Kingdom? Yes, And of more high desert
Far, than when she was ruled by Ethelbert.
For be it known, That (to her great content)
King Charles the Second now is King of Kent.
Xerxes himself could doubtless never boast
Of greater Power than the Kentish-Coast
Does now afford, here is a Bridge will reach
Cross from the British to the Belgick-beach.
But now to raise my Admiration higher,
I am ambitious of approaching nigher;
Come, let us go then, give us here a Boat,
That we may to the Royal Navy float;
(Come Kentish-boys, let those that would not go
This journey, now repent from top to toe.)
Now my heart leaps like those upon the Seas,
Coming so near such stately things as these;
What ravishment here is for a Loyal soul?
This, this alone, may Rebels hopes control.
Come, row away, I long to be aboard,
To see in Royal Charles my Loyal Lord. The Author Boarding the Royal Charles.

Is this a Ship? Why then, this Ship alone
May parallel a pretty handsome Town,
And you may men as populously meet
Here, as in Cheap Side, or in Lombard Street.
Veiwing the great Cabben.
But what is here? A Palace made of wood?
Is Hampton Court now floating on the flood?
But ah! I now my General epsy,
If this be not his Lordship, may I die.
And (now I humbly kiss your hand) I wish
You be made happy both by flesh and fish.
And now your Honor happily is come,
May all the blessings 'till the day of Doom
From the Creation that were to be sent,
Be all at once upon your Lordship spent.
Heavens bless Royal Charles, and conquest bring
To Royal Charls's Master, Charles our King;
May good success and fortune be possessed
By her not only, but by all the rest.
Upon their Sailing out on the Thursday following against the Dutch.
HAil once more, Royal Fleet! now may ye be
Most prosperous in a final victory;
And may ye now so happily go out
To give your Enemies a total rout.
Once, nay for ever, Hail, I know ye do
Many times Thunder, yes, and lighten too;
Then may your thundering Canons so affright,
(Together with their fire-spitting light)
So scare and scorch the Dutchmen, that they may
Be either took, or sunk, or runaway;
And may ye too most powerfully Reign,
Till ye are of the Universal Main
And Ocean-Sea chief Mornarch: May ye thus
Hail, Thunder, Lighten, and Reign prosperous.
Upon a View of them in July last, before their last going out, etc.
Blessed Navy, Art thou here again? What is
A PYTHAGOREAN Metempsychosis
Here transmigrated now in Ships, as then
That fond Philosopher mistook in men?
Because here is just such glory as before
Lay glittering they from off the Kentish shore?
No, here is no transmigration, but the same
They are in Substance still as well as Name,
No Metempsychosis was here conveyed
But what originally they enjoyed:
For they, Heroic Warriors, did not die,
Though they did bravely suffer battery,
Like noble Combatants they only strive
After their bloody Battle to retrive
Their former sprightly looks, and do appear
As void of Sadness now as then of Fear.
And as stout Champions are impatient
To trace the Martial Field, and quit the Tent;
So thus have these such valourous desires,
Their courage, by felt dangers, more aspires.
They may the more be animated, who
Do know the most now that the Dutch can do:
Who though they 'ad numerous advantages,
Had little cause to brag; But such as these,
If they do but escape a total Rout,
It Is thought a wonder to 'am without doubt.
Then let 'um still themselves with fancies feed;
While their sad wound till inwardly does bleed,
Being (poor senseless wretches) ignorant
Of their Disease; Then let 'um proudly taunt,
And with vainglorious solemnity,
Let Them the Triumph, We the Victory
Keep; Doutless those the greatest Conquest gain,
That do the lesser damages sustain.
Then let us Notes compare, We 'ad Losses, true;
If I mistake not (Hogens) so had you.
('It Is true an English Ship's to them a Jewel,
Though theirs with us do even serve for Fuel)
Had We not for Their thirty gave 'um ten,
How do ye think they ever will fight again:
(Yet when they gagged their matchless Victory
They found they had of ours only three)
Thus crafty Gamesters often do begin
To loose, because at last the more to win.
And by so doing (this is their device)
They younger Gamesters often do entice.
I must confess (great Hogens) it is true,
It was a Mogen Victory for you,
'Scaping so well your more courageous foes,
And being strangers to such things as those,
Made ye, because they did not beat ye more,
Fancy that ye had beaten them before.
If Pigmies conquer only shaddows they
Thus think they have enough obtein'd the day;
Or like the Psillian Warriers, of a mind
To fight against their Enemy, the Wind,
And going out against it, it did blow
And destroy diverse of the Army, though
The rest of them (when Boreas did cease)
Returned with Triumph, with victorious Peace:
Such foolish Creatures (Hogens) will ye be,
Thus to mock Heaven with a Victory?
If ye were so Victorious, then I pray
Stand to it once more; Do not run away.
Let fair play be had, then we shall see
Which of the two will have the Victory.
Let Us try it (once more) out, I prithee, and
Have to other Touch at Sea, before ye land:
A Fleet of Wheel-barrows they say ye have,
The Sea will serve, they need not make your Grave;
It Is very needless to attempt a Trench,
Before ye have done swiming with the Tench.
Then Royal Fleet, your foes go once more face,
I know y' are full of Majesty and Grace,
And are enough undaunted, motives are
All needless too, to stir you up to War.
If ye did beat 'um not enough before,
Ye yet may beat 'um notwithstanding more.
Great Armies do not every time prevail,
And greatest Warriers now and then may fail.
Neither did Alexander (without doubt)
Return a Victor every time he fought.
Proceed then, Loyal Souls, and may ye be
Blessed with a final-total-Victorie.
God save our Sacred King, and Heavens Crown.
His Fleet with Conquest, Honor, and Renown.
So most devoutly prays, one of his Majesty's most Loyal Subjects Tho. Sympson.

A Congratulary Poem on the Late Victory, obtein'd July the 25th, 1666.
WHo can be silent now? 'Twere even a Sin
To see so great a work so well begin,
And not express a joy; a joy at least,
That does so pleasantly my Senses feast
With Loyal Raptures, Raptures that alone
Might force Congratulation from a Stone.
Except those stupid Stones and Stocks that be
Possessed with a Phanatick Lethargy.
I cannot (though no Poet) choose but write
When Heaven does so signally invite.
I Am but a Stranger to Parnassus-Hill,
It Is Loyalty (not Wit) incites my Quill.
This joyous News my ears delights too,
More than best Orphean harmony can do,
In Stones and Trees too; This Intelligence
Might likewise now (methinks) transport a sense.
Then let immortal Praise to Heaven be
Returned for this successful Victory.
And happy Blessings be continued on
The work that is so happily begun.
Let no Ingratitude of ours be
A stop to further blessed Prosperity.
Heathens in Triumphs do examples set,
Who never did ungratefully forget
To Sacrifice, and their Thanksgiving pay
Unto their Gods. Why then, without delay,
(As they in theirs) let us zealous be
In our Christian Solemnity.
Nor let us be too forward, 'till We see,
That Heaven sends a total victory;
Nor by too great a confidence omit
Those Duties that are in Devotion fit;
Let Us mix our Prayers with Thanks-givings, and
We then shall fight against the Dutch, on Land:
For Prayers are as prevalent as Arms
Against an Enemy; those pious Charms,
As soon will work their general defeat,
Our Service to the King's in that as great
As any thing, all Ages likewise can
Serve him in that too, whether Child, or Man:
Each sex may join too, (by this holy slight)
Ladies may in their closets for him fight;
Let the blasphemous Dutch cry on, An expression of late very frequently used
amongst 'um in derision of our single strength.
We must
To none (then) but to God a'mighty trust.
We need no other, his Omnipotence
Is a secure, invincible defense.
Then let 'um proudly boast, while Heaven fights
For England against those Sea-Amalekites.
Let 'um in Words exceed, while Heaven knows,
We by his blessings can prevail in Blows.
Rodomontadoes will not do the feat,
Performances are least when words are great.
Though (like the Of whom Plutarch speaks, that when he had a Fall, he would
spring up again, and with impudence affirm it was he that was the Victor.
Grecian Wrestler) they will
With impudence say they are Victors still.
No matter; We at last shall doubtless find
Their words (nay, actions too) will be like wind.
Then let us Heaven's help implore, and then
We need not fear, not fear the worst of men;
That is the aid, the aid alone will do it,
The French and all the Danes are nothing to it.
Let us be careful then to gain the thing
That does our selves, our Country, and our King,
So much concern, when as (alas!) the Task
Is only but to have, if we will ask.
Methinks a Triumph's noblest, when we see
It is attended with Humility;
Nor let excess now Heaven's love annoy,
Let moderation circumscribe our joy,
That so those famous Souls now on the Main
May perfect Conquerors return again.
The BURNING-ISLAND, OR The Dutch-Man's Ignis-fatuus.
Being a Poem on the Fiery-Conquest, or unparalled Exploit, executed by Sir
Robert Holms against the Dutch, wherein about 160. Ships (richly laden) with a
considerable Town in the Isle of Schelling, were burnt and totally destroyed.
Written Aug. the 16th, 1666.

Upon the Authors first hearing of the News, etc.
HAve ye not heard the great Intelligence,
Enough to ravish (nay, amaze) one's sense?
But stay, Is this so great a thing I hear,
Real? Or else does but my flattering ear
Transport my Senses only with a Vision,
Or feigned Dream, that feeds me with derision?
No, no, it is sacred Truth, the Heavens must,
And will do Justice, let us never distrust;
George is so holy, and his cause so fair,
It were a sin of weakness to despair.
Experience tell us, that He needs must be
Successful in a pious Victory.
He is a Joshua that never fights
Without success against Those whom Joshua (appointed General by Moses) fought
against, of whose name any of God's, or good men's Enemies may be called, etc.
Amalekites,
Who by our Royal Moses once before
Appointed General, did then restore
Israel to Peace, and then did civilize
All God's (as well as good men's) Enemies;
(Though those Phanaticks.
Amalekites rebel again
In heart (I fear), their fancies are so vain.)
Is our Cause just? then Heaven without doubt
Can give (though Hogen-Mogen) them a rout.
Our Sacred Priests too have perfumed the Air,
With the sweet Incense of the Churches Prayer.
If good men's Prayers be prevalent and pure,
The Church is pious and devout I Am sure;
If her Sons, some, degenerate become,
Prayers are used by all, and not by some;
(For her unworthy ones, she counts all
Those Antichristian, Anti-Praelatical;)
Then Doubt begone; Though we unworthy be,
Heaven may pour out liberality.
The News is now confirmed enough, the thing
Is for a certain Truth brought to the King;
And who his Royal ears dare so surprise,
Were it but a fictitious surmise?
Thus if we thankful be for blessings past,
We shall have fuller blessings yet at last.
For the The news was brought to Court, on that Thanks-giving-day at might that
was appointed to be celebrated within the City of London, and the adjacent
places.
Thanksgiving was not at an end,
Ere Heaven did these welcome tidings send;
And sable night had canceled not the other,
Ere Heaven sent occasion for another.
The tidings of the Evening did Crown
The Solemn day with Heavenly Renown.
Not popular vain gloriousness, and such
As is the practice of the vaunting Dutch,
But with a mercy, mercy that may well
" Match the dimensions of a Miracle;
And this indeed, this New, was solemn-sport
To the Victorious and Royal-Court.
Nor was the The day following was the News celebrated in the City of London.
City so ungrateful neither,
But that they did rejoice two days together;
(And the next day I could not choose but write,
And be the Dutchmen An Irony, etc.
weeping Heraclite)
But when I wept, (to tell the real truth)
I think 'twas with the wrong side of the mouth;)
(And I hope too, our causes better be
Than the Dutch had for their observing The Dutch for their pretended Victory
in June kept three Thanks-giving-days together.
three.
This flaming News such gladness did convoy,
It made the City too flame all with joy.
Triumphant Fires were as many here,
As those Dutch fatal ones did blaze out there.
They lately so hotheaded were I vow,
I think they 've had Bone-fires now enough.
Their fate, it is true, deserves an Elegy,
But yet (for my part) Faith, I cannot cry.
Or to that passion should I bow, I fear
'T would only be to shed a joyful tear.
I must confess I Am sorry that ye are
Possessed yet of any Men of War.
I should have gladder been too, if the flame
Had from your Merchantmen flew to the same:
I must confess (though I were very willing
To hear such blessed tidings too from Schelling)
I had been gladder (as sure as I am,)
Had it so happened to Amsterdam,
And should have been as 'merry as a Fiddle,
Hogens, had all of ye been in the middle.
But stay, We always ought to be content
With whatsoever is by Heaven sent.
It is enough: Let us with patience see
How the just Heavens our best Carvers be.
But boundless joys do very often cause
Expressions to exceed strict Reason's Laws.
Our Christian Charity ought to be such,
To show it self to Pagans; nay, the Dutch:
But when unjustly they will greedy be,
To exercise all kinds of Injury;
Then they may thank themselves if Heaven do
Return 'um Punishment, and Justice too.
Spoils to an Enemy are just enough,
Especially to those that are so rough;
Those were the men that lately proudly con'd
Project, how they 'd dispose of Royal blood;
And e're they could our Naval force withstand,
Nothing would serve their turn, but they must land.
But now I hope their courage will expire,
Now it is cooled, nay cooled by (even) Fire,
(The means was wonderful, that fire should
Thus cool the heat of Hogen-Mogen-bloud.
But, one extreme does drive another out;
This was the only Medicine without doubt:)
Now Holland's Wealth was turned into a flame,
Schelling a Burning-Island now became;
A Burning-Island? Yes indeed, and truly
Hogens for you it burnt (too, very) blewly.
Nor did ye (Hogens) only loose your Treasure;
But too, (it seems) your Mogen Boat of Pleasure.
No matter, now ye even may go and keep
(As well as As they did in Thanet.
shoot at) silly, rotten, Sheep.
This Ignis-fatuus will without delay,
Put ye too (doubtless) much out of the way.
But Noble Holms, What shall I say of thee?
Who with such Loyal magnanimity,
(By our most Noble General's Commission)
Was Conduct in this famous Expedition:
No Greek or Roman e're did parallel
This rare Exploit: This truly does excel
Lepanto's fame. Indeed, One now may say 't,
That Sixty Six excels -- Eighty Eight.
I cannot applaud sufficiently your Name,
I Will leave it to the Trumpet then of Fame.
Time has, or will, perhaps a Poet raise,
Born under better Stars to sing your praise.
Sit Gloria Deo.
A Praemonition to the States of Holland.
NOw why will ye persist? (poor Hogens) Durst
Ye thus swell with Presumption 'till ye burst?
We often say, and it is a common word,
That after warning twice, beware the third.
Then if again ye on the Seas can crawl,
And rise, I doubt 'twill only be to fall.
('It Is Brandy now indeed, or Aqua-vitae,
Had need to cheer the fainting High and Mighty.)
Have ye not seen a Candle clearly shine,
Just going out, though but a minutes time;
Or as some persons just before their death,
Will pleasant seem just at their latest breath?
So if ye rise again, it is Signum-mortis,
We 'l gi' ye to other dose of Aquafortis;
For ye must know our English Spirit is
Not Brandy, but Aqua-mirabilis;
Admirable indeed, and is endu'd,
Not with a Frenzy, but true Fortitude:
For We are not so foolish as to think
It Is any policy to fight in drink.
Royal Commands oblige all Loyal hearts,
Then let Usurpers play their drunken parts;
And let them proudly brave it out in State,
Till Amsterdam has pawned all her Plate;
And when all 's done, they 'l find the only thing,
Is a submission to a Pious King.
Doubtless could Opdam's Ghost but once appear
Unto ye now, He would not proudly swear
Upon the Sacrament; But tell ye that
In plainer terms, ye must expatiate
No more your high Ambition, but be
Endu'd with more becoming Modesty;
And that that would be requisite, and best
Both for your present and your future Rest.
Thus Mass'anello's Ghost ( In Royal Arbor.
presented it is)
Once preached such kind of Doctrine too as this,
That those whom Wickedness does raise so high,
Will fall at last again to Misery.
(And (in some sense) the States of Holland be
A kind of Fishermen as well as he,
And do by their Ambition swell as high,
As ever he, in Popularity.)
Then ye may take example by this Fellow;
I mean the poorly St^tely Mass'anello;)
For he indeed was (it must be confessed)
Distressed, Mighty, then again distressed.
Your puffed up Greatness of a windy Rise,
Is fitly figured by your own In Amsterdam they have this device, whereby to
hint the sudden downfall of worldly greatness, viz. The Picture of a Man with a
full blown Bladder on his Shoulders; another standing by, about to prick the
Bladder with a Pin; the Motto being Quam Subito?
own Device;
Which by the the smallest prick expires, So
Your Motto's proper too, Quam Subito?
You Will spoil your selves by leaping such a height, The Aconite is so extremely
loved by the Panthers, that being by the subtilty of the Huntsman, hung a great
height in the Woods, they will with leaping at it strive and kill themselves.

Like Panthers streining for the Aconite;
Like Nero's Mother, Ye must needs be high,
Maugre the fatal Sequel. Then ye die.
Of Alexander, it is observed thus
By One, ('it is by Valerius Maximus,)
When with his Conquests proudly swelled, he
No less than Son of Jupiter must be;
He then (forsooth) must be a God, no less,
No longer Man, that Author does confess;
Though, That it was (as Tacitus implies)
One of the three of his ill qualities.
(The other two do both indeed extend,
But to an arrogant profusive end.)
Thus, for a time, because ye have been hurled
Like prosperous Dice by Fate, into the World;
Must ye conceit, that presently ye are
No less (forsooth) than Sons of Jupiter?
Ye, but by Poor distressed lately known,
Because to High and mighty now y' are grown:
Must your Brides Sphere now no Horizon know?
Must ye needs higher still, and higher grow?
Must ye like Ovid's Giants swell so high,
As to contend with Sacred Majesty?
Has Greatness made ye mad, that ye so soon
Must, with Caligula, needs court the Moon?
Does your Ambitious Wheel so swiftly run,
That ye must with Eudoxus kiss the Sun?
Prithee (poor Hogens) do not run so fast,
Least ye (like Phaeton) fall down at last;
And (while ye mount so high in vain desire,)
So set the Belgic Country all on fire.
(But that is needless; For it seems we do
Fire your Ships; yes, and your Houses too.)
Alas! (but like the Babel-builders) ye
In your Luciferous projectings be.
Confusion must needs attend such hopes,
Whose bold aspirings have no narrower scopes.
Then (ye have need enough of, it I Am sure)
Take yet a Sovereign, and easy cure.
Suetonius in in vita, etc.
Augustus Caesar's Ingenuity
Was much; nor yet was less his Clemency:
When he by Proclamation did decree,
A large reward to any that should be
The happy Victor, to bring him the head
Of a then famous Pyrate: (As 'twas s'ed;)
The Pyrate hearing this, as boldly came,
As wisely, and laid at his feet the same.
Caesar then pardoned his past offense,
And then rewarded too his confidence
That he had in his mercy; This may be
(Hogens) Exemplary, If wisely ye
Will but submit unto his Royal will,
Carolus Caesar will have mercy still.
(I might have said, Augustus Caesar, He
I hope ye know's August enough for ye.)
Do not contend, (Ye must at last submit,
In spite of all the wit of proud De Wit.)
But cast your selves (it is the wisest thing)
Upon the Royal Honor of a King.
A King, that (if ye do it not neglect)
Can gallantly reliev ye and protect.
All your French-Mountebanks can do, ye see,
Is nothing else, but even to take the fee:
And gazing at each other, now each Elf
Can only cry, Physician heal thy self.
But if ye will avoid approaching Fate
Then do not Phrygian-like repent too late;
But save the labor (while time does invite)
To either runaway again, or fight;
Least your conceited Glory do expire
In vigorous and condign Blood and Fire.
But do not like such Pseudo-Martyrs burn,
Prefer an Vrim then before an Vrn.
Do but submit to Charles, and Penance do.
He Will be your Vrim, and your Thummim too.
Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum. Juv.
FINIS.

