The true CHRISTIANS Path way to HEAVEN. Wherein is showed, The great
Afflictions which God imposes upon His Children in this life, and the
assurance of their Delivery out of the same. Being very profitable and
comfortable for all those who are in any Crosses or Afflictions.

Whereunto is added a Prayer for Morning and Evening, and Graces before and
after Meat.

Dedicated to all those that desire to arrive at Mount Sion, the Harbor of
peace and joy.

By WILLIAM SIMONS,

Psalm. 34.19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
them out of them all.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDREW ANDERSON, Anno DOM. 1665.

Good people all, pray lend an ear,
and mark what I shall say:
To Heaven if that you fain would learn
the true and perfect way,
Here is a Book, it is but small,
but does in it contain,
Through many a cross and narrow path,
the way to Heaven plain.
The Prophets of the Lord have trod
this path, long time ago:
And Christ and his Apostles all,
the same way do us show:
The Martyrs next do follow them,
and tread the self-same way,
And in the midst of fiery flames
Christ's Banners do display.
Lord, set us in this Pathway then,
that leads us unto thee:
And guide us, Lord: for in these times.
there many bypath be.
The true Christian's path Way to Heaven.
PSALM. 107.6. Then they cried unto the Lord, in their trouble, and be delivered
them out of their distresses.


REmember, first of all, Christian Reader, that through many afflictions thou
must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: As here in this Psalm, the Prophet
David shows, how many ways God does afflict his Children, that he may bring
them unto himself. First, as in the fourth verse, he shows, how he afflicts
them. Secondly. whereby they are troubled in Conscience, then they cried unto
the Lord: And how ready and willing the Lord is to deliver them out of their
distress: Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered
them out of their distress. From whence we gather this instruction, that
afflictions sanctified are (...) preparatives to repentance. First (...) proved
by Manasseh King of Judah, (...) ^eing led captive into Babylon, and being cast
into prison and in chains, confesses his sins, and prays unto the Lord, and
the Lord delivered him out of his distress. Again, in the prodigal Son, who
being in affliction, was fain to eat husks with the swine: then he said, I will
rise and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: And his
Father graciously received him. Again, we read in the third Chapter of the
Lamentations of Jeremy, the Church of God being in afflictions, says in the
fortieth verse, Come let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord,
and He will be mercifuil unto us. For there is no child of God, but must suffer
crosses and afflictions in this life, for in the twelfth of the Heb. and the
sixth verse, The Lord chastens every Son whom he receives. Here we may plainly
see, that if we are not chastned, we are not Sons: For all the Saints of God
that have gone before us, have trod this trace. Your common way to the
spiritual Canaan, is to pass through the wilderness of afflictions. All the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles have done this, Christ himself has begun to
you in this Cup, and will ye not pledge Him? Do you think to go to Heaven in a
feather-bed (...) at hearts ease? Heaven is a strait gate, and (...) strive
hard to enter in: For the strai^^ (...) this gate is afflictions: and therefore
all the Patriarchs and Prophets, and Apostles, and all the Saints of God, nay,
Christ himself has found harsh and unpleasant. Therefore come down you proud
Sons of Zebedee, before you think of sitting in the Throne, first learn to
drink of the Cup. Ye must first suffer with Christ before ye can reign with
Christ; ye must wear the Crown of thorns, before ye can wear the Crown of
glory. But let us know this, that it is not flesh and blood can do these
things, but the Almighty power of a strong God, working in a poor, weak and
frail man.

The Reasons, why God does afflict his Children in this life, are, 1. Because
He may hear from them: For he knows our nature, he is well acquainted with
our dispofition; He knows we will not come unto him, but when we stand in
need of Him. But when we come into any trouble or affliction, then he is sure
to hear of us, as he says by the Prophet, Hos 5.15. In their afflictions they
will seek me early. Again, by His Prophet, Isa. 26.16. Lord, in trouble have
they visited Thee: they poured out their prayer, when Thy chastening was upon
them. A second reason is, because it is good for them, as the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that It was afflicted, that I might
learn the statutes, Here he shows by his afflictions, (...) had learned a
great deal, and was become a good Scholar in Gods books, and well seen in his
Statutes and Laws, and grown to a great deal of wisdom and judgment by his
chastisements, and all things turned about in Gods merciful providence to his
everlasting comfort. For I say again and again, that all things turn to the
best for Gods chosen people: And therefore what state soever God would have his
Children to be in, it is the best for them, whether it be sickness or health,
poverty or plenty, Prosperity or adversity: For sometimes sickness is better
than health for Gods children poverty then plenty. Are Gods children therefore
sick? it is the best for them: Are they poor? it is the best for them: Are they
in many troubles? it is the best for them, because their heavenly Father will
turn it to the best. He will cut us short of our lusts and desires, because he
knows we will love our lusts He like a loving Father, will take the knife
from us, lest we should hurt our selves with it. He will not give us too much
ease nor prosperity in this life, because we will be the worse for them. He
will not give us continual rest, like standing ponds: He knows then we will
gather scum and filth. He deals most fatherly and mercifully with us in all
things. And, in a word when we think he does us most hurt, then he does us most
good.

A third Reason is, Further trial of our faith and patience. For faith does not
show it self most glorious, when we have most sight or feeling of it, but
rather when we feed and discern to the contrary, For when Job felt nothing but
Gods wrath against him, even then he showed a most victorious faith, Job 13.15.
who said, Although thou slay me, yet will I trust in Thee. We read the same of
Jacob, in his tedious conflict with the Angel, Genesis 31.24. who said, I will not
let Thee go, except thou bless me. And we read, Mat. 15. of the woman of
Canaan, who though she had many repulses and denials, yet continued her suit,
and was commended for her faith by Christ, who was the Author and Giver of her
faith, Therefore, for the better strengthening you in these trials, consider I
beseech you, they are but for a moment: What is a moment of afflictions to an
eternal weight of glory? It is but as it were a harsh break fast, as one of
the holy Martyrs said, being burning at the stake, after which says he there
will follow the most dainty and delicious dinner that ever was, even the full
fruition of the joys of Heaven. If we did but feel the torments of hell, and
the joys of heaven, what trials would we not undergo, that we might escape the
one, to enjoy the other? Be not therefore too much cast down in your trials,
but, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.13. Rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers
of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad
with exceeding great joy.

Object. Some may object and say, that it out afflictions and crosses did come
only from God, it were some what: But oftentimes they come from men, which bear
us no good will: And therefore it is no marvel, though they make us impatient
in our afflictions.

Ans. To it I answer, Those men are but instruments, wherewith God does inflict
His justice upon his Children: An example we have in Joseph, who knew well
enough the bad dealings of his Brethren with him, yet he looked not so much
unto them, but to a further cause, namely unto the Lord, as himself says, as
you may read, Genesis 45.5. It was not you, but the Lord that sent me hither
before, for your preservation. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
and He delivered them out of their distress.

Here follows the Use of Encouragement to all the Children of God, who though
they suffer many afflictions, yet they are sure of their delivery in His
appointed time.
WE read in the thirteenth of Luke, how the Daughter of Abraham was 18, years
bound by Satan, and loosed by our Savior Christ: And we read in the fifth of
John, of a man that was diseased 38. years, who was cured by Christ. As Saint
Peter says, 2 Peter 2.6. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
temptation: As if he should say, that he were so experienced in it, that he
could do it without any trouble at all. And again, Joseph being in prison, when
his appointed time was come, the counsel of the Lord had tried him, the King
sent and loosed him, and the Ruler of the people delivered him, Psalm. 105 19,
30. Again, Psalm. 33.17. The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers
them out of all their troubles. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth about them that
fear him, and delivers them. And again, Psa. 19. the Lord says concerning
the Righteous man, Because he had loved me, I will deliver him: I will exalt
him, because he has known my Name. He shall call upon me in his trouble, and I
will be with him, and I will deliver and glorify him. And again we read, Job.
5.19. Eliphaz the Temanite said to Job, In the sixth trouble he will deliver
thee, and the seventh evil shall not touch thee. Many more proofs may be
alleged for the proof of this, but this may suffice. Here you may plainly see,
that as sure as there be troubles and afflictions for the Children of God, so
sure is their deliverance out of the same; for as we may write of the one to be
as sure as the coat is to our back, so may we in God's good time write of the
other, to be as sure as the Lord is true: For Abrabam was in trouble but yet
delivered: Job in trouble, but yet delivered: David In trouble, but yet
delivered; Jonas in the Whales belly, but yet delilivered; Daniel in the Lions
den, but yet delivered: the three Children in the fiery furnace, but yet
delivered: Paul was in innumerable sorts of troubles, but yet delivered out of
all. These things being true that have been said, it follows, that Gods
Children are chastened only for their good, and evermore sure of their
deliverance, in his appointed time: And therefore there is no reason, why Gods
Children should be too much cast down in their afflictions. Can a Father forget
his Children, or a King his Subjects, or a Master his Servants, or a Shep-herd
his Sheep? Does not God Himself say that he will never leave us, nor forsake
us? Heb. 13.5. Does not our heavenly Father know, that we have need of all
these things? Has he not said, we shall want no out ward things? Has he not
said, they shall all be cast upon us? Why then should we hang down our heads?
Why should we not pluck up our hearts and rejoice? God is our heavenly Father,
He is our best Friend, He is our daily Benefactor, He keeps us all at his own
cost and charges, He thinks nothing too much for us, He is most chary and
tender over us, He will not suffer the wind to blow upon us, to hurt us: He
has promised, we shall lack nothing that is good for us, so long as we live.
Why then should we not pluck up our hearts, and rejoice? Heaven is ours, the
earth is ours, God is ours, and Christ is ours: And, as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 3.22.23. All are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The World
clappeth their hands, and croweth long before it is day, and says, All is
theirs. But the Children of God may say, and say truly. All is theirs, For
they have a true title through Christ to all the creatures: Many are their
privileges, and great are their prerogatives: They are free of Heaven, free of
Earth, they are the only free Denizens of the World. Christ has purchased
their freedom for them, therefore they are free indeed: Free from sin, free
from hell, free from damnation: They are young Princes, Angels fellows,
descending from the highest house of the Blood Royal of Heaven: they are Stars
of Paradise, Heirs apparent to the immortal Crown: Therefore God has
commanded His Angels to guard them, being such young Princes as they are: He
has given a very strict charge to all His Creatures, to look unto them, and to
see unto them, that they take no harm, for jealous. so chary, so tender He is
over them, The Angel must comfort Jacob, the Whale must receive Jonas, the
Raven must feed Elias, the Sun and Moon must stay for Joshua, the sea must
divide it self for Moses, that his people may pass through: The fire must not
burn the three Children; The Lions must not devour Daniel; All the Creatures
must change their nature, rather then Gods people shall be unholpen, and
undelivered. O then I how great is the happiness of Gods Children? Who can
utter it? Who can express it? They see not their own happiness, it is hidden
from them: afflictions do over-cloud it, crosses do dim it, troubles do shadow
it; there is an interposition of the earth between the sight and it. But this
is most certainly true, all the best is behind, the sweetest is to come, their
happiness does not appear in this life, it is hidden with God in Christ: When
Christ appears, then shall they also appear with him in Glory. It does not yet
appear what they shall be, but when he comes, they shall be made like unto
him; their names are already taken, and entered in the Book of life, and one day
they shall be crowned, one day it shall be said to them, Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive the Kingdom, prepared for you, from the beginning of the
World. One day they shall enjoy his presence, where is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: well then, let all God's
secret ones rejoice and be merry, however in this world they be trodden
underfoot, and walk like shadows, and counted the very racts and abjects of
the world; yet the time will come when their happiness and felicity shall be
such as never could enter into the heart of man, for it shall be endless,
unspeakable, and inconceivable: and therefore there is no cause, why Gods
Children should be too much cast down in their afflictions; for, though they be
not free from all afflictions, yet they are free from hurtful afflictions; for
there is no rod, no cross, nor no chastisement, but all in the end has a
blessed and happy issue: for this is most certain and true, there is no cross
nor affliction, which God imposes upon his Children in this life but if they
endure it quietly, and trust in his mercy firmly, and tarry his good leisure
obediently, it all comes to a comfortable and blessed end: and therefore God's
Children may rejoice in the midst of their afflictions, and patiently kiss his
holy rod, seeing it is his good pleasere. I am willing withal, seeing he will
have it so: I am well content, as old Eli said: 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord,
let him do with me what he will, and as David said in a certain case, 2 Samuel
15.26. Behold here I am, do with me, as seems best in thine own eyes, And
again David said in Psalm. 39.9. Behold, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, for
thou Lord have done it. Behold here the patience of God's Children, and their
humble submission to his most holy Will: they know all shall end well and
therefore they are glad of it. To conclude this point. Gods children are happy,
in what state soever they are in, happy in trouble, happy out of trouble;
blessed in sickness, blessed in health, blessed at home, and blessed abroad,
and every where blessed.

The next is a use of reproof.

First of all, it reproves those, that when any cross or affliction befalls
them, they fall to cursing and swearing; and therefore I beseech you consider,
how is it possible that any cursing or cursed person should be a Member of that
blessed Head Christ Jesus, who has expressly forbid us to curse? As in Mat. 5.
Luke 6. Romans 10. where he says, Bless them that curse you, pray for them that
despitfully use you. It is said of all them that accustom themselves to
cursing, Psalm. 109.17. They delighted in cursing, therefore it shall happen to
them: They loved not blessing, and therefore it shall be far from them. It is
said, Ecclesiasticus 23.13. The plague shall never depart from the house of the
swearer. And therefore, if ever ye desire to be partakers of the Kingdom of
Heaven, give your selves to blessing and prayer a and then ye shall have that
blessed welcome, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom.
It serves to reprove all those who, being in afflictions, do make great
protestations they will become new creatures: And yet, so soon as their
affliction is over, they become as hard hearted and miserable as before: Like
as the 9. Lepers who, being cleansed, returned to their old Byas again: And as
St. Peter says, The dog that vomited, is returned to his vomit again: The sow
that was washed is wallowed in the mire again. Therefore let all such know,
these are but whips and lashes wherewith God does whip and lain wicked and
ungodly men. And therefore in conclusion, let all those to whom any crosses or
afflictions do befall, for Gods sake, for their own sake, and for their souls
sake, Labor to make their calling and election sure: 2 Pet. 1.10. and then
they shall never fall. And that we may all so do, I commend you to GOD, and to
the word of his Grace who is able to build you up further, and to give you an
everlasting inheritance among them that are sanctified. Now the GOD of mercy
and the Father of all consolation prosper and sanctify you and that which I
have written unto you: To Him be all praise, honor and glory, now and for
evermore, Amen.

YOu that have read or heard this Book,
either, old or young, I pray
That seriously you would in it look,
and learn this heavenly way:
Delay no time, for to be sure,
now in these latter days
The Devil lurketh up and down
in many by-path wyaes.
For like an Angel now of light
transformed he does appear;
And many in this Land are led
by him too much, I fear.
Lord give us strength for to resist
his power and force so strong.
That in this heavenly path we may
most safely walk along.
In all these changes of these times,
and trouble eke to (...)
There Is no protests (...),
O Lord, is (...)
An Exhortation to Prayer.
Job 33.25. HE shall pray unto the Lord, and he will be favorable unto him, he
shall see his face with joy, and he will render unto him his righteousness.

Isa. 65.24. Before they ask, I will answer, says the Lord, and while they
pray, I will hear.

Jer. 10.25. A curse is threatened upon that family that does not pray unto the
Lord.


Then let us not pray coldly with our lips, and our hearts far from God: But
pour out our prayers with attentive mind and a careful heart.

Morning Prayer.
O LDRD prepare our unprepared hearts for the performance of this Duty of
Prayer: Gide us the help of thy Holy Spirit, Without which we can do nothing.

O LORD our GOD, and headenly Father in Jesus Christ we thy poor and unworthy
(...) here humble our selves before thy (...) Majesty, to offer up our Morning
(...) Prayer and thanksgiving for all thy mercies and savours bestowed upon us:
acknowledging and confessing that we are miserable and sinful wretches,
conceided and born in sin, brought forth in iniquity: And so have continued all
our life time, breaking and transgressing of thy holy Commandments, in
thought, word, and deed: So that in us there is no whole part, from the sole of
the foot to the crown of the head, all is polinted with iniquity, sin, and
chil. And therefore we have forfeited thy fabour, and deserved for these sins
ederlasting damnation, and to be utterly thrown from Thy presence.

Nevertheless, we appeal from thy justice, to thy mercy, beseeching thee for
Jesus Christ his sake, to be merciful to us, in the pardoning and forgiving
all our sins, whether they be known or unknown: good Lord, bldt them out of the
book of thy rememberance, that they may never rise up, either in this life to
move us to desperation, nor yet in the life to come to bring us to eternal
death and condemnation: that they be not a wall of separation at this time, to
hinder our prayers from ascending up unto Thee, and thy blessing from
descenting upon us. Seeing that we cannot do any thing that is good and
pleasing in thy sight, we beseech thee, that thou will so renew and change us,
in all the parts and powers of our souls and bodies, that as heretofore we have
been instruments of ungodliness and sin, we may now be instruments of
righteousness, and true holiness, all the days of our lives.

Together with our selves, we beseech she bless thy whole Church, wheresoever
dispersed, or howsoever distrust over the face of the earth: O Lord, fight for
them that fight for Thee: Bless thy friends, and destroy thy foes. Be gracious
to this Land where we live, continue thy holy Gospel with us. We beseech thee,
Bless every particular Member thereof, from the highest to the lowest, whether
by Sea or Land, or in any cross or affliction, or suffering for the testimony
of a good conscience, or any that do crave the benefit of our Prayers, Lord,
thou see them all, thou know were they dwell. Good Father do abundantly
for them, more then we are able to ask or crave at thy hands.

Now we are to come to The again for our selves here present, giving Thee
hearly thanks, that thou have kept us this night from all hurt and danger,
giving to our bodies sweet and comfortable rest. And as thou have drought us to
the beginning of this day, we beseech Thee, that thou will direct us this day
by Thy Holy Spirit, keep us from all the temptations of Satan, from all kind
of sin and wickedness, that being shadowed under thy wings, we may go on
constantly and cheerfully to the end of our days. Bless all our true and
lawful endeavors this day, let us not lack the thing without which we cannot
serve thee! But that we may have sufficient, and not be chargeable, but rather
helpful unto others.

Great these graces unto us, and whatsoever else thou know most needful for
us, and that for Christ Jesus sake, in whose Name and words we do conclude our
imperfect Prayers, in that most perfect form which he himself has taught us,
saying, Our Father, etc.

Evening Prayer.
O Gracious God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, we thy unworthy Children do
here how down our selves, to offer up unto thee our evening Sacrifice of prayer
and thanksgiving, for all thy blessings and benefits continued unto us:
Acknowledging and confessing, that as we are born and bred in sin, and stained
in the Womb, so have we continually brought forth the fruit thereof, both in
Thought, Word, and Works: So that if we should go about to reckon up our
particular offenses, we know not where to begin, or where to make an end: they
are far more in number then the hairs on your heads, or the sands in the Sea:
For, who knows how often he offen death? Our Lord, thou know our hearts,
thou know our sins, nothing is hid from thee. Our conscience does accuse us
of many and grievous evils: We daily feel, by woeful experience, how weak we
are unto all goodness, and how willing toward all evil: Our minds are full of
vanity, our hearts are full of deadness, dullness, and drusinesse in matters
of thy Worship and Service: yea, our Souls are full of spiritual blindness,
hardness, unprofitablenesse, coldness, security. So that in very deed, we are
a lump of sin, a mass of all misery, and therefore have forfeited thy
favor, and procured thy high displeasure against us. But we beseech Thee, look
not upon us as we are in our selves, but through thy Son Jesus Christ, and for
his sake to pardon and forgive us all our sins, and accept His death and
passion, as a full satisfacton for them all. And we beseech Thee, Seal up the
forgiveness of our sins, by the testimony of his blessed Spirit, that when
we shall be stripped naked of all outward comfort, we may have in us peace of
conscience, which passes all understanding: work in us true repentance, in all
particular actions: Fill our souls with joy and peace in believing: Fill us all
with inward comfort, and spiritual strength, against all the temptations of
the World, the flesh, and the devil. Mortify in us whatsoever is carnal.
Sanctify us with thy Spirit: write it in our hearts for ever, that we may fear
thy name. Renew in us the Image of thy Son Christ Jesus, dally more and more.
Never leave us, nor forsake us, till thou have brought us to thy Heavenly
Kingdom.

We beseech Thee to be merciful to Thy whole Church, call home thy ancient
people of the Jews, bring in the sulnesse of the Gentiles. Bless this Land
wherein we live, be thou still our God, and give us Grace to be thy people:
Romove far from us all those plagues and punishments, which we for our sins
have justly deserved. We beseech thee to prevent Popery, and continue thy Word
and Gospel unto us and our posterity, to the end of the world. Confound all
plots and devices of all those which do secretly or openly seek to hinder the
same: Bless, O LORD, all those that truly seek thy Honor and Glory, and the
happy peace of this sad and distracted Nation: LORD, uphold them that uphold
thy truth, unite our hearts all as one, if it be thy holy will, that we may al
serve thee in truth and holiness of life, and keep us from the foul errors of
these latter times. Bless all the Ministers of thy Word and Sacraments; The
Harvest is great, and the Laborers are few. O LORD, we beseech Thee to
increase faithful and painful Laborers in thy Harvest, and double thy Spirit
upon them, for the discharge of so great and weighty a duty. Bless al our
Brethren that are at Sea, keep them from al storms and tempests, defend them
from all their enemies, give good success to all their lawful endeavors,
prosper their voyages, and in good time bring them home in peace and safety.

O LORD, be merciful to all that Thou have laid Thy hand of affliction upon,
whether inwardly in soul, or outwardly in body, or for the testimony of a good
consciences; O Lord, sanctify all their afflictions unto them, and in Thy good
time, give a happy and joyful deliderance.

Now we are to return to thee again for our selves here present, giving the
hearty thanks, that thou have kept us this day from all hurt and dangers both
body and soul: That thou have given us food and raiment, and all things
needful for this life, and have blessed our labors for this day, beseeching
thee to continue thy favor to us this night. Give unto our bodies sweet and
comfortable rest this night, that our minds be not drawn aside by the
temptations of Satan, nor by unquiet dreams: But that we may fear thee, and
rest in thee, that when the light of the day shall spring forth and appear, we
bring in perfect health, may joyfully rise up, and walk forth in our several
callings, to the glory of thy Name, and the benefit of our brethren

Hear these our petitions for thy Church sake, and thy Church for us, and Jesus
Christ for us all: In whose name and words we further call upon thee, as he
has taught us in his holy Gospil, saying, Our Father, etc.

Learn these prayers in your hearts,
and print them in your mind:
Using them morning and evening,
great comfort you shall find.
Grace before meat,
O Lord, we beseech Thee Bless and Sanctify these thy good Creatures, which
of thy great mercy Thou have provided for us: Give us Grace to receive them
thankfully, and use them soberly, to the glory of thy Blessed Name, AMEN.

Grace after meat.
BLessed be Thy Great and Glorious Name, O Lord our God, for refreshing us at
this time, with these thy good Creatures of Meat and Drink. O Lord, we beseech
Thee, that thou will make us truly thankful to thee, in all holy obedience,
according to thy blessed will. And, good Father, Sanctify us more and more
both in souls and bodies, to do thine own service, and that for Christ Jesus
his sake, our Blessed Savior and Redeemer.

O Lord, increase our Faith, forgive us our sins, continue thy holy Gospel with
us, send us peace in our conscience, that we may do uprightly and justly in thy
sight through Jesus Christ our Lord, AMEN.

Grace before meat.
O Gracious God, and loving Father that have kept us by thy good Providence
until this time, by nourishing us with thy good Creatures, and have not
likewise, far beyond our deserts, bestow them on us again, according to thy
wonted mercy: We beseech thee to bless them, and give us grace to be thankful
unto thee for them, without murmuring, Grant us these Graces for thy Son Jesus
Christ his sake, Amen.

Grace after meat.
O Most gracious God, and heavenly Father, we give thee humble and hearty
thanks, for refreshing our body at this time will thy good Creatures. We
beseech thee to feed our souls wit thy heavenly Grace, that we may live
eternally, through thy Son our only Savior, Amen.

FINIS

