Signs and wonders from Heaven. With a true Relation of a Monster borne in
Ratcliffe Highway, at the sign of the three Arrows, Mistress Bullock the
Midwife delivering her thereof. Also showing how a Cat kitned a Monster in
Lombard street in London. Likewise a new discovery of Witches in Stepney
Parish. And how 20. Witches more were executed in Suffolk this last Assise.
Also how the Devil came to Soffam to a Farmers house in the habit of a
Gentlewoman on horseback. With diverse other strange remarkable passages.

Printed at London by I. H.

Signs and wonders from heaven. WITH A true Relation of a strange Monster born
in Ratcliffe Highway: Also a Cat kitning a monster in Lombard street, etc.
IT is a known thing to all Christian people which are capable of
understanding how that the sins of the world have in a high degree offended
the worlds Maker, and provoked the Lord to anger, yet has the Devil so blinded
the eyes, and hardened the hearts of many men and women, that they cannot or
will not see nor take notice of their own iniquities, but rather seem to
excuse themselves of those errors which they every day run into. One will
say, What though the Lord has laid his punishing hand upon the Kingdom, is it
my fault? I am no swearer, nor drunkard, no covetous person, no prophaner of
the Lords Sabbath: and yet peradventure he that thus justifies himself is
guilty of all these, and more then are here named.

Another will be apt to say thus: If it be sin that has brought the sword,
or the plague, or any other judgment upon us, it is not for any sins of mine,
it is long of such a Lord, or long of such a Magistrate that the Lord has
punished the Land.

Others have said, It Is long of the King that the whole Nation is so grievously
troubled, for, say they, if the King had slaid with his Parliament, we had
been all at peace and quiet. And thus do many people fl^tter themselves, and
lay the blame on others. But of this I am certainly persuaded that it is ^ot
only for one man's sins, but it is for every ones sins that the Lord has caused
the sword to be drawn amongst us.

Furthermore I observe that the Lord had decreed a separation between the King
and his Parliament before the wars began in England for the fins of the whole
nation. That the Lord is angry with us every one; for our sins do appear in
this: Do we not see that the bloody wars does more and more increase in our
three Kingdoms* whereby every man's heart even trimbles to think what shall
become of them.

Do we not know that the plague of Pestilence does daily annoy our Cities,
Towns, and Countries: and what great numbers have dyed in Bristoll, Abington,
and many places more.

Do we not hear continual claymour ring in our ears? how that famine will
follow after the sword, except the Lord will in mercy stay the rage of our
enemies: It is said, that Pestilence, the Sword and Famine, are the searchers,
wherewith the Lord draws blood of sinners: is there then any particular man or
woman amongst us all, but either at one time or other has felt the smart of
one, if not all of those forenamed scourges* no, no, there is none alive but
has smarted in one degree or other; even from the King to the Beggar, Ergo, we
are all sinners: to make it further appear* that the Lord is angry with us for
our sins. Have there not been strange Comets seen in the air, prodigies,
fights on the seas, mavelous tempests and storms on the land: all these are
eminent tokens of Gods anger to Sinners yet that's one all: Have not nature
altered her course so much, that women framed of pure flesh and blood, brings
forth ugly and deformed Monsters; and contrariwise Beasts bring forth humane
shapes contrary to their kind.

Have not the Lord suffered the Devil to ramble about like a roaring Lion
seeing to devour us: have not a crew of wicked Witches, together with the
Devils assistance done many mischiefs, in Norfolk* Suffolk, Essex, and other
parts of our Kingdom, whereof some were executed at Chensford in Essex last to
the number of fourteen, and many more imprisoned to this day, and by the voice
of people there are some in Stepney Parish now in question about witchcraft,
being persons of eminence* their names must as yet be concealed, but time will
bring truth to light: one thing more of the Witches which have not been yet
printed, was thus: on wednesday last, July, 30. being Fast Day at a Town
called Soffam in Norfolk, at the House of Peter-Smith, about 4, a clock in the
afternoon came a woman seeming to be some great gentle woman or Lady on
Horseback who knocking at the door desired to come in, there being in the
house no body* but one servant Maid, who told her, that he^ Master and Dam with
the rest of the Household were at the Church, and that she durst let in no body,
till such time the Sermon was done, whereat the Gentlewoman commanded her to
fetch her some of the best Beer in the House: the Maid replied, that there was
but one sort of Beer in the House, and that she would not meddle with till her
Master came from Church, the Gentlewoman bad her to give her some of the Bacon,
that was boiling in the pot, whereat the Maid began to tremble, and withal
marvelled much how she should come to know what meat was in the pot, and
therwithall lift up her hands crying, The Lord deliver me from all witches:
said the Gentlewoman, see thou look well to thy Beer, and thy Swines flesh
presently seem^d to mount her Horse over the top of the Barn and so vanished:
When the mau and his servants were come from the Church, they found the Maid
trembling and quaking in a mighty sweat, being not able to speak to them for
the space of two hours, but having recovered her strength and speech, she told
them how the Gentlewoman had talked with her* and what answer she made, and of
her sudden departure, and of her going into the Sellar for Beer the Casks were
broken, and all the Beer about the Room: Then the Maid remembered, how that
the woman bad her have a care of her Beer, and Swines flesh went streight-way
into the Barten, where she found three of her Masters fat Hogs, crying, and
laying out their tongues, and so they dyed.

July 30. Soffam, a known witch in Suffolk, not above 2, miles from Clare,
met with a woman great with child coming from the Bake-house with a Cake
under her arm, said the witch, Give me thy Cake: the woman broke it in the
middle, and offered her one part, which the witch refused, and said, As she had
broken the Cake, so should the child be broken in her body. And immediately
the woman went home, and was delivered of two lumps of flesh.

It is likewise certified by many of good quality and worth that at the last
Assizes in Norfolk there were 40 witches araigned for their lives, and 20.
executed: and that they have done very much harm in that Country, and have
prophesied of the downfall of the King and his Army, and that Prince Robert
shall be no longer shot-free: with many strange and unheard of things that
shall come to pass.

These and many more such like evils have of late been done in the Country,
as is affirmed by good sufficient Authors, as shall be related hereafter. And
now will I return and tell you of some strange news nearer home.

July 28. at a place called Ratcliffe Highway near unto London, at the sign
of the three Arrows, dwelt a woman named Mistress Heart, who lived and was well
beloved of her neighbors, she was religiously given, honest in behavior,
courteous in her speech, and well qualified in her actions: This woman being
with child, would oftentimes say that she was mightily troubled with what she
bore in her womb, as well she might be: for on the 28. day of July last, about
6. of the clock in the morning she fell strongly in labor, and therewithal
sent for the Midwife, whose name is Mistress Bullock, and other of her
neighbors to come to her labor, who through Gods assistance brought her to a
safe delivery. The Infant being brought into the world, the Midwife and the
rest of the women having taken a view of it, perceived it to be the strangest
misshapen Monster that ever they looked on, or heard tell of. It was both he
and she, borne without a nose, without hands and feet or legs, one ear, and
that grew in the neck, and where the legs and arms should have been, there
grew pieces of flesh, and no bones nor joints. This deformed Monster was borne
alive, but it lived not long: the woman is yet living.

Thus does the Lord daily send wonders into the world, thereby to put us in
mind of our sins, and move us to repentance.

One strange Relation more I have to mention, and so conclude: and that is
this:

In Lombardstreet in London in a Goldsmiths house, a Cat brought forth a
monstrous Kitnen, which was partly shapen like a humane creature, and the other
part Monster like. The manner of the form was thus: It had eight feet upon one
body, and two tayls, his paws were like a childs hands, and never a head, but
one great eye placed in the body where the head should be.

Thus have I related unto you such news which is known to be as true as
strange: God in his mercy give us all a sight of our sins, and grant us grace
to acknowledge them, and amend our lives.

FINIS.

