DIATPI.

Wherein the Judgment of THE Reformed Churches AND Protestant Divines, is
showed,

Concerning Ordination. Laying on of Hands in Ordination of Ministers: And,
Preaching by those who are not Ordained Ministers.


Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

London, Printed for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

The Judgment of the Reformed Churches and Protestant Divines, concerning
Ordination, Laying on of Hands in Ordination of Ministers, etc.
ORdination is taken commonly for an act of Ministers or Elders, after
Examination and Election: In that sense,

Ordination is not Essential to the Calling of a Minister: For,
1. The word, To Ordain, Tit. 1.5. (...), even when it is used concerning
Officers, signifies to six, settle, establish one who was in Office before, as
appears by Psalm. 2.6. where the Septuagint uses the same word Paul does to
Titus, (...); Now if you understand the Psalm of David in the type, he was a
King many years before he took in the Hill and Fort of Zion, 2 Samuel 5.5, 6. Or
if you understand it of the Apostles Preaching up Christ, as the Apostles do
the Psalm, Acts 4.25, etc. Christ received all power at his Ascension, and did
but settle his Kingdom by their Preaching. The Apostles were but witnesses of
Christ's glory, and in being so, did (...). And however the word (...) may be
taken sometimes, yet Tit. 1.5. it cannot be taken for making him an Elder who
was none before, for what is enjoined there, is to be done by Titus only, or by
Titus joining with other Ministers; For the Text says, I have left [thee] to
Ordain: But neither did the Apostles, much less might other Ministers make a
Minister by a sole act of their own: As for example* Acts 14.23. (...), etc.
the word translated, They Ordained, in the Plural number, may be referred to
the people, as well as to Paul and Barnabas: For its such a word as properly
belongs to the people as well as their Rulers when they gave their votes, and
never to the Rulers without the people. The custom was amongst the Grecians in
their (...) or lawful meetings, Budaeus, H: Stephan. These.
that the people joined votes with the Rulers, and the Rulers with the people,
before any act was accounted Legal; yea it may be rather referred to the people
then to them, for the people sometimes voted alone, but the Rulers did never.
And in this sense it is taken by the Reverend Divine of Scotland; Eng. Popish
cerem. p. 166. printed 1637.
his words are, But it is objected, That Luke says not of the whole Church,
but of Paul and Barnabas, that they made them, by voices, Elders in every City.
Answ. But how can one imagine that betwixt them two alone the matter went to
suffrages? Election by most voices, or the listing up of the hand, in taken of
a suffrage, had place only amongst a multitude assembled together. Wherefore
We say with Junius, That (...), is both a common and a particular action,
whereby a man chooses by his own suffrage in particular, and likewise with
others in common one: So that in one and the same action, we cannot divide
those things which are so joined together. But if the word, They Ordained, be
referred to Paul and Barnabas, and signify to Create or make an Officer who
was none before; yet the power whereby this Creation is wrought, is not their
own only; for (...) is Creare per suffragia, These. ling. Graec in
as H: Stephan renders it, which is as much as to say, They did it not only
virtually in the power of others, but they did it by others.

2. The end and scope of ordination is but to solemnize, inaugurate or publish
the calling of a Minister, It is to a Minister as Coronation is to a King,
which makes him not a King, but declares him and sets him forth with glory.
Aegid. Hunn. ad artic. Arturi contra assert. 6. Declaratio solemnis. Ames Case
Cons. lib 4. c. 25. sect. 28. Constitutionis testification Croci. Anti Soci.
Disp. 24. sect. 3. Missio solennis in possessionem honoris. Jun. Testimonium
vocati publicum. Tarnov. de Minist. lib. 1. c. 25. Consecratio and
Manifestatio, Declaratio, Promulgatio, Significatio coram Ecclesia solennis
testificatio. Voet. Despcausa papatus, lib. 2. sect. 2, c. 20.
These are the very expressions and similitudes of Protestant Writers, both
Lutheran and Calvinist in this matter. Sicut non Coronatio facit Regem, sed
Electio etc. Aegid. Hunn. ad actic. Acturi contra assert. 6. Ames Bellar.
enervat. tom. 2. p. 76. Id cas. cons. l. 4. c. 25. sect. 28. Voet. Desp. causa
Papatus, lib. 2. sect. 2. c. 20. p. 264. Majorem differentiam comminisci nemo
potest inter duo illa (Elect. and ^^di^^t.) quam inter Constitutionem et
Commissionem Principis unde spectatam, et inter eandem commissionem arbitrariis
quibusdam simbolis sceptra, Corona, etc. insignitam, Id page 267. And they are
agreeable to Scripture; For Act. 13.2, 3. Paul and Barnabas are said to be
Separated to the work by prayer and fasting and laying on of hands; but both of
them were Ministers before, as appears Act. 12. ult.

3. Then a man is a Minister, when he has a calling to the work from God and
man. But both those he may have without Ordination: For a man is called by God
when he is approved to be of eminent gifts, and has his heart stirred up by
spiritual respects to use those gifts for public good. And he is called by
man, when the people who are godly, consulting with the Word of God, and laying
aside all carnal respects, choose him and give up themselves unto him. This is
the reason of Crocius in defense of the Protestants against the Socinians. Ant.
Soc. disp. 24. sect. 3.
"Distinguimus inter necessitatem vocationis et ordinationis (says he) we
distinguish between the necessity of having a Call and of being Ordained. Illa
est necessaria ratione mandati, haec ratione ordinis and constitutionis
Ecclesiasticae. Illa est constitutio in officio, quae si legittima est duo
habet. 1. Vt a Deo quis eligatur. 2. Vt per antecedentem populi consensum
^ligatur A Deo eligitur cum ipse donis exornat, etc.
A calling is necessary, by reason of Gods command; Ordination is necessary in
respect of order and Ecclesiastical Constitution. The calling is the
Constitution of one in Office, which (if it be lawful) has two things in it.
1. That one be chosen of God. 2. That he be chosen by the Antecedent consent of
the people: One chosen of God when he is adomed with gifts, etc.

Quicunque ad docendum idoneus eligitur. and vocatur suffragio and voce
Ecclesiae, is verus est verbi Minister; Siquidem vocatio and electio legitima
facit Ministrum. Ordinatio vero est illius vocationis declaratio coram caeui
Ecclesiae; sicut non coronatio facit Regem sed electio: Coronatio vero est
solennis duntaxas renunciatio and declaratio regis. Ae gid. Hunn. contra
assert. Arturi. Vocatio proprie and essentialiter. consistit in electione. Ames
Case Consc. l. 4. c. 25. sect. 28. Ordinatio seu Consecratio nihil aliud est
quam legitima electio. Vo^t. 267.
4. Whatsoever substantial act belongs to the making of a Minister, or is
solemnized in ordinatio^, the same is done in Election. For first, to Election
there goes the trial and approbation of a man's abilities; In Election, the
Church gives up it self to God to take whom he shall direct their hearts to,
Acts 1.2, 4.
and in choosing one well qualified, they choose him whom God would have Chosen.
In their choice they, eo ipso, separate and set him apart to the Ministry: Him
they take as from Gods appointment and hand, they offer themselves to God by
him. In accepting the choice, the party chosen undertaketh to be in Gods stead
to them, 2 Cor. 5.20.
and to go in their stead and behalf to God (for what else is it to be a
Minister?) And all this is done with prayer and mutual agreement. Now as where
the Church agrees in an act, God will be present to confirm that act, Mat.
18.18, 19. so prayer is also a separation of one to the Ministry, Act. 13.2,
3. Add further, Our Translators of the Bible take and render (...) To Ordain,
Acts 14.23.
which signifies properly to choose: And where the Scripture speaks expressly
of choosing, they supply the Text with the word Ordain, as Act. 1.22. Hen.
Stephan calls the act of choice ((...)) Creare Magistratum, These. ling. Graec.
novum usum hine verbo tribuere.
the making of and Officer, for it is (as he says) a new found sense of the
word, to signify, laying on of hands. And if the Apostle Luke should use it
for laying on of hands, Eng. Pop. cere. p. 165, 16^.
it was never used so before his time by any writer, holy or profane: And
unless his purpose was to write that which none should read, it must needs be
that as he wrote so he meant, Cart. on Acts 14.23.
Election by voices, says Cartwright.

Yea let it be further observed, that in Election and Ordination, the same word
is used; In Election, Act. 1.23. Act. 6.6. (...) In Ordination it is (...); the
same word, with addition of a preposition, ((...)) only: And as the Translators
of the Bible render both words, Appoint. (...) They appointed, Act. 1.23. (...)
we will appoint, Act. 6.3. So the Preposition (...) does not alter the sense
specifically from the word when it is without it, (...) pro. (...) apud
Eustrach.
no not in the matter of making an Officer: For its all one (...), and (...),
as H. Stephan observes. These. ling. Graec. tom. 1. 1732. C. and 1767. E.
In the New Testament (...) signifies to place one, and to place one with
honor; whence the phrase is (...) he shall set the Sheep on the right hand,
Mat. 25.33. Its an authoritative word, as Romans 3.31. (...), We establish the
Law. And the Septuagint, whom Luke is observed to follow most, Cart. in Acts
14.23.
use (...) for as much as (...), as 1 Chronicles. 9.22. (...). These did David and
Solomon appoint in their set office. But especially consider that electing one
is taking up an Office for him, Act. 1.20.22. and he that is elected is said to
be numbered amongst Officers, Act. 1.26. The lot fell on Matthias, and he was
numbered amongst the Apostles. Numbered (...) communibus suffragiis seu calculis
ad scriptus est, by common consent or votes he was put into the number, or
enrolled amongst the Apostles.

Omnes illi actus qui pertinent ad vocationem vel tendunt ad electionem, ut,
nominatio, praesentatio, examinatio, vel ab electione pendent, ut, Ordinatio,
institutio vel immissio. Ames Case Cons. ubi supra. Relationes in subjecto
dicuntur existere posito* fundamento and termino. Sed legittima electio and
fundamentum Ministerii and p^rticularis Ecclesia ista vel illa terminus. Voet.
ubi supra. p. 265. Consecratio est adjunctum Ministerii, atque adjunctum est
posterius suo subjecto. Id. 18.
5. Upon whomsoever Election falls, Ordination does, necessarily, and
therefore the Call to the Ministry lies principally in Election; as he that is
chosen to be a King, must be Crowned, therefore his election gives him the
right to rule. That Ordination necessarily follows Election, appears Act. 6.3.
where the Apostle bids them look out ( i. e. choose, as its explained ver. 5.)
and he would appoint.

And to this agree our Brethren of the Church of Scotland; Eng. Pop. cere.
part. 3. c. 8. p. 167.
speaking of Ordination in general (though they instance it as to a particular
flock) Neither the Patrons presentation, not the Clergies nomination,
examination, and recommendation, nor the Bishops laying on of hands and giving
of institution; nor all these put together, can make up to a man his Calling to
be a Pastor, without the free Election of the flock: Again, A man has from his
Election power to be a Pastor, so far as concerns Jus ad rem; And Ordination
only applies him to the actual exercising of his Pastoral Office, which
Ordination Ought to be given to him Only who is elected, and that because he
is elected.

6. A Minister may want and be without Ordination in some cases, therefore its
not essential to his Galling. Thus Gregor. Thaumaturgus way, and others may be
in times of persecution. This Argument Voetius presses larger, and shows,
even by confession of the Papists, (That one elected or chosen, may without
Ordination do all the offices of a Minister, as, Excommunicate, Absolve, and
concludes it is no more to the effence of a Minister, then bowing of the knee
externally is essential to prayer to God, or the leading of the Bride and pomp
of a wedding ^ay, is to marriage, Desp. causa Papal. 266, 267.

7. The inconveniences will be very great which follow upon this, That
Ordination is Essential to the calling of a Minister: For of necessity, for the
maintenance of it, it must be asserted that the Romish Priests, by whom
Ordination comes to us (and therefore to Beza it was all one, to be Ordained by
the Ordinary, and to be Consecrated in Romana Ecclesia, in Acts 14.23.) are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, and the Church of Rome wherein they are, the true
Church and Spouse of Christ: Yea, that there is a personal succession of
Ministers (uninterruped by Heresy or whatsoever else may nullify a Ministers
Calling) from the Apostles times to this present; For if there be but one, who
when he Ordained was no Minister, or not Ordained, all that were Ordained by
him are no Ministers, if Ordination be essential.

Imposition, or Laying on of Hands, is neither Essential to a Ministers Call,
nor to his Ordination: For,
1. SOme have been made Ministers without it, as the Apostles and Matthias,
Acts I.

2. When the Apostle bids Titus to Ordain, Tit. 1.4. He says not a word of
Imposition of hands.

3. When the Apostle used it to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. it was so used as it was
in giving the Holy Ghost; as appears by comparing that place with Acts 19.6.
And therefore was no more essential to Timothy's being a Minister, then it was
to their Baptism, Act. 196. The Apostles indeed by the laying on of their hands
did signify their giving of the gift of the Holy Ghost ( say the Divines of
Scotland) but now as the miracle, Eng. Pop. cerem. p^g. ^69.
so the mystery has ceased. Something extraordinary its likely was in the
Apostles laying on of hands, for he says the Gift was given (...), 2 Timothy ^.6.
by the laying on of my hands, as it was (...) by prophecy, which was peculiar
to extraordinary Officers; but it was but [with] (...), 1 Timothy 4.14. They it
seems had but a bare concurrence, but the efficiency was in Paul singularly, as
our Brethren of Scotland express it, Paul's hands were the mean, Eng. Pop. cere.
168, 169.
the laying on of their hands, the Rite and sign of his Ordination. And
therefore they add, Its not to be used with opinion of necessity; Ordination
may be done by word alone without any Ceremony. And again, If the use of
imposition of hands in Ordination, be accounted and used as a sacred Rite, and
as having a sacred Signification (the use of it not being necessary) it becomes
unlawful, by reason of the by gone and present Superstitious use of the same in
Popery.

4. If laying on of hands be essential to a Ministers Call, then are the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches no Ministers: For, though they use laying on
of hands now as a thing indifferent, In Act. 14.23.
yet they who used it first had it not themselves. Quidam hoc refer malunt ad
manuum impositionem quae and ipsa sit prorsus necessaria; and hoc praetextu
accepto, vocatione^ nostram irritam esse dicunt, quoni^m Ordinarii (quos
vocant) nobis Manus non imposuerunt; Sive, quod non simus in Romana Ecclesia
Ordinati. Respondeo, and ipsis Canonibus quos jactant, irritam esse
consecrationem cui non praeirit legitima electio, aut quae fit Excommunicato,
Ostendant autem ipsi vel unum in tota illa sua Hierarchia qui legitime sit
vocatus, imo qui non sit centies ipso jure Excommunicatus. Si ipsis eorum
Synodis stetur. Nos igitur cur abillis Impositionem manuum peteremus, aut quo
jure ipsi nobis eam tribuerent? Habemus autem nos, Dei beneficio, Certas
nostrae vocationis notas, legitimo ab Ecclesiis nostris and vitae and Doctrinae
testimonso (per Dei gratiam) ornati; and ab iisdem electi, ac Demum etiam
invocato Deo nomine in nostro ministerio confirmati, cui Dominus (ut spero)
ejectis tum furibus Mercenariis, benedicat.
They are the words of Beza, Some (said he) choose to refer this to laying on of
hands, as if it also were altogether necessary, and under this pretense say,
Our Calling is Null, because the Ordinaries (as they call them) have not laid
hands on us, or because we are not consecrated in the Church of Rome. I answer,
By those Canons which they boast of, the consecration is Null, where there was
not first a lawful choice, or which was done by one who is Excommunicated: Let
them show but one in all their Hierarchy, who is lawfully chosen, yea who is
not by the very law, a hundred times Excommunicate, if they will stand to their
own Synods. Why should we therefore desire hands to be laid on us by them? Or
by what Law can they do it? But we have by the blessing of God, certain Marks
of our Calling, being (through the Grace of God) adorned with the lawful
testimony of our life and Doctrine from our Churches, and after that by calling
upon the name of God confirmed in our Ministry, which God I hope will bless,
and cast out both the Thieves and Hirelings.

And in the same case are the Lutherans, who hold laying on of hands not to be
essential to their calling; Yea that its Popery to hold it so. Bellarmine (says
Tarnovius) would have laying on of hands to be absolutely necessary, Tarnov. de
Ministerio c. 25. l. 1. qu. 1.
as the substantial part of Ordination. Chemnitius puts the case, Whether his
Ministry be Null who has not hands laid on him; and having reptated their
opinion who say its not necessary so the Call be lawful, he lays the necessity
of it to be in regard of others who ^un and are not sent, not in regard of the
Calling it self, but that the Calling may be witnessed which the Minister
has: and says, Ordinationon facit vocationem, Ordination makes not his
Calling, but declares it. And further, Praecipue servatur iste ritus at tota
Ecclesia communibus and ardentibus pracibus, etc. that Imposition of hands is
retained chiefly for the prayers sake which the whole Church make, etc. Yea,
Fatendum sane, nullum extare in scripturis Mandatum Dei quod hic citus
Ordinatione fit adhibendus; there is no Command of God in Scripture to Ordain
by laying on of hands. In 1 Timothy 5.22
Loc. Com. Tom. 3.137. Danans says, Laying on of hands is not necessary, so
there be but prayer made to confirm the party elected, and the whole Church
join in prayer with him that the Spirit of God would strengthen him; and he
gives amongst other reasons, as that prayer is all, this for one, Qui hanc
ceremoniam Praecise urgent incidunt in vanas quaestionis and ineptas, The
urging of it breeds vain and foolish questions about Ministers callings. And
with them agrees the Church of Scotland; Eng. Pop. cere. page 168, 169.
The Church has full liberty to use any other decent Rite, or to use no Rite
at all, beside a public declaration; the Church is not tied to use any Rite
at all by the word of God, in the giving of Ordination.

Yea suppose it Essential, and then, whereas it has been held against the
Brownists, that the Ministry in the Church of England is not [Null] though the
Bishops laid on their hands, who should not have had a finger in it (because an
extrinsecal circumstance failing, or being corrupted, a thing ceases not to be)
yet if it be made essential, what shall be said* seeing both in the Bishops
intention in ordaining, and in the profession of the party ordained, hands were
laid on him, not as a Presb year formally, but as one of a superior Order to
Elders; And for scuh an Order there is no Divine Institution. As therefore that
Baptisin must be repeated which was administered by a person not lawfully called
to the ministration of it; if the person ministering be essential to Baptism, so
must that person be ordained again who had hands laid on by a Bishop, as a
Bishop, if laying on of hands be essential to the Ministry. Whatsoever wants
its essentials, is not, though it seems to be.

Object. 1 Timothy 5.22. Laying on of hands is put for the whole matter of
appointing Ministers, ergo its essential.

Ans. Take it for granted that it be so taken, (though it will not be easily
proved, because the Scripture shows it has been used in other cases then in
appointing Officers) yet it follows not that it is the principal or essential
thing in Ordination. As for example, Prayer is put for the whole worship of
God, yet is it not the principal part of worship; for sometimes keeping the
Sabbath is put for all the worship, as Isa. 56.4. Again, as when the Scripture
by the same figure puts lifting up of hands for election (as it does Acts
14.23.5.) it binds not to that in all elections, nor places it the essence of
a choice in that: So neither does the Scripture place the chief part or essence
of Ordination in laying on of hands, though it put it for that work.

If therefore laying on of hands be not essential, why should those be kept
altogether from laboring in the Lords Harvest, who cannot or have not received
it; and in a way too that is as questionable as the thing it self? We have the
word [Presbytery] but once spoken of in all the Scriptures, as belonging to the
Churches of the New Testament. Calvin understa^ds by it the office of a
Presbyter, not a company of them. Those who take it for a company differ
a^ongst themselves: Some say a a company of Preachers, as the Leyden
Professors, Synops, purior. theol. disp. 43. u. 3^. Some take it for a company
of extraordinary Ministers, as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Scott (...)
Paracles. p. 2^8. Others for a company of Ruling Elders, as well as others,
Eng. Pop. Cerem. p. 1^ 1. Some understand it of a Congregational P^esbytery,
(a^ the Non-conformists against Downame, and the Scots against Tilenus) Some of
a Classical, Provincial Presbytery, as the London Ministers.
If the Calling may be true without it, why is it equally pressed with it? Is
there more need of an adjunct, an accessory, a solemnity, then of Ministers,
peace, salvation to peoples fouls by preaching? As Soon as they had but an
Altar, they offered on it when they came out of Babylon, and staid not till all
the Temple in all its furniture and utensils, was ready, EZra. 3. Before they
were wholly carried away into Babylon, they worshipped and served God with
those Vessels which were left in the Sanctuary, though they had not all, 2 Chronicles. 36.7.10.18. What higher point of Separation is there, then to make void,
or deny a whole Ordinance for want of a Circumstance?

FINIS.

