RARE VERITIES.

THE CABINET OF VENUS UNLOCKED, AND Her Secrets laid open.

Being a Translation of part of Sinibaldus, his Geneanthropeia, and a
collection of some things out of other Latin Authors, never before in English.

Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba. Horat. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit
utile dulci. Mart. Lex haec carminibus data est jocosis,
Non possint, nisi pruriant, juvare.
LONDON, Printed for P. Briggs, at the Dolphin in St Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To the Amorous READERS.
TO you (the devout Adorers of Venus) am I solely willing to make my
dedication; and blame me not if I am so provident as to shelter my self under
the tutelage of the more numerous and stronger party. Besides, since your whole
society is all composed of love, and reciprocal affection; I have great
grounds to hope you will not now change your natures, in refusing to patronize
and cherish those things, (that though they are now other men's) yet may be
justly termed the genuine offsprings of your own thoughts. Wherefore that you
may the sooner try whether they are so or no, I shall not at this present
imitate some long-winded Pulpit-thumpers, that at every accent blow their
Auditors out of doors by their tedious preambulations, but shall be quick to
open the doors of that closet wherein lies the treasure of that profit and
pleasure my looser minutes intend to present to your joviall perusalls. To you
(I say) that are the tried Champions of Venus, do these occult mysteries belong
solely, and are offered by me; (For I know the very Title of this Pamphlet is
enough to scare young modesty from venturing to approach.) Hence boldly fetch
new fuel to augment your pleasing fires: and though it be a little
storehouse, yet despise it not; for the more vigorous a thing is, the less
space it animates. But you will say the lesser it is, the fewer faults you
expect to find in it. No doubt some there are, which have either escaped the
Printer, or else were occasioned by my negligence; but my refuge is the hope of
your Clemency; and if you will not afford me that, then let the pardon of my
errors be as a gratuity for that benefit (if you find any) that you shall reap
in reading this collected Translation. It may be some seemingly modest, will
hold me for a Capital offender for Transcribing those things into English,
which should have remained still in the obscurity of an unknown To which I
answer; that I hold it a very unjust thing that scholars should monopolize the
trade of Drollery to themselves, and that they should be so uncharitable as not
to let their Contrymen partake of those sublime secrets they understand,
unless they puzzle their brains with the Latin and Greek. I think such men,
had they their ends, would make such sots of Englishmen, as that they should
either forget, or never know the manner of generation; and that when they are
married, they must be forced to come to them to be taught the way of
copulation. To prevent which, I have made Sinibaldus and some other
Pornodidascalians, to speak English, and that in plain terms; which (I hope)
shall rather excuse me then accuse, if by this means I shall lay open the
mysteries of generation, and its concomitants, more facile and easy. Moreover,
if I write any thing that is obscene, it is because my Authors wrote so, from
whom I Collected this miscellany.

Again, I must ingenuously confess, that no tongue sounds sweeter to me then
the English; I could wish I were the instrument of making it sound so to
others. However, things of this nature, let them be in ever so plain and rude a
dress, will be acceptable to some, nay most. Methinks I already foresee, that
the longing Chamber-maide will read this little book with a great deal more
devotion then she would Dod or Sibs. Nay I may shrewdly suspect, that the
Learned (though not this, yet its Original) will be more desirous to turn over
in private, then some voluminous Rabbin. Suffer then (I beseech) Sinibaldus to
breath his thoughts in your chambers, and you shall find by a kind of
sympathy, their sweet harmony in your bosoms: as two Lutes set unison, both
of them move, if but one be struck. If he speaks not English so pleasingly as
he does Latin, blame the Translator, not the Author; and as little too as
possible, when you shall consider the distractions of the times. For that soul
must be filled with pleasant and delighting Idea's, that would communicate such
things to others: Wit is as soon eclipsed by turbulent thoughts as beauty is by
the indisposition of the body. If then my rhymes displease, take notice that my
Genius pleads its excuse, as never deserving much to kiss Pegasus his -- Its
equally a matter difficult, to be a Poet in despite of Fortune, as of Nature.
Read then these Collections (that are nove dicta, etsi non nova) with as much
pleasure and profit, as I shall have blame; and it is all I expect.

Aug. 24. 1657. Erotodidascalus.

An Epistle to his Friend concerning the publishing his Book.
Sir,
I Send you this Pamphlet, desiring your perusal of it, but by way of
corollary, I beseech you not to think it was any part of my study, but composed
for my own and my friends recreation. You will at least find this satisfaction
by reading it, to know the difference of your practick and speculative
knowledge in this science. Be not angry at my freedom with you, but either
commend or pity me for the pains I have taken, to make you and others more
intelligent in these occult mysteries. I am content to be the pick-lock of
Venus her Cabinet, to let you with more ease enter and rifle and despoile her
inestimable treasure. Nay you may plainly perceive that I am willing to be any
thing, that I may be something either of pleasure or profit to any of my
friends. For my part I expect no less then to be whipped by every squint-eyed
fellow, worse then Dr Gill lashed his maids Bumbgillion, when He took up her
smock,
And then whipped her nock.


I do not apprehend the least favor I can have of any, much less your
approbation. But thus much I beg at your hands, a brief manifesto or
demonstration of your good will, to shelter me from some of those jerks I
foresee will be laid on me. In so doing you will highly oblige me, who is
yours, and every ones else, as far as it consists with his own profit, and
their contentment.

Anonymus

His Friends Reply.
Sir,
WHen first your Manuscript found me, I was strangely surprised, to see Venus
her Cabinet unlocked, and her most mysterious recesses discovered. The strict
Italians wife that upon the absence of her husband, is reported to have her
secrets buckled up, may sometimes make a subtle escape by the benefit of a
false key or pick-lock. But yours is a more universal delusion, to prostrate
Venus to a whole Nation, and present Vulcan (who before was no monstrous, but
an ordinary cuckold) with a monopoly of horns. But because you think your self
in danger of calumny, and request something antidotal to its poisoned weapons;
I shall (rather then be deaf to importunity) single out some objections, and
afterward salve them with the best balm I have, which is natural. Though I
know they pass not, nor cannot escape your piercing eye, yet they may keep me
from the forelorne hope of the Press. Several objections you will encounter
with, from several sorts of Readers. Though I think your guard is so sure, as
it will lie open to none, yet will they bandy, though they suffer dishonorable
repulses. From the learned pretenders, you will be accused of no less then
sacrilege, for opening those sanctuaries of nature so long undiscovered to
profaner eyes. They will lay as great an imputation on you, as the Romans of
old did on Clodius, that in a counterfeited feminine habit, insinuated himself
into the presence chamber at the secret sacrifice of Bona Dea: whose infamy
has proverbially descended to posterity. But you may justly answer, that this
kind of Philosophy is natural; and therefore not to be debarred from its native
universality, by the shells of languages, and outward obscurity of words.
Besides, you and the rest of our Contrymen may truly boast of presidents in
this nature, that of late years ennobled the treasury of our language. Such as
without ravishing nature, have made her fruitful. Again, Venus hates secrecy,
for she is in her most noble and pleasant dress, when undressed, and a pure
white and melting Adamite. In her naked presentation she is best armed, and to
indue her with any ornament, is but to veil her perfections. Every glance from
her eye is an armed Phalanx, and her discovered parts send streams of rays,
which (uniting in the eye above all the rules of Optics) inflame the
immaterial soul. I cannot therefore but give due encomiums to him that shall
succesfully and plainly lay open and spring these new mines. Aristotle's highest
demonstrations never so augmented his monarchy, nor procured him so many
scholars and followers, as the translation of his Problems, which made every
Lady become a Peripatetick, and sworn Philosopher. The next objection will be
diametrically opposed (I suppose) to the former, so that with all your
sedulity, you will hardly satisfy the discerning and scrupulous head. Albi an
nigri sint? will pose my Optics. They will not only be irritated by your
discovering too much, but also too little. That is, that you have omitted the
observations of the admired Harvey: whose Rules do encounter desperately with
most of the fundamental axioms of his predecessors. And yet these observations
are so piercing, as that they seem Oracles pronounced a Tripode. You have
omitted his opinion of secret magnetical contagion, ejaculated into the womb,
without any corporal seminal effusion perceptible. There will be expectations,
that you have touched on his ingenuous notions or conceptions. Here will be an
enquiry made for the noble juice, from which mild nectar, rather then from the
fierce channel of blood, the matter of seed is conceived to have its
derivation. Here is no mention made of the probable conjectures of the Faba
Fallopiana, being as it were a casket to the seed for a determinate season, and
afterward returning this chief gem and extract into the womb, where by
fomentation of heat it arrives at perfection.

Maxima de nihilo nascitur historia. Thus you see in this long objection you
are only accused of a fault of omission, for which not the translation, but
the original stands chiefly engaged. Sinibaldus was not acquainted with these
men, as living not in their time: and therefore you could not have steered
according to their suppositions, unless you had hoised up sails and trusted
your own compass, and deserted your Author, a learned and skilful Pilot, or
distorted him as Physicians do Galen.

Besides, the incomparable Harvey his book is already civitate donatus, by a
noble and learned pen, and although he speaks English, yet its not intelligible
by the unlearned vulgarity, as being not versed in Anatomical dissections. So
that it is evident that to transcribe these had been an useless plagiary. And
thus far you have got your self loose and your book, as unconcerned to the
optimates literarii, but more justly appertaining to the minorum Gentium. I
perceive the intent of your wanton page is rather to incite an itching or
titillation whereby women may be disposed to conception, then to stir up the
conception of learned men's brains. The Chambermaid is like to receive great
satisfaction in making a scrutiny, whether she enjoys the integrity of her
Hymen, and so be resolved, quid poterit salva virginite rapi. She will roll
over your pages to see whether she has not forfeited the notes of her
virginity, by petulancy, whilst others (I mean the profoundly learned) make
strict inquisition into abstruse Philosophical verities. Here shall both sexes
view their several postures, how to fight in Venus her battalia, beyond all
dull books of fencing and fighting. And now at last you are arrived at the
amphibious sort of Objectors, that Curios simulant, and vivunt Bacchanalia:
such as carry the Practice of Piety in their hands, this in their pocket, and
yet make public exclamations against it for obscene language, etc.. while
their fancies immerg'd in its luxurious imbracements commit adultery with their
own Chimera's. These will tell you it is the spawn of Aristotle's Problems, and
that the brotherhood at Amsterdam publish no such libels. But if from those
that are prejudiced with these delusive apprehensions, you could gain attention
to reason, their confutation were to be effected with facility. For to call
these worthy acts of nature, obscenities, by an easy induction, will seem but a
little removed from atheism, to him that believes nature is the hand of God.
Therefore Sir, I will advise you, no farther to stand endeavoring satisfaction
to every capricious humorist; only I wish them, with the Poet Lucretius, that
they do not (as he suspected his endeared Memnius) Nec mea dona tibi studio
disposta fideli,
Intellecta prius quam sint contempta relinquas.
Nor let my gifts framed out of just respect,
Un-understood, be answered with neglect.


Rather for encouragement, I may add a just elogium to Sinibaldus, that for
variety of learning, he has exceeded all on this subject. And if any thing
were culpable, it was his copiousness, which you have artificially contracted.
Those spirits and masculine vigor, which flourished in his large volume to
admiration, you have miraculously and in (invita arithmetica) by substraction
multiplied, that those that lay before dilated into great extension, and ready
to evaporate, have in your book received their due fixation, and maturation.
Now to deal ingeniously with you, what lapses I find in your book, one I think
is, that it is without any. Venus should not be presented to open view without
her moti cella, or some small defect, but yours has not so much as a black
patch, or any discoverable inequality. In the interim, what others discover,
must go under the usual apology of humanity and clemency; there is not in any
singular a prerogative of infallibility. That in most things there are both
superfluous additions, and substantial deficiencies, this paper of mine, (which
haste must excuse) will bear sufficient demonstration. And really I think that
deception and misapprehension are become so universal and epidemical, that
there is hardly a book but that may have for its prologue, a catalogue of
Errata, and for its Epilogue, a --

Caetera desiderantur.

Concerning the Name of VENUS.
THe Poets feign the Original of this Goddess to arise from the seed and
testicles of Saturn cast into the Sea; whence the name in Greek is phrodte
although others would have Venus to be derived from the Latin word viere, to
bind, thereby intimating its usual effects, by inslaving and captivating men's
bodies and minds. It would not be improper to deduce her name from phrosne,
since that pourtraies her nature. By reason she excelled all in her excessive
appetite after pleasure and delight in lust; she is held of old to be the
patroness or Goddess of Love. And hence by reason her adorers found such
delighting ease in worshipping her; she soon acquired a vast number of vassals
and subjects, so that now she is become the most powerful among the Goddesses.
Above all others that worshipped this light Goddess, there was a Cynique sect
of Philosophers, that without either shame or blushing did openly ofter up
their chastities to her shrine. At Corinth she had a Temple consecrated to her
name, unto which did daily flock a number of young men and maids, at whose
altar they willingly did sacrifice, as a pleasing offering, unspotted
virginities. Boemus Aubanus makes mention of a Country, whose inhabitants are
all Adamites, or those which went naked. These people have very often set
meetings, where a number of both sexes meeting together, every man takes her
that likes him best to satisfy his lust; according to the Poet: And then upon
these well known sweets they ventred,
Where many an often sacked fort was scaled and entered;
Art they had none, no man there played the suitor,
Each man linked to his own without a tutor.


Let thus much suffice for the name of Venus, which you may take throughout
this discourse, for nothing else then a mutual copulation, or lust, the
substance of which being an unbridled force and scum of a luxurious nature.

What is Copulation?
LEt us now pass from the name to the knowledge of the thing it self; and
although there is none so ignorant, but knows somewhat of it, yet a word or two
may not be amiss, to make it appear more perspicuous. Its thus then; Copulation
is a conjunction of male and female, by fitness of instruments, with an
ejection of seed to beget their likeness. Its a conjunction, because its act
cannot be done at a distance of male and female, because in every operation of
nature, there is required an active and passive faculty; by apt instruments is
meant, male and female genitals, which are required to be fit and proper; and
not, as some vainly suppose, that creatures may engender by conjoyning mouth to
mouth, or eyes to eyes, etc. or unnaturally one male with another, for that is
not by apt instruments. Lastly, with the effusion of seed, etc. which is the
complement of venereal action, and without which conception and generation can
no way be effected. In this consists the whole pleasure and delight of lovers;
this is that which luls, nay almost stupifies their mutual senses: Wherefore
take Ovids counsel if you please: Fly not then (maids) your tickling
pleasures, when
They are desired of you by loving men.
Tell me what lose you by it of your store;
You nothing lose, but rather still get more.
Taste then a thousand sweets, be not afraid;
You keep your own, and nothing is decayed.
Stones are by use made soft, irons wore to dross;
That never wears, and therefore finds no loss.


What is Venereal love.
THere are of this love two sorts; the one contemplative or Platonic, the
other active or Socratical; the first contents it self solely with seeing the
object beloved; the other is inflamed the more by it, and can no ways be
satisfied, but by the carnal enjoyment of its beloved. This is that which is
termed lust. Seneca's definition of it is a forgetting of reason; to this you
may add, its an enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the mind,
a corrasive to the conscience, a weakner of the wit, a besotter of the senses;
and finally an enemy to the whole body. Another says, Love is I know not what,
born I know not where; it came I know not from whence, and inflamed I know not
how.

Love is a blinded fool, an angry boy,
He Is neither God nor man, a witless toy;
He Is any thing, yet's nothing that is just,
A private hell, a raging sea of lust.
Through what part is love at first received in.
THe receptacle, and habitation of Love is the eye; that is the first thing we
perceive in the face.

Venus her eyes do deeper wound men's hearts,
Then Cupid can with all his bows and darts.
Love wounding through the eye of a lover, easily lays open a passage to
penetrate the heart. Cardanus is of opinion, that those are not easily
affectionate, but are flowly inthral'd by love, that have their eyes quick and
piercing; For there is no beauty so perfect, in which a curious sharp eye may
not find some defect. In a word, its the eye which is all in all to a lover;
Its his sentinel to perceive all things for his advantage, nay it even
penetrates the thoughts; its his legate and silent orator, to discover (when by
either fear or her presence he is struck mute) thereby the inward motions of
his or her amorous heart.

Who are they which are most apt to be in love?
ONe calls love a passion of an idle soul, In idle breasts
Love takes its rests.
Let labor be thy sauce, and exercise thy fire,
Then will loves flames with its effects retire.


Sloth and idleness being it is said to be the pillow of the Devil, therefore
it must needs be the fountain of most vices, but especially of lustful desires.
How in an instant was valiant Hercules metamorphosed by it into effeminate
Venus? By giving way to idleness he soon laid aside his Lions skin, and his
mortiferous club, and betook himself to soft wantonness and effeminacy; he
quickly changed his masculine habit, and invested himself with feminine
apparel, that thereby he might insinuate himself, and more easily enjoy Queen
Omphale. Sardanapalus fell into the self same error as Hercules did, by not
banishing idleness from him. For divesting himself of that sublimity and
excellency which accompanies Majesty, and sequestring his person from his
martial Nobility; he made these solely his companions, which were either
Whores, Bawds, Panders, etc. by which means he converted his royal Palace into
a most filthy brothel-house. Doubtless there is scarce a whoredom or adultery
committed, wherein this sluggish vice has not a predominant hand. You may be
resolved of the Poet, why Aegisthus fell adulterately in love with
Clitemnestra; both of which being steeped in ease and rest, and she being a
lusty Lady, (taking likewise with impatience the absence of her husband) such
secret familiarity sprung up between them, that at last it turned into flat
adultery.

Aegisthus did fair Clitemnestra woe,
Being idle he had nothing else to do.
Those yet have been cried up through the whole world for their prowess and
valor, have by a little giving their minds to rest, been miserably infested
with this lustful vice. Achilles had no sooner rested himself from slaying the
Trojans, but he was ready to embrace his love, if you will believe Ovid, as he
expresses it in these terms: -- He unarmed his head,
To tumble with his love in a down bed.
Those warlike hands that did but late embrew
Themselves in blood of Trojans whom they slew,
Were now employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a lance that had no point of steel.


It should seem by this, that amorous encounters is a petty kind of war, or at
least a duel, if I may term it so improperly, otherwise Mars the God of war
would have never loved it so well. Here Ovid relates his being in love with
Venus: The God of war does in his brow discover,
The perfect and true pattern of a lover:
Nor could the Goddess Venus be so cruel,
Mars to deny; such kindness is a jewel.
The Sun both sees and blabs the sight forthwith,
In all great haste he speeds to tell the Smith.
Oh Sun! what bad example do thou show?
What thou in secret see, must all men know?
For silence sake, ask bribes from her fair treasure,
She Will grant thee that shall make thee swell with pleasure.
The Smith whose face is smok'd with smut and fire,
Places about the bed a net of wire;
The lovers met where he that train has set,
And both are caught within that wiry net.
He calls the Gods, the lovers naked spraul,
And cannot rise; the Queen of Love shows all.
Mars chafes, and Venus weeps --


Moreover, Phlegmatic and Melancholy men, as (it is confessed) are not easily
induced to love, yet when once they are so, they love most vehemently. Another
thing that does invite, or rather charm men to love, is Music.

As without breath no pipe does move,
No music kindly without love.
To be sure they have little else to do then to behave themselves as servants
befitting Venus, that spend most of their most precious time in reading
Romances, and such like amorous and fictitious stories.

Concerning those things that increase love.
A Morous desies are rekindled by the sight and remembrance of the object
beloved.

Tu nisi vitaris quicquid revocabit amorem,
Flamma redardescet, quae modo nulla fuit.
Or as one of our Englishmen has it; Fair beauty is the spark of hot desire,
And sparks in time will kindle to a fire.


Philosophers are of opinion that we are nourished of that of which we are.
Love has its original from the eyes, and from thence by consequence it must
have its increment and aliment; Love, though blind, by often meeting and seeing
the person beloved, observes some new pleasing charm which it observed not
before, which keeps up its heart from sinking into despair, and which forces
him to use importunity and opportunity, that he may at last crown his desires.

Do but persist that suit thou have begun,
In time will chaste Penelopy be won.
Often what she most denies she most desires;
In frosty woods are hid the hottest fires.
Only begin to reap what thou have sown,
A million to a mite she is thy own.
Whether Love may be cured by medicaments.
ALthough there be many things that will blunt the edge of lust, yet when love
is a chaste passion, being of a long time rooted in the heart, its not easily to
be supplanted but by death, or the object possessed or enjoyed.

Apollo that by vertual heat
Did virdant plants and herbs create,
Yet found no herb or plant to be
A medicine for loves malady.
Concerning Love-potions or Philters.
ALbertus Magnus and Pliny relate several things conducing to this Philter,
though for the most part vain and feigned. Former times joined to ours will
afford variety of examples of such men, as by these potions have so perverted
female fancies, as in an instant they have caused them to love those which a
little before they hated. At Brixia there is a monument which makes mention of
a woman that used this art, with this inscription: D. M.
Qui me volent.
Valete matronae, matresque
Familias, vixi, and ultra
Vitam, nihil credidi, Me
Veneri alumnae addixi.
Quos potui, pellexi philtro,
Et astu; viro humato
Non vidua fui, etc. --


Its reported that Charles the Great, King of France, was by this means charmed
to affect a woman of a mean beauty, and had he not been miraculously admonished
by an Angel what to do, he had been for ever undone. The thing effecting this,
is small, if you consider its external quality, as being nothing but a little
stone fastened to the woman's gums; but it seems its internal virtue was such
that it made him lay aside and almost wholly forget the affairs of his
kingdom, that thereby he might have the more freedom and occasion to be
continually embracing this strumpet. At last a Priest of this Kings was
admonished by an Angel to kill this woman, to free his Majesty from such a
pernicious malady, which accordingly was done; yet the King still loved the
dead and almost stinking carcass; till the second time the Angel appeared, and
told him he should remove the stone out of her mouth; which was no sooner done,
but the King then as much detested her, as before he loved her. There is no
question but Philters may be made, but the danger the composing and
administering them will bring, may be a sufficient ground to hinder any from
making them.

Whether females may change their Sex.
HIstories are full of such accidents. Ausonius says, Venus Epheborum virgo
repent fuit. Hippocrates, Marcellus, Donatus, with many other learned
Physicians, can sufficiently furnish you with many examples of such
catastrophe's. Michael Montanus attests, that in his time a maid by a violent
jump was changed into a man, her Clytoris issuing forth. Fulgosius writes of a
maid of fifteen years of age, being married, the first night her husband lay
with her, was thus changed: whether it was by reason of her too much motion in
the venereal act, or the fervent heat of those parts, I cannot tell; but
probably it might happen by an extraordinary dilatation of the Clytoris, by
much hot, and thereby being provoked, and by reason of its swelling on every
side, not able to contain it self within any longer, issued out. This Clytoris
lies latent within a woman's pudenda, which answers to a man's virile; this if it
chance to grow overmuch, may stand in stead of a man's members, yet without
effusion of seed. Wherefore heretofore there has been laws enacted against
feminine congression, being it is a thing that happens too too common and
frequent.

Which is most lustful, a man or a beast.
MAny beasts and creatures are so intent on their lust, as some become mad,
others have died in the action. Asses and Stags by reason of their raging lust,
run horn-mad. Vipers eat the head of the female in the act. All which
demonstrate plainly the greatness of the lust of beasts. And the truth of it
is, they have a better plea for it (in many respects) then men. There were
enough, if they had nothing more on their sides, then that delight is most
proper to them, but joy to man; and that which beasts do by sense, man should
abstain from by his reason. Yet for all that man is so vain as to take lust
for his leader, to conduct him to bawdy-houses, to commit adulteries, nay even
incests, which (to his shame) some beasts abhor.

Lust makes oblivion, beats reason back,
Forgets shames pure blush and horours wrack.
Besides it is very unusual and seldom seen or heard of, that beasts have
desired copulation with mankind, whereas, O wickedness! many men have been
convicted and condemned for buggery. Histories make mention of those that have
had congression with a Goat, and the birth proved as monstrous as the act was
unnatural and abominable. Wherefore we may peremptorily conclude, a man to be
more lustful extensively, beasts intensively: Men as they respect no time,
beasts as they are guided by sense alone. Furthermore, he may not only be
accused for unseasonable and immoderate use of Venus, but also for the
illegality of it. If he is truly convicted of lust, he may also be condemned
for vice; for lust is defined to be a lascivious petulancy, or a concupiscence
of proving unlawful and sinful pleasures. The two handmaids of it are
fornication and adultery, accompanied with scortation, incest and sodomy. Of
this sin were most of the Roman Emperors guilty, in polluting and maculating
their resplendent power and Majesty with filthy luxuries and effeminacy; of the
manner and excess of which no heart can conceive, or fancy apprehend. They
seldom brought home victory from any nation, but they did likewise their
vices. As it is apparent from their learning from the Greeks, not only
Graecari, that is to drink hard, but also Moechari, that is to stuprate and be
lascivious. But to conclude, let your Wantons seriously consider what this
lustful pleasure is, and in the end they shall find it a delight bought with
pain, and hatched with unquietness; always accompanied and finished with
sorrow; by continuance it grows to impudence, and infamy continually waits at
its heels, nay oftentimes sudden death, which you shall find true (laying aside
whole volumes of tragical histories of this nature) if you inquire after the
monthly Sessions held at Newgate, where those that would pass for maids,
rather then come to any disgrace, have inhumanely destroyed that which was the
issue of their stolen delights, and so have for the fact meritoriously suffered
death. Wherefore those that are libidinously addicted, let them be forewarned
with this distical caveat: Quid facies, facies Veneris cum veneris ante?
Non sedeas, sed eas, ne pere as per eas.
What will thou do, when thou before
The face of thy fair Paramore
Appear'st? stay not, but disappear,
Lest her inticements cost thee dear.


Which of the two is most lustful, a Man or a Woman.
THe Poets of old make us believe that Tiresias was blinded by Juno for his
just judgment. For on a time Jupiter meeting with him, asked him a merry
question, viz. whether a man or a woman was most lascivious, and takes most
pleasure in venereal copulation? to which he answered positively, the woman
did. Though this seem a fabulous fiction, yet I will assure you the moral of it
is all truth. Caelius Rodiginus thinks (and that upon good grounds) that a
woman is ten times more inclined to, and delighted in copulation then a man.
Ovid in his Art of Love insinuates as much, when he sings, Stolen pleasure
which to men is never hateful,
To women (seeming shie) is ever grateful.
The difference is, a maid her love often covers;
Men are more impudent, and public lovers.


But especially if she conceives; for then the injected seed moves the nerves,
and from thence the ardor of confrication arises. A Woman swelling with lust
is not easily satisfied, for the tasting of those sweets makes her the more
desirous of them. Solomon says, there are four things never satisfied; the
grave, the womb, the earth, and the fire. Messalina the Empress was so impudent
as openly to confess, that if she lay with a man an hundred times a day, she
might be wearied, but never satisfied. It may be objected, that a man though of
a cold constitution, is of a hotter then the hottest woman. Aristotle easily
resolves this objection, by this distinction, that a man's upper parts are
hotter and stronger, but the lower parts of a woman are much hotter. Wherefore
it seems nature foreseeing the danger that might ensue by it, prepared the
menstruous blood, and ordained it to flow once a month, to frigifie
temperately those parts, otherwise she might by an over-ardent venereall desire
run mad.

Which is most lustful, a Maid or a Woman?
THough it is a difficult thing to determine, if you consider the manifold
reasons that may be alleged on both sides, yet we shall in the end find, that
of the two, the maid is least stirred and pricked on to lust. For Virgins
having never experimented those sweet and ravishing delights, that are
swallowed at a venereal banquet; by that means they cannot so eagerly desire an
unknown thing -- Ignoti nulla cupido. Whereas a woman recollecting into her
memory, her past delights, and fervently thinking on those she may enjoy, she
already burns in her fancy with impatient desires, before she come to action.
Who then can deny, but that one loves a delightful good (if I may so call it)
and desires it with more fervency, which is already known, then that which is
only perceived by imagination? But you will say, that the force of imagination
is very strong, and oftentimes supposes more then really there is. Beside, a
maid more abounds with blood, seed, and spirits. Again, when their courses
first begin to flow, their lust is very much sharpened; and that is the reason
that Aristotle advises parents diligently to observe the actions of their
daughters at that time (that is, at the age of fourteen, sometimes twelve)
because then they are most apt to be drawn to commit uncleanness. What then may
we determine in so dubious a matter? We can say no more but this, that the maid
is more lustful intensively, the woman extensively, as continually having in
her remembrance her past and future sweet ravishing embraces.

The signs and marks of lustfulness from a man's temperament, age, disposition
of body, and his Country.
Temperament.
IN the first place, the sanguine complexion is that which has the greatest
proclivity to Venus; for in this temperament has calidity and humidity almost
the sole predominancy; such was the complexion of a man of Arragon, of whom it
is reported, that he -- his wife ten times a day. In the second rank is to be
accounted the melancholic, whose flatuous humor much whets the edge of lust.
In the third place the Choleric, which though it abounds not with seed, yet
there are sharp spirits, which cause prurition. Whence Plato gathers that
concupiscence and anger are cousin-germans, for the seat of both these passions
is the Liver. The last temperament is the Phlegmatic, which being cold and
moist, the edge of lust is thereby suppressed.

Age.
THe youthful age is the time of Venus her harvest. In old men there is not so
much vigor and heat as to prick them on to lust, whereas youth is all spirit
and life. Hence the Poet, Prima Cupidine is aetas manet apta triumphis;
Non gaudet veteri sanguine mollis amor.
The youthful age lies open to Cupids dart,
But the old man is valued not a --


Sick men want seed by reason of their weakness; old men want it, because they
have no strength to concoct their aliment; young lads have it not because its
converted into increment: And youths though they have it, yet by a small matter
they lose it; accordingly Seneca says, Juvenilis ardor impetu primo furit,
Languescet idem facile, nec durat diu
In Venere turpi, ceu levis flammae vapor.


Disposition of body.
A Thin body both gives and receives far more delight then a fat corpulent one.
For fat men are destitute of much blood, and therefore are inclined to cold;
your fat women are commonly barren. Ovid affirms what I say to be true in
saying that, Thy leanness argues love; seem sparely fed,
And sometimes wear a nightcap on thy head.


Country.
THose which inhabit cold Countries are both hot and strong, it must needs be
then that they are inclined to venery. The Thracians (a warlike people) loved
venery so well, that they gloried in the multitude of their wives. Thus Ovid
sings of Tereus King of the Thracians, being in love with Progne: Progne in
Tereus such a burning breeds,
As when we fire a heap of hoary reeds;
Or catching flames to sunburned stubble thrust.
Her face was excellent, but inbred lust
Enraged his blood, to which those climes are prone, etc.


The Egyptians so much devote themselves to this kind of life, as that few among
them are found chaste. Americus reports, that in his voyage to East India, he
found an Island, whose inhabitants were so extremely given to lechery, that his
Mariners were hadly ashore, before ten women were about one man, every one
desiring him to appease and qualify their burning itch: these people have
among them an herb which has such a mysterious quality, as that it will dilate
girls privy members, and magnify and longifie their boys members; to both
which they use to administer it, that they may the sooner be capable for to
exercise them.

The signs of lustfulness from the stature, color, strength, and season of the
year.
From the Stature.
MEn of a low or short composure of body, enjoy a more quick and piercing sense
of venereal pleasure, then tall men. For since their aliment does not increase
their bodies, certainly the more often it is converted into seed. This holds even
in beasts; the Elephant brings forth but one, and yet the little Coney bears
twelve, the Wren eighteen, yet the Pigeon but two.

Color.
ARistotle in his Epistle to Alexander, admonishes him to beware of the red
hair'd man, because as he is given to all manner of vices, so especially to
incontinency. Women that have flaxen hair are for the most part wanton; of the
same signification are brown hairs. Therefore Physicians advise to choose a
nurse that is brown, for by her temperate natural heat, she breeds good milk.
That man or woman that have hairs of a leadish color (proceeding from
adustion) are insatiable in venery.

Beauty.
ALthough a beautiful soul may inhabit in a comely body, yet it is not ordinary
to meet with them both so accomplished.

It is a thing we seldom see, Juvenal.
Beauty and honesty agree.
Demetrius, Hysmael, Lais, and Faustina were beautiful and handsome, even to
admiration, yet unchaste even to detestation.

Season of the year.
WOmen are most lustful in the Summer, but Men in the winter. Women being of
cold and moist temper, are refreshed and cherished by the application of its
contrary, whereas a man is debilitated by the too much extracting of his proper
heat. Wherefore for the commodity of both Sexes, the Spring is to be chosen as
the best season of the year for generation.

Signs of lustfulness from diseases.
Barrenness.
BArren Women for the most part are unsatisfiable in their lust. And this is so
upon two considerations. First, having no children, they are so much the more
desirous to have them, and therefore they would use the means oftener. Give me
childen (says barren Rachel) or I die. But the chief reason is, that they
abound with so much heat and blood, as it burns the man's seed; the same thing
makes them excessively lecherous.

Retention of the Courses.
OBstructions do so inflame the womb and genitals, that as they cause a
prurition, so likewise they are the original of a thousand dangerous symptoms.
The sign of this indisposition of body is too too visible to every ones eye; to
wit, and universal paleness. This wanness (if we may credit Ovid in his Art of
Love) is an excellent indicium of a loving soul.

Let him that loves look pale; for I protest,
That color in a lover still shows best.
Orion wandering in the woods looked sickly;
Daphne being once in love, love color quickly.
Bunch-Backs.
THese sort of men, as they are for the most part proud and fantastic, so they
are commonly very lecherous. They seldom or never are fat; therefore we may
suppose that the seminal humor (by reason of the shortness of their back) dath
pass immediately into the seminal vessels. This may be the reason that Camels
use copulation all the day long. There are very few defective in one part, that
are not gratified by nature in some extraordinary manner in some other part.
Those that have lame legs are fruitful and lustful; for that which should
nourish those parts, is turned into seed. Wherefore Antianita Queen of the
Amazons, being reprehended for marrying a lame man, made this her plea, that
Claudus optime virum agit. The lame man is the best woman's man.

Concerning Satyriasis.
THis affection is an itching in a woman's privities, causing in her an ardent
desire to scratch them. This disease is so powerful, that it forces women
(against their custom) to entreat men to lie with them, with this proviso,
that they are sufficiently able to quell this itching.

If modesty and women once do sever,
Farewell their name, farewell their fame for ever.
Some women of a greater modesty then ordinary, strive to suppress these
motions, caused by this disease, but all to little purpose; their very looks
betray them.

Poor woman's looks,
Are their fault-books.
Physiognomical signs of lust.
YEllow hairs, and black flagging are a type of lechery: The fearful and the
peevish, pale and wan;
The black a woman lover more then man.


Its an infallible sign of this, if a man is bald and not old; but if old and
not bald, you may conclude he has lost one of his stones, or both.

Face.
ONe that has a thick and smooth face is slothful and given to pleasures. Take
this for a general rule, that to what beasts face soever a man's may be likened,
you may parallel their conditions and manners together.

Forehead.
A Little straight forehead denotes an unbridled appetite in lust.

Eyes.
SO many motions as are in the mind, so many significations thereof can the eyes
make. Streaky eyes (such as Venus is said to have) are her minions, but red
eyes signify insatiety in lechery. Great trembling eyes in men proclaim
intemperancy; little merry ones, and those that seem always smiling, in women
betoken lasciviousness.

Ears.
LIttle ears demonstrate aptness to venery.

Nose.
A Roman Nose is a lecherous sign; Heliogabalus associated all that had such
noses, to satisfy his beastly lust withal: A woman that has a long nose is
lustful. A man that has a big nose and wide nostrils, is the only darling of
Venus.

Mouth.
A Great mouth as it is an evident sign of greediness, so of lust.

Chin.
THey which have beards over-soon are very petulant; if women have beards,
being not very old, their lust is not to be satisfied.

Breasts.
LIttle breasts in women are a greater sign of lust, then great ones. But if
men have them great, it signifies the contrary.

Pubes.
THey who have much hair about the privy members are lustful, because it
denotes that they abound with much fumy heat and excrements. Those women that
have none, are slow to venery, and not fruitful.

Navel.
THe navel should imitate the proportion of the virile members. Therefore let
midwives take notice that they cut the navel by an equal proportion of
longitude with the pudenda. For the longer the navel (by sympathy) the longer
the Pudenda.

Legs.
THick calves and bow-legs signify that man to be lustful; of the same
signification are very small legs. But enough of these Physiognomical signs:
And though they are sure marks, yet may they prove false by grace and reason.
Socrates and Hippocrates ingeniously confess that they were marked out for men
given to these lustful pleasures, and really had a great propensity to them,
yet by their endeavor to restrain themselves from them, they became such
absolute conquerors, as they betook themselves wholly to Philosophy. Therefore
it is a hard matter to conclude any man lustful or chaste, but by experience;
yet B'advised my friend for thy more quiet life,
Too far trust no man with thy wife.


Of Moles.
IF on the eyes or nose a mole appear, it shows that man or woman to be
lustful. There is a great sympathy between the nose and privities; wherefore
Haly says, that if there be a mole on the nose, there is one also on the privy
members.

Examples of such Men and Women that have been very lustful and lecherous.
ITs not my intent to write of all that have been that way addicted, but only
such as have been notable for their birth and dignity. Among whom may be (in
the first place) Julius Caesar, who neither spared Women, Maids, nor Boys, but
made them all prostitutes to his lust. But most of all he loved Cleopatra, with
whom he usually sported from night to morning. Tiberius Caesar would ordinarily
at his banquets have naked Virgins attend on him, and there in his sight would
he have lusty young men to lie with some of them, to stir him up the more to
lust when he should come to act his part. Nero was such an incestuous villain,
as not to spare his own Mother. He loved a boy so entirely, that he endeavored
to change his sex, by cutting off his members. Darius was wont to carry to the
wars with him three hundred and fifty Concubines. Sardanapalus left the
government of his Kingdom to enjoy the company of loose women, with whom he
lived in woman's apparel, till Arbaces burnt him, his whores and riches
altogether. Romulus is reported by Ovid to have erected a stage or convenient
place to satisfy his soldiers lust; in these words: Now with a sign of rape
given from the King,
Round through the house the lusty Romans fling,
Leaving no corner of the same unsought,
Till every one a frighted virgin caught.
Thus were the ravished Sabines blushing led,
Becoming shame unto each Romans bed.
Full well would Romulus his Soldiers please,
To give them such fair mistresses as these.
If such rich wages thou will give to me,
Great Romulus, thy soldier I will be.


Hercules is said to have made fifty Virgins so many women in one night.
Gordianus had two and twenty Concubines, of every one of which he had three
children apiece. Proculus Caesar begat with child an hundred maids in fifteen
nights and days. Solomon (as the holy Writ has it) had three hundred
Concubines, besides fifty Queens who were subservient to his desires. Cyrene
invented twelve several ways to delight her lovers; but of late days Aretine
found out two and forty, which he calls his Postures. Messalina was wont to
congregate a number of virgins, whom she caused to be deflowred, and if they
refused it, she put them to death. Hear what Juvenal says of her, in his sixth
Satyr; The Imperial strumpet, with one maid stole out,
In her night-hoods, and having cast about
Her black hair, a red Perriwig she got,
Into the Stews --
There many thirsted for encounters tried,
Departed tired with men, not satisfied.


Semiramis though she was a wise and heroical woman, yet beyond measure
lustful. Her husband being dead she enticed several of her soldiers to her
loose embraces, which very men afterward she caused to be slain. At length
nothing would satisfy her but a horse. The Poets write that Pasiphae was in
love with a Bull, and she obtained to be mistress of her desires, by Daedalus,
who made a wooden Cow and enclosed her therein, and cunningly deceived the
Bull. Thus Ovid writes speaking of her; How often has she with an envious eye
Looked on the Cow that by her Bull did lie?


Yet for all this let us not condemn all mankind for levity, because some are
so. But let us rather honor and reverence the more those that are honest and
chaste, since now adays there are not many of such to be found. To which
intent let us immortalize the names of some of them that have been so chaste,
as that they can hardly be taxed for an idle word, much less for a vicious deed
of that nature. Marcus Marullus Spalatensis would never so much as look on a
woman. His sister being very ill, sent to desire him to come and see her, which
he refused several times, till at last being much importuned to it, he went,
but with his eyes covered, giving her the benefit of hearing him speak, but not
of seeing him. Ursinus had a wife of an excellent beauty and feature, yet he no
sooner took upon him an office in the Church, but he vowed never to see her
more, which accordingly he performed. There lived at Rome one Paulina, a woman
no less virtuous then noble, nor rich then fair; she was married to Saturninus
a worthy man, worthy of so good a wife. It happened that Decius Mundus fell in
love with her, but had withal but small hopes to corrupt her with bribes,
since she was rich, and a hater of vice. Yet for all that he attempted the
thing, by offering her three hundred pounds for a nights lodging; yet th^s
nothing shook her modesty. Since this would not do, he bethought himself of
another stratagem, which was this: He observed that of all the Gods in Rome,
Paulina most of all worshipped the God Isis. Whereupon he speedily repaired to
this Temple, and there bribed the Priests with a large sum of money to assist
him in his enterprise. They consent; one of them presently went to Paulina, and
tells her that the God ^sis was much taken with her beauty, and that ^he
desired that very night her company. She grants the request with abundance of
joy, that Isis should think her worthy of her company. She imparts the business
to her husband, and he is willing likewise. Whereupon she makes all speedy
haste to the Temple, where being come, the Priests conduct her into the place
where Mundus lay hid, telling her that there she must expect Isis; where being
no sooner entered, and the Priests departed, but Mundus falls to his embraces,
in which they enjoyed extraordinary pleasures, because the one had her he so
long longed and thirsted for; the other, as supposing she was in the arms of a
God. In the morning she returns home, (not imagining any fallacy) and relates
all the pleasures to her husband. But two or three days after, Mundus meets
her and tells her, that he cared not if Mundus was despised, upon condition he
may be loved as Isis. She now fully understands the deceit, and imparts it to
her husband, with showers of tears and millions of sighs and groans, withal
making him swear to he revenged on all the competitors of this plot, who
accordingly was; for being enraged, he caused Mundus and all the Priests to be
slain.

At what age is a wife to be chosen, that she might be fit for generation.
COncerning this point, so many men so many minds. Xenophon thinks the
fourteenth year to be the best. For at that time of the hairs about the pubes
begin to grow, and the courses flow, which by reason they cause a titillation
in those parts, they infuse into them a desire of marrying. Others object
against this opinion, that every beginning is weak and imperfect, and therefore
unfit for conception; Take Plato's counsel then to decide all controversies of
this nature, which is to search (by inspection) the young man and the maid,
whether they are capable to enter loves lists. At Cynthia there is a Temple
where the couple that intends to be married, meet, and there the Priest views
them naked, and so accordingly judges of their ability for marriage. It would
be well (in some respect) if we had this custom here, if it were for nothing
but to prevent making so many cuckolds in a year. Now to avoid all suspicion,
it would be far better for maids to stay till they are eighteen years of age
before they think of performing hymeneal rites, for then to be sure there can
be nothing wanting in nature, which may be required for the conception of
mankind. I cannot allow that a man of the same age should intend a married
life; because as it is fourteen years before he bears seed, so it is commonly
one and twenty before it partakes of a true generative faculty. As it is
convenient at this age to marry, so it will be improper for him to stay much
longer.

Turpe senex miles, turpe senilis amor.
An aged soldier's base we all confess,
And an old lover is but little less.
Not only unseemly, ridiculous, and filthy, but also obnoxious to himself,
wife and issue. To himself; for he shall find old age steal upon him faster by
the enjoyment of a wife one year, then if he lived ten years without one.
Secondly to his wife; for what is more loathsome then his issues, spittings,
night-coughs, stinking breath? but that which is worst of all to her, his
coldness to the exercise of Venus. Lastly, to his children; for his seed is
without spirits. In brief, he is nothing but a disease, how can then his
offspring be healthful? Therefore let those that intend to marry, be cautious
that there be not too great disparity of age between them.

Concerning a man's Genitals, and of their apt conformation.
SInce that a man excels a woman in all things, let us describe what belongs to
him, before we handle her secrets. Nature has bestowed on man a Yard and two
Testicles, for the accomplishment of that great and wonderful work of
Generation: which two parts are so conjoined by nature, that by their
separation, they become altogether useless. In the first place let us speak of
the Yard; in so doing we may take into consideration its nature, disposition
and form. By the potency, or impotency, fitness or unfitness of this
instrument, is the tie of wedlock infringed or preserved. The Ancients, that
they might express the esteem of it, they were wont to paint the form and shape
of it in all places of resort. The Ethnicks used to hang the picture of the
privy members about their childrens necks, to keep them from being bewitched,
and did place them in their gardens to make them fruitful.

Let us now treat of the Anatomical part of the Yard, examining its substance
through every particle. The Latins have variously named that part of a man,
whose beginning is placed at the utmost end, and so juts out of the lower part
of the belly. These are the names they usually call it by, Penis, Coals,
Veretrum, Virga, Verpa, Scapus, Priapus, Caules, Mutonis, Menta, Mentula,
Phallus, and virile pudendum. This thing that has so many names, is not a
simple body, but composed of diverse particles. It is of a sinewy substance,
long, pendulous, hollow, and very spungy, except in the glans, or, nut of the
yard, which is void of all humor, and only fit for ejaculation of the seed.
In the lower side of the yard is placed a hollow nerve, which is both a passage
for the seed and urine; this sometimes is filled with a flatuous humor or
spirit which extends the yard, and causes its erection. About the pubes grows
hairs, because those parts are very hot and moist, and these serve for a
covering and an ornament. The glans always reserves its magnitude, though the
yard is inflamed and swelled by venereal spirits. The prepuce which serves as a
cap to cover the head of the yard, keeps it from all outward inconveniencs; as
dust, etc. It is a dangerous thing if the prepuce be cut, because it cannot be
rejoined. If you desire a longer description of these parts, consult with
Anthropographers.

From whence proceeds the erection of the Yard.
ITs erected sometimes from wind and spirits, sometimes from the heat of the
Arteries, which are in the spermatick vessels. The truth is, it is as great a
wonder it should rise to so great a weight, from so small a thing, as when it
stands not; as it is for a woman's womb to open so large, at the very time of
travail, as to give room enough for the child to issue out, and yet all the
time before it is so close shut, as that the point of a needle cannot enter it.
The yard being made of a nervous and spungy quality, quickly distends it self
from the affluence of spirits proceeding from the seed. And therefore it is
that it hangs its head as soon as ever the seed is evacuated; because with the
seed flows abundance of wind and spirits, which are the cause of its stiff
standing.

Whether a too long or a too short Yard be obnoxious to generation.
A Mean in all things is the best thing in the world. To over-do or under-do in
effect is one and the same fault. Wherefore it is not to be questioned, a too
long yard is not good. For it is a long while before it does stand, and does
not long remain so, for the spirits are not able to support so great a weight.
Again, it is so long before seed comes through it, (and then too much cooled)
that the woman has spent her self a long time before the man's issues, and so
renders that act ineffectual; to make work, both seeds should meet.

Let not thy mistress use too swift a sail,
Nor let thy haste beyond her speed prevail:
Both keep one course, your oars together strike,
Your journie's one, then make your pace alike.
Tog there strive, let both meet at the mark,
You may no question groap it in the dark.
Then is the complement of sweet content,
When both at once strive, both at once are spent.
Ovid. On the otherside (in my opinion) the short yard least of the two to be
endured. Ask the question of good honest women, that know by experience what I
say to be true. Because (though it stands more stiff, and ejects the seed more
vigorously) yet it reaches not so far as sufficiently to provoke a woman's lust
and seed.

How to enlarge the pudenda to a fit proportion, in case it be neither long,
nor thick enough.
ITs nothing worth if those parts partake not of a due thickness as well as
length; the former being more useful and delightful to a woman, as Avicen will
have it. Wherefore that there may may be an equality of them both, let us
prescribe some helps. The Arabians counsel in this business to use hot oils or
fat things, or an infusion of good store of milk, for milk being fattish, and
of a thick substance, it insinuates it self into the pores, and by that means
obstructs them and hinders the exhalation of spirits through them. Milk has
many more excellent qualities conducing very much to the enlarging of the
privities. Ground worms steeped in wine, then dried, and lastly pounded with
the oil of sweet Almonds, is an excellent secret for this purpose: In the same
manner may be used Leeches. The receipt of Rhazes is this. Take an Indian nut,
and open it, and you shall find in it a sweet water, then take a Leech and put
into it, and let it be enclosed for eight days, then take it out and pound it,
and anoint the yard. Dioscorides says, that Coriander is very good for the
amplification of the virile parts, for the same reason that it increases seed,
and incites lust; but take heed by these means that you enlarge them not too
much, for the afore-cited reasons.

How to shorten the Yard being too long.
AS it will be a hard matter for me to persuade those men that are thus
qualified, to diminish this member, because most glory in its longitude and
magnitude; so I am sure to displease well-affected women, in prescribing things
so contrary to the excess of pleasure. Yet since I look more to the good of
posterity, then to satisfy their foolish humors, let me tell you that are
troubled, and would be cured of this redundancy, that you must for a time keep
a spare diet. This is the first remedy in all preternatural tumors, or
redundant affections. He must likewise for a time bid adieu to wine, and to all
things that increase lust, as Pine apples, Almonds, pigeons, and all hot and
flatuous things, but rather eat Hens, Lettice, etc. and all cold things.
Copulation will diminish the Yard very much, but that's only a medicine
lawfully used by married men. Many things more might be alleged, were it not
that most affect rather things that will increase, then lessen their privy
members.

Of venereal impotency.
THis may proceed from three causes. Either first, from the want of seed, or
from its coldness. Secondly, from the stones, either from the want of them, or
else being too little and cold; by reason of which they either receive not
seed, or else work it not sufficiently. Or lastly from some defect of the Yard,
as there may be many. If it proceed from the first distemper, there is nothing
more to be done then to take things that are hot, and that increase lust; as
strong bear and wine. Ovid in his Art of Loving says thus much of it: In wine
is lust and wanton youths desire;
Join wine to love, and you add fire to fire.


If the cause lie in the Yard, then let that part be corroborated with hot and
dry things, as Mushromes, Turbith, Coloquintida, Simp. Comp. Diaphenicon,
Hiera, Cocchiae aggregativae. There are again many things that dry by degrees;
as Guaicum, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, Mastick, Juniper. These things must be
applied outwardly; a Bulls gall, a Hares gall, the decoction of wild Cucumers
and the oil of Nutmegs, with which the genicals are to be anointed, which will
wonderfully corroborate and comfort them.

Concerning some men that have had wonderful great Genitals.
SUch men the Ancients called Onobeli, of which kind of men Histories make
often mention. I knew a boy that had such huge great privities, as that where
ever he went he was pointed at for them. His yard would be a long time before
it stood, but being once erected he could carry upon it thirty pound weight.
Being a merry fellow, he would oftentimes show his companions his
six-foot-long -- not without their admiration and laughter. Petronius makes
mention of one that had so large and long a Priapus, as that all the rest of
his body seemed but as an appendix to it. You may ask the question, how these
men were known to be so qualified? The Ancients had public baths where the men
went in naked, so that if any appeared to have greater members then ordinary,
the standers by gave a great shout. So that that doubt is easily resolved.
Phisippus Haeasterus reports in the sixth Decade of his observations, that
there was a man in his time had a monstrous great Yard full of innumerable
warts, just like the seeds in a bunch of grapes. The top of this mighty thing
was as big as the head of a newborn child. The part adjoining with the
scrotum, was an ell long. The prepuce drawn back, had the likeness of a horses
collar. If you desire a larger description of it, consult with the Author
himself, where you may see the shape of it cut in brass.

Some questions concerning the Pudenda.
WHy is the Yard composed of nerves?

Because nerves are strong, and have a very great sense of feeling, and thereby
mankind injoys the greater sensual pleasure in the venereal act.

Why is the Yard fat?

Because it might not be any impediment to its erection, the nature of fat
being laxative and mollifying; wherefore it is that the fatter a man grows, the
less becomes his Priapus.

Why is he that has a desire to piffe unable to perform the venereal act, till
such time as he has evacuated his water?

Because the pores of the yard being filled with moisture, they cannot admit of
any thing more of that nature.

Why is it that there are two holes in a man's yard, the one a passage for the
water, the other for the seed?

Because the one helps the way of the other; for were it not so, it is to be
feared that that passage would (by reason of seldom copulating) be wholly
stopped up.

Why did the Ancients believe that there is a certain kind of spell in the
pudenda, against witchcraft?

It may be from an old custom the Italians had, in worshipping the privities
of Bacchus. For on his Festival day they carried them about; first into the
fields, and then into the city, where an honest Matron did crown them with
laurels and gatlands.

Concerning the excellency, virtue, and temper of the stones.
EVen as the chyle in the ventricle; in the liver the blood; the vital spirits
in the heart; and the animal in the brain, are concocted for the preservation
of life: so for the propagation of mankind, is the seed wrought and prepared by
the stones, or testicles. They are called so from the Latin word testes, which
signify witnesses; and truly a man (without such witnesses) will have bad
success in his cause, if a woman be of the Jury. These are the flower of life,
the well-springs of generosity and valor, of heat and of pure blood. In brief,
as without them, the body becomes effeminate, so it loses the most part of all
the forementioned virtues. Besides, they are not only of such inestimable
value in men, but also the stones of other creatures. Concerning the usefulness
of the Castors stones, there is none so ignorant in Physic, but knows somewhat
of their excellent quality. They are hot and dry, and are good against any
disease, except a violent fever. The stones of a dung-hill-cock do wonderfully
refresh the body, being eaten, and do increase seed, for which purpose they are
used by new married people. Amatus Lusitanus tells us a notable story of a
woman that prepared a dish of them for her husband, being a man that little
used her company carnally; but it seems these stones so altered his body, that
he immediately was troubled with such a priapisme, as nothing would satisfy
him till he was in bed with his wife. Into which he was no sooner entered, but
he plied his wife so close that she was able to hold out no longer, but ran out
of the bed from him, and he after her; but being not able to overtake her, he
went into the room where his three maids lay, and went into the bed to them,
and begat them all with child. None knows what farther mischief he would have
done had he not been prevented by a Physician. The stones of a young Pig do
wonderfully help barrenness, both in men and women, and will cause them to be
fruitful. A Foxes stones dried have the same virtue. Horses stones are an
excellent thing to bring away the secundines of women; Gesner knew a man that
got his living by helping women by this remedy. They are likewise very good
against colical pains, as Fonseca says. The powder of a Bulls stones is
commended for curing ulcers in the vulva; an Asses and Stags for expelling of
poison; a Goats against shedding the water in the night; a Ganders are
excellent good to help conception, immediately after congression; and lastly a
man's testicles (though they are placed in the last rank, yet for their variety
of virtue excel all) will make excellent mummie, good against all diseases. See
more of their virtue in Crollius, and the rest of the Theophrastians.

What may be the reason that though a man loves a woman extraordinary well,
yet after the enjoyment of her his love grows cold.
HOw unhappy are they that are in love! They are always distracted with
anguish and grief, they are ever perplexed with new cases; they lived a dying
life, and a living death. He a long time languisheth for the possession of his
dearly beloved, but in a far shorter time is satiated and glutted with her. The
reason may be, because being in love, his fancy is perverted, and so judges of
its effects contrary to what really it is; En quod non esset, esse putaret amor.

Besides, the mind is most eagerly bent on that which is forbidden, (nitimur in
vetitum;) and therefore like a torrent it overflows, and becomes more impetuous
by opposition. Too much liberty in any thing nauseates the appetite. I have
heard of a Gentleman that kept a Lady of pleasure, allowing her two hundred
pounds for yearly maintenance, but would not marry her, because, says he,
knowing she is my own I shall disesteem of her, whereas now I accost her every
time I come to her as if she was a new mistress. Cornelius Gallus professes,
that he was perditly in love with a fair virgin, and could have been willing to
have redeemed her life by his, till she yielded to his unlawful embraces, and
then he slighted her. Hence Ausonius; Hanc volo quae non vult, illam que vult
ego nolo.
She that is willing to love me,
To her unwilling will I be.


And a little after he proceeds; Oblatas sperno illecebras, detrecto negatas.
Proffered pleasures I defy,
Give me her that does deny.


If love be only a desire, as some say it is, then desire is no desire when it
is satisfied.

Concerning castrating Men and Women.
ITs a custom among great Princes, but especially among the Turkish Emperors,
to have Eunuchs to wait upon their wives, for fear lest their beds might be
dishonored. In these our times its usual to cut children when they are young,
that they may become the better Musicians, for by that means they have a more
clear and harmonical voice. Castration is effected either by collision or
excision: Collision is the compressing the stones, and so squeezing out the
substance of them. By Excision, when you depress the scrotum with the
testicles, and so make an incision on the line, and take them out clearly both
together. But Paulus Aegineta has a better and easier way, which is by
pricking with a sharp instrument the Epididymis, which is the second outermost
skin that covers the testicles, and knits the didymos to the seminal passages,
by which means the testicles are hindered of transferring the seed. Its a far
harder matter to Eunuchize women, yet in former and latter times it has been
accomplished. Antonius Ulmus says it may be done by cutting the Nympha, which
is the throne of love and lust. Thus many of the Egyptian women have been used
by reason of their untamed lust. Now properly to castrate a woman, is to take
out her womb, for the doing of which, since it is so hard and dangerous, I dare
not give any directions.

A particular relation of such things as will increase seed and lust.
ALl sorts of round roots, especially Scallions, Satyrion, Struthium, Bunguen,
Beets, Capars, Acoras, and Squils, etc. likewise al salt things, and shel-fish
do augment very much the seed, so does also Goats milk. Theophrastus reports,
that that there was an Indian brought him an herb, that not only the eating,
but even the touching of it would excite a man to lust so much, as to cause him
to copulate as often as he pleased. He adds more, that some that have eaten it,
have acted venereally twelve times in the space of an hour. This Indian
confesses, that by it he spent himself seventy times, till at last his seed
issued by a drop, and last of all came his very blood.

Johannes Shenkins writes of another herb which grows on Mount Atlas, that
increases lust beyond any credit. Moreover he says that if a maid should
chance to piss on it, she would as infallibly lose her maidenhead, as if she
lay with a man. A multitude of herbs more there are that have this quality in
them, which are so many that they would be too tedious for our intended
discourse to describe.

Wherefore to conclude this subject, take two or three receipts which are great
provokers of lust, and strengtheners of the body,

Recip. Mellis anacardi, mellis apum, and butiri vacicini ana.

Let them boil, and so let them be drunk in wine. Let there be made also a
suppository ex adipe anatis, and granis cotti, and pyretro in oleo de nuce
Indica.

Arnaldus pills Recip. Faeniculi assi seminis erucae
ana. unc. 2. Arnaldus pills Tere lacte vaccino.
Fallopius his electuary to strengthen and cause a titillation in the privities.

Recip. Noctilucas praeparat. cum 4. Specimen Aramat. Diambrae.
ros an. unc. 1. Pulpae carnis nucis Indicae unc. 5. Seminum cinarae excortis
unc. 1.
Let this be taken after dinner and after supper. I shall conclude with Ovids
receipt in his Art of Loving.

Pepper with biting nettle-seed pray mix,
With Bastard Pellitory some few sticks;
Which beaten, and in cold wine drunk up clear,
Make sprightfull men aloft their standards bear.
A brief description of a Woman's Genitalls.
THere are four things subservient to her secret parts. Spermatical vessels,
both preparing and carrying, the Testicles, the Womb, and the Vulva. As in men,
so in women there are found four vessels preparing the seed; namely, two veins,
and two arteries. The testicles are inwardly placed to the sides of the Vulva,
because they should be more heated; they are less then a man's, being broad,
and glandulous, thin and moist. Whereas a man's stones are covered with four
tunicles, a woman's are only with one. These in a woman by reason of a certain
disease will grow as big as a man's head; so says Schenkius.

The womb is like a fruitful field wonderfully propagating and husbanding the
seed that is sown in it. Its situation is in the Hypogastrium, between the
bladder and the rectum intestinum. Its magnitude is various according to the
age of the person, temperament, venereal use, talness of the body, or
barrenness. The wombs of virgins and sterile women are much less then pregnant
women, or whores. Its shape is somewhat long, yet round in the form of a great
pear. For the substance of it, it is membranous, for its more commodious
shutting at conception, and likewise for the enlargement of it, as the child
within increases in growth. The womb is divided into four parts, viz. the
bottom, the inner mouth, the neek of the womb, and lastly the orifice of the
neck. Those parts that are obvious to the eye, are the pubes or hairy region,
Venus hill, and the two lips separated by a slit or scotch; within which lips
lie latent the Nymphae, four caruncles, and the passage for the urine. The neck
of the womb is all that which belongs to the inmost mouth, and its a long
chanel, like the scabbard of a dagger, which is the receptacle of the yard to
sheath it self. The inner mouth is that which receives the seed, and then
immediately shuts so close, as if it was an entire body. The body of the womb
is that which contains and cherishes the seed, some have called these privy
parts a Lion: First because they and that beast have much alike the same smell.
Lastly, because as that beast is very greedy and desirous of a man's blood; so
is the womb of his seed, which is nothing else but pure and refined blood.

Concerning the Clytoris.
A Little in the cleft of the Vulva, is the Clytoris, its substance is fleshy,
arising out of the mouth of the womb, almost filling the empty space of the
pudenda. It is somewhat longer in Summer then in Winter; for by reason of the
heat, it inlarges it self, nay many times it issues out, metamorphosing the
woman into a man. This is the seat of love and pleasure; for by a mutual
contrition of the man's yard with it, their seed is provoked, and so meet for
the propagation of mankind.

How to contract the Vulva being too large and wide.
WHen this is too large, it receives the yard with too great a facility; hence
both parties are insensible of its progress, and by that means there is little
or no seed ejected. But by the way let us examine from whence this amplitude
proceeds. Upon consideration we shall find it may happen from immoderate use of
venery, which we may conjecture from contraries: for if widows stay long
without a husband, their privities will so close, as that they are hardly
distinguishable from maids. When nature is at rest, it restores all the unity
of the parts. Secondly, it may arise, from martying a man that has great
members. Lastly, by a hard delivery; when the child is signally great, it
breaks its way: yet this may be a natural disposition. All adstringing things
are good against this cachexie, as a compository ex Cypero, Xiloale, Ennula,
Carriophillis, Ramich, and Moschi; Let these be pounded and taken with honey.
Likewise decoctio consolida majoris, is excellent. These with many more, whores
use to cheat young gulls withal, when they promise them their maidenheads.
Take this receipt as the best that can be used: Recip. Aluminis, lapidis
Gagatis vel Thracii nitri ana drach. 1. Pulveris gallorum, baccarum hederae
exiccatarum, Babustionum, Corticum, granatorum, atramenti sutorii, rubi, ana
drach. 2. succi acaciae, sorborum, agrestris oleae, ana. unc. 1. S. vini rubri
unc. 2. S. misce omnia --

Boil these over a slow fire, and put them on a cloth in prosthema. These will
strengthen and contract wonderfully any orifice. But be sure for a time let the
woman abstain from her husbands company. For in every operation of nature, rest
is required; and therefore it is that an ulcer in the lights is never cured,
nor consolidated, by reason of their continual motion. Perhaps some curious
person would be desirous to know some outward signs to discern such men and
women. The woman commonly has a wide mouth, the man a great nose, as Martial
says: Mentula tam magna est, tantus tibi, Pipile, nasus.
O Pipilus, thy nose so great and thick
Denotes how great's thy stiff-neckt-standing prick.


A woman's long foot bewrayes her long cleft, but a man's great hand shows his
good mentulous qualifications; as likewise does his long eyebrows, but in a
woman her long face; these marks seldom fail.

What is that which is infringed at the first venereal act; as also some signs
of Virginity.
IT is the opinion of most that there is a membrane which is drawn across the
matrix of virgins, and called by the name of Hymen. From thence did the
Gentiles derive the name of the God of marriage, by reduplicating Hymen,
Hymenaeus. So Catullus calls him in his nuptial song: Jam veniet virgo, jam
dicitur Hymenaeus:
Hymen, o Hymenaee, Hymen ades, o Hymenaee.


The Jews were wont at the marriage of any person, to put fine clothes in the
bed where they were to lie, for the reception of the blood that usually flows
at the breaking the Hymen: which clothes they were wont to show to the Parents,
as a sign of the loss of an incorrupted virginity. Such a custom had the
Romans, as it is recited by Claudian in his Epithalamie: Et vestes Tyrio
sanguine fulgidas,
Alter virgineus nobilitet cruor.
Tunc victor madido prosiliat thoro,
Nocturni referens vulnera praelii.


This membrane which is thus broken, yields a greater or smaller quantity of
blood, according to the largeness and fullness, or smalness and emptiness of the
veins. Some have immediately died by the greatness of the flux of blood. And
this is the reason that virgins suffer pain, (nay men too according to the
strength of the Hymen) by losing their maiden heads. Now by way of caution, let
no man think his newmarried wife to be heretofore defloured if he finds not
this Engine: For by chance it may be broken many ways, as by a petulant humor,
or a great fall, etc. In many there is no such thing to be found from their
very births. Yet let not this be an inducement to wantons (because such things
may happen) therefore to set up their virginities as a but for every man's arrow
to hit. For this being once lost, modesty is likewise lost; one of the two I am
sure, if not both, must never be expected to be found (...)

Whether there be any Signs of corrupted virginity.
THere are many indiciums which too too manifestly publish infallible marks of
a lost virginity. For example, Impudence; as it is fear and shame that keeps
wanton girls within their bounds, so banishing these two out of their
thoughts, they value not their chastities, preferring rather to split
themselves against the rocks of pleasure, then to sail in the calm sea of
virtue and continency. But to return to our purpose; in the next place if you
observe and perceive that the top of the nose is divided, seeming forked, (if
you will credit Michael Scotus) its an unchaste sign. The Ethnicks had this
observation of a chaste person: When any couple was married, on the first night
they measured her neck with a thread, and if next day her neck appeared bigger,
then they deemed her an unspotted woman. So Catullus sings on the Epithalamie
of Peleus and Thetis.

Non illam nutrix orienti luce revisens.
Hesterno collum poterit circundare filo.
No (...) arising from her bed,
Her neck ^^^nd compass with fore-tried thread.
Some say that deflowred virgins cannot endure the smell of the Lilly, as being
the Hieroglyphick of virginity. Others say, that Bees will presently smell out
unchaste persons; for they are great lovers of chastity. Jo. Baptista Porta
says, that if jet be taken and reduced into powder, then searched, and lastly
drank in wine or water, if presently the woman cannot hold her water she is no
virgin. Albertus Magnus writes, that if you take a Lodestone, and lay it under
the head of your wife, if she presently embraces you, then will she ever prove
faithful unto you. Whether Comma was naturally constant, or forced to it, I
know not; but it is reported this foresaid last experiment was tried upon her,
by her husband, and she proved so loving to him, that for her non-pareil
fidelity to her extinct husband, be pleased to take her story in brief. She was
very fair, and withal very virtuous: She was married to a rich and pious man
named Synatus. There was one Synorax (that was his neighbor) envying his
felicity, attempted all means to allure this modest matron. But seeing that all
his endeavors came to nothing, being spurred on with anger and despair, slew
Synatus, thereby hoping to obtain his desires; which accordingly he did; For a
little after the murder committed, be prosecutes her again with fresh
importunities of love, and at last gained her consent to marry her. The
marriage-day is prefixed, a great feast is prepared, and he with abundance of
jollity welcome^ (...) his friends. About the middle of dinner, (...) drinks to
him (with a great deal of alacrity) in a cup of poison, drinking off the one
half, and presenting him with the other half, which he no sooner drank off,
but she spoke out aloud, calling often on the name of her deceased husband,
saying, that since his death, for his sake, she had lived a sorrowful life, but
now being revenged on his and her murderer, she died joyfully. An example
rarely to be paralleled in these our times.

Concerning night-pollutions.
WHy do night pollutions afford more pleasure, and do more debilitate then a
man's spontaneus copulating with a woman?

Because there flows (when a man is asleep) a greater quantity of seed then if
he was awake. For being at rest, nature recollects the spirits, and sends down
a greater quantity of heat to the bowels. Whilst one is awake the spirits are
dispersed, but congregated when the senses are at ease. And hence it is that
many men are very subject to this manner of pollution. No doubt women are
troubled in the same manner. Aristotle is of the opinion that they do ejaculate
their seed in their sleep, and afterward have the same affections as men have,
namely, dissolution and weakness, etc.

He that intends copulation, ought to be free from turbulent passions of the
mind, and vain phantasmes.
THe mind must not then be troubled, either with fear, anger, wrath, grief, or
such like perturbations; for Venus requires calm and serene minds, which must
sit at her table; such as are wholly composed of tranquillity, but alienated
from all sorrow and sadness. According to the Poet, speaking of Venus: Non
solet in maestos illa venire thoros.
Fair Venus never goes to bed
To those that are with sorrow fed.


This is not only requiste for pleasure sake, but chiefly for generation. For
sad or weeping women cannot conceive. Experience tells us that Virgins ravished
are never with child; or on the other side, if she be possessed with too much
joy. So that it plainly appears the mind must then be equally poised, which is
absolutely conducible to the begetting a fair well proportioned and wise
offspring. Learned men, whose minds are continually prepossest with cares,
study, and meditation, seldom beget wise children, but are for the most part
fools and naturals. Moreover, the mind must cast off all idle phantasmes: for
the force of imagination is wonderfully powerful, and can so alter the seed, as
to change it into what form it lists. Albertus Magnus tells a story of a Queen
that had the picture of an Ethiopian hung up in her bedchamber, which being
continually in her sight, and so wherever she was she had the idea of it in
her fancy. When she was brought to bed, (though her husband and her self were
very fair) she was delivered of a black child.

No doubt Jacob knew sufficiently the force of imagination, in laying the
colored rods before the sheep when they were to be leapt by the rams, Genesis
chap. 30. This is the reason that the children of an adultress are commonly
like her husband, for fearing and suspecting her husband might come and find
her acting her villainy, she has his representation in her sight, and so the
child becomes like him, and not the true father.

Whether to copulate backwards after the manner of beasts is best.
THe causes of sterility are many, many of which proceed not from the yard or
seed, but from an absonant and incongruous use of Venus. Although the common
way of congression be more civil and comely, yet its less fruitful then that
way which nature showed every beast. The womb is inflext, and therefore it
stands to reason that the yard ought to be in the like posture. Hear Lucretius
his opinion of this: -- more ferarum
Quadrupedumque magis ritu plerumque putantur
Concipere uxores; quonium loca sumere possunt
Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis.


But enough of this, a thing proper only for beasts, altogether unbeseeming
men, but if it must, be used by any, let them be such as marry only for lust.

Concerning pendulous venery, us also many other fantastical venereal postures.
APuleius calls that pendulous venery, when the man lies under, and the woman
upon him. These are his own words: Haec dicens inscenso grabaulo super me
sensim ac crebra subsiliens, lubricisque gestibus mobilem spinam quatiens,
pendulae veneris fructu me satiavit, usque dum lass is animis, et marcidis
artubus, simul ambo corruimus. But as this is prejudicial to a man's health, so
likewise it is unfit for generation. For by this means the seed cannot stay
within the Womb, it being naturally very slippery. Some again copulate
standing, which much wearies the man, and hinders conception. Others do it
sitting, but in that gesture there cannot be an apt and close connection of the
members. See more in Aretines Postures.

Whether there are Pigmies, and how they are generated.
THat there were and are such creatures, is no fable, nor feigned story. These
are men a cubit high in stature, as the word pgan signifies. Pliny says, that
these diminutive men do ride on goats in stead of horses for three months
together, spoiling and laying waste all the habitations (that is the nests) of
the Cranes, with the hope of their future issue, that is their eggs. As for
their houses, they are made of dirt, feathers, and egg-shels; but Aristotle
contradicts him, and says, that they live in holes in the earth. But as for
their generation, it is no easy matter to conjecture. It may be from the
paucity of seed, but more probable from the streightness and narrow capacity of
the womb, hindering thereby their increment after conception. In imitation of
which some dainty Ladies use to enclose a Puppy within some small pot, and so
the dog grows so big as he has room. Though we cannot justly derive their
original, yet it is not much to be questioned but there are such, otherwise so
many learned men would not write of them so much, and to so little purpose.
Amongst whom Caelius Rhodiginus attests he has seen them not much longer then
an ell, as you may read it at large in his Lectiones Antiquae, cap. 20.

Whether there were and are Giants, and whence have they their original.
BOth sacred and profane writers confirm, that there were Giants. See what the
holy Scripture says of them in Numbers 13. Deuteronomy 3.1 King. chap. 17.
Pliny relates that there was found by reason of an earthquake, the body of a
man forty six cubits long. Galleotus Martius makes mention of a man whose name
was Pallas, killed by Tyraeus; his carcass was found in Henry the thirds time,
which standing measured the walls of Rome in height. Americus Vesputius first
found out a land, which he called the Isle of Giants, in which the men are
ordinarily five fathomes long. But how these are begotten, and why they appear
not in these latter days, is a difficult thing to find out. Hippocrates thinks
that the temperature of the air and climate is a great means of immense growth.
Therefore (he says) it is, that Asia bring forth things fairer and greater
then other parts of the world, because there is there such an equal and
temperate mixture of the seasons of the year. It Is no wonder then if our times
are not infested with them, since we are destitute of those things, that in all
probability are the cause and original of them, viz. clemency of the heavens,
equality of the seasons, or plenty of humor in their aliment, as also strong
mutations of the air, extraordinary heat or cold, etc.

Of the good and of the bad that comes by Venery.
AS there is the heighest pleasure in Venus, so there is no less of profit,
when it is enjoyed lawfully in wedlock; otherwise I renounce my opinion, and
esteem those for mad men that will prefer momentany delights, before those that
are eternal. That's an unworthy commodity that cannot be bought nor obtained but
by the death and destruction of the merchant. But to our discourse in hand.
Venus very much profits those that are Phlegmatic, and troubled with rheumes;
its good likewise against the palsy, nay it is called a petit palsy, because
its action resembles it so much. Hence Faustus de Coitu; Turpis, and est morbi
species horrenda caduci.

But chiefly its profitable to melancholic men; many times by the retention of
Virgins and Widows seed, they become excessively melancholy, and in a small
time after run stark mad. There is no other cure for them but copulation.
Congression likewise is an excellent remedy to bridle choleric men's wrath.
Wherefore the Poets feigned that Venus the Goddess of Love and venereal sports
conquered Mars the God of war. How many valiant men have proved arrant cowards
at the first shot from a beauteous eye, paying tribute unto it, forgetting both
their honor and safety? Venus again is very good for hot and moist
constitutions; nay it is altogether necessary. For this complexion abounds
much with blood and seed, whereby the spermatical vessels are filled and
oppressed; so that if they are not disburdened, they are so overmuch extended
that thereby proceeds from it a gonorrhoea; or if the seed be a long while
detained, the seminal passages will be obstructed; hence arises putrefaction,
seminal feavours, and there often worms breed: So says Mercurialis.
Copulation gives men a soft skin, it cures the Iskurie or difficult making
water. But you must understand that these benefits come not but by a moderate
use thereof. Now let us proceed to the ills that Venus brings with it, which
are so many that I stand in need of more then one tongue to relate them. Hear
how Aristotle exhorts Alexander, saying; O Clement Emperor, incline thy self
not too much to Venus, because its a thing most proper to brutes! what then is
thy glory, if thou make thine actions equal with beasts? I believe he
followed his counsel well; for after he had conquered Darius, he behaved
himself so well to his captivated wives and daughters, as became so virtuous
and magnanimous a Conqueror. For, says he, after he had viewed them, its not
just that he that has conquered so many kingdoms, should at last be conquered
himself by a silly woman. Believe me, Venus is the destruction of the body, the
shortning of life, the corruption of virtues, the transgression of the law of
God, and the mother of effeminacy. Here what the Poet says of this bestial
delight: O multum damnosa viris, damnosa voluptas!
O nimium damnosa viris, damnosa libido!
Damnosi visus, damnosaque basia, torpor
Damnosus, damnosus amor, damnosaque scorta!
O multum damnosa viris, damnosa voluptas!


To conclude, it depraves the mind, it weakens the body, it dries up the
natural moisture, and therefore hastens death.

Crebra Venus nervos, animum, vim, lumina, corpus,
Debilitat, mollit, surripit, orbat, edit.
Venus man's body, his strength, mind, and eyes,
Makes weak and soft, corrupts and putrifies,
Lastly, Venus is the original of all diseases, and all mischiefs that happen
in the world. Let us then with all care and diligence shun these damnable,
execrable and short fading pleasures, since they seldom have any other end
then grief, vexation, ignominy, shame, and sudden destruction, and after this
life is ended, eternal damnation.

Why are young men the more delighted in Venery, by how much the more they use
it.
IF we dare credit Hippocrates, he is ready to satisfy us in this question.
For (says he) often copulation inlarges the veins, and dilates very much the
seedy vessels; by reason of which there is a larger and freer passage and
receptacle for a greater quantity of seed and spirits, whereby venereal delight
and pleasure is prolonged and increased in the act. At first most youths have
these passages very straight and narrow, so as the seed can hardly be
evacuated; but by use they become enlarged, immediately after which nature is
so provident as to fill these domicils of lust (thus enabled) with a great
quantity of blood, spirits and heat. There being then a sufficient plenty of
these three, they cannot otherwise choose but cause a great inclination to lust
with a pruriting and itching quality; and lastly administer the greatest of
pleasures in the act. This is natures property, that where she is sent for,
thither she flies with all expedition to be an assistant. Where grief or
pleasure is, there she takes up her resistance, to aggravate the one or augment
the other. Thus she deals with youth, when the receptacles of blood and spirits
are amplified, thither she immediately sends great quantity of them to fill
those vessels, though for it she leaves destitute the other parts. And so by
this means copulation very much weakens the whole structure of the body. Hence
it proceeds that that man is never fleshy or fat that begins too soon to be
petulant and act wantonly. But why should not middle-aged men partake of the
same privilege that young men do in the excess of venereal delight? The reason
may be that though they have their seminal vessels extended to the same, nay
greater measure, yet they have not the same plenty of seed and alimentary
humor. Hence it falls out, that as they cannot copulate often, so is their
desire and appetite that way deficient. Its no wonder then if women are so
politic and cunning in preferring youth before any other age, to administer to
them venereal cordials and electuaries. Add to this, if the seminal conduits of
young men are obstructed, their seed becomes like a torrent, the more fervent
and impetuous by the obstacle, and so being loosened flows with greater force
and quantity, and consequently affords a more intense sense of pleasure.
Therefore Plato forbad not only any thing that might inflame youthful natures,
but in especial manner wine; for by drinking it, (says he) they add fire to
fire. Thus Ovid expresses himself in his Art of Loving, concerning a woman:
Turpe jacens mulier multo madefacta Lyaeo,
Digna est concubitus quoslibet illa pati.
O hase! a woman sop'd and steeped in wine,
In lust her arms is willing to intwine.


The INDEX of the several subjects contained in this Book.
Concerning the name of Venus page 1. What is copulation? p. 3. What is
venereal Love? p. 4. Through what part is love at first received in? p. 5. Who
are they which are most apt to be in love? p. 6. Concerning those things that
increase love. p. 9. Whether love may be cured by medicaments? p. 10.
Concerning love-potions, or Philters. p. 11. Whether females may change their
sex. p. 12. Which is most lustful a man or a beast? p. 13. Which of the two is
most lustful, a man or a woman? p. 15. Which is most lustful a woman or a maid?
p. 17. The signs and marks of lustfulness from a man's temperament, age,
disposition of body, and his Country. p. 18, 19, 20, 21. The signs of
lustfulness from the stature, color, conformation of the parts, beauty,
strength, and season of the year. p. 21, 22, 23. The signs of lustfulness from
diseases. p. 23, 24, 25. Concerning Satyriasis. p. 25. Physiognomical signs of
lust. p. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Examples of such men and women that have been very
lustful and lecherous. p. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. At what age is a wife to be
chosen, that she may be fit for generation. p. 35, 36. Concerning a man's
Genitals, and of their apt conformation. p. 37. From whence proceeds the
erection of the yard? p. 39. Whether a too long or a too short Yard be
obnoxious to generation. p. 40. How to enlarge the pudenda (in case it be
neither long, nor thick enough) to a due proportion. p. 41. How to shorten the
yard being too long. p. 42. Of venereal impotency. p. 43. Concerning some men
that have had wonderful great Genitals. p. 44. Some questions concerning the
Pudenda. p. 45. Concerning the excellency, virtue and temper of the stones. p.
46. What may be the reason that though a man loves a woman very well, yet
after the enjoyment of her his love grows cold. p. 48. Concerning castrating
Men and Women. p. 50. A particular relation of such things as will increase
seed and lust. p. 61. A brief description of a Woman's Genitalls. p. 53.
Concerning the Clytoris. p. 55. How to contract the Vulva being too large and
wide. ibid. What is that which is infringed at the first venereal act; as also
some signs of Virginity. p. 57. Whether there be any Signs of corrupted
virginity. p. 59. Concerning night-pollutions. p. 61. He that intends
copulation, ought to be free from turbulent passions of the mind, and vain
phantasmes. p. 62. Whether to copulate backwards after the manner of beasts is
best. p. 64. Concerning pendulous venery, as also many other fantastical
venereal postures. p. 65. Whether there are Pigmies, and how they are
generated? p. 66. Whether there were and are Giants, and whence have they their
original? p. 67. Of the good and of the bad that comes by venery. p. 68.
FINIS.

