PErlegi has Conciones viri insigniter docti, operarii (...) Iosiae Shute, aevi
sui Chrysostomi; quas impressione dignissimas censeo.

IA. CRANFORD.

DIVINE CORDIALS: DELIVERED IN Ten Sermons, UPON Part of the ninth and tenth
Chapters of Ezra, in a time of Visitation.

BY That godly and faithful Preacher of Gods Word, JOSIAH SHUTE, B. D. and
late Rector of Mary Woolnoths in Lumbard-Street London.

Published by Authority.

HABAKKUK 3.17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the Vine, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall
be no Herd in the Stals: yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation.

London, Printed for ROBERT BOSTOCK, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign
of the Kings head, 1644.

TO THE READER.
I Have presumed to present to public view, a scantling of those pious and
numerous Sermons, preached by that worthy Minister of God and bright Star of
our Church while he lived, Mr Josiah Shute. I confess ingenuously, they lose
much of their native luster and beauty, by coming under an unskilful Pen; but
sure I am, you have their marrow and substance, how defective soever in
Quotations and circumstance. I know my attempt will be censured by the
Learned, for bringing him abroad in so homely a dress, who was the Chrysostom
of his time: But I chose rather to be censured by them, then to engrosse a
treasure to my self, which by the blessing of God may enrich many: The benefit
I reaped by him, the honor I owe unto his memory, and the importunity of
friends, are a sufficient Apology for my rash adventure. That which I have
brought to light, is but the work of five days; To what a vast volume would it
rise, if the elaborate Sermons which he preached for above thirty years
together, should come to see the Sun? I am bold to speak it, because I have
hundreds to bear me witness; he was as faithful and constant a Labourer in
Gods Vineyard as any the Kingdom had. What remains then, but our diligence
to be bettered by his holy Doctrine and godly Example, considering the end of
his conversation? My prayer to the most High is, that this Reverend Author may
prove a Bonaerges, a Son of thunder, to rouse and awaken the secure sinner,
but a Barnabas, a Son of consolation, to the Mourners in Zion: And if this
taste of his Ministry shall produce these good effects in any, I not only have
my desire, but if God so please, (not being prevented by others) I shall
hereafter assay to give you a deeper draught of his Religious Labors. Thus
wishing thee as much comfort in perusing them, as I had in hearing and
transcribing them, I leave thee and them to the blessing of God, and bid thee
farewell.

William Reynoldes.

DIVINE CORDIALS,
Sermon I.
EZRA 9. 13, 14, 15. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds,
and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less
then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this; should
we again break thy Commandments? etc.


OUr Text is part of the prayer and confession of Ezra, the occasion whereof
was this; That holy man being returned from Babylon to Jerusalem, with men,
money, and great encouragement, he is welcomed by a sad message from the
principal in Israel; they complain, that the people of Israel, the Priests
and the Levites, had not separated themselves from the people of the lands,
doing according to their abominations: the hearing of this caused much sorrow
in good Ezra, that he should come so far, and find Paganism in Judea;
therefore like a distracted man, he rends his clothes, tears the hair off
this head and beard, and sits down astonished: all which is but a fair preface
to the prayer he makes; wherein, as if his heart were poured out in devotion,
he professes that he is ashamed to lift up his face to God, and confesses the
iniquities of the people, acknowledging that God had been just in punishing
them; And now, O our God, says he, what shall we say after this? thou have
worthily plagued us, for we have forsaken thy Commandments. These three
verses are a part of his prayer, the substance whereof is an argument which he
makes for God against themselves, and it stands thus; Those whom thou have
delivered out of servitude and bondage, if they shall again provoke thee by
their rebellions, they deserve to be consumed; but this is the state of Israel,
thou O Lord have delivered Israel out of captivity and thraldom, and yet they
have rebelled against thee; therefore they deserve to have no more favor
showed them, but to be destroyed and utterly consumed. Our course in opening
these verses shall be this: In them I propound two things to your
consideration; first an Indictment preferred by Ezra against Israel: secondly,
his pleading it for God against themselves. In the first he remembers Gods
mercy, and their rebellion: Gods mercy is laid down in the thirteenth verse,
and that three ways: first he shows that they were not punished without
cause: secondly, that God punished them less then they deserved: thirdly, that
he had totally delivered them. Their rebellion is comprised in the fourteenth
verse, in which there are two parts; first the sin, secondly the punishment:
the sin is laid down, first generally, should we again break thy
Commandments? secondly particularly, and join in affinity with the people of
these abominations? Then follows the punishment; first, God will be angry:
secondly there is the degree of his anger, he will not leave consuming till all
be destroyed. This is the carriage of the three verses; in the opening of
which, we shall see that they suit us in this Land as well as any people under
heaven: for considering that God did lately scourge us by the pestilence, and
of his mere mercy removed it totally from us; seeing we have revived our
sins, and renewed our provocations against his majesty, if he begin again to
renew his plagues, and scourge us till he have consumed us, we must justify
him in his proceedings, who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works. Before we handle the particulars as we laid them down, there be two
things in general which offer themselves to be discussed: the first is out of
the party, which was Ezra; the second is out of the course he takes, and that
is humbling himself in Gods presence. First for the party, it is Ezra; ye
shall read in this book that he was a man that set his heart to seek the Lord,
neither did he this only himself, but sought by all possible means to incite
others to follow his godly example. Had all Israel been such as he, they
needed not to have feared judgments coming upon them; but they were not,
therefore seeing the sins of the Land, he could not forbear, but breaks
forth into lamentation and mourning; which affords us this point of Doctrine.

Good men, though they be at peace with God, find cause of sorrow for other
men's sins: ye shall see this proved in the Scripture: the Spirit of God
calls Lot a righteous man, yet this righteous man's soul was vexed from day to
day with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. The like we
see in Moses that good man; 2 Pet. 2.8.
do ye not think that he was strangely moved at the sin of the people,
when he let fall and brake in pieces the two Tables of Stone, in which God had
written the Decalogue with his own sacred finger? Exodus 32.19.
Exodus 32.19. It was so with the Prophet Samuel, he mourned for the
disobedience of Saul, for which God rejected him from reigning over Israel, 1 Samuel 15.35.
1 Samuel 15.35. the like we see in David, mine eyes, says he, gush out rivers
of tears, because men keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136.
Psalm. 119.136. may some man say, what were the sins of the world to David?
it is true, they were none of his, yet he thinks himself bound to grieve for
them, because he knew they were displeasing to his maker. We see the same in
good Jeremiah, he wishes his head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of
tears, that he might weep day and night for the iniquities of his people, who
were all adulterers, and an assembly of treacherous men, Ier. 9.1.2. Ier. 13.17.
Ier. 9.1.2. and in Ier. 13.17. He professes, that his soul shall weep in
secret for their pride: and was it not so with thee O blessed Savior, thou
did mourn for the hardness of men's hearts, Mark. 3.5.
Mark. 3.5. and when thou came to Jerusalem, thou weptst over it, saying, if
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
to thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19.41, 42. and the
same spirit was in S. Paul, Luke 19.41.42. Philip. 3.18.
Philip. 3.18. he tells them, he had told them often, and now speaks it
weeping, that there be those among them, who are enemies to the cross of
Christ: thus ye see the point sufficiently proved.

Belial; though they have most cause to weep and mourn, yet they live in
jollity and merriment, and are mere strangers to all sadness: Some of these
stick not to say, What has any man to do to weep for their sins? and that
by their impieties, they trouble none but their own souls; But I tell thee O
wretch, thou troublest not only thine own house and soul, but thou troublest
all Israel, thou give the Saints of God occasion to be pensive for that which
makes thee jocant and glad: and happy is it for thee, that there be such as
Noah, Lot, Samuel, and David to mourn for thee; for were it not that some did
mourn for thy prophannesse, thou should not live again to commit it; did not
some bewail thy drunkenness, thou should be taken away with the pot at thy
mouth; did not some godly people grieve for thy filthy lust, thou should with
Zimri and Cosbi be smitten dead, flagrante crimine, in the very act of
uncleanness: but the servants of God pray and mourn, fast and weep, and all to
avert judgments from thee, who deservest little at their hands.

David, because he is constrained to sojourne in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
and to dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5.

Ezra, though we have made our peace with God, let us mourn for the wickedness
of others: every one knows what cause there is for this, iniquity having
overspread this Land of ours, from Dan to Beersheba, from one corner of it to
another: and were these impieties modest, it were not so much, but they be
impudent and have a Brazen front, Religion is out of fashion, and none are so
esteemed as fashion-mongers, they be your only men now in credit: The case thus
standing, there is no way to prevent judgments which be imminent, but by
mourning and fasting: Now that ye may be persuaded to practice these so
seasonable and necessary duties, remember but these things; First, it is piety
to mourn for the sins of others; shall we hear and see God to be dishonored,
and not grieve for it? piety cannot lodge in that breast where such an ill
spirit inhabites: a man will and ought to grieve when his friend is wronged;
Christ calls us his friends, Ioh. 15.15. and he is our best friend, John 15.15.
therefore we have abundant cause to mourn for the sins of wicked men,
whereby he is much dishonored and the Holy Spirit grieved. Secondly, pity
requires this duty at our hands: I read of Marcellus the Roman, that entering a
City which he had gained by composition after a long siege, he burst forth into
tears; one that stood by him demanded why he wept, says he, I cannot choose
but weep to see so many thousand led into captivity. Shall a Heathen weep for
the captivity of men's bodies? and shall not Christians mourn for their sins
which are enough to enthrall souls and bodies in Hell for evermore? it should
be the grief of our souls, to see thousands and ten thousands that will be
damned. Thirdly, if we do not mourn for other men's sins, we make them our
own: that of the Father is most true, peccatum quod non displicet, tuum est,
that sin is thine, with which thou art not displeased: and that ye may see,
I go not without book in this, look that place in 1 Cor. 5.6. there was one in
the Church of Corinth that had committed that foul sin of incest, 1 Cor. 5.6.
and the Corinthians were so far from grieving for it as they ought to have
done, that they gloried in it; S. Paul corrects them for it, telling them that
thereby they were become a sour lump. Lastly, we should be moved to this duty,
by the blessing which attends it, what says our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5.4
Matthew. 5.4? Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: And in
Ezekiel. 9.4. the Lord gives command to spare them in Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9.4.
that did sigh and cry for the abominations done in the midst thereof: The next
way to escape judgment, is to mourn for the sins of the Nation, and though
we should be taken away in a general visitation (as none be exempted) yet
that shall be to us, as the fiery Chariot was to Eliah, it shall put us into
the possession of Heaven, where all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes.

The second general is, the course which Ezra takes, and that is humbling
himself by confession, weeping and supplication, to let us know thus much.

The maine receipt in time of affliction, is humiliation: a probatum est, of
this will appear in Gods people: if a judgment have been threatened or
coming, they have humbled themselves before God; 2 Chro. 20.3.
in the 2 of Chro. 20.3. when that great Army of Ammonites and Moabites came
against Iehoshaphat, it is said, Iehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek
the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah: So when that fatal
Decree of Haman was procured, for extirpation of the Jews, and a day destinate
for their destruction, Hesther commands the Jews 10 fast three days, and
says she, I also and my Maidens will fast likewise, Esth. 4.16. and we doubt
not, Esther 4.^6.
but they afflicted their souls as well as their bodies: Jonah. 3.5.
And in Jonah 3.5. when the Prophet denounced destruction to Nineveh, saying,
yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown; what follows? the people of
Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloth, from the
greatest to the least of them: This is in judgments imminent and to come; ye
shall see that this also has been their course, when a judgment has been
inflicted in a time of drought, Ier. 14.20.
Ier. 14.20. We acknowledge O Lord our wickedness, and the iniquity of our
fathers, for we have sinned against thee: in a time of dearth and famine, Joel
2.12. the prescription is, Turn to the Lord with all your heart, with fasting,
Joel 2.12.
weeping and mourning: The people of God have done the same when the sword has
been amongst them; this we find in Josh. 7.6. when Israel was discomfited by
the men of Ai, Joshua rent his clothes, Josh. 7.6.
and fell to the earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord until
eventide, he and the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads: So in the
judgment of mortality, when David saw that seventy thousand of his subjects
were slain by the pestilence for his sin, he betakes himself to God in a
humble manner, saying, Lo, I have sinned and done wickedly; but these sheep,
what have they done? let thine hand I pray thee, be against me, and against my
fathers house, 2 Samuel 24.17. We see it also in David's particular case, 2 Samuel
24.17. Psalm. 30.7.8.
Psalm. 30.7.8. Thou O Lord did hide thy face, and I was troubled: then I
cried to thee O Lord, and unto the Lord I made my supplication: So likewise in
the case of the whole Church, Hosea 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord,
for he has torn, and he will heal us: Hosea 6.1.
he bath smitten, and he will bind us up: The grounds they went upon were
these two:

Zeph. 2.1.2.
they knew it was Gods Commandment; that place in Zeph. 2.1, 2. is notable to
this purpose: where the Lord says, Gather your selves together, yea, gather
together, O Nation not desired; before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lords anger come upon you: As when Absalom could not speak with
Ioah by fair means, he knew that if once his corn were on fire he would
quickly come unto him; So when the Lord inflicts judgments on his people, it
is to humble them in his presence: Isa. 22.12.
So in Isa. 22.12. In that day (to wit in the day of their affliction,) did the
Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, to baldness and to girding
with sackcloth.

Achan which troubled the whole Host, and the Jonah endangering the whole Ship;
therefore, to look to have the judgment removed, without humiliation and
repentance, were to no purpose: who looks to have a wound cured, as long as the
weapon that made it sticks in it? and it is in vain to expect the removal of
a judgment, till men be humbled and purged: but take away the cause and the
effect will cease.

and more, and more against him? this was the sin of Abaz, for which the
Spirit of God stigmatizes him to all posterity, in the 2 Chro. 28.22. saying, 2
Chro. 28.22.
and in the time of this distress (that is when the Philistimes had invaded
his Land) did he trespass yet more against the Lord; this is that King Ahaz:
This also we find charged on Israel, Isa. 57.17.
Isa. 57.17. For the iniquity of his coveteousnesse was I wrath and smote him,
says the Lord: I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart; They' were so far from being better, that they were the worse for
Gods afflicting them: and are they better, that when the plague of God is gone
out against a place (as at this time it is against this City) yet can swear,
lie, cheat, and be drunk? they know not, but that the destroying Angel may
smite them next, and yet they dare provoke God by these and many other sins:
woe is me, that people should be thus unprepared for death; will nothing teach
these but bare feeling? will they take no warning till God touch them and set
the bloody cross upon their bodies? let these know, that although God spare
them a while, he will not spare them for ever, and to be sure, he will put all
into the last draught, which shall be as bitter as gall or wormwood.

Ezra, address our selves to God by Prayer and fasting: what is it for us to
fast in private, though Authority have not commanded it? when it is done by the
command of the Magistrate, we seem to fast of necessity; but when we take it
up voluntarily, it argues ingenuity, nay there cannot be a more pregnant sign
of sincerity: Is it such a matter to forbear one meal in a week? Well,
however we think of this duty, if it be performed as it ought, (with
supplication and humiliation) there is no such way to prevent or remove a
judgment: I hope there is none so wicked amongst us, but will confess that we
have great cause to humble our selves before God, for who can be ignorant but
that we our selves are the cause of the plague which is now among us? it is
true, sometimes it increases, at other times it decreases, so that it keeps at
no stay; but if we shall therefore neglect to humble our souls and bodies in
the presence of God, we shall so incense him, as to increase this plague among
us without measure; but if we shall turn to him that smites us, by unfeigned
repentance and amendment of life; he will not only take this grievous
sickness from us, but he will leave a blessing behind him. So much for the
two generals: We now descend to the particulars, as they were laid down: We
begin with the indictment preferred by Ezra against Israel, in which is
remembered Gods mercy, and their rebellion: Gods mercy is laid down in the
thirteenth verse, and that three ways: First, he shows that they were not
punished without cause: Secondly, that God punished them less then they
deserved: Thirdly, that he had totally delivered them.

First, for the first particular in the gradation of Gods mercy, (thou our God
have punished us,) that is, thou have punished us deservedly: Tyrants will and
do punish men without cause, nay, they desire to pick holes in men's coats
that they may punish them; but the Judge of all the world never proceeds to
punish, but when he is provoked. In that Ezra says (seeing that thou our God
have punished us) take notice in the first place of this observation.

Whatsoever is the instrument, Isa. 45.7.
God is the Author of the punishment. This is proved in Isa. 45.7. where the
Lord says, I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things: so
in Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, Amos 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it? ye must understand these places, not of the
evil of sin, but of punishment; for, Deus non author, sed ultor peccati, God
is not the author, but revenger of sin: it was he that opened the bottles
of heaven, and sent the deluge on the earths it was he that rained that igneum
imbrem, shower of fire and brimstone from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah; it
was he that shut up the wombs in Abimelechs house, and that plagued Egypt with
those successions of plagues: the Magicians could not, or would not see,
digitum Dei, the finger of God in them; but had they not been blind, they might
have seen ambas manus, his ten fingers, in those ten judgments which he
inflicted on them: It was he that offered David his choice of three plagues,
and upon his choice sent the pestilence; and in 1 Cor. 11.32. S. Paul there
labors to persuade the Corinthians, 1 Cor. ^^.^^.
that God chastened them; Psalm. ^9.9.
and David says, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou
did it: mistake me not, I know that sometimes God makes use of instruments
for the execution of his wrath: he made use of the earth, to swallow up Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram; he made use of the water, to drown Pharaoh and his Host;
he made use of the fire to slay the Captains, and their fifties which came to
apprehend Eliah; he made use of a Lion, to kill the disobedient Prophet; and of
Bears to destroy two and forty children, that called Elisha baldpate; and he
used Serpents, to sting to death the rebellious Israelites: but the primus
motor, the chief efficient is God, who is the Lord of Hosts, and has all
creatures at his beck. Joseph was not ignorant, that his brethren had a hand in
selling of him into Egypt, yet he tells them that God had sent him thither: and
Job knew well enough that the Sabeans and Caldeans had taken away his goods,
yet he says, The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be
the name of the Lord: though men were the instruments, yet he knew God to be
Author of what he suffered.

repine: whereas if a man looked up to God in what he suffers, he would say as
Eli, It is the Lord let him do what he will, and with Job, The Lord gives and
takes, and blessed be his Name: Nay, if a man would do this, it would not
only make him patient, but to profit by his affliction; for no man sees himself
so clearly and truly as in the glass of adversity; every affliction that God
lays upon us seems to say as Ehud to Eglon, I have a message to thee from
God, which if a man would consider, it would make his affliction a Bethesda, to
cure him of his spiritual infirmities, and by so doing, he would come out of
that furnace, clear gold, purged from the dross of his corruptions.

a judgment sent from God, and surely there is something more divine in it
then in other punishments, and a man may say of those that die of the
Pestilence, as Moses said of the death of Korah and his Accomplices, they die not
the common death of men: for as there is something in this disease for the
Physician to look on, so something for the Divine.

we would have it removed, the nearest way we can take, is to have recourse to
God by prayer: for as our Savior told Pilate that he had no power but what was
given him from above, so afflictions could not seize upon us, without Gods
giving them a commission; a man may spend all that he has to be cured of his
disease, as did the woman in the Gospel that had the bloody issue, and yet
unless God please, all shall do him no good; Saul may go to the Witch of
Endor for help, and Amaziah to the god of Ekron to be healed, but except the
God of heaven work the cure, it shall never be effected: let us therefore in
all our afflictions seek to God and to him alone, for he that is the inflicter
must be the restorer. I now proceed to the point which even now I named, Ezra
says, (God punished them not without cause,) which guides me to this
Observation.

God does never punish any without desert. Genesis 18.25.
Says Abraham, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the world do right?
Nay, let me tell you, it is not trivial, but gross sins, which cause God
to punish men: mark it in his dealing with the old world, did he take
advantage at every petty impiety? No, but he staid till all flesh had
corrupted their ways, and then, and not till then brought he the deluge, Genesis
6.12.
Genesis 6.12. so before ever he punished Sodom and Gomorrah, their sins were
exceeding grievous, Genesis 18.20. Psalm. 78.^8.
Genesis 18.20. It is said in Psalm. 78.38. he being merciful, forgave their
iniquity, and destroyed them not, but oft-times called back his anger, and did
not stir up all his wrath. Another pregnant place to prove this, 2 Chro. 36
16.
is 2 Chro. 36.16. where the Spirit of God says, They mocked the Messengers of
God, and despised his words, and misused the Prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy: Mark, he must of
necessity punish them, unless he would have his justice, truth and providence
trodden under foot: and when he says, he is pressed under men as a cart is pressed
that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13.
Amos 2.13. it shows evidently, that God does not punish for every small
sin; he is propense to mercy, but loath to punish: hence it is that he calls
opus judicii, the work of judgment, opus alienum, a strange work, Isa. 28.21.
Isa. 28.21.
and when he must needs punish his people, he says he will shave them with a
Rasor that is hired, Isa. 7.20.
Isa. 7.20. as if he had none of his own, but was feign to borrow; so prone is
God to mercy, that he would ever think thoughts of peace toward us, but we
will not suffer him.

David, Psalm. 119.75.
Psa. 119.75. I know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me: it was so also with Nehemiah, Nehem. 9.33.
Chap. 9.33. Thou O Lord art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have
done right, but we have done wickedly: the like we see in Daniel, Dan. 9.7.
Chap.9.7. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but to us confusion of
faces, as at this day; and the poor Thief on the cross tells his fellow when
be reviled our blessed Savior, Luke 23.41. We indeed suffer justly, for we
receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss: in
Matthew. 16.27. when our blessed Lord called the woman of Canaan, Matthew 15.26.27
dog, she digests it, saying, Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which
fall from their Masters Table: and let wicked men dispute and plead as long as
they are able, it shall never be found, but that God punishes deservedly. But
if it shall come into the minds of any to say as those in Ierem. 16.10.
Wherefore has the Lord pronounced all this great evil against us? Ierem.
16.10.
or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against
the Lord our God? I tell these as the Prophet told them, you are plagued for
your swearing, lying, Sabbath-breaking, hypocrisy, drunkenness, lusting,
oppression: these and other sins be the procreant causes of all plagues,
these be the traitors which open the gates to all judgments.

canina patientia, a doggish patience, when like a snarling dog tied up in a
chain, we endure what is inflicted upon us, against our will: Neither of
these will stand us in stead, but Christian-like with all submission, we must
take thankfully the hand of God upon us, saying with holy Bernard, Lord, that
which thou layest upon us, is durum pro viribus, hard to be born, in regard of
our poor strength, sed dignum pro meritis, but just in regard of our
iniquities: Let us be as the good corn, which when it is winnowed falls at the
winnowers feet, not like the chafe which flies in his face; and let us say
with David, 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold here I am, 2 Samuel 15.26.
let him do unto me, as seems good unto him. Further, we may observe, that
Ezra speaks not only of sin in general, but of (a great trespass;) what was
it? it was the peoples mingling themselves with the Heathen, which was a foul
transgression: the Doctrine arising from hence is thus much.

When God arises to judgment, he ever sets himself against the foul sins
of men. Will some man say, which be the foul sins for which God is so much
offended? They be these, The first, is pride; what was it that put on David to
number his people, but the pride of his heart? for which you know he smarted
shrewdly, 2 Samuel 24. A second, 2 Samuel 24.
is Idolatry; this is a grievous sin, and for this God is exceeding angry
wherever it is practiced or countenanced, Exodus 20.5. A third, is lust, Exodus
20.5.
especially when it grows impudent, as was that of Zimri and Cosbi. A fourth,
is blasphemy; wherefore was Senacharib that proud monster and a hundred
fourscore and five thousand of his Army slain, but for blaspheming the God of
Israel? Isa. 37. A fifth, is murder; this is that sin for which God has a
quarrel with a Land, Hosea 4 2.
Hosea 4.2. The sixth, is oppression, the Lord is very wroth where this is
committed, therefore we find him saying, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of
the poor, Psalm. 1^.5.
and the sighing of the needy, I will arise and set him in safety, from him
that puffs at him: And elsewhere he threatens to make his arrows drunk in
the blood of oppressors. The last sin (that I will name) causing God to rise
to judgment, is the profanation of his Ordinances: Moses knew this, which
made him request Pharaoh to let them go three days journey into the Desert,
and sacrifice to the Lord their God, lest he fall upon them with the
Pestilence or sword, Exodus 5.3. 1 Cor. 11.33.
a Exodus 5.3. and S. Paul says in 1 Cor. 11.30. for this cause (to wit, for
profaning Gods Ordinance) many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

Idolatry, is not that among us? and though Dagon have been thrown down, yet is
he not set up again? So for uncleanness, is it not to be found (shall I say
in the skirts?) nay, in the more noble parts of the City? and I wish it were a
slander to say there were professed brothell houses both without and within the
walls of London: and for pride, if ever it rid in triumph in any generation,
then now it is; how near does the toe of the Citizen come to the heel of the
Gentleman? This smoke contains not it self in palaces, but gets into mean
habitations: the back and the belly, two daughters of the horse-leech, cry,
Give, give, and the men of the times are so indulgent to them, that they will
deny them nothing, insomuch that by this means many brave Estates are brought
to nothing. Fourthly, for blasphemy, who can with patience pass along and
hear the volleys of oaths which are sent out against heaven daily? nay, so
common is this sin, that children can no sooner speak, but they can swear and
blaspheme: And for murder, you have scarce a bill comes out, but some or other
are slain; nay, sometimes blood touches blood: and for oppression, what
complaining is there in our Streets, against such as grind the face of the
poor? and for profanation of Gods ordinances, I grieve to declare how
frequent this is: men are grown so profane, that they will excommunicate
themselves from the Congregation, and save the Minister a labor: and for those
that do come hither, the greatest number of them stand but for ciphers, for,
dum corpus in choro, animus in foro, while their bodies be in the Church, their
minds are in the Marketplace. Now seeing these sins are found among us, may
not the Lord say justly of us as he said of the Jews, Ierem 5.29.
Ierem. 5.29. Shall I not visit for these things? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? he may say, I will no longer suffer their
iniquity to out-brave me, but I will up and make them smoke, I will root them
from under heaven, as I did the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah. Lastly, in
Ezra his practice we may see a true form of confession, he confesses their
(great trespass:) teaching us thereby, that as we must confess all sin in
gross, so especially, our maine and master sin; that Saul which is higher by
the head, then the rest of his brethren: we want not examples of this in
Scripture, David confesses his murder, Paul his persecution, and Daniel
confesses the great sin of his people: A great many confess their sins,
but they do it as Nebuchadnezzar told his dream, he tells his wisemen that
he had a dream, but never tells them what it was: So these men say they are
sinners, but they will not confess their gross transgressions. Will thou
deal otherwise with God Almighty then with thy Physician? when he comes to
thee in thy sickness, thou will conceal nothing from him, but tell him how it
is with thee in every particular: and yet when thou come to confess thy
sins to thy God, thou concealest those capital sins which have most
offended him. Well, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, get thee up to the
beam of thine own conscience, and judge thy self: and in judging thy self,
do not think it enough to censure thy self for thy lesser sins, but
especialiy judge thy self for thy great offenses, if thou do not, God will
judge thee; mince not then thy sins by laboring to extenuate them, but
confess them ingenuously, for the more severe thou art against thy self, the
more merciful shall thou find God unto thee.

Sermon II.
EZRA 9. the latter part of Verse 13. Seeing that thou our God have punished us
less then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this.


We come now to the second amplification of Gods mercy, Ezra had said that God
had dealt mercifully with them, how proves he the mercy of God? he proves it
thus, because that when he punished them, it was less then they deserved,
(thou our God have punished us, less then our iniquities deserve:) Here is one
word joined with punishing, which I would have you take notice of, he says
[thou our God have punished us:] Herein he is a pattern to us, when at any time
we come to confess our sins before God: [Our God] intimates a strong
relation and affection; certainly when he says thus, be knew there was hope
of Gods being reconciled to them again, giving us thereby to understand what
is required of men in the confession of sin; a man must not only as David,
water his couch with his tears, Psalm. 6.6. Matthew. 26.75.
Psalm. 6.6. nor with Peter, go out and weep bitterly, Matthew. 26.75. nor with
the woman which was a sinner in the City, wash Christ's feet with our tears,
Luke 7.38.
Luke 7.38. nor secondly, must he only with a great deal of self shame
confess his sin, as did Ezra in this chapter, and the poor Publican, Luke
18.13. Thirdly, nor must he only confess his sins with anger, Luke 18.13.
Ioh 42.6. Hosea 14.8.
as did Ioh 42. chapter, 6. v. and Ephraim in Hosea 14 8. But lastly, he must
confess them with faith and confidence; that is, so to aggravate his sins
before God, as not to let go his hold in God: We see the Church taking this
course in Hosea 6.1. Come, Hosea 6.1.
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us: he has
smitten, and he will bind us up: Mark, they had a confidence in Gods mercy,
though they knew their sins were foul and criminal: So Daniel confesses
and aggravateth the sins of the people, yet he lets not go his hold, but
says, To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have
rebelled against him, Dan. 9.9.
Dan. 9.9. The like we see in the Prodigal, he had gone into a far
Country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living: afterward being
pincht with want and coming to himself, he says, I will arise and go to my
Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, Luke 15.13.17.18.
Luke 15.13.17.18. Though he knew he had grievously offended God, yet he
will make use of that name [Father] and not let go the staff of his
confidence: and to say the truth, God does make known to us in his word, that
he is our Father, intimating thereby the duration of his affection: a husband
may cease to be a husband by reason of a lewd wife which is divorced from him;
and a master may cease to be a master, for want of a servant; but a father can
never cease to be a father, though his child be never so wicked and
contumacious, because he is full of bowels and compassion: Therefore when a
man comes to confess his sins before God, he must not confess them with
assurance to die, as Achan did, but he must confess them with hope to obtain
mercy and pardon: and if ye look into sacred Writ, you shall find that when
Gods children have come to confess their sins, they have still done it with
hope of forgiveness; therefore sometimes they urge him by his Covenant, Nehem.
9.32. sometimes for his mercy sake, Nehem. 9.32. Psalm 6.4. Psalm. 25.11.
Psalm. 6.4. and sometimes for his name sake, Psalm. 25.11. as if they had said,
O Lord, we know we for our sins deserve not to be heard, yet Lord find
matter in thy self of being merciful unto us, and for thy goodness sake
reject us not, the depths of whose misery call for the depths of thy mercy.

Let the consideration of this, Use.
teach us to take out this needful lesson: some there be that confess their
sins, but it is with despair, thus did Cain and Judas; and of Francis Spira
we read, that being near unto death, he could not be persuaded of Gods
mercies, but died despairing: But for our selves, let us confess our sins
with hope that God will pardon us, and with the servants of Benhadad let us
address our selves to him, and say, we have heard that thou who art the King
of Israel, art a merciful King; let us never despair, but still come in hope
of mercy, though we know that God has just cause to damn us, because the
sharp grapes of our sins have sowred his countenance with indignation: Let us
not for all that cast away the staff of our confidence, but look up to heaven
and say with Job, Though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee. [thou our
God have punished us.] Does he call him their God, and yet does he punish them?
he seems to impropriate God unto them, and yet he says, he punished them: by
the conjunction of these together, I lay down this as a firm conclusion.

God may love, and yet punish. I will make it plain unto you; sometimes God
punishes unwillingly, Lam. 3.33. He does not punish willingly, Lamen 3.33.
nor grieve the children of men: And when he is forced to punish, Isa. 1.24.
it is with Ah and alas: Isa. 1.24. Secondly, it appears thus, because he
desires to be stopped in his way of punishing; ye see on what fair terms he
would have been taken off from punishing Sodom and Gomorrah; if there had been
but ten righteous persons in those Cities, he would have spared them for tens
sake, Genesis 18.32. nay, Genesis 18.32. Ezekiel. 22.30.
in Ezekiel. 22.30. the Lord says, if he could but have found one man to stand in
the gap before him for the land, he would not destroy it: and in Ierem. 5.1. he
says, Ierem. 5.1.
Runn to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and
seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, or that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it: God would
have been glad if one could have been found, to avert his indignation: Nay,
when he finds no such intercessours, then he tells men beforehand what he will
do, that by their repentance they may keep him out of the way of his justice,
Amos 4.12.
Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel: and because I will do
thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel: it is the saying of Seneca,
and it is a true one, a man that professes hatred to another, is thereby
prevented of doing him the mischief he intended: Hence it was that Absalom
forbore to speak either good or bad to his brother Ammon, for three years
together, for fear he should suspect some mischief toward him: and when God
tells men plainly beforehand what he will do unto them, it is a clear
demonstration that be desires to be stopped in the way of his fury. Thirdly, this
shows it, because that when his hand of punishment is upon them, it shall be
removed if they repent: This we find often made good to Israel, on their
performance of the condition; and it is a sign we have not repented under Gods
hand, if we have not found it true in our own experience. Lastly, it appears
to be true by this, he punishes men because he loves them, this is plain, Prove.
3.12. Revel. 3.19.
Prove. 3.12. cited in Rev. 3.19. whom the Lord loves he corrects: He sees
punishment as necessary for his children as meat, and when he lays it on, it
shall not be so much penal as medicinal, therefore there must needs be love
in it.

durus sermo, a hard saying, and men will hardly be drawn to believe it,
especially when the affliction is smart: How often did Job think God his enemy,
when his hand was heavy upon him? I knew it was in his paroxysme and hot
blood, for in his cool blood he retracts whatsoever he had said before: the
like we see in the Jews, because God did not presently settle them in the Land
of Canaan, therefore they say, because the Lord hated us, he has brought us
forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to
destroy us, Deuteronomy. 1.27.
Deuteronomy. 1.27. And as a man is apt of himself to think so, so the World and the
Devil are prone to suggest such thoughts unto him; the World says, as Moses
supposes the Enemies of God would say, if he should destroy his people, Deuteronomy
9.28.
Deuteronomy. 9.28. the Lord lays this affliction upon thee because he hates thee:
and the friends of Job were conceitd that God punished him because he hated him;
and his wife doubtless thought no other, therefore she bids him curse God and
die. The Devil also is busy at this, when he sees Gods hand heavy upon a
man, What, says he? is this the God ye serve, that thus lays load upon you?
assure your selves, he would never punish you in this manner if he loved you,
this is but a draught of that cup, the dregs whereof ye shall suck out in
Hell: thus he lays an assault to our souls to hinder our eternal good,
wronging Gods mercy like a liar as he has been from the beginning: Why should
we think it strange, that God should love and punish? see it in Joseph, the
time was when he took his brethren to be spies and felons; all this while
Joseph offered violence to his own heart, cruciat and amat, he torments them
and loves them, for when he handled them most roughly, he could not forbear
but he must go out and weep: shall he do all this, and yet love his
brethren? and may not God much more punish his children, and yet at the same
time love them? So in David, all men knew that he loved his Absalom well, but
yet when he turns Rebel, he must take up arms against him, yet at the same
time he bids his men entreat the young man Absalom kindly: now can man punish,
and yet love? and shall not God do the same, who is fuller of mercy, then the
Sea is of water? all the mercy which is in all the men upon earth, is not as
the drop of a bucket to that Ocean of mercy that is in the Almighty. Come to
our own experience, thou art the Father of a child, and he offending thee, thou
correctest him; shall a man say, thou hate him because thou chastifest him?
no wise man but will say thou love him, and therefore thou punishest him,
that he may grow better again; thy child has a disease growing upon him,
which if it be not prevented in time, will be his death, and thou tendering his
good, give money to a Surgeon to cure him, though it be to his great pain;
is it because thou hate him? O no, it rather appears, that therefore thou
love him, else thou would not be at charge with him: So God finds cause to
punish us for our sins; shall we dare to say, he does it because he hates us?
God forbid. Says Augustine, I know the Physician is irksome to a man in a
frenzy, because he ties and binds him: does he use him thus because he hates
him? no, but desire to cure him, constraines him to take that violent course
with him. Again, thou sometimes walk into thy garden, and find occasion
to prune thy trees, is it because thou hate them? no, but therefore thou
do it, to make them grow better: now if all this be true in thine own
experience, why should not God love, and yet punish?

to take heed of censuring any to he such as God hates, on whom God lays his
afflicting hand: This was the humor of the Jews spoken of in Luke 13.2.3.4.5.
they thought those Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices; Luke 13.2, 3, 4, 5
and those eighteen on whom the Tower in Silo fell, to be greater sinners then
any in Jerusalem: our blessed Lord corrects this, and tells them it was not so,
but that except they repented, they should likewise perish: This was also the
misprision of them of Melita, Acts 28.4.
Acts 28.4. When they saw a Viper come out of the fire and fasten on Paul's
hand, they presently judge him to be a murderer. O take heed of this, for all
these things fall out alike, both to good and bad, and in so doing a man may
censure the generation of the righteous, Psalm. 73.15.
Psalm. 73.15. Nay, he may be guilty of censuring our Savior Jesus Christ, for
he was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, Isa. 53.3. yet at the same time he was the Son of his Fathers love,
Isa. 53.3.
one in whom he took an everlasting complacency: Joseph's cup may be found in
Benjamins sack; and Gods child may be punished, yet in his love and favor, for
God may love and yet punish. [thou have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve:] The point is plain.

God does not punish any of his so much as they deserve. In Ierem. 10.24. the
Prophet prays thus, Ierem. 10.24.
O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger; lest thou bring me
to nothing: as if he had said, correct me moderately, and not according to my
demerits; and ye shall find it to be Gods own promise in Ierem. 30.11. I
will not make a full end of thee, Ierem. 30.11.
but will correct thee in measure: the same also is the confession of the
Church, Psalm. 103.10.
Psalm. 103.10. He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities. And Zophar Jobs friend tells him, Job 11.6.
Job 11.6. that God exacted less of him then his iniquity deserved. It is a
good observation that is made by some of the Learned, that as God still
rewards, ultra merita, beyond men's deserts, so he ever punishes, citra, less
then they deserve: that he is always beyond our merits in rewarding us, is
evident in Luke 17.10. where our Savior says, Luke 17.10.
When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty: but he is
ever on this side in punishing us: See this in Gods dealing with Adam, what
deserved he at Gods hand but hell? yet be punished him only with temporal
death. So, when Cain had committed that great sin against God, he might have
sent him presently to his own place, but he spared him, and suffered him to
live a long time on the earth, waiting for his repentance; and when the
Israelites deserved to be destroyed, and that he was forced to punish them,
yet he let not his whole displeasure rise against them, Psalm. 78.38.
Psalm. 78.38.

tempestates mentis, the tempests of the mind, and far worse then any
corporal disease; judge then if God do not punish thee less then thou
deservest. O but says another, when God sends a man to Hell, does he punish
him less then his desert? I answer, in regard of the extention of time, that
which God inflicts on the damned in hell, is as much as they can deserve or he
can inflict upon them, because it is for ever: but in regard of the intention
of the punishment, they be not punished as they deserve, God could make the
pains of those in everlasting chains much more intensive, but that all his
ways are intervein'd with mercy: let us therefore be patient in suffering what
God lays upon us, knowing that whatsoever the punishment is, it is less then,
and on this side our demerit.

to be merciful as he is merciful: he does not deal with us after our
deserts, why should we deal otherwise with our brother? you see Solomon
spared Shimei his life, though for reviling his Father, he had deserved death;
only he confined him to Jerusalem, which when he violated, then and not before,
he took away his life: The Jews ever had a desire to be more holy then the
Law of God required, therefore when the Lord had set and appointed when the
Sabbath should begin and when it should end, they would begin it an hour
before, and conclude it an hour after the time limited by God: So the Lord
commanded them to have no familiarity with the Heathen, and they were so
strict, that they would not so much as speak to one uncircumcised: So for the
matter of punishment, which is to our purpose, God commanded them not to exceed
forty stripes, therefore they would inflict but thirty and nine upon
offenders: Thus S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.24. Of the Jews five times I
received forty stripes save one: 2 Cor. 11.24.
I do not applaud their superstition, in doing more then God commanded, but yet
it argues mercifulness toward Delinquents: so when a man had deserved death,
if the Lord had not expressed in his word, what death he should die, they would
put him to that which was most esie: I wish that this practice of theirs rise
not up in judgment against us Christians; how many be there among us, that for
petty matters seek to crush and undo men? they are so far from punishing men
less then they deserve, that they inflict ten times more upon them then is
meet: this is the fault of Masters and Mistresses, they will so beat their
servants for trivials, that they be scarf their own men and women ever after:
does this argue bowels of mercy? or does God deal so with your souls?
remember the parable of the two servants, one whereof owed his master ten
thousand talents, and because he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him, his
wife and children, and all that he had to be sold, and payment to be made: the
servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Luke 1^.
Lord have patience with me and I will pay thee all: Then the Lord of that
servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt: No
sooner had his Lord forgiven him, but he goes out and found one of his fellow
servants which ought him an hundred pence; and he laid hands on him, and took
him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe: and his fellow servant fell
down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will
pay thee all: and he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt: When his Lord heard of it, he calls him to account again,
(for it seems he had forgiven him upon condition that he should forgive his
brother) and says unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that
debt, because thou desiredst me: should not thou also have had compassion on
thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? and his Lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him:
Call this parable often to remembrance, and seeing God is so merciful to thee,
deal not to extremity with others; let those that be superiors think of this,
let them remember what they expect from God, and let them be merciful as he
is merciful. Another Exposition of these words, [thou have punished us less
then our iniquities deserve,] is this, the words in the Original are, [thou
have held us from being beneath by our iniquities.] As if he had said, thou
have kept us from being pressed down to hell by our transgressions: in this
phrase of speech, the Spirit of God intimates to us of what weight and load
sin is: says David, mine iniquities are as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me, Psalm. 38.4. and in Isa. 1.4. God calls Israel, a people laden
with iniquity: Psalm. 38.4. Isa. 1.4. Matthew. 11.28. Heb. 21.1.
and our Savior Christ calls to him all that are heavy laden, Matt. 11.28.
and in Heb. 21.1. we are called upon to lay aside every weight: and our Savior
says to his Disciples, in Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves lest at any
time your hearts be overcome or pressed down with surfeiting and drunkenness.
Luk 21.34.
Now that sin is weighty and of a ponderous nature, appears thus. First, one
sin presses upon another, and they all press down to hell. Secondly, sin
hinders us from doing whatsoever good is, it makes us dull and heavy in the
performance of good actions: above all remember how heavy Christ our Redeemer
found our sins: though he was but a sinner by imputation, yet he found the
burden of our sins so weighty on his sacred shoulders, that they made him sweat
drops of blood in a cold night; and to cry out on the Cross, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me?

folly and stupidity of people, that go on in sin, and never find it
burdensome; but let me tell these, if ever God shall awake their drowsy
conscience, they shall find that one Jonah is too much for a whole Ship: the
Devil is cunning, and to the end he may engage men in sin, he will not
represent it to them in its own hue (which is most ugly,) but he shows it in
a false glass, either of profit or pleasure; and hence it is that he ensnares
so many souls: he tells them that sin is no burden, and that hell is not
so hot as the Minister makes it to be; but herein he plays the liar, which
has been his trade from the beginning.

let us find sin a burden; there is no better argument of grace then to be
sensible of the weight of sin: and that man that does not find it ponderous,
happily he may complain of the stone in the kidney or the bladder, but he
has most cause to cry out of the stone in his heart; for were not his heart
harder then the nether millstone, he would feel sin a burden too heavy for
him to bear.



them; there be too many that make men drink drunk, and provoke them to swear:
these are desperate wretches, and most unchristian-like, for instead of keeping
their brethren from, they put them on to sin.

that he had delivered them: [thou have given us such a diliverance as this:]
Will some man say, what deliverance was that? it was the delivering of Israel
from the Babylonish captivity, which lasted seventy years, and was a very
great deliverance; for in Babylon they hanged their harps on the willows, and
sat down by the rivers, and wept when they remembered Zion, Psalm. 137.1.2.
therefore the Spirit of God sets a special character on this, tearming it
[such a deliverance as this:] Psalm. 137 1.2.
the point is perspicuous.

There be certain deliverances which God bestows on men, for which they are
to be more thankful then for others. It is true, God is so great in the
greatest, that he is not little in the least, yet some are greater then others;
some of Gods works are written in greater, some in smaller characters: it was
not every deliverance that made Noah build an Altar to the Lord, but Gods
sparing of him and his from perishing with the old world: it was not every
deliverance which caused Hezekiah to pen a song, but it was Gods adding a lease
of fifteen years to his life, when he thought himself past recovery: they
were great deliverances that made the Jews keep their Anniversaries, as the
Feast of the Passover, of Tabernacles and of Trumpets. And when Joshua
commanded a man of every Tribe in Israel to take a stone out of the midst of
Jordan, it was in remembrance of a special mercy, that when their posterity
should see that pile of stones, and ask them the meaning of them, then they
should answer, that the waters of Jordan were cut off and stood on heaps
until they past over on foot: and it was no small, but a grand deliverance
which caused the Jews to keep the days of Purim, it was for the reversing of
the fatal decree Haman had got out against them: and when Iehoshaphat and his
people assembled themselves in the Valley of Berachah, it was to bless the
Lord for a great Victory which he gave them over their great Adversaries, 2 Chronicles. 20.26.
2 Chronicles. 20.26.

Use.
Let me call upon you, to reflect inwards upon your selves, and to say with
Ezra, [God has given us such a deliverance as this.] What a deliverance did
God give unto us in this land at the entrance of Queen Elizabeth of ever
blessed memory, who restored true Religion among us, and broke the heavy yoke
of Antichrist from off our necks? what a deliverance was that which our God
vouchsafed us in eighty eight, when he overthrew our enemies to their
perpetual shame? their strength at that time was so great, that if God had not
subdued them for us, we had never been able to make resistance: what a
deliverance was that which God afforded to King and People in one thousand six
hundred and five from that damnable and hideous Popish powder treason, which
was hatched and forged in hell, and should have been executed a primogenitis
Diaboli, by the first borne of Satan? what a deliverance was that which he
gave us five years since from the raging Pestilence, when there died in one
week five thousand two hundred and five? God was then pleased to cause it to
cease on a sudden, till it came to a paucity, nay to a nullity. And to come to
our own particulars, may not many of us say, that our next neighbors were
visited, and we were preserved? may we not say that some in the same house,
nay some that lay with us in the same bed, were smitten and died, and we
escaped? see then how God has magnified his mercy toward us, in giving us
such a deliverance as this: O let us remember what the deliverance was, and
what the blessing is, he snatched us as brands out of the fire; as therefore
our sorrow was the greater then, so let our Songs be the more now: shall Gods
mercy be to us in a fire, and our thankfulness to him in a frost? God
forbid. As therefore at that time of need, his mercy was great toward us, so
let it appear in our lives that we are sensible of his extraordinary favor,
by living holily and righteously all the days of our life.

Sermon III.
EZRA 9.14 ver. Should we return to break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? would thou not be angry with
us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor
escaping?


IN this verse we may take knowledge how Ezra justifies Gods severity, upon the
precedence of man's sin; the verse divides it self into two parts: First, the
sin; Secondly, the punishment. The sin is laid down: First, generally, shall
we return to break thy Commandments? Secondly, particularly, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? Then follows the punishment;
first, God will be angry; secondly, there is the degree of his anger, he will
not leave consuming till all be destroyed. We begin with the sin in
general, [Should we return to break thy Commandments?] in the Original it
is, should we return again to commit iniquities? which intimates to us, that
when Gods hand was upon them, it wrought them to amendment: from whence I note
thus much.

That is sound repentance, when a man so sorrows for his sin, that he
forsakes it. In the three special languages, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
the words which signify repentance intimate as much: the Hebrew words are two,
(...) and (...), the one signifies grieving, the other turning: the Greeks have
likewise two words, (...) and (...), one is an after grief when a thing is
done, the other is an after wisdom to fly from it for time to come: the
Latins also set it out by two words, the one is poenitentia, which is a grief
for sin, the other is resipiscentia, which signifies a turning from that for
which he sorrows: and the phrases in Scripture intimate as much, as in 2 Cor.
12.21. there the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.21.
I fear lest when I come again my God will humble me among you, and that I
shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the
uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed. So
in Rev. 9.21. they repented not of their murders, sorceries, fornication,
Revel. 9.21.
nor of their thefts: That is, they neither sorrowed for, nor repented them of
these horrible sins: It is the counsel of Saint Peter to Simon Magus, Acts
8.22.
Act. 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps
the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee: So in Heb. 6.1. the Apostle
says, Heb. 6.1.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and
of faith toward God: The former of these is to grieve for their ignorance, the
other is to turn from it: and ye shall find the same in those places where
repentance is described: as in 2 Chro. 7.14. If my people which are called by
my name shall humble themselves and pray, 2 Chro. 7.14.
and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal their land. Joel 2.12.
So in Joel 2.12. Turn unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning; there is compunction of soul, and amendment of
life: And says Saint James, Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your
hearts ye double minded, James 4.8.
Iam. 4.8.

Olims, turning with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow that was washed, to
wallow in the mire; what repentance do men call this, when as they have
neither cleansed their hands, nor purged their hearts? dare thou say thou art
cured of the lea prosie, when it appears white in thy forehead? I know thou
dare not; and dare any be so impudent as to say they have repented of their
sins, when as they daily renew them? this is so far from deserving the name
of true repentance, that it is, poenitentia poenitenda, repentance to be
repented of.

Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, O King break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; it is possible for a man to turn
from sin and yet be never the better, if he grieve not for it; and it is
possible for a man to grieve for sin, and yet far enough from true repentance,
if he turn not from it: if any of us should have a servant that grieved for
his offense, promising no more to commit the like, and yet as soon as our back
is turned should run into the same again, we would presently conclude that
he did but dissemble: what then shall we think of our selves when we say we
disclaim sin, and yet our lives testify the quite contrary? let us in the
fear of God sorrow for sin, and turn from it, else God shall be just in
consuming us. [Should we return to break thy Commandments?] The manner of Ezra
his speaking intimates to us, that it is possible for a man to be engaged in
sin, when he has had a taste of Gods mercy; and if so, give me leave from
hence to gather this Observation.

After the receipt of great mercies, Gods children are apt to be engaged in
great sins: See it made good in some instances; was there ever a greater
deliverance bestowed on any then that which the Lord afforded Noah, when he
out-rid that storm of the Deluge in the Ark, when all the World besides him
and his were drowned? It is true, for the present, he was so affected with it
that he built an Altar to the Lord, and offered burnt offerings on it; but
soon after he forgot this great favor, and was over-taken with intemperance:
could there be a greater deliverance then Lots? he was snatched by the Angel
out of Sodom as a brand out of the fire, and in his flight God gave him his
hearts desire, and that was to escape to Zoar, yet after his going to live in
the Mountains, he made the Mountain where he lived a Sodom, for there he
committed incest with his two daughters: the like we see in wicked Pharaoh, he
is very passionate with Moses and Aaron to have the judgments of God removed,
and when he has his desire, he is so far from being better, that he is
worse then he was before; just like Iron, which is soft as long as it is in the
fire, but being cool, returns to its former hardness: he got strength by
his fall. So in the children of Israel, what a deliverance did God vouchsafe
them when he freed them from Egyptian bondage? while their necks were under
the yoke of that oppressor, they were in as great distress as ever people
were; well, it pleased God to ease them of that servitude, and to give them a
miraculous passage through the red Sea; would any man have thought that ever
they would have forgotten this transcendent blessing, yet with in a few weeks,
Moses being but gone up to the Mount to receive the Law of God for them, they
make a golden Calfe and worship it: how soon was this forgotten? So in the
book of Judges, we find the same people often guilty of the same fault: they
provoke God, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies, sometimes for
eight years, sometimes for eighteen, sometimes for forty years; but no
sooner are they delivered, but they run their old bias, and are engaged in
foul transgressions: as if they had been redeemed to dishonor their
benefactour. The like we see in Hezekiah, the Lord bestowed upon him a strange
deliverance; for when Senacherib came against him with a puissant Army,
thinking to destroy Jerusalem, the Lord for his insolence and blasphemy, put a
hook into his nostrils, and slew of his Army in one night, an hundred fourscore
and five thousand, and so delivered him out of his hands: after this the Lord
smore him with the plague, (as most Interpreters think) and yet he recovered;
no sooner was this done, but the Babylonish Ambassadors coming from their
Master to congratulate his recovery; he was so taken with it, that he showed
them the house of his precious things, which was a bait to that King to come
and destroy his Land; and it fell out accordingly: for when Isaiah had asked
him from whence those men came, and that Hezekiah had told him, adding withal,
that he had showed them all his treasures; he says, the Lord of Hosts says,
Behold the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy
Fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: as
if the Prophet had said, thou have made thy will O Hezekiah, and the King of
Babylon shall be thy Executour: and so it fell out afterward, for the King of
Babylon made war against him, and took and carried away all the Treasure
which formerly had been showed to his Ambassadors. And when our blessed
Savior says to the man whom he had restored to his limbs, Sin no more lest
a worse thing come unto thee, Job. 5.14. it intimates to us, John 5.16.
that men are apt to run into sin, when they have had the sweetest relish
of Gods mercy. What may be the reason of this?

corruption of our nature since the fall of Adam, which is so depraved thereby,
that we are apt to forget the mercy of God, even then, when we have most cause
to remember it.

from the malice of the Devil, for when he sees God to bestow great mercies
on men, he then labors especially to engage them in transgression: and why
so? that the mercies of God may be obscured by their unthankfulness, who but
even now were the objects of his bounty: and not only so, but he does it
likewise to vex and afflict Gods children, for when God shall open their eyes,
he knows it will grieve their spirits for sleighting Gods mercy as they have
done; therefore it is that he steps in then, when God has been most gracious
to men, and puts them on to commit sin, that thereby he might draw black
lines over the legible characters of Gods mercy.

Let me persuade you, Use.
that as ye be sensible of Gods mercies, so to watch over your selves upon
the receipt of them, that ye may be thankful for them: the Saints of God have
been careless this way, notwithstanding God has bestowed abundant favors
upon them; they have been wanting in payment of that tribute of praise which
God expected and deserved at their hands: when God looked for sweet, they have
brought forth wild and sour grapes; like as it was with the Heathen of old,
who coming to the Temples of their gods to give thanks for their health, went
home drunk; and as the Devil does labor then to step in when God has done
men most good, so above all times labor at that time to be most thankful and
obedient, that God may have his glory, and you a sweet relish of his mercy.
[shall we break thy Commandments?] How shall we understand this? break his
Commandments? how could it be otherwise? does any man live and not sin? and
yet shall they for this be exposed to Gods judgments? who knows not but as
long as we live in this world, and spin out the thread of our life, that we
cannot but break Gods Commandments? were we as faithful as ever Abraham was,
yet we could not but we must be guilty sometimes of breaking Gods
Commandments: and does not Saint James say, in many things we sin all? and
what says the Apostle John? he that says he has no sin, is a liar, and
there is no truth in him: As it is in the Fable which was told the mother of
Achilles, that if she dipped her Son into such a River, so far as the water
wet him, so far he should be invulnerable, therefore she drencht him over
head and ears, and wet every part of him, save only the tip of his heel, by
which she held him, and in that part he received his deaths wound: So let a
man be never so much sanctified, be he as holy as ever any Saint was, I will
not except the Virgin Mary, yet as long as he dwells here below, he will be
guilty of breaking Gods Commandments: how then must we understand what Ezra
says, when he says, [shall we again break thy Commandments?] His meaning
is, that if after so great mercy, as God had vouchsafed them, they should fall
into gross sins, then God should be just in punishing them; for though a man
cannot shun peccata quotidiana, sins of infirmity, yet he may refrain from
committing foul and scandalous sins. Luke 1.6.
In Luke 1.6. it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, That they were righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless: and it is possible for a man to live sine scandalo, without
scandal, though not sine querela, without being guilty of lesser iniquities:
or secondly, he may be understood thus, though they be sins which be less,
yet if men shall wilfully commit them, it shall be just with God to punish
them for the same; if they be of industry and not of infirmity, if they be
less then the first, and yet shall be run into against knowledge and
conscience, they shall for these be exposed to Gods judgments, as well as for
greater sins. From the words thus opened, note thus much in way of application.

Paul, to sigh while we are burdened with this body of clay, desiring to be
clothed upon with immortality, that mortality might be swallowed of life? Is
there not just cause for us to say, with the same Apostle in the sorrow of our
souls, Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo, I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ?

Ezra would have them avoid foul sins; in the name of God let our care be
to abandon such; Which be they? Swearing, whoredom, oppression, murder,
drunkenness, Sabbath -- breaking; these do vastare conscientiam, wast the
conscience, and endanger the soul more then other sins: a ship may live at
Sea, that has a leake sprung, if the Mariners bestirre themselves in pumping;
but when it is shot through and through by wind and water, it is hardly kept from
sinking: So a man that sins of infirmity, if he repent, he shall obtain
pardon; but the soul that sins wilfully is scarce kept from sinking.

Lastly, he would have them avoid smaller sins; and so ought we; for a
little sin committed with purpose, is greater in Gods account, then a great
sin committed against a man's will: as therefore a man should avoid great
sins, so also all lesser impieties: the heart of man should be against all
sin, and he should have respect to all Gods Commandments, that if he chance
to fall, it may not be presumptuously, but by infirmity, and then he may
expect mercy from God, who knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we
are but dust. [Shall we join in affinity with the people of these
abominations?] It is an Hebraisme, the Spirit of God calls them people of such
abominations, in stead of abominable people: it is more to be called people of
such abominations, then abominable people; thus when Antichrist is called the
man of sin, it is more then if he were called a sinful man: Here I could
observe how hateful the Heathen and all their doings be unto God, as also how
odious all gross sinners are in his pure eyes; he loathes and abhorres them:
in the Scripture ye shall find, if the godly be compared to gold, they are
termed dross; if the godly be compared to wheat, the wicked to chafe: Nay,
the ungodly man is resembled to the dirt in the street, which you know is
filthy and noisome: Again, if the godly be termed sheep, the wicked are called
goats; nay, in our Text, they be abominable: As it was said of Naaman, he was
an honorable man and a brave soldier, but a leaper; So we may say of the
wicked man, be he never so rich and honorable, if he be a gross sinner, he
is hateful to God; yea, I will be bold to say, he is more loathsome to him,
in peccato, quamvis non persona, in his sin, though not in his person; then a
toad is or can be in our eyes: But I cannot stay here. [Shall we join in
affinity with the people of such abominations?] The Holy Ghost makes it a foul
sin to join in affinity with the Heathen; and indeed so it is, for God
charges the contrary, Exodus 34.15.16.
Exodus 34.15.16. And ye shall find that God has followed those with
punishments that have joined themselves to Heathens: Esau married strange Wives
to the great grief of his Father and Mother, and he was made the more profane
by it: The like we see in Solomon, he married the King of Egypts Daughter, and
she brought him to Idolatry, for which God plagued both him and his posterity:
it was so with Sampson, he would needs have the Daughter of a Philistim to
wife; what followed upon it? she proved his bane: so in Ahab, he took to wife
Iezabel, the Daughter of the King of Zidonia, which was the filling up of his
iniquity, and brought the curse of God on him and his progeny: it is said in 1
Cor. 7.39. A woman, 1 Cor. 7.39.
if her Husband be dead, is at liberty to be married to whom she will, only
in the Lord: That is, says Gregory, to a Christian, and says Augustine, she
must still remain a Christian, though married to a Heathen: And the same
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not unequally yoaked with Infidels, 2 Cor. 6.14.
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? What is the meaning of that? Gregory
says, S. Paul means that Christians should marry with Christians; and
Chrysostom says, To do otherwise is to make the members of Christ, the
members of a Harlot.

Let us take heed of intimate familiarity with Heathens; Use.
and in this case I say to you as Sampsons Father said to him, Is there never a
daughter in Israel to please thee? Nay, I will spread it further, Shun not only
familiarity with Heathens, but make no league with gross sinners, for there is
much danger in it: First, the danger of suspicion; let a man be never so good,
yet if he associate himself with those that be bad, he will be thought as
bad as they; for what will men say? birds of a feather fly together. Secondly,
he runs the hazard of infection; all the Rivers in the World run into the
Sea, but yet they cannot sweeten it, but are made brakish by it: and a wicked
man is ten times more apt to corrupt a good man, then he is to be wrought on
by the conversation of a good man. Thirdly, there is a danger of a curse by
consorting with wicked men; for as many ill men fare the better for one good
man; thus the household of Potipher was blessed for one Joseph, and all in the
ship fared the better for Paul's presence: so many good men may sometimes fare
the worse for one wicked person: thus for one Achan, the whole Host of Israel
is discomfited: and this made John the Evangelist to hasten out of the bath as
soon as he saw Cerinthus there, for says he, I fear lest the house should
fall upon my head for being in company with such a wicked heretic as thou art:
This also was that which caused Moses to command the Israelites to depart from
the Tents of Korah, Dathan and Abiram: and the Spirit of God says, Come out of
Babylon my people, lest by partaking in her sins, ye partake of her plagues:
Besides, when a good man maintains inward familiarity with the wicked: First,
he seems to approve and applaud their wickedness: Secondly, it is a scandal
to Religion, and does greatly prejudice weak Christians: Thirdly, it is a great
means to keep the wicked from repenting; for too much intimacy with them,
hardens them in their sin: take heed therefore of intimate acquaintance with
wicked men, and let our affection be to the Saints that be in the earth, and to
those that excel in virtue. We now come to the punishment: [wouldst thou not
be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping?] First, here is Gods anger, in the first clause: [wouldst
thou not be angry with us?] Secondly, we have the degree of his anger, in the
last words: [so that there should be no escaping.] We begin with Gods anger,
[wouldst thou not be angry with us?] We must know that anger is not a passion
in God, as it is in man, but in speaking thus, the Spirit of God stoops to us,
to raise us up to him: as the Nurse stammers to the child in its own dialect,
so our weakness makes God condescend unto us: certain it is that anger is in
God, as zeal, not as vice. Out of this first clause I note two things for our
instruction: The first is this.

Great sins, after the receipt of great favors, are usually inherited by
great judgments. Cham was freed from being drowned with the old World, which
was a great deliverance; if after this he shall not be sensible of Gods mercy,
and shall mock his Father, no marvel if he be made servus servorum, a servant
of servants. Nay, Noah himself, if he shall no more remember the favor of
God, then to be excessive, it is no wonder if he be mocked by his own child,
and this was no small judgment. So for Lot, if after so great a deliverance
vouchsafed him, he shall be guilty of Incest; no marvel if his two Sons
begotten of his Daughters, prove the fatal enemies of Israel: So for Pharaoh,
the deliverances which God gave him were admirable, but for the contempt of
them, they are succeeded with great plagues: it was a notable mercy which God
afforded Nineveh, in keeping off that judgment which Jonah had denounced
against it: when Nineveh sins again, see what God says, Nah. 1.9. I will make
an utter end; Nah^m 1.9.
affliction shall not rise up the second time: that is, he will so set on the
stroke, that he need not smite twice: it is like that speech of God to Samuel
concerning Eli and his household, When I begin, I will also make an end, 1 Samuel
3.12. and that caution of our blessed Savior, 1 Samuel 3 1^.
to the man that was cured at the Poole of Bethesda, [Sinne no more lest a
worse thing come unto thee,] What does it intimate to us, but that great sins
after great favors, are inherited by great plagues? The Magdeburgenses
observe, that these three things go together; great mercies have been
bestowed, great sins have ensued, and great judgments have followed both:
And wonder not at this, for it is a great dishonor to God that his favors
should be slighted; Romans 2.4.
as in Romans 2.4. Know not thou O man, that the goodness of God leads thee
to repentance? That is, it should lead thee to repentance: Therefore beware of
abusing the mercies of God, else they shall be seconded by fearful
judgments. The second observation arising from that clause, [wouldst thou not
be angry with us till thou had consumed us?] is this:

There be degrees of Gods wrath, it rises by little and little till it consume:
Levit. 26.
This is proved in Levit. 26. there we find that as men's sins increase, so
Gods plagues shall increase; and if they persist to sin, he will plague them,
seven times more, and seven times more: So in Psalm. 78.38. He, that is, the
Lord, Psalm 78.38.
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity and destroyed them not; yea,
many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath: So
in Psalm. 2.12. if his wrath be kindled but a little, Psalm. 2.12.
blessed are all they that put their trust in him: If therefore the Lords wrath
be turned to fire, all the World will be consumed: So in Revel. 6.17. The
great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Revel. 6.17.
The Prophet David makes it an imprecation against his enemies, That God would
render seven times into their bosoms their reproach, Psalm. 9.12.
Psalm. 79.12. as if he had said, O Lord, I know thou do punish them now, but
I am sure, thou can punish them much more: It was so with Eli, one brings him
word that Israel was discomfited, another that his Sons were slain, a third
that the Ark of God was taken, the hearing whereof caused him to fall
backwards, and it is a question whether his neck or his heart brake first: So
it was with Job, one brings him word that his cattle were taken away by the
Sabeans, another that his sheep and servants were burnt with fire from heaven,
a third that his sons and daughters were slain with the fall of a house,
which was the most woeful news of all: Thus the wrath of God rise higher and
higher. Could Rehoboam make his little singer as heavy as his Fathers loins?
and could Nebuchadnezzar make his Oven seven times hotter then it was before?
and shall not God increase his wrath? Yes he can at pleasure.

Agag, the bitterness is past, and they shall no more have it: What think
thou? is not God able to visit thee again? or think thou that thou
deservest no more at Gods hand? Gods manner is, first to shake the 10d at his
child, if that will not deter him, then he gives him two or three stripes, if
that will not work him to obedience, then he lays on more; and no wonder if
new judgments succeed new sins, and if great sins be inherited by great
judgments.

David up to adultery and murder, it was much worse, then that the sword
should never depart from his house: spiritual judgments do far exceed
corporal and temporal; Why? the one drives men to, the other drives men from
God. Again, there be some judgments beyond these, and they be troublers of
soul; says Solomon, A wounded spirit who can bear? these be so great, that
none can express them but those who have felt them; those lashes of soul are
insupportable: and yet there is that which is beyond all this, if men repent
not; and that is hell; Tophet is prepared of old; yea, for the King it is
ordained, he has made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much
wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it: Isa
30.33.
Isa. 30.33. all the strappadoes in the world are but flea-bitings to this:
Nebuchadnezzars banishment, was but for seven years, but the pains of hell be
eternal: when a man has been punished there ten thousand millions of
years, he is never the nearer coming out of that Pit, for he must go them
over again and again, world without end. The miseries of this present life be
compared to waters, which ebb and flow, but hell is called stagnum, a standing
peole; says John, Rev. 20.15. Revel. 20.15.
Whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of
fire: There is nothing in that place but sorrow, and that for ever: So that God
can plague thee corporally, spiritually, and eternally. Has he begun to fleece
thee? he could flea thee: has he begun to bond thee? he could break thee;
does he punish thee in thy body? he could plague thee in thy soul; nay, he
could send thee to Hell, and that is the dregs of the Vial: Therefore stand in
awe and sin not: Has he begun to plague thee? Repent; if thou do not, he
can plague thee ten times more, and ten times more; And it is fearful to fall
into the hands of the living God.

Sermon IV.
Ezra 9. the last Verse. O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we
remain yet escaped as it is this day: Behold we are before thee in our
trespasses; for we cannot stand before thee, because of this.


IN this verse Ezra pleads guilty to the indictment, acknowledging God to be
just, though he should renew his judgments afresh upon them: There be two
things in it; First, his justifying God, in these words, [O Lord God of Israel,
thou art righteous.] Secondly, the reason which he gives for it; first on Gods
part, he had used all possible means to bring them to Reformation: [Wee
remain yet escaped as at this day:] secondly on their part, [they were still
in their trespasses.] And therefore they were the fresh fuel of Gods
indignation. Before we come to these particulars, give me leave to speak a word
or two of the style he gives God; he calls him, [Lord God of Israel.] The
title [Lord,] signifies his greatness, [the God of Israel,] his goodness: A
fit Preface for a prayer: for the word [Lord,] it is a term well befitting
God; in the holy Scripture he is said to be strong in power, and wonderful in
working: Nay, so powerful he is, that nothing whatsoever is impossible to him:
The Scripture demonstrates further, That he does what he pleases, in heaven
and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. And what he will
do, Psa. 135.6.
all the world cannot hinder. Secondly, the holy Scripture sets out Gods power
by this, that whatsoever he does, he does without difficulty: he knows how
to sit still and work, and to work and sit still; Yea, so far is his power
extended, that his will is his power, as appears in the creation; he said the
word, and all things were created: and though some Atheistical spirits have
asked with what ladders and engines, God built the Fabric of heaven; if they
had but consulted, Genesis 1. they should have been resolved; Genes. 1.
for that shows them, that by his word speaking all things were made: and it
is worth our observation in the Book of God, where he is said to effect things
by means; we shall find that he has done the greatest things by the smallest
means: Thus by Moses and Aaron, a couple of poor men, he delivered his people
Israel out of Egyptian bondage, in spite of Pharaoh that great Potentate; and
by Gideon and his three hundred men, he conquered that great Army of the
Midianites which lay as as Grasse-hoppers on the earth for multitude: So he
ruined the Walls of Jericho by the sound of rams horns; and he wrought those
great wonders in Egypt by Moses his rod, which was a contemptible thing: This
also by Shamgars goad he laid the Philistims heaps upon heaps: and by a
jawbone of an Ass in the hand of Sampson, he slew a thousand men; and by
little David overcame and slew that great Goliath: When he would work
redemption for the Sons of men, he brought it to pass by him who was,
novissimus hominum, the meanest of men: who was poor in his birth, obscure in
his education, poorly attended when he came to the execution of his Ministry,
and poorest of all in his death, for qui in vita non domicilium, in morte non
sepulchrum, he that in his life had not a house to hide his head in, when he
died, was buried in another man's Tomb: and when he will dispense the Gospel,
he makes choice of Fishermen, to publish those glad tidings to the World.
Thirdly, God is said to be powerful, because he can do more then he will: he
could of stones have raised children to Abraham, but he would not; and when
our blessed Lord was apprehended, he tells Peter, that he could have obtained
of his Father, more then twelve legions of Angels to help him, but he would
not: He can do more then he will, but he will not do all that he can.

Plinius secundus says, God is not Almighty, because he cannot lie nor
deceive: Lodovicus Vives wonders at this, saying, I admire that a man so wise
should cavil at Gods power; but Saint Augustine answers him well, and says,
therefore is God ommipotent, because he cannot he nor deceive, for these argue
impotency. Secondly, it confutes others, who say God is not so powerful as the
Scripture makes him to be, because he cannot make a thing to be against its
nature, as to be, and not to be: to whom I answer, things which in their
nature are simply impossible (with reverence be it spoken) God cannot do; but
all other things, though impossible to created nature, God can do; therefore
this vain objection does not disparage Gods power.

Sarah, till it had ceast to be with her after the manner of women: he comes
not to deliver Israel, till they were upon the brink of the red sea; and then
Moses said, Fear ye not, but stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord;
he came not to deliver the three children, till they were cast into the fiery
furnace; nor to Daniel till he was among the Lions: there can be no falsehood in
what he says, for nothing is too hard for him to effect.

the greatest Prince to powder, if he be rebellious: nay, he can make the
flies, the lice, the locusts, the ants, those contemptible creatures to destroy
man, if he continue refractory: therefore let us stand in awe of this great
Lord, that his mighty power may be armed to our preservation, not to our
destruction. So we come to the second, which is, that he is, [the God of
Israel.] And if in the first he was maximus, the greatest, then in this he is
optimus, the best. l know he is the God of all the earth, Psalm. 24.1.
Psalm. 24.1. but more especially he is the God of Israel: First, secundum
specialem cultum, by a special and peculiar worship: to them above other
people, he revealed how he would be worshipped; they were scriniarii legis,
the treasurers of the Law: God dealt not with the Heathen, as he dealt with
Israel; they are described by calling on the Lord, as if no people called upon
God but they. Secondly, he is the God of Israel, secundum specialem curam, in
regard of that special care he had of them: he was a wall of fire round about
them, to preserve them from their enemies: God is said to carry his people, as
an Eagle carries her young ones on her wings, Deuteronomy. 32.11.
Deuteronomy. 32.11. it is a sweet comparison, the Eagle fears nothing from above to
hurt her young ones, because she soars higher then any other bird; and if
there come any danger from beneath, her body is between it and her young, she
will be hurt, rather then they shall: So God interposes between his people and
their enemies, so that no mischief shall befall them, but by his permission.
Thirdly, he is the God of Israel, secundum speciale praemium, by a special
reward which he has promised them: he says to Abraham, I am thy exceeding
great reward; and that God that told him he would give the land of Canaan to
him and his seed for a possession, does not only provide for his people a
temporal Canaan here, but an eternal Canaan hereafter, of which the other is
but a Tipe: they be called, segullam, his chief treasure: and Saint Peter calls
them, a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar
people, 2. Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 2.9.
And to spread it a little further, it is not only now, Deus notus in Iehuda,
God is known in Judah, but notus inter Gentes, he is known among the Gentiles;
for wheresoever the Gospel is preached, they be the Israel of God: they be the
piece of ground culled out of the whole world, to be a garden for the Lord;
they be his enclosure, and are tied to him by the strictest relations in the
world; he is their Master, and they be his servants; yet more, he is their
Father, and they be his children; yet more, he is their Husband, and they be
his Spouse, for he has married them to himself, Ierem. 3.4.
Ierem. 3.14.

quia magnam, because it is great, as quia suam, because it is his: Therefore
if God entitle his people to himself, they may be sure he will care for
them: and what can be more for Gods people to triumph in, then that the Lord
is their God? This high Privilege exceeds all things whatsoever; for he that
has honor and riches, may go to hell with them; but he that has God to be
his God, is sure to be everlastingly happy. I read of one in S. Augustine,
that passing by a stately house, which had fair demeanes about it, he asked
one that he met, to whom that house and land belonged, he answered to such a
one; O says he, that is a happy man: no, says the Father, he is not happy,
that has that house and land, but he is happy that has the Lord to be his
God.

Rabshekah that railing Orator reviled the Host of Israel: and Christ says to
Saul when he was going to Damascus, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It
is well known that there was an infinite distance between our Savior and he;
but it was in his members that he was persecuted. Zeresh the wife of Haman
gave good counsel to her Husband, had he taken it in time, she tells him,
Esth. 6.13.
Esth. 6.13. If Mordecai be of the feed of the Jews before whom thou have
begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but surely falI before him.
I know that oftentimes God gives Persecutors power to hurt his people, but it
is not ad extirpationem, to root them up, sed ad exercitationem, but to
exercise and try them; Therefore the enemies of Gods Church, are compared to
Bees, that have honey, as well as a sting: God makes the wicked as useful to
his children, as the fire is to the gold: as Ignatius that holy Martyr said,
when he was threatened, that he should be eaten up of wild beasts; says he,
By passing through the teeth of wild beasts, I shall be the purer manchet for
the table of God my Master.

Moses will more prevail with God to turn away his wrath, then a thousand
other men: Acts 27.
and in the Acts 27. all in the ship are beholding to Saint Paul for their
lives: I know the wicked mis-use the godly, and think meanly of them; but were
it not for them, they should quickly be made as Sodom and Gomorrah, for they
stand in the breach interceding with God for them, in so much that he says,
let me alone: but though ungodly men malign them, we who are led by a better
spirit, should do the Saints of God all the good we can: And they that do it
shall not go unrewarded, for it is a Sacrifice well pleasing to God, Phil.
4.18.
Phil. 4.18. And says the same Apostle, Heb. 6.10.
Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love,
which ye showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered unto the Saints,
and yet minister: and Christ himself says, Matthew. 10.42. Matthew. 10.42.
Whosoever gives a cup of cold water only to the least of these, in the name
of a Disciple, verily he shall not lose his reward.

Israel? let Israel then behave themselves as Gods people: what says the
spirit of God in Deuteronomy. 26.18? Deuteronomy. 26.18.
The Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he has
promised thee, that thou should keep all his Commandments: So in 1 Cor.
6.20. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods: Titus 2.14.
and in Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works:
and Saint Peter calls the people of God lively stones, and a holy Priesthood:
Why so? it follows in the next words, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, 1
Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Therefore as many of you as lay
claim to God, be not companions to wicked men; though they swear, lie,
deceive, oppress, vos autem non sic, yet must not you do so: Though Judah
play the harlot, let not Israel sin; let your chief care be, to live as the
people of God: and if ye would be known to be such, Let your conversation
be according to the Gospel: and as many as walk after that rule, peace shall
be upon them, and upon the whole Israel of God: Now we come to the particulars
in the Text, as we laid them down: First, for his justifying of God, [thou art
righteous.] This has been ever the practice of Gods people, they have still
confessed God to be just in what he has brought upon them. Thus does David,
Psalm. 51.4. Psalm. 51.4
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge:
As if he had said, though thou punish me severely, yet I cannot but confess
that it is justly: Psalm. 119.137.
So in Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy
judgments: The like we see in Eli, when Samuel told him that sad Message from
God, concerning the extirpation of his house, he says, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18.
1 Samuel 3.18. which calls to my mind that of Hezekiah, when he had showed the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon his Treasurers, and that the Lord had sent
Isaiah to tell him, that for his vainglory, he would give them into the
hands of that King; all that he says, is, bonum est verbum Iehovae, good is
the word of the Lord, Isa. 39.8. Isa. 39.8.
The like we see in Daniel, Dan. 9.7. Dan. 9.7.
O Lord righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us confusion of faces as at
this day: The same was the practice of good Nehemiah, Neh. 9.33. Nehem. 9.33.
Thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done right, but
we have done wickedly: As if he had said, we know we lie under a great
judgment, and we hope thou our God do not think it small, but be it what
it will, we are sure thou art just in inflicting it upon us; and because
contraries do best appear when they are brought together, ye shall see how
contrary the wicked be to the godly in this: Cain cries out, that his
punishment is greater then he could bear: he complains not of his sin, but
of his punishment, as if God punished him more then he deserved: and Saul
takes it ill that Samuel should charge him with disobedience, though it were
gross and palpable; and ye shall find in Scripture that God exposes his
actions to scanning, Ierem. 5.19. Ierem. 10.16.
that it may appear to all the world, how just he is. In Ierem. 5.19. and in
Chap. 10.16. the wicked are not ashamed to question God, why he punished them,
as if he had done it without cause: Ezekiel. 18.25.
So in Ezekiel. 18.25. They say, the Lords ways were not equal: as if he had
punished the children for their Fathers sins; when as the same sins were
found in the children: Mal. 3.8.
So in Mal. 3.8. when God challenges and plagueth them for their
transgressions, they reply, What have we done? As if God punished them without
desert: and this humor of turning again, will not leave the wicked at the
last day: for when Christ shall say unto them on his left hand depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels, for I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:
then shall they answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or a
thirst?

particular; when God lays his hand on men, how apt are they to dispute with
God, and say, why does he deal thus and thus with us? and by this means they
are so far from mitigating, that they increase his hand upon them: Nay, there
be those presumptuous ones that in argumentation will ask, why God elected
some, and reprobated others? but take heed of this, is it not enough to knock
at the door, but we must break it open? Who art thou O man, that reply to
thy Maker?

Voluntas Dei secreta sit, nunquam injusta; the cause why God punishes, may
be hid, but it is never unjust: Therefore when thy tumultuous flesh shall say
with Rebeckah, Why am I thus? know that it is for thy excess, thy
Sabbath-breaking, thy hypocrisy, thy lewd conversation: Therefore change thy
note, and say with the Church, Mich. 7.9. Mich. 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: I
know it is a hard thing to suppress the tumultuous thoughts which arise in men
in times of trouble; but these must be labored against with all our power, for
no man gets by contending with his Maker, but multiplies his strokes: We
proceed now to the reason which he gives for justifying God: [for we remain
yet escaped, as it is this day.] As if he had said, thy goodness is
demonstrate, he that runs may read it, thou have been abundantly more
merciful to us, then to thousands of our brethren who perished in the
captivity; for lo, we remain even to this day: That which I collect from hence
is this.

In general judgments which God brings upon the World, there is still some
escaping. When God sent the Deluge upon the world, Noah and his Family perished
not; in the fiery shower which God rained on Sodom, and Gomorrah, Lot, and his
Daughters perished not; nay, a whole City (to wit Zoar) is spared at Lots
entreaty: When Pharaoh commanded all the male children of the Jews to be
drowned, Moses was preserved: and when Jericho was destroyed, Rahab and her
Family were spared: and when for David's pride, seventy thousand were consumed
by the Pestilence, many thousands in Israel escaped: and when the last great
Plague was among us, thousands and ten thousands had their life for a prey.
What is the ground of this?





mercy: when some in the same house with us were infected, and died of the
plague; why were we spared? it was of Gods mere mercy, and it ought to be
mavelous in our eyes.

Cham was spared: We are bound to praise him for our selves, for why did he
spare us? was it not that we should be better? Gods sparing men, is either to
harden them, or to amend them; therefore, except we repent, we shall likewise
perish. The reason which he gives on their part, is, that though God had
spared them, [yet they were before him in their trespasses:] as if he had
said, O Lord thou have to the full performed thy counterpart with us, but we
are yet in our sins, for we are as bad or worse then we were before. Here
take notice of thus much:

What a fearful judgment it is, not to profit by afflictions: It is that for
which God finds great fault with his people in Deuteronomy. 29.2.3.4. his hand had
been heavy upon their Enemies in their sight and view, Deuteronomy 29.2.3, 4.
yet they were never the better. So in lsa. 1.5. there the Lord says to
Israel, Isa. 1.5.
why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: Ierem.
12.13.
The like also we see in Ierem. 12.13. They were sick and had no profit: This
was the sin of Cain, he was stigmatized for a wretch, yet he was as wicked
as he was before: It was also the sin of Pharaoh, Ahab and Ahaz; they were
all the worse for coming under the rod, and are therefore branded by the
spirit of God to all posterity. There is a great deal of difference between
Gods afflicting the godly and the wicked, Isa. 27.7.
as may appear Isa. 27.7. Has he smitten them, as he smote those that smote
him? What is the reason? the godly profit by affliction, but the wicked are the
worse for being afflicted: Every thing works together for the best to Gods
people, but every thing turns into sin to the wicked, according to that
strange speech, Ierem. 4.11.
Ierem. 4.11. says God, I will cause a dry wind of the high places in the
wilderness, to blow toward the Daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to
cleanse: That is, I will bring a great judgment upon them, but such is their
obstinacy, that they will not be bettered by it.



affliction; (it is a lesson worth our learning, for affliction is not good in
it self) and then we profit by it: First, when it urges us to examination and
confession of our sins. Secondly, when it works us to humiliation for our
sins, when we have the melting heart of Josiah, and the contrite heart of
David. Thirdly, when we pour out our souls to God in prayer, when his
chastning hand is on us, as the people of God did, Isa. 26.16. Isa. 26.16.
Lastly, when we not only vow amendment of life in our affliction, but when
we reform our ways, and so follow our vows with endeavors: This is the
true end of affliction, when like gold we come purified out of the fire, and
when it is as a file to clear us from our rust, and becomes a Bethesda, to
cure us of our spiritual infirmities; but when men are the worse for being
afflicted, they may well expect a worse thing to befall them. The last clause
is, [neither can we stand before thee, because of this.] As if he had said,
we cannot come before thee with any confidence, while we be in our sins
unrepented of: which yields us this Observation.

That man that comes before God in his sins without repentance, cannot come
with any confidence or hope of mercy. Prove. 28.13.
In Prove. 28.13. mercy is promised to him that confesses and forsakes his
sins, but wrath is pronounced against him that hides them: Such a man may
come into the Courts of God; such a man may offer sacrifice to God, but it is
an abomination to him, Prove 1^.8. Isa. 1.15.
Prove. 15.8. and he tells such, in Isa. 1.15. When ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will
not hear: Why s;o? your hands are full of blood: And this is the meaning of
those words in John 9.31. [God hears not sinners: Io^ 9.31.
] That is, not such as are obstinate and impenitent sinners.

It should teach us to abhor sin; Use.
if we know a man to be infected, we will be sure to avoid his company: and
shall we not cast away sin, which makes us unable to stand before God?
Therefore abandon thy wicked lusts, and wash away all sin by the tears of
true repentance, and then in the name of God come into his Courts: though thou
can not be an innocent, yet come in penitence, and thou shall find that God
is as well pleased with penitents as innocents. And now that I have done with
this Text; give me leave to go over the three verses again by Application,
and to spread them on you, as Elisha spread himself on the Shunamitish woman's
child: we have right to them all three; it is said in the first, that God
punished them, but less then they deserved, and that he had delivered them:
was not this our case five years since? for our sins God punished us, by
turning our waters into blood, and he punished us less then we deserved; but
withal he magnified his mercy toward us in taking that judgment off, the
pestilence wholly from us in a short space. Then for the next verse, did not
we say, as these Jews, O Lord, now that thou have delivered us, if we shall
return to our sins again, it shall be just with thee to punish us most
severely? Which of our souls did not say thus? And for the last verse, we may
say also with Ezra, We are before thee in our trespasses, therefore O Lord it
may stand with thy justice utterly to consume us. (Beloved) I have ever been
free and bold with you, and I will not now begin to discolor: Is not London as
full of pride, excess and adultery as ever? does not sacrilege and usury keep
as high a room in the City as ever it did? Surely those sins must be of a
deep tincture, which all this scouring will not cleanse; well, God has begun
with us again, and he shall be just, if he should not leave a man of us
alive: What shall we now do? every man to his prayers, let every one amend
one, and then all will be amended: Let every one sweep his own door, and the
Street will soon be cleansed. Here we be now, but God only knows whether
we shall have so much leave as to come into his house again; while therefore
we have time, while the arro^es of God fly beyond us, and beside us, round
about us, and yet not touch us, let us seek his face by true repentance; and I
will be bold to say, if he find us penitent, he will remove his judgment:
but if we stand before him still in our sins, no marvel then, that he
renew and increase our plagues.

Sermon V.
EZRA 10. Verse. 1. Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed,
weeping and casting himself down before the house of God; there assembled unto
him out of Israel, a very great Congregation of men, and women, and children:
for the people wept very sore.


THe former Chapter did set down the humiliation of Ezra, this demonstrates
the fruit and effect, that it produced: when the people saw that he was so
affected and afflicted, and that not so much for his own sins, as for the
sins of the people, they take it to heart; and first, there is a very great
Assembly gathered together. Secondly, they weep sore. Thirdly, one particular
person, Shecaniah by name, confesses the sins of the people. Fourthly, they
conceive hope of remission. Fifthly, they resolve to put away their strange
Wives. Lastly, they put their late resolution into execution: That which gives
occasion to all these, is laid down in the first words of the Chapter, which
contains; First, the actions of Ezra, and they be two: [praying and weeping.]
Secondly, his manner of confessing, [hee cast himself down before the house of
the Lord:] upon this follows the coming together of a great assembly of men,
women and children. We begin with his actions, and first for his praying, [when
Ezra had prayed.] As I told you in the former chapter, this good man was come
from Babylon, with a great deal of comfort, and with a happy message of good
news to Israel; no sooner is he come to Jerusalem, but he is welcomed with
a sad relation, there is a complaint made to him that the Princes, Priests,
Levites and people, had mingled themselves with the people of the land, doing
according to their abominations: Ezra hearing this, knows no other way to
appease Gods wrath, but by pouring out his soul to him in prayer; and if ye
look into the sacred Scripture, ye shall find, that this has ever been the
practice of Gods people in time of affliction, they have still betaken
themselves to prayer: The commandment of God is for it, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble: Psalm. 50.15. Iam. 5.13.
So in James 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. And as God
commanded it, so his children have practiced it: in almost all the pages of
holy Writ, ye shall find the Saints of God exercising prayer: this was the
weapon that Jacob took up, when he expected nothing but hostility from his
brother Esau; the Text says, He prayed to the Lord to deliver him from the
hand of Esau his brother, Genesis 32.11. This also was that which Moses took up,
Gen 32.11.
when that Pharaoh and his Host were at the heels of Israel, and the red Sea
before them, he betook himself to God by prayer, Exodus 14.15.
Exodus 14.15. And this was the weapon which he used, when Israel conquered
Amalek, Exodus 17.11, 12. Exodus 17.11, 12.
How often do we find David practiced in this duty? as few of the Saints had
more crosses, so none oftener in prayer then he: This is that which the three
Children make use of in the fiery Oven; Daniel in the Lions Den; and Jonah in
the Whales belly: instances hereof are so obvious in the Scripture that I spare
to name any more: and from proving the point, I come to answer some Objections
which are made against that which I have said, and they be these.

First, Objection.
say some (being in affliction) God knows our desires and wants before we
ask, what need we then pray to him?

I answer to this with Saint Jerome, Solution.
we pray not to God, to acquaint him with what he knows not, but that we may
the more incline him to mercy: as that Father says well, non narratores, sed
oratores sumus, we come not to inform him of what he is ignorant, but we are
humble suitors that he may be facilitated unto mercy.

O but say they, Objection.
God has determined how it shall be, and let me pour out never so many
prayers, it is impossible for me either to hasten or fore-slow his pace.

The Answer to this, Solution.
shall be that of Daniel, he knew by reading the Prophecy of Jeremiah, how
long the captivity of Babylon should last, yet he addresses himself to God by
prayer, Dan. 9.19. The Prophet knew, Dan ^.19.
that as God had ordained the end, so also the means, and amongst those,
prayer is the chief.

But thirdly, they reply and say, Why should we pray? Objection.
are we not commanded to be patient in tribulation?

I answer, Solution.
these two be not incompatible: as for instance, David was as patient a man as
ever lived, as we may see 2 Samuel 15.26. where he says, 2 Samuel 15.26.
If the Lord have no delight in me, behold here am I, let him do to me as
seems good unto him: and yet David was frequent in prayer to God: the like
we see in our blessed Lord and Savior, who is an example without exception,
all the world knows that he was patient to the death, yet he prayed, Father
if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me: it is true, a man must be
patient when Gods hand is upon him, and not have so much as the least rising
thought against God; but yet he may at the same time, without offense, implore
God to have mercy upon him.

Ahaziah goes to the god of Ekron, and Saul to the Witch at Endor; and a
company among us in time of trouble, seek to Negromancers and Wizards, which is
no other, then to cast out the Devil by Beelzebub: to such I say* as the
Prophet Elijah said to the Messengers of Ahaziah, is it because there is no God
in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? cannot God
help ye, but you must go to such as these? This is the highest degree of
irreligion, even mere Atheism. Secondly, it meets with others who are sullen
and pettish when Gods hand is upon them; they are so sensible of the stroke,
that it drives all piety out of them; they had rather sullenly die, then
seriously pray unto God for ease and release; but let these know and be
assured, that God will either bend or break them.

sensibly, be sensible of what thou suff^rest; God loves not that men should
be as so many Stoics, insensible of what they suffer; nay, he hates
indolence, Ierem. 5.3.
and finds fault with them for it, in Ierem. 5.3. Because they grieved not,
though he had stricken them. Secondly, a man must pray, as feelingly, so
fervently; says James, the prayer of a righteous man availes much, if it be
fe^vent, Iam. 5.15. Moses his prayer is called a cry, Iam. 5 15. Exodus 14.15.
Genesis 32.24. Hosca 12.4.
Exodus 14.15. and Jacob is said to wrestle with God, Genes. 32.24. which was by
prayer and supplication, as is evident in Hosea 12.4. and Saint Paul desires
some to whom he wrote, to strive with him by prayer to God: Augustine says,
this was the reason why the Egyptian Monks made short prayers, lest they
should lose their fervency by praying long: And here under this will come in,
intention in prayer, which is when a man minds what he prays; and though
Bellarmine say, that a vertuall intention is enough, without an actual; yet
Gregory, and I, ask him or any such, this question, why seeks he to be heard
of God, when he hears not himself? when a man does perfunctorily slubber
over his prayers, how should he look for a comfortable return of his
petitions? the bullet can fly no further then the quantity of powder,
wherewith the piece was charged, can carry it: and it is impossible our prayers
should reach heaven, unless fervency go along with them. Thirdly, we must
pray faithfully, that is, believing we shall receive what we implore God for,
if it be according to his will: Iam. 1.5.6.7.
says S. James, Iam. 1.5.6.7. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
that gives to all men liberally, and it shall be given him: but let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering, for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea,
driven with the wind and tossed: neither let that man think, that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord: And in Chap. 5.1^. The prayer of faith shall
save the sick, Iam. 5.15.
and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sins they shall
be forgiven him. Fourthly, we must pray constantly; this is that which our
Savior commends to us from the importunity of the poor women, who would not
cease troubling the unjust Judge, till he had granted her request and done her
justice: this also is that which the Apostle Paul means, when he says,
continue in prayer, Colos. 4.2. to wit, that men should be importunate with
God in prayer, Coloss. 4.2.
and if any man think it ill manners to be sollicitous in pressing God by
prayer, Gregory tells him, it is a good violence, and affects God, who loves
that his servants should take the Kingdom of heaven by force. Further, there
be two other things to be observed in our prayers; First, We must aim at the
glory of God in all the prayers we make: This our blessed Lord teaches us in
that absolute form of prayer, which he has left us, the first petition
whereof is, [hallowed by thy name.] The glory of God must be preferred before
all things; yea, before the salvation of our souls, as we see in the examples
of Moses and Paul, who chose rather to have their names rased out of Gods book,
then that he should lose his glory in the salvation of his people. Therefore
when a man is in affliction, he ought to pray to God to deliver him, but for
this end, that he may live to glorify him: This was the end of good Hezekiahs
request, when God sent him word by Isaiah that he had added fifteen years to
his life, says he, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the
Lord? Isa. 38.22.
Isa. 38.22. as if he desired health upon no other condition, but that he
might glorify God in his Sanctuary. Secondly, a man must so pray to God, that
withal he use means to accomplish his desires: This is the advice of
Solomon, Prove. 2.3.4.5. If thou cryest after knowledge, Prove. 2 4.3.5.
and liftest up thy voice for understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid Treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: There ye see that crying and
calling, seeking and searching, must go together: and in vain do thou pray
to God, if thou follow not thy prayers with thy endeavors, for the attaining
of that for which thou art a petitioner: as for example, thou prayest to be
delivered from thy filthy excess, but unless thou strive to forsake it, thou will never be rid of that filthy vice: to do otherwise is to be like the man
in the Apologue, who when his Cart stuck in the mire, prayed to Hercules for
help, but never set to his shoulder to lift it out.

If we lay the men of these days to this square, Use.
we shall find them to fall very short of what we have said; do the pray
sensibly? Alas, when they pray, their hearts like Nabals, be as dead in them
as stones. Secondly, do the pray fervently? alas no, for their prayers be
even keycold. Thirdly, pray they constantly? O no, they desist and are soon
weary, they would have God presently to hear them, but they will not stay his
leisure. Fourthly, do they pray in faith? Alas, they have no promises to lay
hold on. Again, do men aim at Gods glory in their prayers? And do they use
the means to accomplish their prayers? I am persuaded these be things scarce
thought of, much less practiced, but by a few: well, let us observe the true
properties of supplication, and we shall find to our comfort, that he is a
God hearing prayers, and if he please not to give us the very individual
things which we beg of him, yet we shall have something that is as good or
better for us, so as he shall be glorified and we comforted: So much for
Ezra his first act. The second act performed by him is his confession, the Text
says, [when he had confessed.] Augustine says, confession is twofold,
confessio laudis, a confession of praise, and confessio fraudis, a confession
of sin: First, there is confessio laudis, a confession of praise, such was
that of our Savior Christ, in Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee O Father Lord of
heaven and earth, Matthew. 11.25.
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to babes. The second is, confessio fraudis, the confession of a
man's sin, and this is either public or private: First, public, when the
Minister goes before in confessing sin, and all the people follow after him;
this is the custom of our and all reformed Churches. Secondly, there is a
private confession, and that is of a particular man, and this is fourefold;
First, when he confesses his sin to God, as did David, Psalm. 32.5. says
he, Psalm 32.5.
I confessed my sin unto the Lord, and my iniquity I have not hid. Secondly*
when a man confesses his sin to the whole Church, this was that which the
incestuous Corinthian was driven unto. Thirdly, it is to the Minister in
private, and such was that of the people to John Baptist, Matthew. 3.6. It is
said, Matthew. 3.6.
they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins: such also was
that of David to Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. Lastly, 2 Samuel 12.13.
it is to a man's neighbor or brother, as when a man that has offended his
brother goes and confesses his fault, desiring him to be reconciled to him.
This is that which our blessed Savior aims at, Matthew. 5.24.25. Iam. 5.16.
Matthew. 5.24.25. and which S. James means, Iam. 5.16. Now for confession,
whether public or private, first, it is that which is commanded: Numb 5 6.7.
Look into Numb. 5 7. See what God says there, When a man or a woman shall
commit any sin, and do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be
guilty: then they shall confess their sin which they have done. Secondly,
forgiveness is promised to those that do confess their sins, Prove. 28.13.
1 John 1.9.
Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses his sins shall have mercy. And in 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all iniquity. Thirdly, we have examples of holy
penitents going before us in this way; as David, Nehemiah, Daniel, the
Prodigal, and those Converts in Acts 19.18. The Text says, Acts 19.18.
They confessed, and showed their works: This confession stands; First, in
accusing our selves for our sins in general: but more especially for our
particular sins; thus did David, 2 Samuel 12. he accused himself for his
adultery and murder: 2 Samuel 12.
and in like manner, Paul that chosen vessel accuses himself of being a
blasphemer and a persecuter; yea, the chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13.15.
Secondly, 1 Timothy 1.13.15.
it stands in a man's judging himself, when he passes the sentence of
condemnation against himself: Thus did David, he confesses that he had done
wickedly, 2 Samuel 24.17.
2 Samuel 24.17. and Daniel acknowledges that to him and his people belonged
nothing but shame: This is to judge a man's self, which if men do, they shall
save God a labor, for he that judges himself, shall eseape the judgment of
the Lord.

I desire you to practice this second act of Ezra; do not only pray unto God,
Use.
but likewise confess your sins unto him; I do not charge on you that kind
of confession which our Adversaries of the Church of Rome charge upon their
people: they tie a man; First, to a particular enumeration and confession of
all his sins to the Priest. Secondly, they say, if men do not particularly
confess their sins, they cannot obtain pardon. But thirdly, if a man shall
do so, then he deserves to be pardoned. But we are against them on these
grounds. First, there is no precept in the Word of God, which commands a man to
make a particular enumeration and confession of his sins to the Priest.
Secondly, there is no promise to encourage us to do it Thirdly, there is no
example for it in the whole Book of God. Nay, I will prove that without this
particular enumeration of sins, remission has been granted, as to the woman
which was a sinner in the City, Christ pronounces her pardoned without a
particular enumeration of her sins, Luke 7.48.
Luke 7.48. and thus he pardoned Zaccheus, who only made a general confession
of his sins, and obtained remission. Secondly, we oppose them herein on this
ground, because they charge that on people which is impossible, for as David
says, Psalm. 19.12. who can understand his faults? Psalm. 19.12.
and yet he was better skilled in this kind of Arithmetic then any Romanist:
and if he could not reckon his sins, no man else can. Our sins are as the
sands upon the Seashore for multitude, which no mortal wight can number: And
says Solomon, the just man falls seven times a day, Prove. 24.16.
Prove. 24.16. Therefore it is impossible for any man to confess all his sins
particularly. Thirdly, this is the wrack of the soul, for such a man goes away
without any plenary remission of his sins; for if it be so, that he that
means to obtain pardon must make a particular enumeration of all his sins,
then it is certain that he must go away without remission, because it is
impossible to confess all his sins particularly. Lastly, this is that which
the primitive Christians knew not: it was a yoke too heavy for them to bear;
and one of their own says, Tertullian never knew any particular confession,
but to the Church. Again, when it grew up in aftertimes, it was put down
wisely; For when a Bishop of Constantinople perceived that a Priest under
pretense of confession, did with Eli his Sons abuse a woman at the door of
the sanctuary, he presently put it down. Again, they of Rome make it the
picklock of Kingdoms, for by this particular confession, they unlock all the
secrets of Princes I charge not this on people, but I wish them to acknowledge
their sins in the presence of God: Neither is this so easy as most men think
it to be, for since our fall we are so prone to conceal our sins, that if
there be but one bush in Paradise, we will find it to hide our selves in;
but let us not hide our sins as Adam hid himself, but let us with the
prodigal confess them, and that is the way to have them pardoned: But some
will demand and say, how shall we confess our sins? To this I answer; First,
we must confess them, with shame, thus did Job, Job 42.6.
Job 42.6. I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. And thus did the
poor Publican, he confesses that he was not worthy to lift up his eyes unto
Heaven. Thus also did the woman which was a sinner in the City, she was so
full of shame for her sins, that she dares not come before our Savior, but
comes behind his back as he sat at meat, and washed his feet with her tears.
Secondly, we must do it ingenuously, it must not be extorted from us as it
was from Achan, but we must willingly confess our iniquities. Thirdly, we
must do it with sorrow and contrition of soul. Fourthly, with anger. Fifthly,
with honest hearts, that is, with an assured purpose to leave our impieties:
therefore it is said, Prove. 28.13.
Prove. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy.
Lastly, we must confess our sins fully; there must be no retaining,
excusing or extenuating of sin, for God knows the depth of our deceitful
hearts: ye know how it is with a beggar, if he have one soar worse then
another, he will be suit to lay that open, that he may move passengers to
commiseration; So we should not only confess our lesser, but our gross
iniquities, which is the next way to have God merciful to us: Alas, what will
it avail us to keep one Achan? when that one is enough to trouble a whole
Host; what shall we gain by reserving one Jonah, when that one will hazard
the loss of the ship, and the lives of all them that sail in it? Let us
therefore confess our sins according to the manner prescribed, and then we
may be confident, that God will forgive our iniquities, and blot out all our
offenses. We come now to the manner of Ezra his confession, laid down in these
words, [weeping, and casting himself down before the house of the Lord.] The
first thing in it, is [his weeping] and this has ever been an usual
concomitant of prayer. Psalm. 6.6.
See it in David, Psalm. 6.6. I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I
my bed to swim, and water my couch with my tears. Mark, he made his prayer
to God, and tears went along with it. The like we see in the same Prophet,
Psalm. 42.3.
Psalm. 42.3. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, Where is thy God? The like we see in the sinner in the City,
Luke 7.38.
Luke 7.38. and we see it in Ezra in our Text, he not only prays but weeps.
And there is great reason, why we should weep in regard of sin:

a wife, or a child, but what great cause have we to mourn especially for our
sins? though we lose our friends by death, yet we may meet them again in
the Kingdom of Heaven, if we live and die in Gods fear: but if we mourn not
for sin, we shall never see the face of God to our comfort. Micha like a
foolish Idolater wept for the loss of his carved image, Judge. 17.23 shall he
weep for the loss of that which was no God? Judge. 17 23.
and shall not we mourn for sin, which deprives us of the true God?

gnashing of teeth, to all eternity. Therefore we have good cause to shed
tears; yea, many tears for our sins, both in regard of the good we lose by
them, as also the miseries they bring upon us. But me thinks I hear some say,
are tears necessarily required of all those that truly repent? I answer no,
for there be some constitutions which afford no tears; (I have read a story
of one that ever laughed) and though such persons cannot burst into tears for
sin, yet they may inwardly as truly mourn for sin, as he that sheds
rivers of tears. Secondly, though a man be apt to tears, yet the affliction
may be such, that a man cannot weep: I read of one that could not but weep
when his friend went to be executed, but when his two Sons went the same
way, his sorrow was so great, that he could not shed a tear: Great sorrows
stupifie men, so that they be as full vessels, which will not run. Thirdly,
we read in the Scripture, as of tears without repentance, as in Esau, Genesis
27.38.
Genes. 27.38. He shed many tears, but left not his profaneness: So in Mal.
2.13. we read of some, Mal. 2.13.
that covered the Altar of the Lord with tears: yet at the same time they were
impenitent; So also of repentance without tears, Luke 18.13.
as in Luke 18.13. we read not of a tear that the poor Publican shed, only
he smote his hand on his breast, saying, O God, be merciful to me a sinner:
yet he went away justified: Acts 2.
And in Acts 2. we read that the new Converts were pricked in their hearts,
but not of any tears that fell from their eyes: and the Thief upon the Cross
was a true penitent, for he went to Heaven, but we hear not of a tear which
he shed: but withal give me leave to tell you, if any be apt to tears, at
first or last God touches their hearts to weep for their sins. Secondly, if
any can weep for the loss of wife, children, or any other worldly thing, and
not for their transgressions, they may question, whether ever their repentance
were sound or no. Lastly, if a man can weep for his sins, no soul receives
such satisfaction, as that soul does.

It should exhort us to weep and mourn for our sins: Use.
We spend tears in abundance for these secular things, but we should spare
them there, and spend them here; Is it not a foolery to wash a Stable with
sweet water? Thy tears be the sweetest water in the world, therefore spend
them on thy sins, I am sure thou can not spend them better: but as it is in
the times of solemnity, when the Bells ring, all the clocks be tied up: So I
fear it is now adays, for such is the jovisance of men, that they forget to
weep for sin; but if they would call their ways to remembrance, they would
be sorry and weep, whilst others sing and rejoice: Every of us have cause to
weep, for not a Mothers Son of us, but has brought the fuel of sin to
kindle Gods wrath among us by sending the Pestilence to destroy us, and it is
better to weep here, then hereafter. The second thing in the manner is, [hee
cast himself down, before the house of the Lord.] This has been the custom
of Gods people, the more to testify their sorrow: We find many expressions
of sorrow in the Scripture, as fasting, weeping, rending the garment, putting
on sackcloth, sprinkling ashes on their heads, knocking the breast, striking
the thigh, and this in our Text, which is casting a man's self down before the
house of the Lord: Thus did Joshua, he fell to the earth on his face, before
the Ark of the Lord, Josh. ^.6.
Josh. 7. 6. That which I gather from hence is this Observation.

Where repentance is true inward, it will put it self outward. Where
repentance is sincere, it will not only alter a man's judgment, to make him
with Paul to think himself the worst of sinners: Secondly, it will not only so
humble him inwardly, that he will not care for the revilings of wicked men, as
we see in David when Shimei railed on him; but as it will have this inward
effect, so it will have outward effects also; it will make him fast, and weep,
and smite the breast: it will force him to abstain from those delights, which
otherwise he might lawfully take: Nay, it will turn every thing to him into
sorrow; when another man laughes, he will mourn to see him laugh, and holy
Bradford the Martyr cannot sit at his meat, but tears trickle down his cheeks:
and it is impossible, but where repentance is true within, but that it should
show it self without.

Those that find not this in themselves, Use.
may suspect their repentance: I would not have men to use external
expressions of repentance, on purpose to be seen of men, for repentance ill
becomes a Stage; it is said of Peter, that he went out and wept bitterly; it
seems he regarded not whether any man saw him, so God took knowledge of him:
and as a Father says truly, oculi virorum basilisci sunt operum bonorum, the
eyes of men are the basiliskes of good works. Our blessed Savior would have a
man anoint his head And wash his face when he fasted, that he might not
appear unto men to fast, but unto God: it is a part of Iehu his humor, to do
good works to be seen of men, but Gods child as he uses outward expressions
of repenting, so these proceed from inward sanctification. [He cast himself
down before the house of the Lord.] Why so? it was the more to stir him up to
humiliation: he seems to say, What? shall thy people enjoy the privileges of
thy house? and shall they thus irritate and provoke thee? thus the servants of
God have been conversant in those courses which might make their prayers most
fervent: Dan. 6.10.
it is said of Daniel, Dan. 6.10. that he prayed thrice a day, and when he
prayed, he opened his window toward Jerusalem, which was, instar flabelli
devotioni, as a pair of bellows to blow up his devotion: and this is a
strain of Solomon's prayer, 1 King. 8.44.
1 Kings 8.44. If thy people go out to battle against their enemies
whithersoever thou shall send them, and shall pray unto the Lord, toward the
house that I have built for thy name; then hear thou in heaven their prayer
and their supplication, and maintain their cause: Psalm. 5.7.
and David says, Psalm. 5.7. In thy fear will I worship toward thine holy
Temple: all this was but to inflame the affections of these holy men in that
religious duty.

Sermon VI.
EZRA 10. the last words of the first Verse. There assembled to him out of
Israel a very great Congregation of men, and women, and children; for the
people wept very sore.


WE come now to the first fruit of Ezra his humiliation, and that is the
convening of a great Congregation to him; before that he had humbled himself,
as we have heard, we find not that any took it to heart, although their sins
occasioned it; but this compassion of his, made them congregate, and weep very
sore; so that Ezra has here the glory of being an example of goodness to
others; and it is as great a glory as can be in this life, for a man to go
before others in well doing: it was so here with Ezra, he begins, and the rest
follow: What a glory was it to Abraham, that among all the men in the world he
should be called the friend of God? What a glory was it to Sarah that she,
above all other women, should be called the mother of believing women? What a
glory was it to Solomon, that he should be the first man that should build a
Temple to God? What a glory was it to Hezekiah, that he should be made choice
of to restore the Passover, which for so long a time had been intermitted?
What a glory was it to David, that he led the people into the house of God,
with the voice of singing and praise? Psalm. 42.4.
42 Psalm. 4. It is a great commendation which Saint Paul gives to Epenetus, 16
Romans 5. he calls him, Romans 16.5.
the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ. Ye know, the first fruits were ever
best pleasing to God, and surely, for a man to be the first in a Country,
which shall give up his name to Christ, it must needs be a very great honor;
Chrysostom says on that place, if it be such a matter to be great in the
world, what is it then, to be eminent for Piety? Nay, says he, this good man
was not only the first fruits of Achaia, but he was a door or entrance to all
that believed in that place: so it was a great glory to Mary Magdalene, that
our Blessed Savior would vouchsafe to appear to her first after his
Resurrection: and it was no less glory to the people of Antioch, that they
above all others should be first called Christians; it was no small honor to
the Thessalonians, which Paul testifies of them, in the 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. that
they were ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia; 1 Thessalonians. 1 7.
and he says as much to the honor of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 9 2.
2 Cor. 9.2. that their zeal had provoked very many.

holy pride, to be the first in good actions: He that did first invent
Printing, his Name will be famous to the end of the world: so now, to be the
first that believes in a Town, to be the first that puts a good law in
execution, to lay the first stone in a Pious work, this is no small, but a
very great honor: but on the other side, what a shame is it for a man to be
the first that shall break a good Law, to be the first that shall invent a new
fashion, to be the first in inventing wicked games, and new ways of drinking?
nay, there have been those that have invented new pleasures, as Sardanapalus;
and new torments, as in the Primitive times, the first experiment whereof, was
made upon the poor Christians; and in the Romans 1.30. among the catalogue of
sins and sinners there spoken of, Romans 1.30.
ye shall find inventers of evil things, to be of the number: O it is an
evil thing to be such, and yet we have such as these in these times; what
strange oaths are coined and devised now adays? they are such, as I fear
once to name them: what strange fashions are invented by others? such as our
Forefathers never knew nor saw: what strange ways of drinking have the sons
of Belial devised? by the yard, by the dye, by the dosen, by the score: nay,
what beginners of strange opinions have we amongst us? and what strange kinds
of cheats are there in the world? they are such, as no wariness of Laws can
take hold of the Authors: we wonder at new diseases that come amongst us
every year, but we may cease to wonder, when we consider what new sins be
every day committed: therefore God sends strange diseases amongst us, because
we are guilty of new impieties: in the Name of God, let us affect being first
in well-doing; but let us not so much as move to be the last in evil: I will
not excuse him that follows an ill example, but his judgment shall be
greatest, that gave an ill example, that dug the pit for another to fall
into; for our Savior has said it, Woe be unto him by whom the offense comes.
But will some say, I could be content to follow any in a good way or work, but
I would feign have others show me the way: To whom I answer, that if Noah had
stood upon this, he had never built the Arc; and if Nehemiah had stood on
this, the walls of Jerusalem had not been rebuilt: had the Leaper in the
Gospel stood on this, he had never returned to give thanks, for ten were
cleansed, only one returned to give our Savior thanks: so if the Samaritan
had stood on this, the poor man that lay by the highway side half dead, had
died outright: how can the Kingdom of heaven suffer violence, if men strive
not to go before each other in goodness? We say, he is an ill horse that will
not lead the way, but only follow; and I will not give a button for that
Christian, that will do no more then he sees others do: How do ye in your
affairs in the world? if a commodity come from beyond the Seas, of which you
stand in need, do you stay till others bid money for it? no, but with all
speed, ye get it into your own hands, and shall there be such a moderation in
spiritual things? well, take heed of this, else that may befall you, which
befell the Scribes and Pharisees, Publicans and Harlots will go before you
into heaven: be persuaded then to be the first in good actions, and when thou
art in a good way, keep in it; for unless thou persesevere in well-doing, it
will avail thee nothing, that thou were once good: it did Judas no good at all
to be of the twelve, when once he fell away; and it shall not do man any good,
to lay a good foundation, if he build not a good structure upon it; for to
begin in the spirit, and to end in the flesh, to set out good Wine at the
first, and then that which is worse, is the Devils banquet, and no other.
Further, as Ezra had the honor to be an example to others in goodness, so now
see the effect of it, [a great company of men, women and children assembled
together.] And why so? Doubtless for no other cause, but to humble themselves,
as he had done: So efficacious and powerful is the example of goodness in
great ones: see it in Joshua, when he protests, that he and his house will
serve the Lord, the people presently say, that they also will serve the Lord.
Josh. 24.15.18. the like we see in Nehemiah, Josh. 24.15.18
he no sooner showed himself willing to reedifie the walls of Jerusalem, but
all the people set their heart and hand to the work: we see the same in the
King of Nineveh, as soon as he put on sackcloth, all his Subjects did the
like: it is said of Augustus, that in his time Rome was full of Scholars,
because he affected Learning: in the time of Commodus, it was full of Fencers,
because he loved that exercise; and in Nero his time, it was full of Musicians,
for he took great delight in Music: thus that old verse is verified, Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis, all men compose their manners to his who is
their Governor; the truth is, the example of great ones, is the Lodestone,
which draws inferiors after it; that is the Compass, by which most men
sail: and as it is so with those who be great in the State, so with those
which are eminent in the Church, their Godliness draws many to goodness: how
admirable is that which Nazianzen reports of St. Basil, he says, he thundered
in his Preaching, and lightened in his conversation; he was like another John
Baptist, who was a burning and shining light, Jo^n 5.35.
Joh. 5.35. he burned in himself by sincerity, and shined to others by a godly
conversation: and what was the effect of this? we find in the same verse,
that all men rejoiced in his light: thus it was with Ezra, in our Text, he
weeps and mournes, and that so works upon the people, that they are presently
moved to do the same.

in oculo mundi, in the eye of the world, and if they be not godly, their
failings be taken notice of more than others, and though their offenses be but
small, yet they hurt much by reason of their example: a Wem in the back, is
not so much as a Wart in the face, because the one is hid, but the other is
obvious to all beholders; and a private man's sin is nothing so great as the
sin of a public person, for the errors of great men are observed strangely:
as ye see it is with the Sun, when it is not eclipsed, few look upon it, but
when it is in an Eclipse, all men's eyes almost are fixed upon it: so it is with
the sins of eminent persons, their failings, though small, run into the
observation of many, when as great sins of private men are scarce taken notice
of. Neither is this all, but by this means other men are heartned on in sin,
for inferiors take a liberty to sin, when they see their superiors do the
same; ipsi non solum corrumpuntur, sed alios corrumpunt, they are not only
corrupted themselves, but they corrupt others by their evil example; they
poison many by their vicious life, which is as a canker that frets, and as a
gangrene that corrupts, and they do not more hurt by their sin, then by
their example.

Ezra was* let them not only Preach, but live well; for if Aaron shall have
his bells, but not his Pomegranates, he may sound well, but he will sent ill:
if a Physician shall prescribe that Physic to another in the same disease with
himself, to recover him, and yet will refuse to use it himself, what can men
say less, then that he is an enemy to his own health? and when Ministers
shall Preach that to others, which themselves will not practice, is the next
way for them to be cast-awayes: neither is this all, but by an ill life they
infect many; it is said of Saint Paul, Gal. 2.11.14.
Gal. 2.11.14. that when he came to Antioch, he withstood Peter to the face,
because he had compelled the Gentiles to live as the Jews: we must not think,
that Peter used any violence to constrain them, but they took boldness by his
example, and therefore as Paul says there, he was to be blamed. Let all such
therefore be exhorted, not to bind heavy burdens upon others, which
themselves will not touch with one of their fingers; if they do, I know it
will be laid unto them, Medice cura teipsum, Physician heal thyself* and for
you that be the people, not to leave you without an admonition, it will
advantage you nothing to say, that your Governors and Ministers have been bad,
and therefore you are no better, but remember what our Lord and Master says,
Do what they say, not as they do: therefore, when you have holy Precepts and
Patterns, make conscience to follow them: but if neither of these will prevail
with you, judge whose fault it is, if ye fail, and fall short of your
Salvation, [there assembled a very great company of men, women and children,
for the people wept sore:] the sin was great and general, therefore all
assembled, that they might be humbled together: the point of Doctrine which
arises hence is this.

Where the sin is general and epidemicall, good reason that all should be
joined together in humiliatition: in the 1 Samuel 7.6. the people had committed a
great sin, 1 Samuel 7 6.
therefore they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and powered it out
before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said, We have sinned against the
Lord: they were conscious to themselves, that all had sinned, therefore they
were all humbled: Neh. 9.1, 2.
the like we see in Neh. 9.1, 2. it is said, All the children of Israel
assembled with fasting and sackcloth, and earth upon them, and confessed their
sins, and the iniquities of their Fathers: and Joel calls for this, Joel 1.14.
Joel 2.15, 16,
Joel 1.14. and 2.15, 16. and this is that which Solomon prescribes as a
general receipt, in time of affliction, 1 King. 31.39.
1 Kings 8.38, says he, What prayer or supplication soever be made by any men,
or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own
heart, and spread forth his hand toward this House* then hear thou in Heaven,
thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according to
his ways.

When we shall see that the sins of the times do overflow, Use
and be grown up to heaven, as at this time they are; it shall be fit, though a
publik humiliation be not prescribed by Authority, to make our humiliation
general by every man's sorrowing for his own sins. (Beloved) were it not for
some faithful Moses that intercedes for us, this ground would not bear us;
but as for the ten thousands of Israel, they are so far from humiliation,
that as God complains, Isa. 22.12, 13.
Isa. 22.12, 13. When he called to weeping and mourning, to baldness and to
girding with sackcloth: they would admit of nothing but joy and gladness,
slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking Wine, saying, Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Which of us is there, but must
needs confess, that our sins deserve the wrath of God* Shall we all cry
guilty? and shall we not all be humble? It is fearful; The Court complains
of the City, and the City of the Court, and the Country of both, when as all
are in fault: O say they in the City, Those of the Court are so horribly wicked
that we are all like to smart for their profaneness: and says the Court,
Such is the cheating of the Citizens, that they will draw down judgments upon
us all: thus one accuses another, but in the mean time, who smites his hand on
his breast, and says, What have I done? Well, every man must have a hand in
the general humiliation, because all have been guilty of provoking God to
indignation; therefore he that excepts himself, deceives himself: Great
judgments are now upon us, and greater are feared and expected, because
deserved; therefore let us humble our selves in the presence of Almighty God,
that those judgments which are feared, may be recalled, and those which lie
heavy upon us, may be removed from us. But mark the particular numeration
which die Spirit of God mak^s, [men, women, children.] First men, and good
reason men should lead the dance, and go before the rest in a good way:
Abraham went first out of his Country, and Sarah followed him: it is said of
Elkanah, That he went out of his City yearly to worship, and to sacrifice to
the Lord in Shiloh, and be carried his two wives with him. Men should lead the
way to their Wives, for it is a shame unto men, that women should excel them
in goodness: it was so with the wife of Phinehas, 1 Samuel 4.21.
1 Samuel 4.21. she was a gracious woman, but he was a son of Belial: so it was
also with Abigail, she was a virtuous woman, but Nabal her husband was wicked:
nay, if a man be good, yet if he be exceeded by his wife, it is a shame to him;
Manoah the father of Sampson, was a good man, but if we mark what is recorded
of his wife and him, we will say, that his wife was the better of the two: out
of doubt, the Shunamite was a good man, but of the two, his wife was the
better, for she gave him counsel to make that good provision for the man of
God, 2 Kings 4.9, 10. and in the time that our Savior was on the earth, 2
King. 4.9, 10.
there were diverse women famous for goodness: I press it no further then
thus; you that are men, I confess, you have more honor put upon you, then
women have, and I know, you are apt enough to arrogate as much to your selves;
but take heed that whilst you go before them in honor, that they prevent you
not in the best things; if it shall be so, I say no more, and I cannot say
less to you, then Jacob said to Reuben, Your dignity is gone. the second sort
of people spoken of, are [Women,] and indeed the service of God is charged upon
them, as well as upon men, as in the 1. Tim. 2.10.15. 1 Pet. 3, 4. and they
ought to join in humiliation, as well as men: 1 Timothy 3 10, 15. 1 Pet. 3.4.
nay mark in the 2. of Joel; The Bride is charged to come out of her
bride-chamber, to mourn; Joel 2.
she that might plead most exemption, is not excepted: And when the King of
Nineveh made that Edict, that all should fast, it were a fond thing to think,
that women were excluded: Isa. 32.12.
in Isa. 32. 11. the Spirit of God says, Tremble ye women that are at ease, be
troubled ye careless women: strip ye, and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth on
your loins: so that it is charged on that sex, to be humbled, as well as upon
men; and ye must know, that the sins of women draw on judgments, as well as
the sins of men: in Jerem. 7.18. The women's making cakes to the queen of
heaven, Jere. 7.28.
did provoke God to anger, and hastened his judgments upon the land: and the
daughters of men drew on the deluge, as well as the sons of God: It were a
poor thing to think, that God hated the perjuries of Troy, and loved the
perjuries of Rome, that he hated the sins of men, and loved the sins of
women; this cannot be imagined of him, who is a God of pure eyes, and hates
sin, wheresoever he finds it.

Let me press that which has bin said upon you of that Sex, Use
that ye may humble your selves for your sins: there is much cause for it, as
your vanity in apparel, your going beyond your means and calling, your
negligence in Gods Service, your idolizing your children, your froward
behavior to your husbands; these and many more sins whereof you are guilty,
call for your repentance and tears: and let not the fairest of you all fear
that the shedding a few tears will spoil your beauty, but if you should
chance to hurt your faces by weeping, I am sure you would do good to your
souls: I read in the Ecclesiastical Story of one Pambus, who seeing a woman
dress her self curiously and lasciviously, he could not forbear weeping, and
being demanded the reason, he gave two reasons for it, first, that he was not
so careful for his soul as she was for her tiring; secondly, that she wept
not for her sins, which drew tears from his eyes: and shall others weep for
the sins of women, and not they for their own sins? in the name of God
humble your selves in his presence, that when he sees you poor in spirit he
may exalt you. Thirdly, [The children came,] What? the children join in
humiliation? Yes, why not? for God was offended, and they had reason to be
humbled for it. Secondly, though they were not actors in sin, yet they were
guilty of Adams transgression. Thirdly, they could not excuse themselves, for
besides their original sin, they had committed many actual sins; for I
suppose none came to this assembly, but such as were of some understanding, and
such, though little ones, are proud and wanting in duty to parents, and love to
brethren; and such will speak wickedly and falsely, before they can talk
perfectly: there have been excellent virtues found in little ones; Samuel, when
he was a child, ministered before the Lord; and in the time of our Blessed
Savior, the children cried, Hosanna to the King of Israel: I therefore direct
my speech to little ones, let sin be detested by you in your younger years,
learn the trade of fearing and serving God, when you are young, and it will
never be forgotten as long as you live. The second thing set down in this
verse is, [that the people wept very sore.] What was the reason? the Reason
shall be the Observation.

Great sins must have a great measure of sorrow. In Psalm. 6.6. David having
committed great sins, Psalm. 6.6.
made his bed to swim, and watered his couch with his tears: Nay, he made them
not only his Physic, but his meat, ^sa^. 42.3.
Psalm. 42.3. My tears have been my meat day and night: it was thus with Peter,
he had committed a foul sin, in denying his Lord and Master, therefore he
went out and wept, (...), bitterly: it was so with Mary Magdalene, she was a
great sinner, therefore she shed many tears: and the incestuous Corinthian
grieved sore for his foul sin: the Church says in the Lamentations, Mine
eyes drop down daily; the tears stood still in her eyes, and trickled down her
cheeks in great abundance, because she knew her self guilty of many sins:
This is that which Cyprian subscribeth to, says he, as we are sensible of
great sins, which we commit, so let us spend tears in abundance for them.

It is to censure the slightness of sorrow which men bestow upon their sins,
Use
though great and grievous: but if the heart be a daily fountain of sin, as
sure I am it is, I know no reason, but our eyes should be Rivers of tears:
seeing we have deserved to be in that place, where is nothing but weeping and
wailing, there is good cause we should weep here for our sins, that we may
avoid those eternal flames; Nay, though God have pardoned our sins, yet let us
remember them with grief and sorrow, that we may be the more humbled for them:
ye lay your flesh in brine, to keep it from putrefying; and there is no better
way in the world to humble us, then to call to mind our former iniquities: Ye
say, much rain makes the highways foul, and so it is* but the more tears we
shed, the cleaner will our souls be; for repentant tears cleanse better then
either Soape or Nitre. To conclude this verse, all the people saw Ezra mourn,
therefore they weep with him: from whence I collect thus much;

Sin must have sorrow at one time or other: says the Wiseman, Prove. 29.6.
Prove. 29.6. In the transgression of an evil man, there is a snare: and the
truth is, in the commission of every sin, a ground is laid for sorrow; nay,
let me tell you, the sweeter sins have been to men, the soarer shall be the
remembrance of them, when God sets them before their eyes. Job 13.26.
See it in Job, 13.26 Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me
possess the iniquities of my youth. The sins committed in youth, men account
the sweetest sins, and yet the remembrance of these was most grievous to Job.
We see the same in David, when he had committed that sweet sin, as men call
it, and had layn nine Months in it, at last he calls it to remembrance, and
it brought him so much grief, that he thought he had lost the favor of God,
and therefore he says, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. But it will
be said, we find it not always thus, for there are some that sin, and
never have sorrow in all their lives, but dye in peace: I will suppose this, but
yet the Doctrine is true, for I say, sin must have sorrow at one time or
other, and if such men have not sorrow here, to be sure, they shall have it
hereafter.

hic mordeant, ne in aeternum excrucient, let thy sins bite thee here, lest
they torment thee for ever hereafter: tears will do thee good now, but if
once a man be over the threshold of this life, though then he would weep a
whole Ocean of Tears, they would do him no good.

Sermon VII.
EZRA 10.2. Then Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam
answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, etc.


BEfore we fall upon this verse, we have a few things more to handle out of
the last words of the first verse; the words are these, [for the people wept
very sore:] that the multitude should come together, which was the first fruit
of Ezra his humiliation, it was no great matter, for the common rout be apt to
assemble on the least occasion; says our Savior, speaking to the people
concerning John Baptist, Matthew. 11.7.
Matthew. 11.7. What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with
the wind? as if the shaking of a feather, would bring the multitude together:
Acts 19.29.32.
and in Acts 19.29.32. we find that the whole city was full of confusion, and
rushed into the theater with one accord: and yet the text says, The more part
knew not wherefore they were come together: but now for the other effect [that
they wept, sore] there was comfort for Ezra: That which I gather from hence is
this:

What comfort it pleases God to give his Ministers here, in that happy fruit
of peoples humiliation. So great is the comfort of this kind, that there
cannot be a greater. I do not think, but at this very time, the tears stood
in Ezra his eyes, yet when he saw tears distill from the peoples eyes, it made
him glad at the heart: do you not think it was a great comfort to Nathan, to
see David so penitent, when he came from God, to detect and reprove him for
his adultery and murder? Mark what the Baptist says, Joh 3.29.
John 3.29. the friend of the Bridegroom which stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly, because of the Bride grooms voice: the meaning whereof is
this, That it is the joy of Gods Ministers, when the voice of Christ our
Bridegroom is accepted: See this in Paul, how great was his joy for the good
success of his Ministry? Romans 1.8.
in Romans 1 8. there he says, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all,
that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world: his joy was, that he
had taken pains among the Romans, to good purpose: so in the 2 Cor. 2.2. 2
Cor. 2.2.
If I make you sorry, who is he then that makes me glad, but the same which is
made sorry by me? he knew that by that means the old leaven was purged out of
them, which must needs make him rejoice: 2 Cor. 2.14.
and in the 14. Verse of the same Chapter, he says, Thanks be unto God, which
always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the favor of his
knowledge by us in every place: He thought it worthy Thankesgiving, that he
had not labored in vain: the like we see 2 Thessalonians. 2.19. 2 Thessalonians 2.19.
What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? Are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his camming? Yes, you are our glory and
joy: and in the 13. Verse, Verse. 13.
he says, for this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye
received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but (as it is the truth) the Word of God, which effectually works
also in you that believe: so in 2 Cor. 3.7. We were comforted over you
brethren, 2 Cor 3.7, 9.
in all our affliction and distress, by your faith: and in the nineth Verse,
he says, What thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy
wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God? In that good St. Paul saw the
success of his labors, it gave him infinite satisfaction: Nay, he regarded
not his shackles, so long as they neglected not the grace offered them by his
Ministry: and to Philemon, he testifies his exceeding joy for the conversion
of Onesimus: this was the comfort of that good Bishop of Neocesarea, of whom
mention is made in the Ecclesiastical story, when he was to dye he comforted
himself with this, that whereas there were not seventeen believers in that City
when he came thither, at the time of his death he knew not of seventeen
unbeleevers in that place; such a blessing had God given to his endeavors. And
for the further proof of this point, the truth of it will best appear by the
contrary, to wit, the great sorrow which is caused to the Ministers of God,
when they see no fruits of their labors: what a grief was it to Isaiah; that
he had labored in vain, and spent his strength for nothing, Isa. Isa. 49.4
49.4. and Jeremiah was so grieved that his labors were ineffectuall, that he
resolves to speak no more in the Name of the Lord, Jerem. 20.9. Ezekiel. 2.3.
Jer. 20.9. In the 2. Ezekiel. 3. God says to that Prophet, Son of man, I send
thee to a rebellious nation, and thou shall say to them, thus says the Lord,
but surely they will not hear thee: what a cooling card was this for the
Prophet? Ezekiel. 3.14.
and in the Ezekiel. 3.14. he says, I went in the bitterness of my Spirit, but
the hand of the Lord was strong upon me: as if he had said, had I not been
swayed by a Divine power, I had not gone* this, as it is thought, was the cause
that Jonah waved his Commission of going to Nineveh: he found that he had
been unsuccessefull among his own people, and therefore despaired of doing good
among the Ninevites: and to speak the truth, although I know our reward shall
be as great as theirs who have won many souls, if we be faithful in the
discharge of our duty; yet when the Minister shall pipe, and the people will
not dance, when he shall sow the Rocks, and plough the sands, and with Peter,
shall fish all night, and catch nothing, it cannot but be a great corrosive to
his soul, and a vexation to his Spirit: every man desires to see that thrive,
which is committed to his charge: the Father joys to see his Children prosper
and do well, so does the Master, to see his servant thrive, the nurse her
Child, the Shepherd his flock, and the Minister is a man as well as the rest,
therefore he desires that the people committed to his charge, should thrive
and prosper in grace and goodness: men grow in grace, under a man's Ministry,
it makes much for the glory of God, which every Minister is to prefer before
the salvation of his own soul, as we see in the examples of Moses and Paul.
Paul, 1 Cor. 9.2. 1 Cor. 9.2.
Ye are the seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord. Dan. 12.3. Dan. 12.3.
They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever
and ever.



nor your kind entertainment, neither your liberallity to us, which pleases us
half so well, as to find the seal of our Ministry upon you, in your godly
walking: I therefore say unto you as St. Paul to the Philipians; fulfill ye
our joy, by obeying the truth which we deliver: ye cannot more honor us than
in this, and this will make way for your eternal salvation. A second thing I
note is this; as God gave Ezra a great deal of comfort, so he adds to his
comfort in this, that by his humiliation he wrought not only on the baser sort
of people, but on great persons, such as were eminent among the Jews: which
being so (as app^ares in Shecaniah and others) it affords this observation.

Above all comforts this is the greatest, Doctor.
When God so blesses the labors of his Ministers, that they win great persons
to God, when they convert those who be as Saul higher by the head than their
brethren. I remember what the Lord says to Isaiah, Isa. 49.7.
Isa. 49.7. To him that is despised in soul, Kings shall see and arise. As if
God should have said, I will so bless thy labors, that thou shall convert
Kings unto me; and this was no small comfort to the Prophet. And if Jonah had
been well advised, he would have been glad at the heart that his Message had
wrought so effectually on the King and Nobles of Nineveh. How did St. Paul
rejoice in Sergius Paulus the Governor, whom he converted to the faith? (...)
^^ 12.
Acts 13.12. His joy for his conversion, made him so bitter against Flymaes the
Sorcerer, who withstood him, and sought to turn away the Deputy from the
faith. Acts 18.8.
And in Acts 18.8. it was no small comfort to the same Apostle, that he had
caught Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue in the net of the Gospel. And
there is great reason why the Minister should be comforted when he wins great
men: Do any of the Ruers believe in him? but this people which know not the
Law are cursed. Joh. 7.48.49. But yet they spoke untrue in that; John 7.48, 49.
John 12.42.
for Joh. 12. 42. Even among the chief Rulers many believed in him, but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be cast
out of the Synagogue.

Ezra, to labor the conversion of great and eminent persons, and to do what
they can to bring them to sorrow for their sins; and I shall desire those who
be called to speak to those that be high, to rowse them up by sharp reproves,
that they may be drawn out of the snare of the Devil, and be saved: for
whilst Ministers shall dawb with untempered Mortar, and sow pillowes under
their elbows, by singing placentia, pleasing things unto them, who deserve to
be reproved; they are so far from working on them to conversion, that they
more and more harden them in their sins.

Theodosius that good Emperor thanked God more, quod Christianus crat, that he
was a Christian, quam caput imperii; than for being an Emperor: and though St.
Paul could have boasted of many external privileges, yet he accounts it his
chiefest honor, to style himself servus Jesu Christi, the servant of Jesus
Christ: and Jude that stood in a near relation to our blessed Lord, puts this
first in his Epistle, Jude a servant of Jesus Christ. And to say the truth,
such as these be Excelsi, these, and these only be the stately ones. And you
who are the people, I would have you rejoice at the conversion of great men,
and to pray to God daily that such may be converted, who may advantage the
truth of Christ. A third thing which I note out of the last clause of the first
verse, is this, the success which God gave to Ezra, was so much the more,
because he dealt roundly with the people; for the Prayer he made was very tart
and invective against them, it touched them to the quick, by discovering their
gross sins: some hot spirits, if they had been present, would have replied,
and said as Korah and his Confederates, All the Lords people are holy; but here
is none of this, but they are humble, and sorry, and weep very sore; which
affords us this observation: A penitent, good, and honest heart, is so far
from hating him that reproves him, that he is sorry for that, for which he is
reproved, Prove. 9.8.
Solomon Says, Prove. 9.8. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: And it is
thought, that David loved Nathan better after he had reproved him, then he did
before: In John 4. it is apparent, John 4.
that after our Savior had touched the woman of Samaria home, she became very
full of respect toward him, whereas before, she had answered him sawcily; and
in Acts 2.37. Acts 2.37.
those men that said the Apostles were full of new Wine, as soon as their
hearts were pricked, they gave much respect unto them, saying, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? so in the 1 Cor. 14.24.25. says the Apostle
there, 1 Cor. 14.24.25
If all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or unlearned, he
is rebuked of all men, and is judged of all men; and so are the secrets of his
heart made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face, and worship God,
and say plainly, That God is in you indeed. Now the ground of it is this;
Revel. 3.19. and yet it is an evidence of Gods hatred sometimes, when he will
not have men reproved and punished, Hos^a 4.14.
Hosea 4.14. God says there, I will not punish your Daughters when they commit
Whoredom, nor your Spouses, when they commit adultery. Sodomites did against
Lot, saying, He came to sojourne with us, and shall he rule over us? They
say, as the Hebrew to Moses, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge? and with Ahab,
they call such Ministers the Troublers of Israel. And the Conscience of such a
one tells him, That though he seem to love such a Minister, yet in his heart
he hates him; Herodias hates John at the heart, because he met with dilectum
delictum, her darling sin. But let such a one know, whosoever he or she be,
that there cannot be a more evident sign of a desperate estate, then this;
David had committed two great sins, adultery, and murder, but because he took
the reproof of Nathan well, (which appeared by his confession and submission)
he was presently pardoned: but he that hates reproof, goes up into the chair of
the Scorner, which is the next degree to hell.

[Shecaniah:] Secondly, his speech, [ we have sinned against our God, etc.] I
begin with the party speaking, which is Shecaniah; Ezra had done his part; and
lo here is a man sets to his hand, and seconds him: from whence I note this
brief conclusion.

How comfortable it is in good Actions, to have an Assistant. When Moses is
praying in the mount, and Joshua fighting in the valley, Israel is like to
prevail against Amalek: and when Deborah and Barak join together* they soon
conquer the Midianites. Daniel, having undertaken a great business, he comes
to his three Associates, desiring them to join with him in Prayer to God, and
it pleased God to hear their Petition, and to reveal the Kings dream unto
him: Thus Nicodemus and Joseph join together for the Interment of our Savior;
and Paul and Barnabas gave each other the right hand of fellowship, and Saint
Paul calls Aquila and Priscilla, his helpers in Christ Jesus, Romans 16.3.
Romans 16.3.

David, that he is as a Pelican in the Desert, it shall be long enough ere any
come to assist him: well it should be otherwise; let us therefore, as we tender
Gods honor, join together in promoting goodness; Pilate and Herod, though
they were enemies to each other, yet they can agree to persecute the Lord of
life: and though the Jesuits, and the secular Priests, be at daggers drawing
amongst themselves, yet they can agree together to set Kingdoms in a
combustion: and why should we be backward, nay, why should we not be forward,
to help forward good Actions? Further, it may be observed, that this Shecaniah
was a great man; surely, he was no less then a Magistrate, and if so, it
yields us this observation.

It is a happy thing, when the. Priest and Magistrate, the word and the sword,
go hand in hand together: when Moses and Aaron kiss each other, when David
the King, and Abiathar the Priest, when Joash the King, and Jehoiada the
Priest, agree in the same thing, then it is a sign that sin and Satan will
fall like lightning from heaven.

Ezra, and the sword of Shecaniah go together. But now what is it which
Shecaniah says? (which is the second thing in the verse) he speaks that in a
few words, which Ezra had delivered more largely; he confesses that he and the
people had trespassed against God: He blaunches not their sin, but says, [We
have trespassed against our God:] enough: the first is insufficient sorrow for
his sins: the second is in the assurance of Gods love in pardoning them: the
third is in his obedience to Gods Commandments: but it is quite otherwise with
the wicked in all these; for first: he thinks he has sorrowed enough, if he
have shed a few tears for his sins: secondly, for the remission of his
sins, and the assurance of Gods favor, if you will take his own word for
it, no man is surer of that than himself; and for a godly life, he is far
enough from that, for he is afraid of being too holy. But I pass by that, and
fall upon another observation, which naturally springs from Shecaniah's words,
and it is this.

Above all other griefs, Doctr.
this to a good soul is the chiefest, that he has offended God. See it in
David, Psalm. 51 4.
in Psalm 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned. All the world knew that
he had wronged Uriah and Bathsheba, and doubtless he was much troubled at it;
but in the day of his humiliation, he pitcheth on this especially, that he had
offended God. 1 Samuel 2.25.
Eli says to his sons, 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him? Intimating to us, that no offense done against man should grieve us so
much, as that we have grieved God. The like we see in the Prodigal, he says,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son. It was not his penury and misery (which now lay heavy
upon him) that grieved him so much, as the sin against his Father; and
therefore he goes over it again, saying, Father I have sinned against heaven,
and in thy sight, Luke 15.18.21. St. Paul speaking of true Repentance, Luke
15.18.21.
which ever has sorrow for its companion, 2 Cor. 7.9. in the tenth verse he
comes to speak of worldly sorrow: and it is possible for a Cain, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
an Esau, a Saul to be sorry after a worldly manner, which kind of sorrow is
poenitentia poenitenda, a repentance to be repented of: but there is a godly
sorrow, never to be sorrowed for. I deny not but shame and fear may make way
for this, as the needle makes way for the thread; but yet at last Gods child
comes to this, that he grieves above all for that he has grieved God: and if
there were no hell, he would not willingly sin against God any more: his
heartbreaking is that he has so much abused his bounty, who has been his
best friend.

Judas; I am persuaded, he was so sorry that he had betrayed his Mr. that if he
had had all the world, he would have given it to undo what he had done: and so
I may sorrow for my sins; but yet if I find in my self such a disposition to
the same sins, (that if occasion were offered, and men saw me not, and that I
were sure to escape Gods judgments) then I would commit them again, this is
the Spirit of bondage, and not the Spirit of adoption: but on the contrary, if
I find that I grieve above all things for offending God, this is not so much a
fear to burn with the devil, as to displease my God, and this is a true
filial fear. But I tender weak consciences, and therefore I will endeavor to
give them satisfaction. Objection.
O say they, we fear to sin, but it is for fear of shame and hell: to whom I
answer, Solution.
this is not to be disliked altogether, for when I am prone to sin, I wish that
the consideration of hell may deter me from sinning: and to such a soul I say,
God may work in it a hatred to sin, when as he discovers it not. Secondly, such
a soul must labor to grieve and abstain from, and for sin, because it
displeases God. But says the poor soul, how shall I attain to this? First,
by earnest and constant prayer to God. Secondly, by considering the nature of
sin, which is a filthy thing, and very displeasing to God; a child that loves
his Father, will forbear to do what may displease him; and I make no doubt
but God will so work in his children, that they shall abstain from sin, and
weep for it; not only for fear of hell, but because thereby his holy Majesty
is dishonored. Thirdly, I would have such to consider the mercies of God,
which he has bestowed upon themselves and this land, which if they do, they
will grieve and be severe against themselves, for neglecting so great
expressions of bounty: such a one will say, What? has God made me? has he
redeemed me? has he spared me hitherto? and shall I displease him? I could not
subsist one hour without him; therefore let me mourn and grieve for offending
so good a God, and so gracious a Father.

Sermon VIII.
EZRA 10. The latter part of the second Verse, and forwards.

Yet now there is hope in Israch concerning this thing. Now therefore let us
make a Covenant with our God.


WE descend now to another fruit of Ezra his humiliation: Shecaniah confesses
the sin of the people, which was of the first magnitude, to wit, their
joining themselves in marriage with Heathens; yet he despaires not of
forgiveness from God, but says, [Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing.] From whence I ground this Observation.

The greatness of a sin, if there be repentance, Doctr.
is no impediment* to the forgiveness of it. So says Shecaniah here, though
we have committed a great trespass against our God by taking heathenish women
to be our wives, yet there is hope in Israel even concerning this. I will take
some pains in proving this point, because it may be of special use for tender
consciences.

Isa. 1.16.
as in Isaiah 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. So Jerem. Jer. 3.12.
3.12. Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you. The like we see in the new Testament, Matthew.
Matthew. 3.2.
3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Acts 17.30.
So in Acts 17.30. God now commands all men every where to repent. Now I
reason thus, if God commands that men should repent of their sins, then
surely there is pardon to be obtained upon repentance for the foulest sins: but
God commands the greatest sinners to repent, therefore upon their repentance
they shall be pardoned. Nay, we shall find in Scripture, that the Lord
threatens to plague those that repent not: and says Tertullian, God would
never threaten the man that repents not, if he meant not to pardon him upon
his repentance. Nay, to add more weight to that reason, we may observe the
encouragements which God affords sinners, thereby to move them to repent, which
are so many arguments to assure them, that there is pardon for the greatest
sins: as that in Isaiah 1.18. Isa. 2.13.
Though your sins be as-Scarlet, they shall he as white as Snow. The word
there for Scarlet, in the original is (...) which in the Latin is iterare, a
thing twice dipped: The Lords meaning is this, though your sins be of a deep
dye and tincture, yet my mercy shall expunge them, if ye repent: Mi^. 7.19.
and in Micah 7.9. it is said, He will cast all their sins into the depths of
the sea: Now ye know the sea is of that vastness, that it will swallow up,
not only Mole-hills, but the greatest mountains: and so it is with the mercy
of God, it is so infinite and bottomless, that it shall pardon the grossest
sinners, if they repent.

Aaron committed a notorious sin against God in making a golden Calse for the
Israelites to worship, (when their coming out of Egypt was not above a month
old, and when his brother Moses was gone up into the Mount to receive the Law
of God for them) it was a sin of a horrid representation, yet for that he
found mercy and forgiveness. They were foul sins in which David was
engaged, and sometimes they put him shrewdly to it, causing him to complain and
say, They were a burden too heavy for him; yet, God be thanked, he had
remission of them. A fouler sinner cannot be imagined than Manasseh was, who
was an Idolater, a shedder of innocent blood in great abundance, one that made
his son pass through the fire, and dealt with familiar spirits, yet there
was hope in Israel for him, for upon his repentance he was received to mercy.
Look upon Matthew and Zaccheus, they were Publicans; and Publicans in those
days were notorious sinners: for in the Gospel ye shall find Publicans and
sinners rankt together, yet two maine, ones of these were converted. Shall I
tell you of Peter, who denied, nay forswore his Lord and Master? yet he
obtained mercy. Or shall I tell you of the woman which was a sinner in the
City, out of whom was cast seven devils? yet Christ had mercy upon her, and
forgave, her. Shall I tell you of Paul, who with his own tongue confesses
that he was a persecuter, a blasphemer, nay the chief of sinners? yet he
obtained mercy and pardon. And when God would extend mercy to such a finner as
he, what does he but proclaim to the world that none should despair? Again,
shall I tell you of the incestuous Corinthian, who was a notable sinner? yet
upon his repentance he was absolved. Or shall I tell you of the Corinthians
themselves, of whom some had been Idolaters, Adulterers, Covetous, Drunkards?
yet they were washed, sanctified, and justified, when they had truly repented.
Let us therefore be persuaded and assured, that every sin is remissible, if
we can but repent.

Micah says, Micah. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, Mi^^. 7.18.
that pardons iniquity? he is not as man, who can pardon a few offenses, but
he can pardon all sins, as well the great as the small. Secondly, we may
reason from the justice of God; says the beloved Disciple, 1 John 1.9. 1. John
1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faith full and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Thirdly, we may reason
from the mercy of God; that bottomless Ocean which can never be exhausted and
drawn dry; O the depth, the breadth, the length, the height of the mercy of
God! the depth of it is such, as it cannot be imagined, for it is infinite: and
such is the breadth of it, that it reaches over all the earth; and for the
length of it, it is of a large extension, for it is everlasting, Psalm. 117.2.
Psalm. 117.2.
and for the height of it, it is of such an altitude, that it reaches above
the clouds, Psalm. 108.4. Again, Psalm. 108.4.
if ye speak of the greatest gift that ever God bestowed on the world, it was
this, he gave his Son Jesus Christ to die for sinners: and when our Savior
came into the World, he did converse with sinners, at which, though the Scribes
and Pharisees snuffed, saying, He was a companion of Publicans and sinners, yet
we must know, that he no more contracted pollution from them, then the Sun
does when it shines on a stinking dunghill, and yet some of those went into
heaven before those learned Rabbis: And for the death of our Blessed Lord,
which was the end of his coming, the efficacy of it was such, that it was not
only of force to forgive pence, but talents: and it is the unanimous consent
of all the holy Fathers, that no sin is unpardonable, if men do but repent;
Tertullian says, he that threatens sin, grants pardon to men upon their
repentance: and says Cyprian, It is impossible that the whole burnt offering
of a contrite spirit should be repelled: and Saint Bernard says, The plaster
is bigger then the soar, and where sin abounded, grace has much more
abounded. Enough then has been said for the proof of the point: I will only
answer one Objection, and so I will come to apply it.

Will some man say, Objection.
Is the greatness of the sin no impediment to the forgiveness of it? What say
ye then to the sin against the holy Ghost? those that commit that, are never
like to obtain pardon.

I answer, Solution.
this is no impeachment to the truth, which I have delivered, for I said, and
say again, If men do repent, though their sins were never so grear, they shall
be pardoned; but the sin against the holy Ghost admits of no repentance;
therefore if ever thou did sigh for sin, that was not the sin against the
holy Ghost, for such as are guilty of chat transgression, are without all
sorrow and remorse: and that sin is not irremissible, because God cannot pardon
it, but because that wicked man cannot perform the condition which God
requires of him, and that is Repentance: as it is with a Patient, who spits in
the Physicians face, and throws away all good potions prescribed him for his
recovery: of such a one we say, he is incurable; so we say of the sin
against the holy Spirit, he that commits it, because he despights the Spirit
of God, and because he repells grace, being offered him, therefore he becomes
so obdurated in sin, that he cannot repent. So that notwithstanding this
Objection, the truth of the point remains unshaken, that the greatness of a
sin, if there be repentance, is no impediment to the remission of it.

Novatian Heretics, who said, That men falling into sin after conversion,
there was no place for their repentance: Cyprian calls the author of that
Heresy, the enemy of Gods Mercy, and the slayer of repentance: but they held
not constant to this, for afterward they said, There was no place for
Repentance to him that sinned after Baptism: and not long after they came to
mollify this also, saying, That a man might repent of small sins after
Baptism, but if he fell into great transgressions, then there was a falling
away utterly: but the Fathers of the Church did all fight against these,
affirming, That although men committed great sins after Conversion, yet
Repentance was ut tabula post naufragium, as a planck to carry men to land,
after they had suffered shipwreck. Will ye hear some of their arguments?
First, they bring that place in Hebr. 6.4. Hebr. 6.4.
where it is said, It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, if they shall fall away, to renew them again
to repentance. This place has much troubled the learned, and for resolving it,
some have said, impossible, impossible, is no more than difficile, hard or
difficult: others say, that such persons could not repent after this life,
which indeed is impossible; but the best exposition is, that the place is meant
of the sin against the Holy Ghost; now whosoever commits that, despights the
Spirit of grace, and so it comes about, that it is impossible he should be
renewed again by repentance. The second Argument they bring is this, If God
should forgive men gross sins, upon the breach of their Covenant, he should
be mutable; Not so, for it is peremptory with God, that men should repent and
be pardoned; when therefore God pardons a great sinner upon his repentance, he
changes not, neither is there the least shadow of change in him, but the sinner
is changed by repentance and amendment. Thirdly, say they, the recovery of
great sinners is very questionable in Scripture; ^^od. 32.
as Exodus 32. It is a matter very doubtful, whether God forgave the Israelites
their sin of making a Calf: So Jonah 3.9. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, ^^nah; ^
and turn from his fierce anger that we perish not? and Peter says to Simon
Magus, Acts 8 22.
Acts 8.22. Repent therefore of thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. To which I answer, That which is
chiefly meant in those places, is corporal judgments. Secondly, all those
places tend to the aggravation of their sins, and not to shut the door of
repentance upon them: the last place they urge, Hebr. 12.17.
is Hebr. 12.17. For ye know that afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears: the meaning of that place is easy, it is meant
of Isaacs Repentance, that he could never be persuaded to alter what he had
done, when once he had blessed Jacob, notwithstanding Esau sought it with
tears: But secondly, suppose it is meant of Esaus repentance, yet it would not
make for them, because it was no true repentance, for at the same time he
resolved to kill his brother Jacob; his repentance was for somewhat he had
lost, not for what he had done.

Jerem. 18.12. There is no hope. Jerem. 18.12.
But I say there is hope: Have thou been an Adulterer? there is hope in Israel
concerning this, if thou repent and forsake that sin: Have thou been a
Covetous person, a Drunkard, a Swearer? there is hope in Israel for these, if
thou from thy heart repent thee of them: Have thou been a fraudulent person,
and a deceiver of thy brother? repent of this sin, and make him satisfaction,
and thou shall be pardoned, for there is hope in Israel even concerning this.
(Beloved) the Lord has this day sent the greatest of sinners to tell you; That
there was never any perished for want of mercy. Therefore, do your sins
grieve you? repent of them; lie down at the foot of Gods Mercy-seat, and sue
for pardon in the Name, and for the Merits of Jesus Christ: In any kind,
despair not, for yet there is hope of Mercy: and to this purpose remember
these things which I shall now tell thee; First, as it was a sin in the
Israelites, to limit Gods Power, so it is a sin to limit his Mercy: what
sin can be imagined or committed too great for God to pardon? Cain did lie,
when he said, his sin was greater then could be forgiven: I read of one, that
being told by the Devil, That his sins were more then could be pardoned, and
that he could not be saved, thinking thereby to make him despair: says he,
thou unclean spirit, thou art a liar, for if thou could repent, thou
might be pardoned. Secondly, think upon the infinite satisfaction, which our
blessed Savior has made for sinners; and he came not only to cure green and
smaller wounds, but great and inveterate soars, some eight, some twelve, some
thirty eight years old. Thirdly, think upon what kind of Persons God has
showed mercy; as Adam and Eve, David, Manasseh, Zaccheus, Mary Magdalene, Paul,
and many others, who found mercy. Fourthly, think of this, that despair is the
greatest sin in the world, for that wrongeth God in the chiefest of his
attributes; to wit, his mercy, therefore the learned say, that Cain and Jidas
sinned more in despairing, then the one did in killing his Brother, or the
other in betraying his Master. Lastly, remember this, that if thou despairest,
and die in that condition, thou shuttest the door of mercy upon thy self,
and thou may be sure of Hell for thy portion; therefore despair not in any
case: but withal remember, that all this is promised thee upon the condition
of thy repentance; be sure therefore to repent seriously, and speedily: First,
do it seriously, God does not love that thou should only hang down thy head
for a time like a bull rush, but thou must be rent within, by having a broken
and contrite spirit. Secondly, repent speedily, it must not be to day for thee,
and to morrow for God; I know God may and can pardon him that repents at the
last hour: but if men defer their repentance, out of hope of pardon, let
them know, that he that has promised mercy to him that repents, does not say,
a man may repent when he will: and you that have never felt these breakings of
soul, and horrors of conscience, you will find one day, that there is a wide
difference between the Devils tempting you to sin, and his afflicting you
for sin; for when he tempts men to sin, he tells them that the gate of mercy
is ever open, and that though their sins be never so great, yet they may repent
for them at pleasure; but when a man is in affliction and anguish of soul, then
he multiplies his lashes, and lays on load, telling him, That God wll show
mercy to none such as he is; he will tell him, that his sins are more then
can be forgiven, and with Jobs wife, he will bid him curse God, and die:
therefore think of this now in time, for the Devil is never so sweet in his
temptations to sin, as he is bitter at last in putting men on to despair for
sin.

be merciful to our brethren, as our heavenly father is merciful to us: What
offense can a man commit against another, that the party offended should not
forgive? Let our displeasure be as just as may be, yet there is no reason but
we should forgive our Brother, because God is so proclive and ready to forgive
us: but there be some such, who by no means will be reconciled to their
Brother, who harh offended them: but I fear not to tell such, that they are not
sensible of Gods mercy in forgiving them; God forgives them pounds, nay
talents, and shall not they forgive their brother pence? Neither tell me, he
is a base and unworthy fellow, for there is not that distance between him and
thee, be he never so base, as between thee and God: O but it is a gross wrong
which he has done me; is it worse then the sins which thou have committed
against thy God? O but he has done it often: What of that? yet not so often
as thou have offended thy Maker. O but it stands not with my credit to pardon
him: thy pride at once eats out both thy Piety and Charity, and let me tell
thee, look to obtain that from God, which thou art willing to do for thy
brother: Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness, would not set in a cloud,
though he was put to death without cause, but he prays for his persecutours,
Pater ignosce, nesciunt quid faciunt, Father forgive them, they know not what
they do: If thou follow not the example of our Blessed Lord, take heed, lest
he stop his ears to thy Prayers, because thou refusest to be reconciled to thy
Brother. Before we leave this clause, another observation offers it self to be
handled; [there is hope in Israel concerning this] that is, in the Church; and
the point, which I hence infer, is this;

There is no remission of sins out of the Church. Doctr.
Remission of sins is not a flower that grows wild, it only grows in the
Garden of Zion. For proof of this, look that pregnant place Psalm 128.5. The
Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: or as another translation renders it, The
Lord shall bless thee out of Zion from heaven; Mark, he does not say, the Lord
in heaven shall bless thee from heaven, but the Lord from heaven shall bless
thee out of Zion: indeed the Church is a heaven; for where the holy people of
God be, there is a heaven, and there is a blessing, which though primarily it
come from God, yet secondarily it comes from the Church: and though I do not
say with some Philosophers, that all influences come from the Moon to the
Stars; yet I will say it of the Church, thither has God conveyed his
blessings to be transmitted to the sons of men. I would have you to mark
one thing, which it may be you never yet took notice of; the Propitiatory was
joined to the Arc, so as it could not be removed from it, to show that he that
would have his sins forgiven him, must hold close to the Arc: and this is
according to that ancient rule of Divines; he that will have God to be his
father, must have the Church to be his mother. Our blessed Lord was named
Jesus, because says the Angel, He shall save his people from their sins: and
in the end of the Creed we say, I believe the holy Catholic Church, the
forgiveness of sins, by the conjunction of which two Articles together, is
intimated to us, that out of the Church there is no forgiveness of sins. This
is also proved in the 87. Psalm last verse, ^s^^. 87.7. Isa. 33.24.
All my-springs are in thee, and Isa. 33.24. The people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven all their iniquity.

John 8.24.
John 8.24. They shall dye in their sins: And what is it to dye in sin? it is
immediately to go to hell, there to be tormented with the devil and his
Angels for ever. Heathens are here said to be without the Church; and to be
sure, if they live and die such, they shall be excluded heaven hereafter: for
as in Rev. 22.15. without shall be dogs. Rev 22.15.


Cham was saved alive in the Arc, so that it is not all to be external
members of the Church, but as we be admitted into it by Baptism, so we must
believe and repent, else we are but Tares in the field of the Church, which
though for a time they may grow up with the good corn, yet at last they shall
be but fuel for the fire of hell: A man's water in Baptism is but a cold
proof of Gods love, unless he has faith and repentance, (I speak not of
Infants, which never committed actual sin) for unless there be a heart to
believe and repent, he may be damned for all his Baptism, as some of the Jews
were, for all they were circumcised. As therefore we glory in this, that we
are within the pale of Gods Church; so let us not content our selves with it,
but let us labor to be within the Covenant, by getting faith and Repentance,
that so in Gods good time we may attain the end of our faith, the salvation of
our sinful souls in Jesus Christ. Shecaniah now goes on and says [Let us
make a Covenant with our God:] It appears by this good man that as he had
heard Ezra to confess his sins, amongst the rest, so he desired not only to
be pardoned for what he had done amiss, but he resolves on a new course of
life, saying [Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God.] And indeed
these be the two maine stones in the building of repentance; first, when a man
desires to be better; secondly, when he resolves to be better. First, when a
man desires to be better; it is a good part of health, we say, to desire
health: our blessed Lord faith to the impotent man, Will thou be made whole?
he would not heal him against his will: even so we must desire to be cured of
our spiritual maladies. It was so with the Iaylor, Acts 16.30.
in Acts 16.30. he says to Paul and Silas, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved?
and this, where it is, supposes a sense of misery: and we see it in holy
David, Psalm. 142.2.
Psa. 142.2. I powered out my complaint before him: J showed before him my
trouble. And Saint Paul says, O miserable man that J am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Romans 7.25. Thus sure it was with Manasseh, Romans 7.25.
and with those Converts in Acts 2.37. who being pricked in their hearts, Acts
2.37
say to Peter and the other Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Augustine when time was, says he, I prayed to God to extinguish lust in me;
but I had rather it should have been satisfied than extinguished: and many be
of his mind, such a spirit of slumber seises on men, that their consciences be
seared, and they take pleasure in sin; tell these, that sin is a burden,
they say they feel no such matter: but he that hopes for mercy must labor to
feel sin to be a pressure; the man that desires to live in a prison, it is
pity the Key should ever be turned for his enlargement: and who will pity him
that desires not to be eased of his sins? Our blessed Redeemer calls none to
him, but those who are heavy laden; and till men come to this, they will never
be earnest for the pardon of their sins. Secondly, there is a resolving
against sin: we must not only say we are sorry for our sins, (which every
one can do) but we must leave them: this is the disposition of a good and
penitent soul: See it in David, Psalm. 17.3. He not only desired pardon of
God, Psalm. 17.3.
but he says, I am purposed, that my mouth shall not transgress: and Ephraim
says, Hos. 14.4.
Hosea 14.4. What have I to do any more with Idols? and Saint Paul says,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Now when a man comes to this, it is a good
step toward Heaven; for if he should be taken away suddenly, and want time to
repent, as he desired, the Lord would as well accept of his good purpose and
resolution, as if he had lived to repent to the full: and in the course of
Sanctification, it is a great comfort to a man, when he can say, he fell
against his purpose.

tell thee one thing, and the child of God finds it true in himself, he does
as earnestly desire grace, to restrain him from sin, as he does the pardon
of his sins: Now, when thou will pray for the one, and not for the other,
never expect to be heard of God; for if the Devil be cast out by a desire, and
no further, he will return with seven spirits worse then himself.

Sermon IX.
EZRA 1O.3. Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, to put away all
the Wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my Lord,
etc.


SHECANIAH is not only resolved to do as he says, but he is willing to make
a Covenant with God, both in his own, and the Peoples behalf, which Covenant
was an Oath, as ye may read in the succeeding Verses of the Chapter: Now an
Oath is the most sacred bond of all others, and when he ingageth himself this
way, it is a sign he meant to perform what he promised: which being so, I
cannot but observe from thence, this conclusion;

The true penitent is desirous to tie himself by all possible bonds, to keep
that which God commands; mark it in some proofs: In Genes. 28.20. when Jacob
had got a nap on that hard pillow of the stone, Genesis 28.20.
in his journey to Padan-Aram, he vowed this vow of his own accord; If God
will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread
to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house in
peace: then shall the Lord be my God. There is no doubt, but Jacob knew he was
tied to God, not only by the bond of nature, but as he was a member of the
Church; but yet he is willing to tie himself more strictly to God, if it were
possible, because he knew the thing that he desired of God, Jo^^. 24.25, 26.
was of great consequence. So in Josh. 24.25, 26. the people of Israel had
revolted from God, and Joshua knew they would be flinching again, therefore
before he was to die, he makes rhem enter into a Covenant with God, to serve
him and no other, and set up a great stone under an Oak, that was by the
Sanctuary, that when they revolted, that stone might be a witness against
them: Mark, he ties them as fast as he can, that they might cleave unto the
Lord: Psalm. 119.106.
the like we see in David, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and will perform it,
that I will keep thy righteous judgments: and in Psalm 132.2, 3, 4. there he
vows to the mighty God of Jacob, Psa^. 132.2, ^, ^
saying, I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my
bed, nor suffer my eyes to slumber, till I find out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: and 2 Chro. 15.12. it is said, 2 Chro.
15.12.
that Asa and the people entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul. And in the 14. verse,
we find, that they swore to the Lord with a loud voice; as who should say, they
were willing that any body should hear how strictly they had tied themselves
to God. The like we see in the mariners, ^ Jon^h, 16
1 Jonah, 16. the text says, they offered a sacrifice to the Lord, and made
vows. It is not set down what they vowed to do, but it is likely they
performed what they vowed. If ye require a reason of this, it is easily rendered.

God is a matter of special consequence, he knows it is as much as the
salvation of his soul; and therefore he conceives he cannot perform it too
strictly. A man that has much business to do in the morning, is very strict
to himself; in which regard he will either sit up all night, or lie down in
his clothes, that he may go about his affairs early, and compass them
before night: and the child of God considers what a weighty business the
service of God is, therefore he is willing to oblige himself as sure as may be,
to perform what God commands.



I cannot but mourn for this, that they are afraid to tie themselves to God:
Does David desire and beg of God, To knit his heart unto him, Psalm. 86.11. And
does Saint James say, Psalm. 86.11.
Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you, and do these fear
being tied too close to God? Again, I cannot but mourn to see the Devil
transformed into an Angel of light in this matter; I confess a man that comes
to Gods Table ought seriously to bethink himself what he goes about; but yet
let me advise you, not to run into one sin, under a pretense of avoiding
another: for what know thou, but if thou come prepared, that in thy
receiving those sacred mysteries, God may give thee strength to do all that
thou promisest.

Cor fugitivum, fugitive heart of ours to its good behavior: let us bind the
Sacrifice with cords unto the horns of the Altar; and if a man shall serve God
with some reluctation of Spirit, (following the motions of the Spirit, to the
distasting of the flesh) out of doubt God will be very gracious to such a man:
for when he sees with what violence his servants strive to enter heaven, it
gives him great contentment: in the 2 Chronicles. 15.15. it is said, ^ Chr^^. ^5.15.
All Judah rejoiced at the oath, for they had sworn with all their heart. And
it is most acceptable to God, when he perceives his children willing to tie
themselves to him in the most strict and sacred bonds. Now we are to examine
the matter of this Covenant: first, it was [to put away their strange wives.]
Out of doubt was to flesh and blood was a hard and grievous thing, for out of
their affection to them, they had married them: besides, they had lived long
with them, and their love was confirmed by the children they had by them: for
says the Philosopher, good minds be reunited by children: now to put away
wives, and wives who had long continued with them, and by whom they had
children, this must needs be very irksome to them: but the truth is, their
sin lay in this, and it being so, therefore they are willing to put them
away. The point which grounds it self from hence is this:

When the soul is truly penitent, Doctr.
whatsoever it be that is pleasing to a man, if it displease God, he will
forgo it. In every man's body there is a mixture of the four humors, blood,
phlegm, and the two cholers; but in every person some one of these is more
predominant than the rest, from whence a man has his denomination: thus one is
called a phlegmatic, another is called a sanguine, and third a choleric man:
even so it is in the soul, there is in every man's soul a seed-plot of
corruption, which is original sin: all sins are in all men, in regard of the
root, but yet some one is more predominant in the soul than the rest: in some
it is pride, in another it is lust, in a third it is covetousness, in others
it is envy: as it is in a field of weeds, though many weeds spring up at the
same time, yet some one springs up more than any other; so some lusts will
bear a greater sway in the soul than any lust besides: and from this many a
man is denominated: it is ambition in some, contention in others, excess in
others; and for this we say a man is libidinosus, contentiosus, malitiosus,
ambitiosus: and the learned observe, that these and the like words which end in
osus, do make an increment to their sin: every David will have his
Bathsheba, and every Herod his Herodias. David says in Psalm 18.23. I kept my
self from mine iniquity: ^s^^. 18.23.
Surely, he meant the sin to which he was most inclined: and he is a great
stranger at home, who finds not one sin to exercise the chief regency in
him. Now this beloved darling sin, if a man be truly repentant, he will
forsake that; and so I come to prove the point. Isa. 1.16.
In Isa. 1.16. the Lord says, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes. If ye observe the scope or tenor of the
place, ye shall soon perceive, that the Lord meant those sins to which he
saw them most proclive and prone. And in the 33. Ezekiel. when the Lord charge
his people to abstain from all sin, (...) ^3.
do you not think that he meant those especially, which were their beloved
sins? see it in some instances: in Hos. 14.8. though Ephraims Idols were
formerly contenting, ^^s. 14.8
yet when he comes to be truly penitent, he says, What have I to do any more
with Idols? The like we see in the repentance of Nineveh, Jonah 3.8. the King
gives command, Jonah 3.8.
that every man should turn from his evil way, and from the violence that was
in their hands. It seems oppression and offering violence was the special
sin for which that City was notorious, therefore the Kings charge is, that
they should bid adieu to that. We see the same in Matthew, he had a profitable
place, for gain came in apace; and doubtless when our Savior called him from
the receipt of custom, he was at the first much troubled at it; but the call
of Christ was so prevalent, that he forsakes all and follows him. Was it not
so with Mary Magdalen* though her sin of Lust was sweet unto her, yet having
obtained repentance and pardon of her Savior, she forsakes that sin, and
becomes a new woman. And in Luke 19.8. when God had touched the heart of
Zaccheus, Luke 19.8.
he resolves not only to leave his oppression, but he offers to make a
fourfold restitution to whomsoever he had wronged. Syria to his Captains and
soldiers, to fight neither against great nor small, but only against the King
of Israel: and it was good counsel: for as soon as they had slain the King,
the day was presently their own: and when a man has been victorious over his
Master sin, he will easily conquer his lesser corruptions.

dilectum delictum, his beloved transgression. See it in Augustine, he was
very unwilling to leave his unsanctified Olims and wicked acquaintance, when at
first God opened his eyes; his lusts then said unto him, nonne tecum erimus in
aeternum? shall not we be with thee for ever, who have been with thee so long?
but yet when God furnished him with his grace, he cast them all off, though he
had taken never so much complacency in them before. And this must be done by
us* take it in some instances: Come to a licentious man, and press on him the
practice of diverse things, and he will be content to admit of them, but if you
touch his sin of uncleanness, ye touch him to the quick, and he will no longer
bear with you; as in Herod, He heard John gladly, and did many things which he
spoke: but if he offer to meddle with his Herodias, his life must pay for his
error: so that say what man will or can, such a one will not leave his filthy,
yet beloved sin: nay, some have protested, they could not leave their
uncleanness. In like manner come to an excessive person, bid him do this or
that, he will subscribe unto it; but if ye strike at his sin of excess, then
he storms and fumes, saying, Take away my cup, and take the club out of
Hercules hand; take away my liquour, and take away my life: he says with the
Vine, Judges 9.13.
Should I leave my wine, which cheareth God and man? Come to the covetous man,
and he will easily be persuaded to avoid prodigality, here you shall find him
as tractable as may be; but yet all that you can say or do, shall not work
upon him to forsake his covetousnes. But notwithstanding all this, as men take
knowledge of those sins which domineere most in them, so they must forsake
and leave them, yea though they be as dear unto them as Shechaniahs wife was
unto him. And tell me not that this is difficult, but hearken to what our
Savior Christ says, If thy right hand offend thee cut it off, for it is
better to enter maimed into heaven, then having two hands to be cast into hell
fire. And what do thou telling me that they be profitable sins? is not
Godliness the best, nay the only gain? and what do thou tell me of thy sweet
sin of licentiousnes? I tell thee, Momentaneum quod delectat, aeternum quod
cruciat, it is a momentary pleasure, and unless thou forsake it, will bring
thee into eternal torments, to the utter ruin of thy soul and body. And say
not to me as Naaman to Elisha, God be merciful to me in this or that sin; for
as one leak is enough to sink a ship, so one sin will damn a soul; and thou art
far from mercy, if thou preferrest a profitable or pleasurable sin to thy
God. I will come home to thee in a familiar resemblance; if thou should
harbor a Rebel in thy house, and when the King sent unto thee upon pain of
death to deliver him, thou should refuse to do it, could thou expect any
favor, though he were never so near or dear unto thee? even so, thy sins
be Rebels against the King of heaven, no such Rebels against his Majesty as
they; if now at his command thou will not renounce them, and cast them from
thee, how can thou hope for mercy? there remains nothing for thee, but a
fearful expectation of wrath and vengeance to light upon thee: Away then with
the bondwoman and her-sonne, away with this Jonah, for which the whole ship
fares the worse: though thy sins be as dear unto thee as thy right eye, yet
cast them from thee, because they displease God: do not love thy sin, and
hate thy soul, if thou do, what then will thou do in the end thereof?
Secondly, [they put away the children borne of them.] What was the cause of
this? Carthusian gives the reason, and it is a very good one, which will yield
us the ground of an observation; says he, They cast out the children with
their mothers, lest the wives having lest their children behind them, should
take occasion to return again to fetch them: so that you see they cut off all
occasion of being again engaged in that transgression: the point then is this;

He that would avoid sin, must make conscience of avoiding all the occasions of
sin.

For proof hereof, see that place, Genesis 39.10.
Genesis 39.10. Joseph was so resolute in goodness, that he not only repells his
mistress her unlawful request, but says the text, though she spoke to him
day by day, yet he hearkened not unto her to lie by her, or to he with her.
Exodus 12.15.
In the 12 Exodus 15. the Lord gives his people charge, that when they keep the
Passover, they should eat no leavened bread for seven days: and because he
would be sure they should observe it, he commands them on the first day of the
seven, to put away all leaven out of their houses. So Job 31.1. says he, Joh
31.1.
I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid? and it
is David's prayer, Psalm. 119. 37.
Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and when Solomon
gives the young man counsel against the strumpet, he says, Remove thy way far
from her, and come not nigh the door of her house. Pro. 5.8.
Pro. 15.8. The ground of this is double; Occasion makes a thief; and it is as
true, that occasion often times does make a sinner.

Paul says, Fly all occasions of evil. It has been paid them home with much
loss, who have presumed too much of their own strength, by throwing them
selves into places of temptation: If therefore we desire to overcome our lusts,
let us avoid all the occasions of sin, which are as so many pandars waiting
upon it. As for example, thou art an excessive person, and would conquer
that sin: First, get a hatred to this sin; secondly, avoid all occasions which
tend this way, sit not long at wine, and beware of idleness and ill company.
Thou art a contentious person, and desire strength against that sin; take
heed of heat in holding Arguments with others; Secondly, contest not with thy
brother; and if this will not do, avoid company altogether: so, for lust, thou
art addicted to that sin, and would feign be rid of it; first, take heed of
idleness: when David was walking on his palace, then the Devil laid a bait
for him, presenting Bathsheba to his view, and so engaged him in that foul
sin of Adultery: and the truth is, the Devil will hew any sinner out of
idleness, that is his Cushion, on which he lulls the poor sinner asleep: the
sins of Sodom were great, and the ground of them was idleness: a second
occasion to be avoided, as being a hand maid to lust, is intemperance in eating
and drinking; for when men feed and drink freely, then they are apt to neigh
after their neighbors wives; Saint Paul speaks of wanton widows, Tim. 1.5.11.
doubtless they were such as gave (...)
their lusts the reins, and that made them wanton. Thirdly, if thou would
master thy lust, take heed of thy lust, take heed of thy eyes, for death often
enters by those windows; our grandmother Eve, by looking on the forbidden
fruit, undid her self, and all her posterity; and says our Blessed Lord, He
that lusls after a woman, has committed adultery with her in his heart: And to
this end look not on lascivious Pictures, nor on the Creatures in their
mixtures, for these occasions further this filthy sin: beware of thy ears,
shut them to all obscene and lascivious discourses and songs, which are notable
promovers of lust in the heart; avoid also the company of lust full persons,
and if before thou art aware, thou fall into the company of such, then beware
of unchaste dalliance, for this is a great incentive to uncleanness: and as
thou must avoid these, so all other occasions that I have not named; remember
what I tell thee, and lock it as a jewel in thy heart; pray as long as thou will or can, if thou do not withal endeavor to avoid the occasions which
promove these sins, God will never grant thy request; do thou pray to God
to do that for thee, which is not in thy power? And wilt not thou do that
which is in thine own power? This is a madness indeed, thou must do the one,
if ever thou look that God should do the other. Well, when Shecaniah and
the rest had done this, what rule will they then walk by? [according to the
Counsel of my Lord,] Some of the learned demand here, who is meant by Lord?
and these are of opinion that Shecaniah means not Ezra; but I am verily
persuaded he means Ezra, and no other: and the Septuagint inclines to this
interpretation, for thus they render that clause [as is judged fit by thee.]
Now if it were so that Shecaniah, who was a Prince, said thus to Ezra the
Priest: take knowledge then of thus much:

What respect in times past was given to those whom God called so near unto
him, Doctr.
as to be his Friests. 1 Samuel 1.15.26.
In the 1 Samuel 1.15. when Eli mis-judging Hannah, told her she was drunk,
she answers, No my Lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful Spirit: and in the 26.
verse, when she came to present Samuel before the Lord, she says to him
again, O my Lord, as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that stood by
thee here, praying unto the Lord: 2 Kings 4.16.
the like we see in 2 Kings 4.16. when Elisha told the Shunamitish woman, that
she should have a son, she says, Nay, my Lord, thou man of God, do not lie
unto thine handmaid: and in the 2 Kings 13.14. Joash, 2 Kings 13.14.
that wicked king, coming to visit Elisha on his deathbed, he wept over
him, and said, O my Father, my father, the chariot of Ifrael, and the horsemen
thereof: and it was more then sociall respect, that Cornelius gave Peter, which
he would by no means admit, Acts 10.25. And we read of Alexander the Great,
Acts. 10.25.
that he entering Jerusalem, with an intent to sack it, as soon as he beheld
Jaddus the High Priest in his formalities coming to meet him, in honor of
him, he alight, and met him, and desisted from him wicked purpose.

Sam. 3.1: we find there, 1 Samuel 3.7.
that the word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open
vision. The raritie of vision made the word of God precious then; and I fear
the plenty of preaching and preachers makes that Ordinance to be slighted now.
But let us take heed of vilifying Gods Messengers: God has a controversy with
this land for many things, and amongst the rest, I think this is one: therefore
let his Ministers be honorable in out eyes; O let their feet be beautiful
that bring unto us the glad tidings of salvation: but if we shall despise them,
it is just with God to send us a famine of his word, which is the greatest
judgment on this side hell.

But suppose that by [Lord] is meant God, yet because Ezra was Gods Messenger,
the words he spoke were Gods words; and what be spoke from God, Shecaniah
counts it as Gods voice: teaching us, that whatsoever Gods Ministers do
faithfully deliver out of his word, must be received as God's voice. Luke 1.70.
This is proved Luke 1.70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which
have been since the world began. Luke 10.16.
So in Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. And Paul affirms of the
Thessalenias, 1 These. 2.13. That they received his Word, 1 These. 2.13.
not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God. And in 2 Cor.
5.20. he entreats the Corinthians in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. 2
Cor. 5.20.
So that if it be the counsel of God, if it be Gods Commission, it is Gods
word: and till we be persuaded of this, we shall never reap any benefit by
Gods Word: Jer. 1.9.
The Lord says to Jeremiah, Jer. 1.9. J have put my words in thy mouth. Christ
is called The Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. and the Ministers be stars in
his hand; Mal. 4.2.
from him they have and borrow their light and influence. Therefore let men be
persuaded of this: I inveigh against such a man's pride; what faith he? I think
he loves to hear himself talk; and thus because he is not persuaded we
speak Gods word, like Noah's unclean beasts, hither he comes, and from hence
he departs unclean and polluted; whereas if men replied, it was God that put
this invective into his Ministers mouth, to meet with my corruption, they would
say as the people of Israel said, Deu. 5.27. Whatsoever the Lord says, Deuteronomy.
5.27.
that we will do. Therefore pray unto the Lord, that ye may be persuaded,
that what his Ministers faithfully deliver, he himself speaks in them; and
till you come to this persuasion, in the care will be no attendance, in the
outward man no reverence, in the heart no credence, and in the conversation no
obedience.

Sermon X.
EZRA 10. the latter part of the 3. verse. And According to the counsel of
those that tremble at the Commandment of our God, and let it be done
according to the Law.


IT should seem that there were others besides Ezra, which advised the people
to put away their strange wives, and they such as are said to tremble at the
word of God: and here observe the power of Gods word.

The power of Gods word is such, Doctr.
that if makes mem tremble. Jer. 23.29.
To prove this, look Jer. 23.29. Is not my word like a fire, says the Lord?
and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? it is a fire to melt the
relenting heart, and a hammer to break in pieces the heart that is obdurate.
See it in some instances, when Josiah heard the Law read, his heart was tender
and melted, 2 Kings 22.18 Psalm. 119.
2 Kings 22.18. there Gods word was a fire: and in Psalm. 119. David says, sHe
was afraid because of Gods Word. There it was a hammer, Hab. 3.16.
and Hab. 3.16. the Prophet says, Whon I heard, my bellytrembled, my lips
quivered at the voice; rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my
self. Here also it was a hammer. See it in the wicked themselves, when Samuel
told Saul, that God had rejected him for his disobedience, 1 Samuel 15.
1 Samuel 15. he was excedingly terrified and amazed. The like we see in Ahab,
when God sent Elijah to challenge him for killing innocent Naboth, and taking
possession of his Vineyard, the word of God in that Prophets mouth made him
quake and tremble, 1 Kings 21.27. So we read of Belshazzar, 1 Kings 21.2^.
when he saw the hand writing on the Wall (which ye must suppose to be the
Word of God) His countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so
that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against
another; and all his Concubines, Wine, and Copes-mates, could not bring color
into his face, Dan. 5.6.
Daniel 5.6. And it is said Acts 14.15. As Paul reasoned of righteousness,
temperance, Acts 24.25.
and judgment to come, Felix trembled. Now that this effect of Gods Word may
not seem strange unto you, see the causes thereof; one cause whereof is in the
word it self; therefore it is said to be the power of God to salvation, Romans
1.16.
Romans 1.16. And in Hebrews 4.12. it is said; Heb. 4.12.
to be quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: and in the 2 Cor. 10.4,
5. the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God: mistake me not, I do not make this power to be in it, as it is consisting
of syllables, but as it is Gods Ordinance, and has the Spirit of God going
along with it. The second cause is from the application of it, when it is not
only generally delivered, but particularly applied; when the Word of God meets
with a man's particular sin, then the conscience takes part with the Word
against himself, and makes him tremble; so it was with Saul, the Prophet Samuel
fell so pat upon his finne, that be became afraid, and took part with Gods Word
against himself, saying, I have sinned, and have transgressed the commandment
of the Lord: the like we see in Ahab, he was very brisk when Elijah first met
him, saying, Have thou found me, O my enemy? but the Prophet knowing him to be
guilty of Naboths blood, tells him home of it, and before he left him, brought
him upon his knees: and when Felix trembled at Paul's Sermon of Righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come; some are of opinion, that he trembled at the
consideration of the last judgment; and it cannot be denied, but that is
matter of such terror, as to make the fairest Lady look pale, if she be not
painted: but I rather conceive that there was something more which made him
tremble, for Saint Paul discoursed of Righteousness and Temperance; now he
was a wicked man, and defective in both these, for he was an unrighteous
Judge, and abused the power committed to him, however Tertullus flatter him in
the contrary: again gain he was guilty of intemperance, for he kept Drusilla
another man's wife: Now when a man that was a stranger to him, should thus
directly fall upon the sins which he knew himself guilty of, it could not but
make him tremble: It was so with David, the parable of the poor man's sheep,
came so home to him, that he presently confesses, that he had sinned against
the Lord: as it is with a man that is smitten in a sound part of his body,
though you smite him hard, he can endure it; but if he be but touched in a
fore place, he starts presently; so when a man is met with in his sins, he
will quake and tremble, if any grace be in him.

if thou have not found this by thy self already, thou art worse than either
Ahab or Felix: for Gods word made the one humble, and the other tremble. If
fire be cried in the street, it amazes every one, but if the Ministers of God
cry out against sin, scarce any tremble; but let such as these know, that this
stupidity is the forerunner of eternal misery.

Isa. 66.5.
Isa. 66.5. and to such he has promised to have respect, as in the second
verse of that Chapter: and such a man is most capable of comfort from God: for
our Lord Christ says, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; as also such as are weary and heavy laden: therefore se: vile fear
is of good use, it keeps the heart supple for the impressions of grace, and
makes way for filial fear, as the needle makes way for the thread. But
because the wicked men may tremble at Gods word, as well as the child of God,
therefore I will direct you how you shall know whether ye tremble at Gods word
as ye ought: First, the man that trembles aright at Gods Word, he reflects on
that sin which is the cause thereof; this we see in Joseph's brethren, the
Governor handling them roundly, makes them reflect on their sin against him,
causing them to say, Verily we have sinned against our brother, in that we saw
the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him; G^n
42.21.
therefore is this trouble come upon us, Genesis 42.21. so that no sooner was the
word spoken to them, Genesis 42.21.
but they reflect on their inhumanitie. And a godly man when he is reproved of
a sin which he knows himself culpable of, he immediately reflects upon his
transgression, and says, My sin is the cause why I tremble when I am met
withal. Secondly, the true trembling at Gods word is joined not only with a
reflection upon a man's sin, but with contrition for his sin, Isa. 66.2.
these go together, as in Isay 66.2. where God says, To him will I look that
is of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. It is said of Ahab, that he
rent his clothes, but he rent not his heart; therefore his humiliation was
unsound. Thirdly, if a man do truly tremble at Gods word, then he will at the
same time find in himself a resolution to amend that for which he knows he
is justly reproved. It is said, Acts 2.37. they which heard Peter preach, Acts
2.3^.
were pricked in their hearts and what then? Men and brethren what shall we
do? Mark; they being touched to the quick, labor to get out of their sinful
estate, in which till that time they had continued. And in Acts 9. when it
pleased God to convert Paul, Ac^s 9.
he was strangely terrified at the words which God spoke unto him, and the
first word he says, is, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Lastly, in such a
one as trembles truly at Gods word, there will be seen an endeavor and
striving to put in practice what he resolves upon: for Gods word works in a
regenerate man, not only a fear to displease God, but a care for time to come
to practice all possible obedience, in the whole course of his life and
conversation. And so much for chat point. But now, who were these that trembled
at Gods word? some expositors suppose they were such as had been engaged in the
forementioned sin, and hearing Gods word, were smitten with fear, because of
the strange wives which they had married: and if so, they were fit men to advise
others who had committed the same sin, but had not repented of it: and the
truth is, which shall be my observation,

A man that has been exercised with the terrors of God, Doctr.
such a man is most fit to advise and counsel others. Moses was a man that was
exercised with the terrors of God, not only when he saw the bush to burn
and not consume, but when the angel of God met him, and would have slain him:
and this did coapt and fit him, to speak comfortably to others that were in
distress. In the 51 Psalm. 12.13. David begs of God to restore to him the joy
of his salvation: and what then? Psalm. 51.12, 13.
then will I teach transgresours thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. Luke 22.31.32.
In the Luke 22.31.32. our blessed Lord says to Peter; Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to have you, that he may winnow you as wheat: but I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. Feter had had experience of Gods mercy to him, and what man more fit
than he to comfort others in distress? and St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.11.
Knowing therefore the terror of the 2 Cor. 5.11.
Lord, we persuade men. I know he especially aims there at the last judgment;
but yet I am persuaded thar withal he meant that he was most fit to advise
them who had been exercised with the terrors of God. As for example, we
believe him that has been in the same case with us, before we will believe any
other. It was well said by one, that one thing among the rest that makes a good
preacher, is temptation: such a man as has been tossed in chese billows, is
most fit to advise and comfort others. A man that knows a Country by the Map,
may be able to speak something of it, but it is nothing in comparison of what a
Traveller can say, which has been there: so a man that has never felt the
terrors of God, may be able in part to advise and comfort those in such
distresses; but not like him that has been exercised with the same terror.

persuaded by me, to leave such and such courses, give not your self up to the
service of sin, for I tell you out of experience, sin was never so sweet in
the temptation and commission, as it will prove bitter in the conclusion: now
that man that has thus trembled at Gods Word, it is good to hear him, for none
more fit to advise thee, then such a one. But I go another way, and think,
that by those who trembled at Gods Word, is meant such as had not been engaged
in that common abomination, of marrying strange wives; and if so. I cannot but
note thus much:

When the times are most wicked, God reserves some to himself.

This we see in the old World; when God brought the Deluge to destroy it, he
reserved a Noah to himself, who was a holy man: so when Sodom was destroyed,
God had his Lot, and to him he showed mercy: and though Israel was very
rebellious in the Wilderness, yet God had a Caleb and Joshuah, whose hearts
were upright: and God himself tells Elijah (when he knew of none that served
God besides himself) that he had reserved Seven thousand to himself in
Israel, which had not bowed their knee to Baal: and though all men, for the
most part, bowed to Nebuchadnezzars Image, yet the Three Children chose to die,
rather then they would fall down to that Idol: and in Ezekiel. 9.4. though the
generality of men was wicked, yet some were found, Ezekiel. 9.4.
Who mourned for the abominations of the Land: and in the time while our
Savior converst with men, though the times were depraved, yet God had his
number; as Hannah, Simeon, Mary Magdalene, etc. And for Rome, that cage of
unclean Birds, I persuade my self, that in that heap of Chafe, God has some
good Corn. Saint Paul salutes the Saints that were in Neroes house, we all
know what Nero was; he was the monster of Mankind for his wickedness; yet in
his Court, God has his followers. God has his in all times, in these times
wherein we live, though they be very wicked, yet God has some that belong to
him: though there be a great number that make no conscience of an Oath, yet
there be many that fear to swear; though some be excessive, yet there be
others that detest that sin: though there be many covetous persons, yet there
be others who be mercifully minded, and distribute to the necessities of the
Saints: and though very many be profane, yet God be thanked, there be those
that will not. run with them to the same excess of riot.

Peter's exhortation to the Jews, Acts 2.40
Acts. 2.40. is, Save yourselves from this untoward generation. and S. Paul
says, Redeem the time, because the days ara evil, Ephesians. 5.16. Shall we
say, Ephesians. 5.16.
that because the disease is epidemicall, therefore we may run our selves into
the infection? we will not reason thus in regard of our bodies, and dare any
man be so desperate as to reason thus in regard of fin, which is the bane of
the soul? Besides, it is not the place that makes thee bad, but it is thy
wicked heart, that is a cage full of unclean birds, from thence proceeds all
villainy: and if thou have an ill heart, thou will be wicked in the most holy
place: it is said of some, Isa. 26.10.
Isay 26.10. that in the land of uprightness they did unjustly: Thus the
Angels fell in heaven, our first parents in paradise, and Judas in Christ's
college.

David makes it a blessed thing not to walk in the way of sinners, Psalm. 1.1.
Psalm 1.1. And certainly there is no greater ground of comfort either in
life or death. Secondly, the purity of a man's Religion stands in this, to keep
himself unspotted of the World, James 1.27. Thirdly, J^m^s. 1.27.
remember for what end Christ dyed, he gave himself for our sins, That he
might deliver us from this present evil world, Gal. 1.4.
Gal. 1.4. O blessed Savior, was this the end for which thou did shed thy
precious blood? and shall they for whom it was shed, set no more by it? a
conscionable man will say, Did my Blessed Lord redeem me to be holy, and
shall I take license to sin against him? no, I will not: for if I do, in so
doing, I sin against the end of my Redemption. Fourthly, I would have a man
to consider what a glory it is to God, when he is good amidst a froward
generation: to be as the fish which retains its freshness in the salt Sea:
and to come into the High Priests Hall, and neither to be burnt by the fire,
nor blackt by the smoke; this makes much for the glory of God. Fifthly, mark
what a confusion it is to Satan, when a man goes on in a good way, where most
men go wrong; the Devil was more confounded in one Job, than in all the men
of the East besides. Lastly, if we sort our selves with the sinners of the
time, we hinder the conversion of the World: whereas, when a man shall shun
such a wicked man's company, he will begin to say with himself, Surely such a
man sees something amiss in me, which makes him refrain my society; and by
this means he may be reclaimed. Therefore sort not your selves with these
Korah's, but depart from their Tents. A second thing I note from that clause is
this; may some man say, what was the cause that these men abstained from such
abominations as others committed? I answer, their trembling at Gods word was
the ground of it: from whence I note this short observation;

The fear of God is the restraint of all sin. Doctr.
This is proved sufficiently. (...) 16.6.
Proverbs 16.6. By the fear of God men depart from evil. Mark it in some
instances, What was the reason that Joseph refused to fulfill his Mistress her
unchaste request? but because the fear of God swayed him. And it is faid of
Job, that he feared God and eschewed evil. Mark, the fear of God made him
eschew evil. This was that which kept David from killing Saul, when he had
him in his power: and to this he exhorts others, Psalm 4.4. where he says,
Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe and sin not. And this so swayed in the three Children, that
they durst not bow down to Nebuch adnezzars Image: the fear of God wrought in
them to make them obey God rather than man.

Psalm. 36 1.
Psalm 36.1. The transgression of the wicked man says within my heart, that
there is no fear of God before his eyes. And Saint Paul having dissected the
sinner, and ripped him up to the bottom, Romans 3.18.
Romans Chapt. 3. Verse 18. he gives this as the reason of all the enormities
there spoken of, Non est timor Dei coram oculis little, There is no fear of God
before his eyes. When Abraham came to Abimelechs Court, and to save his life
said, his wife was his sister: the truth of the matter coming to Abimelechs
hearing, he asks him why he had dealt so with, him? Says Abraham, I thought
the fear of God was not in this place: See, he did conclude* that there might
be Adultery and murder there, because they wanted the fear of GOD. The
fear of GOD is, Janitor animae, The Porter of the soul, it stands Sentinel,
and will tell of dangers that be approaching; but if that be removed, then the
heart becomes a cage of unclean Birds; and such a man will not stick at any
sin. Therefore I wonder not, that the unjust Judge did refuse to do the poor
woman justice; for it is said, He feared neither GOD nor Man. Would thou
then be kept from offending GOD? above all thy getting, get the fear of GOD;
which if once thou have, thou shall be kept from committing those sins which
else thou will run into every day. Thirdly, these that take upon them to
advise the rest, were such as were not guilty of the same sin, and the truth
is;

That man is most fit to advise others, Doctr.
who is not engaged in the same transgression.

The hand that must wash a thing clean, except it be clean, will but add to
its pollution: if it be not thus, men will turn upon him that usurps this
Office, and say, Medice cura teipsum, Physician heal thy self; and, first
pull the Beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall see clearly to cast
out the Meat out of thy brothers eye: Nay it will be said to such a one as our
Savior said to the Pharisees, You lay heavy burdens on others, but will not
touch them with one of your fingers.

When therefore we take upon us to reprove others, let us be sure we be
innocent of that for which we reprove them, and that is the way to be
successful.

The last clause is; [And let it be done according to the Law.]

What Law? The Law of GOD; they intend a Humiliation, and they will have it
according to the Law of GOD: Here I cannot but observe the ingenuity of these
People, they are not only careful for the matter, but the manner of their
Humiliation, it must be according to GODS own prescription.

Cain offered sacrifice as well as Abel, he failed not in the matter, but in
the manner; therefore God had no regard neither to him nor to his offering.

So Herod heard Jobn Baptist gladly, and went beyond many professors in these
days; but yet, because he failed in the manner, it being not according to the
Law, therefore God rejected him.

And the ground of this, is that old rule of Luther, God loves Adverbs better
then Adjectives, he looks not so much to the factum, the doing of a thing, as
to the been factum, that it be well done, that is, that it be done according to
the law.

Reverence and Attention, together with a purpose to Practice what we hear.
So for Prayer: God not only commands us to Pray; but he prescribes the manner
how; we must pray Fervently, Faithfully, and Constantly. Look we to both
these, to the matter, to the manner of Gods Worship; Isa. 58.^.
else God will fay to us, as he says to the Jews of Fasting, Isaiah 58.5. Is
this the Hearing, the Praying, the Receiving which I have chosen? is this the
giving of Alms that I have commanded, to blow a trumpet when ye give it, as
if ye were afraid to trust God without a Witness? God looks that we should
be right in the manner, as well as in the matter of his Worship, for he will
not be pleased with opus operatum, the thing done, which though it be the
Papists Latin, yet it is bad Divinity: God is, Deus Cordis, non corticis, the
God of the heart, not of the bark; he has respect to the manner how a thing
is done, as well as that it be done; and if we do not persorme his service
with a heart full of sincerity, we had as good cut off a Dogs neck. I press
this the more, because most of the Religion of this land is formality; men come
to Church, give Alms, and receive the Sacrament, I can testify with them,
that they are not defective in the matter, but they exceedingly fail in the
manner of GODS Worship, for they do not things according to the Law.

FINIS.

