SLANDERS and LIES Being cast upon the Children of Light, given forth to Print
from one HENRY WALKER, which R: IBITSON has Printed, That they Deny the
Resurrection, and Heaven, and Hell, which are Lies published to the Nation:
which Lies R: WOOD has also Printed. Therefore for the truths sake, and them
that fear God, is this Paper given forth, that the Lies return from whence
they came, and them that are given over to believe Lies may receive them. But
the honest hearted regard them not, knowing the time is coming, as the
Scripture says, The wicked shall fret themselves, etc.
WHEREAS Henry Walker gave in Lies to the Printer, that two QUAKERS which came
to White Hall, said, That there is no such place as Heaven and Hell: Thou
Walker have ministered forth thy Lies; for hell Thou shall find, which the
wicked must be turned into, and all Liars; and Heaven is Gods Throne, and (...)
Scriptures in the Old and New Testament is a Declaration from the Spirit; and
^od is the Word, and Christ Jesus is the Light that lights every man that
comes in^^ the world; and Thou who have made a scoff at this, Thy folly is
made manifest, and ^^y self declared to be a false Witness, and brought Thy
self upon Record; for John ^^^d, that, Christ was the true light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world; (...) whose Doctrine Thou
stumbles; and Thou shall find a Resurrection to Condemna^^^^ for Thy body to
go in, when that the Just shall witness a raising to life: and (...) ^eward
shall be according to Thy work, for many Lies have Thou uttered forth in (...)
papers against the Children of the Light, and published to the Nation: But all
that (...) God does not Thee nor them regard. That in Thy Conscience shall us
remember (...) day of Thy calamity, that we to Thy soul are friends, though
now to the world (...) thy work to speak evil upon the Children of light, and
render them odious to the (...). And R: Wood in Thy paper is many unsavory
speeches against the Children of (...); who art seeking to justify lies,
showing thy self to be one of the world, which loves (...) own, whose custom
is to utter lies, whose Torment is beginning, and whose ill (...) and savor
ascends, because the Sun is risen: And Thou declarest Walkers lies (...) he
has given forth against the Children of light, in Thy Book which is called
(...) Weekly Post, and have uttered forth Thy slanders and lies against the
Children of (...). And those words Printed in thy Book, called, A Declaration
of the Children of ^^^ht, shall stand and witness against thy lies, and a Hell
Thou shall witness who said, (...) said, there is no such place as Hell. R:
Wood. And secondly, Thou say they say, (...) is no such place as Heaven,
which are lies; for the wicked shall be turned into (...), and all that forget
God; and Heaven is Gods Throne. Again, thou say, they (...) There is no
Resurrection of the Body; Resurrection to condemnation thou shall ^^tnesse,
which we witness, who do witness a Resurrection to life, according to the
^^^iptures: And R: Wood thou say the Judges sat at White Hall, which is
another (...) thy lies: The Scriptures the Old and New Testament the Children
of light do own, ^^d the Scriptures says, God is the Word, which we witness
according to Scripture, ^^ich makes such lying fellows as Thee to rage: And
R: Wood when thou have utte^^^ forth thy lies, thou say, Pure Rogues to
roast. O Tyranny! here upon Record (...) all the Nation thou art, what spirit
thou art of, and whose Servant thou art. And ^^ou sets in thy Book, John
Boulton, Simon Dring, William Rayman, Richard Davis, those Names thou art not
worthy to mention, such as be men fearing God, and their ^^tnesse stands
against the deceits and lies, The light in thy Conscience shall witness it, We
are justified by faith in Christ, which faith works by love.

From them whom the world calls QVAKERS scornfully; but Moses who quaked and
trembled, said, To him Reproaches was great Riches.


