CHRIST'S BIRTH Misse-timed.

OR, A Resolution to a Question about the Time of Christ's Nativity; Evidencing
by Scripture, That JESUS CHRIST was not Born in December.

By R. S.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the Gilt Cup at Austins Gate,
near the Stump. 1649.

A Resolution to the Right Honorable, the Lord Carewe's question, touching the
true time of the Conception and Birth both of John Baptist, and also of our
SAVIOR.
Sect. I. The Preface
RIght Honorable, Seeing we all agree in the substance, and differ only three
months in the circumstance of time, (premising that of Tullies, Loquendum ut
vulgus, sentiendum tamen ut sapientes,) for that I am careful that the least
schism should be made in Christ's Tunica, which is seamlesse and unica: I have
sent your Honor this resolution, not out of Beroaldus, Bucholcerus, and
Broughton, but out of the sacred Scriptures, which we are commanded to search,
especially in difficult points.

Sect. II. The true Time of Christ's Nativity Evidenced.
THe Conception of John Baptist was in the month of June as the Hebrews reckon
their months; Therefore Christ's conception must needs be in the sixth month
following June, which is December, where we ignorantly make his Birth.

1. The Consequent of the major is proved, for that John Baptist was six months
elder then Christ, as appears Luke l. 36. And behold thy cosen Elizabeth she
has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is her sixth month which was
called barren. Now compare the 26. v. with the precedent 36. v. and it will
appear that this sixth month of John's age in his mothers womb, was the same
sixth month in which the Angel Gabriel was sent to the Virgin Mary, and in
which she conceived Christ, as the words show, v. 26. And in the sixth month,
(viz. in which John was six months old) the Angel Gabriel was sent from God to
a City of Galile named Nazareth to the Virgin Mary, etc. And v. 31. his message
is declared to be this; For lo thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a
son, and shall call his name Jesus. The Virgin then conceived Jesus in the
same sixth month of John's age, John was then six months old at Christ's
conception; Therefore Christ was consequently conceived in December after, and
not borne then as the calculation is [groundlessely] made.

2. Secondly, Now that John's conception was in June (and not his birth as we
make it) is proved by the course of Abbia, being the eighth course of the 24
courses of the Priests as is proved 1 Chro. 24.10. The seventh lot fell to
Hakkoz, the eighth to Abbia. Now Zacharias the father of John Baptist was of
this eighth course or lot of Abbia, Luke 1.5. In the time of Herod King of
Judea there was a certain Priest named Zacharias of the course of Abbia and
his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth, and they
had no child, v. 6. and verse. 13. The Angel Gabriel verse. 19, told him; Thy
wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name John. And
v. 23. And when the days of his Office was fulfilled, he departed to his own
house. And v. 24. And after those days his wife Elizabeth conceived, after the
end of his Eighth course in the beginning of July, after our account; for their
June contains part of our July. And she hid her self five months, saying.
And v. 25. in the sixth month after Elizabeth's conception the Angel was sent
to Mary to tell her of her conception of Christ. Now for as much as the Jews
did begin to reckon their years from the month of Nisan or Abib, part of our
March and April, which was the first of the months of the sacred year since
their going out of Egypt, as appears, Exodus 12.2. This month shall be unto you
the beginning of months, it shall be unto you the first month of the year. Now
chapt. 13.4. Moses tells you what month he means (by this month) This day came
ye out in the month of Abib, the month corn began to ear, containing part of
our March and part of our April. Now begin thou thy reckoning from Abib or
March, giving and allowing to every lot or course of the 24 courses of the
Priests one Fortnight, (for there were 24 courses of Priests and but 12 months,
therefore every Priest must needs serve a fortnight for his course for 24
fortnights makes 12 months;) And so the eighth fortnight or course shall fall
to Abbia, of which Zachary was, which was in June, after the Hebrews account.

For two courses in March, and two courses more in April following make four
courses, two more in May make six, and two more in June make eight. The eighth
Abbia's course, of which Zacharias was. I conclude then John's Conception to be
in June, where we make his Birth, which in truth was in March following. And so
consequently Christ's Conception was in December, six months after John's
Conception, in which December we make Christ's Birth, which Birth of Christ was
in truth in September following in the Feast of Tabernacles, beginning at the
15. of Septem. and lasting 8. days, till the end of the 22. day, in which feast
time of 8. days Christ pitched in the Tabernacle of his flesh amongst us, as
appears, John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, [(...)] and pitched his
Tabernacle amongst us. He became a Scaenite. Thus behold the sweet Harmony
between the Type and the thing typified, for Christ came not to break the Law,
but to fulfill it.

And thus desiring your Honor to vindicate my credit from the unjust
imputation that some, peradventure seeing this, may lay upon me as a Brocher of
Novelties, in that I endeavor to wade further in the Originals, and
paralleling of Scriptures then the vulgar do, having written this to satisfy
your Honors request only, I rest now and ever.

Your Honors obliged in all Duty and Service. R. S.

Sect. III. Of the Occasion of this error, the invalidity whereof is manifested.
SAint Chrysostom, Postscript.
mistaking the story of Zachary, John's father; was the occasion of this error
in circumstance of time. For he supposed that Zachary ministered in the Priests
office in the seventh month, which is September, and fourteenth course of the
Priests, and not in the fourth month June, and eighth course, which is the
truth; thus we following his calculation, Christ's Conception was in March, and
his birth in December, as we commonly reckon. Now that which deceived the
golden mouthed father, (though all is not gold that glisters) was this.
Chrysostom supposed, (as Arias Montanus the Popish Spaniard does,) that
Zachary was the High Priest, and therefore the course of his ministry must
needs be on the 10. of Septem. the seventh month, because on that day, only
called (Iom Haccippurim) the day of expiation of sins, (...)
and reconciliation, the High Priest must go into the Debyr, the Oracle, or
Sanctum Sanctorum once a year only. Now I will show you Chrysostomes ground
for these two things that moved him to think. 1. That Zachary was High Priest.
And 2. That therefore consequently he must on the 10. of Septem. go into the
Sanctum Sanctorum.

Drusius on Luke 1.5. says thus, In Historia Hebraica Johannes Baptistes
vocatur, (...)
(Cohen Gadol,) hoc est magnus, sacerdos: quae vox aeque significat Pontificem
maximum and Principem sacerdotum. Therefore its probable that Zachary was
Princeps Sacerdotum, which he might be, and yet not Sacerdos maximus. For
though these two words Sacerdos maximus, and Princeps Sacerdotum be often
promiscuously used one for the other, yet the distinction is plain in
Scripture that Princeps sacerdotum (...) (Sar Haccohanim,) was the chief
Priest only of every one of the 24. Classes or Courses of Priests, and so its
likely that Zachary was the Prince of the Priests, of his eighth course of
Abbia. But Sacerdos maximus or Pontifex, is he that is Head of all the 24.
Classes and Orders of Priests, which Zachary was not. For these reasons.

First, because he is called, Luke 1.5. [(...)] a certain Priest, therefore
not Pontifex maximus; for had it been certain that Zachary had been High
Priest, Buke would have so styled him, and not have spoken uncertainly of a
certain and known dignity in the Pronoune indefinite, [(...) quidam] which
indefinite Pronoune, [(...)] he presently defines, saying Of the course of
Abbia, so v. 8. Its said of Zachary, that while he executed the Priests office
before God. And St. Luke does not style him with the Highpriests office; which
title of dignity to omit, had been an indignity offered by St. Luke to Zachary.

Secondly, for that it is said, v. 8. that his Lot was to burn incense when he
went into the Temple of the Lord. And v. 11. that there appeared an Angel to
Zachary, standing on the right side of the Altar of Incense. For these two
reasons Chrysostom and Arias think Zachary to be an High Priest, whereas all
Jews know, that the Candlestick, Table and Altar of Incense were without the
Sanctum Sanctorum, (not within as they suppose,) and therefore being placed
without, they were daily gone unto by Zachary, and other sacrificers in their
courses. And thus much of Chrysostom's and Arias Montanus grounds, no solider
then an Irish Quagmire to trust to.

Thirdly, Mr. Broughton says that there was an Old Record in Greek found at
Rome, (as the Romanists say but it is not now extant to be showed,) that
mentions Zachary to have ministered in the seventh month. And thus all error
comes from Rome, that bitter Star, Worme-wood, cast into the fountains of
the Scriptures and Universities, to corrupt and bitter them, not to better
them, as Moses tree did the waters of bitter Marah. Now I will add after
Confutation of the error, a probable Confirmation of the truth.

The Rabbines in Midrash Rabba conclude, that the Messiah must be born in the
month Aethanim or Tisri, that is in Septem. the month of strengths, full of
feasts, to teach of the Messiah. And so agreeably we find in Moses that the
three chief Anniversary Feasts do foretell and typifie out Christ's times.

1. Their Passover, and our Easter prefiguring his death, falls out fitly in
the first month for redemption from Egypt, and of our redemption by Christ, 2.
Their Feast of weeks, or harvest, fifty days after the Passover, or joy of
the ^aw, when the fire of the Law was given Israel; jumps with our Pentecost or
Whitsontide, when the fiery law of the spirit was given by Jesus in cloven
tongues, Acts 2. 3, The feast of dwelling in Tabernacles on the 15. of
September, for eight days; Is suitable to our Lords pitching in the Tabernacle
of his flesh amongst us, or his Nativity in Septem. the first month after the
Creation. The feast of joyful meditation of Gods dwelling in the cloud amongst
Israel, is a memorial of Christ dwelling in the flesh with us, John 1.14. And
the Word was made flesh, and he pitched his Tabernacle amongst us. So in 1
Kings 8.2. this is plainly typified. Solomon brings the Arc and Tabernacle
into the Temple, in the seventh month called Aethanim or September, month of
strength and fruits, and the Cherubims spread their wings over the Ark. This
Arc and Tabernacle was the type of the Ark and Tabernacle of Christ's body: The
bringing in of this Tabernacle into the Temple, the coming of Christ into the
world, in the Temple of Zarobabel, under which he was borne, preached, and
wrought miracles. And the Cherubims are the Angels, spreading their wings of
Protection over him, proclayming him singing at his birth. And this was in the
month Aethanim or September, (the month of strengths, or fruits and feasts,)
wherein Christ was borne, bringing strength, and fruits of righteousness into
the world.
And thus having showed your Honor the sweet Harmony between the type and the
thing typified: the feast of Taberacles in September, and Christ in the same
time pitching in this Tabernacle of his flesh, amongst us; The Concent between
the history and the mystery, I conclude with that of the Apostle, Great is the
mystery of Godliness, God-manifest in the flesh. For the true Calculation of
the months Consult with Munsters Calendarium Hebraicum.

FINIS.

