Six strange PROPHESIES Predicting wonderful events, to betide these years of
Danger, in this Climate, whereof some have already come to pass, Well worthy
of Note.

The first being found in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth: The other in
the Reign of King Henry the Eight:

Printed by a true Copy with new Additions.

Viz 1 Mother Shiptons Prophesies 2 Ignatius Loyolla --. 3 Sybilla's
Prophesies. 4 Merlins Prophesies. 5 Otwel Bins Prophesies. 6 M Brightmans
Prophesies.


Mother Shipton

Wolsey



Printed for Francis Coals, 1642.

The first Prophecy by Ignatius.
IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four or five.
After the E is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
Prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall till many a day.
The ninth shall die young, and the first
Perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be ^he time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three;
For then the Eagle shall hava help
By craft to catch the Lions whelp,
And hurt him sore; except the same
Be cured by the Maidens name.
In July month of the same year
Saturn conjoyns with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prize.
And sure much alteration
Sha! happen in religion
Believe this truly, if then you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be^
The lines (I confess impartially) are very mysterious, and withal they are
involved in a stupendous obscurity. They seem as aenigmaticall as Sphynx his
hidden Riddle yet I doubt not but that your judicious minds will prove as
auspicious unto this, as Oedipus did to his.

You may enucleate the genuine sense, and signification of the words, if you
do but seriously, revolve them.

When the formidable Armado was dessipated in Eighty eight, this Kingdom did
flourish a long time in peace and prosperous tranquillity, unto one thousand
six hundred and thrirty four or five: After Queen Elizabeth died, King James
came out of Scotland, and inherited the imperial Crown after her.

A plot all men know was most nefariously hatched in his Reign, to wit, the
Gunpowder Treason: which not preventing him, he swayed the Scepter very
peacefully in a great succession of future time.

Prince Henry the Ninth of that name died young, and king Charles the first of
that name reigned next in Majesty (whom God long preserve, and protect from the
wicked plots of his enemies.) The beginning of these petrilous times, began in
1639, The next four verses I wll leave to the exposition of the Reader hereof.

The Philosophers have given their unite a stipulation, and with all the
Astrologians have affirmed in their solid assertions, that when Saturn has
any conjunction with Jupiter, great wars and bloody times shall ensue, and I am
sure their opinions have not proved falliblem this respect. Many false Prophets
are now risen amongst us, and do Prophecy false things to the people, who
dare presume to preach in Tubs to their Schismatic Auditors: whom they
delude and suggest vain imaginations unto them, that they are sent from
Heaven, and have the Spirit of God, when they have nothing but the Spirit of
error and false-hood. Mahomet has shown indeed his prize sufficiently amongst
us, for too many (I suppose) in our times rather Mahometans, than true
Christians. The alteration of Religion has been very great, and tossed to and
fro by the various wind of every ones opinion.

The last two Verses I refer to the judgment of the Reader: for I will
nominate no man particularly.

This Prophecy is stupendous, and as it includes a mstyery, so it includes
verity withal: as by the former it is involved in obscurity, so by the latter
it is illuminated in apparent truth.

The demonstration of Prophetic Divinations predictates the future estate of a
Kingdom, and whatsoever has been expressed in this lately mentioned, is
already fulfilled in exemplary relations.

But the distracted opinions of most men are still so promiscuous, that we
want Prophets enough to exclaim against them; for some they will not bear,
others they neglect, others they in a despicable detestation do contemn.

But God of his infinite mercy grant, that we may hereafter all make true use
of the sincere Prophecy of him, and his Gospel that these various mists of
errors may be expelled, these roaring waves of Schism may be calmed, and the
distempers of the whole Realm cured perfectly.

The second Prophecy of Mother Shipton.
WHen she heard King Henry the Eight should be King, and Cardinal Wolsey
should be at York, she said that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York
with the King, and the Cardinal hearing being angry, sent the Duke of
Suffolk, and the Lord Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the
Kings House near York, where leaving their men, they went to Master Besley to
York, and desired him to go with them to Mother Shiptons house, where when
they came they knocked at the door, she said, Come in Master Besley, and those
honorable Lords with you, and Master Besley would have put in the Lords before
him, but she said, come in Master Besley you know the way, but they do not.
This they thought strange that she should know them, and never saw them; then
they went into the house, where there was a great fire, and she bade them
welcome, calling them all by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and
they drunk and were very merry. Mother Shipton said the Duke, if you knew what
we came about, you would not make us so welcome, and she said the messenger
should not be hanged; Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said the Cardinal
should never see York; yea, said she, I said he might see York, but never
come at it, But said the Duke when he comes to York thou shall be burnt; We
shall see that said she, and plucking her Handkerchieffe off her head she threw
it into the fire, and it would not burn; then she took her staff and turned
it into the fire, and it would not burn, then she took it and put it on
again; Now (said she) I might have burned. Mother Shipton (quoth the Duke)
what think you of me? my Love said she, the time will come you will be as low
as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Piercy said, and what say you of
me? My Lord (said she) shoe your horse in the quick, and you will do well,
but your body will be buried in York pavement and your head shall be stolen from
the Bar and carried into France. Then said the Lord Darcy, and what think you
of me? She said, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it will do you
no good, you are going to war, you will pain many a man, but you will kill
none; so they went away.

Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood, and going to the top of the
Tower, he asked where York was and how far it was thither, and said that one
said he should never see York; Nay, said one, she said you might see York,
but never come at it. He vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then they
showed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence? he said that he
would soon be there: but being sent for by the King, he dyed in the way to
London, at Leicester, of a Lask; And Shiptons wife said to Master Besley,
yonder is a fine stall built for the Cardinal in the Minster, of Gold Pearl,
and precious stones, go and present one of the pillars to King Henry and he
did so.

Master Besley seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her
to tell him some more of her Prophesies: Master, said she, before that Owes
Bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall fall
in the night, until they get the highest stone of Trinity Church to be the
lowest stone of Owes Bridge; then the day will come when the North shall rue it
wondrous sore, but the South shall rue it for evermore; When Hares kindle on
cold hearth stones, and Lads shall marry Ladies, and bring them home, then
shall you have a year of pining hunger and then a Dearth without corn; A
woeful day shall be seen in England, a King and Queen, the first coming of
the King of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come through the
Barie, and when the King of the North shall be at London Bridge, his Tail shall
be at Edenborough; After this shall water come over Owes Bridge, and a Windmill
shall be set on a tower, and an Elm-tree shall lie at every man's door, at that
ti^e women shall wear great Hats and great bands, and when there is a Lord
Major at York, let him beware of a stab; When two Knights shall fall out in
the Castle yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives after; When all
Colton Hag has borne Crops of Corn, seven years after you shall hear news,
there shall two Judges go in and out at Mungate Bar.

Then wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much woe to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry well-away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most,
you shall not know of the war over night, yet you shall have it in the morning,
and when it comes it shall last three years, between Cadron and Air shall be
great warfare, when all the World is as lost, it shall be called Christ's
Crossed. when the Battle begins, it shall be where Crookback Richard made his
fray* they shall say, to warfare for your King for half a crown a day, but
stir not (she will say) to warfare for your King on pain of hanging, but stir
not, for he that goes to complain, shall not come back again. The time will
come when England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall be
heard to speak, then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the
one is down they will go to London Town; Then there will be a great Battle
between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, and when
they come to Brammamore, they fight and are again pacified for a time, then
there will be a great Battle between England and Scotland at Stoknmore; Then
will Ravens sit on the Cross and drink as much blood of Nobles, as of the
Commons, then woe is me, for London shall be destroyed for ever after, Then
there will come a woman with one eye and she shall tread in many men's blood to
the knee, and a man leaning on a staff by her and she shall say to him, what
art thou? and he shall say, I am the King of Scots, and she shall say go with
me to my house, for there are three Knights, and he will go with her, and stay
there three days and three nights, then will England be lost; and they will
cry twice a day England is lost, Then there will be three Knights in Petergate
in York, and the one shall not know of the other; there shall be a child
borne in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him three
horses to hold, while they win England, and all Noble blood shall be gone but
one; and they shall carry him to Sheriff Nuttons Castle six miles from York,
and he shall dye there, and they shall choose there an Earl in the field, and
hanging their horses on a thorn. And rue the time that ever they were borne,
to see so much blood shed, Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they
shall keep them out three days and three nights, and a penny loaf shall be
within the Bar at half a Crown, and without the Bar at a penny; And they will
swear if they will not yield to blow up the Town Walls. Then they will let
them in, and they will hang up the Major Sheriff's and Aldermen, and they will
go into Crouch Church, there will three Knights go in and but one come out
again and he will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take House,
Tower, or Bower for twenty one years, and whilst the World endures, there
shall never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or Queens, but the Kingdom
shall be governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after
this shall be a white harvest of Corn gotten in by women. Then shall be in
the North that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have seen a man to
day, and for one man there shall be a thousand women, there shall be a man
sitting upon St. James Church hill weeping his fill; And after that a Ship come
sailing up the Thames till it come against London, and the Master of the Ship
shall weep, and the Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he has
made so good a voyage, and he shall say; Ah what a goodly City this was, none
in the world comparable to it, and now there is scarce left any house that can
let us have drink for our money.

Unhappy he that lives to see these days,
But happy are the dead Shiptons Wife says.
In th'worlds old age, this woman did foretell,
Strange things should hap, which in our times have fell.
The Prophecy of old Sybilla.
WHen Scotlands hundredth and ninth unconq^er'd King
The sixteen hundred thirty and nint^ year,
Into his age of thirty nine shall reign,
Then shall the Pop^ll overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire
For Scotland shall that blessed work begin
Then shall the whore of Babel we had her,
Be bani^ht quite, which Bishops did bring in,
Then thou brave England which was led so blind
By their perverse Episcopapall pride
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed, who cruelly have cried;
So that, that sacred Prophetess Sybilla,
Shall shortly come to pass she tells ^om Milla.
And Tom tells me, and I must tell't agai^e,
Thr^ugh Scotland, England, Ireland France and Spain.
Merlins Prophecy.
ON Boreas wings then hither shall be borne,
Throu^h Week ore Tweed, a Princely Unicorn,
Who brought into the world his own fair Crest,
A rampant Lion figured on his breast
And to his Arms 6 Lions more shall quarte^
With six French flowers environed with the Garter
^oyning by Fates unchangeable dispose
The Northern Thistle to the S^utherne ^ose:
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain,
With pious zeal during his blessed reign.
That Lincoln was, tha^ London is, that York shall be;
Brave London prays those days she never may see
Master Brightmans Prophesies.
WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame,
Full of lukewarmnesse, glory vain,
The worst in works, and outward form,
And with contrary factions torn,
When Romish Rites by reformation,
Shall be exlpell'd out of this Nation,
Lord beggar Bishops then shall come
To ruin, and be overthrown,
The Priests shall be vile to each wight,
Their downfall read with much delight;
For God will not them guiltles hold,
That neither have been hot nor cold.
The Scotch Church shall be in condition
A virgin free from superstition,
They shall be joined in covenant,
Against which the world shall boast and vaunt:
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
Until she truly her self reform;
Such burly burly and such stir,
No form of Church shall remain in her:
But reformation must take breath,
From the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
The Prophecy of old Otwell Bins, kept by M. Smith Vicar of Hudderfield 40
ye^res.
Then James shall seek a second crown,
In pulling Pope and Papists down;
But James shall vanish from their face
At half Elizabeth's royal race.
Then using foreign policies,
Grudgings and discontents arise;
Yet shall they assemble at the seat
Of Parliament, for a work most great;
But strange opinions there shall sow,
Dissentions that too high shall grow:
And Laodicea's, Englands Church,
Of grace and beauty some shall lu^ch;
And Smiths of policy shall invent,
To cast molds of new government,
While vulgar birds of weakest wing
Grow stout against their Eagle King.
Whose just integrou^ heart shall prove
The Adamant of subjects love:
Then pride shall some in prison lock,
And lop a head off on a block:
By honest power they shall bring down
An Aspirer that assumed a Crown;
That he whose power did Laws contemn
Might find a grave, no Diadem.
Some Comic Scenes shall then be acted
By vulgar players much distracted;
The Gospel from a tub or tun
Shall broached by Mechanics run.
Pettic^ats shall in pulpits Preach,
And women be allowed to teach;
And in those gloomy dogged days
They shall tear off the Muses Bays.
Thus strife and fury shall increase,
And Roundheads shall disturb the peace
Of Religion, while they it toss
In blanketts, and pull down the Cross.
The Brownists shall no old prayers brook,
Sermons shall drown the Service-booke:
Then all men in those times shall see
Great troubles and calamity.
Then on the Irish bogs and heath,
Many a man shall taste of death.
The Soldiers wages shall increase,
Till wars at last in conquest cease:
To such as are good Landlords known,
In hostile times some love is shown:
Bu^ for all such as have great store,
They Are in less safety than the poor:
Then twenty pounds of coin in hand,
Is worth so much of yearly land,
From Ireland then there shall come one,
Must loose his head upon a stone:
But when England does swim inflouds
Of plen^y and grows proud of goods,
Then from their sleep they shall be waked,
To know themselves both blind and naked;
Christ's Church must know some misery,
There shall be a doleful tragedy:
The Lord abroad his sword will send,
unless they warning take t'amend:
Yet Germany, France, and Brittanny,
This last act of your tragedy,
Good days will follow, bad ones cease,
There shall be plenty and great peace:
The whore of Romes nose shall be slit,
And of her proud attire be stripped:
In the mean time Bishops shall be
Thrown down from all their dignity;
Their H^erarchie and their train
shall never recover strength again:
Nor is Romes City only Rome,
But all the Popes Dominion;
So that Rome feels her self annoyed,
While she in Ireland is destroyed:
In forty one by computation.
The Pope shall fall by reformation:
A clergy man shall then suffice
His pride with one poor benefice;
Then Cambridge and the Oxonian
Shall be scorned by the Rotundian,
And some that cannot say no^ sing,
Shall drink much at a troubled spring,
And Cobblers then shall leave their l^st,
In Sermons up their gall to cast:
Magpies and Parrats then shall prate,
Both of the Eagle and the State,
Until they bring things in conclusion,
To much disorder and confusion.
Rebels and men most seditious
Shall make the times prove pernicious,
Rich men shall do things unbefitting,
An upright Judge be scarce found sitting:
Vpstart honor shall seem dreams,
And Bishops Seas prove little streams;
While many feathered foul shall fly
Beyond the Seas for Ieopardie;
Rumors shall be of wars and Arms,
And there shall be of Sects great swarms:
A sort of mad rude common people
Shall pull the cross from every steeple.
The King while they do thus presume,
Unto this Realm that right shall doom,
He shall this Kingdom wisely guide,
And other Kingdoms more beside:
Then Peers and Commons shall elect,
Whose Laws shall ever take effect;
No man's shall Lawyers council crave,
For men their right at home shall have;
And Officers each Town within,
Shall right their wrongs and punish sin;
Worthies be nine, and reckon we,
And this the tenth and last shall be:
The Moon obscured full Sixety year,
Shall then get light and shine full clear;
While England then for joy shall sing,
And bless the reign of their good King.
FINIS.

