BLOODY NEWS FROM THE NORTH, DECLARING The particulars of three several
Fights, near Carlisle, Berwick, and Scarbrough between the English* Scots, and
French, under the command of

Lieu. Genesis Crumwell, Col. Genesis Lambert, General Monro, Col. Sir Tho: Tildsley
Colonel Boynton, Major Sanderson, and Major Ashton.
WITH The number killed and taken on each side, the routing of the French near
Scarbrough, the great blow given to the Scots near Carlisle, Monro's retreating
into Scotland with the remainder of his Horse and Foot, and the dispersing of
Col. Tildsley's forces near Berwick.

Likewise, the marching of the English Army toward Scotland, and Lieu. Genesis
Cromwels Summons to the said Kingdom.

London, Printed for G. Lawrenson, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange,
1648.

BLOODY NEWS FROM THE NORTH D^claring The proceeding of the English and
Scottish Armies, and their late Fights nee^ Barwick and Carlisle.
SIR,
THE Royal Party in the City of Carlisle, are very resolute, and insolent,
denying to yield, who says, they are resolved to sacrifice their lives for
their King and Country, rather then to yield to the mercy either of General or
Soldiery; so said the late Colches^erian Shavers, but says the Proverb,
Necessity has no Law, Hunger will break through stone walls; the late
sufferings of Carlisle, may suffice for a present president to them, who
notwithstanding their great and vast Numbers, and their gallant Heroes of
Chivalry, yet forced to surrender, and accept of conditions.

On Friday last they sallied out of the City with a considerable party of Horse
and Dragoons, marched some few miles up into the Country, fell to their old
trade of plundering, and had gathered great store of cattle in a heard
together; who even in the nicke of time as they were driving them away, a party
of Major Genesis Lanberts Horse, came in to the Countries assistance, fell upon
the Scots and English Cava^ry, rescued the cattle, and put diverse of the enemy
to the sword, killing above 30 upon the place* and took near upon as many
prisoners, with the loss of eleven men, 5 slain, and 6 wounded.

The rest of their Body retreated, and the night approached, which much
eclipsed the splend^r of our Victory, and our horses being tired, and the ways
difficult,? could not mainta^n the pursuit no further, so that they are now
marching up to the headquarters of Lieu. Genesis Cr^mwell, their Major General
being likewise marching toward the Borders of Scotland with 3000 horse, as
also col. Whites and col. Hackers going after him with all speed from the siege
of Pontefract.

The Lieul. Genesis is likewise marching toward the Borders, and has sent the
Bishopric horse commanded by Major Sanderson, and another of his own Regiments
by the way of Anwick, to dissipate the English Enemy about Barwick, commanded
by Sir Thomas Tildsley, and to fight them, or force them to a ^etreat; and we
hear that they have lately fallen upon some of their out-quarters five miles on
this side Chillingham, killed some, and took diverse prisoners, and have
alarmed the rest, who (we hear) are using all means possible to escape their
mercy, and desire to move ^estward, but it is believed, col. Lamberts Forces
will interpose between them and Carlisle, and frustrate their design of joining
with the Lord ^yron in Wales.

Monro is ^retreated into Scotland with all the Scots both Horse and Foot, the
Lord Lanerick is joined with him with the additionall Forces, consisting of
about 3000. who upon their march toward Edinburgh to the committee of Estates,
received intelligence, that the said committee were all forced from thence, the
castle surprised by old Genesis Leven, and that the Marq. of Argyle with a great
Army were entered the city; whereupon they changed their motion, and is now
marching toward the West of Scotland; but Lieut. Cen. David Lesley having
notice thereof advanced with a considerable party of horse, fell upon the Lord
L^nericks Briggade, and dispersed most of them.

Lieu. Genesis Cru^well is resolved to send summons to Scotland for surrender of
the English Garrisons to the obedience of the Parliament of England, and to
have a mutual correspondency between both Nations, which is the earnest
prayers of

Your most obliged friend, R. SMITH.
Richmond 18. Sept. 1648.
The General Summons of the Royal party in Scotland, to the Commonalty of the
respective Counties throughout the whole Nation.
SIR,
THE Royal party in Scotland have summoned in the Country, to assist M^nro
against England, but the Scots Jockies refuse to engage, slighting the Summons,
which causes the Commit of Estates to give express Orders for an
inforcement; yet all cannot prevail, the major part disserting their own
habittations, and flies to the Marquis of Argyle for shelteth who^e gallantry
toward the Commonalty, induces the whole Kingdom to adhere to him, and have
now completed three or four thousand horse and foot, for their safety and
preservation, to be commanded and conducted by the said Marquess, being
resolved to oppose Mouro and his Army, and give a check to the Results of the
Committee of Estates.

Lieut. Genesis David Lesley has raised two thousand old Soldiers, desires a
conjunction with the Marquis, who is now upon his march from the North toward
the City of Edinburgh.

But Monro uses ^is utmost endeavor to obstruct the same, and is now marching
from the Confines of England, to secure the said City, and Committee, being
much disturbed with new commotions and insurrections.

They are pursued exceeding close by Lieut. General Crumwell, and Major Genesis
Lambert, who are resolved to have restitution of all their plu^dered goods and
cattle, which they have so barbarously seized on, and took from the
Inhabitants in these parts, the Lieuten. Genesis having de^lared, That he is
resolved to hazard life, estate, and fortune, for the privilege and liberty of
the subject, and to preserve the freeborn people of this Kingdom from violence
and oppression, and therefore will give his utmost assistance, for the
restoring of them to their just rights, and remanding back the Cattle which
has been taken from them, and sent into Scotland; this gives great
satisfaction to the Country people, who are so far taken with his declaratory
expressions, that they have tendered theie service in this present Expedition,
proffering to adventure all that is near and dear unto them, for his
assistance, which was well taken, and thanks returned for their late and
present forwardness in showing themselves willing to promote so great a work,
and to root out, and disperse the enemies of Religion, King, and Kingdom.

We hear that the Royal party in Cheshire had lately a design to have
surprised the City of Chester for the King, and to have put most of the
Officers and soldiers to the sword; but even in the very nick of time, they
were discovered, and the grand Actors taken, and executed.

The like horrid and persidious complottings have been fomented in several
other parts of the Kindome, but by the providence of the great Jehovah still
frustrated.

Scarbrough holds out with great insolency, the young Gentleman Col. Bointon
denies a surrender, having fair promises of relief from the Prince, some Forces
are landed there, but no considerable party, not amounting to above three or
four hundred. Col^nell Bethell the Commander in chief against it, is resolved
to storm.

The like preparations is making at Pomfract, the officers and others denying a
surender, Ba^teries are raising, and skaling ladders sent for.

They are in all 500 strong at Scarbrough, with the 300 that came by Sea, which
one Major Ashton commands in chief, being Governor of the town, who upon
Sunday last, made a salley forth upon the Parliaments forces, fell upon the
quarters of Col. Legard, forced them from two or three Guards, burned one, and
advanced up toward the main Guard; but renowned col. Bethell having received
the allarm, with a party of horse advanced, charged the said Major Ashton,
disputed the ground, killed nine, took about fourteen prisoners, routed the
Body, and pursued them to their very Works, and we hear have since stormed,
killed Major Ashton, and put many of the Scots, French, and Irish to the sword.

FINIS.

