Imprimatur,

Joh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom Richardo
Archiepis. Eboracensi, a Sacris Domesticis.
Datum, Episcopo-Thorpae, Aug. 5. 1667.
A REPLY To a Pamphlet called, Oaths no Gospel-Ordinance, etc.

Wherein a Sermon Preached at Carlisle, Aug. 17. 1664. with all the Arguments
therein produced ( to prove that our Savior did not forbid all Swearing) is
fully Vindicated, the Text of St. Mat. 5 34 and St. James 5. 12. are plainly
interpreted, the Truth undeniably manifested, and the Objections to the
contrary. what ever could be sound in the Writings of Francis Howgill, Sam:
Fisher, or any other Quaker satisfactorily answered.

By Alan Smalwood, D. D.

Prove. 12. 19. The lip of Truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
Tongue is but for a moment.

York, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Francis Mawbarne, 1667.

To the Honorable Sir JAMES PENNYMAN Knight and Baronet, one of his Majesty's
Deputy Lieutenants for the North Riding of the County of York, and Justice of
Peace in the said Riding, and in the County Palatine of Duresme.
Sir,
THis Dedication is not to acquaint the World either with your firm adhesion
to the Church of England, or your utter abhorrence, and detestation of Sects;
for those are sufficiently known: nor to provoke you to a greater severity
against Sectaries, for that is contrary to my maine design, which is, by Gods
blessing, so to rectify their judgments, and reduce them to such a measure of
Conformity, that no rigor of Law can reach them: nor to contribute the least
Glory to your Name, whereto no Addition can be affixed by the mean endeavors
of so and obscure a person; but indeed (which expression has so little of
Courtship, that it cannot probably pass for a Complement) to please my self,
who am not more ambitious of any worldly honor, than to be justly accounted
grateful to those Persons, who have merited of me beyond all possibility of
compensation: In the Catalogue of whom, not to place You, and many others,
(some dead, some alive) of that Loyal Family, whereof you are chief, would be
a crime inexpiable in the Judgment of all those that have known you, and their
continued (not to say continual) benefactions to, Sir,

Your humble Servant, A. SMALWOOD.

To the Reader.
THe God of Heaven and Earth, the searcher of all hearts knows, That my
design in writing and Publishing this Discourse was, and is for the fuller
discovery, and clearing the truth, and the conversion of those seduced
Christians that are in Error. I bless God, I can truly say with the Apostle,
That my hearts desire, and Prayer Romans 10. 1.
for them is, that they may be saved: And in order thereto, may come to the
knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Nay, such affection I have for them, and so really I wish their good, that I
would willingly use my best endeavor to undeceive them, that they may enjoy
the Liberties of other Subjects, and be secured from the danger and penalties
of the Law. ^at what I have holden forth with the right hand, some have thought
fit to receive with the left. Of which number, one F. H. (who is to me so mere
a stranger, that so far as I know, we have never seen one another face) is
one, who in a pretended confutation of a Sermon Preached by me August 17. 1664.
at Carlisle, out of a mistaken zeal to his own cause, contrary to mine
intention, and then -- expressed profession, tells the world in Print, That I,
and such as I, have by such Public Discourses as that of mine, blown the
sparks, and kindled a flame in the Rulers, and incensed them, and stirred them
up to severity and harshnesse against them who fear the Lord, etc. (page 11.)
And lest the Reader should fail to take notice thereof, he speaks to the same
purpose in diverse other places of his book. But this wight perhaps fall out
accidentally, and beyond his purpose: And therefore his words (page 5.) are
more fully expressive, that his meaning was, that my very end in Preaching and
Printing that Sermon, was to stir up persecution against them. I had said to
this purpose in my Sermon Sect. 2. That were it granted, that Christ had
forbidden all Swearing, We should be necessitated to disobey the Magistrates
Legal commands. The Reason is, because we must obey God rather then man, and
consequently not act by an humane precept what is prohibited by a divine. And
the truth of that proposition is evident, and undeniable: For that is a Legal
command, which is a command according to Law: So the Magistrates imposing an
Oath in many Cases is a Legal command; yet were it not to be obeyed, had our
Savior countermanded all Swearing. So what I said is demonstratively true; and
yet F. H. avers the contrary, and says (page 4.) That there is no necessity to
indge, that he that fears (he should have said vesuses, or else he speaks
nothing to the purpose) to Swear -- does therefore disobey the Magistrates
Legal command: which Assertion is false, and contradictive of it self. The
Magistrate Legally (that is by Law) commands F. H. to Swear; F. H. will not,
does not: F. H. there disobeys the Magistrates Legal commands, Yet these
(says he, page 5.) are but the secret smitings and suggestions of A. S. to
render them odious to the Magistrates, and all people, who dissent from him in
judgment. Is not this a strange man, that will take upon him to judge of, and
discover the thoughts of another man's heart, as though he knew them better than
himself* But this is a subtility, which tends visibly to begit in his brethren
a dissafection to me, as though what I said to reclaim them, sprung rather out
of hatred to their Persons, than love to their souls; which false conceit once
rooted in them, may create in them a prejudice against what ever they find in
my Writings, by which, in that case, they are like to receive no advantage;
either out of neglect to read them, or in reading them with neglect.

Another like Artifice F. H. makes 2.
great use of, and that is, to make people believe that I am a time-server, and
such an one as makes no conscience of what I say or do, provided it tends to
mine own advantage, and so there need no great regard be had either to what I
Preach, or Print. To which purpose he speaks in the first page of his Epistle
in these words; A. S. has sought to make void Christ's command, for to obey the
command of men. And in the third page of his book, he breaks out into this
expostulation* What would not this man encounter with? or what would not he
oppose, if he have but the power of this world on his side? And again (page
32) he speaks of A. S. and such as he, who sail with Wind and Tide, and exalt
and applaud that which has praise amongst men, and has not the praise of God.
On the contrary, he styles himself in his Frontispeece, A sufferer for Christ,
and his Doctrine; and those of his own party, the Righteous (page 8^.) which
may probably induce those seduced persons of his opinion to adhere the more
constantly to him, and disrespect what ever can be said by such as are of a
contrary Judgment, because they are not only erroneous, but ungodly persons,
that make no conscience what they either Speak, or Act. But to prevent the
misunderstanding of well-meaning people, let me for a little speak foolishly
(as the Apostle words it) in mine own vindication. When the prevailing party
had subdued that part of the Nation where I then lived, the Covenant, an
unlawful Oath (as I ever held it) was tendered to me; and when it was perceived
that I had no mind to swallow that Pill, I was urged (not without intimations
of favor) to give it to my Parishioners. Which proposalls when I had refused,
I was upon that account deprived of an Annual Pention (without the least
compensation to this day) which I had from the then most pious Prince, since
glorious Martyr King Charles the first, which had it been continued to this
present would have amounted to above 2000. Marks. I do not know that any
Quake^ for refusing to Swear, suffered so considerable a loss in his Estate;
the truth whereof (if need were) would be attested by hundreds of people yet
living, it being a matter well known throughout Cleveland in Yorkshire, where
I then inhabited: I bless God, by whose only Grace I was enabled, rather to
Suffer, than do Evil. Now this may charitably be thought to have begot in me
a compassionate affection toward others (and that indeed set me upon this
work) but it were hard to brand me now, as one that in his old Age, for
worldly and base ends, would run himself, and endeavor to carry other
innocent persons headlong to Hell. I should have thought, that one that
pretends so much to Conscience as F. H. should never have cast such groundless
aspersions upon an unknown stranger; I beseech God it may never be laid to his
charge. Only I desire the Reader to consider seriously what it is F. H. would
not say to advance his Cause.

I am one of a disdainful spirit, (page 32.) and that all that dissent from me
in opinion, I call Fanatiques, and Paul shall hardly go free, nor diverse of
the ancient Fathers. And in his Epistle to the Reader, and in his Book (page
2.) he again and again harps upon this string. As far as I remember I used the
word but twic^ in all, once (Sect. 2.) where I mentioned a Sect of Fanatics in
France five hundred years ag^e. And I am sure that neither St. Paul, nor any of
the Fathers were amongst them. And I suspect that F. H. had scarcely ever heard
of them, had he not found them in my Book; and therefore I should think he
should not much concern himself therein. In the other place, (Sect. 16.) I
confess I meant of the Quakers, and there indeed I intended them so little ill,
that I was pleading in their behalf to the Judges for a dispensation. You see
how I am requited (not much unlike S. Fishers dealing with Bishop Gauden) and
how some return me hatred for my good will. I used the word as being of the
largest sense, as comprehensive of Anabaptists (who refuse all swearing) as
well as Quaker^. Nor did I suspect that it would have been offensive to them,
for I heard one of them call some of other Sects Fanatiques. And I guessed that
that Appellation would not have been unacceptable to those of that Judgment,
some of whom at lest have pretended to inspirations, prophetical infusions,
and extraordinary measures of the Spirit beyond others, which is the very
genuine meaning of the word. And therefore I desire all who are concerned, not
to suffer themselves to be abused by F. Hs. malignant Rhetoric, as though I
had desired to cast any aspersion upon them, or intended them any harm, at
that very instant, when I was making a serious intercession for their impunity,
I did endeavor to be inoffensive in all mine expressions. But I see that no
Care is armor of proof against those who are minded to pick quarrels.

plead against him (p. 2.) making his words one thing, and his intention
another (p. 18.) to this purpose he speaks in seven or eight several places.
But this is a mere calumny, and a groundless slander. And it was not well, that
in the heat of his mistaken zeal he did forget the ninth Commandment. If the
defense of Truth were his aim, he must confess that it is prejudiced by such
Artifices. I thank God, so blasphemous a conceit never entered into my mind.
What our Saviors words were there is no question. All men grant that he said,
Swear not all, etc. but to find out the true, and full importance of these
words by the context, and divine Reason was my design; and he cannot show that
in the least I have failed therein, though he would prepossess his Reader with
all prejudice against me imaginable.

A. S. were the veriest Atheist, and the most corrupt, and selfeended creature
in the world; yet the wise Reader will easily descry that all this is wholly
extrinsecall, and impertinent to the question in hand, which is not whether F.
H. or A. S. be the wiser or honester man; but whether of them does more truly
expound the words of Christ. What is false ought not to be received, because it
is the Opinion of a deluded, or mistaken Saint; nor is Truth to be rejected,
because an hypocrite, or a great sinner professes it. It had not been safe to
have disbelieved the holy Jesus, because the Devils proclaimed him to be the
Son of God. There is no greater sign of a weak Cause, than by such petty Arts
as F. H. makes use of, to render the Adversaries odious, that the matter it
self (the people being forestalled by prejudice) may never come to an
indifferent hearing.

F. H. the most service, and whereof the most part of his book consists, is,
That when he cannot satisfy the Argument propounded, he falls into tedious
discourses, filling up many Pages with incongruous, and unintelligible
Sentences, which he calls Answers, that the weak, or unwary Reader that looks
no further than to the multitude of his words, may think that he has fully
answered what in few words had been objected against his Tenet. If this be done
out of weakness (as I am very apt to believe) he is indeed to be pitied for
his ignorance, but justly to be blamed for his presumption, that he would take
upon him to Write he knew not what, and answer what he does not understand, and
thereby (being blind himself) to lead others into the ditch. I do much
pity his ignorance, conceiving him to be one that means well, and strongly
conceited that he is in the Truth, as having pinned his faith upon S. Fishers
sleeve, and receiving his dictates as oracles, and undervaluing all those (as
S. Fs. mode was) that are of contrary Judgments. And this I do the more, in
regard that I fear his mistakes, and delusions have since been strengthened by
some that he has mistaken for his brethren (Devils may appear in the
resemblance of Angels of Light) who have suggested to him somewhat that he has
made use of out of Authors that have Written in the Learned Languages, which a
mere English Scholar could by no industry have reached. And by his style it is
evident enough that he is no more, for it is so full of incongruities, as
plainly shows, that he understands not his Accidence; and if so, how should he
come to understand what Greek and Latin Authors untranslated have Written?
For his citations of Origin, and other Fathers, happily he may be beholden to
Bishop Gauden, or S. Fisher out of him; but how he should know what the
Romanists (as he quotes them, page 20.) Renerius, (I suppose it should be
Rainerius, for I never heard of the name Renerius) and Jansenius said of the
Waldenses (whose books I think are not to be had in the North of England, and
scarcely read, or ever seen by any Divine there) I can hardly imagine, unless
he had plowed with their heifer.

over-^idden the most weighty matters in the Books and Papers of Dissenters, I
have fully answered in the back end of this Book, whereto I remit the Reader
for satisfaction. And for matters of less moment (although they seemingly tend
to the justification of Error) I shall pass them by, as though I had not noted
them, such as this that he names, his Pamphlet Oaths no Gospel Ordinance, as
though any Orthodox man had ever said they were: Whereas on the contrary our
Tenet is, That they are commanded in the Moral Law.

If any demand why this Discourse was so long before it came forth? I answer,
That I was not fully resolved of Publishing it at the first, because some
judicious friends advised the contrary, whose Opinion I could not deny to be
rational, in regard that not one of mine Arguments were satisfactorily
answered in F. Hs. Pamphlet. Besides, soon after that came to my hands, I heard
there was another Confutation of my Sermon in Manuscript, whereof a worthy
Friend sent me the first lease transcribed, whereby I conceive, that if the
Body be answerable to the Head, it will prove not at all more valuable than
this of F. Hs. But the opinion of those of that party either was, or at lest
was pretended to be, That F. Hs. Treatise was weak, and not altogether
satisfactory; but that this other was a full answer to what ever I had said,
and that out of that consideration, they had a great desire to have it Printed.
In expectation whereof, I have waited now a full year, but all in vain. This
seemed somewhat strange to me, because they might as easily have procured an
impression of that, as F. H. had done of his. which at length occasioned this
conjecture, That so long as I sat still, this brave answer would never come to
light; for then if any one had objected to them my Sermon; they would presently
have said, That F. H. had confuted it. But had I replied to him, this other
would forthwith have been Printed, and F. Hs. piece would by themselves have
been decried, and this applauded. Thus I thought with my self, which guess,
whether it hit upon the full Truth, or no, is not much material. But in this
time whilst I remained in suspense, F. Hs. book has been disperced into all
parts, (and as some of themselves say, beyond the limits) of this Nation; which
is an Argument, that they do not so much undervalue it, as was to me
pretended. Nor is it like that they think that this lurking Manuscript could
have done them more service, then what F. H had Published, for then there is no
Question, but it in place of that other had gone this Pilgrimage, which could
have done their Errant better. But of that I can by no enquiry inform my self
further: but on the contrary F. Hs. Answer is much cried up; Whereupon I was
induced to manifest the defects thereof, and to show to men of mean
capacities, that upon his grounds, he is neither able to make any tolerable
sense of our Saviors words, nor answer any one of my 12. Arguments, but that
his whole discourse is nothing else than a mere delusion of the Reader; whereas
in the way I go, all difficulties are surm^unted, all F. Hs. Objections Vanish,
and every thing will appear plain and rational to any that will take the pains
to Read this ensuing Vindication with an impartial Eye. This motive had
weighed down the scale, had it not been encountered with a contrary, which was,
that such a discourse to those that were already confirmed in the Truth, it was
unnecessary; and to those that are grounded in a contrary persuasion (...)
would be useless, in regard that few of them would in likelibood read it, and
though they did, they were so prepossessed against it, that it was not probable
to make any deep impression upon them. But then again I considered, that it
might possibly be matter of some Advantage to the former sort, either in
explaining some Scripturetexts more clearly, or in confirming their grounds
with greater evidence of Reason than formerly perhaps had been made out to
them. And for others, why might not some weak and unresolved Consciences hence
receive satisfaction? Nay, why might not some, that read it only to Carpe,
and Cavil at, be (through Gods blessing) unwillingly convinced by so clear
and undeniable discoveries of the Truth? There have been some examples of that
kind in former times. How ever though I was not sure of any happy success, I
thought I did but my duty, in bearing witness to the Truth, leaving the event
to Gods gracious disposal; for thereby if I could not (as I desired) benefit
others, yet at lest like a vigil^nt watchman, I should deliver mine own soul.
But whilst I was now and then meditating of these matters, providence so
ordered, that one of F. Hs. persuasion came to me, and told me in a very civili
manner, That if I could (as I had pretended) answer F. Hs. Book, I might do
well to do it for public satisfaction. I replied, That I was Ioth to put my
self to so much trouble, unless there were hopes that at l^st some of of his
Opinion would seriously, and with all indifferency compare F. Hs. Book with
what I should oppose thereto, and submit their Tenants to Truth on what side
soever they could discover it. He professed that he was desirous of
satisfaction in this doubt, and promised, that himself (telling me likewise,
that he was much assured, that several others were of the same inclination)
would with his utmost care and sincerity endeavor to procure it. I believed
that he spoke the dictates of his Conscience. Whereupon I forthwith put on a
resolution to contribute what I could to the effecting of so just a desire: for
I should think no pains too great, could I thereby be isntrumental to convert
one sinner from the error of his way, and thereby save a soul from death, St.
James 5. 20. In order thereto, I humbly beseech our heavenly Father, that it
may please him to bless mine endeavors, and to bring it to the way of Truth
all such as have ^^red, and are deceived. Thus you have the Reason, both why
this piece is now at length exposed to the public view, and why it was
Published no sooner, which was not any difficulty in answering F. H. as you may
easily perceive by perusal of his Pamphlet, wherein there was nothing of
intricacy, but the unintelligibleness of his style.

F. H. or my self) as what is spoken. Regard not the maintaining of any Sect,
or Opinion, so far as to side with it against the Doctrine of Christ. Weigh the
Reasons on both sides in the balance of equal judgment; and above all things
deposit Pride and prejudice. For so long as you are parties, you cannot be
indifferent Arbitrators. No man ought to be Judge in his own cause, how
knowing, or enlightened so ever you conceive your selves to be, think that you
are but men, and consequently, that you are in possibility to be deceived. If
you find (which by no help of Spectacles I could ever discover) or of your
selves can discern any one convincing Argument for the confirmation of F. Hs.
Tenot, I shall gladly become your Pros^lyte. But if there be no such
discoverable, nor any more than this, It must needs be so, because Christ meant
so, (for of his Words what he said, there is no controvers^e) and Christ meant
so, because S. F. and F. H. say he meant so (though that interpretation of his
words be inconsistent with the Context, other Scriptures, and Reason;) then I
must most earnestly beseech you not to labor to uphold the dictates of men for
Doctrines of the Gospel. Think it no disgrace to turn to Truth, but a great
shame to continue obstinate in such an Error as is indefensible. It Is a glorious
victory to conquer ones self, and a mighty honor to submit to a manifest
verity. St. Austin won to himself no less repute in the world by the
Retractation of his mistakes, than by any other of his most solid Tractates.
Read then this little Discourse, but read it so consideratively, as you may
receive benefit, not harm thereby. For if you read it not, it is apparent
that you are so (...) love with your own Opinion, that you purposely neglect
the Apostles advice, Prove all things (1 These. 5. 21.) lest you should
hold-fast that which is good. And if you ^oade it so, as wilfully to shut your
eyes against the shining beams of Truth, and oppose it, because you have long
supported an Error, know that this little Book will one day rise up in
Judgment against you, and you shall have a place amongst them that Love
darkness rather than light, which God of his in^inite mercy prevent. Read
then, and examine what you find with all equability of mind, and be not so
tenaciously addicted to either party (for what is it to you whether F. H. or my
self get the better) as not to embrace the Truth by whomsoever it be made out
to you. Peruse seriously, and consider indifferently what is said on both
sides; and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things.

BEing desired by Colonel Lamplugh then High Sheriff of Cumberland to Preach
the Assize Sermon at Carlisle August 17th. 1664. I made choice of St. Mat. 5.
34. for my Text; from whence I inferred, That our Savior did not intend by
those words, Swear not at all, an absolute universal and unlimited prohibition
of all manner of swearing; which I proved by several Arguments: whereto having
added some other, I was content they should be Printed, in hope that they might
(by Gods blessing) become isntrumental to confirm the wavering, and convert
the erroneous. This it seems fell into the hands of one F. H. a person to me
utterly unknown, who being of a contrary persuasion, has thereto returned a
Reply, which whether it be satisfactory, or no, I refer to the Readers
Judgment.

That the Father, and the Son are one and the same God, immutable in Nature and
Will (for mutability would argue imperfection) and consequently cannot issue
forth contrary commands, for that would evidence a contrariety, or mutability
in heir will: And the Father having commanded Swearing, the Son surely has not
forbidden it. The Argument in form runs ^hus, What ever the Father has
commanded, that the Son has not forbidden: But the Father has commanded
Swearing, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. therefore the Son has not forbidden it. The Minor, that
the Father commanded Swearing, is granted by F. ^. ^. 6.
H. and all other of his opinion that I have seen. The Major, That what ever
the Father has commanded, the Son has not forbidden, is proved thus: If the
Father, and the Son, be one individual Essence, and immutable in Will, then
whatever the Father has commanded that the Son has not forbidden But the
Father, and the Son ar^ one individual Essence, and i^mutable in Will:
Therefore, what ever the Father has commanded, that the Son has not
forbidden. Neither of these Propositions is deniable, nor denied by F. H. The
first is clear by the light of Reason: for none, without change of mind, can
command and forbid the same thing. The other F. H. grants, and yet contrary to
the everlasting and unchangeable Law of Reason ( Ex veris nil nisi verum)
denies the conclusion, and notwithstanding, in a discourse of four leaves
long, gives three Answers to this Argument.

First, he says, There are diversities ^
of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5.
of administrations, but the same Lord: that is, One and the same God has
bestowed several gists, and several offices upon several persons. He might
as well have told us, that, In Niniveh old Tobit dwelt; Or (if he would use
Scripture words) That God created Heaven and Earth, and said, That had been an
Answer. It was not well to make the simple Reader (who perhaps out of an
Opinion that he will say nothing b^ the Truth, may give credit (...) his words)
believe that the was an Answer, which is n^thing to the purpose. Nor (...) that
pertinent which he a^ledges out of St. Hierome, tha^ it was permitted to the
Iew^ under the Law to Swear by the name of God, not that it w^ rightful so to
do, etc. For ther^ is a vast difference betwix^ Permission, and Command,
because what ever is Commande^ is Permitted, and more; bu^ what ever is
Permitted, is no^ Commanded. Now F. H. grants that Swearing was not onel^
permitted, but commanded Read then according to hi^ sense: It was commanded
under the Law to Swear by the name of God, not that it was rightful so to do,
etc. and the Proposition would savor of blasphemy* implying, That God
commanded what was not rightful to do. Besides this (though it makes against
Swearing by Creatures) the Father in the same place saying, Hic salvator non
per Deum jurare prohibuit, sed per Coelum, etc. is wholly impertinent to the
proposed Argument, and thereupon I leave it, and follow to the next Answer,
which is, that

As Christ said of Divorcement, It was not so from the beginning: so we may
say, Oaths were not from the beginning, but were added after hardness of
heart, and sin, and unbelief entered into the world: but Christ put an end to
the transgression, sin, unbelief, variance, and strife, who said, Swear not at
all, etc. And so A. S^. reason is made void, and his impossibility made
possible, that God gave forth a command to Swear, -- and yet Christ in the New
Covenant countermands it, -- and yet the Father and the Son are all one in
Will, etc. To this I reply, and first, Grant that in the time of Innocence
there was no use, nor need of Oaths. (adly.) That Christ came to put an end to
sin, and strife, and to that purpose gave holy Precepts of all virtue, Peace,
and Charity; and yet notwithstanding we must confess (unless we should
disbelieve our own eyes) that wickedness, and variance too much abound in the
world; even F. H. himself has here entered into a causeless, and unjust
contention. Nor is there hope it should be otherwise, until all our
understandings be fully illuminated, and our wills perfectly rectified, which
will not be in this life. (3dly.) Neither do I, nor any other that I know deny,
that our blessed Savior spoke these words, Swear not at all. The Question is
not of the Authority, but the meaning, and importance of them. But (4thly.)
Notwithstanding these concessions, I must needs say, that this discourse of F.
Hs. is wholly extrinsicall to the matter, because from thence it can neither be
inferred that the Father and the Son are not one and the same God; nor that God
is mutable; nor that he never commanded Swearing, one of which must necessarily
be averred, or else the force of the Argument is unavoidable. For, if Gods mind
were once that people should Swear (as appears by his commanding it) and that
mind never alter (for if it do, God is mutable, contrary to that of the
Prophet, 1 Samuel 15. 29.) then his mind is still that people should Swear; I
mean when there is necessary occasion, for otherwise his mind is altered. And
if his mind be still that people should Swear, then cannot Christ's mind be
that people should not Swear, unless God and Christ be contrary minded, and
then they are not the same God. And if Christ's mind cannot be that the people
shall not Swear, then his mind is that the people shall Swear, and then he
neither did, nor does, nor will forbid them to Swear: for otherwise he should
forbid what he would have done. This is so evident a Truth, that no multitudes
of confused words can obscure it. And therefore it is a vain flourish of F. H.
when he says A. Ss. Reason is made void, and his impossibility possible,
because God commanded Swearing, and Christ countermanded it, and yet the Father
and the Son are one in Will, which words are impossible to be true, in regard
they are contradictory one to another. For it cannot be (what ever F. H. or any
other man say to the contrary) that the Father and the Son should be one in
will, if the one forbids what the other commands.

Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial, and accounted Swearing in a right manner
to be a duty of the Moral Law. To this F. H. says, That these nice
distinctions have confounded peoples understandings. That Is as true, as that
many Windows in a room makes it dark. For the use of distinctions, is to clear
an ambiguous word, that it may appear in which of the various acceptions it is
taken. Such an one is Law, which denotes either those reasonable duties, to the
observance whereof God has obliged all people, at all times, and in that Notion
it is called, The Moral Law; or those external Rites which God imposed upon
the Jews, only to be by them observed until the death of the Messiah; and in
that sense it is termed, The Ceremonial Law: Or lastly, those Political
Statutes which were designed by God for the Government of the Jewish
Commonwealth in the Land of Canaan, which were not binding to other Nations,
and are known by the name of the Judicial Law. So then Law signifying three
things, it is necessary to avoid confusion, and mistakes, to have three words
whereby they may be expressed, which serves not to confound, but clear men's
understandings.

But whether Swearing be made Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial, is not much
matter (says F. H.) seeing that Christ is the end of the Law, etc. which
Assertions, is both repugnant to the Truth, and to his own Tenet. For though
the shadows ceased at the appearing of the sustance (as the Leviticall
Sacrifices were useless after Christ's death, which was by them typified) yet as
to the Moral Law, our Savior came not to destroy, but to fulfill it, St. Mat.
5. 17. And it makes clearly against F. H. For if Swearing be enjoined by the
Moral Law, it must be of as much force now, as ever it was, it being easier
for heaven and earth to pass, then one title of the Law to fail, St. Luke 16.
17. which must needs be understood of the Moral Law, seeing the Judicial and
Ceremonial are both failed.

Sect. 28. That Christ is improperly called, The Oath of God. To that F. H.
answers (out of its place) That it is no more improper, then that he is a Vine,
a Door, a Way, a Shepherd, which is to grant what I asserted: For I think F.
H. will not say, that Christ is properly a Vine, a Door, or a Way, though in
the Gospel he be called so. But it is far more intolerable to call him an Oath,
as he is never styled. And it is far fetched to say, Christ is a Covenant,
because God made a Covenant with man grounded on Christ's merits and death. And
further yet, to say he is an Oath, because God confirmed that Covenant by Oath;
the contrary would better follow from those premises. For in exact speaking,
the ground or motive of (...) Covenant is not a Covenant i^ self: nor an Oath
to make good a Covenant, is not a Covenant. And therefore Christ is neither
Covenant, nor Oath. As to the Marginall proof, Is. 55. 3. the words are, I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, which cannot be understood of
Christ: For God could not say, I will make an everlasting Christ with you for
Christ was begotten, not made.

F. H. adds, That for any proof Dr. Sm brings, Swearing may be either
Ceremonial, or Judicial, as well as Moral. Yet that very point was proved in
the second Argument and F. H. cannot be ignorant of it, because he has labored
(though in vain) to answer it.

That Oaths were used in Judicial proceedings; that Ceremonies were used in
the worship of God; and that he hopes (he may be sure of it) that A. S. will
say the worship of God is Moral, and that the most do grant, and be thinks A.
S. will hardly deny, (assuredly he will not) that Swearing was a part of the
worship of God. All these are granted; and one would surmise they made for
Swearing, not against it. From thence he argues, That it had some Ceremony or
Shadow in it. answer, That the consequence is false: For though much of the
divine worship in the Leviticall Law was wrapped up in Ceremonies, yet all was
not. Mental Prayer, such as Hannah's, was a service of God, yet had no
external Rite, or shadow necessarily annexed thereto. But I shall be liberal,
and grant the Conclusion. Perhaps Swearing (especially solemn) had some
Ceremony not in it, but with it; as lifting up the hand: Yet from thence it
follows not that Swearing it self is a Ceremony. No body is without many
Accidents inhering therein. Is a body therefore an Accident? There is no man
that is not of some color, White, Red, Brown, or some other: can it thereupon
be inferred, that every man, or any one man is a color? For F. Hs. proofs (
p. 8.) that Swearing was used in Judicial proceedings, he might have spared
them. For I willingly grant the Truth thereof, though he seem to be contrary
minded, page 4.

F. H. comes to a third answer (having good ground to suspect that neither of
the former would serve) and that is, The Law said many things by way of
Precept, at least permission from God, which would be irregularities grossly
reproveable under the Gospel, etc. I need not pursue his Instances, unless
Swearing had been one; for I grant the Proposition to be true, if meant of the
Ceremonial Law: but it is false if it be meant of the Moral. And this can no
way be applied as an answer to the Argument. For it neither denies the Identity
of the Father and the Son: nor shows that the Son forbad what the Father
commanded. And for the instances, F. H. repeats them again and again, and so I
shall meet with them afterward.

F. H. takes notice that in the seventh Sect. I said, That Christ abolished not
the Judicial and Ceremonial Law once commanded by God, because the one was
peculiarly given to the Jews, and so not at all concerning us: and the other
was temporary, expiring at Christ's death. To this he replies, That he argues
not against it, yet BP. Gauden does (whom A. S. willingly acknowledges his
superior, no less in knowledge, Learning, and Eloquence, than in promotion)
whose words are, That Christ came in the way of fulfilling, to abrogate the
Ceremonial Law: the meaning of which sentence is (not that Christ forbad the
Ceremonial Law formerly commanded by the Father by any contrary precept in his
life, which was the thing that A. S. denied, but) that our Savior by dying put
an end thereto, it being thereupon to expire, which is A. Ss. own Judgment,
having expressly said as much in a marginall note to the 8th. Section of his
Sermon. So by F. Hs. good leave, the Bp. and the Dr. are in perfect unity, and
not at all at odds betwixt themselves.

F. H. If Swearing be a part of the Judicial Law, then A. S. has overthrown
himself, because he acknowledges, that the Judicial Law is not obligatory to
us. I grant the consequence (though it be wide fromthe dispute betwixt us,
which is, whether our Saviors words, Swear not at all be prohibitive of all
Swearing) but deny that Swearing is a part of the Judicial Law. This F. H.
proves, because it is the judgment of many. But who those many be, he tells
not. It is not A. Ss. Judgment (and that F. H. knows) for he has proved
Swearing to be Moral in his second Argument. Nor is it F. Hs. Judgment, for
he holds it to be Ceremonial, p. 7. and therefore in his own Judgment this no
Argument; yet he endeavors to enforce it by this Reason, That Swearing was
used by the witnesses before Judges in Israel. This he would have granted here,
because it seems to make for him: but p 4t^. he professes the contrary in his
marginall note, whereby he gives great occasion to suspect that he seeks not
Truth so much, (which is always consonant to it self) as the defense of his
Cause by any means whatsoever But this I pass by, and will not deny that
witnesses spoke upon Oath, whence it does not follow, that Oaths are not
Moral. For in Suites and Trials by our English Laws (which are answerable to
the Judicial amongst the Jews) Oaths are enjoined, and taken, which yet
thereupon do not cease to be Moral. The vanity of this Argument that relyes
upon the Judgment of many appears by the like. If Christ were a mere man, and
not God (as has been the Judgment of many) then is Christian Religion false. I
hope F. H. would abhor the conclusion no less than our selves, and thereby he
may discern the weakness of his premises.

F. H. finds great fault with A. S. That he defines not certainly what Swearing
is. And p. 34. he falls upon the same subject again, saying, That if one should
traduce A. S. in his discourse (A. S. thinks that here and elsewhere he is
traduced sufficiently) and his definition of an Oath, its so uncertain, one
shall hardly know what to pitch upon to be his judgiment; sometimes it is this,
and sometimes it is that, and sometimes it is neither this, nor that. I grant
that this were a fault, had it been true. But A. S. said expressly in his
Sermon Sect. 16. That to call God to Witness is the very substance of an Oath,
producing St. Austin, who says, Jurat qui adhibe^ testem Deum: and again,
Hocest jurare Deum testari: and in his margin cites above 30. Authors
concurring in Judgment with him. And again, he says in a marginall note in
the 17. Section, The substance of an Oath consists in the attestation of God,
by what terms soever it be expressed. So this charge was causeless. However,
what F. H. blamed in another, he should not have been guilty of himself, but
somewhere have laid down (had he not rested in my definition) what that
Swearing is which he so much strives against. And if he, or any other think fit
to Reply, I shall desire (if they consent not to what I by an unanimous consent
of Writers of all sorts, call Swearing) they would tell us what they mean by an
Oath.

F. H. goes on in a querulous discourse, That their Attestations of God have
not been received as such by the Magistrates. So before him had R.
Hubberthorne, and Sam: Fisher done, to whom I fully answered in a large
Marginall Note to the 16. Section of my Sermon, which therefore (unless he had
enforced it with some further Reason) needed not have been repeated here,
especially seeing F. H. took notice that it was answered, which appears,
because he replies to it, That it had been a more necessary discourse for A. S.
to have exhorted the Magistrates if the Law had been answered in the substance,
not to be so severe in the form, etc. Indeed I did as much as F. H requires
without his prompting, when I spoke to the Reverend Judges in these words (
Sect. 16.) Would they (meaning the Quakers) yield the substance, and with St.
Paul, call God to witness of the Truth of their Assertions, it were to be
wished out of condescension to their weakness, that they might be dispensed
withal (if the Law would give leave) as to the external formalities of an
Oath. Thus much I spoke in Public in their behalf, and little expected* to
have been reproached, as one that thereby incensed the Rulers to a severity
against them, whereas it was one of my prime ends to rectify their Judgments
by clear and undeniable Reasons, so that by due obedience, they might avoid
all Legal punishment. But if was not necessary to have gone on as F. H.
dictates, and to have told them, That where any Law was made contrary to the
Law of God, either in matter, or form, (as ours is not) the Conscience could
not yield obedience thereto. For that had been idle and impertinent, unless I
had supposed our Law in this matter had been some way repugnant to Gods, which
is utterly untrue. His next conceit, That our Clergy receives from the
Lawmakers great incomes and revenues for the preservation and peace of all
men, I pass by as a vain dream of F. Hs. they receiving no such matter either
from the Lawmakers, or any other, either for that, or any other purpose. For
his new platform of Legal proceedings, when His Majesty in Parliament shall
please to settle it, I shall cheerfully yield obedience thereto, and should be
glad if any expedien^ could be found out without prejudice to the Truth, where
by these unhappy difference^ might be composed, and they freed from incurring
those penalties whereof they so sadly complain. To conclude, I would have F. H.
and the Readers that are of his persuasion to take notice, That though I have
attended his wandering Motions through this last leaf; yet his discourse
therein has been wholly impertinent to my Argument, though it go under the
Notion of an answer thereto. At this rate, he might have written a Volume as
big as Speed's Chronicle, and called it an answer to the first Argument. But I
proceed to the second,

Swearing at all times as well under the Gospel, as under the Law, ^ends in an
especial manner to the glory of God. And therefore all Swearing is neither a
Ceremonial Ordinance, ^or forbidden by Christ. He that would answer to this
Argument, must either say, that some of the old Ceremonial. Ordinances are to
be continued under the Gospel, tending no less now to Gods. Glory, then they
did before; or that Christ forbad some what that tended in an especial manner
to his Fathers Glory; and then he had not sought (as he professes, St. John
18.) but hindered the Glory of him that sent him; or else he must say, that
Swearing is not now such an acknowledgment of Gods Wisdom, Power, and
Justice, as formerly it was. Each of which is so very absurd, and irrational,
that F. H. does wisely forbear to mention any of them: yet somewhat must be
said, or else it cannot be thought that he has answered the Argument. Whereupon
rather then say nothing, he falls into an extravagant discourse against the
Morality of the Ten Commandments, and wonders what A. S intends to do with
the fourth. A. S. may more justly wonder that F. H. will so abuse his Reader
with such impertinencies, no more to the purpose, then if he should tell him,
That Corn grows now where Troy Town stood. But he having found such a passage
in that seurrilous Pamphlet of his Br. F^shers against Bp. Ganden thin^ it
would do well to fill (...) room here, and else where, an^ so falls upon it
several time hereaster. But to satisfy F. H. (if it be possible) I judge the
Ten Commandments to b^ all Moral: and yet I grant that the fourth has in i^
some what Ceremonial; t^ wit, the particular designation of the seventh day,
which not with standing does not derogate from the Morality of the Precept. And
that he may not think this strange, he may take notice, That the Creed
comprehends all necessary points of pure belief. And yet that Summary (as
short as it is) contains some what that is not of absolute necessity to
salvation, to wit, the Name of that Judge by whose Sentence our blessed Savior
was condemned to death. So the Decalogne is an abridgement of the whole Moral
Law, and yet besides, contains somewhat in it that is not Moral, but
Ceremonial. I see no inconvenience in all this; nor (if there were) can divine
how thence my Argument may be answered.

F H. goes on, and tells us, There was no Service or Worship in that Covenant
that had not some Sign or Shadow in it, instancing in Prayer and Praising,
whereto were annexed, Incense, and Sacrifices. Be it so, That Moral Duties
were then attended with Ceremonial Rites; does it from thence follow, that
either then they were not, or now are not Moral Duties? Are not we now as much
obliged to Pray, and Praise God, as the Jews formerly were, though the
Sacrifices, those Ceremonial lypes of Christ's Death, are necessarily disused?
Such external Rites are not of the substance of Gods Service, though sometime
annexed thereto. They as Accidents may either be present, or absent without the
destruction of the Subject whereto they adhere which is not therefore to be
termed a Ceremony, because some Ceremonies were joined to it; as the duty of
Thanksgiving became not a Ceremony, because it was accompanied with Sacrifices.
So upon supposall that Oaths for the greater solemnity thereof were usually
taken with some external significative formalities, that they might be the
more revered, and fix a deeper impression upon his Conscience that Swears,
they are not thereupon to be called Ceremonies, without all which their
substance does entirely remain, no more than Praising of God is now to be
termed a Ceremony, because Leviticall Sacrifices were once subjoyned thereto.

F. H. says, That Confession under the Gospel is brought in, in place of
Swearing under the Law, which he endeavors to prove, because that of the
Prophet Isay 45. 23. Every tongue shall Swear, is rendered by the Apostle, Romans
14. 11. Every tongue shall confess to God. This I had observed before in mine
Annotation to the 9th. Section of the Sermon. But I would pervert (says F. H.)
Paul's words, to have them mean confession by Oath: but to my Reason that
induced me to that Opinion, he replies not, which is, (besides that the Greek
word is some where in that sense) that the Prophets Hebrew word is generally
acknowledged to signify Swearing, which several hundreds of years before the
Apostles time (and therefore not by the Apostle himself) was translated into
Greek, which St. Paul finding, makes use thereof verbatim, thereby by his
Authority, approving the Truth of that Translation. But (a Comment perhaps, or
an Explication, but) a true Translation it could not be, unless the very sense
of the Original were justly rendered without either enlargement, or restriction.

A. S. (quoth F. H.) might as well have said, That Offerings, and Oblations,
and Sacrifice, tends as much to the glory of God under the Gospel, as under the
Law, as Swearing. But that is an idle dictate, and no way to be made good. From
this Proposition, gross inconveniences follow: none from mine. For it follows
from this, That the Ceremonial Law is as much obligatory to us, as the Moral:
That St. Paul must not be of credit with us, Gal. 5. 2. That men had as good be
Jews, as Christians: That it is not nenessary to believe Christ's Incarnation,
Passion, Resurrection, or Ascension. All these follow from this, That
Sacrifices tend as much to Gods glory under the Gospel, as under the Law; none
of which can be said of Swearing. And therefore F. Hs. parallel was very
inconsiderate, which he presently retracts, confessing in express words, That
it does not follow as well under the Law, as under the Gospel, and gives a good
reason for it; For that (says he) were to set up the Figure, and deny the
Substance: which notwithstanding, he magisterially concludes (according to his
wonted manner, that is, yielding the premises, and denying the conclusion)
that this second Argument (...) sufficient, though he have said nothing
material in answer thereto.

Swearing, then it was either because it was repugnant to our duty to God, or
repugnant to our duty to our Neighbor. But some Swearing is neither repugnant
to our duty to God (whose glory in sundry particulars it advances) nor
repugnant to our duty to our Neighbor, to whom thereby much advantage may
accrue in several respects. And therefore Christ forbad not all Swearing. He
that would answer this Argument, must either say, That Christ prohibited some
what that was neither repugnant to our duty either to God, or Man: or else that
all Swearing is contrary to one of these duties. For granting these, he must of
necessity grant the Conclusion. But F. H. will do neither (indeed he cannot)
yet resolves to Reply, l^st his friends should think he had answered nothing.
And his Reply is, That which was o^^e a duty to be performed under the Law
because commanded, is not required as a duty under the Gospel. This I grant,
many Ceremonial Offices being to be observed, when commanded. But it is
neither prejudicial to the Truth, nor any whit advantageous to his
pretensions. And then he falls into a wild extravagance, and says, It may be
A. S. would contend as much for the Morality of Tithes, (which he might with
great security do, were it pertinent, notwithstanding F. Hs. opposition;) and
then he belabours this shadow, and takes some pains to confute what A. S. had
not said And this may perhaps induce some credulous Reader of his own
persuasion to surmise, that all this time he is answering the Argument. At
length he retreats from this impertinent digression, and acknowledges, That
Oaths were commanded to the Jews, but it was to keep them from Idolatry: and
says, That as the Lord lives, was an Oath, and bids us mark, That the Law of
Oaths needed not have been added, had not sin entered in. Well, we mark all
this, and find nothing therein against the Morality of Swearing, or to show
that Oaths are repugnant to our duty, either to God, or our Neighbor, which
only had been pertinent. It Is true, that Oaths had been useless, had man
continued in Innocence. B^ so had the whole Decalog^ been too (man's whole du^
being then engraven in h^ heart) which thereupon w^ not promulgated till after
t^ Fall. But how then* Will (...) thence conclude, that no^ of the commands are
Moral* He may do it upon the sam^ grounds that he lays again^ Swearing, viz.
The uselesne^ thereof in the state of Innocence, which if they be insufficient
for the one, the^ are also for the other.

A. S. in pursuance of hi^ Argument, That Swearing w^ not repugnant to our duty
to ou^ Neighbor, recounts many advantages that accrue to men thereby; As
Princes are secured of their Subjects Allegiance; Generals of their Soldiers
fidelity; Leagues betwixt Nations confirmed; private Men's Rights maintained;
Offenders discovered, and punished; and Controversies, and Suits decided. And
it cannot be denied, that Swearing is a good Medium, yea the best we have to
the attainment of these ends, though sometimes through the wickedness of evil
men, it may, and sometimes does fail thereof. And this is that which F. H.
thinks fit to Reply to those alleged Advantages of Oaths, that many have
taken, and broken them though I hope many mo^ have kept them. This is a^ much
as to say, that such (...) Medicine (the best that i^ known against such a
disease^ that has cured hundreds, i^ useless, because twenty, b^ reason of some
other complicated infirmity have taken it without success. I gran^ there is no
such great necessity of Oaths amongst suc^ men as will not lie (though
sometimes they may not be altogether useless in respect of them, as is
evidenced in the 22th. Section of the Sermon) but then Magistrates have no
infallible mark to ^iscerne (especially amongst strangers) who are such
conscientious men, and who not. F. H. must not think that the mere profession
of being a Quaker is a certain note, and never failing evidence of sincerity.
Nor was it enough (as ^e pretends) in the Primitive times to say Christianus
sum. Christianity was had in no such honor amongst Heathen Magistrates. Many
of them indeed refused to Swear, because they were Christians: but that was by
Devils, or Idols whereto the Ethniques attributed Divine Honor. Otherwise to
Swear upon just occasion, they refuse^ not, as appears, that man^ thousands of
them were Soldiers in those days, which they could not have bee^ had they not
taken (as the^ was accustomed) the Sacramentum militare, the Oath (...)
Observance and Fidelity. Bu^ F. H. objects, (and indeed, i^ most of his Replies
he man be allowed to have somewha^ of Objection, but nothing (...) Answer) That
what ever (...) super-added to Gods command (...) will worship, and renders the
other imperfect. I answer, Tha^ we add nothing essential to the command. The
very essence of an Oath consists i^ calling God to witness. The ^ormalities
usually annexed ^n Judicatory proceedings are ^ot of the substance of an Oath,
but only conduce to the solemnity thereof, and were ordained probably to
create in the Swearer a greater Reverence of God, and a deeper sense of the sin
of Perjury.

Swear not at all, which renders the following words vain, and impertinent, is
false. (And that must either be granted, or we must confess that some of our
Saviors Sentences were vain, and impertinent, which were an high degree of
blasphemy. But that Interpretation which expounds our Saviour^ words Swear not
at all, to be prohibitive of all Swearing, render^ the following words vain and
impertinent. And therefore it is false. To this F. H. replies, That Christ knew
better what he intended then A. S. (which notwithstanding, A. S. may possibly
know better than F. H.) who would make his words one thing, and his intention
another. He should have said (for that had been true) who by a diligent
investigation what the purport of the words might be, labored to discover what
Christ intended thereby. F. H. adds, That it is evident by the preceding
Doctrine, and by that which follows after the Text, that Christ prohibits all
Swearing. This dictate being too hard for him to prove, he puts off to another
place, like a bad debtor that will pay, but at another time. Then he seems to
be offended with those that dispute about the plain words of Scripture, though
as plain as they be, he cannot make sense of them, if meant as he would have
them. Then he says, That Swear not at all by Heaven or Earth, is a general
Negative of all Oaths. He must have either a very high conceit of his own, or a
very mean esteem of other men's Abilities, if he hope to-perswade them, that
there a^e more Creatures to Swear by than these two. Did not the Jews Swear by
the Temple, Altar, and many other things? And are there not amongst our selves
too many that do the same? And if these two comprehend all others, why did
Christ immediately mention two more, Jerusalem, and the head? He says again,
and again, That by Heaven, and Earth, and Jerusalem, are more ample, and more
large (he should have said, more strait and narrow) expressions, which he
immediately confutes, saying, That these, and much more, were in the general
Negative, Swear not at all. For surely, a general that comprehends many
hundred instances, is much more large and ample, than four particulars therein
contained. So that it is utterly, and evidently false, that Christ intended the
enumeration of these few instances to be an amplification of his former
prohibition, which indeed was an Explication of his meaning, showing what kind
of Oaths he forbad, to wit, such as were taken by Heaven, and Earth, and the
like Creatures. And by this it appears, that F. Hs. selfe-contradicting Answer,
is no way satisfactory.

But to make the Truth appear beyond all contradiction, I shall somewhat more
fully enforce this Argument, and show that the meaning which F. H and those of
his persuasion do give of these words, Swear not at all, agrees neither with
what went before, nor with what followed after. For according to F. Hs.
exposition, these words, Swear not at all, import, that you are never to Swear
upon any occasion; either by God, or any Creature. And he, and those of his
Opinion say, that they (in this sense) are very agreeable to the preceding
words, ve. 33. It has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. But I say unto you,
(who as F. H. tells us, says more than the Law has said) Swear not at all.
But this exposition of the Coherence, upon which they much rely, cannot stand;
because from thence many absurdities would follow, to wit, That Christ forbad,
what God commanded; That the Law should be imperfect, as needing emendation;
That Christ made void some part of the Law, contrary to his own express
profession, ver. 17. That the Gospel is not consonant, but repugnant to the
Law, etc. These and the like inconveniences do evince that Interpretation of
the words (from whence all these follow) to be false. And therefore some other
is to be found out to clear our passage, that we be not split upon these
Rocks. And that is, That these words, But I say unto you, stand not in
opposition to the Law, but to the Pharisaical depravation thereof, and the
peoples wicked, and corrupt practices. The Law had enjoined only Swearing by
God, and no other. But the People did usually Swear by Creatures, as by the
Temple, Altar, the Gold of the Temple, and the gift upon the Altar, all which
were expressly mentioned by our Savior, St. Mat. 23. And the Pharisees
approved thereof, and Taught, That some of these were obligatory, and bound the
Swearer, (as the two latter) and some not, as the two former. Of which sort
were (it seems) these Oaths here mentioned, to wit, By Heaven, Earth,
Jerusalem, and the Head. Whence these two irreligious Propositions arise.
First, That Creature. Swearing is lawful. And then, That all Oaths do not
ob-Lige to performance, where as all Promises even without Oaths are binding.
The ground whereof was, that such as had Sworn by Heaven, Earth, etc. though
they broke their Oath, yet they were not thereupon guilty of Perjury, or the
breach of the third Commandment, because they had not Sworn by God. Which
gross mis-interpretation of the Law, tending so much to the patronage of vice,
and lewd practices, very well deserved our Saviors reprehension, especially in
this place, where he was Teaching the exact importance of the Commandments
which he came not to destroy (or alter) but to establish in their full force
and true meaning. Read then according to this Exposition the 33th. ver. The
Pharisees have taught, that it is lawful to Swear by Creatures, as Heaven,
Earth, etc. and that those Oaths when taken do not bind to performance, so
that men though they do not what they Swear to do, become not thereby liable
either to Perjury, or the breach of the Divine Law. But says Christ ver. 34.
on the contrary, I say unto you, (in regard those courses are so repugnant to
Christian Truth and Sincerity) Swear not at all, neither by heaven, nor by
earth, etc. that is, by those Creature^ which men do, or may abuse to the
dishonor of God, the wrong of their Neighbor, and the great scandal of
Religion. You see how aptly ou^ Saviors words are set in opposition to the
false Doctrine of the Pharisees, and what just cause he had to forbid what they
permitted, and how impertinent it had been to the premises to have prohibited
Swearing by God, which Oath was much revered, and (for ought appears) never
abused by the Jews.

Nor are the words, Swear not at all, (as F. H. understands them) less
incoherent with what follows. For the blessed Son of God forbidding to Swear by
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, and the Head, subjoynes to each of them a Reason,
which Reasons do all particularly relate to those particular Creatures whereby
he forbids his followers to Swear, but no way tend to an universal prohibition
of all Swearing. Let any man to whom God has given a Mediocrity of
understanding read the words in F. Hs. sense, and judge. You shall never Swear
by God, or any other Oath, because Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his
Footstool, and Jerusalem is his City; or because men cannot make one hair
white, or black. Pray what tolerable sense can any one pick out of this
discourse? Or how can these Reasons be pertinent to a general, and absolute
forbidding of all Oaths? But on the contrary, understanding the words in
opposition to the Doctrine of the Pharisees, and the practice of the people,
forbidding Oaths by Creatures, and yet asserting the obligingness of them when
taken, the coherence will be clear, and the Reason convincing. For the better
understanding whereof, it may be considered, that one may Swear by Creatures
either Vltimately, or Mediately: Vltimately, when he invokes a Creature as a
searcher of the heart, and a sovereign punisher of deceit: And this is flat
Idolatry, by ascribing to a created being, what is peculiar to God. Mediately,
when the Oath does ultimately relate to, and is terminated in God, though a
Creature only be nominated; as when one Swears by Heaven, meaning by God that
made, or sits in Heaven: And in this sense it is not possible to Swear by any
thing finite, that has not a Relation to a Creator. In this sense the holy
Jesus was willing to understand these Oaths, giving thereby reputation to that
Rule in Divinity, That, when any man's words admit of a double meaning, whereof
the one is extremely bad; we ought in Charity to interpret them in the better
sense, unless some circumstance does undeniably ^vince the contrary. Thus did
Christ, and yet that better sense was too bad to be permitted. The Pharisees
allowed Swearing by heaven, etc. yet taught, that such Oaths put no Obligation
upon the Swearer, as is plain by that passage, St. Mat. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19.
whereupon those vain, and irreligious Oaths were multiplied, and a gate opened
for crafty Cheaters to impose upon the credulity of the simple, and
well-meaning vulgar. In opposition to which deluding Doctrine and cousening
practices, our Savior prohibits all such abused Oaths, and gives this Reason
thereof, That the Pharisees were mistaken in saying, that such Oaths were not
binding, because God was not expressly therein named, because even those, by
Heaven, Earth, etc. have a consequentiall attestation of God in respect of the
necessary dependence of all Creatures upon their Creator. Which is more clearly
expressed, St. Mat. 23. 20, 21, 22. Hence appears the ground of Christ's
prohibition, and the true, and full meaning of the Sentence, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne, etc. which in F. Hs. way seems to me
altogether inexplicable.

not to Swear at all, either by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or the Head, can by
no Art be extended to forbid Oaths duly taken by God, and consequently not all
manner of Swearing. You may sooner draw water out of a flint, or pumice, than
that conclusion from these premises, which by F. Hs good leave are so far from
being more ample expressions, that they are indeed restrictive limitations of
that precept, which otherwise might have been perhaps reputed general. Which
were it so to be understood, as F. H. would have it, there could be no
rational account of the particular Enumeration of these four particulars,
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, and the Head. No wonder therefore, if he in the
attempt of such an impossibility labors in vain, and falls into
contradictions. He says, These and much more were included in the Negative,
and yet they are more large expressions than it; which is no more true, than
that the thing contained, is wider than what contains it: Or that four
Creatures are more than all in the world besides. In to such straits he
pittisully plunges himself, whilst he strives to defend such a Paradox as he
perhaps is ashamed to forsake, by an ingenuous acknowledgement of his error,
and striking sail to an undoubted Truth, and yet unable to maintain, being
thereby enforced, not only to oppose against so demonstrable a verity, but
also to fight against Reason, and common Understanding.

Ireland, Archbishop Usher was of Christ's mind, I shall easily believe. But
of F. H.s. Opinion he was not, unless he be much wronged in that book that goes
under his name, entitled, The sum and substance of Christian Religion,
wherein amongst the special abuses of an Oath, he sets down in the first
place, The refusing of all Oaths as unlawful, which saves he) is the error of
the Anabaptists, to whom therefore in that particular, he is like to prove no
great Patron. But (says F. H.) he pleaded the Cause of the Waldenses, who were
the most ancient, and true Protestants, if any Reformation be looked at beyond
Luther. They professed it no way lawful for a Christian to Swear; and the said
Bishop Usher, de Success. cap. 6. does esteem that place of the 5th. of Mat.
Swear not at all; and that of the 5th. of James to be a sufficient plea for
them against the Papists, and he pleads their Cause. I was very confident that
the Reverend Primate was much abused; but not having the book, I could not
answer particularly thereto, not thinking fit to oppose my conjectures (how
probable soever) against F. Hs. positive assertion. Where upon I used all
endeavors to procure a sight of that book, but could not retrive it, either in
the public Shops, or private Libraries in the North; till at length my
Reverend, and Learned friend Dr. Samwaies afforded me a sight thereof. Whereby
I perceive, that the Primates Plea for them, was not to defend such Opinions as
they are charged with; but to show that they were wronged, and falsely
slandered with the maintenance of such errors. For (says he) Sanders and
Parsons produce certain absurd Heresies, (amongst which one is, That all
Swearing is unlawful, whence I collect, That the denial of all Oaths, is in
the Primates Judgment, an absurd Hic vero a Sandero, Coccio, Parsonio, etc.
occurritur: utcunque Walaens^s, cum nost rorum temporum Pro estantibus in
nonnullis dogmatibus consenferint, in pluribus tamen ab iisdem dissensisse:
ideoque ad eandem Ecclesiam utrosque pertinere non posse. Quod ut probent, ex
Guidone, etc. Sanderus and Co^cius ^ ex G^br: Prateolo, and Bernardo
Lutzenburgo, Rob: Parsonius absurdas quasdam Haereses producunt, quas a
Waldensibus mordicus desensas persuadere nobis volunt. Quarum accusationum
vanitas ut magis elucescat, etc. De Christ: Ecclesiarum Successione, and Statu.
cap. 6. Sect. 19.
Heresy) which they would persuade us were tooth and nail defended by the
Waldenses. And then he proceeds to show the vanity of that Accusation of their
Adversaries. And the very point he instances in, is that of Swearing.

Their third Error and Heresy Terrius Error, and Haeresis est, quod jurare in
judicio. sive extra judicium pro quacunque causa, and in quocunque casu, est
illicitum, and mortale peccatum: and statim tamen addit. Quartus Error, and
Haeresis est, quod dejeraro in judicio coram ^udicibus de dicerida veritate,
and revelandis complicibus suis in hac Sect^, non est illic^tum, nec peccatum,
imo licitum atque Sanctum. Ibid.
(say their Accusers) is, that they hold, That to Swear either Judicially, or
extrajudicially in any cause, or upon any occasion, is unlawful, and a mortal
sin. And their fourth Error and Heresy is, That forswearing themselves before
Judges at the Bar, concerning the speaking of the Truth, and discovering the
accomplices of their Sect, is neither unlawful, nor sin, but a lawful and holy
Act. These Opinions do thwart each other; and therefore my Lord Primate had
reason to conceive, that the Accusation that charged both these repugnant
Tenants upon the same Persons was false, and malicious. So his defense of them
is not, that they did well in denying to Swear (as F. H. pretends, and which
only indeed had been to his purpose) but that the Papists did ill in burdening
them falsely with error that they did not hold. But not to conceal what might
be surmised, to give (the least) advantage to F. Hs. allegation, the
Archbishop cites an old Vetus Autho^ Germanus qui de Waldensium doctrina, and
moribus scripsit hujus erroris occasionem suisse dicet frequenriam jurandi, and
assiduitatem pro levibus causis, and quia incidunt in perjuria: additque
lepidam similitudinem, haere^^c^s qui nunquam jura ^^, similes esse D^abolo,
qui nu q^am legitur jurasse. At qui a Christo dedicerunt. Esto Sermo vester,
Etiam, etiam. Non non; quod autem supra haec, redundat a malo illo est, Man. 5,
37. Papistus apud quos ino^^vit frequ^ntia jurands, and assiduitas pro levibus
c^usis, multo similiores malo huic Daemoni judic^bunt qu^m Wa^de se* qui (at ex
Relatione inquisitoris Pont^fi ti (...).) dicere ^antum consuev^runt, Est, est,
Non non, etc. Ibid 21.
German Author, who writing of the Doctrine, and manners of the Waldenses,
says, That the occasion of that Error of theirs was, men's common and
customary Swearing about trifles: adding, That such Heretics as allow of no
wearing, may be resembled to the Devil, who is never read to have taken an
Oath. Which Sarcasme he retorts, saying, That those Persons who have learned
from Christ, that their communication should be yea, yea; nay, nay, because
whatsoever is more than these comes of that evil one, Mat. 5. 37. (not a
word out of either Apostle of Swear not at all, as F. H. feignes) will judge
that such Papists as have got an habit of frequent Swearing upon trivial
occasion^, are much more like the Devil then the Waldenses, who (as appears by
the Relation of the Romish Inquisitors) were accustomed to say only, Yea, yea;
Nay, nay. Which as it is a reproof of customary Swearers (whom all pious men
disallow;) so it is no Plea for those that deny Swearing upon just occasion
(that is, when ever the glory of God, or the benefit of our Neighbors require
it) which Opinion the Primate is so far from countenancing, that he excepts it
not from being one of those absurd Errors, which he conceives was wrongfully
imputed to the Waldenses. And therefore F. H. did not well to labor to support
his tottering Tenet by such unjust means, and to abuse a Person of such eminent
worth, and Learning, by making him an Advocate for an Opinion that he detested,
as (at least) an absurd Error. If F. H. took it upon trust (as I am charitably
apt to believe he did from the words or writings o^ some whom he reputes hi^
friends, it may be a warning to him how he trusts them another time. Yet
(though he did it ignorantly) he is no^ excusable to deceive his Readers, and
wrong the memory of so famous a Bishop, by imposing upon him so gross ^
slander, which (the book being scarcely to be had) few men can have opportunity
to discover. Truth desires not the patrociny of falsehood, no^ ought to be
defended by lies.

F. H. comes to know what the two Romanists Renerius, and Jansenius said, is
somewhat strange; He, I presume (and it appears sufficiently by his Language)
not being able to Read their books. And it gives some color to what was not
long ago much suspected, that the Romanists were at first the Inventers, and
still continue the supporters of Quakerisme. What these men say, as I know not,
so it is little material, F. H. not being willing (I suppose) to stand to
their determination of the Controversy. The Reasons produced are sufficiently
frivolous. The Antiquity of the Waldenses is not considerable, their Name being
unheard of in the world, till above 1100. years after Christ. Their
Universality was shut up within the limits of a few Dioceses about Tolous. And
their Opinion against the lawfulness of Swearing was not so terrible a Monster
as that those two Champions should be afraid to encounter it.

It may be (says F. H.) that A. S. will tell us that these were condemned in
some General, or Provincial Council for Heresy, and if he do, it is no
great matter, since most of these have erred. How rash is F. H. to condemn of
Error most of the General, and Provincial Councills, which I assure my self
he has never read. It would be a difficult matter for an abler man than he to
prove, that ever any one General Council, truly so called, has erred in
matter of Faith. However, a General Council (though not free from all
possibility of error) is the highest, and most Authoritative Judicature for
matters of Religion in the World, and therefore should not have been so
slighted by F. H. though I cannot condemn him of Imprudence in waving all
Judgments but his own; for unless he stand upon that guard, he will certainly
be worsted.

Argument in form is this, Nothing that is not of it self, and intrinsecally
evil, is forbidden by Christ. (And that is proved by Induction.) But Swearing
is not of it self, and intrin-secally evil; for the best Creatures, Angels,
and holy Men, the Patriarchs, and Apostles, yea Christ himself, and God also,
did Swear upon occasion. And therefore Christ did not forbid it. With this
Argument F. H. seems to be much troubled: For he spends about five whole leaves
in his attempt to answer it. And he begins with asking Questions: Whereto I
answer, That it was not evil for a Jew under the Law (as an executioner of
Justice) to smite out an Eye, or Tooth, or cut off Hand, or Foot, or Wound. Nor
was it evil to give Sentences to that purpose, because it was so appointed in
the Judicial Law, Ex. 21. 24. Lev. 24. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Nor was it, nor
is it evil for a man to seek the defense of his Rights by just means. Yet from
all these Concessions, A. Ss. Argument cannot be answered. For that of our
Savior, S. Mat. 5. 39, 40. was spoken to his Disciples, and the people (St.
Luke 6. 20. and 7. 1.) but the Law, Eye for Eye, Deuteronomy. 19. 21. was given to the
Magistrates, Sect. 18. and the execution thereof not permitted to the people,
but by the Magistrates consent, Deuteronomy. 19. 18. unless (as some think) in capital
crimes. If it be objected, that then our Saviors words are not opposed to the
Law, as it seems they should by these words, But I say unto you, I grant that
to be true. For they indeed stand in opposition, not to Moses's Law, but to the
peoples depraved custom allowed by the Pharisees, who being irritated by some
injury, were often such carvers of their own satisfaction, that they cut out so
large retaliations, that at length their adversaries were no less wronged, then
they had formerly been injured by them, which was an occasion to make their
quarrels, and enmity perpetual. Whereupon the holy Jesus thought fit to
prohibit that practice, arising not so much out of the love of Justice, as out
of malice toward them by whom they had been grieved. Here then is not any
thing forbidden that was commanded before, or what in it self was good or
lawful; but what was evil in it self, and formerly so acknowledged, as
malice, and desire of revenge. So the whole purport of Christ's words was, That
men should neither wish any mischief, nor out of any heat of anger, or rage,
contrive, or act any harm to those Persons who before had done somewhat to
their prejudice. Which notwithstanding, it was lawful to bring offenders before
the Magisirates, that they might be corrected, and thereby learn to amend their
lives, and abstain for the future from the like injuries, or that others by
their punishment, might learn to beware, and not run into such exorbitances; or
that they (the wronged parties) and others, might afterward live in greater
security, without violence, or oppression; or (if the grievances were of that
Nature) to recover their own, or receive a just compensation. Self defense
then, and preservation in a moderate way, is not disallowed; but such a
resistance of Will only, as arises out of hatred, or desire of revenge. So the
Learned Dr. Hammond, a Star of the first magnitude in our English Horizen
expounds (...) (the word here Translated resist) by vicem refer, return not
one wrong for another. And so the sense will be perfectly that of the Apostle,
Romans 12. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil. So all manner of Resistance
is not here forbidden, for he that pleads for his own innocence in a moderate,
peaceable, and legal way against the calumniations of an Adversary (which
Christ himself did, being wrongfully accused) is not to be blamed: nor he that
for the manifestation of his Innocence, or Defense of his Rights, appeals to
the Sentence of the Magistrates. Only that Resistance is culpable, and here
condemned, that is either unjustly, or by undue means undertaken, or
prosecuted with malice, or revengefull desires, which are contrary to Charity.

turning the cheek to the smiter, is not to be understood literally. For
Christ himself being smitten, did not so. And St. Paul, being struck, answered
sharply, Acts 23. 2, 3. He excused himself indeed afterward, but not in
respect of the acrimony of the Language, but in regard of the Person to whom he
spoke. Nay, our Savior was so far from the literal observation of these
words, that he gravely reproved the Officer that had smote him, as he was
making his defense, S. Joh. 18. 22, 23. So what he commanded here, he did not
observe himself. else where (the words in both places being of the same
Original) (...), and (...), and consequently did never intend to oblige his
Disciples to a literal performance of this Precept, but to a great measure of
meekness, Patience, and Humility, though perhaps some rude people would
thereupon be encouraged to overpress them with more, or greater injuries. The
like may be said to the following passage concerning Law Suits, which are not
simply, or of themselves evil, but accidentally through quarrelsomeness,
covetousness, or some other undue circumstances, may be evil. Rather we ought
to suffer wrong, than to break the Rules of Charity, remembering that of S^.
Paul, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all men.

F. H. tells us, That it is written in the New Testament, Avenge not your
selves. This I willingly grant, but cannot guess what he would infer from
thence. Then he falls again upon asking Questions. Whereto I answer, That to
keep the seventh day Sabbath, was not Morally evil* That it was lawful for
the Jews to fight with the Amalekites, Canaanites, etc. That Circumcision,
Sacrifices, Offerings, etc. were not evil in themselves. And yet all these
answers do nothing invalidate what I said, to wit, that Christ forbad nothing,
but what was intrinsecally evil F. H. says further, That these (meaning the
Leviticall Ordinances) were once as really good, as ever Swearing was. But this
dictate is not true, and was already confuted in the Sermon it self, Sect. 28.
and therefore should not have been brought in again without some proof.
Besides, it is impertinent, for F. H. knows, that in the Sermon it was
asserted, That the Ceremonialls ceased of themselves at our Saviors death, but
were not abrogated, but observed by him in his life. From that he falls to
object, instead of answering, and says, If A. S. will needs uphold Swearing
because commanded to the Jews (that is as a part of the Judicial or Ceremonial
Law, for nothing else was commanded to the Jews more than to other Nations, the
Moral Law extending to all) before Christ, he is a debtour to t^^ whole Law,
Gal. 5. 3, 4. Th^^ is as much as to say, Though (...) cannot answer the
Argumen^ proposed, yet I can bring i^ another which A. S. never proposed, nor
any man e^ that understood what he said and that I can, and do thu^ answer.
And it is tru^ that F. H. cannot answer the Argument proposed, unle^ the bare
denial of the Conclusion will do it; or that wha^ ever he says must be taken
for Truth upon his word. (...) proved that all Swearing wa^ not forbidden by
Christ, because some Swearing was lawful, (it being used by holy men in both
Testaments, Angels, and God himself) and Christ never forbad what was lawful.
Whereto F. H. replies, We do not look upon any Swearing to be now a duty, (his
looking, or rather not looking must it seems be preferred before my Reason) but
affirm all Swearing to be now a sin, (is not this to deny the conclusion?)
because forbidden by the positive Law of Christ under the Gospel, (he begs the
Question, and without Reason takes for granted, what I ^y Reason had disproved)
who by his death ended the right ^f that. These words do enterferr, and are
not reconcilable together. For, if Christ for bad Swearing by a positiv^ Law,
then he ended not the right thereof by his death* And if he ended the righ^
thereof by his death, then h^ did not forbid it by a positiv^ Law in his life.
All the me^ in the w^rld cannot mak^ this Sentence of F. Hs. either true, or
consonant to it self* And he might have learne^ as much out of the 29. Sect*
of the Sermon. But to mak^ it pass more currantly (at le^^ in the fist member)
he bring^ in the ^estimony of Sam: Fisher. Ridiculous! A man to b^ a witness in
his own cause or a Quaker says, That he is in the right, therefore he is in
the right. And although F. H. calls that S. Fs. Argument, and says, It is of
force, which was indeed but a mere dictate; yet I think other men will not be
of his mind. For that would equalize these people to God in respect of
Veracity, if all their words were proofs not to be denied. But by ill luck F.
H. having cited with applause S. Fs. words, That that sort of Swearing which
was not sin simpliciter in its nature under the Law, is now a sin upon the
account of Christ's universal prohibition of all Swearing; immediately
contradicts it, saying, That Christ by his death put an end to the Law. For if
Christ forbad it in his life, how did he put an end to it at his death? So then
F. H. and S. F. are irreconcileably at odds; and if S. F. said well (as F. H.
says he did) then F. H. did ill, when in the same breath he contradicted it.
The wit of man cannot atone those repugnant Assertions. Nor does F. Hs.
subtle invention of a middle dispensation unty the knot, because there is no
in^^^mediate time betwixt life and death. Our Savior kept (...) over the very
Night he was betrayed, and dyed the next day, with whom the Ceremonial Law
expired. I demand then, whether had it been lawful to have Sworn that night,
or no? If it had, then it was not forbidden by these words of our Savior,
Swear not at all, (for they were spoken before, and surely it had not been
lawful to have acted contrary to Christ's precept) and consequently A Ss.
Doctrine in his Sermon was true. But if it had not been lawful, as formerly
prohibited, then F. H is wrong, who says, Christ put an end to it at his
death. For he could not then put an end to that which was ended before. So it
is most certain, that either S. F. or F. H. are false Teachers, they dating the
unlawfulness of Swearing upon different accounts, and from several times. And
for that conceit that Christ's words Swear not at all, were Prophetical (which
it may be F. H. aims at by his middle dispensation, and his discourse of
Christ's foreknowledge) as it yields the Question in granting, that Oaths were
not thereby at present forbidden, so it was refuted in the Sermon Sect. 29.
whereto no reply has been made. But here F. H. offers at a proof (which he
seldom attempts, and therefore it is fit he should now be regarded) from St.
John 4. 23. where the Samaritan Woman perceiving Jesus to be a Prophet verse
19. desires to be resolved whether the Jews, or they, were in the right,
touching the place of Gods external worship then legally performed by
Sacrifices, and Offerings, verse 20. He in his Answer tells her, That that
debate shall presently take end by the abolition of these extrinsecallrites,
whereto a more Divine and Spiritual worship should succeed, For the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit, and in Truth, ver. 22. Where upon F. H. inferrs, That the time was
then, but came on more afterward to be fulfilled, (in timating, that what is
now, may come more perfectly afterward) and so applies it as a commodious
place to interpret and explain Christ's meaning in that prohibition, Swear not
at all. But ^ answer to this, First, That these words as he understands them,
are not applicable to his purpose. And secondly, That he does not understand
the place aright First, The words in his sense are not applicable to that o^
Swear not at all. For though some what may be now in inchoation, which shall
after arrive at a greater measure of perfection (as an Embryo in the womb) yet
Christ's commands were not of that Nature, but were perfect as soon as
delivered, and to be exactly observed; nor could possibly acquire any greater
perfection, or become more obligatory afterward. Secondly, He does not rightly
understand the meaning of these words, The hour comes, and now is; the
purport whereof is not that one, and the same thing is both present, and
future; but that what he there speaks of, was then near approaching, and should
not be long delayed. For in Scripture the praesens is sometimes put for Paulo
post futurum, as may appear by several places. As our Savior, St. Mat. 26.
28. speaking of the Sacramental Wine, says, This is my blood which is shed,
where is, do: not import, that it was already shed, or then in shedding; but
that is was to be shed the next day. So St. Paul 1 Cor. 11. 24. reciting
Christ's words at the Institution of the holy Eucharist expresses them thus,
Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, where no man will say, that
the word is, implies that Christ's Rody was then broken (though it be of the
present Tense) but that it was soon after to be broken. So here, The hour
comes, and now is, imports no more, than that Nu^v significat tempus d^
pro^imo immiuens: quasi dicat eru, imo jam Jam erit, Grotius in loc.
the time is at hand And thus both the Fathers, as S^. Chrysostom, and
Theophilact, and the modern Commentators interpret the words; whereby it is
clear, that F. H. mistakes the meaning of the place, and that his subtle device
makes nothing at all to his advantage.

F. Hs. many instances, to show that somewhat was commanded by the Ceremonial
Law, which ought not now to be observed, he need not wonder what may be said
thereto. For I have already granted them, and shall not think that concession
does any way prejudice mine assertion, That Christ forbad nothing, but what was
evil. For which I appeal to the judgment of any man that is able to
distinguish betwixt Expiration, and Prohibition, which was plainly taught in
the Sermon Sect. 8. In this sense Christ forbad not, but used the Ceremonial
Law all his life; at whose death not withstanding it expired, the shadows
vanishing, when the substance was exhibited. So it is now antiquated, not by
any prohibition, (for who could forbid what God had appointed?) but by
impletion, the death of the Son of God being prae^ipyfied, and adumbrated by
the Legal observances which are now become unlawful, not in themselves, but
as implying a denial of Christ's Passion, and an expectation of a future
Messiah, or another Savior.

F. H. proceeds, and tells his Reader, What ever may, or can be said, A. S.
will needs conclude, that all Swearing is not forbidden. And why? Because it
has been the practice of holy men, and also an Angel. This Argument is of
little force, etc. and yet he spends five pages in confuting it, and says, It
has been answered over and over, and over again, though A. S. will not take
notice of it. Indeed A S. is resolved to take no notice of it, for he owns not
the Argument. His Argument was, Christ never forbad any thing that was not
evil. But Swearing is not evil, because God, and Angels, Christ, and St. Paul
used it, and therefore Christ forbad it not. F. H. attempted to refute the
Major, or first proposition, but his instances by ill fortune not reaching
home, and so (it seems) perceiving himself too weak to answer that Argument,
he craftily substitutes another in stead thereof, and frames it thus, Swearing
was the practice of holy men, and an Angel, and therefore all Swearing is not
forbidden. And then he falls with might and main upon this figment of his own
invention, whilst the simple, and unattentive Reader may think, that he is all
this time confuting my Argument, which he does not in the least touch, much
less oppose. Whereupon I do not hold my self at all obliged to trace his
steps in this wild and impertinent extravagancy.

F. H. denies not, but that good men, and Angels swore, but grants, That the
Lord Swore once, yea more than once, and tells us upon what consideration it
was, which concessions are fully sufficient to prove, that Swearing is not of
its own nature evil, which is as much as I desire, and as much as will make
mine Argument unanswerable. And therefore it is not at all material to my
purpose, whether Amen be an Oath, or not, which our Church (as S^. Ambrose also
thought) asserts; though F. H. judges it to be concluded upon too slender a
ground; or whether our Savior swore, or not, (which were it true, says F. H.
would only prove Swearing lawful in Sermons as though that were not
sufficient for the confirmation of mine Argument) for the acknowledgment that
God, and Angels swore, sufficiently evidences Oaths to be lawful; and
therefore I shall not debate the point with F. H. but for quietness sake,
suffer the Opinion of F. H. to preponderate (if the Reader think fit) the
Authority of the Church.

And upon the same account I pretermit his strange conceit, I hat it seems to
him that I prove the Magistrate^ exacting Oaths out of the Mosaicall Law; as
also his knowledge in Is: Pennington's writings, which nevertheless is possible
not so great, but some of his private Letters may escape his notice; and how
ever what I alleged, I can show under his hand, that subscribes himself I P.)
and his reiterated complaint, that their calling God to witness (which we grant
to be an Oath) is not accepted by the Magistrates, (which I answered in the
Annotation to the 16th. Sect. of the Sermon, and again here, Sect. 14.) where
to he had it seems nothing to reply, but is pleased to talk the same thing over
and over again, and his citation of Authors whose Testimonies are not at all
repugnant to what A. S. had said: and his roving discourse of holding up the
hand, or laying it on a Bible, or kissing a Book* or saying after a Crier, I
Swear, which never man that I know did: or finally, that pretty device, which
he terms, a more necessary discourse, which he would suggest to A. S. to
induce him to persuade the Magistrates to forswear themselves; all these I pass
by, a^ wholly impertinent to the matter in hand, and hasten to consider his
Answer to the sixth Argument.

Paul (though assisted by the holy Ghost) understood not the Text; or if he
understood it, he acted against it, and that not rashly, but upon deliberation,
because in his Epistles, he calls God to witness, which is a formal Oath. To
this, after a diversion what a just occasion is (and that I call a just
occasion of an Oath, when thereby some necessary may be effected, which
otherwise probably could not be done) and a crimination of my discourse as
tending to an allowance of frequent, and unnecessary Swearing (notwithstanding
his contrary acknowledgement, That I seem to condemn sometimes needless and
vain Oaths in ordinary communication) he grants that the Apostle knew his
Masters meaning, and that in his writings he acted not contrar^ to his
knowledge, and also that he calls God to witness and soon would think he would
yield the conclusion: but to avoid that, he unexpectedly denies, That calling
God to witness is Swearing, notwithstanding that cloud of witnesses I produced,
that defined it in that sense. It Is hard to deal with men that deny
definitions. But if that be not an Oath, I would gladly know what in F. Hs.
Judgment (or those of his persuasion) an Oath is, and by what discriminating
Character it may be known, when a man Swears, and when not, which till it be
done, all dispute is rendered useless, or fallacious, as must needs happen if
men do not agree what it is concerning which they dispute. For not performing
of which, I am taxed by F. H. though I thought I had done it sufficiently in
the 16. and 17. Sections of the Sermon. And I am clearly of Opinion, that an
Oath consists in the attestation of God employed, or expressed by some means or
other, that always, and nothing else being essential there to. Nor can I call
to mind that ever I read, or heard any to another sense. And therefore F. H.
when he denied that, should have given us a better, at lest another, which yet
he has not done, and so is really become guilty of what he causelessely imputed
to me. And therefore I cannot but fear, that F. H. did not only wrong me, and
the Truth, but his own Conscience also, when he writ this Sentence, In the 89.
page he says, That Christ answering to the High Priest, I am, and thou have
said, is an Oath. Look that page in the Sermon, and it will appear, there are
no such words, nor any to that purpose. And with the like, or rather the same
blot he asperses me again, and the same 34. page, where he says, That I am so
uncertain in my definition of an Oath, that one shall hardly know what to pitch
upon to be my Judgment; sometime it is this, and sometime it is that, and
sometime it is neither this nor that. A Christian ought not to take the liberty
to swerve from the Truth for his own Advantage, or for making good his own
Tenent. And I challenge F. H. as he would gain the reputation of a man that
speaks Truth, to show where in that Sermon, I professed that an Oath was either
this, or that, or indeed any thing, save only some kind of attestation of God,
which I have professed so plainly, and so often in sundry places, (as in the
45. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 56. 57. 93. Sections) not only as mine own, but the
universal Judgment of all men, and Ages, that I wonder with what face any man
can tell the world, that I fluctuate up and down, and cannot tell what Swearing
is, but make it sometimes this, and sometimes that, and sometimes neither this
nor that, whereas I have been always constant to the same definition of an
Oath, though not always expressed in the same words. For I never said (as F. H.
abuses me) That it consisted in saying truly, truly; but I said, that Amen,
Amen, is an Oath in the Judgment of St. Ambrose, G. Biel, and Chemnitius. To
make which Opinion agree with my former definition of Swearing, I brought in
Mr. N. Fullers objection against it, That there is no Oath wherein God is not
interposed, (which I do not dislike, as F. H. mistakes) but fully consent to
as mine own sense (as F. H. in the very same page seems to acknowledge) and
answered it, that when the word Amen, Amen, is used there, it may be an Oath,
though N. Fullers Reason be granted, because God is interposed there, Amen,
being a Name, or Epithet of God. Thus F. H. falls into absurd mistakes, whilst
he will needs undertake to confute what he does not understand.

F. H. pretends to some Reason why St. Paul did not Swear, though the judicious
Hugo Grotius say, Non potuit jurari expressius. For (says he page 31.) what
ever A. S says, this would make the Apostle guilty of frequent, unnecessary,
and common Swearing. But this is very unadvisedly, and irreverently spoken. For
unless all the men that ever defined what Swearing was be mistaken (I challenge
F. H. to produce one contrary instance) and all the world be deceived in the
Notion thereof, the calling God to witness is an Oath. And if so, St. Paul
Swore; and if that be true, I know not how to excuse F. H. rash Language from
blasphemy. But put the case that all Ages have erred in their Notion of
Swearing, and only F. H. and those of his Opinion be in the right, that these
expressions of the Apostle be not Oaths; What are they then? Why, they are
ardent and zealous, or fervent expressions, etc. but the Apostle (as F. H. goes
on) spoke not these fervent words unnecessarily. Had they been Oaths, they had
been unnecessary; but being only servent speeches, they are not. Smells not
this ranckly of partiality? I shall now to conclude take no notice of his
causeless reproaches, or his extra vagant excursions, to what the Lord
Chancellor said to one of Wieliffs followers, or that the Council of Constance
burned Wicliffs books and bones: also John Hus, and Hierom of Prague; or
looking for Protestants before Luther. These matters being so widely distant
from St. Paul's Swearing, I pass by, and hasten to see how he answers the
seventh Argument.

Swearing is enjoined in the third Command, every precept prohibitive of vice
being necessarily so to be expounded, as implying the contrary duty. For else it
is impossible to free the Decalogue from imperfection. And consequently, Thou
shall not take the Name of God in vain, implies, Thou shall take the Name of
God (that is, Thou shall Swear) where there is just occasion. And therefore
Christ who came not to destroy the Law, did not forbid all Swearing. To this F.
H. replies, That the substance of this is answered before. If so, (which I
cannot find) he might the more easily answer it again. Secondly, he says,
That how A. S. can make the third Commandment to prove the continuation of
Swearing under the Cospel among Christians, he does not see? By this Concession
it appears, that he lept over the style before he came at it, and answered the
Argument besore he understood it. Thirdly, Instead of further answer to the
proposed Argument, he brings an Objection against Swearing out of Bp. Gauden.
Whereto I return this dilemma, Either he believes the Bishop, or he believes
him not. If he believe him, he must yield the Question. For the Bishop was of
Opinion, (and writ a Tractate to that purpose) that some Swearing is now
lawful for Christians. If he believe him not, why should he impose his
Authority to be believed by us? Nor is it Argumentum ad hominem, as they call
it, unless we were obliged to defend what ever that Bishop said. The Truth is,
that that late eloquent Bishop of Exeter did merit well of the Church of
England; but (as his Genius led him) was more prone to make use of the palm of
Rhetorique, than of the fist of Logique, and was willing by endearing
expressions, and all possible condescentions to gain the affections of his
Adversaries, (which Method, some great and good persons have followed; but,
through the untractable disposition of those they dealt with, not often with
good success) for which civility, he had a very unhansome return given him by
the scur^ilous and petulant Pen of S. Fisher. Lastly, this Objection needed not
to have been repeated here to no purpose, it being at large, and satisfactorily
answered in the 22th. Sect. of the Sermon; against which, though F. H. has
neither offered any Reply, nor can with any show of Reason refute what there is
said, yet dissembling that it was already fully answered, he reiterates the
same Objection as unanswerable, when he had nothing else to talk of, that the
weak people of his persuasion might surmise that he said somewhat (though
indeed nothing to the purpose) and was not altogether confuted. But F. H. has
yet a further Reply, and that is, That I stand upon the Morality of the third
Command, I much forget my self. And his Reason is, because all things
contained in the first Table, are not Moral. And then he instances in the
confessed Ceremoniality of somewhat in the fourth Command, to wit, in the
designation of the seventh day; and professes, we used to call it (that is, the
fourth) as Moral as the third, which if he mean of every particular therein
specified, is a gross, and notorious untruth. But let him not mistake himself
in thinking to escape so. For either the third Command which is no more dut
this, Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain) is Moral, or it is not. If
it be, then Christ has neither forbidden it, nor ought that is consequent
therein; and so my Argument holds good, notwithstanding his pretended Answers.
But if it be not Moral, but Ceremonial, (Ceremonies being now antiquated in
the time of the Gospel) then we may now lawfully, and without sin, take the
Name of God in vain, which is impious to assert. From which F. H. (to give him
his due) is so far different in opinion, that he expressly says, That he does
not make void the third Commandment, and by consequence acknowledges the
validity of my Reason, that our Savior did not forbid all Oaths, and
implicitly destroys what formerly he had built, and grants his own Tenet to be
false.

F. H. says, He cannot own Swearing in that Ceremonious way as the Jews did
use it. It would perhaps puzzle him to tell us of any one Ceremony that was by
the Jews inseparably annexed to the taking of an Oath. How ever the Question
now betwixt us is not, whether any Ceremonies annexed by the Jews to Swearing
be lawful, or unlawful; but whether Swearing it self be so, or no. And his
saying, That he cannot own it in the Jewish Ceremonious way might put one in
hope, that he meant not to refuse it, if tendered simply after the manner of
Christians.

That Christ never did any thing without Reason. But there was no Reason why he
should absolutely forbid Swearing; and therefore he did not so forbid it. To
this F. H. replies, (granting that our Savior did never any thing without
Reason) That he denies the Conclusion. Indeed he has all this time hitherto
done so: but here he means better than he speaks. For he produces six Reasons
why Christ should forbid all manner of Swearing. To recite them, is to refute
them. They are these: The first is, There was a time before the fall, when
there was no Oath, nor any necessity thereof, for unbelief, or sin, had not
yet entered. And therefore Christ had Reason to forbid Oaths when sin and
unbelief were entered into the world, and consequently, when there was a great
use, if not a necessity of them. Is not this a rational consequence?

Christ is the Mediator of the everlasting Covenant, yea the Covenant it self,
(if so, he is the Mediator of himself) and is made a propitiation for sin, and
transgression, to end both sin, transgression, and unbelief, and therefore
Christ forbad Swearing, which is not useful where there is neither sin,
transgression, nor unbelief. I grant that Christ came to abolish sin, which
were it effected, there would be no need of Oaths. But let F. H. himself be
judge, whether sin does not still abound in the world. If it do not, he has no
cause for his tragical complaint of the sad times, and how they that depart
from Page 5.
great iniquity are become a prey, etc. and then surely he himself sins in
laying such causeless aspersions upon the Magistrates, and the Laws, in
speaking evil of the Rulers of the people, and in bearing false witness
against his Neighbor. If it do, then there is no Reason why Oaths should be
prohibited, they being very isntrumental to the discovery and punishment of
wickedness. So this Reason is not for F. H. but against him.

That after sin was entered, and death by sin -- such was Gods love to mankind,
that for confirmation of his Word, he swore by himself, which was not
exemplary for Christians truly such. What then? this undoubtedly proves that
some Swearing is good, for God swore, and yet he never did any thing but what
was good. But Gods Swearing (be it exemplary to Christians, or no) is no Reason
why Christ should forbid men to Swear, who thereby might rather be warranted
thereto. Our Savior wrought Miracles; these acts are not exemplary to us: and
yet, that was no Reason why he should forbid his Apostles, and such as he had
endowed with that supernatural power to work them. But this is not all: For F.
H. adds, That our Savior prohibited that, Mat. 5. 34. which sometimes was
commanded, and yet be did not destroy the Law, and command for Oaths. If this
be true, then God once commanded Swearing (and that command was added (says F.
H.) because of transgression) and that Reason, viz. Transgression, still
continues, and Christ did not abrogate that Law, (and therefore it still
continues in force) and yet did enact another flatly repugnant thereto. God
commanded Swearing, Christ disanulls not that command; yet prohibits by his Law
all Swearing. So we have two Laws (according to F. H.) both in force, whereof
one is diametrically contrary to the other, to both whereof Obedience is
impossible, in respect that if we perform the one, we must of necessity
violate the other, which is such a Doctrine, as to me seems worse than
Manicheisme. For I should easilyer believe there were two several Gods, one
repugnant to the other, than that the Father, and the Son, to wit, one and the
same God should thwart himself by promulgating contrary Laws. Whereupon I
cannot imagine that the wit of man could invent any Reason more forcible why
Christ should not forbid Swearin^ than this which F. H. prod^ces as a reason
why he should forbid it, that is, because h^ Father formerly had commanded it.

At that time when the Law w^ given forth at Mount Sinai, generally all Nations
were give^ to Idolatry. That I do not deny, which is some favor to F. H For
his proof thereof i^ as weak, as unnecessary, which is, That J^roboam 500.
years after erected two Golden Calves for the Israelites to worship: and that
irreligious practice continued in the time of Amos the Prophet, which was
almost 200. years after, as appears Amos 8. 14. and therefore the people of ^he
whole world were gene^ally Idolaters many hundred years before. A weak
intel^ect may discern what a non sequitur this is. Well, but I have granted
the thing, that the Nations were addicted to Idolatry. And what then? Therefore
(says he) God commanded (mark that word) ^his peculiar people to Swear by his
Name to keep them from Idolatry, and that they should not Swear by the Gods of
the Heathen. I hope then Swearing was good, for God never commanded any thing
that was evil for a good end. And think that F. H. dares not b^ wilfully
guilty of so horr^^ blasphemy, as to say, He did, a^ though he were so impoten^
as not to be able to effect hi^ good purposes, without the assistance of wicked
means N^ man, I hope, is so Atheistical, as to fix that upon God, for which
just damnation is allotted to men, Romans 3. 8. Besides, one might much more
justly argue, that Swearing by false Gods was unlawful; and therefore God to
rectify that abuse, commanded them what was lawful, to Swea^ by his Name
(which was the undoubted Reason of that praecept, in the observance whereof
they should not sin; from whence it follows, that some Swearing by God is not
sinful) than that God desirous to withdraw them from the great sin of Swearing
by Heathen Gods, should give them leave to practice a lesser sin (but a sin
still, if all Swearing be of it self unlawful) to swear by his Name, whereas
he might better have prohibited all Swearing, and consequently, made the people
avoid all sin. Which as it had been far more suitable to the goodness of God, so
it would have been matter of little, or no more difficulty to the people. For a
common Swearer that added t^ every sentence, By Baal the is true, might as
easily get (...) contrary habit to speak without an Oath, as to forge^ Baal,
and say instead thereof, By the name of the Lord thi^ is true. But I conceive
that this frequent and customary Swearing was never permitted, being flatly
against the the third Commandment. And therefore that Swearing that was
commanded, was only when there was some just and weighty occasion to take an
Oath, which was to be not inconsiderately, but advisedly done. And then sure
the Name of the Lord might with as much facility be used, as that of Baal. But
admit, not grant, that God commanded Swearing for that end merely: What
follows? It is to be considered, (says F. H.) that this was the state of
minority of the Jewish Church, wherein God gave them Ordinances suitable to
their state; but it does not follow, that these Ordinances were to be
perpetually binding -- especially seeing Christ has prohibited this about
Swearing, and Prophesied, that Types and Figures should cease. Which is a most
pitiful begging of the Question; I have always denied that Oaths are
Typical, and he without any proof but his own bare assertion, takes it as
granted, that they are, and uses that as an Argument, that now they are
unlawful. So the Question betwixt us is, Whether Christ forbad all Swearing,
or no, and he holding the affirmative, says, That Gods command for Swearing
was temporary, (which is false) and that appears, because Christ prohibits
Swearing: So that upon the result of all, one of F. Hs. great and weighty
Reasons (as himself terms them P. 39.) Why Christ forbad all Swearing, is
indeed this, because he forbad all Swearing. Were it not out of great
compassion to weak, and seduced Christians, I could not have forced my self to
write all this (which some perhaps will judge loss of time) in refutation of
such irrational Tenets.

That seeing God commanded Swearing merely for the prevention of Idolatry
(which fancy was refuted in the last Sect.) and that there is not now that
Idolatry in Christendom that was in the world before, and after the Flood;
therefore Christ had Reason to forbid all Swearing. The weakness of this
illation is very discernable. For supposing at present (not granting) that God
upon that sole motive commanded Swearing, it follows, that where the Reason of
that command still remains, there the command it self is still in force. But
there are some Christians that at this time either border upon, or live with
Heathen Idolaters (as those that dwell amongst the Indians) who therefore by
virtue of that command may lawfully Swear. Secondly, There are that hold, that
there is gross Idolatry committed in the most parts of Christendom (if not in
all) to this very day, and I suspect that F. H. may be of that Opinion, and
then it is lawful to Swear by the Name of God, in a manner al Christendom
over, because it is more tolerable to Swear by God than by the Mass. But
(3dly.) the vanity of this Argument does more fully appear, that (whatsoever
may be said now of the conversion of the world from Paganism, yet) at that
time when our Savior is pretended to have prohibited Oaths, the world was in
the very same condition, as concerning Idolatry, that it was in, when the Law
was delivered upon Mount Sinai, all Nations besides the Jews, being then no
less guilty of worshipping Heathen Deities, than they were before. And
therefore if God for preventing that wickedness did once command Swearing (as
F. H confesses) then Christ upon the same account had Reason not to countermand
it. So unhappy is F. H. in his Argumentations, that the very same motive which
he brings in as a Reason why Christ should prohibit Swearing, is an Argument
for it, being the only ground (as he saves) upon which God formerly did
enjoyne it. And therefore upon suppesall that there is now no fear of Idolatry
amongst us, and thereupon no necessity of Swearing by God; yet it was not so in
our Saviors days, when the Jews were on every side environed with Heathens,
who thereupon should not (and therefore doubtless did not) prohibit Swearing,
when there remained the very same cause for it, for which God before had
commanded it. If F. H. then would expound the meaning of Christ's words
according to his own Principles, he should interpret them. The time will come,
when Idolatrous Worship shall cease, and the Gentile World become Christian,
till that time you may as God has appointed, Swear by his Name, but then all
Oaths, even that by the Name of God will become vain, and unnecessary, and
from thenceforth I charge you not to Swear at all. But F. H. is not Alchimist
enough to extract that sense out of Christ's prohibition.

The command of Oaths was given for the ending of strife, and controversies
among men H^b. 6. But men in Christ, new Creatures, Christians ought to walk no
more as carnal, nor as men, but as men of God, and as spiritual, and as true
Saints and Christians, to come both out of strife, and Swearing. It is most
certain Truth, that one main end of Swearing is the Decision of suites, and
differences amongst men, whereto it is a very useful medium. But strife, and
contentions were in the world in Christ's own time, and ever since, and still
remain, if not increase, not witstanding the praecept of our Savior, and the
endeavors of Christian Ministers to the contrary. Now it were very
unreasonable, that so long as they continue in so great an height, the means of
composing them should be taken away. And therefore this is so far from being a
Reason why Christ should prohibit Oaths, that it is a great Reason why he
should neither then, nor yet forbid them, there being the same (if not greater)
necessity of them now, as has been in all Ages. It is true, that all men ought
(as they are taught) to avoid the works of the flesh, hatred, variance,
emulation, wrath, strife, etc. But it is as true (and that too apparent) that
men do not what they ought. Nay, can there be any certain, or infallible
assurance to others that any one man in particular does always, and ever will
walk as he ought? Is it not evident, that there are many failings even amongst
those that pretend they have arrived at the highest perfection of Christianicy?
Has not F. H. himself (who I doubt not is sufficiently persuaded that he is in
Christ, and become a new creature) raised a causeless strife, when he saw a
Scripture truth so fully consonant to the clear light of divine Reason
published to the world merely (for other Argument he can produce none against
it) because it was contrary to the Opinion that he, and his fellows had
imbibed? Did not another Precious servant of the Lord (as F. H. styles him)
Write a Pamphlet fraught with scurrilous invectives, and bitter raylings
against a Reverend Bishop, (who had largely expressed much affection, and
compassion toward them of that persuasion) as though he had been ambitious to
have been listed amongst them that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities;
or would have had the Kingdom take notice, that he was set down in the seat
of the scornful: tantaene animis caelestibus irae? Nay, cannot all men that
have either conversed with, or read the discourses of those men tha^ pretend
they are come out o^ strifc, witness, that they are so contentious in defense
of their own Tenants (though most apparently repugnant to the clearest beams
of divine light) that they will rather speak non sense, than nothing at all,
and produce reasonless Reasons (nay Reasons th warting themselves) rather than
once denied? This one Tract of F. Hs. were there no other (as there are too
many) is too great an evidence Assertion. Stri^e then there is, and variances
there be, and so are like to be amongst people of all professions. I confess
these things ought not to be, but yet they are visibly conspicuous. And can any
judge it fit then, that where a disease is epidemical, the best expedients for
the cure thereof should not be practiced, but forbidden, and disallowed? But,
says F. H. every true saying, or testimony, is equivalent with an Oath. It is
so, for Oaths are required in Judicature, to oblige witness^s to speak Truth.
Bu^ what then? F. H. will possibly affirm that he will speak Truth, but he
will not Swear it. But then, how shall the Magistrates, or others concerned, be
assured that he speaks Truth, when he refuses to confirm it by Oath? Because
he is a Nathanael in whom is no guile. But that is altogether as hard to be
known, as the other. For as many have, so any one may pretend to as great a
measure of sincerity as he can do, and yet possibly may, notwithstanding the
most zealous profession of integrity, be an hypocrite, or Atheist Whereupon all
civilized Nations, even people of themselves, have ever approved of, and
practiced necessary Swearing. And thus I have examined all F. Hs. pretended
Reasons why our Savior should prohibit all Oaths, and can truly say, (and
doubt not but every understanding Reader will be of my mind) that I have
therein found somewhat against, but not the least color for the maintenance of
so strange, and paradoxicall an Opinion. From my very soul I pity the strong
delusi^n of these weak seduc^d persons, and heartily wish that mine endeavors
might be isntrumental to reduce them from their errors; to which end, I have
devoted this Refutation of that has (as much as in him is) labored to uphold
their tottering Babel and confirm his credulous brethren in that deception
whereinto such as he have mislead them. It would be matter of great joy to me
to step the cur^ent of this Schism, reduce these wanderers into the way,
defend the Truth, prevent Apostasy, and defection from Religion, and reconcile
disagreeing Judgments.

F. H. in his Reply denies mine Assertion, but says nothing to the proofs,
whereupon mine Argument stands as at first untouched, and in its full strength.
But to color over his tergiversation, and induce the unwary reader to believe
that he had answered all, when indeed he had answered nothing, he falls to his
wonted method of arguing against the Conclusion. And he first assaults it with
the Authority of Bp. Gauden, who says that our Savior gave many singular
precepts of more eminent diligence, patience, charity, etc. above what ever the
Letter of the Mosaic Law seemed to exast, (mark that expression seemed to
exact, which F. H. as though he were sensible that seeming to exact, is not
really to exact, puts in a different character) or by the Pharisaicall
interpretations were taught to the Jews. To this Sentence I shall without
scruple very readily subscribe. For the Law as expounded by the Pharisees
seemed not to exact what really it did (because in regard of its confessed
perfection it must needs contain the whole duty of Man; for otherwise it had
not been perfect) whereupon our Savior, in that seeming Opposition against it,
in these words so often by him used, St. Mat. 5. sets not himself against the
Law, in the true and full intent thereof as delivered by God, but as corrupted,
or depraved by the Pharisaicall Glosses; or (which is all one) he opposes not
the Divine Law, which was exactly perfect, nor alters, nor adds, nor detracts
therefrom, but disallows those sinister Interpretations which the Jewish
Doctors had put upon it. And to this I yield my full assent, and am in perfect
Accordance with that Reverend Bishop. And I could wish that F. H. were so to
with this worthy person whom he so often cites.

F. H. proceeds, but finding little to say, yet resolving to swell his answer
into a book, repeats what he had formerly laid down in his pretended Reply to
the fifth Argument, concerning Evangelical commands of loving enemies, of
turning the cheek to the smiter, and of giving thy cloak to him that sues for
thy coat, etc. to all which I have returned answer in the due place, Sest. 29.
30 and shall not so far imitate F. H. as to recite what already has been
delivered, which I hope will satisfy even F. H. himself, who I suppose will
grant that of the cheek to be a Figurative expression, not a literal command.
And however it is not peculiar to the Gospel, there being a Phrase suitable
thereto in the Old Testament, Isa. 50. 6. And for going to Law, I presume F. H.
will not disallow it, nor condemn all them that use it, as breakers of the Law
of Christ. I am sure of this (and can justify it) that some of his persuasion
are both Plaintiffs, and Defendants, when occasion serves: nay further, that
some of them have consulted with Lawyers, and make use of all subtleties that
could be invented to hinder the proceedings, and defeat the Legal Pleas of
such men as commenced suit against them, for what they themselves knew that the
Plaintiffs by the Law of the Land, ought to have had, and what they themselves
ought to have paid.

F. H. asks, where in the Law it is Written, Love thine enemy, which Christ
commanded? I answer, That though it be not enjoined in the Old Testament in
express words; yet (which is tantamount) indeed it is, Prove. 24. 17. and 25.
21. which is confirmed by David's expression, Psalm. 7. 4, 5. and example, 1 Samuel
26. 8, 9. where Saul is expressly called David's enemy, whom notwithstanding he
secured from all harm, and danger, which was an undeniable evidence of the
love and Respect he had for him. But F. H. goes on in his catechizing vain, and
asks again, Whether did not Israel fight with their enemies, and kill them? and
whether they had not a command so to do? I answer that they did, and were
warranted thereto by Gods command. This makes way for another Question, Whether
this be not another thing that Christ says, But I say unto you, love your
enemies etc. I grant this is another thing, but not contrary to the former. For
that was spoken to public persons; this to private. It was lawful, to use
military Actions against their, and Gods enemies. But it was not then, nor at
any time lawful for private persons to hate one another. Hence Casuists
conclude that war is lawful, but not duells: and that if a private Soldier
kill his particular enemy in war, out of malice, or revenge, whom otherwise he
would not have killed, it is murder. Yet all this will not infer that our
Savior gave any new command, or added any thing to the Moral Law, but only
vindicated it from the Jewish depravations.

F. H. names Polygamy twice for sureness, but brings not any Text to show that
it was either commanded, or permitted in the Law, nor can do. And therefore
there cannot so much as any repugnancy with any color of Reason be pretended
betwixt the Law, and the Gospel in that respect. So what Christ said to reduce
Matrimony to its primary Institution, disallowed indeed the lewd customs of
the Jews; but not the Legal Sanctions, whereof there was not one made in
favor of Polygamy.

But that objection of F. H. which is of greatest weight, is the seeming
Antilogy betwixt the Law, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. etc. and what our blessed Savior said,
St. Mat. 5. 32. ( and 19. 3. etc.) which (says F. H.) is a clear prohibition
of that which the Law allowed. But the terminations of shortsighted men are
often rash, and unadvised. Indeed it is impossible to resolve what either
harmony, or dissonancy there is betwixt those Texts, until we understand what
is the full importance of them, wherein Expositors do so much vary, that it is
evidence enough, that there is no small difficulty in them. The Jew^ who had
best reason to know their own municipall Laws* were much divided amongst
themselves about the interpretation of this; and there were great disputes
amongst their Doctors concerning this matter, not long before our Saviors
Incarnation. The Opinion of Rabbi Sammai (or Sameas) and his Schollen was, That
no divorce was lawful, but where the Husband has found some uncleanness in the
Wife, which yet (say some) they interpreted to a great latitude, indeed to any
mode, or gesture that might occasion suspicion of Incontinency, as by keeping
company with riotous men, washing with men in public bathes, or going with
breasts naked, etc. But Rabbi Hillel, and his followers, expounded the Text
disjunctively, Seldens Ux ^ br. ca^. 13. 18.
that one might put away his Wife, not only for matter of uncleanness, but
also if she found no favor in his eyes; that is, if he took any distaste at
her, were the occasion never so slight, as if she had over-rosted his meat,
etc. But R. Aquiba went further yet, (and the more liberty they afforded, the
bettes they pleased that libidinous people) and permitted divorce at the
Husbands pleasure, if he had cast his affection upon some other younger,
fairer, or richer, or whom he judged more fit for his occasions, or more
suitable to his humor. These debates gave occasion to the Pharisees to ask
Christ's Resolution tempting him, not out of a desire to learn the Truth, but
to bring him into danger, disgrace, or hatred with the people. For (as Origin,
St. Hierome, St. Chryostome, and Theophylact say on St. Mat. 19.) had he
approved of divorses for every cause, he had crossed his former Doctrine
delivered on the Mount, (St. Mat 5. 52.) and seemed to have patronized the
libidinous demeanor of the leudest people; and had he disallowed thereof, he
might have been reputed (as they objected against him) an opposer of Moses, and
a violator of the Law, that God by him had promulgated to that Nation. And
however, what so ere his determination of the Question had been, he could not
possibly have avoided the opposition of those Schools, whose sentence he had
condemned: Nor are the debates fewer, nor the Opinions of the Fathers and
Doctors of the Christian Church concerning the true meaning, and full
importance of that Judicial Sanction, and of our Saviors Doctrine concerning
divorces less various, than were those of the Rabbis, though they generally
agree in this, That there is no enantiology, or repugnance betwixt the one, and
the other. Whereby I perceive, that F. H. has not concerned himself in Reading
the Expositions upon th^se Texts, nor weighed the Reasons, and Grounds of of
those learned Authors, whose consentient Authors, whose consentient Judgments
are Opinion. Otherwise he would not (I suppose) at first sight have so rashly
concluded, That what Christ said, was a clear prohibition of that which the.
Law allowed; which therefore I may deny upon better grounds, and more Authority
than he asserts it.

Mat. 5. 32. But I say unto you, may seem to infer an opposition to what went
before, whereby a less attentive Reader may fall into F. Hs. delusion, the
concurrent suffrages of both ancient, and modern Hierome, Ghrysasiome. Aust^n,
Theophylact. Par^us in St. Man. Jun^i (...), Scharpii, Sym, honia.
writers do teach me, that that expression is opposed not to the Mosaicall
Law, but to the doctrine of the Jewish Rabbis, and the lascivious practices of
the seduced people, who were taught, That it was lawful upon any pretended
occasion, or indeed at their mere pleasure to turn away their wives, so they
gave them a Bill of Divorcement. Now that was not the sense of the Law (which
did not so much allow of, as suppose Divorces) (...), non (...), as Junius
words it) but this, That no man should be permitted to turn away his wife,
unless he gave her a Writing of Divorcement. Whereto Christ's words are not
contrary at all, but very consistent therewith, as is evident to him that
seriously considers the 31. and 32. v.

F. H. is mistaken, when he says, That it is evident enough that some things
were prohibited by Christ which the Law commanded, or at least allowed; which
is a no less weak, than bold dictate, what ever the intention of that
Leviticall Precept was. But to give F. H. and those of his persuasion all
possible satisfaction, that they may find Reason to revoke their erroneous
Tenent, I shall add, ex superabundanti, that some very learned persons have
thought, that that of Deuteronomy. 24. 1. was rather a prudentiall Ordinance, than a
Divine Command. Non dixit (says St. Hierome) propter duritiam cordis vestri
permisit vobis Deus, sed Moses, ut juxta Apostolum consilium sit hominis non
imperium Dei; that it was rather an humane Advice, than an Injunction of God.
And of that mind is Paschasius Ratbertus in his ninth book on St. Matthew. And
before him Lib. 8. in 6^. Luke.
St. Ambrose, Moses permisit, non Deus jussit: 'Twas Moses's permission, not
Gods injunction. But because I cannot my self subscribe to that Opinion,
having reason to believe, that the Judicial, and Ceremonial Laws were of
Divine Institution, no less than the Moral, I shall add for F. Hs. further,
and (I hope) full satisfaction as to the sense of that command: First, That
Tertullian the most ancient of the Latin Fathers (to omit others) renders
(...) (which our English reads, some uncleanness; the Geveva Translation, some
filthiness; the Septuagint, (...); and the Vulgar Latin, aliquam faeditatem)
impudicum negotium, some unchastity, which seems very probable, because (...)
is that very word that is so often used in the 18. of Leviticus, for nakedness;
which is there put for carnal copulation, the word signifying, the secret
parts, as Exodus 20. 26. and 28. 42. and Hos. 2. 9. and so it is Englished, Isa.
3. 17. and metaphorically any immodest actions, and in that sense rendered
shame, Nahum 3. 5. and particularly Whoredom, Ezekiel. 23. 29. And it may be
further noted, that this expression (...) is but twice found in the Old
Testament, (as diligent Textuaries have observed) to wit, here, and Deuteronomy. 23.
14. where it is rendered by the Septuagint, (...), and in English, an unclean
thing. And that Text is expounded by Maimonides in his More Nevochim Part, 3.
cap. 41.
to be a dehortation from fornication. All which laid together make Tertullians
opinion very probable, that the Sense of that Leviticall Edict, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. is
only this, that when a wife defiles the nuptial bed, the Husband justly
offended therewith, may put her from him by a bill of divorce, which is so far
from being repugnant, that it is perfectly consonant to that Evangelicall Rule,
St* Mat. 19. 9. And so that Father might well, and rationally Lib. 4. cap. 34.
conclude, Adversus marcionem. Jam non contrarium Moysi docet, That Christ
taught nothing contrary to Moses. I grant there may be some Objections raised
against this Interpretation. For Adultery by the Mosaicall Law was a capital
offense, Lev. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. And therefore in that case, what need was
there of divorce, when death, not separation, was the punishment due to the
offender? This, though urged by some of great Learning, and Judgment, inferrs
no necessity of what it is produced for. For it may be considered, that a
Husband was not obliged to prosecute his offending Wife with putting the utmost
severity of the Law in execution against her, as appears by the instance of
Joseph, who seems in that respect to be commended, St. Mat. 1. 19. Again, an
Adulteress could not always legally be put to death. For perhaps the Husband
alone might surprise the Wife in the very Act, and could not be a witness in
his own behalf; or perhaps some other might do the like, whose single
Testimony notwithhanding, could not be reputed sufficient to take away life, as
it is clear, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. or possibly the Husband might through the
concurrence of many probabilities think himself assured of the perpetration of
that crime, which yet he could not make out to the Judgment of others. If any
reply, That that Nation had means of discovery whether a Bride had not been
devirginated before Marriage, Deuteronomy. 22. 17. and whether, or no, she had not
been too prodigal of her honor afterward, Numb. 5. 27. it may be said to the
former, That the Learned Mr. Ux. Ebr. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Seldom tells us out of Jewish Authors, that may be thought to have understood
their own Laws better than others, that Law concerned not any woman that was at
the time of her congress with her Husband younger then twelve years, and one
day; or elder than twelve years, and six Months; nor to her whom her Husband
before espousals had enticed to lewdness, and defloured, ( Exodus 22. 16.) or
ravished by force, Deuteronomy 22. 28, 29. nor to her that was not originally an
Israelitess, nor to her that had not fifty shekells assigned her for her dowry
before Marriage; nor to her that had been vitiated before the Espousalls, but
only to her that had been devirginated betwixt the contract, and the
consummation of Matrimony. Which many limitations may well be thought to have
restrained that Law into so narrow a compass, that it cannot easily be imagined
to have facilitated the proceedings of the other by bringing the offender to
capital punishment. And further, that famous Antiquary says, The Husband
Ejusdum libri, c. 2.
had his choice to impleade his Wife for the loss of her Virginity; either
Criminally, or Judicially, to cut off, or diminish her Dower. And as to the
other, the trial of the Woman's innocence by drinking the water prescribed,
Numb. 5. 24. which might seem to render all divorces useless; there were
several things necessarily pre-required before the jealous Husband could bring
her to that Test. For when he suspected her to be too familiar with any Person,
then he was to admonish her before witness, that she should not be shut up with
that man in some private place; for of that admonition he was to make proof in
presence of the Magistrate, before his Plea could be allowed. Again, the
suspected party was not to be a boy of nine years old, or under, for in respect
of such, there could be no just ground for his jealousy. And further, he was
to prove by credible Testimony that she was found in private with that Person
of whom he had forewarned her. Besides, if he either retracted his
prosecution, as he might if he pleased, or had carnal knowledge of her after
her being in private with the suspected party, she was freed from undergoing
that trial; as likewise she was that was Married to an Hermaphrodite, or to a
blind man, or to a minor, or was a minor her self, or if she were lame of her
feet, or wanted a hand, or were dumb, or deaf, or were only contracted, not
Married; or if she had been carnally known by her Husband before Marriage, or
if her Husband were as culpable as her self; as Paschasius Ratbertus in Mat 5.
says, Nihil iniquius quam fornicationis causa uxorem abjieere, and seipsum ab
eodem vitio, non custodire. For in all these cases, she was excused from those
bitter waters of execration. And besides all this, it was in the woman's power
absolutely to decline that trial, before the Priest had blotted out the curses
he had written with the bitter Water which she was to drink; but so, (as also
in some of the recited cases) that she was forth with to be dismissed without
Dower, which is an Argument, that notwithstanding this Law of Zelotypy, there
was great Reason that divorces should be allowed in case of Adultery. Lastly,
This Legal Trial of Women began to be disused in the Age foregoing the final
destruction of Jerusalem, in respect of the frequent Adulteries of Married men;
by Reason whereof, God as he had fore-threatned them by his Prophet ( Hos. 4.
14.) would no longer have his Name (used in that Rite) to be profaned, nor
continue his miraculous discovery and punishment of their whorish consorts.
Thus much I have collected out of that Writings of that great Scholar that was
so singularly eminent in the knowledge of Antiquities, which may serve Lib. 3.
13, 14, 15.
as an Answer to the Objections, and clear Tertullians Opinion from
improbability.

For which Truth, see the marginall citations with St Chrysostom in St. Matthew.
5. (...). Erat hoc veteri in lege mandatum, ut qui propriam quacunque de causa
odisset uxorem, non tam prohiberetur ejicere, in quc illius locum alteram
ducere, quod certe non simplicites ficri Lex jusserat, etc. Idem etiam in St.
Mat. 19. (...). (...). ostendens -- quod ea quae ab ipso sunt dicta de non
repudianda uxore non mod^ repugnant, verum etiam valde cum Mose convenient, (
Ariano interpret) Idemque ibidem (...). Si oppositus veteri Testamento fuisset
(se: Christus) non decertasset cert^ pro Mose. and St. Hieronymus in locum.
Moses libellum repudii dari jusserit -- non dissidium concedens, sed auferen^
homicidium. Sic etiam St. Augustinus de sermon Domini in monte. l. 1. Non qui
praecepit dari libellum repudii, hoc praecepit ut uxor dimittatur. ^t Author
Operis imperfecti in St. Matthew 19. Si malum est quare praecepit? si bonum
est, quare destruis. Denique Theophylact: in St. Matthew 5. (...). Non solvit
Mosaica, sed integri^ati suae restitui^. Idemque in St. Matthew 10. (...). Non
contrarid Deo Moses constituit.
which I would not trouble the English Reader. But especially the Author of the
imperfect work, (which sometimes went under the Name of St. Chrysostom, and is
still bound up with his works,) upon this place does argue to this purpose.
Either the Mosaicall Law was bad, or good. If bad, why was it commanded (it may
be added that upon that supposition it could not come from God the Author of
all good) or by whom? If good, why then should Christ forbid it, who came to
destroy sin, and propagate Truth, Piety, and Virtue? F. H. will have much ado
to clear himself from the push, and escape the horns of this dilemma. And
though it will be easy for him to elude the Authority, yet he will not find it
so easy to evade from the Reason.

Moses in this particular may be very sufficiently deduced from Scripture, for
Moses to avoid clancular separations (which might have occasioned much
turpitude) ordained that when an Husband had cause to put away his Wife, he
should give her a bill of divorcement, and Christ says there is no just cause
of divorse save only Fornication. No humane wit or subtility can make one of
these thwart the other, but they are perfectly consistent together. Again our
Savior sought to reform those Matrimonial abuses (so common in his time) by
reducing Marriage to its primary institution, St. Mat. 19. 4, 5, 6. And that he
must necessarily do, his will being the same with God the Fathers. To which
purpose St. Hierome (in locum) speaks well, Nunquid potest Deus sibi esse
contrarius, ut aliud ante jusserit, and sententiam suam novo frangat imperio?
non ita sentiendum est: Can God be so contrariant to himself, that when he has
once commanded somewhat, he should cross that decree with some new Edict? it is
not to be imagined. So then, Gods will (as expounded by Christ, that best knew
it) being against divorces, it is much improbable that Moses should allow of
them, save (as the holy Jesus did) in case of Adultery. For he was faithful in
all his house, (Heb. 3. 5.) as a servant, and therefore would not oppose his
Master. This Epiphanius teaches us, saying. That what Moses Writ, was not (...)
Epi^h Haer. 33. in ^tol. sect 9.
without the will of God; but he gave them Laws by the impulse, and inspiration
of the holy Ghost. And this he illustrates out of St. Matthew (19. 5.) where
what Adam uttered Genesis 2. 24. is said to be spoken by God, because though the
words were Adam's, yet the will was Gods; and so in like manner, though Moses
promulgated the Law, yet he had learned it from the dictamen, and appointment
of God. And the contrary assertion he refutes in that place as heretical,
being the Tenent of one Ptolomy, an improver of the impious Doctrines of the
old Gnostiques. And there is much Reason for the declared Judgment of that
ancient Father, it being very unlikely (as the learned Grotius well argues, in
locum) that Moses, who by his own Authority would determine nothing about a
temporal inheritance, but brought the cause of Zelophehads Daughter before the
Lord, Number. 27. 5. would make a Law in a matter of much higher concern, before
he had consulted with God, and known his pleasure therein. Nor is it probable
that Moses when he repeated the divine Ordinances ( Deuteronomy. 5. 1. and 6. 1.)
would insert amongst them any thing of his own head, or what was not stamped
with Supreme Authority. And therefore we may well conclude, That there is no
opposition betwixt God, and Moses; or betwixt Moses, and Christ, especially in
respect that the Prophet Malachy many Ages before Christ (2. 16.) declared
expressly, that divorces were displeasing to God, and therefore doubtless never
allowed by him, notwithstanding the contrary practices of the Jews, and the
idle determinations of their Rabby, which here Christ reformes, S. Mat. 5. 32.
opposing his But I say unto you, not against the Law, but the wicked
depravations thereof, which very place of the Prophet F. H. cites against
himself ( page 41.) and yet it seems had not so much either understanding to
conceive, or ingenuity to confess, how fully it invalidated his Objection.

Moses; because that were a work both laborious, and unnecessary, and in lieu
thereof shall declare what I conceive probable to be the just importance of
that Leviticall Law (yet without derogation to Tertullians Judgment) from
whence it will be clear, that there is no repugnancy betwixt it, and the words
of our Savior, that F. H. thought fit to oppose thereto.

uncleanness found in the Wife, though she was not legally enabled to repudiate
her Husband under any pretense. And of that turpi^ude the man was appointed
Judge, whom it most concerned, and who had the best means to discern the
behavior of his consort, whose uncleanness he might possibly discover, though
perhaps he could not always make proof thereof by two witnesses, as the Law
required in that case; so that there might oftentimes be a just cause of
separation (even according to our Saviors Doctrine) when yet there could not
be any Legal evidence thereof produced. Upon which ground, I conceive, God
ordained the Husband to be sole Judge in that matter, and enabled him to put
away his Wife, by giving her a bill of Divorcement sufficiently attested, not
requiring the reason of his so doing to be therein specified; partly perhaps in
favor of the wife, whom the man peradventure might be unwilling to disgrace
publicly (though she had deserved it) in regard of their former affection, or
their common children; and partly it may be in respect he could not legally
evince her of that crime known only to himself: or if he could, yet he might
be desirous that the severity of the Law should not be executed against her;
which was the case of good Joseph, and the St. Mat. ^. 19. where the word (...)
which ^^^ transl^^^ just, is expounded by the learned Grotius in locum, to
signify a gentle, kind, moderate person. that would no^ inflict the rigor of
the Laws upon offenders, because utmost severity has oftentimes no small
tincture of injustice. For it might have been that the holy Mary might have
been forcibly violated, where she could not have called any to her rescue, or
assistance, and thereupon was to have been acquitted (could proof have been
made thereof) by the express letter of the Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 26. And (...), a
charitable and well-natured man, is apt ^o conjecture the best of what is
doubtful: whereto Joseph might rather be inclined by the virtuous, and
unblameable demeanor of his Spouse. Whereupon he resolved in equity not to call
her into public question to detain her Dowry, as he might have done by the
Authority of the Judges (to whom in that case it was necessary to have made his
address) being loath to turn informer against one of whom he had good thoughts
(which office is not very grateful to men of mild dispositions) and who
(though he had no small ground to suspect her of inconrinency, yet) for ought
he knew, might be innocent of any wilful crime. And yet being (...), that is
(as the learned Mr. Seldom expounds it in his Ux. Ebr. l. 3. c. 23.) rituum
patriorum observantior, very observant of his Country Laws, thought it not fit,
nor congruous to the dignity of a just person to retain her for his wife, whom
he probably suspected (though he knew not by whom, or by what accident it had
happened) to have been formerly defi^ed by u^bast embra^^s.
blessed Virgin, no man being obliged to accuse all that offend. And it may
seem that the divine Providence thought fit to place the supreme Judicature in
these Matrimonial cases in the Husband, the rather out of intuition to the
(...), the hardness of the hearts, that is, the fierce, and untractable
disposition of the Jews, many of whom perhaps would have been so impatient of
so great an injury, that rather than to live with an Adultress (which they
might know so, though they could not prove it by such Testimonies as the Law
Numb. 35. 31. Deuteronomy. 1^ 6. and 19. 15. Heb. ^0, 28.
required in capital offenses) they would revenge that wrong with a greater,
and bereave that lewd woman of her life, which had been too prodigal of her
honor. To prevent which mischief, God was pleased, not as the Pharisees would
have had it, to command, St. Man. 19. 7, 8.
(which expression Christ corrects) but to permit divorces (as our blessed
Savior also did) in case of Adultery, to which only I conceive that Law,
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. in the native and primary sense thereof was particularly
restrained, and make no doubt but that God was highly offended with the Jewish
frequent divorces upon slight occasions, as is expressed, Mal. 2. 16. St. Mat.
19. 4.
being injurious to the wives, ( verse 14.) and contrary to his own primitive
Institution of Marriage. By all which it is clear, that it was not the Law
(but the abuse thereof those so common repudiations upon every cause, any
pretense) that our Savior opposed. The Law indeed authorized the husband to be
Judge, and unaccountable for the dismission of his wife, provided he gave her a
bill of divorce, unless he would either prosecute her criminally to take away
her life; or civilly, if he had a mind to put her away, and retain to
himself either the whole, or part of her dower; neither of which he could do
by his own Anthority, but by the power of the Magistrate, before whom he was to
bring proof of her crime. And this was suitable to the Divine Ordinance, which
for the transgression of the Woman, and her seduction of Adam, appointed her to
be in subjestion Genesis 3. 16.
to her Husband, which some of them have professed to be the greatest curse
that ever was laid upon that Sex. Nor was it so much as the Laws of the ancient
Gauls, and other Nations gave to Husbands, who (as Grotius says) had power of
Life, and Death over their Wives. Yet I grant that this power of Jewish
Hu^bands was very great, they being constituted Sovereign Judges as to
Divorce, which Authority they might make use of without proof (which was often
impossible) or allegation of any crime. Which Political Law, as it was just
(if rightly observed) so it was (as the practice of that people manifested)
very unjust when abused; but had a necessary rise in respect of the ferocity of
that Nation to prevent greater mischiefs, as before was said. But this was
without the least intention, that they to whom such an absolute power was
entrusted should abuse it, who therein sinned no less, than if a Supreme
Magistrate, who for the management of affairs is by Law responsible to none
(and some such there must necessarily be in every Kingdom, and Commonwealth)
should contrary to his knowledge, of set purpose give wrong Judgment in a
weighty matter. This would doubtless be unjust, (though irreversible by the
Laws of that Nation) and much displeasing to God, and so no less were the
Jewish causeless divorces. Against which vicious practices, Christ opposed his
But I say unto you, and not against that Judicial Ordinance. For he came not
as an earthly Prince to interpose his Authority in civil affairs, or to
promulgate, alter, or abrogate any political Constitutions (for his Kingdom
was not of this John 18. 30.
World) but to decry sin, and teach his Disciples how to demean themselves in
the performance of their Moral duties. I have dwelt the longer on this point
to make it evident to all impartial Judgments, that there is not the least
discrepancy betwixt the Mosaicall Law, and our Saviors Doctrine.

F. H requires, That A. S. or any man living should show him wherein Christ
requires a righteousness, or perfection that exceeds that of the Law; if he
forbad nothing (as to the matter of Oaths) which was not forbidden before,
(which Objection he so much likes, that he touches upon it in ten several
pages.) I answer, That one of my Principles is with the Royal Psalmist, to
acknowledge the Ps. 19. 7.
perfection of the Law Moral. And me thinks F. H. should know that it is so, it
being asserted plainly in the 20th. Sestion of the Sermon, as the ground of the
seventh Reason. And so it may well be, for David either spoke what was true, or
what was salfe, when he declared the Law to be perfect. To say he spoke false
is blasphemy, because he writ by Divine Inspiration, and the infallible
guidance of the Spirit of Truth. And if he spoke truth, then the Law being
perfect, there can be no Additions be made thereto by Christ's, or any other;
for whatsoever is added to that which is already perfect, must needs be
superfluous. F. H. brings in simple proofs when he builds his Tenet on
blasphemy, and when he considers this, he may please to excuse us, and require
no more, that A. S. Or any man living should show him that, that can never be
found. I guess the root of his mistake is, that saying of our Savior, That
none shall enter into the Man. 5. 20
Kingdom of Heaven unless his righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees. It seems he surmises them to have been exact observers of the Law,
(and so reputes their Righteousness, and that prescribed in the Law to be the
very same) when as they were the greatest depravers thereof, and (as it is
recorded in the Gospel) transgressed the Mat. 15. 3
commandment of God by their Traditions It Is tedious to repeat the same things
over and over, and yet unless I so do, F. H. will not take notice that our
Savior opposed not his Evangelicall Praecepts (which were nothing else than
just explications of, no Additions to the Law) to the command of God in the Old
Testament; but to the Pharisaical corruptions thereof. I should therefore
desire, that neither F. H. nor any of his persuasion would henceforth buz into
the ears of credulous, and well meaning people such vain, and absurd dictates;
but on the contrary consider seriously with themselves in the fear of God,
whether that be not a pitiful cause that stands in need to be supported by
blasphemy, and cannot otherwise subsist, than by setting God the Son in
opposition against M t. 5. 17
God the Father; and the New Testament against the Old: whereas Christ in that
very Chapter gives his Auditors a sufficient caveat against that error,
bidding them not to think, that he was come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets.

That the bigh Priest charged our Savior to Swear, and he accordingly answered
upon Oath; and that some years after he had said Swear not at all: from whence
it follows, That the lawful Magistrate may impose Oaths, and the people upon
whom they are imposed, may and ought by Christ's example to answer upon Oath,
notwithstanding the seeming prohibition, Swear not at all. F. H. is much
perplexed with this discourse, and in answer there to spends above three whole
leaves. And first, he grants, that the administration of the first Covenant not
being fully ended, because Christ was not as then offered up, the high Priest
might require Christ to speak upon Oath. Fisher in his Antitote goes surther (
page 15.) and says, That Christ being under the Padagogy of the Law as the
Jews were, might use some such Swearing as was used under the Law, etc. Thus
far it is well. One would think that such means as the Jewish Magistrates might
lawfully use for the discovery of Truth, might also be lawfully used by
Christians for the same end: and what obedience our Savior himself did yield
to the Rulers of his Nation, should not by any of us Christians be denied to
ours. But F. H. thinks I perceive, that though the high Priest might have
required Christ to speak upon Oath, yet indeed he did not For in a Marginall
note borrowed from S. F.) he says, That adjure does often signify to charge,
or oblige by bare promise, and as well as by Oath. For which he produces, Acts
19. 13. F. H. did not well to take such dictates upon trust, and write what he
did not uuderstand, and so being deceived himself, to become isntrumental to
the deception of others. But S. F. did much worse, that being a Scholar did
abuse the ignorant and credulous vulgar by a specious pretense of Expounding
Antidote Page 19.
the original words. Adjure indeed is used in our English Translation, both in
Mat. 26. 63. and in Acts 19. 13. which (together with too much confidence of S.
Fs. fidelity) might occasion F. Hs. error. But the Greek words are not the
same, nor always used in the same sense. And therefore there is no credit to
be given to S. Fs. contrary assertion, as appears by what may be found in the
Sermon Sect. 24. whereof F. H. vouchsafes not to take any notice.

F. H. objects, That the high Priest and Pharisees were about a wicked work,
(he means, I think, that they were contriving our Saviors death.) Be it so.
What then? Then (says he) had Christ answered to that adjuring he had
consented to their wicked work, which to speak, is Blasphemy. And yet we know
St. Matthew speaks it, and I trow that he therein did not blaspheme. So this
objection fights against Scripture it self. Besides, had he barely without an
Oath (as F. H. would have it) made that answer he did, had it not been the same
as to their wicked design? His confession that he was the Son of God, was that
which they desired, and labored to extort from him, that they might have
matter to proceed against him. And had it not been all one to them whether they
had gotten their desire by the intervention of an Oath, or without it? True it
is, they were unsuccessfull in the latter, for Christ by silence eluded their
Questions, and would not betray his own Innocence to their malice, till the
high Priest put him upon his Oath, which in duty to the Magistrate he could not
refuse, but acknowledging his power, and that by divine institution, John 19.
11. (not answering as F. H. conceits without ground, and often repeats and
reiterates in his own authority) confessed the Truth, giving thereby an Example
to all Christians, how to demean themselves in the like exigent. His much
silence therefore is argumentative that he would not have Cooperated to their
bloody design, had he not thereto been enforced by Oath, from which he could
not evade without derogating from that Authority, which his Heavenly Father had
placed in the person of the High Priest. Which exemplary demeanor might have
taught F. H. to have been more judicious, or at least, more cautelous than to
have Printed that anarchicall sentence, that though they (meaning Herod,
Pilate, and the high Priest) had the name and bare the title of Magistrates,
yet they were out of the power of God (in the persecuting Nature) which is the
ground and foundation of all authority which is of God. Which treasonable, and
rebellious principle is repugnant to the practice, and Doctrine of the holy
Jesus (who owned the authority of these, however wicked Magistrates, as
divinely empoured) and destructive of Government, opening a gap to all
Seditions, as often as any factious person whether Justly, or unjustly, take
occasion to asperse their Superiors.

F. H. will prove that Christ did not Swear, and that out of A. S^. own words,
who had said, Se^^ Sect 17. and Sect. 27.
That the substance of an Oath consists in the attestation of God, by what
terms soever it be expressed, and that the essence of Swearing, is in calling
God to witn^ss But Jesus answered only, Thou have said; which was neither
attestation of God, nor calling him to witness. Had this Argument been uttered
in Vtopia, or in some Country so barbarous (if there be any such) as admits of
no Judicial proceedings, it might have passed with some color of Reason. But
it is strange, that F. H. durst adventure to publish it in England, where the
ordinary form is, That the Person that is to Administer an Oath, tells the
parties that are to be Sworn, You shall speak the Truth, and the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth, etc. So help you God, whereto they assenting by some
visible token, as kissing the Book, etc. what ever they then affirm, or deny
is upon Oath, though not one of them say, I Swear, or By God, or I call God to
witness that this is true. All which expressions are needless, as employed in
the Adjurors proceeding words, So help you God, which is a serious Invocation of
God the searcher of hearts, and protector of Truth. And therefore (...)
Christ Swore, though he spoke only, Thou have said, etc. or I am. And the
Oath he Swore, was, by the livi^g God, not expressed indeed by himself, but by
the high Priest, who adjured, or took him Sworn. And F H might have been so
ingenuous, as not to have fastened such an uncou^h Paradox upon A S. as that the
words (Thou have said* barely of themselves, without any attestation of God, is
an Oath* which A. S never thought, or imagined. N^r was tnere any cause for his
zealous exclamation against such perverting, straining, and screwing of the
Scriptures from genuine sense, etc. But (says F. H.) neither Mark, Luke, nor
John take notice of the high Priests adjuring. What then? St. Matthew does, and
that is enough. For St. Matthew either writ what was true, or what was false. To
say he writ false, is blasphemy. And if he writ what was true, the no mention
thereof in the other Evangelists, cannot make that Truth become false. And
therefore F. Hs. illation, though Matthew say, (I adjure thee to tell us
whether thou be Christ the Son of God) is not much material, to speak in the
softest Language, is very indiscreet, and unbecomming a Christian. For surely
every sentence suggested by the holy Ghost, is very much material. Indeed, it
is neither material, nor true, that F. H. adds, That Christ was as much bound
to answer Pilate, or Herod, as the high Priest. For though they were all
Magistrates, yet only the last examined him upon Oath. And it is as little
material whether the high Priest tore his clothes at the words, Thou have
said, or not till the end of the sentence about which I affirmed nothing, nor
will contend. A. S. had said, that it was enough that Christ denied not to
Swear, Se^^on Sect. 2^.
which assuredly had it been unlawful, he would have done, that the people
there present might not have been deluded. This had been sufficient to have
prevented F. Hs. refuge, That Christ did not answer as adjured, but in his own
Authority. For upon supposition that it had been unlawful to answer upon Oath,
Christ's (who before was silent) upon the Priests Adjuration, returning answer
to the demand without any apparent disallowance thereof, must needs have been
an appearance of evil. And therefore F. H. should not have made use of that
evasion, so derogatory to the sincerity, and goodness of the Son of God, or
vindicated it from this Objection, and not only named it, (as though that had
been enough to have refuted it) and so let it pass.

A. S. had said, That to allege that Christ Swore not, because he laid not his
hand on a Book, is to trifle, because the Essence of Swearing, ( viz.) calling
God to witness consists not therein. That (though of 1250. years standing) and
such like, are but extrinsecall, not essential to an Oath. They may be without
it, and it may be without them. So our Church appoints Matrimony to be
celebrated with a Ring, which notwithstanding she reputes not essential
thereto, nor voides any Marriage, because it was solemnized without it. From
the former words F. H. inferrs, That these Ceremonial Adjuncts of Swearing are
trifles; And then asks me (who never sent, or occasioned any of them to be
sent to Prison, though in respect of some of them, I have had too much cause,)
Why are so many conscientious people in bonds this day in England, under a
praemunire for these trifles? Surely F. H. does here trifle egregiously. And for
these Acts of laying the hand on a book, or kissing it, they are only
external significations, that the party Sworn, acknowledges himself obliged
by the then recited Oath: but no part thereof, Which perhaps (as F. H. says)
would notwithstanding not be received without them, in respect that those that
refuse them may well be suspected not to account themselves bound by Oath, when
they refuse to use such indifferent Actions, as long custom has annexed to the
taking of an Oath; not that thereby any weight is added thereto, but that they
are tokens, and tacit Declarations, that the Party Sworn does own the Oath,
and confess the great Obligation that thereby is put upon him. For I know not
one single person in the world (and I suppose F. H. cannot produce any) that
says, or ever did say, That these bare Acts are Swearing, (though commonly
annexed thereto in Courts of Judicature) or that an Oath cannot be without any,
or all of them, (for otherwise there could be no rash Swearing in ordinary
discourse) or that our Savior when he said, Swear not at all, etc. had any
intention to prohibit these Ceremonies, which were not then by any practiced.
And this may suffice to refell that cavell, that many conceive these
formalities to be Swea^ing by Creatures, which F* H. truly says, was
unlawfu^. For were it so (as I believe it is not) the mistaking Opinion of some
weak, or conceited men that wrongfully thought an innocent action to be
unlawful, did not ipso facto render it unlawful: otherwise we could never be
assured that any thing were lawful, because for ought we could possibly know,
some or other might have a prejudice against it. But F. H. argues further, That
it (whether he means Swearing, or Kissing the Book, is no great matter, but I
think he intends the latter) were better to be wholely avoided, then so many
men suffer, because they cannot do it. I answer, They may do it, if they
please, for Id possumus quod jure possumus: Cannot any man lay his Hand on a
book set before him? Or cannot he do that justly, which no Law either of God,
or man forbids? But it is not any Gospel Institution. What then? No Law of God
either enjoynes, or prohibits it. Therefore it is a thing of it self
indifferent, and may be done, and indeed must be done, if a lawful Superior
command it. I would ask F. H. if nothing be lawful but what is expressly
appointed in the Gospel? If so, then he may not wear nineteen buttons on his
doublet, for that I take it he finds not in the Gospel. Again, if nothing were
lawful, which were not a Gospel Institution, then a Prince could enact no
Laws, nor make any Orders (how beneficial soever he found them for the
Commonwealth) if God had not already Instituted them in the Gospel. By this
strange Principle, all Legislative power of temporal Monarche^ is abolished,
and men may disobey any humane Laws (which they are un willing to observe)
under that colorable pretense of Religion (but indeed the source of
Anarchicall confusions) that they are not Divine Ordinances. And then farewe^l
to that Apostolical Rule, ^ St. Pet. 2. 13 Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords s^ke

A. S. ^ad said, That an examinat Sermon Sect. 26.
is to answer the Magistrates both in matter and form, aecording to what is
proposed to him; to show, that Christ being upon Oath was obliged to answer the
High Priest. F. H. replies, That is A. Ss. vain supposition (though nothing was
supposed) and repeats the words thus, Every examinate is to answer directly to
every matter and form, to any that pretends power to administer an Oath: as
though a Magistrate had no real, but only a pretended power. F. H. is still
the same, consonant to himself. You know who said, That out of the abundance
of the Mat. 12. 24.
heart the mouth speaks. But I hope so well of those persons so well of those
persons that are of his persuasion, that I dare make them Judges, whether here
he demeans himself ingenuously, or no, who presently after the misrecitall of
my words* inferrs, That I am going about to stablish the Popes Inquisition,
etc. as though there were no differences betwixt that, and the moderate
Government of England.

Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. (as I had before upon the like Sermon. Sect. 28.
occasion, Sect. 9.) where it is conjoined with the fear, and s^rvice of God,
which certainly are Moral. F H replies, That I tell him this over and over
again: (I hope Tautology in his Judgment is no sin) and goes on in a confused
discourse to show, that Sacrifices and Offerings were Gods Service, not
distinguishing betwixt the Moral, and Ceremonial Law, (Oaths being duties of
the former, and above those of the latter, whereat he seems to wonder, and
would gladly therein find a contradiction) nor regarding what was there said of
Swearing, That it conduces now as much to the honor of God, as ever it did,
which cannot be said of the Leviticall Observances. And for what he says, or
seems to say, that Christ's Swear not at all, was both a Prophecy, and a
Praecept; he had expressed his thoughts more largely before in his Reply to the
fifth Reason (but to the same purpose altogether) which is already fully
answered in the thirtieth Sect.

Swear not at all, that renders it a total prohibition of Swearing, does so;
for it makes it contradict several Texts in the Old Testament, and therefore
it is not to be admitted. F. H. grants the former proposition, and says, It is
true. And the other he does not deny, nor can he: For whereas the Old Testament
says, Thou shall not Swear; if the New said, Thou shall not Swear, there were
doubtless an inconsistency betwixt them, which no multiplicity of words can
reconcile. But F. H. is resolved to say somewhat, that it may be thought by
weak persons that he had answered all that was, or could be objected, and so
spends sours whole pages in very confused language, without a period, for
sixty, or seventy lines, leaving his Readers to guess at his meaning, which I
take to be, that an Oath was a point of the Ceremonial, not Moral Law, which
is contrary to the Opinion of his Brother John Wigon, who in his Paper directed
from Lancaster Castle to the Reverend Judge Twisden, places it amongst the
Judicialls (which as F. H. confesses page 9. is the Judgment of many) and was
confuted in the Sermon Sect. 9. and 28. yet at length, he kindly grants with A.
S. That Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and to end both
sin, transgression, and the Law, (mark that, he came not to destroy the Law,
but to end it) and to bring in everlasting righteousness, etc. This is a new
and unheard of method, to end the Law, to introduce Righteousness. But the
Texts alleged, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Ps. 62. 11. and Jer. 12. 16. prove not that
Christians under the second Covenant, should Swear as they did in the first,
for these precepts were only to keep them from Idolatry: Whether that be true,
or no, is not pertinent to the Reason proposed. A. S. did not argue, that men
might Swear, because the Law enjoined it, (though if he had, it might have
passed, for ought F. H. says against it; for if these percepts served to keep
the Jews from Idolatry, they may have the same use still, especially amongst
such Christians as border upon, or are mingled with Heathen) but that these
Texts make it appear, that Swearing was once commanded in the time of the Law,
and therefore not forbidden now; which is assuredly true, unless there be an
inconsistence betwixt the Doctrines of the Old and New Testaments, which F. H.
as well as A. S. denies. But desiring it seems to expatiate, he falls upon a
marginall note that cites the Prophet Isay, foretelling that Christians should
Swear under the Gospel, for which there be two Texts quoted, Isay 19. 18. and
45. 23. To the former whereof F. H. says, That it is a prediction of the
Egyptians, owning the Jewish Religion, which he would prove from the words,
Sacrifices and Oblations. But when that happened, it would be hard for him to
tell. I am sure the Fathers, and modern Expositors, both Romish, and Reformed,
interpret the place of the Christian Religion professed in Egypt: And some of
them tell us how, and when it was accomplished. And Theodoret says, That those
Sacrifices and Oblations praesignified the Christian Liturgy, that spiritual
oblation. However, were it as F. H. would have it, that were no answer to the
Argument in hand. The like may be said to that other Text, Isay 45. 23. of
which Saint Hierome Jurat ut -- omnis per illum juret lingua mortalium, in quo
perspicue significatur populus Christianus, Moris est enim Ecclesiastici
Christo genu flectere, H. in locum.
says, That therein the Christians were clearly foretold, giving a Reason of
that Interpretation. And (...) -- Eorum quae furura expectantur per Christum
virtutem praesignisicat. -- And a little after, (...). Q^id est igitur quod
annunciatum est? Salus and conconversio omuium ubique Gencium, etc. And
somewhat at after. Si legitime jurare velint, ejus solvis mentionem faciunt --
Cyrillus Alexandrinus is of the same Opinion, and says, This place is
Prophetical of those things that were expected to be accomplished by Christ,
and particularises the Salvation, and Conversion of all Nations, who when they
Clem: Alex: ^^ Little.
would Swear in a right manner, make mention of his Name only. And (...), Quod
ex part jam vocatis Gentibus accidisse videmus ^ efficietur autem penites in
consum^atione seculi Proco^in locum. So Iyra in locum, Ista nune sunt
adimple^^, quod per orbem cessavit idolatria, Romans 14. 11.
Pro^opius says, That Prophecy is in part fulfilled (not by the return of the
Israelites out of Captivity, as F. H. would have it, but) by the calling of the
Gentiles, and shall be wholly made good (as to a general subjection to the
dominion of Christ) at the end of the World. And though perhaps F. H. may
repute himself wiser than these Fathers, and so give small credit to their
Expositions; yet me thinks he should give way to Saint Paul, who expounds this
place, not of the Reduction of the Jews by Cyrus, but of the day of Judgment.
This is some ground beyond mine own affirmation, that this Prophecy has
relation to the state of the Christian Church, wherewith if F. H. be not yet
convinced, I propose to his consideration the testimonies of his brethren, Is.
Pennington, (who says in this particular case, That the Prophets foretold of
things under the Gospel in Law-Phrases:) and Morgan Watkins, whose words are,
The Prophet. Isaiah spoke of Swearing, and as we judge, has relation to the
Gospel times, Isa. 65. 16. But for this also F. H. has provided an answer, and
that is, That the Apostle has altered the Prophets word Swearing, and instead
thereof has put Confession, which he conceives to be argumentative, That God
required not Swearing by his Name among Christians, as formerly he had done
among the Jews. One might have thought that thin had been prevented by a
Marginall Note annexed to the ninth Section of the Sermon. The Truth is, that
the Apostle St. Paul did not alter the words, but took them as he found them
rendered by the seventy Interpreters (which in an evidence of the
Authenticalness of that Translation) without the alteration of one syllable, as
is yet to be seen in that rare Alexandrian Manuscript presented to His late
Majesty, and in Procopius his Copy that he made use of. Now if this be a true
Translation of the Hebrew Original, as it must needs be, (because St. Paul has
given it authority, by transcribing it) then (...) which is always rendered to
Swear) and (...), which the Apostle (as did the Septuagint before him) uses,
must necessarily be of the same importance. For the more confirmation whereof,
those that please may have recourse to that Annotation, which might have been a
caution to F. H. either to have forborne this answer, or else to have added some
Reason thereto, to have invalidated this Reply, whereof he was forewarned. And
this you may imagine he would have done, had he had any. But if he could have
done this, and fully have satisfied those Prophetical expressions, this
eleventh Reason had notwithstanding remained in full force, even by F. Hs. own
confession. For he grants, that God in the Law commanded Swearing, and gives a
Reason why he did so, to wit, To keep the people from Idolatry, page 51. and
yet he says (which is the main scope of his book) That Christ forbad all
Swearing, as much as any, page 68. Now if in the Old Testament some Swearing
was condemned, and in the New all Swearing was sorbidden, (both which F. H.
averrs) it is evident that there is an inconsistency betwixt the one and the
other, which is the force of this Reason which F. H. grants, though he pretend
to refute it. For the close of which Argument, A. S. lays down these words, I
cannot but look upon it as a perfect piece of Manicheisme, and extremely
derogatory both to Scripture, and God himself, that for what Moral duty one
man was commended in the Old Testament, another for the same should be
condemned in the New. Whereto F. H. replies, That it is not matter of Man^
Judgment; he might as well accuse Christ, and the Apostle, (as himself, and
the Manichees, for that must be his meaning, if he will make his Proposition
intelligible) the one for forbidding to Swear, and the other for diminishing
from Scripture, and altering the Prophets words, which neither of them ever
did. Which sentence (implying that Heretics, and sinful wretches, ought to
be as free from censure, as our Savior, and Saint Paul) whether it be more
bold, or blasphemous, I leave to the judicious and Christian Reader to
determine.

The twelfth Reason was, the general practice of Christendom through all Ages
since Christ, who could not all be so ignorant, as to misunderstand the meaning
of these words, Swear not at all; or so wicked, as not only rashly, but
advisedly to act against them. For answer to this, F. H. plows with Bp.
Gauden's heifer, and brings in sundry instances that seem (but indeed no more
than seem) to make for the unlawfulness of all Swearing: to examine all which,
would require a longer time than I can at present spare from my more important
occasions; and when it were done, F. H. might puff it away with scorn, as he
does the practice of Transmarine Nations with, What does this prove from the
Scripture of Truth? Whereby I perceive, that this Reason, though never so
clearly made good, would have but a weak influence upon F. H. (which calls the
Christian World a Rabble) or those of his persuasion. Yet for the satisfaction
of more judicious, and sober persons, I could wish that some of those many (to
whom God has given more leisure, and greater Ability) would please to undertake
the History of Oaths, (which was once in my thoughts, though I now cannot
promise it) to show the practice thereof throughout the Ages of Christianity;
which I doubt not would be very satisfactory to all them that are of moderate,
and intelligent Judgments.

F. H. makes a transition to the affirmative part, which (says he) has been
answered over and over again. If so, his Province is easier. 'Twere no great
labor (had he nothing to add of his own) to transcribe what has been so
often written by others. Another great advantage he has against A. S. that he
can discern his thoughts, and tell others what they are, which he does in
these terms: He (that is A. S.) thinks he has said more in clearing of it,
then others have said. If that be so, and A. S. be not mistaken in his
thoughts, then either F. H. is deceived in saying these things were so often
answered, or some other have as omniscient, and heart-searching faculties as F.
H. who could redouble their Answers to thoughts before they were spoken. But to
proceed, A. Ss. Opinion was, and is that our Saviors, But I say unto you,
Swear not at all, was not opposed to the Law, but oneto the Pharisaicall
corrupt Glosses thereon, and the irreligious practices of the misinformed
Jews. And for both these, he conceives there are undeniable grounds of Reason,
and Religion. The former part, that Christ's command, Swear not at all, cannot
be set in opposition to the Law of God, was proved in the Sermon by twelve
Arguments, whereto no satisfactory answer can possibly be given, the contrary
Tenent being destructive to the Principles of Religion, and altogether
inconsistent with the following words, whereof (upon that supposall) no
tolerable sense can be made, which thereupon has been justly disowned, not
only by all National Churches at present throughout the world, but also by
the Catholic Church of all Ages, which is a shrewd presumption against a
novell Opinion. And for the other part, That this injunction of our Saviors
was intended to reform the Pharisees erroneous Doctrine, and the wicked
practices of the people, there is much Reason to believe. For can we imagine
that he, that was the wisdom of the Father, would not rather Preach what was
needful, than what was needless? Or that he that came into the world to bear
witness to the Truth, would not be forward upon all occasions to refute
damnable Errors, and reprove those grievous sins which lead so many thousand
souls into perdition, for whose salvation he came to shed his dearest blood? I
desire that F. H. or any other of his opinion, would set himself as in the
presence of God, and consider seriously whether it be not very improbable, that
the Son of God, without any motive, or inducement that we can conceive, would
forbid that Swearing which his heavenly Father had commanded then, when it was
as useful, and innocent, as ever it had been? Is it not much more like, that
he should rather forbid that sin of Swearing by Creatures to deceitful
purposes, then so ordinary amongst the Jews, than that harmeless thing, (that
as Answer to Bishop Gauden, Part 2. page 50.
S. Fisher confesses) had not been evil, had not he prohibited it? Can it
enter into any man's thoughts to believe, that when our Savior interpreted the
Decalogue to the primary and genuine sense thereof, that was at first by God
intended, and reprehended the abuses, either in Doctrine, or Manners acted
against it, that he should take no notice of that customary, and fraudulent
Swearing that was so frequent amongst them? Would he that inveighed against all
other vices, have connived at that villainy? You dare not say, that he was so
ignorant as not to know it, that either then, or not long after, was noted
throughout the Roman Empire; nor that he was so cowardly, as not to dare to
rebuke a vice that was grown to so great a height: doubtless had he not
reformed so gross an abuse, his Doctrine in that particular had been so far
from perfection, that it had not exceeded that of the Scribes and Pharisees. If
it be said, That the Law forbad ordinary Swearing; I confess it, and yet the
people commonly practiced it to bad purposes, and the Pharisees allowed that
practice; so that though there was no need of a new Law, yet there was a
necessity of a rigorous re inforcement of the old, both in regard of the
erroneous Doctrines of the one, and the debauched Manners of the other. And
both these were evidenced in the Sermon, Sect. 39. where it was proved by the
irrefragable Testimonies, and consentient suffrages of Origin, St. Hierome, St.
Chrysostom, and Christian Druthmar, (to whom might be added St. Hilary,
Theophylect, etc.) that the Jews had a base custom of Swearing in their
ordinary discourse. And was not that national sin fit to be decried? And were
not those Preachers justly liable to reprehension, who perceiving the people
where they had their residence much addicted to lust, or theft, would yet never
inveigh against those crimes, because God himself had formerly enacted, Thou
shall not commit Adultery. Thou shall not Steal. St. Chrysostom wa^ of
another mind, That resolved to Preach against Swearing, till he saw a
Reformation thereof amongst the people. And shall we surmise that our Saviors
zeal was inferior to his; or that he would not as powerfully reprove that
Vice whereof the Jews were as guilty, as the Grecians could be, because God had
forbidden it before by a Law which was little observed? And was not this (when
in his Sermon he took occasion to speak of Swearing) a fit time for the
reproof of that epidemick sin? And can we suspect him so careless, or
neglectfull, as to omit such an opportunity, and never to resume any other
occasion (for ought we can find in all the Gospel) to tell his vulgar Auditors
here, that command had been mis interpreted, and how notoriously they were
guilty of the violation of the Divine Law by their idle, and ordinary Oaths? Or
can we conceit, That his Eternal Wisdom would in order to the reformation of
this abuse prohibit Swearing by the Name of God (whereof there might be good
use, and which was not bad of its own nature, as once commanded, and whereof
there was no great need, the Nation being generally very respective thereof, as
they were taught) and not rather those Oath^ which were so common in their
mouths, as though this heavenly Physician would have laid a plaster to cure a
sore heel, when the disease had been at the heart? This could not be the
method of an unerring Goodness (nor are his words reconcilable to this sense,
but the contrary) to forbid the Jews rash Swearing by God, (which they are not
reported to have been guilty of) and not to have reproved them for false
Swearing by Creatures, which was their constant practice, especially in regard
they were encouraged thereto by their Doctors, who as they had certainly taught
them to make good what ever they had Sworn to perform by God, St. Mat. 5. 33.
so also had dispensed with some performances, whereto they were engaged by some
Creature Oath, which they accounted unobliging. For it is certain, (which also
was observed in Sect. 39.
the Sermon) that some of these Oaths, as Swearing by the Gold of the Temple,
or by the gift upon the Altar, they judged to be binding: but on the contrary,
such Oaths as were taken by the Temple, or by the Altar, or by Heaven, they
taught not to be obligatory, as is clearly attested by an Authority more than
humane, St. Mat. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Upon which ground, the people
habituated to Swearing, made choice usually of those Oaths (especially such as
were most subtle, and knavish amongst them) which were reputed in the Divinity
of the Pharisaicall Casuists not obliging, that they afterward might be at
liberty, as occasion served, or their interest swaid them, either to break, or
observe them, which was no less violation of the eighth Command, than of the
third. For he that once had imbibed that persuasion, though he had sworn to his
Neighbor, or to a Stranger by Heaven a hundred times to pay him so much money,
or do him such a favor, did not at all esteem himself bound to performance,
if that tended to his disadvantage. Whereby a door was opened, not only to
frequent perjuries, but also to Cheating of all sorts. And now let all the
World judge, whether it were not more necessary to abolish those irreligious
practices, (which tended so highly to the dishonor of God, and the injury of
men) than to take away the Lawful use of Oaths in Judicature, which God
himself once approved, and (if he have not changed his mind) still allows, and
is yet very subservient to many good purposes. And let any man tell me, whether
the reproof of these gross abuses against the third, and eighth Command (which
were so frequent amongst the Jews, that the Heathens took especial notice
thereof, as may appear by that skoffing Epigram of Martial) were not matter
fit for the reprehension of the holy Jesus, which (if any where) here he
performed, as before was sufficiently manifested, Sect. 22. 23.

Swear not at all, laid down compendiously in the Sermon, Sect. 39. removes all
difficulties, and is so clear to them that impartially consider it, that they
may safely conclude, that such (whoever they be) that oppose it (to what so ere
spiritual illuminations they pretend) penetrate not to the depth of the sense,
but rest in the outward superficies, and discern little of the Truth, but less
of the goodness of that precept. But this notwithstanding F. H. (whether he
really believe his own groundless paradox, as relying upon the infallibility of
his own, and his fellows judgments, or that he was loath to retract an error,
which though it be truly honorable, might appear in the repute of the world
disadvantagious to his party, God knows) set himself against this rational
interpretation of that Command with all the force he was able. And first,
because he could not confute what I said, he sets down what I said not, and
then confute^ it. One of my Principles i^ that of the Psalmist, That the Law of
God is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. (the contrary whereof is F. Hs. greatest ground,
wherein he all along opposes the Prophet David, and that holy spirit where with
he was inspired, no less then he does A. S.) in order whereto I said, (as
Isidoras Pelusiota had Sect. 23. li. Ep. 107.
said before me) That Christ gave no new Moral Command. In stead of which
words, F. H. misreports me, telling the Reader that I said, That Christ P. 62.
gave not any new positive Law before his death. And then he insults, saving,
He sure has forgotten himself much; what will become of the two great
Ordinances still upheld, Baptism, and breaking of Bread? I hope F. H. said
this out of meet ignorance, not discerning the difference betwixt the Moral,
and a positive Law. Yet it is a little suspicious, that F. H. did not answer
thus in its due place, but comes on with a back reckoning long after, when the
Reader may in probability have forgotten what I said so long before. The Truth
is, I did never either say, or think, as F. H. here misalledges my words. I
bless God, I set not down one sentence in my Sermon, which I had not well
weighed, and considered of, and knew to be true. And I was neither ignorant,
nor forgetful that the Sacraments are positive Ordinances, but they be no
parts of the Moral Law: and therefore this Objection is weak, and childish,
and by F. Hs. good leave, A. Ss. Argument is not yet fallen to the ground. And
here I have a good occasion to ask F. H. a Question, if it may not offend him.
And that is, Whether indeed he takes Baptism, and the Lords Supper to be
positive Institutions of Christ or no? If they be not, Why does he Object them
against me, as though they were? If they be, why does not he, and his Sect
observe them? Then he falls back, to repeat what he said before, That Christ
Swore not before the high Priest, (and by this Method he might make a Book as
big as Fox's Martyrs) or if he had, it had been no more president for
Christians, than eating the Passover. But sure if Christ swore, it was not a
sin to swear, and then his Disciples, or any other upon the like occasion might
have sworn; and if so, then their Mr. had not absolutely forbidden it before,
when he said Swear not at all, Page 62
which prohibition was given out before his death (says F. H.) with reference
to the Gospel Sermon. 29.
times after his death, which conceit was refuted. And then he falls back to
Divorces, (which I have answered 49. etc.
) and to retaliation of injuries, (answered 26. etc.
) which he had already four or five times mentioned, so much is he in love
with Battologies -- Sub illis montibus (inquit) erant, and erant sub montibus
illis. One new matter he brings in, and that is, That the Law forbad Adultery:
but Christ, Lusting, which is more. But did not the Law say, Thou shall not
Covet? It Was from thence that St. Paul learned Lust to be a sin, Romans 7. 7.
where is then the Superaddition which the Gospel makes to it? All this
Repetition served to introduce his new Tenet of the unlawfulness of Oaths with
more state, and greater solemnity, whereto as if nothing could be replied, he
concludes magisterially, Its most evident that Christ prohibits somewhat more
here, then was forbidden under the Law; yea, what ever Oaths were lawful ^. ^.
^4.
under the Law, therefore it must be all Swearing at all, or else none at all,
which is but a vain flourish of idle words which have no Truth in them.

F. H. leaps over to the 44. Sect. of the Sermon concerning the fall of the
grand Objection, and dilates thereon; but because he resumes it in its proper
place, I shall remit mine Answer thither. But I must not omit, that whereas I
had for clearing the Truth interpreted these words, them of old time, not of
Moses, and the Prophets; but of the Scribes and Pharisees, and had alleged to
that purpose several consentient Commentators, and proved it out of this very
Chapter, the fifth of Saint Matthew, by the coherence of the 20. and 21 verses;
as also by the use of the word (...), (which we English, them of old time)
which does not always signify any great Antiquity, as is evident by that
expression (...), which i^ Translated, a good while ago, which St. Peter uses,
speaking of Gods making choice of him to Preach to the Gentiles ( Acts 15. 7.)
which Interpreters think with Reason could not be above twenty years before,
and had also refuted the Reasons alleged to the contrary, in an Annotation to
the 23. Sect. of the Sermon; F. H. takes notice indeed hereof, and yet is
pleased rather to join with the Jesuits, and Socinians (those that deny
Christ's Godhead) in opposition to the Moral Law, than to yield to the Truth.
But what answer does he make to all this? Only this, Thus he (that is A. S.)
twists and twines to make the true sense of Christ's words void, its evident by
them of old time, is Moses time, etc. It seems his bare word must pass for a
confutation of all Reasons what ever can be alleged. It is easy for such a
Pythagorus with his ipse dixit, its evident, to answer whole books before he
understand them.

Section of my Sermon (and more largely discoursed on here 66. Sect.) F. H. not
being it seems satisfied therewith, (and perhaps he is resolved that his
dissatisfaction shall be perpetual) objects many things; And first he Page 66.
says, That there is no Reason at all to believe, that the Jews in Judicature
should forbear Swearing by the Name of God, when their Scripture was so
express for it, and should choose that way of Swearing (by creatures) and cites
the Authority of Drusius for his Opinion, who says, That among the Jews, all
things in Judicature were confirmed by Oath, wherein the Name of God was
interposed. This Argument he borrowed of S. Fisher, and both of them were
beholden to Bishop Gauden for it. And to speak the Truth, I hold it rational,
and assent to it, and shall not need to give it any other answer than this,
That it is impertinent. For when our Savior said, Swear not at all, he spoke
not against Oaths in general, nor particularly of Oaths taken before
Magistrates (and therefore did not condemn them) for the due manner of
Swearing by God was there (I grant) observed; but of rash, and fraudulent Oaths
by Creatures in bargaining, or other private communication betwixt one man, and
another. So this shaft was shot quite besides the mark; for what consequence is
this, The Jews in cases of Judgment before their Magistrates never swore but
by God, therefore they never swore by Creatures, as Heaven, Earth, etc. in
their private talk?

F. H. borrow out of S. Fs. Quiver, and that is, That it is unlikely that the
Jews should so customarily make use of those unobliging Oaths, which would have
been so far from putting an end to Men's jealousies, distrusts, unsatisfactions,
and insecurities, that the very tender of such had been suspicious, and
argumentative that the party so Swearing, had an intention to cheat. But to
this I answer, That no Topique is of less force than that of conjecturall
probabilities. It Is well enough known, that an able Orator can make the same
thing seem either likely or unlikely. Nor can an hundred guesses of this nature
counterballance the testimony of one single credible witness. Such a thing is
very unlikely to happen; yet it may chance so to sall out, such a matter is
very like to take effect, yet it is not certain. Of both kinds many instances
may be produced. But what I asserted of the Jews, both Swearing, and
fraudulency, is attested by Authors of indubitable credit, and therefore cannot
be confuted by failable surmises. Neither is there so much probability of the
falsehood of my Tenet (setting aside the unquestionable Authority for the proof
and assurance thereof) as there is for the Truth of it. For who knows not, that
in every place there are some more subtle, some more simple, some cheaters,
some cheatees, (as our Comedian Phrases it) and that these by sinister Arts,
Oaths, pretenses of Piety, and many cunning practices may easily impose upon
the other, or upon strangers, that suspect not him to be a Wolf, whom they
find in Sheeps clothing? I confess it is very improbable, that such as knew,
and considered the invalidity of those Oaths, unless they were very credulous,
should suffer themselves to be often deluded thereby. I neither say, nor think
that: my Tenet stands well enough without it. There might be too many that made
it their endeavors to beguile those they dealt withal, by fallacious Oaths,
or promises of ambiguous sense, though the more wary, and cautelous people were
not always overreached.

F. H. tells us, That if Christ only prohibited those Oaths which the
Pharisees indulged to the people, wherein as to the point of Swearing did he
prescribe a righteousness beyond Moses (he should rather have said, above God)
for God by Moses in the Law it self had universally forbidden all other Oaths,
(to wit, all false, vain, and Creature Oaths) save only that by his own Name.
And so Christ either forbad that, or nothing that was not forbidden before. To
which I say, That if F. H. will repeat the same thing forty times over, I
cannot help it. The ground of all his mistakes is, that Popish Opinion, that
the Law was imperfect. That Paradox (directly contrary to King David's
assertion) he will needs suppose as an undeniable Principle, whatsoever David,
or any other can say against it? Yet I would demand of him (if indeed it be so
as he says, That God made the Law imperfect) did he do it ignorantly, or
knowingly? To say he did it ignorantly, is blasphemy; for if he be ignorant, he
is not Omniscient, and consequently, not God. And if he did knowingly, either
he could not make it better, or he would not. To say he could not, is as bad as
the former, for that takes away his Omnipotency, and then he were not God (to
whom nothing is impossible, St. Luke 1. 37.) nor Almighty, and then the first
Article in the Creed, and many Texts in Scripture, are altogether untrue. To
say he would not, is worse (if worse can be) for that derogates from his
goodness, and from the Truth of his Word, who questionless made his Edicts, as
he did his works of Creation, Very good. It Is strange that F. H. cannot be
content to contradict me, but he must also fight against God. Upon these
grounds I shall not doubt to profess it as a certain Truth, that Christ gave no
new Command in the matters of Oaths (nor in any other) more than what was
formerly enjoined in the Moral Law, though F. H. does conceive that to be a
great obsurdity, and vainly raises, the most of his Objections upon that
bottom.

F. H. adds out of S. F. That the Particle (But) being not between
forswearing, and profane Swearing; but between forswearing then, and no
Swearing now, shows Christ's intent to be to prohibit all Swearing. For this is
a mere begging of the question, and has no force at all in it, the opposition
not being as he surmises, betwixt forswearing, and no Swearing; but betwixt
forswearing by God, and no Swearing by Creatures. And where he adds, That no
Oath by a Creature did God count as an Oath made to him, he is fallen into the
error of the Jews, who for that very Reason thought not such Oaths obligatory;
which conceit Christ refells, St. Mat. 23. 20, 21, 22. And neither S. F. nor F.
H. needed have gone further than the very sentence that immediately follow the
words, Swear not at all, to have discovered the falsehood of that Opinion, had
either of them understood them. This I suppose is one of those firm and
demonstrative Arguments of force of S. Fs. which (yet unanswered) will live as
a living testimony in generations to come, (as F. H. has it:) To each of which,
because I did not mispend so much time as to return a particular Answer in
some marginall Annotation to the Sermon, F. H. taxes me; whereas, had they been
(as he reputes them) unanswerable, he might the rather have been pleased to
excuse me, for not attempting an impossibility. Indeed in all those many I
pretermitted, I could find nothing worth either my Refutation, or the Readers
notice. Nor had I troubled my self at all with this, and several others, had
not F. H. (to small purpose, as I think) inserted them into his Pamphlet. Of
which sort is that which immediately follows, That Christ's own expressions in
the affirmative part, [but let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay] show
his meaning in the negative to be a prohibition of all Swearing, as well as
any. For these expressions (which are to be restrained to ordinary discourse
betwixt man and man, as appears by the word communication) are exclusive of all
Creature-Oaths; but especially of those that were abused to fraudulent
intentions. And that is all that there is meant: for rash, and idle Swearing by
the Name of God was forbidden before in the third Command, and so being not
used by the people, needed not be prohibited again by Christ, (who did nothing
in vain) because he could have added thereto no more than Divine Authority, and
that it had already, whereby it then stood in full force, and so shall do
until the ending of the World.

F. H. demands, If our communication, and conversation P. 68. 69.
should be without Swearing, and our mutual converse one with another among
Men, should be without Oaths, is not this exclusive of Swearing in Courts, and
before Magistrates, where Men have their Communication, and their mutual
converse with each other as ordinarily, and commonly as elsewhere? I answer,
that there is a great difference betwixt ordinary communication, and
examination of people in Courts. And that is generally known. For no examinate
can properly say, I have been conversing, or talking with the Judge; but I have
been examined by him, or given in my answer to the Court. And again Swearing is
called ordinary, not in regard of Places where, but of Persons by whom Oaths
are taken, which though commonly done in Courts, yet thousands of people are
not once, many but once, and few are often called thither upon that account in
all their lives. And can these be truly termed ordinary Swearers? F. H. may
muse hereat, P. 69.
(and so may others, as often as they please;) but I confess I can here
discern no cause of wonder. That which seems to be the alleged Reason
thereof, That no proof can be brought under the Gospel for them (that is I
suppose for the lawfulness of them) is of no weight. For it is proof enough,
that any thing is lawful, to make it out that it is not against Law, either of
God, or Man; of which sort this Swearing in a Court before Magistrates is. For
it is enjoined by the Laws of men, and pract^ced throughout the Christian
world, and not forbidden by Christ whose Kingdom was not terrene, St. John 18.
36. and who came not to altar, or abolish the Polities or Jurisdictios of
Empires or Commonwealths; but, by F. Hs. favor, submitted himself to the
high Priests examination, and answered to his Adjuration. Yet one passage here
of F. Hs. I cannot but observe, which is either impertinent, or else razes his
whole fabric, and quite overthrows his own Doctrine, and what so ere he had
said before. That is, Christ Instituted diverse Page 69.
things among his Disciples which were not in the Law, and yet not against it.
Now either Christ's pretended prohibition of Swearing is one of them, or it is
not. If it be not, then this dictate is impertiment, and non-sensicall: if it
be, then it is not against the Law, and consequently forbids not what God in
the Law commanded, that is, Swearing by his Name, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. And that, if it
be not forbidden, is still Lawful. And all this by F. Hs. concession granted
(if it be true) necessarily proves the whole book to be vain (to say no worse)
that seeks to overthrow a Truth. Yet this does not hinder, but he is resolved
to conclude Magisterially, That all the instances which A. Page 69.
S. and other opposers have brought of the Apostles, and Christ's Swearing, are
but shrouds and shelters they make for themselves. And with this triumphant
Epiphonema he might have concluded, had he not been willing to have expressed
some proof thereof (wherein whether his Charity, or unequalled knowledge be
greater, let the Reader determine) by giving a Reason of what he had said in
these words, Because they have a mind (mark that, he knows Page 69.
the minds of men whom he never saw) to obey the commands of men, rather than
Christ's Doctrine (which he never taught) for avoiding of persecution and
suffering. But how he comes to the interpretations of the Text.

Mat. 5. 34. whereto I said, That they that from thence argue, that all Oaths
are unlawful, break off the sentence in the middle, and stop before they come
to these words, Neither by Heaven, etc. But that F. H. says, he will not do,
and is as good as his word, repeating that Text wholly; and the other also of
St. James 5. 12. In which two (says he) all manner of Swearing is forbidden,
for the Truth of which, many Reasons have been, and may be given. First (but
forgets so far, that Page 70.
he never adds 2d. 3d. or any other) because all manner of Swearing is here
expressly instanced in; which is so gross an untruth, that it is strange he
should not discern it. For all the instances are of Swearing by Creatures
(which I deny not to be unlawful) not one of Swearing by God, which alone had
been to F. Hs. purpose. And this he himself ( if he himself put in the
following passage) not obscurely grants, That none may imagine (as A. S. would
make men Page ^^.
do) that this general Rule admits of any exception; but all know the
prohibition is so strict as to allow of no permission in the point, to Swear by
any thing but God; he adds, neither by Heaven, etc. Does he not very clearly
except Oaths by God out of Christ's prohibition? I can make no other sense of
it, nor I believe F. H. himself. And if he means as he speaks, that our
Savior forbad all Oaths but those by God, he and I without any difficulty
shall forthwith be reconciled. This is certain, he must either retract that
sentence, or such of his persuasion as understand it, will be dissatisfied
therewith, and suspect that he has thereby betrayed their Cause,
notwithstanding what immediately he adjoynes, that those additions, Neither by
Heaven, etc. are more ample expressions, and conclusive of the prohibition of
all Swearing what ever. Which to reconcile with sense, transcends mine
abilities. For Swear not at all, might indeed (were nothing subjoyned thereto)
be thought prohibitive of all Oaths. But Swear not at all (or thou shall never
Swear) by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or thy Head, as it may in a strict literal
sense be restrained only to these four Creatures; so in the utmost latitude
of interpretation, it cannot be stretched farther, then to extend it from these
four Creatures expressed (by that Topique a pari) to all others of the like
nature: so if the Heaven be not fit to be Sworn by then neither (by the parity
of Reason) is a Jewel, or a Metal. And if not the Head (as Christ taught) then
a pari, or a fortiori, not the Hand. And this is an exposition of the widest
extension that I can conceive, which yet is far from the comprehension of God,
by whom alone we account it lawful to Swear. For none can say, that though it
be unreasonable to Swear by a Creature, that it is neither omniscient, nor
Almighty; it is therefore unmeet to Swear by the Creators, that is of infinite
both Knowledge, and Power.

F. H. is not like to make good his Paradox out of this Text; yet if he can
effect it by the assistance of St. James, it is Reason we give place to so great
an Authority. And that he attempts; For (says he) he concludes and shuts up
all in universal terms, and excludes all Oaths, and all possible pretense of
plea at all for any Swearing; adding, neither by any other Oath What words Page
^1.
more plain can be uttered, or can be more expr^ssly exclusive both of all
kinds, or sorts of Swearing, and of all sorts of particular Oaths of every
kind? A. S. foresaw this Objection, and had considered seriously thereof, and
(what ever appearance it may have of a general prohibition of all Oaths, even
such as once were commanded to any that shall not compare it with the other
Texts of holy Scripture) clearly discerned, that it could not be understood in
that latitude, as F. H. would have it, as utterly exclusive of Swearing by God,
when there is necessary occasion for that Oath. For otherwise St. James had
contradicted the Moral Law in a matter that tends highly to Gods glory, and is
not repugnant to our duty, either to God, or man, nor intrinsecally, or in it
self evil; and had thwarted the practice of St. Paul, and Christ himself,
and that without any possibility of producing any Reason for so doing, besides
his own will. Which Arguments, with many others alleged in the Sermon against
the like Interpretation of our Saviors words, enforce a necessity of
expounding what St. James writ to some other meaning than that which inferrs
such gross absurdities. It is a general, and most certain Rule, That no Text
of Scripture (and consequently not this) ought to be so interpreted, as that it
contradict another, or be contrary to the Analogy of Faith. Whereupon A. S. not
willing to rely on his own Judgment in a matter of such difficulty, consulted
amongst others that most judicious Father St. Austin, who found so much
intricacy in this Text, that (as he ingeniously acknowledges to his Auditors in
De verbis Apostoli, Ser. 48.
his Sermon upon it) he purposely declined, and often av^vded meddling
therewith, till at length by Divine suggestion, (as he conceived, and
publicly expressed) he was moved thereto. No doubt therefore he had seriously
perpended with himself what the due importance thereof might be. And his
exposition is, (whereto A. S. freely assented, as having nothing rationally to
object against it, finding it fully consonant to the Principles of Religion,
and other places of Scripture) that these words, above all things, imply not,
that Swearing is the greatest of sins, or indeed (rightly used) any sin at all;
but that the custom thereof is very dangerous, as introductive* of Perjury, in
regard that he that Swears often, is in the high way to for-swear himself. And
this caveat St. James gave the Jews, that generally had got an habit of rash
Swearing, and therefore were more prone to that, then they were perhaps to
Vices of an higher Nature. Upon which ground he charges them above all things
(that is, in a most especial manner) to take heed thereto, and with more care
avoid that, whereto they were so much addicted, because (as that Father says)
That, Major consuetudo majorem intentionem flagitat; a longer, and more fixed
custom requires a more intense care, and diligent endeavor to root it out.
And this he labors to imprint in his Auditors minds, upon the sole account of
the fear of committing Perjury. For he plainly professes, That to Swear truly
(where there is a necessity of so doing) is no sin: suitable to which Doctrine
he acknowledges his own practice was; and that when some did not believe his
bare word (which was expedient for them to believe) in that necessity with
deliberate advice, and awful reverence, he called God to witness (which in his
Judgment is an Oath, for so in that Sermon he declares it) of the Truth of
what he had uttered. And though he grants, that these his Oaths came of evil,
yet that evil was not his sin, but the incredulity of the person he conversed
with. For (says he) when Christ ordered our Communication to be, Yea, yea,
Nay, nay; he gave this Reason, That whatsoever is more than these, comes of
evil; but he did not say, Si quis amplius facit, malus est, that whosoever
said more than so, was thereupon to be condemned of sin, or become an evil man.

so deservedly reverences) I cheerfully embraced, as rational, and
unperplexed, and no way liable to those difficulties, which in the contrary
Opinion are no less unavoidable, than unanswerable. But F. H. (though he grants
that Swearing is not so great an offen^e as Murder, or Adultery, and also that
the Jews were much addicted to rash, and customary Swearing by Creatures, yet)
is not satisfied therewith, because says he) it does not answer the Apostles
end and scope, that is, it reaches not to what he would have it, as not being
totally exclusive of all Oaths, which he groundlessly surmises to be the
meaning of St. James; but is rather inclinable to follow S. Fishers novell
device, which is, That the Antidot^ page 71.
Jews were not (as then informed of the ending of the Law in Christ (under
which among them some Oaths were lawful) and therefore they were apt to think
they did as well in Swearing then, as they did before. So though Adultery, and
Murder may be as bad, and worse then Swearing; yet the Law being so express
against them, (which yet in its time allowed some kind of Swearing) it was more
hard to bring them off from some Ceremonious Services of the Law that were once
lawful, then from such sins as were known, and hated by them, and held
accursed by the very letter of the Law; and so he says, Above all things take
heed of Swearing, that they might know that now to be unlawful, which in
former times was accounted as lawful for them. This subtle discourse of S.
Fishers is very plausible to those that have imbibed his Opinion, or have a
favor for it. But there is this prejudice against it, (though to those that
had never read any thing of this subject, it may appear very probable) that it
is his own mere conceit, without the concurrence of any former Expositors, or
ground in History, and only built upon a begging of the Question. And besides
(which is far more considerable, and over-ballances all possible conjectures)
it is encountered with the forenamed objections, which neither S. F. could, nor
F. H. nor any man living can ever answer. And yet further, the very Text it
self is inconsistent with S. Fishers exposition. For the Oaths which St. James
expressly condemns are Swearing by Heaven, and by Earth. But these Oaths were
never accounted Lawful, as Swearing by God was, but were forbidden in the Law,
as S. F. and F. H. grant, and often urge as an Argument to prove, That Christ
forbad more than the Law had done. And therefore no man in his right wits can
say; that the Jews had gotten a habit of Swearing (which was indulged to them
by the Law) and thereupon were not easily brought off it, and that in respect
thereof, Saint James said, Above all things, Swear not; unless they had only
Sworn by God, for no other Oath was allowed in the Law. But that none charges
upon them, and it is certain they were not guilty thereof. For then St. James's
dehortation here had been vain, and idle. For what reason can any allege, why
he should say to them, Above all things, my brethren, Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by Earth, when they Swore neither by Heaven, nor by Earth; but
(if we may believe S. F. and F. H.) by God, as the Law allowed them? What a
fearful wresting of Scripture is this, when such a meaning is forcibly put
upon the words, as they are not capable of? These men it seems make no
Conscience of making Saint James speak nonsense, so that thereby he may be
supposed by ignorant people to countenance that Opinion, that right, or wrong
they are resolved to maintain. But it may be F. H. will say, that he urges
only the following words [ Neither, etc.] which he judges prohibitive of all
Swearing, [ Neither by any other Oath] If so, let him acknowledge the vanity of
that Interpretation of this Text (as to any word therein expressed) which he
has borrowed of S. F. (and which perhaps was one of those demonstrative
Arguments which Page 61.
(he says) I had not answered) and then I shall go along with him to consider
what the importance of these words, Neither by any other Oath may be, which may
best be discerned by the occasion that induced the Apostle so passionately, and
with so much zeal to forbid Swearing.

Mat. 5. 34. etc. was declared in the Sermon * I thought ^ 39.
sufficiently, to those that would not shut their eyes against the light of
Truth, and is more largely insisted on in the 66th. Sect. of this discourse. In
short, it was the vicious practice of the people, that being taught by the
Pharisees, for which they are reprehended, St. Mat. 23. 16. etc. that some
Creature-Oaths were not binding, made a bad use of that ill doctrine, and
accustomed themselves to Swear by these (as they deemed them unobliging) Oaths
(whereof witnesses beyond acception are already produced) and that on purpose
to overreach those simple souls, whose credulity betrayed them to their
Treachery. And I doubt not but that St. James had the very same inducement. For
he saw the sin nothing abated* for we can make it good, that it was noted by
the Romans as a peculiar Vice of that Nation many years after St. James his
death) but the Precept of his Lord altogether neglected, which he thought fit
(as Reason was) to reinforce (which might well be the cause of his vehemence
against that crime, which in an high manner tended to the dishonor of God, the
breach of Christ's command, the scandal of Religion, and the public disgrace
of the Nation) almost in the very same words which the Son of God had used
before, which makes it more evident, that he had reference to what Christ had
said, and consequent. that he spoke upon the very same occasion, and intended
to forbid no other Swearing than that, which Christ had disallowed before,
which was only those cheating Oaths, not that (which they themselves
reverenced, and cautelously abstained from) by the Name of God. And here I
challenge F. H. or any concerned therein, to produce any authentical Author
that ever objected against their frequent taking of Gods Name in vain, which
that they might the better forbear, (which they did as some have observed,
even to superstition) the Pharisees indulged unto them the liberty of Swearing
by Creatures. Nor can it be thought that St. James, whom though I call an
Apostle (as St. Paul, Gal. 1. 19. and many of the Ancients did before me) yet
was none of the twelve, but only Bishop of Jerusalem, should take so much upon
him, as contrary to the Law of God, and the known practice of Christ, and St.
Paul, (to omit other Reasons) to prohibit that Oath which his Lord had not
forbidden, or that he intended by this expression, Neither by any other Oath,
to disallow any other kind of Swearing then what his Master had formerly
reproved, or the Jews notoriously abused; Christianity doubtless is Christ's
Law, not St. James's, who therefore must not be supposed to add to, detract
from, or alter ought of what his Lord had appointed. His undoubted sense
thereof in this place is this, and no more; My brethren, you know what our
common Savior said as touching Oaths, and how strictly he forbad you the use
of them, which the Pharisees permitted you, to wit, Swearing by Creatures, and
upon what account, which command of his you have hitherto too much neglected,
if not purposely for base ends disobeyed. And therefore I beseech you that
henceforth you would be so carefully respective of your duty, and so
religiously observant of that his sacred Precept, that you never hereafter
Swear by Heaven, or Earth, or any other of those Creature-Oaths which you have
hither to used to deceitful purposes. So that any other Oath, is not
absolutely any other whatsoever, but any other of the like Nature as Heaven and
Earth, any other that the Jews were wont to abuse, of which sort that by God
was not. And this may stop their mouths, that say, that St. James's
Proposition is a universal negative, and therefore exclusive of all manner of
Oaths whatsoever, and so it is no more lawful to Swear by God, than by Heaven.
For it is not general, nor prohibitive of Swearing by the Name of God. For the
Apostle neither did, nor durst forbid what God had commanded, and what Christ
had not forbidden. For the former would have rendered him Atheistical; the
other Antichristian. If therefore our blessed Savior did not abrogate
Swearing by God, which himself upon occasion used (as I have showed before
that he did not, nor could, unless he had set himself in opposition to his
Heavenly Father) then it is certain also, that St. James did not, unless any
dare say, that his Doctrine crossed Christ's, which could they prove, they would
turn this Epistle out of d^res, and not suffer it to remain any longer in the
Catalogue of Canonical Books. For it were blasphemous to assert, That Saint
James, assisted in his Writing by the Spirit of God, as is now generally
believed) should disallow what our Lord himself had approved. Whereupon it is
necessary to assert, That he went no further in this matter, then he had Christ
for his pattern. But further, (if we would make him speak sense) it must be
confessed, that he did not forbid here all Creature Oaths, and namely those
which the Pharisees Taught to be obliging, of which kind were these, By the
Gold of the Temple, or by the gift upon the Altar, St. Mat. 23. 16, 18. if that
be true, (which F. H. affirms, and I deny not) that they were all forbidden
before, and not used by the people. And how can we conceive, that they used
these Oaths to their fraudulent purposes any more, than that by God, when
these, according to the Doctrine of their Rabbis, were as obligatory as that?
And if they used not them, but only such as they might safely break without
Perjury, ( such as by heaven, earth, etc.) why should St. James so zealously
prohibit them above all things, unless he took them for greater crimes than
Murder, or Adultery, which both S. F. and F. H. grant they are not? Let then
any impartial Reader consider, what in tolerable nonsense these men impose
upon the Apostle (or rather upon the holy Ghost, whose Penman he was) for the
upholding of their own credits amongst those wellmeaning people they have
deluded, and for the maintenance of that fond Paradox they have thus long
asserted, and are now ashamed to recant. For according to them, this must be
the Paraphrase of his words, My brethren, I pray you above all things forbear
Swearing, I say above all things, not that it is a greater sin then any other,
but that you have gotten such a custom thereof. I therefore entreat you
earnestly not to Swear any more (as you usually did) by Heaven, Earth, or any
other Oath that is by God, or the Gold of the Temple, or the gift upon the
Altar, by which Oaths you have seldom, or never Sworn. Modest Heathens would
blush to put such non-sensicall foppery into the mouths of any of their
Philosophers. The just importance of St. James's sentence is only this, One
thing I am to give you an especial caveat of, and that is, that henceforth you
permit not your selves that common custom of Swearing by Heaven, or any other
Oath which you account not obligatory, which can never be used to any good
purpose: but that in stead thereof, you be careful for the future, that your
perfor. be answerable to your words, that you be not justly condemned by God
and Men, for your falsehood and cousinage. This interpretation of the Apostles
words (being liable to no inconveniences, or objections that I can foresee)
will be, I am confident, in the Judgment of all knowing, and impartial men,
much preferrable before the other, which is encountered with insuperable
difficulties. And I wish that F. H. and those of his persuasion, would think
themselves to be but men, and therefore such as may be possibly deceived; and
then, take what I say into serious consideration, which if they would do, I
doubt not but God would open their understandings, that they might discern the
bright beams of this apparent Truth, from which there is nothing that can so
much hinder them, as prejudice, and a presumption of their own perfection.

S. Fs. Antidote, and is it may be, one of those weighty things offered to the
Conscience Page 73.
and public view, which A. S. had seen (as F. H. says) but came not so much
as near to answer. Indeed A. S. had seen it, and thought it unworthy of any
answer, hoping that no Reader could be so simple as to be deceived by so silly
a Sophisme. And I confess. that had not F. H. inserted it into his discourse,
it might for me have remained till domesday, without any Animadversion upon it.
And though I should not have wondered to find such pitiful stuff in F. Hs.
Pamphlet; yet I think it strange, that such an acute person (as S. F. shows
himself else where) should think fit to build upon so weak a foundation. It
must be a cause desperately ruinous, that requires to be supported by such a
bulrush. The Argument is drawn from Ecclesiastes 9. 2. wherein (says F. H. to
Swear at all is made the Character of the wicked. Here the Reader is desired to
consider, that this Book is in the Old Testament, and Penned by King Solomon,
in whose time, to Swear by the Name of God (which Oath alone we assert to be
lawful) was not only permitted, (and therefore lawful) but commanded, and
therefore upon occasion necessary. And S. F. F. H. and all the rest of that
fraternity have, and do confess as much, slighting all such Arguments as are
managed against them out of the Old Testament, as impertinent for the proof of
Swearing, which they grant was lawful until Christ forbad it Whereupon it
follows, that if K. Solomon (as S. F. argues) made all Swearing to be the
character of the wicked, then he made the observance of Gods Laws (one of which
was Swearing) to be the mark of a wicked person, which so wise a Prince could
not possibly do. For if it be the token of wicked men to keep Gods commands,
then to break them must be the token of the righteous. Did ever man that made
any conscience of speaking Truth argue in such a manner? One may suspect, that
S. F. was sensible of the folly, or falsehood of this Argument, for before he
produces it, he promises a defense thereof, and seeks to ward off that blow
that threatened it, saying, That in that book the spiritualities, and moralities
of the everlasting Gospel, and not the ceremonialities of the Law are pointed
out; whereas to go no further than that very verse by him cited, there is in it
mention made of clean, and unclean, and sacrifices, which I take it (and hope
that F. H. will not say, that herein I am mistaken) are expressions of the Law,
and not of the everlasting Gospel. And though F. H. do tax me here this third
time, That having seen some of their books, I have not answered many weighty
matters, (such perhaps as this last) which put into the balance of Judgment,
will be found as light as vanity it self, I should expect that of his
courtesy he would pardon me in not having wilfully wasted those unreturning
hours, which might be spent to better purpose, who upon second thoughts may
possibly find Reason to thank me that I have not mentioned them, and also to
excuse me in passing over the rest of this Paragraph stuffed after his wonted
manner with bold, and groundless dictates, which are no other, than so many
beggings of the question, whilst he stoutly asserts, but not at all endeavors
to prove his opinion. Yet, that his favorable Reader may be ou^ of love with
his opponent, and the Truth too for hi^ sake, he tells him, That wh^ ever
Christ, or James had said Page 73.
A. S. would make them, if h^ could, to mean as he means (that is hard for him
to know) to set their plain express word against their mind, (that is
apparently untrue:) But he ha^ asserted nothing but that whi^^ has been
answered over and over again. If that be so, F. H. has bad luck, that when it
comes to the point can answer nothing.

That Sermon. 43.
these propositions how universally soever expressed, ought not in equity to be
extended beyond the intention of the Speakers, but to be limited according to
the subject matter. And there I instanced in many other Sentences of holy
Scripture, that of necessity were to be expounded to a restrained sense, and
could not be understood in the full latitude that the words imported, and
therefore these two Texts may, and ought to be interpreted to such a limited
sense, as that they may not be inconsistent with other parts of holy Writ, nor
dissonant to the Analogy of faith. Here F. H. freely grants, That these two
Texts ought not to b^ extended beyond the intention o^ the ^peakers, but to be
limited according to the subject matter in regard universal prohibitions, now
and then admit of excep^ions: But tells us (out o^ S. Fs. Antidote again, It Is
(...) happy thing to have a friend at a pinch) That these restrictions are
usually in one place (...) other of the same Testament where they are either
expressed, or at least manifestly employed by him that gave out these general
terms, or prohibitions: and so (quoth F. H.) are most (it seems not all) of
these wherein A. S. has instanced. Well A. S. is willing to gratify him in
whatsoever may not prejudice Truth, and will not deny, but that S. F^.
observation is often found to be true. Yet I must needs say also, that it
fails sometimes. And then it is not certain, but it may fail here. And that
it sometimes fails, is certain by the produced instances, to two whereof F.
H. could not possibly apply his Rule; and therefore does wisely not to attempt
it. The first of them is, that of St. Mark 1. 5. whereof he can find no
limitation in all the New Testament. And there the observation fails. The
other is that of St. Luke 2. 1. which he names indeed (I know not to what end,
unless he would have the Reader think, that to name it, were to answer it) and
so in silence passes it by. So here he is at a loss again, and can get no
relief in all the New Testament: Whereupon we may conclude, that this Rule,
(which it is like S. F. invented as a shift to serve his turn at that time; and
yet was so modest as not to profess it universally, but usually true,
intimating that it failed and then) sometimes holds, and sometimes fails, and
so is altogether useless as to the decision of our difference, though collation
of Scriptures cannot be denied to be a fit expedient for the interpretation
thereof. Now then, as it might well be thought unreasonable, to say that all
the sick, blind, lame, decrepit, and bedrid people of that Nation went to hear
the Baptist Preach, though the express words of the Evangelist be, There went
out unto him all the Land of Judea, (there being no Text producible to
restrain the universality of that unlimited proposition) in regard it is so
repugnant to Reason; so it were no less inconcludent to say, that Christ forbad
all Swearing whatsoever, by saying, Swear not at all, because that Tenet is
repugnant to many Reasons, and those divine, and such as are fetched from
Scripture. It is therefore sound Reason bottomed on Scripture (taking into
consideration the context, scope, and intention of the Author) that will be our
best guide in the discovery of the true sense, and full importance of any
difficult sentence. And that in this case, is altogether for the lawfulness of
some Swearing, for the which (and the understanding of these Texts out of St.
Matthew, and St. James accordingly) there be many Reasons producible, and none
for the contrary, as the observant Reader cannot but discern, if he please to
give himself so much trouble, as to compare the Pamphlets of S. F. or F. H.
with what I have now written.

F. H. could reply nothing to two of mine instances, he has added more out of S.
Fs. Antidote, to let us see how well he is versed therein (for other end I
cannot discern, unless it be to swell his book) and to them he has answers
provided, which is as though he should say, Though I cannot answer A. Ss.
Objections, yet I can object somewhat else more then he has done, and thereto I
can answer. However, he cannot grant that these two Texts (of St. Matthew, and
S^. James) admit of any exceptions, or restrictions, Page 7^.
as A. S. would interpret them. His Reason is, because this universal
prohibition, Swear not at all, cannot in equity be taken, and limited in that
sense, nor with that restriction, which A. S. puts upon it, (though A. S.
proved, that it ought to be so limited by twelve unanswered Reasons) for that
sense would make it short of the subject matter, where all Swearing is
forbidden as well as any. This Reason takes for proof the matter in question.
The doubt is, whether all Swearing was forbidden by Christ, or no? A. S. is for
the negative, showing by twelve Arguments, that that command was to be
understood in a limited sense. No (quoth F. H.) that it is not, for then, all
Swearing would not be forbidden, as though that were to be granted an
absurdity, which A. S. had proved to be Truth, or as though all limitations
were not restrictive. A more vain, and childish discourse I think cannot be
invented. St. Luke says, That Cap. 21.
there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should be
taxed. I proved in the Sermon, that that Text 43.
was not to be expounded simply of all the World; but only of that part of the
World that was as then under his Dominion. And no man in his wits can think
otherwise. For who would say, or imagine, That Augustus, a wise Prince would
send his commands to those that were not his Subjects, and therefore would not
obey him? Or to what end should he number them, over whom he had no Authority?
Or why should he send his Decrees for taxing all the Inhabitants of those
places that were not inhabited? And such then, and still are many Islands in
the World. Or how could he send to America, and those vast Regions therein
contained, which were utterly unknown to him, and all his people, and not
discovered till many ages after? And yet they were then in the world, as well
as they are now. This Argument, though it be not Scripture, or of Divine
Authority, is notwithstanding sufficient (and F. H. denies it not) without any
Text of the New Testament to corroborate it (which is a proof sufficient, that
S. Fs. forementioned Rule, that if universal Propositions are to be limited,
those restrictions are to be found in the same Testament, is not universally
true) to interpret the word World only of the Roman Empire. But suppose some
man should pretend to be of a contrary opinion, and say, as F. H. does here,
The general term World cannot in equity be limited in that sense, which A. S.
puts upon it, for that would make it short of the subject matter, because the
World is expressly named, and not any part of the World, were not that answer
ridiculous, where the matter in debate is taken for proof? And is not F. Hs.
reasoning directly parallel thereto?

F. H. adds out of his old friend S. Fs. Antidote (whereto he is so much
beholden) and that is, because there is not only no restriction expressed, but
a fuller amplification added by an enumeration of such particulars as are
exclusive of all kind of Oaths: And beside, had Christ intended any exception
here (as he easily might so) he would have expressed it, as he did immediately
above in the case of divorce. To the former, I refer it to the Judgment of all
the world, whether the enumeration of four particulars (for there are no more
recited) be an amplification of a general Prohibition, or no? For example,
Thou shall never Swear at all upon any occasion, either by God, or any thing
else: Thus Christ meant, if we may credit F. H. And if that be true, we must
needs yield it to be an universal prohibition of all Oaths. But did he make a
fuller amplification thereof, when he said, Thou shall never Swear, either by
Heaven, or by Earth, or by Jerusalem, or by thy Head? I say, and so must all
men that would speak sense, that this is so far from being an amplification of
those general terms, Swear not at all, that it is a plain and express
restriction thereof. F. H. had more prudently holden his peace, than by
pointing to a pretended amplification, where none was, have occasioned me to
take notice of a limitation. As to the other, I only reply, that it had been
vain for our Savior, when he forbad all fraudulent Swearing by Creatures,
which was common amongst the Jews, to have excepted Swearing by God, who is no
Creature, and by whom they did not use to Swear fraudulently. A piece of sense
much like to this: There is never a College in Cambridge infected, except A.
Bs. house which belongs to a private man, and is no College; or we have not an
University in England besides Cambridge, and Oxford, except Edinburgh which is
in Scotland. And whereas F. H. grounding upon S. Fs. words says, That Christ
adds that which strengthens beyond all exception the universality of his
probibition -- and after mentioning our Saviors words, But I say unto you,
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor Earth, nor Jerusalem, nor thy Head, he
tells us, That is manifestly an exclusive prohibition of all Oaths, without
exception, or restriction, or limitation. If he speak what he really thinks, I
do much pity his stupidity, but wonder at his boldness, that dares so
confidently avouch what (at best) he does not understand, and what indeed will
certainly appear to any person of common apprehension notoriously false. For,
is the forbidding to Swear at all by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or the Head,
manifestly an exclusi^^ prohibition of all Oaths; the^ he that Swears by his
Hand Foot, Temple, etc. Swears no^ at all, for my Hand is neithe^ the Heaven,
nor the Earth nor Jerusalem, nor my Head* And further it would follow that
besides these four, there were no other objects (Creatures, or Creator) in the
world to Swear by. Hence may all men perceive that wha^ he professes to be
manifestly true, is manifestly false.

That vain, and false Oaths by 43.
God, even by the acknowledgement of the Pharisees themselves were sufficiently
forbidden before, and so there was no need either for Christ, or Saint James to
speak of them, or forbid them again. This Concession (says F. H.) is still
matter of Argument on our part, that some Oaths were prohibited Pap. 76.
by Christ and James, which were not prohibited before, and of which there was
necessity for them to speak. I grant that there was necessity for them to speak
what they did speak, for I dare not think that they spoke any thing
unnecessariy; and yet I cannot grant, that either the Law was im-perfect, or
that they, to supply the defects thereof, gave other Moral Precepts, than what
formerly had been delivered. But the necessity of their Prohibitions of
Swearing did arise not out of any defect of the Law, as though what they forbad
had not been forbidden before; but out of the peoples non-observance, and
sinful neglect of what had been commanded, being much addicted to Swear
rashly, and falsely (not by God, and therefore there was no need to reinforce
the disuse of that Oath but) by Creatures, as Heaven, Earth, etc. so that in
respect of that sinful custom, both the holy Jesus, and his Apostle James,
judged it expedient to forbid severely such Creature-swearing; and so this
makes nothing at all to F. Hs. advantage.

Here the grand Objection Sect 44.
falls of it self, which is, Either all kind of Swearing is here forbidden; or
else Christ, notwithstanding his words, But I say unto you, forbad nothing which
was not forbidden before, which is utterly improbable. This was the objection
which here in its place F. H. as formerly he had prolixly done, page 64.
(the answer whereto, to avoid idle repetitions, I deferred till now) seeks to
support that it fall not. By the way, let me tell the Reader, that these words
of mine, Which is utterly improbable, (relating to that, that our Savior
should forbid nothing) are part of the Objection; my words indeed, but not laid
down as mine own Opinion, but in the person of the Objectors; one of whose
maine Principles it is, that this our Lords expression, But I say unto you, was
set in opposition not only to the Pharisaicall mis-interpretations, but even
to the Law in self. Whereupon* I guess, that F. H. did look upon these Words,
[ which is utterly improbable] as my Concession, (a matter which I never
thought) by his Printing i^ in a diverse character. To prevent which strange
mistake in others (for I have all along professed the contrary, and here set it
down, with the Objection, to give it as much force as could be) I thought good
to declare thus much; for had I granted that, the Objection I confess had stood
in its full force. I added further in my Sermon the Reason of the Objection,
(that I might lend it all possible strength, and so might not be accused of
partiality) which was, That God had formerly prohibited all false, and vain
Oaths, and all Swearing by Creatures. And that indeed I really granted, and
gave a brief, but satisfactory answer, That the Pharisees had taught the
people otherwise, and that under a religious pretense of a greater reverence to
Gods Name, whereby the practice of that misled Nation, became widely distant
from the Commandment. Both which being necessary to be reformed, were reproved
by these words of our Savior, But I say unto you, Swear not at all, which were
not spoken in any opposition to Gods Law, but to the false and wicked glosses
of those blind Guides, and the lewd deportment of the people* Whereto F. H.
answers to this effect, That if Creature-Oaths were (as A. S. grants) formerly
forbidden by God, and if Heaven, Earth, etc. be Creatures, and if Christ forbad
naught else, then the Objection stands unanswerable. For either Christ did
prohibit those Oaths which the Law allowed, or else he forbad none but what the
Law had forbidden already. The Objection, and Answer he repeats Page 77.
again in many words, much to the same purpose, to which I have no tentation to
reply, because they are grounded upon a false supposition borrowed from the
Papists, (which I have always denied, and neither F. H. S. F. nor any other of
them at all proved) that is, That Christ forbad more than what was forbidden in
the Law, which he never did. Only I cannot but take notice of a passage (and I
shall do no more than take notice of it) and that is, That F. H. will rather
fall out with himself, than agree with A. S. For whereas I had proposed their
maine Objection in these words, Either all kind of Swearing is here forbidden,
or else Christ forbad nothing which was not forbidden before, which is utterly
improbable, (which words I spoke, as objecting, not asserting mine own
Opinion, being that it is so far from improbability, that it is a certain
Truth, that our Savior forbad nothing, which God formerly had not disallowed.)
Nay (says F. H.) but it is more probable than any thing A. S. has yet offered:
Where he either speaks he knows not what; or else he fully complies with me
against himself, and so has a hand in the subversion of this maine, and grand
Objection of his own party.

'its a favor I do not) where he ceases to be Argumentative, and in querulous
Language casts scandalous imputations upon the Government (which in private I
shall make appear to him, or any of his friends) least he take a new occasion
to asperse me, (as he has often in his Pamphlet causelessly done) that I have
added affliction to their Page 7.
bonds, and made their wound wider, whereas my purpose was quite the contrary,
to inform, and convert them (if possible) to the Truth, that conforming
thereto, and renouncing their Errors (for which I yet pray, and hope that God
in mercy at length will hear me) they might be freed from all mulcts, and
penalties, whereto otherwise by the Laws of the Nation they are subjected. And
though for this my Christian intent, F. H. has all along traduced my good
meaning, though I must confess not with that scurrility, wherewith S. F. has
bespattered the Reverend Bishop Gauden, yet with undeserved, and uncivil
reproaches (as enviously laboring that none of his friends should receive that
benefit by me, which himself refused) yet that bad requital of my good
affections toward them (many of whom I take to be very well meaning, though
pitifully sedueed persons) has not diverted me from taking this second pains
to undeceive them, and bring them, through Gods blessing, into the Truth again,
from which the most of them have blindly, but, I think, not wilfully erred. And
I shall think any labor well bestowed, if thereby one lost sheep may be
brought back into Christ's fold, the Church of God.

E. Hs. in vectives against vain, and frequent Swearing, and perjuries, I am
sorry that there is so just a ground for them, and do as much abhor them, as
he, or any other, and would use all just endeavors for the abolishment of so
reigning a vice: but, I dare not do ill, that good may come thereof; nor sor
the suppression of these two common impieties, raise, or countenance a Schism,
pervert our Saviors meaning, or teach a doctrine which my Conscience,
enlightened by Gods Word, and Divine Reason testifies to be false, that all
Oaths whatsoever are absolutely unlawful.

Sest 45. where I said, Now I have done, and I fear it is more then time to
have done with the exposition of these words: he replies, Its Page 80,
more then time indeed to have done, to pervert Christ's plain Doctrine with
his imaginary exposition. These are, it seems, the flowers, and figures of F.
Hs. Rhetorique, which whether he make use of for want of better Arguments; or
whether thereby he seek to beget in the Reader a disaffection to my Person, or
an aversness to the Truth by me asserted (which may probably tend to the
advantage of his Cause) I shall not determine, but leave it to the impartial
peruser of what we both have written (whose interest it is neither to have
regard to him, or me, but to the saving Truth of God, to judge whether I have
perverted, or confirmed Christ's Doctrine, or whether mine expesitions be solid,
or (as he is pleased to term them) imaginary. But I cannot omit to take notice
of his next passage, wherein he exceedshimselfe in boldness, taking upon him to
be a Prophet, telling the World with that confidence, as though he had received
a Revelation from Heaven, That A. Ss. seeming Vindication (meaning my Sermon)
will in the day of the Lord, when the secrets of all hearts shall be manifest
by Jesus Christ, when the book of Conscience shall be opened, be found to be in
real opposition unto Christ, and his reward will be according to his works,
who has by his work strengthened the hand of evil doers, and persecutors, to
the adding affliction to affliction upon the Righteous -- Thus F. H. with a
paulo majora canamus, in an higher strain than ordinary; but be not afraid who
ever you are that cast your eyes upon these pages; but see what a true Prophet,
or rather what the Lord by him spoke concerning such Prophets, Jer. 14. 14. I
would gladly have F. H. to tell us how he comes to know, what he says shall
be. I dare say, God never told him so, for he never speaks contrary to his
written Word. And I am sure he never found it in Scripture, for it is not
there, the current thereof running in a contrary stream. Whence then had he
it? from his own imagination, or from the suggestion of the enemy of Truth? Can
either of these entitle him to the Spirit of Prophecy, or warrant such an
Usurpation upon his Prerogative to whom all Judgment is committed? I wonder
that he was not afraid of that minatory prohibition, St. Mat. 7. 1. 2* I doubt
not but the wisest o^ his friends, and all such as are owners of moderation,
and truly fear God, will be ashamed of this presumption, and at least in this
particular desert their Teacher. And I verily believe that what he ignorantly,
or insolently says, will be found in real opposition unto Christ (when once
his cloudy cavills are dispersed, and the Truth shines in its own luster) will
be clearly discovered to be perfectly conformable to the mind of God. As to
the dreadful, and condemnatory sentence pronounced against A. S. which must be
according to his works, (that is, strengthening the hand of evil doers, and
persecutors, to the adding affiiction to affliction upon the Righteous, which
doubtless is a very damnable work.) I should desire to be resolved in this
Question, whether F. H. knew what he said was true, or he did not know it? If
he did not know it for Truth himself, he should not have told others. If he
did, I wonder how he came to be informed of so misterious a secret. Has he
perused the Stoique Tables of necessity, and therein discerned the unalterable
fate that must inevitably fall upon A. S? Or has he been admitted Privy
Counselor to Heaven? Or is he that Lamb mentioned in the Apocalypse, that
only is worthy to open the Rev. ^. 1.
Seals, and unclaspe the book of Eternity, that is holden in his right hand
that sits on the Throne? Or what spectacles has he gotten, to read the dim,
and unknown characters of destiny? Was the Preaching of that Sermon the sin
against the holy Ghost, and so unpardonable, that by no Repenrance, or
retractation of error it could be expiated? Or is A. S. a Person incapable of
information, or F. Hs. Pamphlet so weak, and dull, as not to hold out the light
of so plain a Truth, as he would have it, to those that have the eyes of their
attention open to receive it? Or if so, cannot God Almighty reveal his Truth
to such as are in error, nay even to A. S. if it be his good pleasure? Till F.
H. have answered these Questions, A. S. will look upon this his no less
ungrounded, than uncharitable censure, as a saucy in trusion, or an insolent
Usurpation upon the Divine Prerogatives, and as a bugbear to affright his
deceived friends, that they may not dare to consider seriously, what so damned
and accursed creature as A. S. holds forth unto them, but rely on what he has
taught them, though the contrary Truth be never so apparent, least they fall
also into the like condemnation.

F. H. seems to be in a great jealousy that his friends will forsake him, if
once they come to the knowledge of the Truth (which now, by Gods blessing, may
easily be discerned by all those that are impartial seekers of it, and are
endued with so much humility, as to submit their own fancies to Gods Word) and
therefore if he cannot terrify them like Children from the search thereof by
his skare-crow threatenings, he is resolved at length (for he will leave no
indirect means unattempted) to cheat them prettily, and put an handsome trick
upon them, and this is it. If (says he) the Righteousness of Christ's disciples
be to exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Page 81.
and they condemned perjury, and all false Swearing by God, and the Law
condemned all false Oaths, and vain Oaths, and Oaths by Creatures, as A. S.
has granted; then the righteousness of the Disciples is to be an other, then
the righteousness of the Law, etc. He should have said, the Righteousness of
the Pharisees (not of the Law) and then he had argued well, but that would not
have made for his purpose; and therefore he slyly leaves out the word
Pharisees, (that he should have used) and substitutes in stead thereof the word
Law, that ought not by the Rules of reasoning to have been inserted, being
altogether impertinent to the Argument. I think there be few so weaksighted, as
not to look through so simple a fallacy. To help the meanest Judgment, put the
word Gospel in stead of the word Law, the proposition will be as true, and the
consequence will appear (as it is) notoriously false. Read it then thus. If
the righteousness of Christ's Disciples be to exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and they condemned perjury, and all false Swearing by
God, and the Gospel condemned all false Oaths, and vain Oaths, and Oaths by
Creatures, as F. H. grants, then the righteousness of the Disciples is tobe an
other than the righteousness of the Gospel. Now what will, or can F. H. say to
this? Is this manner of reasoning good, or is it not good? If it be not good,
why did F. H. use it to delude his friends? If it be good, then the Gospel as
well as the Law is evacuated, and holy men are to seek for some other
righteousness beyond that of the Gospel, or else they cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, as our Savior has expressly declared concerning that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, St. Mat. 5. 20. which was the ground of F. Hs. Argument.

Sorm, Scct 45.
That though I had vindicated Oaths to be lawful, yet that was to be
understood only of necessary, and just Oaths, and so dehorted them from
perjury, because they would fall below the Righteousness of Scribes, and
Pharisees (who forbad the people to Swear falsely by God) which unless they
exceeded, they could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This passage being
so innocent, and in a matter not controverted, could not I thought merit the
censure of any man whatsoever. But so quarrelsome is F. H. that he will needs
confute that, wherein both he, and I agree; and so unhappy am I, that I cannot
escape his ferula, even when I speak to his sense, as here, from my dehortation
Page ^1.
from false Swearing, he will rather than be silent, argue impertinently
against all Swearing.

F. H. himself passionately d^claims) I disallowed all Oaths, but such as were
necessary, and just: To which he replies, That there is none necessary amongst
Christ's true Disciples, and the Righteous. By which titles ( Christ's true
Disciples) he means, I suppose, some of his own persuasion; but whether all of
them, and whether of any other professions, I cannot tell: 'twere well he would
resolve us. And I know as little, whether he hold that the Apostles, and
Evangelists were of that number. For it seems, he does not think fit to be
their voucher, generally calling them by their names, Mark, Luke, John, Peter,
James, not vouchsafeing them the honor of Saints, which is usually afforded
them. But whosoever he means by his Righteous, or Christ's true Disciples,
amongst whom no Oaths are necessary, he has failed in one particular (which
renders his speech insignificant) and that is, That he has laid down no
characteristicall mark, or note of discrimination, whereby the Magistrate, or
any other, may infallibly distinguish these righteous men from hypocrites. And
till that be done, I know not what use may be made of F. Hs. doctrine, That
Oaths are unnecessary amongst Christ's true Disciples, which I fully would
consent to, provided we had any certain means whereby we might assuredly
discern who are such, and who are not. Let F. H. then consider hereof, and
tell us no more, That true Christians may well be credited upon their bare
affirmation, (for thereof I do not at all doubt, nor I think any man else that
knows what it is to be a Christian, and so such discourses are idle, and
useless;) but if he would make his advice practicable, he must by some means
so descipher those sons of Truth, whose immunity, and exemption from Swearing
he so much desires, that hypocrites may not enjoy equal privileges with the
other, for that would tend to the subversion of Truth and Justice.

their ordinary communication, and informed them, that when there was a
necessity of Swearing, no other Oath was lawful, but that, by the living God:
And that I did out of Jer. 4. 2. adding in a Parenthesis, after these words of
that Text, And thou shall Swear, no more but this, here is your warrant for
Swearing, which thence appears to be not only lawful, but in some cases
necessary, because commanded. To this F. H. replies, That this is pitiful
proof, and warrant for Christians to Swear under the Gospel. But he might have
had that ingenuity to have considered, that I had then done with the
Argumentative part, and had already proved the lawfulness of just Oaths, and
vindicated the due use of them amongst Christians by many Arguments, where to I
know, that neither he has, nor any other can give any satisfactory answer. And
to such persons as had been prepared thereby to believe the Truth, this Text
was warrant enough, notwithstanding any thing that he can object against it:
though I confess it may seem (as he calls it) a pitiful proof, as not alone
enough to convince them that have imbibed such uncouth fancies as these, That
the Moral Law of God is imperfect: That God the Son forbad what had been
commanded by God the Father: That Swearing is a part of the Ceremonial Law, and
consequently continued in force till Christ's death, (till when it was lawful)
and then it was abolished; and yet notwithstanding, it was forbidden by Christ
before his death; after which, it was utterly unlawful; so that it was both
lawful, and unlawful at one and the same time. Such pitiful paradoxes F. H.
commends to his friends, who he had rather (it seems) should sacrifice to these
idols of his own imagination, than that they forsaking such portentous
opinions, should embrace the Truth. I beseech God in his good time to open both
his eyes, and theirs.

F. Hs. conclusion, wherein I shall fully close with him, and referr (as he
does) all that both he, and I have said to the Judgment of the Lord, and to
the consideration of intelligent, and conscientious Readers, whom I desire to
deposit all prejudice, favor, and disfavour to either cause, or party, and to
have personal respects either to F. H. or to my self. For assuredly, it will
not be either of our interests at the last day, to have by our Tongues, or
Pens, lead away numbers of those people into error, for whom our dear Savior
was content to shed his most precious blood. And therefore I earnestly request
you, whosoever shall happen to cast your eyes upon these Papers, that you Read
them with deep consideration, and compare impartially what is laid down on
both sides. It concerns you more, both in regard of the comfort of a good
Conscience in this life, and of everlasting happiness in the life to come, to
find out the Truth, than to be parties either of the one side, or the other.
Wherefore I would not that you should believe me any further, either in regard
of my former loyal, and constant adherence to my Principles, or in respect of
wisdom, or humane Learning, (which I grant to be mean) than you shall find
the evidence of Reason, and Truth to guide you. Believe not any thing because I
say it, but because it is true; neither, I beseech you, reject any thing which
I say, either out of disaffection to my Person, or out of prejudice to the
Cause I maintain, or out of your respect to the supposed worth, or holiness of
any that are contrary minded, or out of any worldly end whatsoever, until you
have duly weighed it, and found it erroneous. On the contrary, let not your
good opinion of S. F. F. H. or any other, either in respect of their knowledge,
zeal, good meaning, sufferings, or any other like consideration, beget in you
this conceit, that they are more than men; and if they be not, they may be
mistaken: and therefore swallow not unadvisedly what ever they say, until you
find it to be true, and then in the name of God embrace it: but if you
discover it to be false, as you love your souls, renounce it. And though you
have formerly believed, and professed it; yet be not ashamed to retract an
error. It Is the greatest victory to conquer our selves, and the greatest glory
to submit to Truth. And let me tell you seriously, as in the presence of God,
that knows my heart, that I have studied this point many years, not aiming (I
bless the Divine goodness) at any other end, but the finding out, and clearing
the Truth, and have, I doubt not, found it (having had more advantages there to
than some others) by Gods gracious assistance, and this is it that I here
declare unto you. Be serious then I pray in the perusal of this Treatise, till
you fully understand it; and if through the blessing of the most High, you
discern herein the Truth, be neither averse, nor ashamed to acknowledge it,
not for my sake, but your own. Seek for it diligently, and in simplicity of
heart, that you may find it, and thereby rest to your souls, which the Lord
in mercy vouchsafe to grant.

And yet F. H. has not done: For (he says) he cannot but mind the Reader,
that A. S. has had certain books of the dissenters, in which are weighty
things about this particular of Swearing, which he has not answered at all, as
to their Arguments, only carped here and there at a word, which is not of
great moment: adding, That though it was not possible to answer all things in
so shore a discourse as a Sermon; yet he might have done it in his
Additionalls, or Annotations. F. H. may be suspected to surmise, that his
Readers are very oblivious, that need be so often reminded of the same matter,
This is the fourth time that he has harped upon this string, besides a good
large hint that he gave thereof in his Epistle to the Reader. In answer
whereto, I grant that I have read over all these Tracts by him here mentioned,
and some others besides, as James Picton's just Plea against Swearing, and
Supplementum sublatum, by Rich: Hubberthorne and Sam: Fisher, in answer to Mr.
Tombs about Swearing: and some Papers in Writing of John Wigans, delivered to
Judge Twisden, 1664. and another Anonymous Manuscript, and one of George
Bishops of Bristol, and a short one of Peter Hardcastle's besides many private
Letters from several persons. So diligent have I been to inform my self of
what ever could be said for the maintenance of that Tenent, that I might not
through rashness, or ignorance, wrong either them, or the Truth. And here I
must seriously profess, that what ever I found that in my Judgment deserved an
answer, or might in the least move any rational man to dissent from, or doubt
of the Truth of what I had delivered in my Sermon, I replied to it in some
marginall Annotation. But F. H. is of a differing Judgment, and therefore
whatsoever he has since produced out of them in his book, I have here answered;
and besides, for the most part showed him, how weak those Arguments were, that
he supposed were weighty, and of great moment. But this I look upon, but as a
color to varnish over a ruinous cause, that in case I should take the pains to
answer his book; yet his credulous friends should be kept up in a fools
paradise, as thinking there were other weighty matters, whereto I had not
replied, and so all refutation would be vain, or impossible. For though I had
replied fully to F. H. yet possibly there might be somewhat in some other
Writer which I had not observed. You may perceive herein some subtle dealing;
but I referr it to the Judgment of any of his favorers, whether F. H. may in
reason be thought to have left out any material passage that might assist his
Cause, which he could find in these books, when he has borrowed so much out of
S. Fs. writings (and that often when he does not so much as mention his name)
which has bin found little advantageous to

And here H. F. brings his ^^.
Army into view, and presents us with a Muster-roll of his forces: The first
whereof is the Answer to Bishop Gauden, by that faithful servant of God (as he
terms him) Sam: Fisher, (he might have called him another Paul, for they both
reviled the High Priest, but with this difference, that the Apostle did it by
mistake, but the other upon design.) And the next is his Antidote. The third
is Isaac Pennington's book, whereof he gives us a Summary of several heads,
all which (he says) A. S. has passed over, and has not answered, which
proposition might be well retorted. For I could truly say, all which F. H.
has passed over (as not much conducing to his purpose) and has not urged: and
why should A. S* answer what was not objected? Then follows John Crooks book
the Title whereof is not (as he has it) The Case of Swearing at all discussed;
But Sixteen Reasons, etc. why diverse true Christians called Quakers refuse to
Swear at all. Thus he puts his friends upon a vain enquiry, and perhaps he
would never have them to find it, because then they would always be in
expectation of further satisfaction (as he puts them in hope) if (as he says,
and may well suspect) they be unsatisfied in what has been said already. For
these things A. S. has not answered. Indeed A. S. did neither answer them in
his Sermon, nor in this vindication of it. Not in his Sermon, for why should he
there digress to impertinencies? Not here, because F. H. alleged nothing out
of them, nor 'its like could. For, can we imagine that he would so far betray
his Cause, as not to mention in defense of it, those great and weighty things,
which (as he tells us) are worthy of the serious consideration of all? Or can
we think that he would weed his Authors, and only make use of such flight
Arguments out of them, as might easily be re^uted, and leave untouched those
solid Reasons that would have been satisfactory to his friends; and then, to
make his Reader amends, send him in quest after a mis-named book, that is no
where to be found? Indeed I have some reasons to suspect, that F. H. himself
did never see John Crooks sheet of paper, for it is no more. In his next, I
desire he would deal ingeniously, and tell us whether he have seen it, or no;
and if he have not, how he comes to know that it contains such weighty matters.
John Crook himself is much more modest; for in a Paper which I have under his
own hand, concerning his sixteen Reasons, he says, That some of them tend to
prove the unlawfulness of all Swearing, as especially the first and fifteenth,
(both which are grounded upon the Text, St. Mat. 5. 34. which I have here fully
discussed) Some, more particularly relating to the Oath of Allegiance: And
others tending not altogether so much to prove the unlawfulness, as the
uselessness of Oaths, etc. which being very true, (though not answerable to
what the Title Page held out) let F. H. or any of his friends judge upon second
thoughts, whether I had any reason to answer things so extrinsecall to my
purpose, which was not to discourse of the usefulness, but of the lawfulness of
just Oaths in general, without any reflection upon that of Allegiance in
particular. But besides, F. Hs. prophetique spirit here fails him. For indeed,
I have answered those Tracts of Isaa^ Pennington, and John Crook, and sent
those answers to the parties themselves in writing, (not thinking them tanti,
as to trouble the World with them; though if F. H. in earnest desire them, I am
in a capacity to serve him) which occasioned interchange of some Papers betwixt
us. Morgan Watkins brings up the rear; and F. H. says nothing of answering
him; and that was wisely done: For I am of opinion, that he found nothing
therein that deserved an answer.

F. H. (as in several other places) does that really, for which he so often
aspe^ses A. S. causelessly; mine intention was (as I publicly declared in my
Sermon) and still is in Writing ^^ct. 3.
this discourse, not to cast any odium upon the dissenters, or add affliction
to their bonds, (as F. H. phrases it) but to induce them to relinquish an
irrational opinion, and thereby escape those penalties that are Legally
imposable upon nonconformists, whereby the Church would be freed in part from
that Schism that so miserably distracts it, and themselves enjoy those
immunities, which are the inheritance of good, and obedient Subjects. Nor am I
conscious to my self of any thing that might occasion that suspicion of me in
F. H. though he has often urged it against me; I know not why, unless it be to
get in his party, a disaffection to my Person, and thereby an abhorrence of my
Doctrine. For rationally to refute an error, and modestly to dissuade seduced
persons from such misperswasions, as would draw upon them both guilt, and
punishment, is one of the best services can be done them, and that (especially
where it is accompanied with civility of deportment, and offices of humanity
toward them) as it cannot in Reason, so in charity it ought not to be
mis-interpreted, as a design to incite those that are in Authority to a
further severity against them. God knows that I sincerely wish their
conversion, not their destruction. I have not tasted so lightly of the bitter
cup of persecution for Conscience sake, that it can be any delight to me that
F. H. or any other, should drink thereof upon that account. They think it hard
to suffer for not Swearing, when the Law enjoynes it. But I could tell them who
suffered for not Swearing, (and that I trow was harder) when the Law disallowed
it. But for F. H. he does more then enough (as though he were the greatest
enemy to his brethren) to irritate his Superiors against them by frequent
reproaches of the Civil Magistrate, and calumnious imputations upon the Church
of England. But I shall neither recite the words, nor quote the places, least
that prove the occasion of a new complaint, unless F. H. (or some in his
behalf) put me upon it, for their satisfaction, or mine own vindication. If
the ordinary Reader cannot discover the passages that look with so malevolent
an aspect upon the Government, he has my leave to dye in ignorance. F. Hs
contrary temper is not so lovely as to make me imitate it, or tempt me to
recrimination. And for his frequent insinuations of my being a time-server, an
opposer of Christ's plain words, a deceiver of the simple, one that stirs up
the Magistrates to the persecution of the godly, and I know not what, I impute
them either to his passion, and discontent, or else to his crafty seeking by
these petty artifices, to create in his friends a bad opinion of me, that they
may reap no benefit by my labors; I beseech the Lord that these things may
never be laid to his charge. For my self, I thank God, I harbor no hatred in
mine heart against him, or any other. I never projected the ruin, or hurt of
any of them; but only endeavored to manifest to them, and the world, what I
know assuredly, and what no rational man upon serious deliberation, and
perusal of what is written on both sides can deny to be Truth. And if in order
thereto, I have showed the vanity, or unconcludingness of F. Hs. Arguments,
without any asperity of Language; I hope he, and all others will excuse me, in
regard I could not but show the weakness, and fallaciousness of his answer (who
had openly professed himself a champion for error, and so vigorously
endeavored the maintenance thereof) unless I should have wilfully betrayed
that Truth, the Patrociny whereof I had undertaken. For if I would reply, I was
necessitated to follow whether F. H. led^ me. Neither can any one be justly
offended, that I contend as earnestly for the right, as F. H. does against it.
For this does not only tend to rectify their judgments that have been
seduced by the subtilities, and specious pretensions of Religion, (amongst whom
I account F. H. to be one, of whom I am not so ill conceited, as to think that
he writes against his Conscience; but rather judge him to be deceived by
relying too much upon S. Fs. Judgment) but also to free the Church from
Schism, the Nation from Faction, and themselves from penalties, which they
incur through disobedience. I really pity F. H. and those of his fraternity,
and am persuaded that many of them are people conscientious, and of upright
intentions; and therefore I would endeavor to the utmost to undeceive them,
who have been cheated into their misperswasions by Wolves in Sheeps clothing,
to which unhappy misadventure, the loose lives of some, and the unsound
doctrines of many that called themselves Ministers, during the time of our late
confusions, in all probability did not a little contribute: which may be a
ground for our Christian commiseration toward these deluded souls, and an
inducement for us not only to compassionate their abused weakness; but also to
labor by all good means to recall them into the right way, who have not
strayed from it out of any new fangled giddiness; but have rather been frighted
out of it by others miscarriages; or allured from it by the subtle suggestions
of those cunning imposters, that taking the advantage of our distractions, and
making use of the debauchery, and profaneness of the licentious multitude on
the one side; and the unjustifiable, and contrariant positions of some that
were then accounted the most zealous Preachers on the other, struck them as it
were betwixt Wind and Water, over powered their well meaning simplicity, and
under the plausible color of a more strict Piety, and sincere Religion,
prevailed with them to forsake the Church, and several of those Catholic,
and Apostolical Doctrines therein professed. For whose reduction (through the
blessing of God) I have undertaken this Task; and profess, that I have not
here Written any thing, of the Truth whereof I am not fully persuaded, though
mindful of humane frailty, I do wholly submit it to the Judgment of the
Church. In order whereto, I desire F. H. and those of his persuasion, to think
of themselves, (what he expresses of England) Page 84.
that being no more than men, it is possible they may have been mistaken: and
therefore that they would be pleased without prejudice, or partiality, to
examine what is here laid down, and submit their opinions to the evidence of
Truth, whenever they do, or can discover it. To which end, I shall be
always willing to contribute my best assistance to any of them, whether by way
of Explication of what perhaps may seem dubious, or less intelligible: Or by
way of Application more clearly to reinforce any Argument, or refell any
Objection which possibly may be better affected by private conference, than by
these public dissertations, which not many peradventure will regard; and
sewer (I doubt) weigh seriously (as they should, and must, if they mean to
profit by them) in the balance of Judgment. The Lord grant them humility,
that none of them may be Wiser in his own conceit, then P^o. 26. 16.
seven men that can render a reason, and open the eyes of their understanding,
that they may discern their errors, and re-tract them. And as for me, God
forbid, that I should sin 1 Samuel* 12. 23.
against the Lord in ceasing to pray for them: But as I have now Taught them,
The good, and the right way; so by the assistauce of the Divine Grace, I shall
continue my devout supplications to the Almighty, (as our Church directs us)
that it may please him to bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred,
and are deceived. And so I end with that Prayer in the end of the Letany, That
God would grant us in this World knowledge of his Truth; and in the world to
come life everlasting.

FINIS.

