Heights in Depths AND Depths in Heights. OR TRVTH no less Secretly then
Sweetly sparkling out its GLORY from under a Cloud of OBLOQVIE.

Wherein is discovered the various Motions of an Experienced Soul, in and
through the manifold dispensations of GOD. And how the Author has been acted
in, and redeemed from the unknown paths of darkness; wherein, as in a
wilderness, he has wandered without the clear vision of a Divine Presence.
Together with a sincere abdication of certain Tenants, either formerly vented
by him, or now charged upon him.
Per me JO. SALMON.

Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of
Abraham? So am I.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1651.

AN Apologeticall Hint to the ensuing Discourse.
READER,
THis little Piece comes to thy view as a poor Pilgrim, void of that large
accommodation which happily it may find at its own home. I have here dressed
it in a homely Language, and formed it as like my self as possible I could; if
thou can see so much woth in it, as to give it entertainment, I am bold to
say (ere it part from thee) it will return thee satisfaction. It steals like a
Thief upon the benighted world: However, be not shy of it; for it shall take
nothing from thee but what thou shall be made willing to part withal.

Lastly, I send it into the World, to discharge some debts which in my late
Travels through Egypt land I left unsatisfied.

As more plainly thus:

It is not long since wherein that eminent appearance of light, which dawned
out its glory upon my Spirit, and from thence gave a sweet and powerful
reflexe upon the World, did shroud it self under a most sable and enigmaticall
cloud of darkness, and withdrew for a season, behind the dark Canopies of
Earth and Flesh; in which state the Hemispheare of my spirit was so bespread
with obscurity, that I knew not whither I walked, or what I did.

Thus was I led into paths that I had not known, and turned from a King to
become a Like Nebuchadnezzar.
Beast, and fed upon husks for a season.

After a while posting most furiously in a burning zeal toward an unattainable
end: my manner of walking being adjudged by those in power contrary to the
peace and civil order of the Which indeed were no less, according to the
present state of things.
Commonwealth) I was justly apprehended as an offender: who never before had
demerited any thing from them, except love and respect for my faithful
service, which upon all occasions I was ever free to offer as a due homage to
the justness of their Cause.

I suffered above half a years imprisonment under the notion of a
blaspheamer; which through want of air, and many other conveniences, became
very irksome and tedious to my outward man.

Being now retired from the noise of the world, and cloy stered up from the
usual society of my friends, having my grates on the one side for a defense,
and my door fast bolted on the other, I had time enough afforded me to ponder
my state and condition.

Upon which I summoned my heart to an appearance before the throne of divine
Justice, where after a scrutinous and serious debate, I found that I had in
many things, been led out and acted in the most undoing and destroying paths of
darkness.

Upon which I was for a season deeply, yea intolerably sensible of these
things; and multitudes of armed thoughts all at once beleaguered my soul, as
if they had agreed with one consent to devour me.

In the midst of this trouble and distraction, I was led to consider that
certainly Providence had some end in leading (or suffering me to be led) into
these appearances.

This stayed me, and got by degrees more ground upon my Spirit; in which to
this day I can rejoice and lift up my head above the most insulting and daring
Fury: insomuch as I know the Lord had a special end to accomplish through all
these declinings.

The rage of man shall turn to the praise of God, and for ever blessed be that
Grace and Love which has taught me to say from an inward experience of light,
I thank God that I was made a servant of All things shall work together for the
best to them that love God
sin. But to return: Having this clear conviction upon my spirits, I forth with
addressed my self to those who had been the causers of my then present
confinement: and truly I will speak it to their everlasting praise, (especially
some of them) they were as willing to embrace me and my desires (upon such
fair terms propounded) as I could be to offer my self to them.

Major Beak (a man much honored in my thoughts, though once a professed enemy
to me) upon the discovery of my mind to him, seemed to be much affected with my
condition, and withal informed me of diverse blasphemous expressions, which
were vented in certain letters of mine which had lately been intercepted; which
(after my humble request) he offered to my view one or more of them: I drew
out from them those expressions which most deserved my severest censure,
arraigned them and condemned them as guilty.

I offered what I had done to Major Beak, together with a Petition to the
Council of State for my liberty. Who according to my desires, being in himself
persuaded of my hearty and penitential remorse, did with all care and speed
present the same in my behalf, and so next under God became the only means of
my Release.

Not long after the Right Honorable Colonel Purefoy came down to Coventry with
my discharge from the Council, who after strict examination (and finding
himself with the rest satisfied) presented my Discharge to the Mayor and
Aldermen then present, which accordingly was received, and I set at liberty,
engaging to his Honor and the rest, that I would with all convenient speed
declare my self in Print against those things which I was then charged
withal, and still am by many.

This then is one and not the least end of my exposing these lines to a public
view, that I may appear to be no worse then my word to them whose indulgencie
in a time of need was sufficiently manifested toward me.

And truly had not this with some other weighty reasons prevailed with me, I
should not have troubled the world with things of this nature. Only. Therefore
Reader take notice that my main ends in this business are.

1. To give a faithful account of the dealings of the most High toward me, as
he has led me along through manifold dispensations of himself.

2. To declare to all men what J now am, only in what I am not: if thou
(Reader) art so wise as to discover my spirit by what I shall here declaim,
thou will spare me the labor of making an after profession of my Faith, which
I confess I shall hardly be drawn to declare to Have thou Faith, have it to
thy self.
any man.

3. I now am made to speak, because I am almost weary of speaking, and to
inform the world that silence has taken hold of my spirit. The thunderstrokes
of the Almighty have to purpose uttered their voices in me, heaven and earth
have trembled at their dreadful sounds: the Alarm being over, there is silence
now in heaven; for how long I know not

I lie quietly secure in the Lord while I see the whole world consuming in the
fire of envy one against another. I hear much noise about me, but it serves
only to deafen me into the still slumbers of Divine rest. The formal world is
much affrighted, and every form is up in Arms to proclaim open wars against it
self: The Almighty power is dashing one thing against another, and confounding
that which he has formerly faced with the glory of his own presence: He
sets up and casts down, and who shall say, What do thou? Come then, O my
Soul, enter thou into thy Chamber, shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self
in silence for a season till the indignation be blown over.

Reader, I heartily bid thee farewell, commending thee into that bosom of love,
where I rest,

Thine in silence.

Heights in Depths, AND Depths in Heights. OR TRVTH no less secretly then
sweetly sparkling out its GLORY from under a Cloud of OBLOQUIE.
Vanity of Vanities, All is Vanity says the Preacher.

The highest piece of wisdom, is to see wisdom it self but Vanity.

The whole world is a Circle, including nothing but emptiness.

Worldly.
Wisdom it self is but a womb of Wind, whose wringing Pangs, pretend the birth
of pure Substance, but in times revealing Order it am its nothing, except
travel for sorrow, whose high aspires, do cursorily expire into an airy notion,
even while it appears to be something, it proves nothing.

Man walks in a vain show, he shows to be a man, and that's all.

Below.
Here is nothing that truly is, because it What God does he does for ever.
abides not; things only appear to be, and so vanish.

I am satisfied in nothing so much, as in knowing that In the world
nothing can satisfy me.

We seem to live in the State of variety, wherein we are not truly living, but
only in appearance: in Unity is our life: in one we are, from one divided, we
are no longer.

While we perambulate variety, we walk but as so many Ghosts or Shadows in it,
that it self being but the Umbrage of the Unity.

To descend from the oneness or Eternity, into the multiplicity, is to lose our
selves in an endless Labyrinth.

To ascend from variety into uniformity, is to contract our scattered spirits
into their original center and to find our selves where we In Eternity by Gods
decree.
were, before we As to outward appearance.
were.

Certainly, when a man looks upon the face of things and with a serious
inspection eyes the shaken Frame of them, he must conclude that there is
something above and beyond all appearances, which can only and alone satisfy.

If we look upon the Temporay, or more outward state of things; good Lord how
subject is it to revolutions and vicissitudes? what is it that we can call
certain, but only uncertainty.

Behold the Lord makes the earth empty and void; he lays it waste: it reels
to and fro like a drunkard: all its Foundations are out of course: one change
succeeds another, while the earth is become subject to a constant inconstancy.

The world travels perpetually, and every one is swollen full big with
particularity of interest; thus traveling together in pain, and groaning under
enmity: laboring to bring forth some one thing, some another, and all bring
forth nothing but wind and confusion: this is certainly a great evil that God
has given men to be exercised withal under the sun.

If further we cast our eye upon those things which promise greater Stabillite,
( viz: forms of righteousness and Religion) alas how does experience daily
inform us, of the violent turnings and overturnings which are incident to
these also?

Does not the Almighty power blast those things daily, which have been most in
request amongst us? is he not dashing one form against another as potters
Vessels? what lively Characters of sudden mortality may we runn and read upon
all So far as they are bare form.
outward forms? what means this great noise, and stir, that alarmes the world
continually? the bitter contention, that intermixes it self with men's ways
and worships? the perpetual clashings of one form against another? The heaven
of form is passing away, which goes not without much clamor, strife and
contention. Thus is it the Lords will that people shall labor in the fire, and
weary themselves for very vanity.

The farther a man As Adam, who desired to be as God, to know good and evil.
reaches beyond himself to contemplate an incomprehensible glory, though his
labor may be delightful, yet hisloss will prove very I speak by deep
experience.
extensive.

While with a swift winged ambition, we are transported into the sublimity of
notion; the Scorching influences of the heavenly Splendour, meets us (as it
were) with an untimely check; Singes the golden plumes of our soring fancies;
and down we fall into unconceivable depths of darkness.

Ob. How then shall a man attain to a onenes, and communion with this
inaccessible glory?

Sol. Seeing there is no way probable for us, (by our most lofty aspires) to
interesse our selves in that

We must patiently expect its seasonable descension upon us; whose nature it is
to Out of al our dross and tinn: for he is as a refiners fire.
consume us into it self, and to melt us into the same nature and likeness:

And truly till this come, and thus manifest it self, all that man can do to
acquire satisfaction, does but multiply his sorrow upon his head, and augment
cares upon his spirit. Vanity, vanity, all is vanity.

It is but vanity for me to write, vanity for you to read. Words are but
wind; you read you know not what, and perhaps I write I know not what: and so
let it be till God will have it otherwise.

There is a set time for ever purpose under heaven; vanity has its time also;
nay time it self is but a lengthened thread of vanity; there is no reallity
but in eternity:

When time shall be no longer then things will appear in their proper and
perfect substance.

Well; to every thing there is a season; a time to A vain thing.
cast a way stones, and a time to gather stones together, I know not very well
which of these times I am now under, while I am thus busied:

It may be I am now casting stones against the wind, [that is but vanity]
However, (if so) methinks the wise reader might find some better employment,
then to stand as a spectator of such folly and madness.

Truly I would very willingly say nothing, and yet at present I am forced into
a freedom to speak my mind:

If I speak any thing more then my reason dictates to me as truth; I am become
a fool;

And yet I have not so much reason in me, as to make what I say appear
reasonable to others: this is also vanity, and a sore travel. But to draw near
to what I intend:

I have lived to see an end of all perfections; that which I now long for, is
to see perfection it self perfected.

I have bin led out to seek the Lord in manifold appearances, I must now (by
himself) be found in himself, who is the good it self, and nothing but this
can satisfy: Take only this brief hint, for information.

How the Author has been acted in, and carried thorough various and manifold
appearances.
NO sooner had I attained to any maturity in a natural understanding, of common
principles of morality, but I found in my self a secret longing to sore in a
more celestial orb; (being partly convicted of a higher life than that of
nature.)

This desire being kindled, and supplied with the timely breath of the
Almighty, it soon begann to warm and afterward to set my whole heart of a
flame, which to this day could never be extinct; but has ever since (like the
ambitious spark) made its constant ascensions, and earnest aspires, toward
this heavenly center.

Receiving (after my nocturnal slumbers in nature's grave) some quicknings of a
divine principle within me; I presently arose and (as it were) shook of my
night dresses, and appeared to my self, like the sunn, dawning out its
refulgent splendour, from behind the dark canopies of the earth: I was now
adorned in another hue, and devoutly resolved to tread the paths of a more
princely dignity.

I presently set forth for heaven, the whole powers and faculties of my soul
being infinitely engaged thereunto, by some taste of the fruies of that good
land, which I received as pledges of divine love, and as the earnest of that
more glorious inheritance, which I now waited for.

I now forsook my own kindred and my fathers house, withdrew my self from my
former vanities, and willingly exposed my self to all the contempt and
reproach of the world, that I might own Christ, his cause, and people.

By this time (the honest presbyterian party) were looked most upon, as owners
of, and sufferers for, the cause of God;

These, being newly crept out of the shell of Episcopacy, were hatched into a
more pure and refined form; and (after a small time) did seem to hover
gently, and sore sweetly, in a more sublimer region than the former.

With these I now joined, and became a Zealous hearer and a very great affecter
of them; and truly did enjoy much of God in this station while the Lord
appeared to me in it.

After a while, the notion of Independency offered it self upon the stage, to
which I was willing to lend my audience (at least) and make proof of its
plausible proposalls. I understood they were a people, much decryed by the
vulgaritie, which made me imagine that there was something of God amongst them;

I saw they were a people far excelling others in the strictnes of their
form; and (which most affected me) were gathered out of the world, and knit
one to another in a more close, and comfortable bond of love, than any;

The more excelling luster of this form, (to me) darkened the beauty, and dimmed
the glory of the other: my affections (upon the illumination of the
understanding) were soon commanded and forth they runn with a great deal, of
delight, to wel-com this newly received glory; in this form I was concluded
and shutt up for a season: wherein I also enjoyed much satisfaction:

Soon after, the doctrine of beleivers baptism was much pressed by many: and
this (though it were a much despised form) I was yet free to make trial of
it, and own it so far as I could see it hold a correspondencie with truth.

I (after some serious debate) was convinced that it was my duty to obey God in
my subjection to that ordinance of water baptism: I hereupon tendered my
willing and cheerful submission, and consulted not with flesh and blood in this
business. In the hottest time of Persecution: I was made one eminent both in
holding forth this way to the world, and also in an open suffering for the same.

By this time I began to think it was high time to settle, and not to expose my
mind to such changes and alterations in things of this nature: Whereupon I
here built me a Tabernacle, and was fixed in a peremptory resolve, That this
and no other could lawfully be adjudged the way of God.

Then came that voice from the throne of the heavenly Almightiness: Arise and
depart for this is not your rest.

I was made as truly sensible of this inwardly, as the eye is sensible of the
light, or the ear of the outward sound.

I was certainly struck dead to all my wonted enjoyments.

Stripped I was of my glory, and my Crown taken from my head, and I could see
nothing but Vanity (and that legibly written) upon all my former travels.

I then had a clear discovery in my spirit, how far all my former enjoyments
came short of that true rest which my soul had all along aimed at.

Here I stood for a season weeping with Mary at the Sepulcher: fain I would
have found Christ where I left him, but alas he was risen: I found nothing in
form but a few A few grave clothes, or such like stuff
signals of Mortality; as for Jesus, he was risen and departed.

Thus have I followed Christ from his babe-ship, or infancy, to his Grave of
mortality, running through the life of Form in a bare knowledge of Christ after
the flesh, till I expired with him As many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have been baptized into his death.
into his death, and was sealed up in the Grave of most dark, and somnolent
retires for a season.

Loath, full loath I was thus to shake hands with form, and to leave the
terrestrial image of Jesus Christ; yet so it was designed that he must go to
his father, and (although Like the disciples, who were ignorant of the promise
of the Spirit.
I were ignorant of it) prepare a higher mansion in himself for me.

When my 3. days (or set time) was expired, I begann to feel some quickening
comfort within me; the grave stone was rolled away, and I set at liberty, from
these deep and dark retires; out I came with a most serene and cheerful
countenance, and (as one inspired with a supernatural life) sprang up far
above my earthly center, into a most heavenly and divine enjoyment: Wrapped up in
the embraces of such pure love and peace, as that I knew not often times, whether
I were in or out of this fading form.

Here I saw heaven opened upon me and the new Jerusalem (in its divine
brightness and corruscant beauty) greeting my Soul by its humble and gentle
descensions:

Now I certainly enjoyed that substance, which all this while I had groped
after in the shadow.

My water was turned into wine-form, into power; and all my former enjoyments
being nothing in appearance to that glory which now rested on my spirit.

Time would fail to tell, what joy unspeakeable, peace unconceiveable; what
soul ravishing delights, and most divinely infatuating pleasures my soul was
here possessed with.

I could cast my eye no where, but that presence of love presented it self to
me, whose beatificall vision, oftimes dazeled me into a sweet astonishment:

In a word, I can give you no perfect account of that glory which then covered
me; the lisps and slipps of my tongue will but render that imperfect, whose
pure perfection surmounts the reach of the most strenuous and high flown
expression.

I appeared to my self as one confounded into the abyss of eternity,
nonentitized into the being of beings; my soul spilt, and emptied into the
fountain and ocean of divine fullness: expired into the aspires of pure life:

In breife the Lord so much appeared that Viz: the carnal self.
I was little or nothing seen; but walked at an orderly distance from my self,
treading and tripping over the pleasant mountains of the Heavenly land, where
I walked with the Lord and was not:

I shall be esteemed a fool, by the wise world, thorough an over much
boasting: otherwise I could tell you how I have been exalted into the bosom of
the eternal Allmightines, where I have seen and heard, things unlawful, (I
say As to the weakness of many.
unlawful) to be uttered amongst men; but I shall at present spare my self the
labor, and prevent the worlds inconsiderate censure.

The proud and imperious Nature of flesh, would willingly claim a share in this
glorious work, for which cause happened a sudden, certain, terrible, dreadful
revolution, a most strange vicissitude.

God sent a Thorn immediately; hid himself from me by a sudden departure, and
gives a speedy Commission to a Messenger of Satan to assault me.

The Lord being thus withdrawn, and having carried away (in the bundle of his
Treasures) the heart and life of that Note well what I say, that was reserved
pure in the life of Christ, while the flesh acted its part.
new seed in me, there now remained naught behind but the man of sin, who
(for his pride) being wounded with the thorn of Divine vengeance, began by
degrees to act its part.

This Thorn, I say was in the flesh (or fleshly principle) the spirit (or new
man) that was preserved still in the heart of eternal love, and became a life
occult, hid with Christ in God.

Angry flesh being struck at heart with the piercing dart of vengeance, begins
to swell, and contracting all the evil humors of the body of death into one
lump, to grapple with this thorn of wrath, at last violently breaks out, and
lets forth the very heart and coar of its pride and enmity.

The rankor and venom of this subtle serpent, now discovers it self, and being
sore sick with a cup of pure wrath, disgorges its foul stomach upon the very
face, and appearance of Truth.

I was now sent into a strange land, and made to eat unclean things in Assyria;
walked in unknown paths, and became a mad man, a fool amongst men.

Thus tumbling in my own Vomit, I became a derision to all, and even loathed by
those by whom I had been beloved: being made drunk with a Cup of vengeance,
every one begins to cast a squint eye toward me.

O the deep drunken bewitching, be sotting draughts of the wine of astonishment
that has been forced upon me.

Well, my folly being discovered, and the bowels of corrupt flesh being let
out, I lay as a spectacle of scorn and contempt to every eye; yea my mothers
children were angry with me, and even those were apt to censure me for a
firebrand of hell, an hypocrite, a cast away, into whose hands when the Cup of
the Lord shall come, they may appear as bad, if not worse then my self.

But most true it is, he that slippeth with his feet, is as a Lamp despised in
the heart of him that is at ease.

Certainly if the Lord would but let loose the reins of men's hearts, they
should soon discover as bad, or worse in themselves, as they hate and despise
in others.

The time of many is now at hand; yea, its come upon them, wherein the baseness
and rottenness of their hearts are discovered; they walk with their insides
outward, and show their nakedness and shame.

They are turned and tossed as a ball in a large country: reel, stagger,
stumble and fall with the desperate intoxicating draughts of wrath and madness:
tumble up and down in their own filthiness and beastiality; and are become
signs and wonders amongst men: yea, those that have been Rivals to the chiefest
and most eminent in knowledge and enjoyment, have been pulled down from the
Throne, and set as mirrors of amazement in the world: Judged with a witness
both by God and man: judged in themselves, the damnation of whose flesh
sleeps not: Judged, censured, stripped, persecuted, imprisoned by others.

The hand of the Lord meets them continually, and the world knows not,
considers not, their most heavy and sad pressures.

O God, that men could a little consider the several disposings of the eternal
wisdom!

I would gladly offer one silent whisper in the ears of the world, and leave it
to the wise, and ponderous judgment of every Christian.

Hark then --

Think ye that those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam tell, were greater
sinners then others? I tell you, nay.

Are their impieties on their foreheads? and are not yours in your hearts? is
there not the same spring of enmity, root of bitterness, den of Darkness, and
spawn of folly and madness in you as in them.

What if the Lord should tear off your large Phylacteries of religion and
righteousness, and instead thereof stamp the foul image of that hidden
enormity, which harbors secretly in your breast.

What if God should uncloke you, and strip you of your lovely garbes of
pretended holiness, and should let that apear which is hidden under this
pleasing vesture?

Consider, is there not in the best of you a body of death?

Is not the root of rebellion planted in your natures?

Is there not also a time for this wicked one to be revealed?

Do you think that God will not one time or other, one way or another discover
and judge that flesh, which now seems to sleep securely under the specious
pretenses of righteousness.

You little think, and less know, how soon the cup of fury may be put into your
hands: my self, with many others have been made stark drunk with that wine of
wrath, the dregs whereof (for ought I know) may fall to your share suddenly.

I speak not this either to extenuate my own evil, or to cast approbries in the
face of those who have (to the utmost) censured me; but rather to mittigate the
severity of peoples spirits, and to give a by hint of that doom and judgment,
that is at hand upon the world.

For my own part, I do most ingeniously and heartily confess, that the worst of
men cannot outvie my iniquity. Hell it self cannot hatch that mischief, which
my heart has not been a receptacle to embrace; and if ever a proud Pharisee in
the world dare stepped up and plead his own innocence, let him cast the first
stone at me: If every man be found guilty, and there is none that does good,
why should we so unseemly envy, and not rather pity (and lament over) each
others miseries.

But to return: being thus clouded from the presence of the Lord, I was
violently posted through most dark paths, where I ever and anon stumbled and
fell into the snare of open error and profaneness, led and hurried, (by what
power let the wise judge) in a principle of mad Zeal, to tear and rend the very
appearances of God, which I had formerly cherished in my breast.

Delighting my self in nothing but in that which rendered me most vile and ugly
in the sight of all men, and glorying in naught, but my own shame.

I could not have imagined that such deadly poison had lodged within me, had
not the dreadful piercing lance of vengeance, let it out before my face, and
made it palpably manifest to all men.

I was indeed full sick of wrath, a vial of wrath was given me to drink; the
heavenly pleasure would not exeuse me a drop of it; which no sooner had flesh
received, but it burst in sunder, polluted and defiled my ways and actions,
with its filthy poisonous nature;

Well -- drink I must, but mark the riddle.

'Twas given me, that I might drink, I drank, that I might stumble, I stumbled,
that I might fall; I fell,
and through my fall was made happy.

It is strange to think, how the hidden and secret presence of God in me, did
silently rejoice while flesh was thus manifested;

I had a sweet rest and refuge in the Lord, Spiritual I, or the new man
even while my flesh was frying and scorching in the flames of ireful fury.

I was ark'd up in the eternal bosom, while the flesh was tumbling in the
foaming surges of its own vanity:

And although the beast ascended out of the bottomless pit, and cast out a
flood of envy against me, yet I was preserved in the Lord from its insulting
fury: and this I know is a riddle to many, Jesus Christ.
which none but the true Nazarite can expound; and til he is pleased to unfold
it, it pleases me it should lie dark.

But to conclude --

Thus have I been forced into the strange paths of obscurity, driven up and
down in a tempestuous storm of wrath, and split upon the rocks of dreadful
astonishment; All the waves and billows of the Almighty have gone over me.

I am now at rest in the silent deeps of eternity, sunk into the abyss of
silence, and (having shot this perilous gulf) am safely arrived into the bosom
of love; the land of rest.

I sometimes hear from the world, which I have now forsaken; I see its Diurnals
are fraught with the tidings of the same clamor, strife, and contention, which
abounded in it when I left it; I give it the hearing, and that is all.

I meddle with none-of them; though they are daily censuring me at their
pleasure.

My lovely silence contributes so large a parcel of Peace to me, as that I
would gladly be at Peace with all men: but yet such is the restless fury of the
disturbed world, that it will not upon any terms enter into a league of concord
with me.

I cannot inveigh against any form, party, or religious interest: it becomes
not my sweet silence, to bawl and brawl with the unquiet spirits of men, who
are therefore swollen with madness, and frenzy against me, because they cannot by
their bitter emulation, either disturb the peace and rest of my spirit, or
provoke me to a contest with them, upon such poor base and beggarly terms.

I see there is naught that can satisfy under the Sun.

And certainly were men possessed of that true enjoyment which they pretend to,
they would be better satisfied, and more at peace in their spirits.

My great desire (and that wherein I most delight) is to see and say nothing.

I have run round the world of variety, My mind is wholly bent to contemplate
that.
and am now centered in eternity; that is the womb out of which I was taken,
and to which my desires are now reduced.

There is nothing in the world of so great amplitude, as to comprehend or
contain my spirit within its measurable orb; something that is more durable,
then any thing that is extant in the world, is that which my souls press after.

And in the interim I find my self mostly comprehended, and best satisfied in
my still and silent reserves.

I am, or would be, very little, or nothing in show, yet I am indeed, both
what I would be, or may desire to be.

I am drawn, from off the stage of outward appearances, on which (of late) I
have acted a most sad and Tragical part: I am bound in the close Galleries
with my beloved, where (under the sweet verge of his Love, and shadow of his
wing) I am wooed to refresh my self with most mellifluous delights.

I am as the Lords Lilly amongst Thorns; I stand in a very fertile soil:
though it be a valley, yet its both fat, rich, and pleasant.

I cannot envy the Thorns that are about me, neither can they hurt me; I grow
quietly by them, stand peaceably amongst them, and they are made (against their
wills) a defensive hedge about me.

In sum,

While I view with a serious inspection the state of things about me; I
clearly perceive how every thing prides it self in a momentany state; when
(alas!) after it has showed it self, it suddenly is swallowed up by that
being whence it first came.

Every thing bears a constant and greedy motion toward the center; and when
once we are wearied in the prolixity of variety, we revolve into silence,
where we are as if we had never been.

Every one stands up, Vi and armis, to plead the prerogative of his own
interest; the World is so filled with Verbosity, that I am gladly constrained
into silence, till I have time and opportunity to offer my mind amongst them.

I see partly what the end will be, but I must not declare, neither will the
world hear it.

I have stepped out of my silent Mansions, to offer these few words to the Vulgar
view: how hardly I was persuaded to it, my own heart can evidence, and many in
my behalf can testify: some engagements urged me to it, more then any desire
of mine to become public.

I am quite a weary of popular applause, and I little value a vulgar censure;
the benefit of the one, cannot at all affect me, nor the prejudice of the other
much molest me:

I enjoy greater treasures in my happy silence, then all their cruelty can make
me capable of the want of.

It Is true I have lost a good name, and honorable esteem in the world.

I have also another name, which is a new one, which none can read, but he that
has it; none can blast with the least blot of infamy.

I can cheerfully bear the indignation of the Lord, for I have sinned:

It is not for me to reply against the dealings of the Eternal Wisdom: it is
rather good for me to bear the yoke in my youth, with a Christian silence and
gravity.

I am made willing to give my In any christian contest.
cheek to the smiter, to sit alone, (keeping silence) and put my mouth in the
dust: any thing with the Lord, is to me very acceptable; nothing (without God)
dares approach my quiet and still Mansions.

In a word: I am able both to do and to suffer all things through an Eternal
Almightinesse: And resolved I am to gain a conquest over the World, by
prostrating my self a subject to their weakness.

I must submit to them, that I may reign over them; and even then I trample
them underneath my feet, when I am most subdued to their will and pleasure.

Well -- to draw near to my chamber, (for it is bad standing without doors,
while a storm is impending) I am to this day set upon the account of a
blasphemer, a seducer: what not.

I will not say but I have given some former ground of suspicion, both by my
unwary walking, and heedless expressions.

Somewhat I have formerly vented in certain papers, Especially the book
entitled divinity anatomized.
which the weak stomachs of many can hardly digest: and truly I could heartily
wish, that some expressions had been better pondered; and not so untimely
exposed to a public view: though I also believe, that if they were well chewed
(and not so suddenly swallowed without relishing the nature of them) they would
be better digested then they are.

It Is a vanity and sore travail, for a man to unbosom his life in the face of a
confused multitude; and to offer it up to the rude censure of the (no less
mercylesse then) ignorant world.

I clearly see that the understandings of men (for the most part) are too gross
and corpulent, to turn and wind in the nice, and narrow criticismes of truth;
their spirits too dull and plumbous to mount above their wonted notorious, and
thread bare principles.

Whatsoever stands out of their Sphere, or bears, no proximity to their
commonly received maxims; must presently be deemed as blasphemy, and sentenced
to the infernal lake, as most odious and abominable.

That which men call truth to day, they proclaim error to morrow: and that
which now is adjudged and condemned as error, anon is embraced and extolled as
truth. That man certainly is not otherwise, that will regard the uncertain
censures of men.

Truly for my part, as I sit still and behold how the overbusie world is
acted; so I can quietly let them alone, to roll in their confused labyrinth:
but because in many things I have offended; and the froward spirits of men are
not easily courted to a pardon: I have here thought meet, to cite a small
parcel of the most crying errors of the times; and (before I withdraw into my
sweet and safe retires) spend a little time in sweeping them from my door; that
so the evil of error, may not lie in the porch, to disquiet my blessed rest,
and dissturb the sweet slumbers of my silent mansions. Which done, I shall then
as well resolvedly, as quietly bid adeue to the wretched world; and wrap my
self up in my mantle of silence, where I shall refresh my defessed spirit with
the pure naps of divine pleasure, while the beloved is pleased to awaken me
into a more active state.

Priefly then in one word.

I shall linck the most capital errors now extant, in one chain; and expulse
them by a free vote, form having any future commerce with me, or claiming the
least propinquity to my reformed judgment.

A sincere Abdication of certain Tenants, either formerly vented by, or now
charged upon the Author.
I Am daily accused as one that holds these horrid opinions. Viz. That there is
no God; no Devil; no Heaven; no Hell; as one that denies the Scripture, and the
blessed Trinity of the Godhead; that says there is no Sin; or otherwise that
God is the author of Sin; these (among others of less consequence) are chiefly
alleged against me: to all which I reply, as follows --.

And first, of God.
THE fool has said in his heart, Ps. 14.1.
there is no God. It Is the greatest folly and madness in the world to assert or
give credit to it.

The wise man, whose eyes are in his head, cannot harbor such a motion in his
heart.

I wholly banish such conceits from my mind; Act. 17.25, 26, 27, 28.
and on the contrary assert,

That God is that pure and perfect being in whom we ail are, move and live;
that secret blood, breath, and life, that silently courseth through the hidden
veins and close arteries of the whole creation.

Every thing both visible and invisible is fraught with his presence, Col.
1.16, 17. Isa. 45.8. Ps. 65.8, 9, 10. etc. Col. 3.11
and brim'd up with the plentiful distills of a divine life: he is both all and
in all, Isa. 54.16
he truly is, and there is nothing besides him that derives not power from him.

He has but a weak eye, that sees not the sparkling beams of eternity, darting
out their refulgent beauty in and through variety.

What madman or fool will then deny a divine and eternal being.

Where can we go, Ps. 19.1, 2, 3.4. If I descend into Hell, thou art there,
what can we do without him? heaven, hell, earth, sea, sun, moon, stars, all that
you see, all that you possess, is sweetly replenished with the glory of this
pure majesty: every thing receives from him, and gives up to him.

More might be said but I hope this is sufficient to inform any reasonable man,
that I wholly abjure this conceit, or rather deceit of the world.

Now to the next.

Of the Devil.
THe Devil is understood variously amongst men: either grossly, or corpulently
by some, or more subtly and mistically by others.

I am not now either to advance my own, or to fly in the face of any man's
judgment. I am one under censure; it becomes not me to be over-busie in
judging others, till I have cleared my self.

They say, I hold no Devil --

Truly if any thing ever was vented by me, that is infected with the least tang
or tincture of such a principle; I shall heartily deplore my own weakness in
it, and shall be ready to disown it, as the bastard brat of a vain and empty
notion.

And on the contrary do affirm.

That the Devil, A true history and pure mystery Ep. Jude: v. 6. Pet. 2.2.4. 2.
These. 2. v. 3.4. 7.8.1. Sa. chapter 19. ve. 9. Job. 1. 12.2. cor. 12.7. Ep. 2.2. 2
These. 2 9.
who was once an Angel of light, yet not keeping his first state, became a
Den, and receptacle of darkness; reserved in chains from the presence of the
Lord til the great day.

He is that spirit or Mystery of Iniquity, which continually envies God in his
pure ways and workings.

That dark Angel, or Messen ger employed by the Almighty, to effect the
purposes of his wrath and vengeance.

The Prince of the powers of the air; an airy fashionist, that can assume any
form: That can form, Transform him self into an Angel of light.
conform, resoim, and deform at his pleasure: one that chiefly rules in the
hearts of the children of disobedience.

Let the wise judge, and the righteous, gently smite me, if I deserve censure
in what I have spoken.

I proceed --

Of Heaven.
Heaven is the center of the souls bliss and happiness.

I can in no wise deny it, because my conversation is in it. Phil. 3.20.


If there be no heaven, where is our present enjoyment? Or what shall become of
that future happiness which we all expect? 1 Cor. 15 19.


Heaven is the Christians rest, his divine Sabbath, Rev. 14.13.
where he keeps holy day to the Lord.

Did I ever insinuate a denial of heaven? certainly it was because the
darkness of hell covered my understanding.

To live with, John 17.24.
and in God, to be raised up into the nature and life of Christ out of the
somnolencie of flesh, Ephesians. 2.6.
is to live in the heavenly place; this we enjoy partly here, more fully
hereafter.

Of Hell.
THat there is no Hell, I in no wise can imagine, but contrariwise say, --

That Hell is the appointed portion of the The wicked shall be turned into hell,
and all the Nations that forget God. Mat. 24.51. Tophet is prepared.
sinner, where in sinful man is for ever to be tormented from the presence of
the Lord: the inhabitants of whose dark mansions are ever weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth.

Hell is a The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget
God. Mat. 24.51. Tophet is prepared.
Tophet of scorching displeasure; a fire kindled and maintained by the
continued breath of the Almighty, whereby it becomes a dying, life, or rather,
a living death. The breath or life of Eternity augments and increases this
death and misery, which death and hell has a greedy Lake to receive it.

I hope malice it self will consent, that I am not guilty of this blasphemy.

I therefore proceed for my sweet invitations, to my silent feast, solemnize my
devotions thitherward.

Of the Scripture.
CHrist is the Eternal word of the Father, the saving, teaching, enlightening
Oracle of heaven, to whom the Scriptures ascribe all honor and dignity.

I do not remember that in any thing which I have written, or declared, I have
given the captious world the least ground to render me guilty of denying the
Scriptures.

Yet because I am charged with it through weakness and mistake in some, malice
and impudence in others, I give this satisfactory hint.

I own the Scriptures as the inspirations of the Holy Ghost; to holy men of
old: a history, or map of truth, wherein (if our learned Translators have not
deceived us) is contained a true discovery of the dealings of God with his
people in former times, and ages of the world: wherein the life of many a
precious promise is locked up. They are known to be the word of God to those in
whom the spirit declares them; others do but call them, not knowing them to be
so.

They bare Testimony to the great Oracle of Life and Salvation (Christ Jesus.)
Joh. 5.38.39.40.
They are the letter, 2 Timothy 1.13.
and sound of truth. The form (and but the form) of sound words where they are
not corrupted with the false glosses of the learned.

I must embrace them, own them, honor them; yea, I cannot but delight in them,
because they bear the image and feature of that pure word which was from the
beginning, Joh. 1.1.2.
and is to everlasting.

Of sin, or God being the Author of sin.
THe vulgar censure, is, a many headed ill favored monster, it looks many
ways; it favorably entertains, and smoothly invites, and eagerly gapes after
all reports whatsoever.

Some say I hold no sin, and with the same mouth will be apt to conclude that
I make God the author of sin: Here must needs be a gross mistake on the one
hand or other certainly.

I humbly acknowledge my over readiness to present some notions of this nature
to a public view: In Divinity anatomized.
If any things that I have written, will claim relation to these, I here
recede them, and leave them to the mercy, or rather judgment of those to whom
their nakedness and folly are palpably evident: and further say concerning sin,

That sin is that contagious leprosy, Ps. 14.2, 3. Romans 3.10. Prove. 20.9.
which has Epidemically spread it self over the whole earth.

Neither the The righteous sineth seven times a day.
righteous nor the wicked are free from it.

Sin is a transgression of the Law: unity was once the Law of man, he brake the
Unity, run into to the wily intangles of devision and distance, and did plunge
himself into the gulf of sin, the abysss of misery.

The Law or Command of Unity, Exodus 20 ver. 3.
was to know one, and only one (God.) Man will know more then one; know himself
in a state of division; Gen 3.5, 6.
here creeps in sin, and brings down man from his uprightness, under a state of
obliquity.

Man, as man growing from the root of the first Adam, 1 John. 18.10.
(the Earthly-fallen principle) is nothing else but a massy heap of sin, a
cursed lump of foul impiety, and must certainly expect to receive the wages of
iniquity.

Sin makes every thing a curse and bitterness to us.

Were it not for this sin (or breach of the Law of Unity) all things would be
sweetened with blessing, yea, blessed with a Divine sweetness.

Death it self, the bitterest potion of sorrow, would be nectarized with a
pleasant dulcitude, which (through sin) brings with it, 1 Cor: 15.56.
(and bears in it) an unpleasing mordacity.

In fine, it is sin that corrupts our judgments, stains our natures, burdens
our spirits, and betrays our souls into the snares of endless, and easless
Torment.

Again,

This being the loathsome nature of sin, who will dare to be so impudent as to
affirm, That God is the Author of it? it is true, the Scripture in many places
seem to countenance such a thing, if not wisely and soberly interpreted.

But it is not my work, as I said before, to condemn any, before I have cleared
my self: it is enough for me to exonerat my spirit of that load which is laid
upon me by a fair recession of the Error I stand charged with.

Let all therefore know, 1 Ioh: 1: 5.6.
That I look upon God to be a single object of pure light, whose glorious
nature cannot be touched with the least tincture of dark. ness; evil or sin
may not, cannot He is of more pure eyes than to behold inquitie.
approach his perfectly pure presence.

He is good (the good it self) he does good, Mat. 19: 17.
nothing but good, al good: good is God, there is nothing good but himself.

Men, the best of men, things, the most excellent of things, they are all
vanity and a lie, worse then vanity, vexation of Spirit.

God, the Unity is good: all virtue, and true worth is bundledup in it.
Contrary wise -- The Devil, division, distance, sin, they are naught, stark
naught; evil, nothing but evil, continually evil.

The Devil is a lie, believe him not; sin is a lie; all that you see below
besides God, it is a lie, froth, emptiness, wind and confusion.

God has nothing to do with any thing that existeth not in himself, or is
divided from himself: he is not the Author of division: Col. 3.11
he is all one in all variety: the divider is the Devil, God knows him not: the
division is sin, God owns it not.

I say not then that God is the Author of sin.

Lastly, Of the Trinity.
GOD is one simple, single; uncompounded glory: nothing lives in him or flows
from him, but what is his pure individual self.

Unity is the Father, the Author and begetter of all things; or (if you will)
the Grandmother in whoseintrinsecal womb, variety lies occult, till time
orderly brings it forth.

Christ says of himself, Ion. 14.9.
I and the Father am one: and the Apostle says, 1 Ioh. 5.7.
there are three that bare record in Heaven; the Father, the Word, and Spirit,
and these three are one. Without controversy, great is the mystery.

In the multiplicity or variety they are three, but in the unity or primary
state, all one, but one.

The Father is not the Son, the Son is not the Spirit, as multiplied into form
and distance; I may lawfully and must necessarily maintain three: -- but then
again trace them by their lineal descent into the womb of eternity, revolve to
the center, and where is the difference?

The unity or Father in it self, is a massy heap of an undiscovered glory,
which branches out it self into an orderly variety, and so admits of various
names and titles: Father, Son, Spirit, three in name, but all one in nature.

Unity without variety, is like the Genesis 2.21.
man in the Garden, solitarily slumbering in its own profound retires; having
nothing to delight in but it self.

The Father will not therefore be without the Son, Genesis 2.18.
without the Spirit: It is not fit the Man should be alone.

But then again to contemplate variety without Unity, is to be overmuch
expensive upon the weakness, and to set up the woman without the man, which are
not indeed two, but one in Christ.

I love the Unity, as it orderly discovers it self in the Trinity: I prize the
Trinity, as it bears correspondency with the Unity; Let the skillful Ordipus
unfold this.

FINIS.

