A TREATISE OF THE BEST KIND OF CONFESSORS, By which Priests in England may
see how they may be, and lay Catholics see how they may choose the best kind of
Confessors.

Composed by the most Reverend Father in God, RICHARD Bishop of Chalcedon,
Pastor of the Catholic in England.

1. Thimothe 5. v. 17. The Priests that rule well let them be esteemed worthy
of duble honor. Can. Qui vult de Poenitent. D. 6. who will confess, let him
confess, To the best Priest he can. Printed An. 1651.

A TREATISE OF THE BEST KIND OF CONFESSORS. Presented to the virtuous
Seminarist, and Regular Priests, and Catholics in England.
REVEREND PRIESTS, both Seminarists, and Regulares, and beloved Lay Catholics
in England, my intention in composing this sim all Treatise of the best kind
of Confessors, is not to disparrage any kind of Confessor allowed and approved
by the Catholic Church, and much less to abridge any of their Faculties, or
liberty to hear the Confessions, and absolve whomsoever come to them: but
leaving all Priests with all faculties and liberty of confessing, which they
have, only to show such Priests, as desire, by being Confessors, to procure
the greater glory of God, the greater good and merit to their own souls, and
the greater spiritual profit to the souls of their Penitents, what kind of
Confessors they ought to be, for to procure this. And in like manner, my
intention is not, to abridge in any sort the liberty which Lay Catholics
have to confess to what kind of approved Priest they will or to put them to
more charges of maintayning Priests, or to bring them to more danger of the
laws by using such as I propose to them: but leaving them with all the
liberty to confess, to what kind of approved Priest they will, and to
contribute no more to maintenance of more Priests, then they do, only to
propose unto them, what kind of Priests are best for them, for the greater
glory of God, and greater spiritual good of their souls, leaving it (as I
said) free to their choice, whether they will use them, or no, or contribute
particularly to their maintenance, or no. By which means, they may have both
such Conf^ssors as they have, and also better ki^de of C^^fessors then they
have had almost these hundred years. For it has ever seemed to me a
lamentable case of English Catholics, that whereas Catholics in Catholic
countries, and also in Zeland, and Holland, have two kinds of approved
Confessors, to wit, such as huue pastoral Charge of the souls of their
Penitents, and such also, as have not that pastoral charge, but only lawful
power to absolve them, Catholics in Englad (almost these hundred Catholics
in Engla^nd almost these hundred years have wanted Priests with charge of
souls
years) have had but one kind, to wit, Confessors without pastor all charge
os souls, and have wanted such Confessors, as should have had such charge of
their souls, which (as I shall show clearly) were the far better kind of
Confessors, and more needful to Catholics, especialy of the peorcr sorry, who
are not able to maintain peculiar Priests, and yet for whose good, Confessors
were equally instituted by God. And howsoever some will deny, that Confessors
with pastoral charge of souls, are better for the good of Penitents, then
Confessors, who have no such charge none can deny but that it is better for the
good of Penitents, that there be Confessors with charge of souls, then that
there be none; and that there be more kinds of Confessors, which they may
choose, then that there be but one kind, especially when they may have them
both without any restraint of their liberty, to use whether they will, and
with no more danger or charges to them. And particulerly, this will be better
for the poerer sort of Catholics, who shall hereby have such Confessors, as
shall be bound to administer Sacraments unto them, in what danger of sickness,
or war soever, which sacraments sometimes they have wanted, for want of sueh
Con^^ssors. For my part, I am fully of opinion of the Catechisine ad Parochos,
cap. De Poenitentiae Sacramento, sect. 32. eomposed by order of the Council of
Trent, and set forth by authority of the Sea Apostolic, that what holiness,
piety and religion, remains in the Church, is in great part to be attributed
to Confession, and therefore I make this Treatise of the best kind of
Confessors, and intend (God willing) to make the like Treatise of the best
Penitent. Perhaps there never was in the Church, more frequenting of
Confession, then of late has been, but whether, it be for the fault of
Confessors, or of Penitents, or of both, there does not appear such amendment
of life, as justly may be expected of the greater frequentation of this
sacrament, and which (without doubt) it would effect, if it were frequented in
such sorry, as it should be.

FIRST CHAPTER. The trw state of the question, Concerning the best kind af
Confessors, plainly set down.
THERE be two kinds of lawful Confessors, the one has pastoral charge of
the souls of his Penitents, the other, has no such charge. S. Bonauenturae d^
pauper. Christi p. 422.. S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 188. art. 4. Bellar. l. 2. d^
Monachis. c. 45. Rodriques to. 1. q. 35. art. ^.
Now the question is, whether of these two kinds of Confessors, is, (of it
self) the better, that is, more for the glory of God, more for the spiritual
good, and merit of the Confessor himself, and also for the greater spiritual
profit of the Penitents souls I say (of it self) because I consider these
d^fferent functions, only in themselves, abstracting from the different
persons, in which they are, and also fron their diferent qualities, of
learning, virtue discretion, and such like, or (if you will) supposing these
two different kinds of Confessors, to be equal, or not much unequal, for
learning, virtue, discretion, and such, like qualities, fit to be in the
persons of lawful Confessors. And these two different Confessors Inwhat all
good Confessors agree.
agree in that, that both are approved of the Church, both have lawful power
or authority to absolve their Penitents, and the absolution of both is valid
and undoubted, and also both ought to receive their functions, and. execute
them for the love of God, and good of their Penitents; but they differ in many
other and weighty points, as shall hereafter appear, for which the one kind
is justly to be preferred before the other.

SECOND CHAPTER. That the comparing of the said two different kinds of
Confessors, ought not to be offensive to any good Priest, or Catholic, but
rather grateful.
THat the comparing of the two said kinds of Confessors, ought not to be
offensive to any good. Priest or Catholic, is evident. First, because (as I
said) I compare I.
only the said different functions in themselves, not touching any persons or
state of Priests. Secondly, because II.
it much imports both for Priests and Catholics to know what kind of
Confessors are the best, that both, they may become the best kind of
Confessors, and these, use the best. Thirdly, because Divines III.
S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 187. art. 8.
usually compare the states of Curats, and regulars, without offense of any:
of which comparison, thus writes Suarez: tom. 3. de relig. lib. 1. c. 18. It
is blameless, if it be wisely and modestly handled, and it be Comparison of
Confessors, bess, offensive then the comparison of Curats and Regulars.
considered, that the comparison is made, not between their persons or descrts,
but between their sta^es and conditions, or, as S. Thomas speaks, the
comparison is made for the kind of the work, not for the charity of the
worker, as Christ Luke ^^ prefers the contemplative life, before the active.
And yet this comparison of Curats and Regulars, is not made for the greater
good of a third, as we compare the said different Confessors for the greater
good of the Penitents, but merely to show, which of their states is in it self,
better and perfecter. If therefore this comparison of different kinds of
Confessors, be handled discreetly and modestly (as it shall be of me) it will
be more blameles, then that of Curats and Regulars. Fourthly, because IV.
all sorts of Priests in Countries that are not Catholic (as England is not) or
in Countries, Where there is great scarcitye of Priests, as in the Indyes, are
capable of both these functions of Confessors; and some Regulars S. Thom. 2. 2
q. 184. art. 7.
are, even in Catholic Countries, and where there is no scarcity of Priests,
Confessors with charge of souls, as others are withont such charge. And if
Regular Priests in England, will undertake the burden, they may have pastoral
charge of their Penitents souls, as well as others, Fifthly, because no man
careful of his health, would be offended to have showed unto him, what kind
of Surgeon or Physician, to wit, a Gallenist, or Paracelsian, is better for
him, and why should any Penitent careful of the good of his soul, take it
ill, that the like should be showed to him of his spiritual Physician, who is
his Confessor? If therefore any take it ill, that it be showed, what kind of
Confessor is the best for the glory of God, and good of souls, he shows
therereby, that he is not desirous of the greater glory of God, and greater
spiritual profitt of souls, of which I hope no good Priest, or Catholic in
England, is guilty. Lastly because I, being Pastor of the Catholics in
England, as P. Urban VIII. in his Breue to me An. 1626. in expres terms
calls me, ought to show them all the best means I can, for the good of their
souls, and in doing so, none can be justly offended, for I do but may duty,
and what I am bound to do. And also (though unworthy) I am one of those of
whom our Savior said: who hears you, hears me, who despises you,
despises me.

THIRD CHAPTER. That it much imports, both Priests, and Lay Catholics, to
know, which is the best kind of Confessors.
1. THat it greatly imports Priests, for to know, which is the best kind of
Confessors, is evident. First, because thereby they may know, what kind of
Confessors are most pleasing to God, do merit more to themselves and do also
more good to their Penitents. Secondly, because Priests are dispe^sers of the
mysteries of God, and it imports them to know, who are the best dispensers of
such great matters. Thirdly because Confessors are spiritual Physicians of
their Penitents, and it much imports Physicians, both for themselves, and for
their Patients, to be the most able to cure their Patients,

2. That it also greatly imports Penitents, to know who are the best kind of
Confessors, is likewise evident. First, because (as is said) Confessors are
their spiritual Physicians, who must cure their spiritual diseases. Secondly,
because the Church counseleth her children to choose the best kind of Confessor
they can, De Paenitent. D. 1. c. 88. and d. 6. c. 1. where Navarre in C.
Placuit, says: The meaning of the Canon is, to counsel, that by what way
soever a Penitent can justly, he should seek the best Priests. See him there.
Quod autem. Thirdly, because (as is a foresaid) the Church professes, that one
of the best means she has to keep men from vice, and to drive them to virtue,
is Confession and surely the best means to the best Confession, is the best
kind of Confessor, as the best means to be cured is to get the best
Physician.

FORTH CHAPTER. That a Confessor, who has Pastoral charge of the souls of
Penitents, is better, then one, who has no such charge, proved by their
different Institutors.
THe first proof, that a Confessor, who has pastoral charge of souls, is,
caeteris paribus, better, then one who has no such charge, I will take from
their different Institutors. For Christ himself immediately instituted
Confessors with pastoral charge of souls, as is evident out of S. John chapt.
20. v. 23. where he says to his Apostles, and in them to their successors.
Take the Holy Ghost, whose sins you shall remitt they are remitted; and whose
you shall retain, they are retained. Now the Apostles were, and their
successors are, Confessors with pastoral charge of souls. But that Christ
immediately instituted Confessors without charge of souls, we neither find in
scripture, nor in Tradition: but these were instituted by the Church, as S.
Thomas teaches in these words 22. q. 188. art. 4. It was requisite, that beside
the ordinary Prelates, others should be assumed to such offices. Where he does
not say, that Confessors without charge of souls were necessary, but only
requisite, nor that they were immediately instituted by Christ, as ordinary
Prelates are, but assumed, to wit, by the Church. Secondly, because Christ
instituted no ^ther Confessors but the Apostles and the 72. Disciples: but both
these, doubtless had charge of souls. And surely, that kind of Co^fessor is
(of himself, and caeteris paribus) better, who is immediately instituted by God,
and with whom God will more concur, then that kind of Confessor, who is not
so instituted. For it cannot be doubted, but that he will more concur with
such kind of Confessors, as himself immediately instituted, the^ with such, as
are instituted by others.

FIFTH CHAPTER. That a Confessor with charge of souls, is better, then one
without such charge, proved by the different ends of their Institution.
THat a Confessor with charge of souls, is (of himself and caeteris paribus)
better, then one without such charge, I prove by the different ends for which
they were instituted For Confessors with charge of souls, were instituted for
themselves, as necessary officiers for the remission of men's sins, as is
evident by Christ's words cited in the former chapter. For Christ having
instituted the Sacrament of Penance, he must needs institute purposely
officers for the administering thereof, as were the Apostles and their
Successors. But Confessors without charge of souls, were not instituted
purposely and for themselves; but by accident, and for some other cause, to
wit, as S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 188. art. 4.
says, in the place cited in the former chapter, for the multitude of the
faithful, and for the difficulty of finding sufficient persons for all people.
And the same say Albertus Magnus, and S. Bonauenture, cited by Dionysius
Carthusianus in 4. d. 17. q. 6. and it is evident. But doubtless, those
Confessors, are (of themselves, and caeteris paribus) better, that is, more for
the glory of God, and good of souls, who are instituted immediately by God
himself, and purposely for themselves, as proper ministers of the Sacrament of
penance, then those, who are instituted of the Church, nor yett nether
purposely for themselves, but for other occasions, and if which occasions had
not been, would never have been instituted, as none such were instituted til
about some four hundred years ago.

SIXTH CHAPTER. That a Confessor with charge of fouls, is better, then one
without it, proved by Gods binding to Confess to the one, and not to the others.
1. THe third proof, that a Confessor with charge of the soul of his
Penitents, is better, that is, more for the glory of God, and good of souls,
then a Confessor without such charge, I will take from that God binds to
confess to the one, and not to the other. For that God has commanded to
confess our sins to some kind of Confessors, I suppose as a point of Faith.
And he having instituted Confessors with charge of souls, and none without such
charge, as I showed before, his command must needs be understood of Confessors
with charge of souls, and not of others. For the Council of Trent. sess. 14. c.
5. and all Catholics, do infer, that because Christ instituted the Apostles
and their successors, Judges of sins, for to remitt retain them, therewithal
he bound men to confess their sins to them, because they could not judge of
whar they knew not. But he did not bind us to confess to such, as himself did
not institute judges of sins. And hereupon Sotus in 4. did. 18. q. 4. art. 2.
says The Canon (of yeatly Confession to ones proper Priest who has care of
souls) did but add the Gods command to Confess to ones proper Priest.
yearly time to the divine command. And it would never have restrained
confession to a proper Priest, unless it had understood, that it was a divine
precept, and always observed in the Church. And he adds ibide^: That this
restraint to co^fess to ones proper Priest, is eua^gelicall. So plainly he
says, that to confess to ones proper Priest who has charge of souls, is
divine, and Evangelical. Bellarmin also lib. 3. de Poenitent. c. 13.
ans^ering to this objection of Calvin: the obligation of Confession is but
humain; because it was made in the Council of Lateran, says; That the
Council did only determine the time: and if all that command of confessing to
ones proper Priest, be divine, beside the time, then obligation if self to
confess to ones. Proper Priest, is divine. And if it be a divine precept to
confess to ones proper Priest; who has charge of souls, and not to confess to
an other, who has not such charge of souls, surely it is of itself better to
confess to him, then to any other, because in confessing to him, we do an act
of obedience to Gods command, which we do not, in confession to others, to
whomhe commands us not to confess. And obedience is so grateful to God, as
he prefers a 1. Reg^m. c. 13.
it before sacrifice. And it were a marvel, if any who exhort to obedience
to man, should dehorte from obedience to God.

2. If any object, that if it be a divine precept, to confess to ones proper
Priest, that then it will follow, that cuer more we must confess to him, and
never to others. I answer, that this will not follow, because though God
commands us to co^fess to our proper Priests, yet he fobiddeth not us to
confess to others, when there is just cause: but it will follow, that we must
not confess to others without just cause, as divines Navarre man.
teach. For divine affirmative precepts, do bind always, praelud. 9. Sotus
l. 10. de Iure 43. arr. 1. Azon. tom. 2. lib. 7. c. 4. Gamach. de Poe nit. c.
18.
but not for always, to wit, when there is just cause to the contrary. And
which is just cause, and where there is just causs, pertains to the Church to
determine, and to her determination we ought to stand, she being the pillar and
ground of truth, and taught all truth by the Holy Ghost. And that she had just
cause to dispense herein, appears by the foresaid words of S. Thomas, that
the multitude of Penitents was too great for to confess only to their proper
Priests, and that it was hard to find sufficient proper Priests for all
places. In which cases (doubless) the affirmative divine precept of confessing
to proper Priests who have charge of the souls of their Penitents, does not
bind.

SEVENTH CHAPTER. That is better for Penitents to confess to Priests who have
charge of their souls, then to there is, proved by the ends for which God
instituted Conf^ssion.
1. THe fourth proof, that it is better for the Penitent, to consess to a
Priest, who has charge of his soul, then to others, I take from the ends, for
which God instituted Confession, of sins. For one especial end, for which he
instituted Confession, was, that such as had charge of souls, might thereby
better know the estate of the souls, whereof they have charge (as corporalle
Physicians know the estate of their Patients by their telling it) and thereby
might be the better able to help them. And to this purpose, it is said Proverb.
27. Diligently know the face of thy sheep: whereupon S. Thomas opusc. 18. c. 4.
says; That belongs A principal end of Confession, is to be well known of
the Pastor.
to care of souls, which is said Proverb. 27. Diligently know the face of thy
sheep, which especially is done, by hearing Conf^ssions. And Sotus in 4. d. 18.
q. 4. art. 2. To Confess to ones proper priest is evangelical and profitable
to the souls of the people, that the Pastor may know the sheep, as Christ
says, and be known by the^. Ibid. Among the laws of feeding, that is an
especial one, which is exercised in the sacrament of penance. And d. 20. q.
1. art 5. Seeing the greatest knowledge and judgment of the flock, is gotten by
sacramental Confession, in this sacrament especially, it is not convenient,
that it be free for every one to go to what Priest he will, but that every one
be bound to his proper Priest, so as he confess but to him, or to another, by
his leave. And lib. 10. de Iure etc. q. 3. art. 1. It is the nature, care, and
fidelity of a good Pastor, that he and his sheep know well one an other. Azor.
tom. 2. l. 7. c. 4. A Pastor knows his sheep, and leads them to pasture,
and sheep know the voice of their Pastor. A pastor all so must go before his
flock, and know the face of his sheep. Neither does it only belong to a Pastor
to offer sacrifice for his sheep, to preach and give them the sacraments, but
also he must watch upon his flock, visit his sheep and know their faces. Well
said Solomon; Diligently know the face of thy sheep. Bellarmin. l. 3. de
Poenitent. c. 12. Pastors, by Confession, know the diseases of their sheep, and
by that means, can apply convenient remedies to every one in particular, and
also, in public sermons, reprehend those vices, to which they know their flock
to be most subject. And Henriquez de Poenit. l. 2. c. 16. Curats, for to know
the face of their sheep, may compel them to fulfill the precepts of yearly
Confession and Communion. See Gamach de Paenitent. c. 18. n. 59. I add also.
that the Council of Trent. sess. 25. c. 1. says. By divine precept, all who
have charge of souls, must know their sheep. And the Extrauagant C. Saluatos:
Pastors must see the faces of every one. Out of all which it is evident, that
by commandment of God, all Pastors must diligently know the faces of their
sheep; and also, that this diligent knowledge is chiefly gotten by hearing
their Confessions, so that, one end of the Penitents confession, is to let his
Pastor know the face and estate of his sheep. Which end they fulfill, who
confess to their Pastor; and they frustrate, who confess not to him, but to
others. And doubtless, they do better, who fulfill so cheef an end of
confession, then they, who frustrate it.

2. An other end of Confession, is shame or confusion of our selves, which God
would have us to undergo., both for to restrain us thereby from sinning, and
also for to make thereby some satisfaction to him, whom we dishonored and
disgraced by our sinning. And commonly men have greater shame, to confess to
their proper Priest, with whom they usually converse, then to others, whom they
choose of themselves, and either live not with them, or seldom see them. And
shame in Conftssion, is a great part of penance, and of satisfaction for our
sins, and a great bridle to committ them no more. P. Shame a great part of
Penance.
Innocent 4. C. Etsi animarum: Shame is a great part of Penance. P. Benedict.
C. Inter cunctos: Shame is a great part of penance. The Catechism ad Parochos
cap. de Paenitent. sect. 32, Shame of confessing, does as it were bridle the
desire of offending, and withold wickedness. And Bellarmin. lib. 3. de
Paenitent. c. 12. The shame which we suffer in confessing, is a part of
satisfaction. So that, by confessing where less shame is, we diminish one great
end of Confession, which is to bridle us from sin, and also one part of the
sacrament, which is satisfaction. And surely it is better to fulfill a good
end of confession, and one part of the sacrament of Penance, then any way to
diminish them. And this shame is like to a better potion, which a good Penitent
should not refuse for the greater good of his soul, no more then he would
refuse a bitter potion for the greater health of his body. Nay it will bring
him glory before any virtuous Confessor, and before God and his Angels, who
What shaine brings glory. Ecclesiastici 4. v. 25.
rejoice at the repentance of a sinnar. For (as the scripture says) there is
a shame or confusion which brings glory. And this we see in S. Augustine, who
is most admired for his public Confession of his sins, and that not to a
Priest, but to all the world, and to all and to all posterity till the worlds
end. And besides, true contrition Love of God, makes bitter, swett.
for the love of God, will turn all this bitterness into sweetness, and make
all God his yoke, swett, and his burden, light.

EIGHT CHAPTER. That it is better to confess to a Priest, who has charge of
the Penitents soul, then to an other, proved by the Judgment of the Church.
1. THe fifth proof, that it is better to confess to a Priest, who has charge
of the Penitents soul, then to an other, who has not that charge, I will take
from the judgment of the holy Church. which in that great General Council of
Lateran under P. Innocent 3. and after, by diverse grave and virtuous Popes, The
Church commands to confess to proper Priests but not to others. P. Innocent 3.
has for many hundred years commanded all Catholics of either sex, to
confess (at least once a year) to their proper Priest who has charge of
their souls, but never commanded them to confess to such as had no charge of
their souls. Every Christian (says the foresaid Council) of other sex, after
they are come, to years of discretion, shall truly confess all their sins to
their proper Priest, at least once a year. P. Martin 5. (in his Bull P. Martin
5.
related by P. Adrian 6. de Confess. q. 5. and others) we will, that those who
confess to Friars, shall never the less be bound, to confess, at least once a
year, to their Parish Priest, as the great Council ordains. And P. Sixtus P
Sixtus 4.
IV. in extrauagante, vices; de pace and treuga, admonishes Regulars, that
they forbear to preach, that Parishioners are not bound to confess, at least
at Easter, to their proper Priests, because they are bound thereto by law. And
that the foresaid Council, by a proper Priest, means one, A proper Priest,
has charge of souls.
that has charge of souls, is manifest. First, because P. Martin 5. in his
words cited expounds it of a Parish Priest, who (doubtless) has charge of
souls. Secondly, because what Priest has not charge of a Penitent, is not his
proper Priest, but is common to all Penitents whose confessions he hears.
Thirdly, because as Sotus says 4. d. 18. q. 4. art. 2. It is an abuse, to call
a delegate, a Proper Priest. For a proper Priest, is taken but one way, because
a Proper Priest is the same, that ordinary, to wit, he to whom, by his proper
office and jurisdiction, belongs the charge of souls, and is judge in the
Court of conscience. And again: It is One shing to be a proper Priests, an
other to be lawful.
one thing, to be lawful, an other to be proper, who is proper, is ordinary:
but lawful, every one is, who can work either by his own authority, or by
commission. And the like has To let instruction is Sacerdotum lib. 3. c. 13.
And Estius in 4. D. 17.. 13. says. There is but one acception of proper
Priest, who has proper and ordinary authority to absolve him, in respect of
whom he is called proper that is, to whose charge, each one is properly
subject. Lastly, because to call such as hear confessions without charge of the
souls of their Penitents, proper Priests, was but devised for to show, that
Regulars did not hear confessions against the foresaid Canon of the Council of
Lateran, which shift is needless, for though they be not proper Priests, they
hear confessions by leave of the Pope, and Bishops, and therefore no more offend
against that Canon, then such Priests do, who hear Confessions by leave of the
Parish Priest. Moreover P. Vrbain 2. in Canon. Placuit, P. Vrbain 2.
de Paenitentia D. 6. ordains thus: we will, that no Priest admit to
confession any, that is under the charge of an other, unless it be for the
ignorance of him, to whom he confessed before. And P. Benedict. P Benedict. XI.
XI. Can. inter cunctos: We stirctly command, that Friars carefully admonish
them whose Confessions they hear, and exhort in their sermons, to confess to
their Priests, at least once a year, affirming that (doubtless) ^his is
Doubtless, profitable.
profitable to their souls. And this seems to have been the intent of the
Council of Trent, which sess 25. c. 13. commands, that where Parochial
Parish to be appointed. The Council of Trent would have confessions to be made
to Parish Priests.
Churches have no certain bounds, nor their Rectores certain people, whom to
govern, but indifferently minister sacraments to such as demand them, the holy
Synod commands Bishops, for the greater saifty of souls committed to them,
that the people being divided into certain peculiar Parishes, they appoint to
every one their perpetual and proper Parish Priest, who may know them, and of
whom alone, they may lawfully receive sacraments, or provide some other better
way, as the condition of the place requires. And sess. 14. c. 9. Dioceses and
Parishes were most reasonably divided, and proper Pastors given to each flock,
and Rectors of inferior Churches, who should have every one care of his sheep,
that Ecclesiastical order be not confounded.

2. Neither is the foresaid Canon of the Lateran Council abrogated. For allbeit
some say, that P. Leo X. has declared, that who confess to Mendicants, do
satisfy the obligation of the said Canon; yett that declaration does not
abrogate the said Canon, but rather shows, that it binds still, by saying,
that men by confessing to Mendicants, See Council. Tride^t. sess. 14. Can. 58.
Sixtus 4. and Martin 5. supra.
do satisfy the obligation of that Canon, and only shows, that the
Mendicants hearing of Confessions by the Popes leave, is not contrary to the
obligation of that Canon, as other Priests hearing Confessions by leave of the
Parish Priest, are not contrary to the same. See more of this in Navarre in C.
Placuit D. 6. n. 121. Gamach de Paenitent. c. 18. Henriquez de Paenitent. l. 2.
c. 16. And though the said Canon or law were abrogated, and did not bind now
at all, that would no way weaken the force of my argument, taken from the
judgment of the Church. For she having both by a General Council, and also
by Bulls of diverse Popes, seuerly commanded Catholics to confess to Priests
who have charge of their souls, and never commanded them to confess to such as
have no such charge, but only permitted them so to do by reason (as S. Thomas
said) of the too great multitude of Penitents, of the insufficiency of some
Priests who have charge of souls, she clearly shows, that she judges it (of
it self) better for Catholics, to confess to such priests as have charge of
their souls, then to those who have not that charge. For (doubteless) she
judges that better for her children to do, which she so often, so severely,
and for so many ages has commanded, them to do, then that, which she never
commanded them to do, nor perhaps would permit them to do, if the too great
multitude of penitents, and insufficiency of many Priests who have charge of
souls, did not force her to permit it.

NINTH CHAPTER. That it is better for Penitents, to confess to a Priest, who
has charge of their souls, then to others, proved by the judgment of those,
who were Confessors of Penitents without charge of souls.
1. IT is so evident, that (of itself) it is better for Penitents to confess to
Priests, who have charge of souls, then to others, that even the chiefest of
those, who were confessors of Penitents without charge of their souls, do
acknowledge it to be better. S. Bonauenture a Doctor of S Bonaue^ture.
the Church, and General of the Franciscans, writes thus in 4. D. 17. q. 2.
n. 108. I believe Ever good.
that if the Parish Priest be fit, that it is ever good, that the Paenitent be
remitted to him, of whomsoever he is heard. And number. 105. wherefore it is to be
believed, that all Paris hioners whenever, and Are bound.
how often soever they confess to such (Mendicants) are bound to confess to
their proper Priests, if they be good and sufficient, and exact it, and will not
otherwise be content. And this I say, at least once a year. Ibidem: And
therefore it Wholesome Counsel.
is wholesome Counsel, for all these to be remitted to their proper Priests,
that if they be not content with that Confession, they be heard again.
Angelus, Vicar Angelus.
General of the said Franciscans, and Commissary to Pope Sixtus IV. in his
Sum, Verbo, Confessio, 4. number. 33. It is I after for many causes.
safer to confess to our own Priest or Prelate, then to an other, for many
deceits and vnleawfulnesses, which are in other Deputies. Wherefore I allways
advise, that none leave his own Parish Priest, for an other Deputy, unless it
clearly appear, that he whom he has chosen, be of good conscience and
sufficient skill, and that more, then his own Parish Priest. For if there be
any defect in his own Parish Priest, the Penitent is more excused in
confessing to him then to an other, because superiors in appointing him, do
seem to approve him for sufficient. Scotus Scotus
the chiefest divine among the same Franciscans in 4. d. 5. q. 6. says. We
should always choose that (Confessor) caeteris paribus, Caeteris par^bus.
to whom that belongs by office. And Confessor by office, none is, but he,
who has charge of souls. Richardus de Media villa, Richardus de media villa.
an other great Franciscan Doctor, in 4. D. 17. q. 1. Allbeit in some cases it
were better for one, to choose a Confessor as be would, then to be bound to
confess to his ordinary, yett it were not profitable Not profitable for the
Co^munity. S. Thomas.
for the Communitye, that it should be lawful for every one to choose his
Confessor.

2. S. Thomas, an other Doctor of the Church, and chefest Doctor of the
Dominicans, in Supplemento q. 8. art. 5. ad 4. writes thus: Werefore it is God.
good, that he, who hears Confessions by auctority of the Bishop, do
persuade the Penitent, to confess to his proper Priest. Sotus a Sotus.
grave and learned Dominican, in 4. D. 20. q. 1. art. 5. The supreme Pastor of
the Church cannot suficiently provide for the whole Church, unless he give
Bishops to all churches. Wherefore, seeing the chiefest notice and judgment of
the flock, is gotten by sacramental confession, it is requisite, that
especially Requisite.
in this Sacrament, it be not free for every one to runn to every Priest, but
that every one be bound to his own, that he confes^ not, but to him, or with
his leave. Nauar. Nauar.
a Canon Regular, and famous Casuist. Council. 15. de Paenitentia: I should
thinck, that he did wisely, who (at the hour of W^sely.
death) procures himself to be absolved of his Parish Priest there present, or
of his superior, rather then of others. Gabriel Gabriel. Trithemius. Posseuinus.
also a Regular in 4. D. 17. q. 2 art. 3. If all be a like, it is better to
confess to ones proper Priest, as Doctors commonly hold, as S. Bonauenture, and
Angelus in Summa, Better for many causes.
Confessio 3.. 34. for many causes, and avoiding of dangers.

3. Layman, a great writer, Laiman Good of the Church
and Jesuit l. 5. tract. 6. c. 33. Seeing it is instituted for the common good
of the Church, and convenient government, that all faithful should confess to
their proper Priest, that must not be limited or restrained for private
commodity, by private interpretation of Doctors, espetially because many by
this means, falsely pretending impediments of confession, may withdraw
themselves from the jurisdiction of their Pastor. Reginald Reginald.
an other Jesuit lib. 1. n. 61. Well adds Navarre, that he shall do wisely,
who (at the Wisely.
hour of death) his Parish Priest or Superior being present, procures to be
absolved of him, rather then of others. And as Barbosa writes in Remiss.
Barbosa.
Council. Tridentinisess. 14. c. 7. Navarre Consil. Is. sub titulo Paenitentiae,
Sayrus (an English Benedictin) Sairus.
dec^s. 21. sub eodem titulo, Reginald. l. 2. n. 60. say, that he should do
wisely, who if his Parish Priest or Superior be present, procured himself to be
absolved of him at the hour of death, rather then of an other. And himself
allegat. 25. number. 51. says: It is better to confess to ones Pastor Be^ter, at
the hour of death.
at the hour of death, then to an other. And it if it be both wiser and
better, at the hour of death, to confess, to ones Pastor or Superior, then to
an other, it is much better and wiser to do so in life time. Because it is
certain, as the Council of Trent, hash declared sess. 17. c. 7. that, at the
hour of death, all Priests can absolve any Penitent from any sins or
Censures, which all Priests cannot do, nay few Priests can do, in time of
life, and therefore their absolution is not so certain in time of life, as in
time of death. If therefore it be better and wiser to be absolved of ones Parish
Priest or Superior, at time of death, when the absolution by any Priest
whatsoever, from what sins or censures soever, is most certain, much better
and wiser it is, to procure to be absolved of him in life time, when all
Priests absolution is not so certain, as it is in time of death.

TENTH CHAPTER. That it is better for Penitents, to Confess to Priests, who
have charge of their souls, then to others, proved by the General practice of
those Priests, who are Confessors of Penitents, without charge of their souls.
1. THe seventh proof, that (of it self) it is better for Penitents, to confess
to such Priests, as have charge of their souls, then to others, shall be taken
from the General practice of such Priests, as are Confessors of Penitents
without charge of souls. For they do not confess it in words only (as we saw
in the former Chapter) but much more in practice and indeeds, because they
suffer not any of their own compagnies, upon any occasion, to confess to whom
they will, but only to such as they appoint for them. The Gloss. in Clement.
Dudum. Religious men, according to the statuts of their orders, must confess to
their Prelates. Suarez tomo 4. de relig. l. 2. c. 16. Certain General leave to
confess to who^ one will, Would destroy religions.
it is, that by ordinary right, and without dispensation, regulars cannot
confess to others, then to such Confessors, as are appointed for them by their
superiors. Ibid. n. 6. General leave, to choose ones confessor, would tend to
great detriment of religions, for it may be an occasion of dissolution and
relaxation of religious discipline. And number. 7. By such general license and
ordinary use, religious discipline would be plainly overthrown. Henriquez l.
7. c. 22.. 4. The Society of Jesus keeps that privilege, that none, without
the superiors leave, can choose a Confessor beside him, who is appointed. And
Gregory the 13. granted this to the Society. Layman l. 5. tract. 6. c. 10. n.
20. By their proper statuts, it is not permitted, to religious to confess out
of their own order to any other, but to whom the Superior appoints. And
Rodriquez to. ^ q. 62. art. 4. and 5. recites the Bulls of Popes, which
Jesuits, Franciscans, Augustins, and other Religious orders, have procured,
that none of theirs, even in time of Jubilees, may confess to any, but to such
as their Superiors appoint. And headdeth: This is very good and necessary. And
Petigian in Summa D. 17. q. ^. art. 3. affirms, that there is excommunication
latae sententiae, that no religious, even by virtue of a Bull, do conf^ss to
any other, then to him, who is appointed by his superior.

2. And does such great good come to religious companies, by confessing to
none, but to such, as their superiors appoint for them: and would no good come
to the holy compagnie of Christ, the Catholic Church, if her children
confessed to such as have charge of their souls. Would such great harm come to
religious compagnies, as their utter d^solution and relaxation of religious
discipline by general leave to confess to what approved Priest they would, and
will no hurt, no relaxation of ecclesiastical discipline come by the like
leave granted to all Catholics? Are religious companies, and Christ's company,
of so different nature, as that what is greatly good for the one, is naught for
the other? Neither does it satisfye, which Suarez says n. 6. cit. That
superiors of regular orders are bound, not only to procure the salvation, but
also the perfection of their subjects: as if Bishops, Pastors, and such as
have charge of sonls, were not bound to procure the perfection of their
subjects, and these also bound to be perfect? Did not our Savior say
indifferently to all: Matthew. 5. Be perfect, as your heavenly father is perfect?
Was not S. John Baptist sent. Luc. 1. 1. Joan. 2. Qui, seruat verbumeius, in
hoc vere charitas Deiperfect a est. Et c. 4. si diligamus inuice^, charitas Dei
in nobis perfecta est.
to prepare a perfect people to our Lord, and yet was not sent only to make
Regulars? Does not God give Pastors and Doctors for consummation (that is,
perfection) of Saints. Ephesians. 4? Or does he give none to procure perfection of
Saints, but religious men? or were there no procurers of perfection in the
Church, before religious orders were instituted? Or will religious Confessors
say, that they are not to procure perfection in their secular Penitents? Does
not Sotus lib. 10. de lure and Iustitia q. 1. art 4. say. This is The duty of a
Bishop, both to teach perfection, and persuade it: and q. 3. art. 2. (It is the
office of a Pastor, to bring his healthful flock to perfection: and notes,
that in the consecration of a Bishop, the Church tells him, Vt exhibeat omnem
homine^ perfectum.
that he must bring his flock to perfection, as we read of S. John Baptist?

If any Regular should say to me, that (of it self) it is better for
Catholics, to confess to what approved Priest they would, then to those who
have charge of souls, I would answer him, as Plutarch. in Apoptheg.
Lycurgus answered one, who persuaded to institute popular government in his
city, that he should first beginn such a government in his own house. But
whether they only be to be accounted perfect, who observe the three
Evangelical Counsels, or no: I would know a reason, why it is requisite, that
such as observe those counsels, should confess to none, but to such, as their
regular Superiors appoint and the like should not be expedient for such, as are
to observe the commandments, as all Christians are? Why should the obligation
to confess to none; but to certain appointed Confessors, be requisite for
observation of these Counsels, and the like obligation should not be requisite
for the observation of the Precepts?

ELEVENTH CHAPTER. That is better for a Penitent to confess to a Priest, who
has charge of his soul, then to an other, proved by the greater certainty of
absolution.
1. THe Eighth proof, that it is better for a Penitent to confess to a Priest,
who has charge of his soul, then to an other, I will take from the greater
certainty of absolution by him, then by this. First, because Curats, who have
charge of souls, have jurisdiction from the Canon law, and (as some Sotus 4.
di. 18. q. 4. art. 2.
grave divines say) also from divine law. Whereas Confessors without charge of
souls, have Jurisdiction only by S. Tho mas 2. 2. q. 188 ar. 4. q. 187. ar. 1.
4. S. Bonauentura de paupertate. Bellarmin l. 2. de Monachis c. 45.
delegation, except it be in the hour of death, when all Priests have
Jurisdiction. And Jurisdiction by law, especially of God, is more certain, then
is jurisdiction by delegation, especially when it must pass by so many hands
of delegats and subdelegats, as it commonly does to such Priests 'as usually
hear confessions without charge of souls. And Jurisdiction being essentially
requisite to absolution, the more certain the iu risdiction is, the more certain
is the absolution.

2. Secondly, because the Canon and Civil law ratify and L. Babarius de offic.
Praetoris.
make good all acts done according to law, by one who is commonly thought to be
a lawful ordinary officier, and has any colorable title, though indeed he be
no true officer, nor have true jurisdiction. Whereupon Sanchez lib. 3. de
matrimonio Disput. 22. n. 13. says. All things done by a Parish Priest,
commonly taken to be such, and having a colorable title given to him by a
lawful superior, are valid even in court of conscience, and confessions made
to such, need not be iterated. And Navarre in Manuali c. 9. n. 11. In a Curate,
a title, though naught, with possession, will suffice. But it is not certain,
but denied by many (as may be seen in Sanches l. cit. n. 15. and 6.) that acts
done by a falls Delegate commonly thought to be a true delegate, are valid.
Neither indeed is there the like reason, that the Law should ratifye the acts
of such, as are not instituted by Law, as there is, that it should ratifye the
acts of such, as law it self instituteth. So that, absolution given by ones
Curate, must needs be more certain, then given by an other, who is but
delegate, because the law it self does ratifye the absolution given by a
Curate, when of it self it would not be valid, and does not ratifye such
absolution given by a Delegate. And hence it is that (as we said before)
Divines teach, that it is wiser, even at the hour of death when all Priests
have Jurisdiction, to be absolved of ones Curate or Superior, then of any
other. And the validity of absolution, being of that moment, that a Penitent
having only attrition, but valid absolution, shall be saved, and wanting valid
absolution, shall be damned, well counseled Reginald a Jesuit l. 1. n. 103.
Because in a matter of such importance, it behooves to take the certain and
leave the uncertain, Suarez well advises, that unless there be some great and
reasonable cause on the Confessors part, we should always use the saifer
means, that a Confessor having certain and more probable Jurisdiction, be
always preferred before one, who has a doubtful or less probable
jurisdiction. And (doubtless) a Curate, who has charge of souls, has more
probable jurisdiction, then a Delegate who has no such charge. Which I do not
say, to call in question the absolution of such Priests secular or Regular, who
really have true Delegation, and for just cause, of the sea Apostolic, but
because such Delegation passing thorough so many hands of Delegats and
Subdelegats, as it commonly does before it come to them, who usually confess
without charge of souls, is not so certain, to us, as is the Sea what Angelus
said supra cap. 10.
absolution given to us by Curats, who have charge of souls. Nor are their Acts
(if they be of themselves inualid) ratifyed, and made good by Law, as are the
Acts of Curats, though of themselves they were inualid. I add also, that
Curats do succeed the 72. Disciples as Gloss. liu. 10. Sotus l. 10. de Iure q.
3. art. 1.
Divines do teach, and therefore are instituted, not only by men, but also
by God, whereas Delegats Bellarmin. l. 1. de Clericis c. 14. S. Thomas 3. q 6.
a. 1.
are instituted only by men, nor do succeed the 72. Disciples: and that, of
the 72. Disciples Christ said Luc. 10. Who hears you, hears me. And it is
more sure to be absolved of such, as succeed them, of whom Christ said, who
hears you, hears me, then of others, of whom Christ said no such thing.

TWELFTH CHAPTER. That it is better for a Penitent, to confess to a Priest, who
has charge of his soul, then to an other, because it is more meritorious, and
also more satisfactorious.
1. THe ninth proof, that it is better for a Penitent, to confess to one who
has charge of his soul, then to an other, we will take from that it is both
more meritorious, and also more satisfactorious. That it is more meritorious, I
prove first, because it is more meritorious to confess to such Confessors, as
God has both instituted, and commanded us to confess unto, and also the
Church for many ages has commanded, then to such, as men have instituted, and
nether God, nor the Church ever commanded us to confess unto, but we choose of
our selves. For in the one, we fulfill God and the Churches will, and in
theother, we fulfill our own will. And surely, it is more meritorious, to
fulfill Gods and the Churches will, then to fulfill our own; because there
is more obedience to God and to the Church, and also more humility. But
Curats, who have charge of souls, are of the first sort, and who have no
charge of souls, are of the latter. Secondly, I prove it, because commonly it
is harder to confess to ones Curate, who has charge of our souls, and
authority to gouuernevs, then to another, whom we choose our selves, and who
has no authority to govern us, because ordinarily men are more loath to
discover their imperfections to their Superiors with whom they commonly
converse, then to others, who are not their Superiors, and who may be such, as
they never saw before, nor perhapps shall see afterward. And where is the
greater difficultye there is the greater virtue, and merit to overcome. And
hence also appears, why it is more satisfactorious: for where there is See
Navarre de Indulg. notab. 3. n. 13.
greater pain or difficultye, there is also the greater satisfaction.

2. Thirdly I prove it to be more meritorious, because in confessing to such,
as the Church apointeth and commands, at least once a year we conserve the
order and discipline of the Church, but in confessing to whom we choose our
selves, we do not keep that order or discipline. And how great a good it is,
to conserve the order and discipline of the Church, and what great harm may
come by not observing it, we may see by the great account, which Regulars make
of their Regular order and discipline, as we heard Cap. 11.
before. And if they make such account of their Regular discipline, and esteem
it so great merit to observe it, how much more ought good children of the
Church to observe and esteem the discipline of the Church, she being
incomparably to be esteemed above all regular orders, and her discipline
instituted by more sure assistance of the holy Ghost, and also for more glory
of God and good of souls: wherefor if there be great merit in observing regular
discipline, there is far more in observing the Churches Ecclesiastical.
discipline: and if greater harm come of breaking that, more comes in breaking
this without just cause. Fourthly, I prove, that it is more meritorious to
confess to ones Curate, who has charge of his soul, then to an other, because
that conserueth and increases that spiritual and holy love, which ought to be
between a Pastor and his sheep, whereof we shall speak more hereafter, and
also maintains his spiritual auctority, which he has to govern them:
whereas by leaving our Pastor, and confessing to whom we will, we diminish
both his love, and his authority. But it is far more meritorious to conserve
the Pastors love and authority, then any way to diminish it, as it is evident.

THIRTEENTH CHAP. That it is better for a Penitent to confess to a Parish
Priest, who has charge of his soul, then to an other, because great
commodities, and no inconueniencie comes bythat, and many inconueniencies come
by this.
1. THat all commodityes, which can be gotten by the Sacrament of penance, may
be had by confessing to a Priest who has charge of souls, and no
inconueniencie can come thereby, is evident, because such a Confessor is of
Gods institution, and the proper minister of that sacrament. And all
commodityes, which can be had by a sacrament, may be had by the proper minister
thereof instituted by God himself. And likewise no inconueniencie can come by
confessing to such an officer, as is properly appointed by God. But if there
chance to fall out any inconueniencie, that rises of the person, not of the
office it self. But by confessing to others, whom we choose our selves, there
may rise many and great inconueniencies. First, is prejudice of the Confessor,
First inconuen^e^cie,
who has charg^ of our souls, for it is his right to administer this sacrament
to all those, of whose souls he has charge. And not to give to one his right
or due, is doubtless a prejudice to him. Nether leaves it to be a prejudice to
him, because leave is granted to do it, for that will not show, that it is not
a true prejudice to him, but only that such prejudice is done with leave. And
Nouarre in C. Placuit n. 61. both affirms and proves, that it is true
prejudice to Curats, that their people are permitted to confess to others: and
it is evident, because all taking away of ones right is a prejudice to him,
though if it be done for just cause, it be no sin. And how careful the Church
was in ancient times, to conserve the rights of ordinaries, the Catechism ad
Parochos c. de Paenitent. The Church here tofore most careful of the right of
ordinaries.
sect. 47. shweth in these words: with what religion in times past, in the most
ancient Church, the right of an ordinary Priest was conserved, is easily
gathered by the ancient Decrees of Fathers, by which was ordained, that no
Bishop nor Priest should dare to do any thing in an others Parish, without his
leave, who there governed, or without some great necessity.

2. An other inconueniencie Second inconueniencie.
is, that liberty to confess to what approved Priest one will, breaks
discipline of the Church which is, that every one should co^fess, at least once
a year, to his proper Priest, as is evident by the foresaid Canon of the great
Council of Lateran. And a third inconue Third Inconueniencie.
niencie is, that it lesseneth that spiritual love, which ought to be between
a Pastor and his sheep, whereof we shall speak Fourth Inconueniencie.
more hereafter. And a fourth is, that it lesseneth the authority, which a
Pastor should have over his flock, which doubtless would be greater, if his
sheep did confess to him, because naturally men respect and reverence them
more, to who^ they confess their sins, the^ others, to who^ they do not
co^fess. And this notes P. Innocent 4. Can. Etsi animarum, saying, that
voluntary confessors breed contempt and indeuotion against proper Priests. I
dispute not, whether this Bull of Innocent the 4. be revoked, or no, because I
argue not out of the obligation thereof, but out of the truth it says, which
is, that voluntary Confessors occasion neglect of proper Priests, which so
grave and so learned a Pope, as Innocent 4. was, would not have said, if he had
not seen it to be tru^. And how great an inconueniencie neglect of Pastors is,
is manifest of it self, seeing all communities stand by the authority of their
superior, and fall and are weakened, by the fall or weakening of it. Whereupon
1. Tim. 5. 1. Thessal. 5. Heb. 15 Matthew. 26. S. Cyprian Epist. 55 65. S.
Hieron. contra Lucifer.
the Apostle often and earnestly exhorts Christians to honnour and reverence
their spiritual superiors, and our Savior says, if the Pastor be stricken
theep are dispersed, and holy Fathers note, that the neglect of Pastors, is the
root of schism and heresy, and that the ^ai^tye of the Church, depends on
the honor of Pastors. And Layman, cited Sup. c. 9.
before notes, that by confessing to whom one will, many pretending
impediments of confession, withdraw themselves from the Jurisdiction of their
Pastor. A fifth inconueniencie by liberty Fifth Inconueniencie.
of confessing to what Priest one will, is, that one may omit annual
confession, and say, that he has confessed, when he has not confessed at all.

3. The sixth inconueniencie Sixth Inconueniencie.
is, that by liberty of choosing ones Confessor, occasion is taken to committ
or conti new in sin, which would be much restrained, if men confessed to their
proper Priests. For by this liberty, (as P. Innocent 4. in the Foresaid Bull
notes) thereby shame, which is a great part of penance, is taken away, whiles
ones confesses his sins not to his proper Priest, whom he has continual
and present, but to an other, and sometimes to one, who is a passenger, to
whom there is hard recourse, and sometimes impossible. And Azor. tom. 1. l. 5.
c 25. grants, that leave to choose a Confessor, who may absolve him from
sins to be committed, does give occasion to sin more freely, and more easily.
And what great difference is See Pa^is An. 1246. p. 634.
there (for this purpose) between leave to choose a Confessor, who may absolve
one from sins to be committed, and leave to choose a Confessor, who may absolve
from sins that are committed? what difference (I say) is there for facilitye
to sin, between leave to choose a Confessor, who may absolve one from sins to
be committed, and leave to choose a Confessor, who may absolve one from sins
that are committed, which leave all have who have liberty to confess to what
Priest they will. For facilitye to sin, rises not precisely of leave to choose
a Confessor, which may absolve one from sins to be committed, but from leave
to a choose a Confessor, who may absolve from sins, whether they be committed,
or to be committed.

4. A seventh inconueniencie The Seventh.
in leaving ones proper Priest, and conf^ssing to others, is, that thereby he
is made less able to help spiritually, and cure the spiritual diseases of his
sheep. For by confessing to him, he should better know the State of the souls
of his sheep, and to be better able to apply proper remedies to them, to better
instruct their ignorance, and also better encourage them to follow virtue, and
avoid such vices, as they are subject unto. But of this we have spoken
something, and shall more hereafter. An eight inconueniency Eight
Inconueniencie.
is, that by leaving our Pastor and confessing to others, we discourage him,
and make him less careful of doing his deutye or what good he can do for us.
For he, seeing his sheep to leave him, and go to others, preferring them before
him, has not that courage to labor for them, as he would have, if he saw them
prefer him before others. And what harm comes by the negligence of Pastors,
God himself declares Ezechiel. 54. saying: my sheep are dispersed, because
there was no Pastor. Not because there was no Pastor at all, but because there
was no diligent Pastor. And Sotus lib. 10. de Iure and Iustit. q. 3. art. 4.
affirms, that the root of heresies in Germanye and England, was the
negligence of Pastors: and surely the sheeps neglect of their Pastors,
occasioneth the Pastors neglect of them. And if the negligence of Pastors be
the occasion of such ill, how much more is the want of Pastors? Whereupon the
same Sotus in the said place says: It is a divine commandment, that every
Diocese have a Bishop, for the peculiar care and watchfullness, which is due
unto it. And Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Pontif. c. 2. having cited these words of
Calvin: They convince, that to every Church ought a Bishop to be given,
answers. If by these examples, taken from most grave Fathers, we convince,
that to every Church ought to be given a Bishop, why does not he suffer
Bishops? which is plainly to affirm, that examples brought by most grave
Fathers, convince, that every Church ought to have a Bishop. And it is said in
his life l. 3 c. 5. that he counseled P. Clement 8. to provide Bishops
presently for vacant Churches, least he should be guiltye of souls perishing
for want of Pastors. And it is memorable what S. Bid l. 3. hist. Anglic. c. 7.
Writes of Senwalch King of the West Saxons in England, who having expelled his
Bishop, sustained great losses and spoils in his kingdom of his ennemies; He
understood, that by want of Bishops, he wanted also the help and grace of
allmightye God: wherefore he sent Ambassadors into France to Agilbert,
beseeching him that he would return and resume again his Bishopric,
affirming withal, to make satisfaction for that which was past. Thus S. Bid.
And if so many, and so great inconueniencies follow Penitents not confessing to
their proper Priests, who have charge of their souls, there was some great
necessitye, which forced the Church to dispense therein, as no doubt that was,
which before we rehearsed out of S. Thomas and others, to wit, too great
number of penitents for to confess to one only Priest, and too great want of
sufficient proper Priests generally for all parts. And good children of the
Church, will rather do what the Church of her self commands, then what upon
necessity she dispenses withal, and only permits. But out of all which I
have said in this chapter, I argue thus: It is of it self far better to avoid
so many and so great inconueniencies, as have been rehearsed, then to fall into
them: but Penitents by confessing to such Priests as have charge of their souls
do avoid the said inconueniencies, and by confessing to others, do fall into
them. Therefore it is far better to confess to those kinds of Priests, then to
these. And what good Penitent will not do that, which of it self is far better?

FOVRTEENTH CHAPT. That of it self it is better for a Penitent, to confess to
his proper Priest, then to others, because naturally he loves his penitents
more then others do.
1. THat of it self, it is better Pastors love their penitents more, then other
Priests do.
for Penitents to confess to their proper Priests, who have charge of their
souls, then to others, I prove by the greater love, which proper Priests who
have charge of their Penitents souls, naturally have more, then other Priests
have, who have no such charge of the souls of their Penitents, because his
greater love will make him more careful and diligent to do his Penitents all
the good he can, rather then an other, who less loves them. For the greater
love will cause the greater care. And that a Pastor or proper Priest, who has
charge of his Penitents souls, naturally loves them more then others, who have
no such charge, is evident, because he accounts his penitents his own sheep,
and naturally one loves what it his own, more then an other, who accounts it
not his own. Whereupon well wrote Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Pontif. c. 3. It is
certain, that Princes will take more care of their own, then Vicars will do of
that which is other men's. And our Savior Joan. 10. A good pastor gives his
life for his sheep, as if it were the property of a good Pastor, to love his
sheep so much, as for love of them, to give his life for them. And as himself
says Joan. 15. the greatest sign of love, is, to give his life for one. See
more of this in S. Chysostome lib. 2. de Sacerdotio c. 2.

2. Secondly, because the Penitents of a Pastor or proper Priest, are specially
committed to him by God. And surely, who loves God, will specially love them,
who are so committed to him by God, more then others will, to whom God has
not especially committed them. For Gods special charge, will make him who
loves God, to have a more special care of them, then others, who have no such
special charge. As we see all honest men have a more special care of children
committed to them by their parents, then others have, to whom such children
were never committed. And hereupon our Savior said, Joan. 20. to S. Peter:
Do thou love me, more then these? Feed my sheep: thereby showing, that
naturally Pastors love more Christ's sheep, then others do. And likewise the
Council of Trent. sesl. 13. c. 1. says to Bishops who are the chief Pastors:
let them remember, that they are Pastors, and that they ought so to govern
their subjects, as they love them like children and brethren. And Cardinal
Bellarmin In vita Bellarm l. 3. c. 2.
wrote thus to a Bishop, who desired to give over his Bishopric, to become
religious: who loved us, and gave his life for us, vouchsafed to say to Peter,
and in him unto all Pastors: if thou love me, feed my sheep. Is there any,
that dare say Notable words of Bellarmin.
to our Lord, I will not feed thy sheep, l^ast I leese my soul, unless there be
some, who love thems^lues, and not God? A true lover of God says with the
Apostle, I had rather be anathema from Christ for my brethren, then not
undertake that burden, which the love of God has imposed upon me. Albeit there
can be no danger of salvation, where charity reigns. No danger of salvation
where charity reigns.
Behold. in S. Paul, the exceeding love of a good Pastor to his sheep: behold
also, how there is no danger in taking charge of souls, so it be done for love
of God. Nay ordinarily the greater the charge of souls is, the greater is the
holiness, as Bozius shows, that there are more Popes, Saints, then any
Archbyshops or Bishops of one Episcopal sea in the world; and more
Archbyshops, Saints, then Bishops of any one Sea in his province, and more
Bishops Saints, then Curats of any one Parish in his Diocese. And allbeit
charge of souls be of it self more dangerous, then not charge, is, yet taken
with the greater grace, and greater assistance of God, which he always
affords greater to them, to whom he gives greater charge, it is not more
dangerous, and it is far more meritorious. And What Is. Chrysostom. says: It
is a marvel, if any Rector be saved, he speaks (as Estius Hebr. 13. v. 17.
well notes) of such, as upon ambition only, putt themselves into that
function, as is evident by the words following, because for one lawfully
called, and faithfully exercising that office, as Chrysostom himself did, there
is no danger. And what S. Chrysostom Some Saints have refused to be Priests,
as well as to be Pastors
says of Rectors, may be said of simple Priests or Religious, if these take
such courses of life for wrong ends. And if some Saints have refused to be
Bishops, more have accepted it: and some also have refused to be simple
Priests, not for the danger, but for humilitye, because they thought not
themselves worthy of such a function. Zacheus, upon confidence of Christ's love,
accepted his offer to come to his house, and the Centurion, upon humilitye,
refused it: both well, but he better. So it be God, who imposes charge of
souls upon us, and we accept it for his love, it cannot but be more acceptable
to him, to accept it, then to refuse it, and less dangerous to us, because God,
in his goodness binds himself to assist us far more, in accepting for his
love, the burden which he imposes upon us then in refusing it, when he
imposes it: and less danger is, when God far more assisteth us. And hence some
write, and gather it out of the Apocalypse c. 2. and 3. that God gives to
every Bishop, a special Angel Guardian.

3. Thirdly I prove, that a Pastor or Proper Priest with charge of souls,
loves more his Penitents, then an other, who has not such charge, because a
Pastor is like to a Father to his sheep, and an other, is but like a Paedagog.
For as the Apostle says to the Corinthians 1. Corinthians. 4. Though ye have
ma^y thousand Paedagogs, yet ye have not many Fathers, for I have begotten
ye in Christ by the gbospel. And Pastors, are the proper Fathers of their
Parishioners, because they begett them in Christ by baptism, and give them
their first spiritual life. And the love of a Father is naturally greater,
then is the love of any Paedagog. Sotus also lib 10. de Iure and lustitia q.
3. art. 1. says: The mercenarie flies, because he is a mercenarie, to whom
the sheep are not proper, because the sheep belong not to him, for as Christ
says, they are not his own, as not commended to him by Christ, it follows,
that he loves them not, to wit, with that love, which was demanded of Peter,
whether he loved him more then the rest. In What is common to all is neglected
of all. Aristotle.
which words he shows, why the Penitents are the Pastors own, and proper to
him, to wit, because they are committed to him by Christ, and that therefore
there is a special love in a good Pastor toward his sheep, as there was in S.
Peter, which is not in others, to whom Christ has not commended his sheep,
and he adds: How can they love souls to the loss of their lives, whom they
account not their own? And the reason why God infuseth a special love into a
Pastor, is, because a Pastor must have a special care over such, as God
commits to his charge, more then others need to have, which special care he
cannot perform without a special love: and therefore as God gives to Pastors
a special care of his sheep, so he gives them a special love of his sheep:
which special love he gives not usually to others to whom he gives no
special care of his sheep. For as God and nature do not fail in things that
are necessary, so nether do they abound in things that are superfluous.

4. Fourthly, I prove that a good Pastor or proper Priest loves more his
Penitents, then an other Priest does, because for the love of God, and of them,
he binds himself to assist them in what danger soever, and for their sakes
undertakes the greatest burden, that ca^be, which is to answer soul for soul
for every one of them. And therefore not only does to them all the good,
which others do, but hindeth himself thereto, which others do not, and (as
Lib. de Similitudin.
S. Anselme says of them, who not only do good, but also vow to do it)
gives not only the fruit, but also the tree. Whereas other Confessors, nether
bind themselves to assist their Penitents, nor will undergo that great burden
of answering soul for soul For of Mendicants Rodriquez tom. 1. q 35. art. 5.
writes, that they always refused to put See Regulas Societatis part 4. c.
2.. 4. p. 119.
the heavy burden of Curats upon their shoulders. And Bellarmin. lib. 2. de
Monachis c. 45. says: They do not minister spiritual things, of due: but
do minister them to whom, when, and where they please, without all binding of
themselves thereto; and therefore cannot ask releef of justice or due, but
only of charity, as they minister spiritual things, not out of duty, but
only of charityc: Thus he. If any say, that Pastors or Curats take that bond
and burden upon them, for love of their tithes or reuenews; I answer, that good
Curats or Pastors of souls do not, and I speak of good Curats, or such good
Confessors as have charge of souls, and I compare them with such good
Confessors, as have no charge of souls. Secondly, as it were against charity
to thinck, that such as hear confessions without charge of souls, do it
wholly or principally for love of alms or reward: so it were against charity,
to thinck the like of good Curats. Thirdly, none in England, who may have
charge of souls, could undertake that burden for love of tithes or reuenew,
because there he can expect none. And out of all which has been said and
proved in this Chapter, it will easily appear, that if any Catholics in
England be not willing to have such Confessors as love them more, and bind
themselves to far more for their love, then others do, they are not so
desirous of their own good, and assuredness to be helped in what need soever,
as in wisdom and in love to themselves they ough to be, and as they would be,
if it were in matter of their temporal state, or temporal life. For who would
not have a good corporal Physician, or Aduocat, who would bind himself to
assist him? And if any should not love more such a Confessor, as loves him
far more, then an other, and undertakes the greatest bond of love that can be
in this world, he should show himself to be very ungrateful, and would be
ashamed to do the like to any kind of friend, in any other matter
whatsoever.

FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. That it is better to confess to ones proper Priest, then to
an other, because he is a more noble officer or minister of the Sacrament of
Penance.
1. THe twelft proof, that of it self it is better to confess to ones proper
Priest, who has charge of their souls, then to others, I take from the greater
excellency of the office, and this I prove: first, because Confessors with
charge of souls were immediately instituted by Christ Joan. 20. where he says
to his Apostles, Take the holy Ghost, whose sins you shall remitt, they shall
be remitted: which power with charge of souls, does remain in Bishops their
successors. For as S. Thomas says 3. part q. 67. art. Bishops properly
succeed the Apostics.
2. Bishops succeed to the Apostles. Sotus 4. d. 21. q. 1. art. 4. By Gods law,
Bishops succeed the Apostles, and the same he has lib. 10. de Iure q. 1. art.
4. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Clericis c. 13. Bishops, properly succeed the
Apostles. And cap. 14. All Fathers do constantly teach, that Bishops succeed
the Apostles. And lib. 2. de Confirmatione c. 22. Bishops do simply and
absoluty succeed the Apostles. The same says Stapleton controu. 6. q. 3. art.
3. Nether does any Catholic deny, that Bishops succeed the Apostles in their
power and authority of forgiving sins, by Christ's own institution. But the
difficultye may be of other inferior Priests, who, under Bishops, have charge
of souls, as Curats have, whether the office of such were immediately instituted
by Christ, or no. But the office of Curats may be considered two ways, either
as an Office of Curats considered two ways.
office separately taken by it self, or as a part of Episcopal office and
authority, not including that, which was extraordinary in the Apostles, and
necessary for the beginning or founding of Christ's Church, as the spirit of
the 70. Seniors was but a part of the spirit of Moses. And if the office or
authority of Curats be thus considered, it is immediately of divine institution
as Episcopal authority is, and as the spirit of the 70. Seniors was. For it
is of the same nature, of which Episcopal authority, though not so great, as
Episcopal authority is: as Episcopal authority is of the same nature of
which Apostolical authority was, though not so high, and as the authority of
the 70. Sen^ors was of the same nature with the authority of Moses. And if
the office of Curats were but in this sort immediately instituted of Christ, it
would appear to be far nobler, then is theirs, who hear confessions without
charge of souls. For the office of those, was never instituted immediately by
Christ, either separatly by it self, or in a whole, whose part thereof it is,
but is of a different nature. because Christ, never instituted an office to
forgive sins without charge of souls.

2. But indeed it is more probable, that the office of Curats was it self
instituted immediately by Christ, or by the Apostles at his command. First,
because (as Suarez confesses tom 3. de relig. l. 1. c. 17. n. 25. The office
of Curats, necessary to the Church
and it is evident) The institution of Curats is necessary to the good
gouuerment of the Church, and salvation of souls. And Christ, either
instituted, or commanded to be instituded, all, that is necessary to the good
government of the Church and salvation of souls. For Gods works are perfect,
and even in natural things, he gives all that is necessary to their well
being. Secondly, because Christ, besides the Apostles, instituted 72. Disciples
Luc. 10. and gave them authority to preach, as he did to the Apostles, and
because authority to preach without authority to administer necessary
sacraments at least, (as the sacrament of Penance is) were imperfect,
therefore either himself gave or appointed his Apostles to give them authority
to administer that sacrament. And as S. Thomas says 3. q. 67. art. 2. Christ
gave to the Apostles the office of baptizing, but to be exercised by others,
and Bishops and Curats succeed the Apostles and 72. Discipl^s.
by whom rather, then by the 72. Disciples? Besides, Sotus lib. 10. de Iure q.
3. art. 1. says: Bishops and Parish Priests succed the Apostles and 72.
Disciples Can. in nouo d. 6. And Bellarmin. lib. ^^ de Clericis c. 14. All
Fathers constantly teach, that Bishops succeed the Apostles, and Priests the
72. Disciples. And if any Priests succeed the 72. Disciples, surely Parish
Priests, such as have charge of souls. Thirdly, because the Apostles Ephesians. 4.
says, that Christ gave separatly to his Church, Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, where, by Pastors, he understands such as are not
Bishops, for Bishops he understands under the name of Apostles, to whom they
succeed. And though some by Pastors understand Bishops, yett they include also
such Priests, as under Bishops, have charge of souls, as is to be seen in
Estius upon that place. And the same Apostle, Acts 20. calling to him the
presbyters or elders of the Church, of Ephese says indifferently to them all,
that the holy Ghost had putt them to govern the Church of God; where that by
Presbyters, he includes not only Bishops, but also such Priests, as have
care of souls, appears, both because the word Presbyter, was in the Apostles
time common to all such, as is evident, and there is no conuincing reason to
prove, that the Apostle there restrained the common use of that word, as also
because S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 184. art. 6. says, that S. Paul there comprehendit
vtrosque, and the same says Bellarmin l. 1. de Pontif. c. 8. And Stapleton
upon that place: Paul here afsirmeth, that the Presbyters of Ephesus were made
overseers of God flock, because the ofsice of overseers belongs as much to a
Parish Priest, as to a Bishop of many cittyes. Moreover, here is said, that
there were many Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus, and yett there never were
many Cornelius in Eusebio l. 6. S Chrysostom. in Socrate l. 6 c. 12
Bishops in one Church. Wherefore here under that name, were also, included
some Presbyters, who were no Bishops. I add also. that S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 184.
art. 6. expounds those words, opitulationes and gubernationes 1. Corinthians.
12. of Arch. deacons, and Curats, which Estius upon that place, says, is the
common exposition of the Latins. Fourthly l prove the immediate divine
institution of such Priests, as have charge of souls, out of the Council of
Trent. sess. 23. Can. 6. If any shall say that in the church, there is not a
Hierarchy instituted by Gods appointement, which consists of Bishops,
Priests, and ministers, be he anathema. And Estius in 1. Corinthians. 12. v. 27.
says: The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy properly consists of Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons. And seeing Hierarchy consists formally in power to govern, or
in Principalitye, as is evident by the word itself, the Council must needs
mean, that by Gods institution, some Priests who are not Bishops, are
governors in his Church. And if any, surely such as have charge of souls.
Fifthly I prove it out of the profession of the Church in the consecration of
Priests, where thus she professes: when God had appointed Bishops to govern
people, he chose men of inferior order, and of second degree, for to help their
societye and work. And she adds, that the like was done in the wilderness,
by giving 70. elders to Moses, and in the Synagog, by instituting Priests, and
after that adds also: By this providence, to the Apostles of thy Son, thou
have adjoined preachers of faith, as companions, by whom they have filled the
world with happy preachings. Wherefore o Lord, we beseech thee, add to our
weakness these helpers, who by how much we are the frayler, by so much the
more we need them. Let them be prouide^t cooperators of our order, let shine
in them the form of all justice, that being to give good account of the
dispensation committed to them, they may obtain the reward of everlasting
happiness. In which words, the Church professes, that such Priests, as are to
give account of the dispensation committed to them (as those are, who have
charge of souls) are by Gods institution, cooperators of Bishops, as the 70.
elders were to Moses, and Priests in the Synagog, were to the high Priest. I
add also, that the jurisdiction of Bishops and of Priests, is different iure
druino. For thus Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Clericis c. 14. The Catholic Church
acknowledges and teaches, that Episcopacye is greater iure diuino, then
Priest hood, both in order and jurisdiction, which supposes, that Priestly
jurisdiction, is instituted iure diuino, and in whom, if not in Curats? And
the same Bellarmin. praefat. lib. de Clericis says: The Church is
distinguished by Christ, into three orders, among which he puts Curats. So
that Curats are by Christ's order in the Church.

3. Secondly, I prove, that Curats, of their prime institution minister all
priestly sacraments, but others not.
a Curate is a more noble officer and minister of the sacrament of Penance,
then an other who has not charge of souls; because he is instituted not only
to minister the sacrament of Penance, but also all other sacraments which
Priests can minister: whereas such as have no charge of souls, be instituted
only to minister the sacrament of Penance and the Eucharist, as is to be seen
in Catholic Countries, and if they have leave to minister other Sacraments,
that is only in heathen and heretic countries, and for want of Curats. But he
is a more noble minister of the sacrament of Penance, who of his prime
institution, is to minister all sacraments which Priests can minister, then
such, as of their prime institution, can minister only two sacraments.

4. Thirdly because Curats, Curats have true jurisdiction over their flock. not
others.
and such as have charge of souls, have not only power and authority to
minister sacraments, but also to rule and govern people, as Pastors do
sheep, and therefore Curats are termed by S. Thomas (as we shall see hereafter)
lesser Princes, and inferior Prelates of the Church, ad are a part of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy or Principality, and Bellarmin. l. 1. de Po^tif. c.
8. says: we grant, that it agrees to Bishops and Priests, to feed and govern
the Church. Whereas such, as have no charge of souls, have no authority to
govern them, but as they voluntarily minister sacraments to them, so these
voluntarily receive sacraments of them, and voluntarily do what they advise
them. Wherefor there is no true obedience, or merit of obedience to them,
because they have no true superioritye or power to command. But in doing what
Curats command, there is true obedience, and merit thereof, and likewise true
disobedience and demerit thereof in not doing what they command, because they
have true superioritye and authority to command their flock. And doubtless, he
is a more noble minister of the sacrament of Penance, who has Curats are the
Principal, others but Coadiutors.
not only power to minister sacraments, but also jurisdiction and power to
rule and govern them, to whom he ministers the sacrament of Penance, then
he, who has no jurisdiction and power to rule and govern them to whom he
ministers the sacrament of penance. I add also, that See ^. Thomas 2. 2. q.
187 art. 1.
Curats have authority in themselves to minister sacraments, but who have no
charge of souls, are but Delegats, and have only the use of authority, which
is in an other. And also, that these are but Coadiutors Rodriguez^^ 1. q 59.
art. 2. ^. to 3. q. 31. art 4.
of the others. And a Coadiutor is inferior to the Principal.

5. Fourthly I prove that Curats are more noble officers and ministers of
sacraments, by authorityes. For as the Gloss Luc. 10. says: Bishops are like
to the Apostles; inferior Priests, to wit Curats, are like to the 72.
Disciples. And Generally the Fathers teach, that as Bishops succeed the
Apostles, so Priests who have charge of souls, succeed the 72. Disciples as
Concil-Neocesar. Can. 3. Damas. Epist. 3. Anaclet. Epist. 2. Augustine. in
Psalm. 44. Leo Epist. 83. Isidorus lib. 2. de divine. offic. Beda in c. 10.
Lucae. And S. Thomas 3. part. q. 67. art. 1. says: To baptize, belongs
Curats, lesser Princes of the Church succeed the 72. Disciples.
to lesser Princes of the Church, that is, to Priests, who hold the place of
the 72. Disciples of Christ, as the Gloss says Lucae 10. Sotus l. 9. de lure
q. 4. art. 3. We must needs grant, that the office of Curats has the highest
place of spiritual functions. And 4. d. 18. q. 1. art. 5. Curats of Parishes
have ordinarye power, not from Bishops but from Gods law. Ibid. q. 4. art. 2.
All those (Pope, Bishops, Curats,) are called ordinaries by Gods Law. For
allbeit the Bishop gives a Parochial Church to this or that man: yet
whosoever is Parish Priest, is by Gods Law the proper Priest, as allbeit the
choosing of the Pope, belongs to Cardinals, and the chuseing of Bishops, to
Canons, yett they have power from Gods Law. For Christ himself, who chose the
Apostles, to whom Bishops succeed Can. Quorum vices d. 68. chose also 72.
others helpers of them, to whom Priests succeed Can. In nouo d. 6. Azor. also
tom. 1. l. 11. c. 24. speaking of Curats, says: It cannot be denied, that the
state of Bishops and Priests, was ordained by Christ our Lord, as says
Anacletus, and it is related Can. in nouo d. 21. Bishops succeed to the
Apostles, Priests to the 72. Disciples. And Suarez tom. 3. derelig. lib. 1. c.
17. n. 25. Gerson adds, that the state and office of Curats, is by Gods law,
and Christ's institution, so as the Pope cannot take it out of the Church, as he
cannot take away the state of Bishops, because Curats belong to the entire
Hierarchicall order instituted by Christ. And this is probable, both by most
ancient tradition, and because the institution of proper Curats, is necessary
to Curats necessary to saluations of souls.
the good government of the Church, and salvation of souls. And (as I said
before) doubtless, Christ instituted all that is necessary to the good
government of the Church and salvation of souls. Nether will it follow, that
Curats are of man's institution, because sometime Vicars are putt in their
place; for though Gods affirmative laws do bind always, yet not for
always: and also, because Apostolical Vicars, and Archpriests, are sometimes
put in places of Bishops, and yet none deny, that Bishops are of Christ's
institution. Besides, Vicars, who are putt in place of Curats, have charge of
souls, which is all one for my purpose. Finally, S. Thomas 3. part. q. 67. art.
2. calls Curats lesser Princes of the Church. And 22. q 188. art. 4.
ordinarye. Prelates of the Church, and adds, that for one to preach by
authority of Prelates or to do other such things, passes not the degree of a
disciple or subject. Item. Religious, are instituted to preach and hear
Regulars serve Curats.
Confessions, not by their own authority, but by the authority of superior
and inferior Prelates, to whom that belongs by office. And so they serve
Prelates in such ministry, which is proper to such a Religion. And S.
Bonauenture lib. de Paupertate Christi p. 422. Religious men heelp Curats, not
as Lords, not a^ having charge of souls, but as servants in charity. And
surely, servants, and such as work by authority of others, are less noble
officers, then those, whom they serve, and by whose auctoritye they work.

6. And to all these authorityes 12. Martij An. 1624.
I add, that lately the holy Congregation de propaganda fide has decreed,
that the end of Seminaries is more excellent, The end of Seminaries more
excellent thereof Religions.
then the end of Religions because there is no sacrifice more grateful to God,
then the zeal of souls. Which decree they made, having called before them all
religious orders, and without opposition of any of them. And if the end of
Seminaries be more excellent, surely also the end of Curats, fot whom
principally, seminaries are instituted. And also, that the Council of Trent.
sess. 24. c. 18. commanded, that all Bishops, who were able, should in their
Dioceses found a seminarye for to bring up Priests, who should take the charge
of souls, which shows. that in the judgment both of the said Congregation,
and Council, Priests, who have charge of souls, are more excellent officers,
and more useful and needful to the Church, then such are, who have no charge
of souls. I may add also, that not only Henr cus quodlib. 12. q. 28. Mayor 4.
d. ^8. q. 7. Gerson tract. de statu perfectionis. The state of Curats in it
self perfecter then Religion.
secular Divines, but also regular divines do grant, that the state of Curats
is perfecter, then the state of Religious. For thus Suarez to. 3. de Relig. l.
1. c. 21. n. 6. If the state of religious and inferior Prelates, be considered
in themselves, the state of Prelates is more perfect. And this (doubtless) meant
S. Austin, when he wrote epist. 148. There is nothing more happy before God,
then the office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, if it be exercised as our Lord
commands. And S. Chrysostom, when he noted, that our Savior, having asked S.
Peter if he loved him more then others, bad him not enter into Religion, but to
feed his sheep. And the Apostle, Philippens 1. chose rather to help souls, then
to be in heaven with Christ, so much they esteemed pastoral care of souls.

SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. That it is better to confess to a Priest, who has charge
of souls, then to one who has not, because he is necessary to the good
government of the Church, not others.
1. THat Priests, who have charge of souls, as Curats, are necessary, to the
good government of the Church, is evident by what has been said before, that
they are immediately appointed by Christ, and by the profession of the Church,
that they are such, as were the 70. elders in the wilderness, and as simple
Priests were in the Synagog. Secondly because as in an army, natural reason
teaches us, that not only a General is necessary, but also Captains of
troops, and under them, sergea^ts and Corporalls, who command immediately
every particular soldier: so reason will teach us, in the Church, which is
like to an Army, beside the Pope, who is General and Bishops, who are
Captains of several Dioceses, there should be under them, Curats, who in
every parish should immediately command and govern every particular Christian.
And the same we see in every kingdom, where besides the King, and Lieutena^ts
of shires, there are Constables, in every village. Thirdly, because Priests
who have charge of souls, are of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and who are of
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy are necessary for the good government of the
Church. For God and nature, as they fail not in necessaryes, so they abound
not in superfluityes. Fourthly, because Suarez (as we saw above in the former
Chapter) grants, that Curats are necessary to the good government of the
Church, and salvation of souls. Fifthly, because the Church in all ages, and in
all places, where she could institute Priests with charge of souls, did
institute them, and divided Christian people, into distinct parishes, and
lately the Council of Trent commanded it to be done sess. 21. c. 4. sess 24. c.
13. Therefore she judges such to be necessary to her good gouerme^t, otherwise
she would not so generally, and so continually have practiced it, and also
command it. Whereby we see, that if any will hinder or dissuade the erectio^ of
Curats, or division of Catholics into Parishes, they do against the general,
and continual practice of the Church, and against her good government, and the
commandment of the Council of Trent. But that such Priests, as have no charge
of souls, are not necessary to the good gouerme^t of the Church, is evident,
because such have no authority at all to govern, because such were not
instituted by Christ, because the Church for many ages, had no such, nor ever
commanded such to be instituted or used. And since every one sees, of what
importance the good government of the Church is, every one may thereby fee, of
what greater importance it is to have Priests with charge of souls, rather then
to have others.

SEAVENTEENTH CHAP. That it is better to confess, to a priest having charge of
souls, then to an other, proved by the comparison of the special motives to
confess to others.
1. HItherto we have spoken of the spiritual motives to confels to Priests,
who have charge of the souls of their Penitents rather then to others, which
(as we have seen) are very many, and also weightye; now we will see the
spiritual motives, which may be pretended, that it is better to confess to
others. And I will omit all temporal motives thereto, because they are
vnfitta^d unworthy to be mentioned, when there is question or deliberation
which kind of Confessors are the best for the glory of God, and spiritual
good of Penitents. The first spiritual motive, First motive.
to go to what approved Confessor one will, may be, that such liberty does in
many Penitents help to make entire co^fessions more then would be, if they did
ever confess to him, who has charge of their souls, by reason of their
bashfulness, or some other human weakness. True it is, that liberty to confess
to what approved Confessor one will helps many to make entire confessio^s,
more then restraint to one approved Contritio^ and amandment of life, of more
importance, then Confession.
for the^ by the Church; but does it not hinder as many to have true
contrition, and absolute purpose to amend what they do confess? And seeing
contritio^ is far more necessary, and a more principal part of the sacrament
of penance, the^ Confession is, (because contrition may save one without
Confession, when a Priest cannot be had, but Confession without contrition,
will do no good) if restraint to confess to such as have charge of our souls,
help more to contritio^, and resolute purpose of amendment oflife, then
liberty of confessing to what Priest one will, does, it must needs be better,
because it more helps to the more principal part of the sacrament, which is
contrition, and also more to the end of the sacrament, which is forgiueness of
sins, and amendment of life, and a true Penitent will more regard that, which
more helps him to the more necessary part of the sacrament of Penance,
which is contrition, and also to the end of the sacrament, which is
forgiueness of sins, and amendment of his life, then that, which helps him
more to the less necessary part of this sacrament, which is entire confession
of his sins.

2. An other motive to leave Second motive.
the Confessor, who has charge of souls, and to co^fess to others, may be,
that thereby the sacrament of Penance, is more frequented the^ otherwise it
would be: but notwithstanding this, we should rather seek, what helps to
receive this sacrament better, then what helps to receive it oftener. Because
to receive it better, though seldomer, profits much, whereas to receive it
oftener, but not better, profits little. And (as we have showed) confessing
to ones proper Priest, who has charge of souls, helps much to confess
better, then liberty^ to confess to what Priest one will, does.

3. A third motive may be, that Third motive.
diverse sorts of Confessors, who have not charge of the souls of their
Penitents, can commonly give greater Indulgences, then such as have charge of
souls, ca^ give. To this I answer, that this motive has little place in
England, where all Priests can give sufficient Indulgence. Secondly, that (as
Bellarmin lib. 1. de Indulge^t. cap. 11. well monisheth, after S. Thomas)
Regular discipline must not be broken or relaxed for gayning of Indulgences.
And if not regular discipline, much less Ecclesiastical discipline, which is
of more importance, then regular discipline, as the Church is of more
importance, then any regular order. Thirdly, that since absolution from sin,
is of far greater importance, the^ Indulgence, because, that is, forgiueness
of the sin it self, this, but a relaxation from some te^porall pain, after
sin is absolved, we should rather look, what Priest can give us the most
assured absolution from sin, then who can give us the greatest Indulgence,
which will avail us nothing, if our sin be not assuredly absolved. Besides,
by confessing to one appointed to us by the Church, we both merit and satisfye
more, then by confessing to one chosen by our selves (as is before showed) and
thereby more increase grace in our souls, and our glory in heaven, which is
more to be esteemed, then relaxatio of temporal pain. And Sotus 4. d. 21. q.
2. a. 1. says. Incre^^as of merit, better far then Indulgence.
of it self, it is much better to satissye by his own works, then to gain
Indulgences. And ibid. Incomparably better, is the least increase of merit and
grace, then to be freed from the greatest pain in Purgatory. Incomparably I
say better to be with greater merit and grace in Purgatory twenty years, then
Notable words of Sotus.
with less, to be there but one day, yea to fly to heaven without all
Purgatory. Which words are worthy to be considered. Moreover the valor or
effect of Indulgencet is not certain, unless the causes of granting them be
Nauar. de Indulgent. notab. 15 Sotus 4. d. 21. q. 2. art. 2. Bellar. min l. 1.
de Indulg. c. 12.
just and proportionable, because the Pope, is not Lord of the treasure of the
Church, but only dispensor thereof, and which is a just and proportionable
cause, only God (as Nauar. says tract. de Indulg. notab. 15. n. 8.) knows.
And he adds ibidem n. 17. That too large Indulgences give occasion to people
to thinck, that more is gotten by them, then is gotten indeed, and causes more
neglect of repentance, then ought to be. And number. 18. That the Pope may err,
in thinking this or that cause to be just. And notab. II. n. 23. That it is
most profitable, and most faif, to enjoin and accept penance to be done in
this life, and that it is not the part of a frind to enjoin small pennances.
And notab. 5. n. 44. Setus 4. d. 20. q. 1. ar. 3 Paenite^tiae quae modo in vsu
su^t, non tam paenitentiae, qua^ poenite^tiarum ludibria sunt.
It is imperfection to seek Indulgences, for after them to serve Christ coldly,
and to use less wariness and remedy to avoid sins, and to root out vices,
which I fear this our age does too much. And notab. 21. n. 2. approves the
opinion of Caietan, who says, that who will get In dulgences, must have a
mind to do as See Nauar. notab. 9. n. 12. Sotus 4. d. 21. q. 2. art. 2.
great penance himself, as would suffice for to satisfy for his sins. And
this, says l. 1. de Indulgent. c. 13.
Bellarmin is profitable and pious. by which (says Nauar.) the honor of
Indulgences is conserved, the mouth of raylers against them stopped, and
Christians stirred up to do worthy fruicts of penance. And notab. 31. n. 44.
According For Indulgences We must not for bear to do acts of Penna^ce.
to the opinion of Divines and Canonists, we must not for Indutge^ces, forbear
to do acts of Penance. And finally notabl. 17. he fears that it is too
true, which the Gloss says, That few get Indulge^ces. Thus this pious, and
most learned Canonist, which I wish them to consider well, who for to get
greater Indulgences, would leave their proper Priest, and confeso to others. I
add also, that Regular superiors, Regulars, for no motives, will permit
theirs 10 confess to others.
nether for more making of entire confessions, non oftener frequenting the
sacrament of penance, nor for gaining of greater Indulgences, nor for any
other motive whatsoever, will permit their subjects, out of case of
necessitye, to confess to others, then to such as they appoint. Which clearly
shows, that they esteem more confession made to proper Priests, then all
other spiritual commodities, which can come by confessing to others. And Only
necessity moved the Church
moreover I add, that no greater good, but only the too great multitude of
penitents, and the insufficiencye of proper Priests in diverse places, moved the
Church to condescend to people for to leave their proper Priests, and to
confess to others, as evident by the testimony of S. Thomas, and others Supra
cap. 5.
before cited. And if not greater spiritual good, but only necessity by
reason of too great multitude of Penitents, or insufficiencye of some proper
Priefts, moved the Church to grant liberty to Co^fess to other Priests, good
children of the Church, who will follow her advise, should not upon pretense of
greater spiritual good, but only upon the said necessitye, make use of that
liberty, which she upon that necessitye, was forced to grant, and if that
necessitye had not been, would never have granted. I say also that it is a
divine precept, do fruits worthy of penance Luke 3. And to do fruits
worthy of penance, includes (as l. 4. de poenit. c. i.
Bellarmin See Gregory homil. 20. in Eua^g. S. Thomas in Luc. 3.
well says and proves out of holy Fathers) to make satisfaction to God, and
as he affirms: They cannot be well called fruits worthy of penance, unless
indeed they suffice to recompense the iniurye, if not inequalitye of qua^titye,
yet in equalitye of proportion, and according to the acceptance of him, who was
wronged: And also that Indulge^ces do not exempt us from fullfilling this
divine precept. And likewise, that not Indulgences, Indulgences are not
satisfactions, nor exempt from doing fruits of penna^ce.
but the Penitents satisfaction, is a part of the sacrament of Penance,
without which the sacrament of Penance (as the ^^me Bellarmin Lib. 1. de
Poenitent. c. 17. See him ib. l. 4. c. 8.
says) is lame and imperfect, which lameness or imperfection, Indulgences do
not supply, because they are no part at all of the sacrament. Nether is it
likelye, that Christ, in granting Indulge^ces to his Church, meant thereby to
make his sacrament lame and imperfect, or to exempt penitents from full filling
his divine precept, of doing worthy fruits of penance, which (as Nauar. said)
is the doctrine of divines and of Canonists. Finally, I say with Bellarmin. l.
1. de Indulgentiis c. 12. That prudent Christians do so take Indulge^ces, as
with all they endeavor to bring fruits worthy of penance, and to satisfye
God for their sins. Which prudent advise who well consider, will not for
uncertain gayning of greater Indulge^ce, leess the certain gaining of greater
merit in confessing to their proper Priest: especial, seeing merit (as truly
said Sotus) is incomparably more to be esteemed, then Indulgence, though the
gaining of this were certain.

THE CONCLUSION to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, out of all which has been said in this Treatise, I gather
these importants points which I much commend to thy memory and consideration.
First, that a I.
sufficientConfessor with pastoral charge of souls, is more to the glory of
God, to the good of the Church, and to the spiritual profit of souls, then is
a sufficient Confessor, who has no such charge of souls. Secondly, II.
that what good Priest seeks the greater glory of God, the greater good of
the Church, and the greater spiritual profit of souls, will more desire to be
a Confessor with charge of the souls of those whose Confessions he hears,
then to be confessor without such charge if conveniently he may be. Thirdly,
that what III.
Penitent seeks the greater glory of God, the greater good of the Church,
and the greater spiritual profit of his soul, will use rather a sufficient
Confessor, who has charge of his soul, then a sufficient Confessor who has no
such charge of his soul if conveniently he may. Fourthly, that if any should
hinder or dehort from the making of Confessors with charge of souls, or counsel
Penitents to go to others, rather then to such, he should hinder and dehort
from that, which is to the greater glory of God, greater good of the Church,
and greater spiritual profit of souls which none can do who seek the glory
of God, the good of the Church, and profit of souls. Which (I assure my self)
al good Priests in England do really and heartily seek: and therefore I hope,
that all such, will take this my counsel of being confessors with charge of
souls, in good part; and will if they can conveniently, follow it. Which if
they do, I shall hope of the speedier conversion of our poor Country, in
which are many good sheep, but sine pastoribus without pastors; and because
they are among woolues, need Pastors more, then in Catholic Countries, and
need all spiritual help which may be had both by Confessors with charge of
souls, or without such charge, as Penitents in Catholic Countries have. For my
intention is not to deprive them of Confessors without charge of souls, or of
any spiritual good, that can be gotten by such, but to afford them both
kinds of Confessors, as Penitents in Catholic Countries, and in Ireland, and
in Holland have also, and to procure them all the spiritual good and help,
which may be reaped by both such Confessors.

FINIS.

