A GREAT FIGHT In the Kingdom of IRELAND BETWIXT The Protestant Forces under
the Command of Major General Jones, and the Irish Forces under Command of that
Arch-Rebell General PRESTON.

With the number that were slain on both sides, and the names of the Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, and other Officers and Soldiers, taken
prisoners.

Also the manner of Prestons marching toward Dublin, with 9000. Foot, and
1600. Horse, to besiege the said City.

Printed at London by B. A. Anno Dom. 1647.

A Famous VICTORY Obtained in IRELAND
SIR,
I Have seen the Diui^^all book, entitled, the Moderate Intelligencer, with
the distinct relation of the late happy Victory. But our former intelligencer
makes the Rebels army of 7300 Foot, 1047 Horse, which in all makes 8347, killed
of them 5470, taken prisoners 325 Officers and Soldiers, so that the number of
the slain and taken amounts to 5793. which if you abate of 8347. the remainder
will be 2552 how then says he, that 500. only escaped of the Rebels; it seems
that he is no good Arithmetician, for he has not yet learned substraction.

He says that we have taken Arms of the Rebels for 6000, we have not taken
so much, for the Arms of the killed and prisoners will make up 5795 only, and
so we want 215 of the arms, if we divide not the 4 Pieces of Brass amongst so
many: and if so, the 4 Pieces must not be counted by themselves again.

He writes that there was no quarter but for Officers or men of quality: why
then the 322. that were taken prisoners, whereof 228 were common soldiers, 22
Sergeants, and 13. Troopers were killed, and so the number of the killed should
be 5720^ and our prisoners 68. in all.

Prsston was conceived to be hurt, and why? because he was see^ with 3
troopers, a goodly consequence, 3 troopers in his company; ergo, he was
wounded: in this our Intelligence was mistake^, for he took Major* Dungan to be
Preston, for it was he that escaped, not with 3 troopers, but with 25. and
Preston was not there at all.

Further, again to the number of the killed and taken according to his account
they were 5795. if we examine the business well, the business we shall find
that in all that party of the Rebels that met our force^ there was not the
tenth part of the number of the (...) and prisoners, for they were in all but 4
troops under command of the aforesaid Major Dungan, and 200. Dragoones under
command of one Major L^llor, who was taken prisoners.

This was that great army that fell upon our Forces consisting of 7 troops,
and 800. musketeers, under the command of Sir Thomas Armstrong, Major Dillon
and Lieuten^nt Savill, who were sent by Colonel Jones to make good a passage
before the Rebels coming, which they performed gallantly; for when the Irish 4
troops and Dragoones came upon them, our seven troops left the Pass, and
saved themselves, only 12. and the 4 troope^ chased them half a mile, and
then retired to charge our Foot, who behaved themselves very well for they
resisted them in plain field, until 12 troops came from our Camp, to re^ieve
our musketeers, which (...) Foot per^^^ving, got between the Irish Forces, and
their troops, and le^t the troops on both sides to dispute the matter, and in
this dispute all the 4 troops, and 200 Dragoones were either taken or killed,
saving Major Dungan, and the 25 above mentioned*

The Officers of the Irish taken prisoners, Captain Bar^well of Horse, and all
his Officers, together with the ^arl of Westmeans troop Officers.

Thus have you an exact (...) of the late Fight in Ireland, for the publishing
whereof, you will oblige me to re^^^in

Your ever Servant. G. SMITH.
Dublin 10. September.
BY Eetters from Ireland, it is further intimated, that there has bin a late
discovery of a treacherous design against the Parliament, General. Lieutenant
General, Commissary General Ireton, and the rest of the Officers and
Soldiers, under the power and command of the said General, which plot, as it
was intimated to both houses of Parlirment, were acting and contriving by some
disaffected Scottish spirits, with a resolution to combine and conspire against
the Parliament of England, and to work and use means for a sudden Engagement in
another unnatural and most horrid war, against the most worthy and renowned
Heroes of these times; the manner of this most great and machavilian
Conspiracy, I shall here briefly recite for general satisfaction to all
Freeborn English men, viz.

Major General Starling, a Scottish-man, Commander in chief, under the Lord
Inchiqueet, of the Protestant Forces in Ireland in the Province of Munster,
having a design against the Parliament of England, for an Engagement, both
against them, and their Army, which for the better effecting thereof,
dispatched ^everall Letters to diverse eminent Commanders in that Kingdom, (but
intercepted) viz. the first to Sir Patrick Weimes, a Scotchman, but a most
faithful, and heroic soldier having an excellent Regiment of Foot, and in
actual service with collonell Jones against the Rebels in Lemster: the second
to Mayor General Manroe, Major General of the Scottish Army in the Province
of Ulster: the third to the Kingdom of Scotland, with Letters to General
Leven, General of the Scottish Army, and others.

All which Letters were intercepted, and many things (in them) discovered of
very high nature, and concernment toward this Kingdom, the Design being to
engage all in a war against the Parliament and Army in England. But now it is
hoped their Designs will be frustrated for col. Jones has discovered the
chief Actors therein, and has taken some of them, and committed them to safe
custody.

The Parliament having received information of these underhand workings, and
trecherou^ dealings, Ordered that a Letter ^e sent to the Lord I^chiqueen,
desiring him to send in safe custody the said Colonel Starling to the
Parliament of England,

The Rebels arch General Preston is marched toward Dublin with a great army,
consisting of nine thousand Foot, and sixteen hundred, Horse, and I fear he
will take it, for our forces marched toward Dredath about Trim, when the
Rebels took the place, we have (...) Officers, for in one Sir L^k^ Fitz (...)
house are prisoners 7 Captain^ 4 Colonels, two Lieutenant Colonels, the Lady
Tichburn was there, but Preston sent he^ back, and caused her baggage to be
given to her, they report Sir Henry Tich^^^^ is (...) of a wound which he had,
his son is prisoner in the aforesaid house.

FINIS.

