A SERMON Preached before THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, At their Monthly
Fast, May. 29. 1644.

BY PETER SMITH Doctor of Divinity, Minister of Gods Word at Barkway in
Hertfordshire, and one of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Salvation is of the Lord.

Psalm. 3. 8. Jonah 2. 9.

London, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Die Mercurii 29 Maii. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Rous do from this House give thanks unto Doctor Smith, for the great pains
he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of this House at
S. Margarets in the City of Westminster, (it being the day of public
Humiliation) and to desire him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered that none
presume to Print his Sermon, but such as shall be authorized under his hand
writing.

H. Elsyng, Cler Parl. D. Com.
I Appoint CHISTOPHER MEREDITH to print my Sermon.

Peter Smith.



TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THere it to me nothing more imperious then the request of that Authority,
which might enforce, and unto which this whole Kingdom owes so much of
thankfulness and duty. By such your Command, this Sermon is made public,
which by the same was preached in your honorable audience. I know it will now
want that little life it seemed to have when it was uttered viva voce, and
entertained with your cheerful and religious attention.

I am not of his mind that said, Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa -- Hor. de Art. Poet.
Things move more dully by the ear then by the eye; nor does that reason sway
me that another gives, (...) Damas. Orth. Fid. lib. a. c. 18.
The eye sees by direct lines, but the ear takes in things (after a more
squandring manner) every way. That which the Philosopher says of knowledge,
the Apostle says of faith, It comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. I confess,
memory is frail; and to reflect again, by reading, upon that which we have
heard, may conduce much unto the improvement of our knowledge in such things as
we desire to put in practice. This I presume is your desire (...) Agapet.
paraen. ad Justinian. 57
, and I pray God the same may be in all, whose eyes may now reach that which
their ears could not before. The Text it self holds forth the practice of the
Saints of God of old, in all their troubles; which pattern if we follow
faithfully, God in his good time will so bless your most unwearied travails
for the public safety, that we shall see his great deliverance wrought by
your hands, according to the poor weak prayers of

Your obliged servant in the Lord, Peter Smith.

A SERMON PREACHED at the late Fast, before the Honorable House of Commons,
May 29. 1644.
Psalm. 107. 6. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered
them out of their distresses.
THis Psalm (as some interpreters conceive) is in this order, for the matters
sake, annexed to those that go immediately before it; they all declaring the
mighty acts of God, wrought for the deliverance of his people out of trouble
and distresses.

Yet, after the Original, it seems cut off from those other, it being the
beginning of the last Section of this sacred book, called in the Hebrew, The
fifth book of Psalms.

And to me there appears no little difference betwixt this, and the two next
preceding: they tell forth the works of God, done for the seed of Abraham, etc.
Psalm. 105. 6. This not for the Jews alone, but for both Jew and Gentile, all
the redeemed of the Lord, (...) Gr. Nyss.
from all the four quarters of the world; as verse. 2. and 3. of this Psalm.

And it not only differs in the extent of the subject, but in the curious
composure of it, there being in this two verses artificially interposed, and
interchangeably four times repeated, which (though they have more elegant and
apt Versus inter^alares, five (...)
names in the learned tongues) in our vulgar speech we call, the Burden of the
song.

And truly, I conceive, there is much weight in them the Psalmist reckons up
diverse particular dangers of Gods people, with their deliverances; and in the
close of every of these, we find expressed, first, the way which they take, for
the obtaining of the mercy, as in this verse, and likewise, verse. 13. 19. 28.
Then they cried unto the Lord, etc. And secondly, the return they make in
thanks, for the mercy so obtained, as verse. 8. 15. 22. and 31. in these words,
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

From these two verses thus four times repeated, with reference unto several
dangers, and deliverances of the Church of God, briefly I may collect these
three Observations.

(...) Sophocl.
changes, and variety of condition, and no man knows, what shall be on the
morrow, Iam 4. 14. One while they are crying out, being in trouble and
distresses; Then they cried, etc. Anon they are singing to the praise of God, O
that men would praise, etc.

Take but a short view of this vicissitude of estates, A primo mundi ortu usque
in boc tempus perduxit nos ex splendidis sordidisque alternata series. Senec.
Epist. 44.
in the first family, which herein may well be thought an exact type of all
succeeding generations. Man being in honor (non pernoctavis) lodged not one
night in it; but yet as he fell suddenly, so he was soon refreshed, with that
sweet promise of the Seed of the woman, that should bruise the serpents head.
Again, God gave him comfort in his two sons, that were bom unto him; but the
next news we hear of them, (...) Bafil. Sell. de Cain and Abel.
one envieth the other, drew him aside, and killed him; and Adams joy was now
eclipsed: But presently the light breaks forth again, and this loss is
repaired in a third son given unto him, in whose posterity the Church was
propagated, Genesis 4. 26.

And yet again the story plainly shows, how this generation was persecuted by
the (...) Lycophr. Cass.
brood of Cain, until the whole earth was so polluted, that (...) Basil. Sell.
(...).
it had need of a deluge of waters to wash the face thereof, as in the days of
Noah. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, Eccles. 1. 9. and
experience tells us, that there is nothing certain, and permanent in the life
we live here in the body: but we are even as ships at sea (...) Theocr.
; which in a calm are safe; but the winds rise suddenly Momento temporis mare
evertitur; and eodem dic, ubi luscrum, navigia forbentur. Sen.
, and the waves roar, and unexpectedly they are swallowed up. (...) Epic. apud
Plut. Use 1.


sic Deo placuit, God in his providence will have it so: far be it from us,
to think with the Epicures, that God regards not the things of men below,
especially of his Redeemed; but let us submit to his divine will and wisdom,
and learn from hence these short instructions.

First, Is our estate here so dubious and variable? then in days prosperous,
let us provide for evil times, that we may say (when such things come upon us)
as Job sometime did: The thing I greatly feared (or, greatly expected) is come
upon me, Job 3. 25. which fear or expectation doubtless was a preparative
unto his patience, as knowing that riches have wings, and fly away; and for
his children, he could say better then that heathen man; (...) Apud Plut.
I knew that I begat them mortal, subject to death, natural, or violent, as
it pleases God; and with a better spirit, (to use his own sweet expressions)
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taked away: blessed be the name of the Lord,
Chap. 1. 21. Our earthly buildings are not founded upon the rocks; we dwell in
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. Job 4. 19. Or like those
houses which (...) Zach. Schol. Disput. Contr. Philos.
little children make up of sand, and when they have done, pull them down
again. And as Hiram said to Solomon: What are these cities, which thou have
given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day. That
is, (as the word signifies) dirt, or mire. Such, and so frail, are all our
possessions here.

(...) Theocr. Idyl. 4.
not to be too much dejected: Our case in these sad days, is not unlike
theirs, in the reign of Asa; When there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
countries, 2 Chronicles. 15. 5. And we may say, as Job sometime did; God has
delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over to the hands of the wicked. I
was at ease, but he has broken me asunder: he has also taken me by the neck,
and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark. His archers compass me
round about, etc Job 16. 11, 12, 13, etc. We have a war amongst us, and that
which is the worst of wars, Cum bello civili res aguentur, periclitabit tunc
patria, and in ancipites casus, certumque urbis excidium concidet repent.
Catil. in Cic. Resp. 2.
a wasting, and destroying, civil, intestine war, Bella geri placuit nullos
habitura triumphos.
a war whereof there comes no triumphs, such as do follow others, that are
against a foreign enemy; but even the Et victi and victores in lacrymas fufi.
Tacit.
conquerors with the conquered may have cause to sit down at last in tears.

But shall we therefore cast off our hope in God, who creates war, and makes
peace, and rules all things after his own will? or shall we say, as Livy, in
the like case; If now a stranger should come in upon us Vix open deorum omnium
res sisti potuisset.
, heaven and salvation it self could not save us? God forbid. We may lose all
we have on earth, even our life and all; but God will be no loser, whose cause
we manage; and with him we shall be gainers at the last. Iustus Abel ecclesiam
sanguine dedicavit. Ambr. de Cain and Abel.
Righteous Abel dedicated the Church in his blood, says Ambrose, and by the
drops of it we may see the way to heaven. And he will make his enemies to know,
(...) Car. Rhod. per Hom. 17.
what it is to fight against the Lord. And when he makes inquisition for
blood, he will remember them. And they shall fly to the pit, and none shall
rescue them, Prove. 28. 17.

Paul, I have learned in what soever state I am, therewith to be content, Phil.
4. 11. How shameful is it for us, to fall short of Esau, in this duty, who
could say unto his brother Jacob; I have (...) multum
enough? Genesis 33. 9. Where is the man that has attained to this degree of
contentedness? And yet, hear I beseech you, how far Jacob has outstrip'd him,
when he replied to Esau; God has dalt graciously with me; and I have (...) omne
all. For so the word signifies in the Original, and differs from the word
used in Esau's speech, though both alike translated in our books. We lose much
inward peace and comfort, that we might enjoy, even in this uncertain
pilgrimage of ours, for want of this rich grace of contentation. Adam could not
be happy in Paradise, no nor Lucifer in heaven, when not contented. We must
have what we would have, (...) Chryshom. 2. de Orat.
though it be a mercy to us sometimes to be denied. I wish we could learn even
of that heathen man, to order our requests we make to God: whose suit was;
(...) etc.
That the Lord would give him what he knew good for him, though not asked; and
keep evil from him, though desired. To conclude, amidst all these mutations,
and alterations, let it be our only care, to cast our care upon God, who
cares for us: and be content with such things as ye have: for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. The words in the (...)
Greek, are much more vigorous; there being five negatives to intend the
sense: as if he had said; I will not leave thee, no I will not: I will not
leave thee, nor forsake thee.

A second observation from these vicissitudes of prayer and praise, pressed in
the two verses so often here reiterated, may be this:

Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: is any merry? let him sing Psalms.
Iam. 5. 13. And yet, I think, without offense a man may say, Afflicted, or not
afflicted, let us pray; Merry, or not merry, let us sing Psalms. And I believe
it was not said amiss by that great Divine; (...) Basil Nag^.
Singing and praying are in every season seasonable. But when we have said all
we can, we must acknowledge, that for every work there is an appointed time,
and every thing is most pleasant and beautiful in the fittest season of it.
There is a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice. How shall we sing the Lords
song in a strange land? Psalm. 137. 4. If Danniel could not sing the Lords song
in that captivity, there spoken of; Daniel, I am sure, could pray unto the Lord
then, and that most fervently: Dan. 9. 4, etc. (...) Chryside Orat. hom. 1.
Nay, he chose rather to die, says Chrysostom, then to be deprived of the use
of this holy Ordinance. This Psalm has taught us how to address our selves
to God, according to his mind, and our necessities and occasions, at all
times, and in every season: when we are in trouble, to cry to God, as in the
Text; and when delivered, to call upon our selves and others, as in verse. 8. O
that men would praise the Lord, etc.

Psalm. 50. 15. may serve our turn, added to what you find here in this Psalm,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee; and what then requires
he of us? and thou shall glorify me. And,

(...) Clem. Alex.
active in every holy duty. God has directed us, and all for our good. We may
justly fail of our desires, if we fail in these performances, especially being
so exactly taught, and that by such a teacher.



It seems all repetitions, even in prayers as well as praises, are not
condemned, nor will fall under that prohibition of our Savior, Matthew. 6. 7.
But when you pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do. There are
repetitions which are not accounted vain. Blind Bartimeus cries after our Lord
Christ, and again in the same words, Thou Son of David have mercy on me, Luke
18. 38, 39. Yea, and our Lord himself, in the days of his flesh, when he
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared, Hebr. 5.
7. even then, as appears in the Gospel, he prayed once and again, and a third
time, (...)
saying the same words. Matthew. 26. 44.

to power out thy soul before the Lord, in some request thou have to make unto
him, resolving not to let him go until he bless thee, though asking the same
thing, thou art enforced to use the same words often, but with renewed
breathings of the Spirit, thy prayer shall be as well accepted as if with much
variety of language thou were able to set forth thy suite to God. Vain
bablings, such as are found in formal Liturgies, (had such superstitious
veneration of too many, and called The Divine service, either for the excellent
divinity thought to be in them, or that the Divine Majesty is best worshipped
by them) such I say justly may be ranked with the follies of the Heathen; as
when the Minister (whose Office it is, to be the peoples mouth to God, in
public) shall only propound things to be prayed for, and then the people
twenty times shall say, We beseech thee to hear us, etc. we beseech thee to
hear us, etc. only out of formality, and without devotion, as we know it has
been practiced. God is a Spirit, and as he hears without ears, so he looks
not much after thy tongue, or words, whether plain or polished, whether the
same, or varied; (...) etc. Chrysostom. (...) Ma^^ Hom. 33
it is the heart, the mind, the spirit, that he requires, both in prayers and
praises.

I fear I have detained you over long in these few observations, I come up now
more closely to the Text it self, Then they cried, etc.

In these words we find three things remarkable; first, (...), the condition
of Gods Church and people, trouble and distresses. Secondly, (...), the
practice and the exercise of Gods people in this state; Then they cried unto
the Lord. Thirdly, (...), their success, and the good issue of this practice,
And he delivered them, etc.



That the condition of the Church, or. its most usual lot, is to to lie under
sorrows and afflictions

I say, most usual: For I will not (says God) contend for ever, neither will
I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which
I have made: Isa. 57. 16. But as we say of the several Callings and Trades of
life, this man professes such a Calling, and that man another; and as the Poet
said of Hermogenes, Et quamvis ^a^et Hermogenes Cantor tamen --
Though he hold his peace, (peradventure being asleep) yet he is a good singer,
and a Musician by profession: so say I of the people of God, their trade of
life is suffering; and as Julian told the Christians, when they complained of
his cruelty, (...)
It Is your profession to endure tribulation. Though they may have some short
refreshings now and then, and (...) Theocr.
some fair days, though such commonly prove, but (as we say) weather-breeders.

This truth appears from all Stories of the Church. Should I begin where even
now I left, at Noah; should I recount the lives of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, and all their posterity; Aegypts captivity, and their long travails in
the wilderness; should I remember but the sufferings of our primitive Martyrs
since the Gospel, and of later times, you would require no other proof of what
I said, touching the usual portion of the Saints in this pilgrimage. As the
lilie among thorns, so is my love among the daughters, Cantic. 2. 2. The world
hates you, says our Savior; and again, In the world you shall have trouble,
John 15. 19. and 16. 33. and he gives this reason, because you are not of the
world; you are strangers here, and every dog will bark at Strangers. But
that is not all, God is not so regardlesse of his people, not an hair falls from
the head of one of them, but by his providence; and Quid illi pereat, cui
capillus non, etc.
what can he lose that cannot lose an hair, etc?

The word affords us many arguments, some with reference to grace, some to
glory, showing the grounds of this, Gods dispensation toward his own.

1. From grace, we have these reasons.

1. There is something of (...).
Adam's filth, even in the purest, which must be washed out with these waters
of Marah. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is
all the fruit, to take away his sin. Isa. 27. 9. In that mighty tempest
(Jonah 1. 4, 7.) the Mariners make enquiry, after their way, for whose cause
this evil was upon them: and when it shall be told, as by the Apostle to the
Corinthians, 1 epist. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among
you, and many fall asleep: it will make men look about them, and begin to think
it is time to judge themselves that they be not judged, Verse. 31. to search into
their ways, and to repent.

Secondly, affliction sometime is intended for prevention of sin. Laetus
animus facile lapsum i^currit, quod tristi and afflicto difficile evenit.
Arnob. in loc.
Men are apt to offend in days of mirth, who are soon checked in times of
sorrow. Job feared his children, that they might sin in their days of
feasting, Chap. 1. 5. and David found by sad experience in himself; Before I
was afflicted I went wrong. Paul was wrapped up into the third heavens, but he
must down again; and then, (...). Cyrill. Alex.
lest he should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of the
revelations, a thorn in the flesh is given him, the messenger of Satan to
buffet him. 2 Corinthians. 12. 17. that he may learn to glory in tribulations, Romans
5. 3. For (as Clemangius says) though Amara est amaritudo flagellorum, quibus
a Deo corripimur; sed amarior est amaritudo peccatorum, quibus a Deo separamur.
Clem.
there be bitterness in the rods, by which we are corrected of God, yet there
is much more bitterness in the sins, by which we are separated from God. And
therefore, when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the world. 1 Corinthians. 11. 32.

Thirdly, trouble and distresses (...) Cyr. Alex.
drive men to good, force men to God; sickness, lamenesse, blindness, etc.
brought many unto Christ, who otherwise had never sought him; and these seeking
cure for bodily infirmities, found present remedy also for the maladies of the
soul: what else meant our Savior by that speech, Thy faith has saved thee?
(...)? sanum te fecit? non salvum te fecit, has made thee whole? no, has
brought salvation to thee. It Is said by Basil of Seleucia, concerning the
Centurion who came to Christ, in the behalf of his servant whose sickness was
his sorrow; (...) Orat. in Centu.
The sickness of the servant was the Masters health; The servant was sick in
body, and the Master sanctified in soul: And that Nobleman or Courtier, of whom
we read, John 4. went to Christ for his son; and the issue of that blessed
journey was, himself believed and his whole house, verse. 53. These, and such
souls afflicted, might after truly say with Themistocles unto his children;
(...) Plut. in vita Themist.
O children, we had been lost utterly, had we not been lost.

Fourthly, the Lord by these tries the spirits of men; God led his people in
the wilderness forty years, to prove them, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, Romans 4. 3, 4. Courage Marcet sine adversario
virtus; tunc apparet quanta sit, cum quid possit patientia ostendit. Sen. de
provid.
decays (says Seneca) without an adversary; then it appears how great it is,
when patience shows what it can do. The valor and prowess of a soldier is
seen in the battle; it is not big looks, or great words will do it, but his
grapling with an enemy: If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is
small, Prove. 24. 10. Exhibetur and in lectulo virtus. Sen.
Strength is tried in weakness, when thou lie upon thy bed, when sickness
is upon thee, and when thou art put to the use of all thy graces, as faith,
hope, patience, and the like.

Fifthly, graces are much increased by these trials, such as those I named
before. Solidissima pars est corporis, quam frequens usus agitavit. Sen.
It proves the most solid part of the body which is most used, most in
exercise. It was not said amiss of one, He Qui nescit orare, discat navigare.
(...) Athen. and Posid.
that knows not not how to pray, let him go to sea; especially if that be
true which I find in that Heathen Writer, He that never sailed, never saw ill,
They that go down to the Sea in ships: that do business in great waters: These
see the works of the Lord; and his wonders in the deep. For he commands,
and raises the stormy winds: etc. Then they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, etc. Verse. 23, 24, 28. of this Psalm. And as afflictions abound,
where grace is once begun, there grace abounds. Our calamities are very great
in this our distressed, distracted kingdom; and when was there such a willing
people to spend and to be spent in Gods cause? when was there such a spirit of
prayer? O blessed fruits of our afflictions!

Secondly, the Lord intends to work glory to himself, and to his Redeemed Ones,
from these distresses. Out of the eater came meat, according to Samsons Riddle,
Judge 14. 14. And for this cause these times are brought upon us.

1. Glory to himself.

1. For first he justifies the power of his grace against our adversary the
Devil; as in the case of Job most evidently. There was a day when the sons of
God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them,
Job 1. 6. Satan, that accuser of the brethren, who came, no doubt, upon some
such errand at that time: who, when the Lord, glorying in the integrity of
that servant, said, That there was none like him in the earth; a perfect and an
upright man, Verse. 8. replieth, Does Job fear God for naught? Verse. 9. Have
thou not made an hedge about him? Verse. 10. Have thou not been a good Master to
him? But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will
curse thee to thy face. Verse. 11. And when the Lord was pleased to deliver all
he had into his power, and suffered him to strip him of all that might be
comfortable unto him: and afterward enlarged his Commission, and gave him leave
to smite his body with sore Biles from the sole of the foot, unto his crown,
Chap. 2. 7. even then the Devil found, to his confusion, and Gods glory,
Iacett in storquilinio, cui prius somnuns capere licebat in purpura: ut liquido
constet, eum Dei gratuitum, non mercenarium esse cultorem. Mur. not. in Sen.
that when Job lay upon the dunghill, who was wont to lie under his coverings
of Purple and Scarlet; that he was not a mercenary, but an ingenuous and free
servant of God. So that God in this respect will gain glory to himself from the
sad sufferings of his Saints.

2. It manifestly appears, that saints are added to the church daily, and so
great honor unto God, by the examples of the patient sufferings of his
faithful Martyrs. Take, my brethren, the prophets for an example of suffering
affliction, and of patience, etc. Iam. 5. 10. For if when ye do well, and
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God: For even
hereunto were ye called. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that we should follow his steps. 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21. Thus the people
followed to see the Martyrdom of that glorious Martyr Cyprian, and considering
his constancy, cried out, Moriamur simul cum sancto Episcopo. Pont. in pass.
Cypr.
Let us also die with our holy Pastor: and Justin Martyr affirms of himself,
that he being trained up in the Schools of Plato's Philosophy, applied himself
to the knowledge of Christ. (...) etc. Apol. 1.
by seeing the patience, even to the shedding of their blood, in the Christians
in that age. And Theodoret shows how in this case it was, as in the felling
of woods; There are many more shoots spring forth, then there are trees cut
down -- (...) De Cur. Gr. aff. Ser. 9.
, and the blood of those that are cut down, is but as a watering to those young
ones that shoot forth. Thus some are put to it, to Quidam dura patiuntur, ut
alios pati doceant. Sen.
endure heavy things, that they may teach others to endure the like.

Thirdly, the Lord is pleased to dispose so of his servants, that when they are
sunk deep in sorrows, he may exalt the glory and Majesty of his power, in
drawing them out of the pit (...) Alex. Rhart.
: He casts them into extremities, that he might save them out of such doubtful
dangers. The blind man in the Gospel, to whom our Savior gave sight, was so
borne, to that end, that the works of God might be manifested in him, John 9.
3. He suffered Lazarus to lie four days dead, John 11. 39 (...) Bas. Sell. de
Laz.
. that his power might be the more seen in raising him, and restoring him to
life. He can bring life out of death; out of war, peace; and reformation out
of the greatest deformity and confusion. When the Israelites were forced to
those straits, being Inter mare and bostes, inter un^^ and gladios.
between their enemies and the Seas, between the swords and the waters, and the
Mountains being on either side, that they knew not what way to take: Moses then
bids them, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14. 13. and
accordingly they saw it, as the story shows. Thus Gods honor is most
advanced, when his people are at the lowest.

Secondly, the Lord also turns the crosses of his people into crowns; and
they make also for their glory, that they may see, how he of very
faithfulness, causes them to be troubled.

1. For first, the readiest way to heaven, is by weeping cross. Christ, who
came down from thence, could find no other way thither again; as he sometime
said himself: Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his
glory? Luke 24. 26. And thus taught Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. 22. That we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. To which also
agrees that of the Apostle: Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6. God deals not with his children, as
many foolish parents do with theirs; who (...) Plut. (...).
by their fond affection to them, find cause at length not to affect them at
all. For if ye be without chastisement, then ye are bastards and not sons, Heb.
12. 8. If the Lord say once; I will make my fury toward thee to rest, -- and
will be no more angry, Ezekiel. 16. 42. Nunquam magis irascitur deus, quam cum non
irascitur. Bern.
thou may take it so, as if in plain terms he had told thee, I will withdraw
my love from thee, and will never more be pleased with thee. His fatherly
correction keeps off the severitie of his judgment, fits thee for mercy, and
by consequent for heaven too. It is, I confess, a sight for heaven only; Pium
pauperem in sinu divitis. Aug.
A godly poor man lying in a rich man's bosom: And this is the meaning here,
Lazarus, who after his sufferings here on earth, was by Angels carried into
Abraham's bosom, Luke 6. 22.

Secondly, as afflictions to such are a way to glory; so they work a
proportionable reward in glory. If the damned lie so orderly in h^ll; that it
is easier there for some then others; then surely there is no less order
observed of God in heaven: but as some shall shine as the firmament, so others,
as the stars in the firmament, for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. And one star
differs from another star in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. It should seem
otherwise, by that parable of the laborers in the vineyard; to every one of
which was given his penny; neither more nor less, come he sooner or later:
(...) Plat.
which may be thought unequal. The Schoolmen therefore would have us to
conceive, Denarius unus, differentia claritatis. P. Lumb. Sent. lib. 4 Did. 49.
that though every man had a penny; yet one man's penny was brighter, or better
silver then another: that is, the one may have a more clear vision of glory,
then another. And why may we not much rather take his judgment, who
conceives, Etiam labores in praemio mimorandi. Magal. in Cart. Mos.
that the work of those who bore the heat and burden of the day, is reckoned in
their wages, and their pains accounted as no small part of their payment: it
being an honor to them so to be employed? To you it us given not only to
believe in Christ; but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1. 29. It Is not an
omnibus datum, not given to all: it is an honor God has vouchsafed to you. As
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater riches, then the treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. But let this be only so, in the account of those, that are
of such affections, as that Moses was; it will no doubt be found most true; Quo
plus tormenti, tanto plus crit gloriae. Sen.
That as the troubles are, so at least shall be the glory.

Thirdly, I said at least: But indeed, (...) Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
it shall far exceed; which may be another reason, why the Lord honors his
servants with such trials. The Apostle does make good this assertion to the
full, 2 Cor. 4. 17. where he says, For our light affliction, which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
(...)
Where he compares things present with things future; a moment with eternity;
light with weight; and affliction with glory. And by his expression, after the
(...)
Original, who shows how infinitely the latter does transcend the former.
And again, Romans 8. 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us. (...)
I reckon, or account: says the Apostle, and truly there was no man fitter to
make the reckoning or account, then he; who suffered more then any in his time,
2 Cor. 11. 23. and who had been rapt up into the third heavens: 2 Cor. 12. 2.
And by experience he found it true; that there is no comparison betwixt them.
And whereas (says Chrysostom) (...) etc Chrysostom. in Loc.
it may sad thy heart a little; that the afflictions, they are present, and the
glory is to come; these in sense and feeling, they in hope and expectation: let
this rather comfort thee, (says he) that though the present time how short
soever, may comprehend thy sufferings; yet such shall be thy glory, that it
requires an eternity of being to contain it.

Thus have I showed some reasons amongst many, of this Gods dealing with his
servants in this life; who, though their passions are both many, and great,
causing them, as in this Psalm, to cry, and cry again to God; yet I believe
you see such issue of these sufferings, that I think I may be bold to say, in
the words of Seneca, I Persuadebo jude tibi ut nunquam boni viri misereare.
shall persuade you hence, never to pity any good man in trouble; he being then
in his readiest way from grace to glory. Yet this must be confessed as a truth,
both by divine testimony, and humane experience: No chastening for the present
seems joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.
11.

Come we now to the uses of this doctrine.

Istae manus me portant ad paradisum. Job. de Promy.
These hands shall carry me to Paradise. And it is as truly said of that great
Divine, touching God, who throws sometimes at us (...) Naz. in Carm.
a dart that seems sharp and bitter; yet the hand is always sweet that
throws it. It is the hand of a Father, not an enemy: and Nullus pater tam
pater. Tert.
there is no father so fatherly: He that has put such bowels into an earthly
father, that he cannot endure to see his child's arm, or hand cut off, unless
in case to prevent the creeping of a Gangrene, that may endanger his childs
life: without all doubt would not himself deal so sharply with his dearest
children, were it not for prevention of some great evil, or obtaining of some
good thereby. Remember to this purpose, how patient God has been with us; how
like the patient shepherd, Erroneam ovem patientia pastoris requirit, and
invenit. Nam impatientia unam facile contemneret, etc. Tertul. dc Pat: (...)
etc. Bas Sell (...).
who sought so diligently for his lost sheep, which impatience would have
scorned and neglected, being but one; so patiently carried it upon his
shoulders, when he had found it. How patient has this Father been to his
prodigals; and how lovingly has he entertained them; when the elder brother
after an impatient manner grudged at his Fathers pity and toleration? He has
been patient with us, till there was no remedy: and therefore forget not the
exhortation which speaks unto you as unto children; My son despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, Heb. 12. 5.
He knows what is good for thee, what sin he would purge out of thee; what
grace he would work in thee: or what he would exercise, or augment in thee:
what glory he seeks to himself; what most especially unto thee: that then which
thou hopest for, expect with patience, Romans 8. 25. Quaerat aliquis Quando
perveniant ad speratum illud gaudium? Respon let patientia, Cum dcus de lerit.
Nullae sunt longae morae ejus quod certo eveniet. lib. de Pat. (...) Theocr.
Tertullian says) When shall I come unto that hoped for, and expected joy, and
glory? Patience makes answer, When the Lord shall grant it. No delays are
called long, of such things as shall surely come to pass. What though thou
may endure many a storm and tempest, it may be to the hazard of this vessel
of thy body: thou shall at last arrive at the fair havens, and come unto the
port, where thou would be.

Secondly, this lesson, so grounded, may instruct us to desire of God, rather
to sanctify, then to remove a trouble, till he has done the work for which he
sent it. David said of his enemies, that they came about him like bees: he does
not say like waspes. For though they used their stings, yet he found honey in
them too. There has been much ado amongst the learned, to reconcile two texts
of Scripture; that of Genes 47. 31. with that of Heb. 11. 21. The first place
says, Israel bowed himself upon the beds head. The second, reciting the same
story, says of that Patriarch, when he was dying, that he worshipped, leaning
upon the top of his staff, or (...)
rod. I will not trouble you with the various conceits of the Interpreters,
upon those places. I will only show you how one takes upon him, to reconcile
them readily. Think you (says he) there is no correspondence between a bed and
a rod? Why? I dare make it good, by the testimony of the Martyrs, and many of
the people of God: That Sancti nunquam dulcius requiescunt, quam cum laboribus,
and virgis fatigantur. Magal in Cant. Mos.
the Saints never rest more sweetly on their beds, then when they have been
wearied under the rods of God. Then they can talk of their griefs and
sufferings, as men tell their dreams, says Anselm, upon those words of the
Apostle; As dying, and behold we live, etc. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing,
2 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Thus I have heard one tell, Quasi sedebam, quasi loquebar.
Ausclm. in Loc. Dolor habet quasi. gaudium non habet quast. Ibid.
Me thought I sat thus, and me thought thus I spoke: when all proved but a
dream. So he. Me thought I was a dying, but behold, I am alive. Me thought I
was full of grief, and behold I am rejoicing. Thus the Apostles went away
after whippings, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the
Name of Christ: as if they had but dreamed of scourging, and were indeed
sleeping upon a soft bed. Afflictions sanctified will be found joyful in the
issue. Pray we then for this grace, and expect this rest; rather then struggle
to be rid of them, yea or desire God to take them off, till he has finished,
what he intended by them.

though surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted, Isa. 53. 4. Thus those
Barbarians, Act. 18. 4. when they beheld the (...) Basil.
viper hanging upon the hand of Paul, said one to another: Doubtless this man
is a murderer, who though he has escaped the sea, vengeance will not suffer
him to live. Though soon they fell into the other extreme, (when they saw how
he shook off the beast into the fire) changing their minds. (...) Chrysostom.
Of a murderer they make him a God. How bitterly did those unfriendly friends
of Job deal with him in this kind, adding affliction to the afflicted;
Eliphaz saying unto him, Who ever perished being innocent? or where were the
upright destroyed? lob 4. 7. And Bildad, to the same effect: Behold, God will
not cast away an upright man: Chap. 8. 20. plainly insinuating, that vengeance
from God was gone out against him for his sins. Whereas Job tells them, that
they forged lies, Chap. 13. 4. Will ye speak wickedly for Gods defense, and
talk deceitfully for his cause? verse. 7. They thought they spoke upon Gods
part, while ignorant of his ways, they blasphemed the generation of the just.
A sin too common, and justly here confuted, by Gods usual dealing with most
beloved children. The little boy, seeing his mother pull the Roses and Violets
to pieces; and putting them in a mortar, and pownding them with a pestill,
cries out, his mother will spoil all the flowers; when she intends to make
them more useful: so foolish men conceive of God, when he is pleased to bruise
his choycest servants under tribulations, as if he had an intention utterly to
ruin them; when he is in the way of making them more fit for his service, and
after that more glorious. Learn then to be acquainted with Gods dispensations,
and leave thus to censure them, as cut off from him, whom he is drawing nigher
unto him. And say to every good man so afflicted: God has been pleased to
seem, as if he had departed from thee for a season: but his purpose herein is;
that thou may enjoy him for ever.

(...) etc. Macar. Hom 49.
Here is indeed the ready way to heaven; and present (...) Basil. Sele^c.
sorrows are to the godly most certain arguments of future joys. My
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, Iam. 1. 2.
Yea, Quin insuper grat^lari, and gaudere nos decet dignatione divinae
castigationis. Ego, inquit, quos diligo castigo. O servum beatum cujus
emendationi Dominus instat; cui dignatur irasci, etc. Tertul. de Patient.
we ought to give thanks, that God vouchsafes to chastise us. Whom I love
(says he) I chasten. O blessed servant (says that Ancient) for whose
amendment God takes such care, whom he is pleased to be angry with, etc. All
those reasons before brought to show, why God has given his Spouse no other
dower, his children no other portion in this life, may be so many motives, to
persuade to consolation in our saddest days. And unto these we may add many
more, As first,

First, by crosses we are conformed unto the image of his Son, Romans 8. 9.

Secondly, Christ himself suffers with us, nay suffers in us. Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4. Christ is the head unto that body
mystical, whereof we are the members. Let a man kick another on the shinnes,
or tread upon his foot, (says Augustine) the head will cry out, and say; Curme
calcas? cur me comprimis?
Why do thou kick me? why do thou tread upon me?

Thirdly, he will so strengthen us with his grace, that we may say with the
Apostle: I can do all things (I, and suffer all things too) in Christ, that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

Fourthly, he will sweeten all those waters of Marah to us, that we shall find
them most delicious in the close. (...) Plat in Ph^d.
The worlds sweets, we know, will prove but bitterness in the end. Even for
the present they are but like those Aromaticks, whereof the harlot boasts,
saying, Prove. 7. 17. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Ecce ut cum uno dulci duo amarissima consociat.
Behold (says Clemangius) how with one sweet, (a dry stick of cinnamon) ye
have two extreme bitters, myrrh and aloes. Whereas all bitters are sweetness
which the Spouse or Christ, his Church, receive from him. A bundle of myrrh is
my beloved unto me, he shall lie all night between my breasts, Cant. 1. 13. A
bundle of bitterness, yet as sweetly lodged, and as near the heart, as may be.

Fifthly, and lastly, let this be a motive of comfort in our miseries: that
look by how much the light is sweeter unto him, that has for a long time been
shut up in some darkesome dungeon; then unto those, who have always enjoyed
the Sun in his brightness: as the haven is to the mariner, that has been
tossed, for many months, in the tempestuous seas: so shall heaven be unto that
soul, that has walked heavily in the darkness of affliction; and has been
weatherbeaten with the storms of griefs and troubles.

Thus much may serve, touching the state of Gods Church here on earth.

2. I come now to the second thing considerable, in the Text, which I called
(...), the practice, and the exercise of the Church remaining in this state, in
these expressions, Then they cried unto the Lord.

In which words you readily observe three things. First, that which is here
employed, which I may call, the act; they prayed. Secondly, that which is here
expressed, which is the manner; They did it servently, They cried. Thirdly,
that without which all had been in vain, and that is the object, unto whom
they prayed crying; that is, to the Lord. Then they cried, etc.

I might well here observe, that Afflictio facit religiosos. Eras. in Coll.
Distresses force devotion. Erasmus has observed it, in the rudest mariners;
and we find the same, in that Prophecy, or history of Jonah. When Numa had
ordained many religious ceremonies in Rome, and had induced the people to a
constant practice of them: Tullus Hostilius, who succeeded him, cast them all
out again, and held (as the T. Li^ius.
Historian tells us) nothing less comely in a King, then to submit himself to
such observances. But when a pestilence had once raged in that great City, and
a long lingering sickness had pulled down his own proud flesh: then not great
sacrifices only must be offered, but every trifling superstition must be
punctually observed. The Psalmist notes, how even the brute creatures do in
their kind cry, and call in time of need, and that to God, the great Creator
and preserver of them all. The lions roar (says he) suffering hunger: and
they seek their meat of God. And again: Thou feedest the young ravens that call
upon thee.

But I will not stay you upon this Consideration: But show you what this
practice of the Saints more fully declares to us. And to this purpose shall
make this my second general Doctrine.

(...) Chrysostom. de Orat.
prayer, or crying to the Lord, is an effectual means to get help, and full
deliverance in troubles and distresses.

Where we have just occasion for the clearing of this point, to open, at least
briefly, every of those three things forementioned; as,

First, the act, which is praying. Prayer is a duty necessary, and that, vi
praecepti, God has commanded it: It is as well Dei veneratio, as hominis
petitio, a special part of Gods worship from man, as well as an expression of
man's suits to God: God has made this a character of his people who worship and
serve him: they are such as call upon the Name of the Lord. He has given this
title to the place of his public worship: My house shall be called the house
of prayer to all Nations. While we pray to God, we give him that honor which
is due unto his Name: as, first, of (...), etc. Cyril. Hieros. Cat. 6.
Omniscience, knowing the hearts of men: For prayer is the (...). Damasc.
lifting up of the soul to God. Secondly, of Omnipotence, as, that he is able
to grant us what we ask, and (...) etc. Mac. hom. 12.
to do what he will Thirdly, of Mercy, as being ready, yea more ready to hear
then we to ask. He prepares the heart to prayer, and his ear hearkneth
thereto. And, which concerns our matter in hand, prayer is required of us,
necessitate medii, as a necessary means of procuring good unto us from him,
from whom every good giving and every perfect gift does come, Iam. 1. 17. Ask
and ye shall have, says Christ, Luke 11. 9. And, Ye have not, because ye ask
not, says Christ's Apostle, Iam. 4. 2. If thou want any thing that may be
good for thee, prayer is the key of heaven. Those four keys, whereof the
Paraphr. Hier. in Genesis 32.
Paraphrast of Hieros. speaks, saying, That God ever keeps them in his own
hands, and will not give them unto any Angel whatsoever, (the keys of the womb,
of the grave, of rain, of food) are all turned in Gods hand by prayer; or
prayer is able to do the office of them all. Hannah prayed, and her barren
womb was opened; Christ prayed, and the grave was opened to Lazarus: Elias
prayed, and it rained: and he opens his hand and fills every living thing
with his blessing, and that undoubtedly, when they call upon him.

If thou desire deliverance, when afflicted, I cried (says our Prophet) unto
the Lord in my trouble, and he delivered me (...) Chrysostom. de Orat. (...). 2
. If the whole Land, or the Church be in distress, through any judgment, or
any correction of the Lord; see what Solomon obtained by his prayer, at that
solemn dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 33, etc. the place deserves that
you should read it out at large; and see how it confirms the Point in hand. And
to conclude, that you may know how necessary your most diligent and frequent
prayers. are in afflictions, David, a man acquainted with sorrows, has penned
a Psalm of purpose, which he calls, the poor man's prayer; or, as the title of it
is translated in our Bibles, A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed,
etc. Psalm. 102.

Secondly, but in the next place let us consider the manner how we must pray,
that is fervently, feelingly; the word is here, They cried. Indeed we seldom
read of any of the Saints of God in prayer, but some way or other we may
observe this kind of zeal, and vehemence expressed, or implied. We read
nothing uttered by Moses, in way of prayer, in that place, where yet the Lord
says to him, Wherefore criest thou unto me? Exodus 14. 15. there were assuredly
those groans unutterable, Romans 8. 26. such as were in the heart of Hannah
praying, without vocal expression; and though Eli most rashly censured her,
she modestly, and like her self, replied; I am ^ Sam. 1. 15.
a woman of a sorrowful spirit, etc. I have powered out my soul before the
Lord David most frequently, in this book of Psalms, is found praying and
sighing, praying and weeping, praying and groaning; and nothing more usual
with him then to express his prayer by this word, crying. Sometimes he tells
how he roared, for the very disquietnesse of his heart; as if he had said with
Job, My sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are powered out like
waters, Chap. 3. 24. Velut und^ impellitur unda; as one wave drives on another,
so one sigh forces another, and one roaring follows upon another. Even the
Son of God himself, in the days of his flesh, thus offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5. 7. and at the raising of
his friend Lazarus, he groaned in himself, Ioh. 11. 38. and verse. 33. he
groaned in the spirit, and was troubled; or, as the words are after the
Original, (...). that word in 2 Pet. 2. 4. ((...)) used of the Devils
tormented in Tartarus or, Hell, is derived from hence.
He tormented himself. By all which testimonies it is evident, that prayer,
that expects audience, must not be slight and perfunctory, but active and
earnest; and the reasons are, first, because, cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord negligently. Secondly, because the Spirit it self thus makes
intercession for us, helping our infirmities, Romans 8. 26. And, thirdly, God
loves thus violently to be dealt withal, thus importunately to be sought
unto. This our Savior manifests in the Parable of the man that came unto his
friend at midnight, and desired earnestly to borrow a little bread of him; and
at length had his request, not because he was his friend, but because (...).
he was so impudent; so it is in the words, Luke 11. 8. and in that parable also
which he spoke, that men ought to pray, and not faint, Luke 18. 1. where, after
much delay, the unrighteous Judge avengeth the poor widow, lest she should
weary him out with her importunities. In both which parables God plainly
delivers his own mind, that he will surely hear, and avenge his elect, who
cry (or (...).
roar) after him day and night, verse. 7.

3. In the third place take notice of the Object, that is the Lord. The Lord
alone is to be sought by our prayers, who is a present help in trouble: he
calls upon us to take this course, Call upon me, etc. Psalm. 50. and complains
of such as forsake the fountain of living waters, and dig to themselves pits
that can hold no water. The Philosopher observes this difference between Arts
and Virtues; we account him the best Artist, not that would, but that can work
best; but we count him most virtuous, (...). Arist.
not that can and will not; but that would do best, although he cannot. We need
not say to God, or the Lord Christ, Master, if thou can do any thing; nor on
the other side, If thou will, thou cast: we need make no doubt, either of his
power or will; he is both able and willing to relieve all suitors, and to
supply in every case, when they seek his face, and wait upon him; when they
pray and cry unto him. He is the God that hears prayers; and unto him shall
all prayers come. Read through all the records of the world, and show me, if
possibly you can, where any Saint of God made supplications unto any, but to
God only; and search as you go along, if you can find, that ever he said to
any suitor as Philip of Macedon to that poor woman, (...).
I have no leisure; or, Go away and come to morrow, if it were seasonable for
him to enjoy his suite at present? It was sweetly said of that gracious
Emperor, (...) Theocr.
who would deny no Petitioner; A vultu Imperatoris nominem oportet tristem
discedere.
It is not meet, that any man should go out sadly from the presence of his
King. Who ever came to God, and went out from him heavy, or unsatisfied?
Though he sees nothing in us why he should regard us, yet he sees something
in himself why he should hear us, when we cry unto him; were it but this
only, because he delights in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. And ever may it be the
delight of our hearts, that God is pleased to make mercy his delight.

By this which has been spoken touching these three particulars, the act, the
manner, and the object of prayer, I conceive the general doctrine fully
cleared; that,

Earnest prayer or crying unto God is an effectual means of procuring help in
trouble. I come now to application.

Nabals) even as a stone within them? 1 Samuel 25. 37. Are there not many such as
Hannah speaks of in her song, The wicked are silent in darkness, that is, in
the darkness of affliction, who finding their strength sailing, for by
strength no man shall prevail, 1 Samuel 2. 9. lie Murmura dum secum, and rabiosa
silentia radant.
murmuring and repining? And others, with that wicked King, crying out, Behold,
this evil is of the Lord, what should we wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kings
6. 33. Are there not some, who like Asa, seek not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians? 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. Physicians (...)
of no value, as Job styled his friends, Job 13. 4. the word there is the same
with that which is given to (...) Levit. 26. 1.
Idols: so they seek unto their arm of flesh, and make Idols of their Forces,
and vainly rely upon them, which cannot help? And lastly, are not too many of
us like unto Ahaz, who in the time of this distress do trespass yet more
against the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. If it be so, as I fear it is, then it is
high time for us, now at last to bestirre our selves, and to learn to hold fast
by God, and to betake our selves to prayer, our surest refuge, in such a sad
condition as we are in.

Marcus Aurelius prevailed by prayer, called therefore, The (...).
thunder-darting Legion. Ye have heard how much the Emperor Constantine has,
in this kind, ascribed to prayer. How often did the people of God prevail
against their enemies by this stratageme? When Moses prayed, when Joshua
prayed, when all the men of Israel fasted, and wept, and prayed, then victories
were obtained. It were infinite to recount what mighty things have been
accomplished (...). Chrysostom. de Orat. Hom. 1.
by prayer, things to man's judgment impossible: What diseases, seeming
incurable, have been healed by prayer? what dead raised? what devils cast out?
It Is worth the noting, that Peter said to Simon Magus, Pray to God, if per haps
the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 8. 22. as if he had told
him, if it happen well to thee any way, it will be by prayer. Upon this
practice, man may, with humble reverence, expostulate with God; How long will thou be angry with thy people that prays? As Amalek was overcome while Moses
held up his hands: so (...) Macar. hom. 50. Object.
lift up the hands of thy soul to heaven, and thou shall close with God, and
then Satan and all his Forces shall fall under thy feet.

But some may here object, We have prayed often, and the Lord has not been
pleased to hear us, but rather appeared, as rejecting all our suits.

James, Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, Chap. 4. 3. Ye miss
sometimes in the manner, sometimes in the matter, many times in the end; so
that he said not amiss, that told thee, (...) Chrysostom. de Orat. hom. 2. Audit
ad alutem, cum non ad voluntatem.
Thou have received, when thou have not received, God hearing many times to thy
good, when he hears not to thy desire; and gives thee that which is much better
for thee, then what thy corrupt will, or ignorance would obtain. (...) Ibid.
(...)
because he delights to hold thee longer with him. Remember how often thou
have heard a Beggar cry unto thee, and thou have refused to give him; and this
done of cruelty, when God has never refused but of mercy. Nay, let me add;
Thou have often heard God calling to thee, and thou have not regarded him,
therefore it is but just, that he should render like for like unto thee.

3. Thirdly, let us, from the second consideration be instructed to pray
fervently, and to pray incessantly. Ye heard how the Saints, yea how the Son
of God expressed himself in his supplications. Wrestle with God in prayer,
though thou venture a joint, as Jacob did. The hollow of Jacob's thigh was out
of joint, as he wrastled with him. And he said, Let me go, for the day
breaks; and he said, I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me, Genesis 32,
25, 26. Moses also was wont to lay such strong hold on God, that when he
resolved to avenge himself upon the people for their sin, he was fain to say
unto him, Now therefore let me alone, Exodus 32. 10. as it were to prevent his
violence, as I may call it, holy violence. And in truth, (...)
the prayer of a righteous man has great strength, and is able to do much if
it be acted, or moved by the Spirit: (so I may interpret the words) Iam. 5. 16.
I remember the Cananaan woman, how she cried after Christ, Mat. 15. 23. and
what snibs she, poor soul, suffered; Send her away, said the Disciples; I am
not sent to such as thou art, said our Savior; and yet still she cries, Lord
help me: and when he told her, That it is not good to take the Childrens bread
and cast it unto Whelps; she rejoyns unto him, as if she would have said, I
thank thee for that, Lord, and I Will play the Dogs part, be but thou the
Master; beat me out at one door, I Will come in at the other; for the Whelps eat
of the crumbs that fall from their Masters tables; and a crum of thy bread, of
thy mercy, will serve my turn: and then you know how highly Christ commended
her, and how liberally he grants unto her, verse. 28.

Alas! how different is our manner of praying! justly may that be charged upon
every one of us, (...) Chrysostom. de Orat. hom. 2. Depre^or Deum, ut mihi intendat,
ego autem nec mihi, nec illi intendo Bern.
Thou call unto God to attend to thee, when thou attendest not unto thy
self. Be we then instructed hence, to pray with feeling, to pray with fervor.

(...) Cypr. Hieros. (...)
nor thy self neither day nor night, until thou have obtained some return of
favor from him: well may you wait upon him, for the Lord will wait that he may
be gracious unto you, etc. Blessed are all they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18.

Give me leave to add another short instruction unto this, touching the
Mediator of our suits to God, taken from the consideration of the Object of
our prayers, the Lord.

4. Must our supplications be all directed to the Lord? then must they all be
sent up to him by the hands of Christ, and in his Name: Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John 16. 23. There is but one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. We have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. It has of
late years been By R Montague late Bishop of Norwich, in his Sermon upon Psa.
50. 15. Call upon me, etc. enlarged after by him into a Treatise.
preached in the greatest audience, that there is no impiety in making Angels
Advocates, and Mediators of our prayers, so they be but our Angel-guardians,
(of which kind our Preacher would have no man doubt) and that a man may safely
say, Good Angel-guardian pray for me. And the same Author, in another Work of
his, (though he speaks something more warily in this) tells us, Mont. Antag. page
200.
Perhaps there is no such great impiety in saying, Saint Laurence pray for me.
I will not urge those words in Job, Chap. 5. 1. Call now, if there be any that
will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? But when the
Prophet Isaiah tells us, that Abraham is ignorant of us, and that Israel does
not acknowledge us, Chap. 63. 16. I shall certainly believe, that Laurence
knows not me. I never read in all the Book of God, of any so calling to a
Saint in heaven, but only that one damned wretch in Hell, whose prayer indeed
was much like his, Father Abraham have mercy on me, Luke 16. 24. If Paul had
known that the Philippians could have made such use of him in heaven, he had
been freed of that great strait he was in, Phil. 1. 23. for then not only for
himself, but even for them it had been well, were he where he so much desired
to be, for then he might have been their intercessor with God, and might have
presented all their prayers unto him; but he knew no such doctrine; he has
taught us otherwise. We read in Revel. 8. 1. that there was silence in heaven
for half an hour; and what follows? An Angel with a golden Censer stands at the
Altar, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with
the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne,
Verse. 3. I will not stand to open this whole prophecy unto you, let this
suffice; The Incense that is offered with our prayers, is Christ's intercession,
which smells so sweetly in the nostrils of God, that he is content, silence
should be in heaven for a little time (where yet his praises are sung
eternally) until those prayers of the Saints, so perfumed, be fully heard.
Remember then, Christ sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for
us, Romans 8. 34. let all our prayers then be made in his Name, and presented
unto the Father by his hand.

Favorites, or Masters of Requests in heaven. God the great King of heaven and
earth, is not like these his Vice-royes, who must have their other Satrapas
quosdam (...) appellatos. Philost. vit Apoll. Tyan. lib. 1. cap. ^^ and cap. 19.
Ears and Eyes, to see and hear their subjects in their suits. Whereas he, by
himself alone, sees and hears all things; his eyes, and ears going at once
through all the world. He is that friend spoken of, Luke 11. who when his
children were in bed, P. Chrysol. sermon. in Luc. 11.
his Saints and Angels asleep, rose himself to lend bread unto his friend. How
ready was he to hear, that placed his bed so near the door, that no sooner his
friend knocks, but he hears him? Not like that idol Baal, of whom Elias said
unto his Priests, when with much clamor they cried after him: Cry aloud: for
he is a God; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he is sleeping, and must be awaked, 1 Kin. 18. 27. Nor like the
heathens Jupiter, who when the Grecians and the Trojans were together by the
ears, was gone to visit his old friends, (...) Hom. Iliad. 15.
Oceanus and Tethys. He is always nigh at hand to all that call upon him, yea
unto all that call upon him faithfully. It is he that said, Before they call, I
will answer; and whilst they are yet speaking, I will hear, Isa. 65. 24. And
when they thus come unto him, (...) C. Rhod. Perioch. Hom 9.
he turns about to meet them graciously. He is that father of the prodigal,
who when his son was at last returning to him, with an humble confession, and
a poor petition, Make me as one of thy hired seavants, Luke 15. 19. When he
was yet a far off, saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him. And when he had made his confession, stop's him there,
and before he utters his request, in stead of a servants livery, calls for the
best robe to put upon him, and puts a ring upon his finger, and much more he
does, as if nothing had been too good for him, who was dead, and is now alive
again; who was lost, and is now found: Read the parable, and be comforted.

Land. We find this to have been the constant practice of the Saints of God:
Thus did good Nehemiah, he wept and mourned, fasted and prayed, Nehem. 1. 4.
and withal makes a large confession of great sins, ver. 6. 7. and more
largely, Chap. 9. 33, 34, 35. he confesses the sins of their Kings and
Princes, of their Priests, and of their Fathers, and of all the people. Thus
also did Ezra, as appears, Ezr. 9. 5, 6. Thus Daniel, exceeding them both,
Dan. 9. 4, etc. I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and
said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, etc. We have sinned, and have
committed iniquity, and have rebelled, etc. An example worthy to be imitated,
and therefore worthy to be read over, and over again; and to be learned, and
put in practice by us all.

And for our help in this holy duty, suffer me to present unto you some of
those foul offenses, that have provoked God against us, and which may be the
present matter of our mourning, and of our serious confession before God.

First, I shall begin where, I fear, our miseries began. Our prophets have
prophesied lies, and the priests have ruled by their means, and the people love
to have it so, Ier. 5. 31. The days of visitation are come, the days of
recompense are come, Israel shall know it: The prophet is a fool, and the
spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great
hatred, Hos. 9. 7. Our Nadabs and Abihu's, Aarons sons, have offered incense
with strange fire before the Lord: and no marvel then, if fire be gone forth
from the Lord to devour them. The story of those men, (Levit. 10.) and of their
fire, is by diverse Interpreters, expounded, and applied to such things, as have
been the great abuses of our times.

Procopius upon the place says, Exemplum habemus clarissinum, humana non
admiscenda divinis.
We have here a clear example, that humane things are not to be mixed with
divine. And have not we mixed Apocryphal writings with the Canon of the word
of God? and (which is more to be lamented) have we not preferred them before
the divine Scriptures? Calend and Order for reading, etc. Before the Common
prayer.
Our directions for the public service, so punctually to be observed, by the
late commands upon us, do in express terms tell us, that certain books and
chapters of the Old Testament are left unread, as least edifying: and yet you
shall find, by perusing the Calendar, how most of the Apocrypha, are brought in
stead of them, as it seems thought the more edifying of the two. Besides that
other injunction of waving the ordinary lesson upon the Lords day, in case a
festival of man's appointment, with his proper lesson, shall fall upon it, does
both prefer the feast before the Sabbath; and (such lessons being many of them
taken out of Apocryphal books) does manifestly show the precedence given to
these humane things before those which are divine. Strange fire indeed.

It is withal notoriously known, what strange fire, in stead of that which God
himself has kindled, has for some years past broke forth from Pulpits, and
Presses, Arminian, Socinian, popish opinions, of the deepest die, have every
where gained applause, and the broachers, and abettours of them justified, nay
preferred to the most eminent places the Church afforded.

And whereas Mr. Calvin upon the place and story before cited, tells us, that we
are taught from hence not to Ne dei cultum ullis extraneis commentis viticmus.
Calv. in Levit.
corrupt Gods worship with any strange devises: we know how much of this
strange fire was kindled in our Churches; not only the erecting of altars, and
their superstitious ornaments, prepared both for the altar, and the Priest that
was to wait thereat: But bowings and religious worship has been practiced, and
by some enjoined, toward, or before the altar, pretending it to be Christ's
seat, or throne, as Shelford, and our Speech in the Star Chamber.
Arch prelate call it: whereas those that are skillful in the Original, shall
find by comparing (...).
Matthew. 4. 9. with (...).
Luke 4. 7. that the worship to, or before, an idol is all one in Scripture
language: and our Translatours rendering both places by the same expressions do
show, that in their judgments they are the same. A popish Doctor Dr. Sheldon.
who had been a Romish fugitive sometime, told me, how Papists deride our
Masters of these Ceremonies: affirming, that they in their worship toward
Altars, profess, their adoration is to the Host or Wafer, which consecrated is
supposed by them to be Christ's body really; this being enclosed in a Pix
hanging over the Altar: or else, if no Pix there; then to some relic, or the
like Host, hid in the sepulcher, or hollow place made in their Altars for that
purpose. And whereas Ambrose says, Ignis alt^^us est libi o. Ambr. Epist. 3.
ad Simplic.
that strange fire signifies lust; he means unclean lust, and filthiness. Did
not Hophni and Phinehas, the sons of Eli, run into this slander, causing
men to abhor the offering of the Lord? 1 Samuel 2. 17. 22. I blush to uncover
this shame full nakedness of too many of our priests: (so they desire to be
styled) it is done already by Cont. 1. by that religions Gent and worthy
Patriot, M. I. White.
another.

Some of the Rabbis seem to excuse Aarons sons, pretending that they were in
drink; and thereupon (say they) a law presently was made; that the Priests
should neither drink wine nor strong drink, when they were to go into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, etc. Levit. 10. 9. Though surely this would
have aggravated, rather then extenuated their offense. And, if you ask the
worthy Author, before hinted, you shall see (though we be silent) how much the
Priests of England (a sad thing, being seriously considered) have offended in
this some; which by an ancient Father, is called a Ebrietas in alto crimen. in
sacerdotesacrilegium. P. Chrysol. Sermon. 26.
crime in other then, but in a Minister no less then sacrilege.

But I dare go no further: we shall want tears to bewail sufficiently these
abominations. Let the whole house of Israel be will the burning which the Lord
has kindled, Levit. 10. 6. upon occasion of such strange fire, as you have
heard of. Far be it from any Christian, to disport himself, with these
relations. Qui de lapsu alleno gaudet, gaudet de diaboli victoria.
He that rejoices at another fall, does but triumph upon the Devils victory:
and it is little honor to any man, to countenance such triumphs. Ah! what pity
it is, to see; that such as should have been stars in the firmament of Gods
Church, to give light unto his people, and to have wrought upon them by their
influence and motion, and night have been great instruments for the conversion
of others unto righteousness, and (...) Musaeus.
so themselves have shined as stars (in the firmament of heaven) for ever and
ever, Dan. 12. 3. that they should become Planets, or (...)
erring stars, as it is, Jude 13. verse. erring, and so causing others to err
with them: Or, that such should become stella cadentes, falling stars; a
third part of which, the Dragon, with his tail, should cast down to the earth,
Revel. 12. 4. Oh that our souls could weep for these things in secret; and on
this day of humiliation remember them with sorrow.

Secondly, I shall now pass from the Courts of Gods House, into the Courts of
Justice, shall I say, or injustice? I confess, I have nothing to say of these,
from mine own experience. But, as Plutarch writing of Usury, says, that he
never had to do with any of that craft; (...) Plut. de Vsur.
nor did they ever seize upon his ox, or horse, so may I truly say, (and I
bless the Lord for it) that I never yet was suitor in any of those Courts. But
I have heard, and the whole Land has heard, the cries of many, (and I fear,
those cries are heard in heaven too,) who by woeful experience have complained;
that sometime Cum more pecudis aut mancipii passim illic veneat. Clemang. de
laps. and repar. justit. Cap. 13. Quid detestabilius etc. quam praefecturas,
and alia publica officia justitiae publicae venundart? Ibid.
justice has been bought and sold, even as cattle in the market. And let no
man wonder at it: for if public offices of public justice have been set to
sale, surely there have been Chapmen. And must not he that buys his place,
next sell his practice? Nicolaus Clemangius, a good man (as good men went in
his age) seems to speak very hardly touching the kingdom of France, wherein
he lived: and he acknowledges in his Preface to his speech, that his words may
sound but harshly in the hearing. He said Dico plane mihi videri, plus
justitiae in inferno esse, quam in regno isto, etc. Ibid. Cap. 10. Sinc
causidicis satis olim foelices fuere, futuraeque sunt urbes. Colum.
that there is more justice in hell, then was in that kingdom: And might we
not have said the same of ours, as truly? take but his reason along with you.
In hell, (says he) there is no just or innocent man oppressed or wronged: and
again, in hell there is no unjust, or wicked man escapes unpunished. And no
marveil; for it is heavens justice, that is executed in hell. But, alas, what
briberies and unjust extortions, what corrupting of all law and equity for
rewards, what oppressions, and what cruelties has our Land groaned under? The
Prophets often call such, bloody sins, or shedding of blood: and truly,
what is a man's livelihood, other then his life? Jerusalem, where the seats, and
thrones of judgment were, was (...)
for this called a bloody City. And in that 22. of Ezekiel. verse. 2. The city
sheddeth blood, says the Lord, and verse. 7. In thee have they vexed the
fatherless and the widow; and ver. 12. In thee have they taken gifts, to shed
blood. And then mark what follows, in the very next verse: Behold therefore
I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have made, and at
thy blood which has been in the midst of thee. And he proceeds with terrible
threats of vengeance, which must needs follow upon bloody sins. And we have
great cause to think, that these bloody judgments that are now upon us, are
justly inflicted, amongst others, for such crimson sins, as these. Let this
then add unto the matter of our lamentation, and our humble confessions that
we make to God. And let all officers of Courts remember these expressions of
the Prophet; to despise the gain of oppressions, and to shake their hands from
holding of bribes, Isa. 33. 15. That is, to shake off bribes, as Paul shak'd
off the viper from his hands. They will prove more venomous then any serpent,
poisoning thy soul, and bringing death eternal.

Thirdly, I must not leave here, till I have minded you of one or two sins
more, which as they are more common, so are no less dreadful then the former.
The sin of pride in such days of wrath, and such cause of humiliation, must
needs be acknowledged a sin exceeding sinful. I look but on the outside. Our
hearts are only subject to Gods knowledge. And it is a mercy to us, that it is
so. For so much pride, and envy, and deceit is harbored there, that, if we
knew it, we should never live in peace together. I see your outward garb and
garments; that, (...) Arrian. in Epictet. lib. 3. cap 2.
as if a saylour should set up his flagge when the ship is sinking; even now
when we should put on sackcloth, and lie down in ashes, people will trim
themselves, pride will be tricking. And when the penury of the times cannot
provide rich ornaments or garments, yet in such things as are cheap pride will
peep out. Whence else are these bushes of hair, those frizlings, crispings,
curlings, poudrings, and I know not what? What means your paintings, patchings,
spottings of your faces? and what are those toys that you call Fancies? Are
they not such as an old Writer called Satana ingenia, the Devils fancies? I
know pride came from him at the first, and God cast it with him out of heaven,
and neither he, nor it, shall find the way thither again. Read, Ladies and
Gentlewomen, that third of Isa. from v. 16. to the end of the Chapter. See
there your stately carriage and posture of your bodies, and your curious
knacks, and deckings, even a fair Pedlars stall, of toys and braveries. You
will tell me that there are many things there you know not, much less are
guilty of the use of them. And let me answer; Even herein is no little part of
the pride of these days, that you so alter fashions. For surely they were
sometimes reputed amongst gorgeous ornaments. But I would have you read the
place through, and see what the Lord renders unto such as use these, or the
like vanities. In stead of sweet smell there shall be stink, and in stead of a
girdle arent, and in stead of well-set hair baldness, etc. verse. 24.

There is nothing more foolish, did we rightly consider it, then to show pride
in garments, which are indeed the ensigns of our shame; as if the thief
should be proud of his halter. They are called by (...)
a word in the Hebrew tongue which signifies persidiousnesse, as being the
tokens of our perfidious dealing with God, when at first man was naked, and
without any shame at all. They are but coverings of this vile body, Phil. 3.
21. So our translation. But in the Original, (...)
The body of our humiliation; such as we cannot think of, without humbling of
our souls, in regard of the inordinacie and uncleanness of it. And must our
pride break forth in decking this? The Apostle tells us in another place, The
body is dead because of sin, Romans 8. 10. Me thinks then a course hearsecloth
may become a dead corpse best.

Take heed, I beseech you, of this heaven-provoking sin: it was the first
that did contend with God: and it is that which God resists for ever: and if he
should now fight against us, in these times of war, we need no other enemy,
he can destroy at once. God regards the lowly, gives grace to the humble, and
with such God will dwell; and where he dwells, all will be in safety.

Fourthly, I have but one sin more, that I intend to name unto you, but it is
one, for which the land mourns: as in the days of Jeremy the Land of Judah
did, Ier. 23. 10. The sin of swearing, the common sin of young and old;
children do learn it from their parents, even as soon, as they can call for
meat or drink. It had wont to be accounted the language only of great persons,
(...) De ^ut. Graec. affect. Sermon. 5.
who held it a matter of breeding, (as Theodoret says) and an ornament of
their speech, to swear by Jove, or by this light, etc. But now not graceless
Gentlemen alone, but every base fellow thinks it is a graceful kind of
speaking, to swear, and to blaspheme, especially in such oaths as are in
fashion at Court. It is the grief of all that fear the Name of God, that we
have no law quick enough to meet with such a sin. Surely the Lord foresaw it
would be so, when he adds to that Precept in his Law; The Lord will not hold
him guiltless, etc. As if he had said, Whatsoever man does, God will not let
the swearer go, but he shall one day come to guilty and not guilty for it. And
give me leave (I beseech you) to tell you plainly, that the Lord must needs be
offended, that a sin so horrid, and so frequently, and universally committed,
should go unpunished amongst Christians, that profess the Name of God; and
that you leave all upon him, as if you desired to create work for him at his
great Assizes; when both the swearers, and Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit,
jubet. Sen. Trag.
they that prevent not this sin, what they can, shall all hold up their hands
at that terrible bar together, without repentance, and endeavoring better,
especially being convinced of the fault. I cannot break off yet, till I have
freed my soul in discovering that improvement men have made of their old
swearing, by their forswearing, or false swearing or equivocating, in their
oaths and protestations, and solemn vows and covenants, which being rightly
and religiously performed are an acceptable service unto God, and an ascribing
honor, and glory to his Name. A spirit of Atheism, I fear, runs through
the Land, and the good Spirit of God is much provoked by it: that our late
solemn Vow is taken by many, who putting what sense they please upon it, think
so to delude the Lord, while they cheat their own souls: And others go
downright to it, without any more ado, then that this is the way to save their
goods, or to secure their persons, when their hearts are most malignantly
averse from what they swear. The heathen themselves will rise up in judgment
against such, who ever had an oath in the greatest (...) Pythag. apud Iam.
(...) Theocr. in (...).
dreadful reverence. If any such be present, let them but consider that place
of Zach. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. where the Prophet sets forth his vision of the flying
roll, or book, of 20. cubits long, and 10. cubits broad, wherein were all
those curses that come swiftly into the house of him that swears falsely, and
where it shall remain till it consume it. I remember Chrysostom following the
Greek version, reads, not a flying book, but a (...). Septuag.
flying hook or sickle: whereby (says he) appears how unavoidable the curse
shall be, that shall pursue the false swearer, and him that breaks his oaths
and vows: For had he said (...). Hom. 15. ad pop. Antiochen. -- Et siquis
primo perjuria celat, Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus. Tib.
a flying dagger, happily a man might have avoided it; but when he tells us of an
hook or sickle gotten about the neck, there is no escaping such a weapon.
Remember what the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay it; for the Lord thy God will
surely require it of thee, and it would be sin unto thee.

I shall no longer detain you in this sad discourse, touching the things which
I conceive now incense God against us, and must provoke us, as we desire
deliverance from our trouble and distresses, while we pray and seek the Lord,
to humble our selves for these and all such crying and outrageous evils. Thus
much may serve for this use of direction, and for this second general.

And he delivered them from their, etc.

From which words plainly arises this Doctrine: Deliverance from distresses is
from the Lord. The troubles and distresses of the Saints of God here in this
pilgrimage, (which is nothing else but a miserable absence from God for a
season) are many and various; their whole life being like Ezekiels book,
Scriptus and in (...).
written within and without, and nothing else written but Lamentations, and
mourning, and woe, Ezekiel. 2. 10. Perplexities both of mind and body, in ward and
outward, do accompany them daily. The Lord is pleased sometimes to write bitter
things against them, and to make their life very uncomfortable to them, through
the anguish of their soule^ The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities,
but a wounded spirit who can bear?

It has caused many to cry with Job Chap. 7. 13, etc. When I say, my bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint: then thou scarest me with
dreams, and affrightest me through visions: so that my soul chooses
strangling and death, rather then my life. When through temptation they begin
to think and say, that God has wholly left them, and forsaken them; and
complain, as one should of a dear friend deserting him; Lo, he goes by me,
and I see him not, etc. Job 9. 11. whereas he had wont, to set his heart upon
me, and to visit me every morning, Job 7. 17, 18. (...) Cyr. Alex. in ^o^. cap
2.
There being nothing in the world so sad unto a child of God, as to be so
neglected by his heavenly Father. I remember somewhat of Augustine, to this
purpose: If God should say unto me, go thy way, sin as much as thou will, I
will not punish thee for it, etc. But thou shall never see my face, Nunquam
mecum eris.
or, thou shall never be with me: He seems to make it, even the worst of all
punishments: For as the Psalmist says to God, In thy presence is life: And
again, If thou hidest away thy face, we dye. Now when this shall be our case,
this our trouble and distress, where shall we seek or hope to find
deliverance, but in God alone? His countenance estranged has made the wound,
and a cast of his countenance is able to cure all again. Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, and we shall be whole. Deliverance from
inward sorrows is then from God alone: And the like must be acknowledged of
all outward troubles. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not
done it? Amos 3. 6. (...), etc. Cyr. Alex. in loc. (...) Damas. Orth fid. lib.
4. cap. 20.
He means not malum peccatorium, the evil of sin, (there is no such evil
from the Lord) but malum ultorium, the evil of punishment (as Tertul.
speaks.) And this is properly from God, what, or who ever be the instrument. I
make peace (says God) and create evil, Isai. 45. 7. We, when Gods hand is
upon us, correcting us for our sins, by some or other, whom he is pleased to
use as his rod, or scourge, usually reflect upon these instruments: and like as
children Qui se ceciderint, terram verberari volunt. Seuec.
when they take a fall (as Seneca observes) cry out, to have the ground
beaten; so we fall foul upon such secondary causes, never considering either
the Lord, who makes use of them at his pleasure, or our own evil ways, which
provoke God against us. When Shimei cast stones at David, and cursed him; So
let him curse (said he) because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David, who
shall then say, Wherefore have thou done so? 2 Samuel 16. 10. But did God command
him then? I answer: There is a threefold command of God observable:

1. There is the mandate of his power or efficiency; thus he said, let there be
light, and it was so.

2. There is the mandate of his word, that is, the precepts of his Law or
Gospel.

And 3. there is the mandate of his providence; thus he commanded the widow of
Zarephtah to feed Elijah, 1 King. 17. 9 as also he did the ravens, verse. 6. not
by any express word of command, but by the mandate of his providence. And by
this he said to Shimei, Curse David. He neither puts ill thoughts into the
heart, nor evil words into the mouth of such, but finding them so disposed, he
turns them to the effecting his designs: Such is Gods wisdom, that when he
seeks up weapons to avenge himself upon a people, he sometimes (says
Synesius) (...) etc. Synes. epist. 57.
makes use of a nation of barbarous men, sometimes of an evil Prince, etc.

And as God thus brings on the evil by his providence, so by his power only
can it be removed: I kill (says he) and I make alive; I wound, and I heal;
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. Deuteronomy. 32 39.

This plainly proves the Doctrine, that deliverance is from the Lord, because
Vna eademque manus, etc. the same hand that made the wound, must cure it: as
they observed well, Hos. 6. Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for he has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. He can
restrain the rage of the wicked at his pleasure, can blunt their weapons, and
bind their hands; and say unto them, as he does unto the Sea, Hither shall
thou come, and no further; here shall thou stay thy proud waves.

And hence another reason may be gathered, why our deliverance must be expected
from the Lord alone; because as he makes use of instruments, according to the
pleasure of his will, so in his wisdom he bounds their actions, measures out
his corrections, and his judgments by proportion. His ways are equal, though
ours are unequal. Read that handwriting which was upon the plaster of the
wall of the Palace of King Belshazzar, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin, Dan. 5. 23.
and read Daniels interpretation; He has numbered, numbered, weighted, and
divided: and then observe the manner of Gods dealing, how he does all things
by number and weight, and most exactly numbreth and weighs both the sins
and punishments, before he divides by his hand of judgment. And therefore as
(...) etc. Chrysostom. hom. 4. ad pop. Antioch. (...) Synes. epist. 57.
the Finer of gold lets his metal lie no longer in the Furnace then till the
dross be fully purged from it; so neither will the Lord endure his servants
should stay longer in the iron furnace of afflictions, then till their
iniquity be removed, and they bettered by them. And therefore since the Lord
orders the instruments in his providence, and the durance of our troubles, as
you have heard: you cannot but acknowledge, that our deliverance is in his
hands alone. And lastly, he alone is able perfectly to save, and to deliver
from all and every kind of trouble, be it war, pestilence, or famine, his
three great judgments; or be it any other calamity: I, even I am the Lord,
and besides me there is no Savior, Isa. 13. 11. He is able to save to the
uttermost. Consider the salvation that God wrought for his people of old, The
enemy said, I will pursue, I will over take, I will divide the spoil; my lust
shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them,
Exodus 15. 9. but in the thing, wherein they dealt proudly, God was above them,
Chap. 18. 11. For thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they
sanke as lead in the mighty waters, Chap. 15. 10. Yea the waters covered them,
there was not one of them left, Psalm. 106. 11. No, (...) etc. Josephus.
not one to carry tidings of the great judgment that overtook them, while they
pursued the redeemed of the Lord.

Should I go forward in the sacred story of this people, you would confess the
Doctrine fully proved, by Gods glorious works of power, wrought for their
safety and deliverance many ways. How was it that they traveled in the
wilderness forty years together, and their feet not swollen, nor they wearied
in their journey? I answer, No marvel, when as the Lord bare them, as a man
carries his little son, all the way that they went, Deuteronomy. 1. 31. How did
they escape starving in the desert, the barren wilderness? let me put you in
mind, how when the earth gaye them no food, heaven rained down bread unto
them; that Manna which was (...) Greg. Nyss. vit. Mos.
both bread, and (as they write of it) all kind of meat, wherein they had what
any one desired to taste, or feed on. How were they clothed all those years?
The Scripture tells us, that their garments waxed not old; and we must also
know, that certainly they were extended and stretched out, as their bodies
grew. What should we speak of that guide they had in their journey, of the many
dangers that they escaped, and before they had possession of the Land promised
them, what enemies the Lord subdued by their hands? Let this suffice to show,
that such were their deliverances, as no hand could compass, but that mighty
hand of the great God of heaven: (...) Sophocl.
And that he alone can do the like in every age. Thus you have the Doctrine, I
shall now endeavor briefly to apply it.

Azariah to King Asa, and his people: Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and
Benjamin: The Lord is with you, while you are with him, and if you seek him, he
will be found of you, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Seek the Lord then, and find him: and
having found him, keep close to him. As Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5. 22, 24.
so live as in his presence, (...) Pindar.
who sees thee, and beholds all thy ways. For thou Lord wilt bless the
righteous, and with the shield of thy favor wilt compass him, Psalm. 5. 12.
Stand to the cause of God, and engage thy self upon his part. The quarrel is
not now with us, only determinis and limitibus, touching bounds, or
landmarks, touching privileges, and liberties: but whether Christ shall reign
over us, or we shall basely yield our necks unto the yoke of Antichrist. This
has been known a long time, both to our friends, and foes in foreign parts: And
now at length Ireland has caused the most wilfully blinded here in England to
behold, and see it. If God be God, then follow him. He shall deliver thee from
the snare of the hunter; such as Nimrod, Esau, hunters of men: so the Scripture
styleth persecutours of Gods Saints; whereupon I remember Hierome says,
Penitus non invenimus in scripturis sanctis aliquem venatorem piscatores
invenimus sanctos. Hieron. in Psalm. 90. Nullum invenimus in divinarum seric
scripturarum de venatoribus sanction. Ambr. in Psalm. 119. Sermon. 8.
we read of holy Fishermen, but never of holy Hunters. Such Hunters have been
spoiling, with all cruelty, many of our brethren every where, and still the
hunt is up, and they make but a matter of sport of it. The time shall come,
when God shall laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes,
Prove. 1. 26.

Let them, while their sport lasts, boast themselves, as if they had all sure
enough; and let them add to their other blasphemies, and say, with that proud
Tyrant, in Synesius; (...) Synes. Epist. 58.
No man shall escape our hands, no, though he held Christ himself by the foot.
-- Fidant legionibus illi, perfugioque parent reparatis moenia muris, Nulla
salutiferi quibus est fiducia Christi. Paulin. in Not. S. Foel.
Let them presume upon their strength, who have nothing else to rest upon: But
it is good for us to keep fast by God, Psalm. 73. 28. not to let go our hold. As
Homer said of the walls of Troy; (...) Iliad. (...).
Who has delivered, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 10

In the next place, this must instruct us, in all our deliverances, to return
praise, and glory, and thanks, unto the Author of our help, and hopes. We
are too ready, as those fishermen in Habakkuk, who sacrificed to their Net, and
burnt incense to their Dragge, Chap. 1. 16. so with that Soldier in the Poet
-- (...).
, to ascribe much unto the sword and spear, unto our valiant men, and to our
forces. It is observed by that wise heathen Nimius sui suspectus, and insitum
mortalitati vitium se. suaque mirandi. Sen. De Benef. c. 26.
that this overweening of our selves is a great cause of our ingratitude.
Alas, -- (...) Opp.
what are we if God should leave us? and while he stands by us, what can stand
against us? Mountains of difficulties shall be overturned if he put to his
hand; the proudest enemies shall be made to know and feel what folly it is to
kick against the pricks, and (...). Rhod perioch. Hom. 17.
to contend with the Almighty: and therefore as we see and hear daily of the
mighty things that God has (...). Synes. Epist. 137
wrought for us, so let him have the glory that is due unto his Name, and let
our hearts and mouths be ever filled with his praise.

But, (some may say) do you not forget the season? this is not a day of
gratulation or Thanksgiving, but of humiliation, and of seeking God by prayer.
Ah, let none think these duties inconsistent, which truly I conceive should
never be disjoined. We have been taught already what grace and glory arises
from afflictions sanctified. Are we then humbled under the sorrow of them? let
us be also thankful for the solace (...) Synes. Epist. 57
of them.

But let me entreat you further to consider, whether we, we I say in
particular, living in these parts of this distracted Kingdom, do not even now
enjoy a great deliverance, that we meet here in safety and in peace, while
others are imbroiled in many dangers, either of fights or flights. How unworthy
are we of such enlargement of Gods mercy, if we improve it not? but most of all
are we unworthy, if we be silent in thanksgivings.

Let me add one thing more. What if the Lord should bring the line of other
parts upon us, and cause us to pledge them in that bitter cup, whereof they
have been forced to drink deep? shall we not yet have cause to praise him, for
this his patience, and long-sufferance? And had we but the spirits of many of
the Primitive Martyrs, we should think our selves the less esteemed; in that
we are reserved amongst the last of those, who shall thus honor God, and be
honored by him, in suffering for his sake. They (...) lust. Mart (...) Lucius
Martyr ad mortem designatus (...) Just Mart. Apol. 1. (...) Greg. Naz.
triumphed in their deaths, and accunted death, as no death; but as a
benefactor to them, that preferred them speedily to the fruition of their long
desired happiness. They freely thus offered their children also unto God,
rejoicing, that they were laid so sweetly, and so safely in Gods arms. They
could not but remember how God dealt with Job: How, after his long patience
under sore calamities, with the loss of his substance, the Lord was pleased to
refresh his wearied soul, and to give him twice as much as he had before, Job
42. 10. but yet, if you compare this Chapter ver. 13. with Chapter 1, 2. you
shall find he had no more children given him then he had at first. He had great
comfort in his children; why were not they doubled likewise? surely he had them
double; because the former were not lost, who were locked up safe in heaven.

I the rather speak this; because, it may be, it has been the case of some of
you already: and who knows how many of us may see our children sacrificed in
this cause of God, and may at length taste of death herein our selves? The will
of the Lord be done. Only let us learn to make a right judgment of these
things. That we call death, the Scripture call's but sleeping: and do but mark
that place, Revel. 20. 6. where it is said: Blessed and holy is he that has
part in the first resurrection; on such the second death has no power. What is
that first resurrection, but the rising from the first death; which is the
death of sin? and what is the second death? that we find, verse. 14. The lake
of fire is the second death. Where is then that we call death? surely (...)
Theocr.
it comes not in the account: For otherwise* that should have been the second,
and the lake of fire had been more fitly styled the third death. This then has
only the (...) Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. (...).
empty name of death, void of the thing, that is so dreadful to poor flesh
and blood. Nay it is no other, then a blessed deliverance, and a joyful rest
and freedom from all cares, and troubles. Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they rest from their
labors, Rev. 14. 13. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
saints, Psalm. 116. 15. Whatsoever then the Lord is pleased to do for us,
whatsoever with us, let us be thankful.

Belial, that are now in arms against us, that will not read the Book of God,
or happily dare not; because it no where prophecieth good unto them; I wish they
would peruse our Ecclesiastical Writers, and see what they find there,
touching the divine vengeance, which pursued such as led the way to them, and
taught them this art of cruelty, and instructed them, how to be skillful to
destroy, by their examples. Let them read the deaths, and horrid ends of Nero,
Trajan, Hadrian, Vaterian, Maximinus, Julian, and of many of their instruments,
and under-ministers, whom they set on work: and they shall find that true,
which that holy Martyr Cypian wrote long ago: that Nec unquam Christianorum
s^^l^rein nostrum nomen exurgitur, ut non statim divinius vindicta comitetur.
Cyp. contr Demetr. (...) Syn Epist. 35.
never did any in their wickedness rise up against the profession of the
truth, (he means, by persecuting the professors of it) but straightway
vengeance from God followed them at the heels, and overtook them. They may
peradventure escape man's judgment, (which is that our enemies are so afraid
of) yet the just avenging sword of God cannot be avoided; who when he comes
most slowly, comes most surely and severely. It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. Let our adversaries consider
this and tremble: whilst we comfort our selves with that of the Apostle, as if
directly spoken to us, It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. Even so Lord Jesus come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata in text.
Page 7. line 23. read had in p. 9. l. 28. r. rapt p. 10. l. 8. r. non. salvum
p. 11. l. 22. r. such a narrand p. 18. l. 18. r. with his p. 31. l. 14. r.
Popish p. 39. l. 21. r. Zarephah
Errata in marg.
Page 3. r. Zach. p. 10. r. Athen. ex Pos. p. 14. r. in Ca^ Mos. p. 17. r.
(...) p. 27. r. Cyr. Hieros. p. 45. for Christianorum r. impiorum

