Soule-Reviving Influences Of the Sun of RIGHTEOUSNESS, Or Some bright beams
of Light and Love, sparkling from Christ upon the dark and drooping hearts of
sin-weakned and clouded Believers, even while we are in this Solitary
wilderness, not yet arrived at the Land of Spiritual Canaan; but taking a
turn in the dark and dampe valley of the shadow of death.

With several Evangelicall and heart-winning encouragements to the life of
faith in the Son of God, notwithstanding our manifold weaknesses and heinous
provocations; yea to the keeping up of the same comfort, hope confidence, and
joy in him in the sadest straights, of the sorest darkness.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Isa. 54. 8. For Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, though
their Land was filled with sin against the holy one of Israel.

Jer. 51. 5. I cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me, out of
the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice.

Jonah 2. 2. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, at
the West end of Paul's. 1654.

The Preface.
To all the truly faithful, the Sons and Daughters of the most High God, as well
those under the form of Presbytery, as those under other administrations, Grace
be multiplied, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our
Head and Hope.
Precious Hearts,
EVER since any of the light and glory of Christ dawned upon us, since first we
saw that morning star of righteousness, any of the brightness of the glory
thereof in those hearts of ours, which once lived in the coasts of Zebulun and
Naphtali, in the Region and shadow of death, our life has remained hid with
Christ in God, Col. 3. 3*
and is that spark of glory which has always attracted the most venomous
envies of those men, who make the flesh their residence; were you lower as
Saints, you should be higher as creatures; The world indeed may outrunne you,
and come first to the Meridian altitude of their glory, but surely in the end,
the inheritance shall be yours; their first shall be last, and your last first;
your latter end shall in brightness outshine your beginning. And in the mean
time also, your God will not leave you Fatherless in this solitary desert; Cant
2. 6.
his left hand is under your head, Psalm. 78. 23 24.
and his right hand embraces you. Exo* 16. 4.
Heaven rains Mannah in the wilderness: Hos 14. 5
The Lord, Isa. 41* 18.
who is your Husband and your Redeemer, Isa. 35. 6, 7
the Mighty one of Jacob, Cant. 4. 12
(though he may seem as with Jacob to wrestle with you) will be as the dew unto
you: the Rocks shall give water in the heat of drought, in the wilderness
shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert. The possession that he has
in you shall for ever entitle you, A spring shut up, and a fountain sealed. I
know nothing you have that is long lived, but Jesus Christ: earth more grossly
carnal, and heaven more refinedly carnal, shall pass away, even the kingdom of
heaven, so far as it is made up of forms and administrations, shall wither
and die: but the kingdom of God within you, Psalm. 1 25.
shall remain as Mount Sion, Jer. 50. ^
which shall never be shaken. Cant. 4. 10
Forget not therefore, Exodus 35. 8
your resting place, which is the Lord Jesus, who will come and lead you with
his sweet spices, and the savor of his ointment; then shall not the
consideration that he has laid his hand upon any of your enjoyments below
himself, have an uncomly influence upon you. Romans 10 3
Expect not a bed of rest in the barren wilderness of your own performances
and righteousnesses, since God has appointed spiritual Canaan to be your rest;
Romans 4. 19, 20, 24.
and in the midst of sin and misery, pray in faith, without wavering, that
the Lord Jesus would by his Spirit lead you unto that rock which is infinitely
higher then self, and fix your eye of faith upon that brazen Serpent the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 30
who is made unto us of God, Cant* 8. 6. 7
Wisdom, Righteousness, Ephesians 6. 12.
Sanctification, and Redemption: Romans 8. 37
one vision of whose love will bid defiance to the stoutest of our lusts, and to
all the powers of darkness combined therewith; yea, to Principalities, and
Powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; and in an encounter will more
then conquer them all, so that our David come into the field and engage against
them for us. And you who have taken forth so many Lessons in the School of
Christ, as well as the poor Lambs of his fold (for whose sakes chiefly the
ensuing Treatise is made public) are the objects of Satan's rancor; Psalm* 38. 3.
he either tempts us to sin, Psalm. 77. 7* 8, 9.
and that will cause us to doubt; or else he tempts us to doubt, and that will
cause us to sin. In the treatise are held forth some of the dewes of Hermon
hill, descending upon the parched hearts and spirits of poor sin-weakned
believers, with several evangelicall and experimental directions for quieting
and establishing a poor soul upon the Rock of ages the Lord Jesus, in the
apprehension and assurance of his rich grace, and free love, and in the life of
faith in him; notwithstanding its own weaknesses, Psalm. 23, 4.
corruptions, and heinous provocations; yea, for keeping up the same comfort,
hope, joy, and confidence in God at all times, with several reasons and
inducements thereunto, and to exult and triumph in God, and the
soul-astonishing riches of his grace, making its boast of him all the day long,
who will lead us forth with perfect boldness, not only to look in the face of,
but to trample upon the most terrible of our adversaries, sin, our own legal
righteousness, death, Satan, and hell it self, through the great and glorious
conquest of our captain, Ephesians. 4. 8. and 1 4.
who has led captivity captive, Phil. 3. 9
in whom God always beholds us, Col. 1* 12.
and in whose righteousness we shall be found, being not only delivered from
this present evil world, but made freely meet to be partake^s of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. And surely the bright and glorious
appearance of God in you, and the high Spirit of faith and prayer, which he
has richly powered forth upon diverse of you, is so far from leading those to
repentance, who (wondering after the beast) are bewitched by her, Rev. 13. 3, 4,
5. and 17. 2. and 16* 10, 11.
and drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornications, that it makes them
to gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of heaven: The Prince of
darkness can indeed do no less then repine to see a stronger then himself
bind him, and release many of his captives; And hereupon he with the greater
violence bestirrs himself in setting the Foxes and young Cubs to destroy the
Vines and tender grapes, Cant. 2* 15
and endeavors with might and main to let out the wild boar out of the wood,
Psalm. 80. 13, 15.
and the wild beasts of the field into the Vineyard which the Lords right hand
has planted.

The Mystery of iniquity is now grown more mysterious, Rev. 17. 5.
and deceiving then ever, though in every new change and form mysterious enough
to cozen all the unbelieving world, though never so wise and learned. The man
of sin, seeks with all subtilty to set up that in form and flesh (and so
preserve his kingdom) which God is doing in Spirit and power; It is the form
of Religion, that is the shelter and thicket wherein this deceiver and his
false Prophets lurk concealed; 2 These. 2. 13.
but yet shall never prevail to deceive the chosen, Rev. 21. 23
faithful, and ransomed of the Lord; Rev. 14. 1.
these (being redeemed from the earth) shall still be found with the Lamb upon
Mount Sion, 1 John 2. 20.
for that the Lord shines forth light upon them, whereby through their Sonship
and unction with him, they do and shall discover and overcome it; It is from
this unction that you know truth from error, though it be never so much
reproached, and error from truth, though never so much extolled and magnified
by carnal and temporizing Christians. Wherefore you faithful ones, have great
cause to keep upon your watch, Rev. 13. 3* 4, 5.
inasmuch as the chief design of Antichrist is to seduce the Elect; for that
there are none else in the whole world that either dare, or know how to oppose
him, but you; and he well knows that if he can but prevail with you, all the
world besides will follow him headlong, as the Gaderens swine ran into the Sea
and were choked. You know that the National Antichristian Clergy, and carnal
Priests, are the Sorcerers, who have been so numerous that they have bewitched
and deceived all Nations. Rev. 18 3.
These are the Merchants who have made the Inhabitants of the earth drunk with
the wine of their fornications, Rev. 17. 2.
and with whom the kings of the earth have been, and are so friendly, as to
commit fornication; 2 These. 2* 4, 9, 10, 11
these are they, who by their Jure Divino, (as they will have it) have opposed
and exalted themselves above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, The
wolf in plea with the Lamb, will always be judge.
so that they as God, sit in the Temple of God, showing themselves, that they
are God; and Lord it over Gods heritage, and the consciences of his people: He
has power* from the Kings of the earth to sit judge in his own Quarrels.
These are the men who for their judaical hire (where not sacrificed unto their
idol) snatched by force of the secular power, have (through their humane
learning, Academical degrees, Rev. 17. 13
School Divinity, Ezekiel. 30. 6
Sacredness of their orders, 2 Pet. 5 2, 3
and Ecclesiastical ordination) led thousands of souls hoodwinkt to
destruction: Such School Graduates usually prove Theologi gloriae, and not
Theologi Crucis, Divines of glory, and not of the cross; and in a word, may
easily be perceived to be the Rulers of the darknesse^ of this world, even that
part of Antichrist which he has left lurking in this generation, to oppose
Christ in Spirit; Jer. 41. 6.
take heed therefore, Rev. 18. 4.
that you neither drink nor sippe of the Clergies cup, lest having drunk
thereof, ye (through the strength of their enchantments) fall asleep and be
rendered unable to follow Christ further. The Lord is come out of his place to
rebuke the boisterous winds, Mark 4. 37 39
to break the Cedars, Psalm. 29. 5.
to darken the Sun and Moon, Joel. 3 15. 16.
to shame and confound all humane Policy and power, Isa. 13. 10.
to stain the pride of all glory, Isa. 23. 9. and 34. 8.
and to bring to contempt all that be glorious, Jer. 51. 12
and the honorable of the earth; Ezekiel. 24. 8
and to take vengeance, and do execution upon Babylon; in order whereunto, he
has stained the Lordly power, and pride of those false Prophets, (the
Prelates;) destroyed their Courts, Jer. 51. 9.
Canons, and other abominations; this design of his, he is still carrying on
(though he may now seem to be going backwards;) the Sun of Righteousness is
never retrograde, Jer. 51. 26.
there shall not a stone be left upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down,
she must be wholly desolate. And as before, the Lord made use of the higher
powers for effecting of what was then done, so he will for the residue in the
fullness of time, Isa. 13. 3.
command his sanctified ones, and call his mighty ones, even them that rejocye
in his Highness, Zech* 4. 6. 7.
to fulfill his pleasure upon the great whore; therefore you that have the
Spirit of Christ within you, give the Lord no rest till the Mountain of his
house, Isa. 2. 2.
be (according to his own promises) set up above the mountains, and exalted
above the hills, till the new and spiritual Jerusalem, Rev. 3. 12.
that comes down from God out of heaven, Col. 1. 13.
even his true, spiritual Church that through faith, hope, and love lives out
of this world, and the element thereof, Rev. 21. 2, 3, 4.
in the kingdom of his Dear Son, be made an eternal Excellency, Isa. 62.
6. 7 and 60. 15.
and the joy of generations, Psalm 48. ^
and until those who have afflicted it, and dominiered over it, Zeph. 2. 10 11.
be made to come humbly bending to it, Isa. 60. 14.
and lick the dust of its feet. as the Lord has promised: Rev. 22* 5.
Then shall the light and teaching of the Spirit in Scriptures, which have
been forgotten, and stood like a Sparrow upon the house tops, desolate and
forsaken, become the only teaching; Ezekiel. 37. 1. to 10.
Then shall the Lords inheritance that lie as dead and dry bones now in the
valley, live; their nerves and bones being by the Lord knit together, Ezekiel. 2. 2*
the spirit shall enter into them, and set them upon their feet, and they shall
be called the valley of vision. Isa* 22. 5.
Then shall all low and carnal apprehensions of God which caused doubts and
fears, 22 Isa. 5.
be done away; 22 Rev* 3.
there shall be no night there, nor clouds to hinder the intercourses of Love
between God and the soul: his servants shall serve him. You that are
spiritual, 2 Pet. 3. 12 13.
know that it is also the present Design of God to pull down the old heavens,
wherein the men of the world would ascend up unto God, 21 Rev. 1*
even that old building which men for diverse hundreds of years have been in
seting up, 1 Cor. 3* 12.
is that hay and stubble, 16 Romans 20.
which God by the brightness of his coming in Spirit is burning up. Oh
therefore earnestly beg of him, that we may shortly see Satan trodden under our
feet, and the Beast with the false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, 19
Rev. 20
cast alive (in the midst of their deceitful workings) into that Lake which
burns with Brimstone for evermore. And that we may hear that shout of Triumph
in the Spiritual Church, Rev. 18. 2.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is now become an habitation of Devils and
unclean Spirits, which before was the habitation of hypocrites and false
Christians; yet painted over with the most specious and glorious pretensions
and shows of Religion and holiness, that the deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness could trick up the Strumpet withal, 2 These. 2. 10
and that whatsoever has been captived into Babylon, Jer. 28, 4* 6
may be brought back and set upon Mount Sion; That the redeemed of the Lord may
return, and being filled with the Spirit, Isa. 51. 11.
and restored to their primitive state, may shine in the perfection of beauty,
and holiness. Then shall all Saints sing in the unity of the Spirit, the song
of Moses, Rev. 15. 2, 3^
the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. Great and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

It will, I suppose, seem strange unto many, That I have not (according to the
most general practice) dedicated these endeavors unto some man in authority
for Patronage and protection. The matters contained herein, as well as in the
ensuing Treatise, will appear truth when weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary; stumble not then at the weakness of the instrument; what is more
usual then for the Lord (through weak and contemptible means) to perfect his
own praise? How do men prize the dust of Gold? what a deal of worth is in a
little diamond? despise not the day of small things, a little star may light
to Christ. The As earthly Christ's, so their Prophets and doctrines must have
earthly suppor^s.
Doctrines and traditions of men indeed, call for an arm of the Secular power
to prop them up withal. Deuteronomy. 32. 2
But the true doctrine of the word of the Kingdom, Ezekiel. 30. 6
has a standing license from Christ Jesus, Hos. 9. 3.
and comes upon the world as the rain and dew, Micah 5. 7
without asking leave of man, Joh 14 6.
or the sons of men. 1 John 5, 6.
what is stronger then truth, Pro. 12. 19
whose going forth is as the morning, Isa. 26. 2
and rises up to a glorious day? To protect truth, and bring forth truth, are
the work, and prerogative royal of that King, whom God has set upon his holy
hill of Sion. And therefore also I commend you unto his protection and
guidance, and to the word of his grace, who is able and willing abundantly to
support and strengthen us in the inward man, Rev. 3. 10, 4.
as well during the hour of temptation, which is breaking forth, as at any
other time whatsoever, and remain

Your and the truths unfeigned Friend and Servant, JOHN SMITH.

THE CONTENTS.
A Man may be confident of his Salvation, and yet deluded, and whence such
vain confidence is derived. 1 What it is to be fatherless and lost. 4 121 50
The difference between faith and presumption. 5 Who are weak Members of
Christ. 6 Three properties of true grace. 7 The difference between a weak
Member of Christ and an Hypocrite. 10 to 14 Four differences between the
repentance of an hypocrite and that of a child of God. from 14 to 19 16
Precious and soule-establishing considerations deduced from the Covenant of
grace. from 20 to 37 Diverse inviting Characters and soule-winning
encouragements of faith. 37 to 40 Eleaven motives and incouragement^ to
believe. 40 There is but look up unto Christ Jesus, and salvation is in thy
soul, and believing with thy heart, and thou art saved, thou were saved by
Christ before, but now in thy self. 43 Five grounds why Salvation is so soon
done 46 How God begets faith in an unbeliever. 47 When the soul is come to
believe that Christ was made sin for it; its doubts are vanquished, and the
soul sweetly quieted and settled 48. A Collection of sixteen things, from whence
it is that many weak Believers are encompassed with so many doubts, fears and
discouragements, together with 21* several ways and means to be used by
them, for their settlement in the Assurance of the love of God, when they are
tossed with tempests and encompassed with discouragements. From 50 to 77 Means
alone cannot settle a soul 77 Faith in Christ sweetly quiets and settles a
soul. 41, 42, 49, 190. 191. 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197. The poor believers
doubts, fears, and discouragements proceed neither from God, Christ, nor the
Spirit of Truth. 50 to 53 Nine Reasons against fears and discouragements in a
Believer, raised from 41 Isa. 10. 57 The fears of Believers are usually of
some of these seven kinds. 79 With their Remedies. 1. They are, and they are
not persuaded their sins are pardoned, etc. Ibid. 2. Some are persuaded that
many of their sins are pardoned, but not some others, which they have most
sinned in, etc. 80 3. Diverse fear still God does not intend them such grace
as he proffens and speaks of in his word, but suspect the Gospel, and are
jealous that God has some reckoning still behind, because they see themselves
sinful, etc. Ibid. 4. They think, though God may be reconciled to them, love
them at sometimes and pardon their sins, yet God may be provoked again. 81
5. They suppose they cannot sin as they do daily, and not be accountable, and
that they cannot but be sinners in Gods sight, as well as in their own, etc.
83 6. They think every affliction, or trouble that befalls them, is a messenger
of wrath from God, and so help the affliction to afflict themselves ib. 7. They
enterpret every curse in the law and new Testament for sin, their own, if it be
against their sin. 85 64. 181 A Collection of 30 several fears, doubts and
discouragements, that poor weak believers either in, or about conversion or
desertion, take up against themselves; with several remedies, resolutions, and
answers thereunto. from 86 to 175. Several degrees of the Saints growth in
grace. 88, 89, 90, 91. The time of doubting is a barren time. 89, 90 The way
for assurance 68, 98, 109, 101, 102 Faith evidenceth to us our justification.
67, 68, 181. 182 Believers may think they believe not, when they do believe.
142 Such as desire to believe have faith 153 Faith is where spiritual desires
are. 131 153, 154. It is one thing to know, and another thing to know that we
know. 145, 146 No effect of Sanctification can evidence Justification. 67, 68,
180 A Saints comfort not to depend upon his own personal Sanctification, and
why. 67, 68, 5. It is one thing to be justified, and another thing to be
sanctified. 67, 68, 179, 181 182 Faith looks beyond sight and feeling 123, 124,
125, 126, 127, 131. 60, 61. Several reasons wherefore God leaves sin in, and
many times permits corruptions to be strong in his dear children. 122. 123,
108, 187, 188. God turns the sins of his children to the good of their souls
189 Great faith may be where there is fear and trembling. 148 God is never an
enemy to his, though they greatly sin against him. 31, 32, 110 Heart, what
and where seated. 153 What it is to give God the heart 153 154 The sins of the
Elect are forgiven them before they know it. 163 Faith is so small and weak in
many, that they cannot discern it. 145, 147, 148, 155 God often hides himself
from his. 104, 105 The sins of believers are laid upon Christ, and now they are
Christ's and not their own 66, 179 183, 184 190, 191 A believers unbelief
cannot frustrate Gods faithfulness 144 A believers happiness depends not upon
his own doings 116 117 113 114 115 172, 173, 174 It is not any thing man can
do, that makes him more or less beloved of God 107, 108, 160, 178, 179, 180
Christ's righteousness the Saints comfort 116, 117, 179, 180, 181 182, 183,
190, to 196. Believers are not to apply the threatenings in the Scriptures
against their sins unto themselves, they being laid upon Christ. 64, 85 The
weakest Saint in Christ, has satisfied the Law. 115, 182 True believers put a
difference between the voice of Christ and the voice of a stranger 62, 50, 51.
52 And between the voice of the Gospel, and of the Law. 62 63 What it is to
live by sense 60 61 127 Wherein the life of says consists 196 We should ever
live by faith 124 When a believer lives by faith in infirties. 199, 200, 201 A
Believers comfort, hope, joy, and confidence, should be in God the same at all
times. 175 Six Reasons of the point. 177 1. Because thou art not beloved for
thy own sake, but upon the account of the Lord Jesus ibid 2. Because God is
unchangeable 178 3. Because God ever looks upon his, as they are in Christ. 179
4. Because the comfort of a believer depends not upon his own doing, but upon
Christ's holiness and righteousness 180 5 Because Christ and all true believers
are one. 182 The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us by our union with
Christ. ib 6. Because the state of a believer in Christ, (as considered in him)
is a state of perfection. 183 Four things from whence it is that the children
of God have not their comfort, hope* joy, confidence, etc. the same at all
times. 185 1. From living by sense, and a sensual practice of consulting with
flesh and blood, viz. from their deriving their comfort from their own personal
sanctification. ib. 2. From ignorance of the end^ that God many times proposes
to (...) in suffering corruption to be strong in his dear children. 187 3. From
ignorance or forgetfulness that in their addresses unto the Throne of grace,
etc. they are to come before God, as having put on Christ first, and not as
sinners and unrighteous. 190 4. From ignorance of their glorious gospel
freedom. 192 Two ways for a believer to hold stable comfort, hope, joy, and
confidence in God in saddest exigencies of the most dismal darkness that may
befall him. 194 1. To live in Christ, and a^ all times to consider himself in
Christ by faith ib 2. To live by faith, (1) in effectual vocation* (2) in
Justification. (3) In Sanctification. (4) In infirmities* (5) For protection
and supply of all things we stand in need of. (6) For Glorification. 196 to 205
Courteous Reader,
By reason of the Authors absence, there are diverse faults escaped the Press
(which candor I hope will bear with, and care correct) some whereof are here
marked for thy direction; thou art desired to take special notice of them, for
that diverse are very material.

ERRATA.
Margin of the Preface. Page 3 l 1 r Psalm. 125 1. p 6 l 2 for 41 r 4 to p 8 p
insert 2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11. p 11 for Jer. 41 r Jer. 51 bottom p 13 blot out
Isa. 22. 5.

Book: page 3. l 15 for a gain read again. p 4 l 2 r or. p 12 l 4 r he, p 15 l
28 r looks. p 20 l 13 for his r This. p 24 l 15 blot out first. ibid l 21 r
give. ibid l. 28 r as. p 25 l 16 r that. p 32 l 1 r assures. p 43. l 3 for are,
r. were. p 45 l 29 blot out into. p 50 l 11 for their r the. p 55 l 6 for as r
at. ibid l 14 r meloncholy, ibid l 29 r enlightened. p 56 l 1 r creatures. p 63
for 3 Means r 5th* Means* p 78 l 25 read and hindered. p 82 l 7 for and r in. p
87 l 24 r exceedingly. p. 88 l 6. for unto r into. p 90 l 23 for errors r
terrors p 92 l 28. for those Cedars, r. the Cedars. p 117 l 18 blot out con. p
119 l 7 for one, r. own. p 121 l 7 r place. p 122 l 28 r necessity. p 139 l 1 r
see. p 142 l 6 for persuasion r. preparation. p 167 l 10 for Thy read The. p
170 l 25 for of his r brought. ib. l 26, for brought r of his. p 148 l 6 for
so, r see. p 183 l 29 after the word rig^teousnesse, add etc. and blot it out
in p 184 l 1. p 186 l 10 blot out is. p 191 l 18 r Christ.

Margin, Page 2 r. Micah 6, 6, 7. p 4 l, 5 Psalm. 33. p 17 l 5 for 16 r 61. p 19
l 2 for 17 r 7. p 32 against fourth l of the book, insert Jer. 31. 3. p 39. for
Ezekiel. 16. r Ezekiel. 6. p 40 l 3 for 11 r 12. p 52 r Gal. 5. 5. p 61 r John 21. 3,
6. p 68 l 7 blot out 1. p 71 l 12 for 7 r 17. p 86 l 7 for 129 r 139. p 93 l 2
for 31 read 32. ibid l 6 for 2 r 9. p 94 l 4 r Ezekiel. 3. 9. p 96 l 5 for 29 r
26. p 105 l 8 for Isa. 44. r Isa 54. p 112 against 7th discouragement, insert
Romans 4. 5. p 124 l 7 r 1 Cor. 6. 19 p 131 l 4 r Gal. 2 20. p 135 l 1 for 1 Pet.
1. 10 r 1 Pet. 2. 10. p 137 l 6 for 45 r 5. p 144 l 4 for 2 Timothy 3. 13 r 2 Timothy
2. 13. p 149 l 1 for Genesis 2. 7. r. Genesis 9. 27. at the bottom of p 176 insert
Romans 8. 28. p 183 next after 1 John 1. 7. insert John 1. 29. and under Ezekiel.
16. 14 Ephesians. 1. 8, 9, 10 Dan. 12 9, 10. p 198 l 1 for 21 r 28.

A man may be confident of his Salvation, and yet deluded, and whence such
vain confidence is derived.
THE Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, in the 44 Chapter of his Prophecy 18, and 19.
verses* declaring the dead and miserable state of man by nature, gives this for
one Character of him; viz. he is without knowledge and understanding: For he
has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot
understand. And in the 16 and 17 verses, describes him in the state of death;
and whereas Christ is the food of living souls. John 6. 33.
This Prophet in the 20 verse of the aforementioned Chapter, gives a further
Character of the poor natural man, Isa. 44. 20
he feeds upon ashes; a deceived heart has turned him aside that he cannot
deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? That is to say,
He this poor miserable man is contented with, and expects satisfaction from
groundless hopes, as duties, ordinances, and what not (Christ only excepted
who is the true bread) his understanding and will are darkened, and misinformed
by Satan, and so have turned him aside from Christ, in whom alone is
deliverance, rest, and satisfaction; insomuch that he cannot escape the
dangerous state he is in; nor can he put it to the question, whether his
understanding be deceived by a lie, by something which is not what he takes it
to be, that will not perform what it promises.

2. A natural man is indeed sensible of some wants relating to his soul; and
therefore says, wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Micah 6 7
and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of Rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

No, Luke 15. 17
all this is ashes, and all those that have not bread must die for hunger. It
is the will of God that the ends of the earth look up to Christ; that those
who have no price nor money of their own, might have milk and honey freely. All
the duties, performances, and righteousness which poor miserable man accounts
gain, Phil. 3. 3. 8
shall (if he belong to Christ) be by him counted a gain to be loss for
Christ. And it would be seasonable to remember what the wise man says, Pro.
28. 26
Whosoever trusts in his own heart is a fool. Jer. 17. 9.
Hence it appears, that the strength and confidence of a deluded man, may be so
great, that it may seem unto himself an unreasonable thing once to question
it; yea such an ones confidence of his salvation, may be greater and stronger
then the faith of some of the Lords dear ones, and yet be false; and nothing
but a delusion of Satan, and a deceived heart.

It is not the greatness, or strength of any man's confidence, can assure its
possessor, that it is not a delusion but confidence is proved to be true o^
false by the ground of it, the cause and foundation of it; if it be grounded
upon, or caused by any man's qualifications, either abstinence from sin, doing
of good, or upon his inward peace, Romans 15. 4
comfort, joy, etc. it is false. But if it be founded upon Christ alone in his
free grace, from the word and promise of God, Psa. 130. 5.
then it will hold in a storm, In his word do I hope. Ps. 119. 81.
But I hope in thy word. Did God give thee a taste not only of a river of Divine
consolation, running by thee, but a relish and digestion of the matchless
goodness of the Lord Jesus from a fountain thereof before thee, and transform
thee into his own image thereby; I say, did God so convince thee, that thou
becamest lost and fatherless in thy own sight and apprehension, Hos. 14. 3.
and persuade thy soul that he has mercy for thee, and cause thee to hope in
him for it; it is no delusion: Psalm. 31. 18 21, 22.
For the eye of the Lord is upon them that hope in his mercy: And this is the
work of God, Psalm. 52. 8
to persuade the heart to rest upon his free mercy in Christ; did but God work
upon thy heart so that thou longest for, and thirstest after Christ, and an
interest in him and in his estimable goodness; certainly thou art not deluded,
Psalm 107. 9
God is thine, for he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul
with goodness.

Wherein Faith and Presumption differ.
He that presumes, his confidence of pardon is without ground; he has no word
of God to back his confidence, but his confidence is fetched from his own
conceits; he seeks not life in and from Christ, his word, and promise; and if
he does receive a promise, he receives it upon his own qualifications, without
respect unto Christ, and draws conclusions of life from what he himself is,
and his own doings; and as his own righteousness was never unto him as
dross and dung; so he depends upon his faith, and not upon Christ by faith;
his con^idence being grounded upon his own being so good, or not so bad as
others; like the proud Pharisee, such an one was never fatherless, Hos. 14. 3
nor did he ever receive the sentence of death in himself, 2 Cor. 1. 9
and for that sin never revived in him, he never died, but was always
persuaded that it is a very easy thing to believe; and assumes a confidence
contrary to the word of God which hardens him, Jer. 7. 9.
and renders him bold to venture upon sinful practices, whereas he that truly
believes in Christ Jesus, receives no promise of life, but in and through him
in the riches of his grace; and for the sake of Christ this poor believer will
suffer the loss of all things; his hope and help is only in the Lord, Phil.
3. 8.
his faith works by love, he abhors that which is evil; and cleaves unto that
which is good; and having this hope in him, purifies himself as Christ is pure,
1 John 3. 3
the Lord purifies his heart by Faith. Acts 15. 9


Who are weak members of Christ.
The weak member of Christ, or the weak believer, is either habitually or
accidentally weak.

1. I term those habitually weak, in whom the breathings, or fruits of the
Spirit, are but in a low, infant-like and feeble measure or degree.

True grace is very little at first, and therefore compared to the least of
grains, mustard seed. A huge Oak was but an Acorne at first, a bonefire a
spark. A poor weak believer is little in his own eyes, and little in the eyes
of the world; the Pupil of the eye is very little, yet sees a great part of
the heaven at once; though faith be no bigger then a mustard seed, yet it is
all eye to behold Christ. True grace is as the morning light, 1 John 3. 9.
and has these three properties, Hos. 6. 3.
viz.

1. It is a remaining seed, Mic. 5. 7
a living spring, 1 John 5. 4
that shall never fail. 1 John 2. 27.


2. It is still growing and increasing, True grace ((...) though but little at
first) is a beginning of glory, and may be compared to the golden chain in
Homer, whose top was fastened to the chair of Jupiter.
its going forth is as the morning, and rises up to a glorious day.

3. It will in the end overcome all that overshadows it.

A poor weak believer, being at first but a babe in Christ, and consequently
feeble, is upon that account by the Spirit of the Lord in Isa. 40. 11. likened
unto a Lamb in Christ's fold; He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, etc. And
hereupon God the father appoints Jesus Christ for poor sin-weakened believers,
as in Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has anointed me
to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted.

A true member of Christ may be weak, Mar. 14. 38
in respect of life, in whom indeed the spirit breaths, though faintly, whose
pulse beats, but feebly, whose heart pants after Christ, but weakly, whose soul
is indeed alive, though his actions not lively; who performs spiritual duties
from an internal principle or power of spiritual life, though but in the
initiation of it, in whom Christ who is the wisdom of the Father shines, Romans
14. 1
though through many clouds very dimly, whose faith is weak, who indeed
receives Christ and his free grace, though with a shaking hand; who is a
believer, though but of little faith; who hopes that Christ will not cast him
off, though not sure he will take him up; who (though he cannot see himself
worthy) can notwithstanding see God gracious, or at least has a glimmering
thereof. Neh. 1. 11
A poor weak believer is described by a desire to fear the name of the Lord, 2
Cor. 8. 11 12.
and if this be all thou have, it is accepted: there is as much difference
between some of the Lords people, as between willing and doing; Phil. 2. 13.
a will to obey the Lord is sometimes all that a blessed Paul can find; 2 Cor.
3. 1
One may be a babe in Christ though carnal: 7 Romans 18 19, 20, 21.
those desires which work toward God, 5 Gal. 17.
came from God; 2 Cor. 3. 1
the Spirit returns to him that gave it. 12 Eccl. 7.


Secondly, 145 Ps. 19
I call those Members of Christ accidentally weak, 2 Phil. 13.
who are habitually strong in the faith, having strong breathings of the Spirit
of Christ, and so not liable unto that constant weakness, wherewith babes, or
children in Christ are encompassed; and yet may sometimes be accidentally
weakened by reason either of sharp afflictions, unto which Christ brings them,
or great services unto which he calls them, or else by some great and desperate
falls into sin, which through infirmity (and as it were by accident) they
have taken.

There are two sorts of men, that after the committing of sin, can believe
pardon thereof no further, then they can see themselves humbled, or find
repentance in them for it.

First, Such as have a weak faith in the Lord Jesus, and these with Thomas, may
receive reprehension from our Savior. 20 Joh. 29
Because thou have seen me thou have believed, blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed.

Secondly, Mere titular Christians but in very deed hypocrites, who build
their faith upon the sandy foundation of their own repentance, Sublata causa
toslitur effectus.
humiliation, and such other like qualifications, (though they say and perhaps
think otherwise) and then no wonder, if when their foundation be removed, 7
Math. 26 27.
their faith fail and they fall.

But if it be inquired what the difference is between a weak Member of Christ
and an hypocrite.
I answer,

The weak Member of Christ has, another secret frame of Grace in him, which
will not suffer him to rest upon this rotten foundation; the Spirit of God
blows upon him, and gives him to see that this way of the flesh will fail
him; and at last pitcheth him absolutely upon Christ, and leads the poor soul
to lay hold upon the word of his promise which indures for ever. All flesh is
grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field; the
grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it: Isa. 40 6, 7, 8.
Surely the people is grass, the grass withers, the flower fades, but the
word of God shall stand for ever. When the Lord begets one by the immortal
seed of his Word; he then lets him know, that all flesh is grass, and that
whatsoever ^lesh and nature can desire to rest upon, falls away, and teaches
him to rest only upon the word of Promise, which indures for ever, tendered in
the Gospel. 1 Peter 1. 23, 24, 25.


But the hypocrite being not blown upon by this Spirit, not having the seed of
grace conveyed unto him in the Gospel-promise, 3 Romans 24 25, 26.
stumbles at this way of free justification; and seeks justification in another
way; forming up a Religion according to himself of pleasing and displeasing; 9
Romans 31. 32.
and by what he does and does not; and thus going about (through his natural
knowledge or light) to establish his own righteousness, 10 Romans 3, 4.
wherein is but a more glorious damnation to be got at best, he submits not to
the righteousness of Jesus Christ; And he waxing confident in this way
teaches it unto others; thinks others foolish and blind in regard of himself;
Romans 2. 17 18, 19, 20.
yea he grows so confident, as that he^ dares plead his cause with God: Have
we not prophesied in thy name? etc.

He has a faith, Mat. 7. 22.
though indeed but a dead one; and yet it will go far in the resemblance,
carrying the image of something like unto the new man, as the faint reflections
of the Sun in a cloud look like the Sun, but are not; and may both deceive the
soul of the person where it is, and of others that go but according to the
appearance: yet there being no spiritual life, nor Christ formed in such a
soul, there can be neither any right spiritual enjoyment of Christ, nor sollid
communion with God in him, though all the changes of the Spirit may seem to be
there to such a carnal formally deceiving heart.

He may repent as Ahab; 1 King. 21 27.
he may joy in the Gospel ordinances and have a kind of reforming with Herod,
there may be in him a kind of faith, as in those that believed (mentioned in
the Parable) but in time of temptation fell away; Matthew. 13. 19, 20, 21, 22.
there may be a frequenting of the word preached, as appears by those that said
unto our Savior; have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence? and thou taught
in our streets? There may be a conviction of sin, Act. 24. 25
as in Faelix, who trembled at Paul's preaching; he may hold out with Christ in
very great troubles, 1 Cor. 13. 3
nay suffer even death in the cause of Christ. But all these are not yet in the
power of Christ, nor in the life of the Spirit; so that the fruits and seeming
graces of such, are but like the berries upon the thorn in the way side, not
like the grapes upon the Vine; John 15. 1, 4, 5.
he is not built upon that Rock of ages, Christ Jesus; and other foundation can
no man lay; 1 Cor. 3. 11.
and therefore it is no matter of admiration, if like wandering stars and clouds
that have no water; Jude 12, 13
such are ever rolling up and down, Heb. 12. 24
and never established. He dare not reckon with his conscience, Heb. 9. 7.
for the blood of sprinkling is not there; and without blood there is no
remission, no boldness against sin, no looking Conscience in the face.

An hypocrite may have a name to live, Heb. 6. 4.
and to taste of the heavenly gift; but is indeed dead and senseless, yea
absolutely void of spiritual life, and may not unfitly be compared to that
Statue of a man, which they say Albertus Magnus was thirty years about; that by
reason of springs and devices within could walk up and down, and speak
articulately; which still was void of life; so here etc. some springs within
resulting from self-love, some scrnes of ostentation may produce in the
hypocrite speech and motion in the ways of God, but being destitute of
spiritual life, must needs be void of spiritual senses, and consequently of
those soul satisfying, ravishing, and transforming tastes and relishes of the
goodness of God, which the Saints enjoy: And thus although he may ascend many
rounds in Jacobs ladder, the greater at last will his fall into utter darkness
be, if the Lord give not repentance.

But inasmuch as the child of God and an hypocrite both stand for repentance,
it may be enquired what the difference is between the repentance of the one and
of the other.
I shall only instance a few of the differences, instead of many more that might
be insisted upon.

1. That which turns an hypocrite from his sin, causing him to grieve and
mourn for it, is principally a convicted conscience, Man. 27. 4. 5.
and restraining grace; this made Judas confess his sin, and restore his
pieces of silver, Numb. 22 34.
who nevertheless denied the power of the Spirit of Christ. 2 Timothy 3. 5


But the child of God, Jer. 31. 33
he has this Law of repentance put into his inward parts, 2 Cor. 3. 3
and written in his heart by the finger of the Spirit of the Lord, though many
times by reason of strong motions in the flesh, he would not repent; yet he
cannot resist this law of his mind, Jer. 20. 9.
he must perform it; when the Lord says in his word, Psalm. 27. 8.
repent, and seek my face, he this poor child of God replies, Thy face Lord
will I seek; the very same lesson, 1 John 2. 2^.
that he is taught outwardly by the word, he is taught inwardly by the
anointing spirit; yea, it is even his meat and drink to do the will of God.

2. Repentance in the hypocrite proceeds from a servile fear, Heb. 2. 15
he being begotten under a covenant of works, is through fear of death subject
unto bondage all his life long; and though he look to be saved by faith and
repentance (being instructed out of the Gospel:) yet he dares not expect grace
and pardon any further then he sees himself work, for he looks to be saved,
though not altogether, yet as it were, by the works of the Law, Romans 9. 32
thinking that mercy and pardon must needs follovv his works, and this is that
which makes him take a great deal of pains in the Church; Mat. 20. 12
yea he will bear the burden and heat of the day, and perform abundance of
hypocritical service unto the Lord, Isa. 1. 14.
yea til he troubles the Lord therewith, and makes him weary thereof. Romans 8.
15.


But the child of God is begotten under a Covenant of grace, and has not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of Adoption to cry
unto God, Abba Father, and (being delivered,) Luke 1 74
serves God without fear, in holiness and righteousness all his days; he
knows very well that sin cannot damn him, being delivered out of the hands of
his enemies by the blood of Christ. And hence though God break him in the place
of Dragons, Psalm. 44. 17 19
and cover him with the shadow of death, yet will he not forget God, nor deal
falsely in his Covenant. His repentance (in that sin cannot damn him) is not
arbitrary; he is bound to it by the Covenant of grace; 5 Gal. 6.
his faith works by love, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
the love of Christ constrains him; 8 Cant. 7.
many waters cannot quench this love, neither can the floods drown it; if a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned; the more sin the Lord has forgiven him, the more he loves God, and
repents, mourns and weeps bitterly because of sin, as it is an injurious
offense against so merciful a Father, instance Peter and Mary Magdalene, 22
Luke 16 62
who thought nothing too dear for a Christ, from whom they had received a free
and full discharge from all their sins and provocations. 7 Luke 47 46
the hypocrite repents from a principle of slavish fear; but the poor
believer, from a principle of a child-like love.

3. An hypocrite never turns to the Lord with his whole heart, as the Lord
requires, 1 Jam. 8
for he is double minded. True it is, he may walk according to the dictate of
his conscience, as far as he is enlightened by the word of God, leading a
blameless life, 3 Phil. 6.
and may do that which he does, out of the integrity of his heart with
Abimilech; 20 Genesis 51 6.
he persuades himself he is in the right, when in truth, he is far wrong;
and because he received not the love of the truth, that he might be saved, the
Lord gives him up to strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
that he might be damned, who believes not the truth; He may indeed seemingly
turn unto the Lord, in respect of many glorious actions; 3 Tit. 5, 6.
but he has not a new heart, nor a renewing Spirit within him; and if that
action, that (as he thinks) he does most uprightly, were put into an
Evangelical frame, he would most exceedingly have it, because the carnal mind
is at enmity against God, ^. Romans 7.
for it is no^ subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be; his best duties
proceed but from flesh and nature, and from the old man, which never turned to
God; and as for that, which should give a spiritual being to those actions,
namely faith in Christ, and the Spirit of grace, these he hates from his heart.

But the child of God has a new heart and a new Spirit; he is a new creature,
2 Cor. 5. 17
all things are become new: and although the flesh lusts against the Spirit;
24. Jer. 17
yet this new creature turns wholly unto God, 119. Psalm. 2
and is all for God; 138. Psalm. 1 2
such a man seeks the Lord with his whole heart, 103. Psa. 1
and all that is within him praises the Lords holy name.

4. The hypocrite in his repentance, and all his performances aims at
himself; 7. Hos. 14.
he does them for corn, 7. Zech. 5.
wine, and oil; when he fasts and mourns, he does it for himself, and not
unto the Lord; the salvation of his soul is his utmost end.

But the child of God, the believer, does all for Gods glory; 17. Luke 18
he desires the Salvation of his soul, but he has a further end; hereby the
Lord manifests his truth and mercy, and gets himself a name. 23. Psalm. 3.
Says blessed David, save me for thy mercies sake, for thy Names sake; and
when he repents and confesses his sin, it is principally, that he may give
glory unto God, and in all his actions terminates not in himself, 7 Josh. 19.
but does them to the end that Christ may be magnified and esteemed all in all.

Sixteen precious and soul establishing considerations deduced from the
Covenant of Grace.
The new Covenant of grace is held forth principally in these places of
Scripture. Deus promittendo se fecit debitor^m.
viz.

8. Heb. 10. Jer. 31. 31, 33, 34. 36. Ezekiel. 25, 26, 27, 29, 31. Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4,
5, 6, 8, God in promising has made himself our debtor.
9, 10, 11, 59, 60, 63 Jer. 32. 40. Jer. 33. 20 Heb. 6. 17, 18. Heb. 12. 24.
Heb. 13. 20. Mic. 7. 20. Psalm 89. 28. 31, 32, 33, 34.

1. Consideration. His Covenant is a free Covenant, being the offspring of the
free love, mere grace, and rich mercy of God, whereby he is pleased to make a
blessed agreement with his Son Christ to save poor lost man, yea, the worst,
most vile, despicable, and helpless creatures in the world; and of this sort of
mankind does God usually please to take into covenant with himself; for he does
not (as many would insinuate) therefore take men into this covenant, because
they believe and are holy; but that they might have faith and be holy: in this
covenant he promises holiness, and through it conveys holiness unto men; 36
Ezekiel. 25. 26.
as for example, the Idolatrous Ephesians, the profane Corinthians, the vile
Publicans, the filthy Harlots, yea the poor thief, even at the last hour,
when he could neither serve nor glorify God so much as one hour on earth; and
these when they were at the highest of their provocations, and when no eye
pityed them, yea, when their own eyes pittyed them not, then was the time
wherein the Lord out of the riches of his grace and soul astonishing love
swear unto them, and entered into covenant with them; and this was likewise the
time wherein they became his, as in that pregnant place of Scripture, worthy
to be written in indelible characters of Gold, upon the memory of every poor
believer. Thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, thine habitation and thy
kindred is of the Land of Canaan, 16. Ezekiel. from ver. 3 to verse 11
thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite; and in thy nativity when
thou wast born, thy navel was not cut; thou wast not washed inwater to soften
thee, thou wast not salted with salt, nor swadled in clouts, none eye pitied
thee to do any of these unto thee, for to have compassion upon thee, but thou
wast cast out in the open field to the loathing of thy person, in the day that
thou wast borne. And when I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, and I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: even when thou
wast in thy blood, live. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold thy time was as the time of love; and I spread my skirts over thee, and
covered thy filthiness; yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with
thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine; then washed I thee with
water, yea, I washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil,
I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with Badgers skin, and
I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk, I decked
thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on
thy neck.

It is an apparent truth unto all experienced Christians, that when God first
enters into covenant with men, he finds them in their blood, Nisi omnino
gratuita non est gratia. Aug.
in their infidelity, he finds them unholy, but as soon as this covenant is
struck with them, thou becamest mine, says the Lord, in the last mentioned
Scripture, then I washed thee with water, etc. yea, I washed away thy blood
from thee. The Lord puts his holy Spirit in them, Isa. 63. 11 18.
and his holiness, and so they immediately become the people of his holiness;
God becomes our God, and then makes us his people, and afterward washes us,
and sanctifies us from our sins.

And although poor believers have injuriously and unkindly offended this
gracious God by their manifold provocations, yea though they have despised the
oath in breaking this covenant, and played the harlot in the face of the Lord,
yet the Lord will have such to know, that his ways are not as their ways, but
as far above them, as the heavens are above the earth. For thus says the
Lord God, 16. Ezekiel. 59, 60.
I might even deal with thee as thou have done which have despised the oath in
breaking the Covenant. Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in
the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant,
and thou shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame; when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God.

And as this covenant is free, so likewise it is unconditional on man's part,
God is pleased indeed to take us into covenant, not upon any condition in us,
before he brings with him Christ, and in him all the conditions, and make us as
he would have us, not for the covenant, but in it, or under it; we are not his
people before he be our God, 8 Heb. 10.
first you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. 15. John 16
And it evidently appears, that there is nothing required of a man to make him
partaker of this covenant; no not faith (though diverse affirm that it is
requisite that God gives faith unto men before he enters into covenant with
them, that so they may have it as a hand to take hold upon the covenant) but of
such I would be satisfied, (if the new covenant of grace be not unconditinal on
man's part) how it differs from a covenant of works, is it not a hard and as
impossible a thing for man of himself to believe in Christ, as it is to keep
the whole Law? to believe in Christ is a fruit of his spirit, 5. Gal. 22
and must we not be in Christ before we bear fruit; Joh. 15. 4.
we cannot rationally expect the effect before the cause, the light before the
sun, or heat before we have fire; therefore we must be in Christ before we can
believe, we cannot from Scripture ground expect faith in the soul before
Christ's spiritual presence be there; he that has the spirit of Christ, has
Christ; we have the spirit of Christ before we believe, therefore we have
Christ before we can believe; 8 Romans 9, 10, 11.
so ^at it is Christ in us that brings us to Christ out of us; it is the spirit
of Christ that leads a sinful soul to the person and righteousness of Christ;
faith is no condition, but one of the graces of the covenant on Gods part, to
be given to those who are given unto Christ, and is not given before the
covenant, but in, with, and through the covenant, and there must ^e the
spiritual presence of Christ, who is the Author of ^aith in the soul, ^ither
before or at the very first instant of believing, for that the cause must
necessarily anteceede the effect.

Thus it manifestly appears, that at Gods first entering into Covenant with a
man, the poor Creature is merely passive, having no condition at all in him,
yet when God has taken a man into Covenant with himself, and sown the
immortal seed of grace in the field of his heart; and so sprung up light,
life, and faith in the soul, then the soul is to say as Christ said, my
Father works hitherto, 2 Cor. 6. 1
and I work^; or as the Apostle said, we are co-workers with him; yet herein
we must also know it is not enough for God to tune the instrument of the
soul, unless he himself also play thereon; without this, the Music cannot be
melodious; 1 Cor. 15. 45.
it is not enough for God to work grace in men's hearts, 5 John 21
but he must also quicken, 6 John 63
put forth and act those graces he has been pleased to infuse into, and work
in the Saints.

And it is Gods part not only to propound and to offer, but it is his part also
and his promise to bring men into the bonds of the Covenant, 20 Ezekiel. 37.
and to work a willingness and ability in men to receive what he offers and
gives; 2 Ephesians. 10
to believe what he promises, and to obey what he command^.

The new Covenant is indeed merely a Promise; for the Covenant that God makes
with his now under the gospel, is all on his own part, without any thing on
man's; he makes himself ours, and makes us his, all is of his own doing;
though a Covenant in the strict, legal and common sense is upon certain
Article^ of agreement and conditions on both sides to be performed: Thus stood
the old Covenant; there was life promised on condition of obedience, and so in
Covenants and Contracts between man and man, but now there is a Covenant, or
rather promise in Jesus Christ, who is called the Mediator or Manager of the
Covenant, in which God gives himself freely in Christ to be the God of a poor
sinner, Christ undertaking all both with the Father and the soul; It is not
the way of a Covenant that the Gospel uses, but rather the promise or grace, or
Salvation, and the Doctrine of it in Hebr. 8. 10. Jer. 31. 31. Ezekiel. 36. 26,
27. It is cleared to be only promise, grace and free love to a sinner; for if
any thing were to be done for life or salvation we should darken the glory of
free grace, and make it a promise neither wholly of grace, 11 Romans 6
nor wholly of works; Deus nos non nisi in ea perfectione in qua Christus
resurrexit intuetur.
if it be of grace, it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
nor is this promise of salvation given to sinners as sinners barely, simply and
singly, nor as qualified or conditioned* for so life should be purchased by
us, rather then for us; so as we are only sinners in our own and others
Judgments, but truly loved in Christ when the promise comes: And thus the
Scripture calls us ungodly, and sinners, and children of wrath; not that we are
so, but seem so; or not so in Gods account but the worlds. The Spirit says,
though they be black yet they are comely; they are so in the esteem of him,
who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Rev. 3. 18
being clothed with the robes of Christ's purity and holiness; Isa. 65. 10
though in themselves in the glass of the Law, reason and sense they appear
black, yet in Christ through the glass of the Gospel they are beautiful and
comely to the eye of faith.

The new Covenant no Covenant properly with us, but with Christ for us. 89.
Psa. 28 24 to 38.

God makes no covenant properly under the Gospel, 53. Isa. 10, 11. 12.
as he did at first, but his covenant now is rather all of it a promise; 42 Isa
6, 7
man is not restored in such a way of covenant and condition as he was lost,
49. Isa. 9.
but more freely and more by grace and mercy; 25 Psalm. 14
and yet God covenants too, 13 Heb. 20
but it is not with man only, 89 Psalm. 19
but with him that was God and man; 6 Heb. 17.
even Jesus Christ; 26 Isa. 12.
he is both the covenant, 89 Ps. 2. 35
and the messenger, or mediator of the covenant; God agreed to save man, but
this agreement was with Christ, and all the conditions were on his part. He
stood for us, and articled with God for us, and performed the conditions for
life and glory; and yet because we are so concerned in it, it is called a
covenant made with us, I will make a new covenant with them; and yet that it may
not be thought a covenant only with us, as the first was, it is called a new
covenant, and a better covenant, and Christ is called the mediator of it; and
lest we should think some conditions were on our parts, as in the first, it is
added, I will writ^ my Law in their hearts, I will put my spirit within them; so
as in this new covenant, God is our God of free grace and righteousness on his
part, not for any conditional righteousness on ours; yet in Scripture it is
called still a covenant, because God is our God, still a way of righteousness
though of redemption too, and of condition too, yet not on ours, but on Christ's
part for us, and yet it is a covenant with us, because we are Christ's. 1 Cor.
3. 22, 23.


This Covenant is a full and complete Covenant, richly and plentifully stored
with all suitable promises, both for this life and that which is to come; yea a
poor Creature cannot be reduced unto that condition, but there is something in
the covenant which suits with that condition, and tends to answer, relieve, and
redress him, be it for soul, body, or both: yea it is copiously stored with
all seasonable and suitable promises, like that River of God which is said to
be full of water; there is in God and in this covenant riches of
sinne-pardoning mercy, and renewing grace, and riches of love, and grace to
cover men's nakedness, and riches of glory to satisfy their souls for ever;
yea a poor creature (whether a Saint or a sinner) cannot possibly want the good
thing but it is in Christ, and in the covenant, and it is promised in the
covenant, for the Lords promises are altogether as large as his commands, and
larger then his threatenings.

It is a well ordered Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
and that in three respects.

1. In respect of the promises and parts of the covenant; as first, God becomes
our God, and then makes us his people, and afterward washes and sanctifies us
from our sins.

2. In respect of manifestation; 2 Timothy (...) 10.
God first reveals it by his outward Ministry, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22.
then afterward reveals, seals and assure it unto men's souls by his Spirit

3. In respect of the ends of it; and these are God the fathers, and the Sons
glory: and that he might display the banners of his soul-ravishing, and
heart-melting goodness in the sight of his poor children.

This Covenant (though in respect of men it be altogether free) was founded
upon Christ and his merits; 2 Pet. 1. 1.
yea, doubtless faith, 4 Gal. 5
and all the mercies and promises of the covenant were really purchased by him,
and the covenant it self is built upon the rock of ages, Christ Jesus.

This covenant is a sure covenant, and thereupon the mercies thereof came to be
called the sure mercies of David, as sure as a rock, being founded upon Christ
himself. Hear what the merciful and immutable God says concerning it, yea unto
such as had broken his statutes and commandments, 89 Psalm. 31 32, 33 34
My Covenant I will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips;
when God once comes into covenant with a soul, he will not nor cannot break it
with them; the Mountains shall depart, 54 Isa. 10.
and the hills shall be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
nor shall the Covenant of my peace be removed says the Lord that has mercy on
thee: And he speaks further by the Prophet Jeremiah; Jer. 33. 20
If you can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the Night, that
there shall not be day and night in their season, then may also my Covenant be
broken etc. Romans 8. 38, 39.
As this covenant was not made with us, so it cannot be broken by us; and as
it was not made for our good works, so it cannot be disanulled by our sins;
it is not founded upon so rotten and sandy a foundation, as self and
performances are: what cause therefore have we to break out into joy and
admiration of those heights and depths of the love and wisdom of God who has
neither made the covenant with us, nor left it in our keeping, but founded it
upon his own immutable word and promise, Psalm. 89. 2
which he has also confirmed by an oath?

As the new Covenant of grace is free, unconditionall on man's part, as it is
merely a promise, a full and complete covenant, a well ordered covenant,
founded upon the merit of Christ, and a sure covenant; so also it is an
everlasting covenant; consider that he who made this covenant, is none other
then the everlasting God, Isa. 40. 28.
and his motive to make and enter into this covenant was his everlasting love;
Jer. 31. 3.
the righteousness upon which it is established is an everlasting
Righteousness; Dan. 9. 24
and all the mercies and blessings thereof are everlasting; Heb. 8. 12
as everlasting pardon; for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. Jsa. 54. 8.
Everlasting kindness: In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy
Redeemer; Psa. 100. 5
everlasting mercy; for the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting and his
truth endures to all generations. Everlasting joy, Jsa. 35. 10.
and the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with Songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads, 2 These. 2. 16, 17.
etc. Everlasting consolation; Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even
our Father, who has loved us and given us everlasting consolation, etc. and
likewise everlasting life. For God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, John 3. 16
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
God has ordained men unto eternal life, before they believe; and faith is a
fruit of the spirit of Christ, and of consequence we must be in Christ before
we can bring forth fruit: John 3. 16
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, etc. This and such like
expressions are to be considered as declarations of the qualification of such
as are saved; not that faith gives us any interest in Christ, but manifests
unto us, that he who has loved us with an everlasting love, has by his Spirit
come into our hearts and created faith there and showed forth this love unto us.

When God is said to be in Covenant with a Soul.
A soul is then properly, actually or expressy in Covenant with God, when God
has come to it in the promise, and then when it feels it self under the power
of the promise, it begins only to know it is in Covenant; and yet to obey as if
it were but to enter into that covenant which God has made with it in Christ,
before it could do any thing; so as they that believe do rather feel
themselves in that covenant which God has made with them, without any thing in
themselves, either faith or repentance, etc.

The effect of this Covenant.
The Lord in and through this covenant, brings a poor creature to see, and
seeing, to admire the superabundant riches of his free grace and love, and
humbly and thankfully to embrace the same; and the heart, thus wrought upon,
vehemently desires that such carriage and kindness of its God might not slip
out of mind; but that the consideration of this soul-ravishing heart-melting,
and astonishing grace and loving kindness, might through the Spirit of the
Mediator of this covenant, carry him forth steadfastly to believe in, dearly to
love, cheerfully to obey, and dutifully to honor and serve the God of this
mercy, in soul, body, and spirit, so long as the Sun and Moon endure, and for
ever; in a word, the soul is carried forth, out of self, unto God, and in God
alone finds rest and satisfaction.

Diverse inviting Characters, and soul-winning encouragements of faith.
Faith is an assenting or cleaving to the truth and faithfulness of God in his
promise; Romans 4. 20 21.
not from any thing the soul sees, or feels in it self, but from something it
apprehends in God, in his word; faith sometimes is attended with much strife
and struggling; for Satan will say to the soul, it is in vain to believe, Christ
says, come, I will ease thee; and faith sweetly persuades the heart to rest
upon the ability and fidelity of God in his free promise. Faith is an emptying
grace, yea it is its property to empty the soul, and keep it empty of self
confidence; and thereby it makes way for receiving of the righteousness of
Christ, even as the poor widows empty vessels, 1 Kings 17. 14, 16
for the receiving of the oil out of the cruse, whereas the fullness of the
vessel caused the stay. Yea, it implies an emptiness of self, that we may be
filled with him, out of whose fullness, we receive grace for grace.

Faith is a believing that Jesus Christ is the Christ, which implies a seeing,
and knowing that all is in Christ for life and salvation, and so to rest upon
him for it: he that thus believes in Christ, is brought over by Christ, unto
Christ: and so centered upon him, John. 6. 58
that he will never go from him. My soul, wait thou on God, Psalm. 62. 5.
for my expectation is from him.

And in those souls who enjoy this precious faith; old things are done away,
and they are new creatures; there is a light set up in the soul, and the soul
sees and knows all is by Christ, and that there is no way, or means of life,
but by him; and thereupon closes with him, and rests upon him.

Faith looks unto what God says, rests upon it, and sets to its seal that God
is true.

Faith does not lay hold on Christ to fetch Justification from him, till Christ
has first laid hold on us, and imputed his righteousness unto us, and by his
Spirit in a free promise of grace declared the same unto us; Quid putas aliud
fidem esse quam sensum and gustum misericordi^ and (...). Dei in Christo: hic
sensus misericordi^ et is est qui laxat corda solvitque in dilectionem Dei,
etc. Rolloc on 5. John.
and then faith becomes active to receive and depend upon Christ and his
everlasting righteousness.

Faith works by love, and most highly prizeth Christ and his righteousness,
debases and vilifies self, admires the immense and infinite riches of Gods free
grace and love, and engages the heart to holiness; yea, to dedicate it self
as a monument of eternal praise and thanksgiving for his inestimable goodness.

Yea, that soul that is possessed of such precious faith, can never in its own
eye see God high enough, nor it self vile enough, Phil. 3. 8, 9 10
and fetches all its strength from Christ to do all it does. Ezekiel. 16. 9 10.


There are many mistakes about faith, some have thought comfort, Gal. 2. 20.
joy, or ravishments of soul with God to be faith, Mat 22. 37
and so because they had not them, have concluded they had no faith; it is not
men's believing, but the object of faith, that gives faith its denomination.
There are many precious souls that trust in Christ for life, from an hope of
mercy, but this hope (though the poor soul at present sees or knows no
certainty of enjoyment of what it hopes for) has a blessing intailed on it:
Turn ye to the strong hold, Mat. 16. 17.
ye prisoners of hope. Zech. 9. 11


Eleven Motives to believe.
1. By believing, Joh. 3, 15, 16, 36.
we come to know our interest in Christ, and salvation by him. John 6. 40


2. By believing, Joh. 3. 33.
we honor God; he that receives his testimony, has set to his seal that God
is true.

3. If ye believe not, Isa. 7. 9.
surely ye shall not be established; Romans 11. 20
there is no true quietness and settlement of soul without believing; Heb. 9.
12.
thou stand by faith, Heb. 4. ^
and fallest into sin by unbelief; the word preached, is precious and
powerful, yet it profited not, being not mixed with faith in them that heard it.

4. Its faith that rids the soul of all its distempers, Romans 5. 1
doubts, fears and discouragements; we may not separate the Spirit from faith,
nor faith from the Spirit, nor Christ from both.

5. By faith in Christ thou shall be kept in perfect peace, it will sweetly and
transcendently refresh the soul; Isa. 26. 3, 4
thou shall keep him in perfect peace because he trusts in thee. 5 Romans 1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God; by faith we apprehend Christ
our Justification, the fruit of which is joy and peace.

6. By unbelief we add sin unto sin in the highest nature, if we believe
not what God says, we accuse God of speaking falsely: 1 John 5. 10.
he that believes not has made God a liar It is impossible for God to lie,
the strength of Israel cannot lie, nor can it be any dishonor to God or danger
to thy self to hope in his mercy and believe in him: 1 Samuel 15. 29.
The eye of the Lord is upon them that hope in his mercy. 33 Psalm. 18


7. As bad as thou can be, have been received unto mercy; Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16.
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance. When thou layest in
thy blood, 16 Ezekiel. 8
it was a time of love; Romans 4. 5.
He justifies the ungodly; While we were yet sinners, Romans 5. 8. 10.
Christ dyed for us; have hope therefore, fear not but believe; Mark. 5. 36.
the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, Psalm. 42 8.
and in the night his song shall be with thee, hope thou in God.

8. Unbelief streightens thy heart, stops thy mouth, and hinders thy
thankfulness and praising of God; thou shall be dumb because thou believe
not. Luke 1. 20.


9. Unless we believe, we can never glorify God. Abraham staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, Romans 4. 20
but was strong in faith giving glory to God.

10. Our naked cleaving to God in his free promise shall carry down all our
distempers at once, Isa. 26. 3.
and drown them in it as in a Sea; the promises will answer all thy doubts and
fears whatsoever, and fill our souls with peace in believing.

11. By our unbelief we oppose riches of grace and love; yea, that love that
could love enmity it self, and reconcile those unto God, that are enmity
against him.

There is but looking up to Christ Jesus, and salvation is in thy soul; and
believing with thy heart, and thou art saved: Isa. 45. 22.
thou were saved by Christ before, but now in thy self.
Jesus Christ and forgiveness of sins in his name, and redemption through his
blood, is the first and only thing held forth in the Gospel to sinners; the
other mystery of Righteousness is revealed to believers; forgiveness of sins
is first taught, that they may believe; and the other glorious mysteries are
taught, that they may know what they believe: they are first to see Gods love,
and afterward his glory: Jesus Christ crucified, is the best story for
sinners; and Jesus Christ exalted, for Saints; and therefore it is, that in all
the Apostles Sermons, the story of blood and redemtion was first preached; and
when they did believe that, then they wrote Epistles and Revelations of greater
things unto them, so as they spoke of Christ only to make them believe, and
wrote to them of him when they did believe.

Salvation is not made any puzzling work in the Gospel; it is plainly, easily,
and simply revealed; Jesus Christ was crucified for sinners; this is salvation,
and this work of salvation is past and finished, sins are blotted out, sinners
are justified by him that rose for their justification; Romans 4. 25
now that which we must do to be saved, Act. 16. 31.
is to believe in the Lord Jesus Jesus Christ, and the promise is annexed, thou
shall be saved. All that is to be done in the work of salvation, is to believe
that there is such a work, and that Christ dyed for thee among all those other
sinners he dyed for. 1 John 3. 23.
This is the commandment, that ye believe on his Son Jesus Christ; that is,
that ye be persuaded of such a thing, that Christ was crucified for sins, and
for your sins, and we are called on to believe, because they only that can
believe, are justified* by him all that believe are justified; Act. 13. 39
so that salvation is not a business of our working and doing; it was done by
Christ with the Father: Sin, Satan, and hell were all triumphed over by Christ
himself openly for us; and all our work is no work of salvation, but in
salvation; in the salvation we have by Christ. We receive all, not doing any
thing that we may receive more, but doing because we receive so much; and
because we are saved: therefore we work, not that we may be saved, and yet we
are to work as much as if we were to be saved by what we do, because so much
is done already for us, and to our hands, as if we were to receive it for what
we did our selves; this is short work, believe and be saved, and yet this is
the only gospel work and way. Christ tells ye in few words, and his Apostles in
as few. John 3. 14
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes on him should have eternal life; Romans 10. 6
7, 8, 9
Says Saint Paul, say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven; that is,
to bring Christ from above? or who shall descend into into the deep? that is,
to bring Christ from the dead? but what says it? the word is nigh thee, even
in thy mouth, and in thy heart; the word of faith which we preach. if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

The work is already done, but then thou shall see that it is done.

There are five grounds why salvation is so soon done.

1. Because it was done before by Christ, but not believed on before by thee
til now.

2. Because it is the Gospel way of dispensation to assure and pass over
salvation in Christ to any that will believe it.

3. There needs no more on our sides to work or warrant salvation to us, but to
be persuaded that Christ Jesus died for us, because Christ has suffered, and
God is satisfied; now suffering and satisfaction, is that great work of
salvation.

4. Because they and they only are justified who can believe. Romans 1. 17
Righteousness is revealed from faith to faith, Act. 13. 39
all that believe are justified.

5. That it may be by grace, Romans 3. 24
and not of works, being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus.

How God begets faith in an unbeliever.
We are commanded to believe, and faith is the gift of God; Ephesians. 2. ^
and the Spirit of Christ (without which we can do nothing) enlightens our
understandings, Joh. 15. 5.
and works faith in us; Ephesians. 1. 19
and hereupon our believing is said to be the work of God, 2 Cor. 3. 17. 18.
and the Spirit having set up a divine light in our understandings (we being
before altogether darkness) bows our hearts to believe; and indeed without
this quickening Spirit of Christ the two edged sword of the word preached, 1
Pet. 1. 23. 24. 25.
will prove but as Scanderbegs sword, which without Scanderbegs arm, was able to
do little or nothing. It is through grace that men believe, Act ^8. 27.
yet men are to use the means; for in the preaching of the word God has
covenanted, that his Spirit go along with, 2 These. 2. 13, 14
and add power to the word spoken, and make it effectual to the enabling of the
creature to obey; Isa. 59. 20, 21
he said unto me, Son of man, Ezekiel 2. 2
stand upon thy feet, and the Spirit entered into me when he had spoken unto
me, and set me upon my feet. And the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, Joh. 5. 25.
and they that hear shall live; otherwi^e were it in vain to speak unto dead
men to believe, ^ Pet. 4. 6.
and all men are by nature spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2. 1, 4 5.
only they believe, whose hearts God opens: None can believe but they unto whom
it is given. Act. 16. 14


When the soul is come to believe that Christ was made sin for it; its
doubts are vanquished, and the soul sweetly quieted and settled.
As soon as Jesus Christ by his Spirit has convinced the soul that he is
made sin for it, Peccat ini^ quus, et punitur justus
and that it is made the Righteousness of God in him, then do all its doubts,
2 Cor. 5. 21
fears, and objections vanish; and Christ is believed in, and lived upon with
thankfulness and joy; yea, such a soul by its eye of faith, sees it far
better, that Christ was made sin for it, then if it had never sinned; yea, as
much better as a spiritual body is better then a natural, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44, to
55.
as much better as the image of the heavenly is better then the image of the
earthly body; yea as much better as strength is better then weakness, and as
heaven is better then earth: Rom, 5. 1.
It is faith in Christ that rids the soul of all its distempers, doubts, fears,
and discouragements: we may not separate the Spirit from faith, for faith is
the fruit and effect of the Spirit, and we cannot rationally expect the effect
without its cause. And it is the want of faith that causes troubles in the
soul; John 14.
says Christ, ye believe in God, believe also in me, and let not your hearts
be troubled, believing in Christ sweetly quiets and settles a troubled soul,
and those that know God, will trust him with their bodies and souls, and that
upon his word; Ps. 9 9. 1^
all that know thy name, will trust in thee; yea, they will cleave unto God in
his promise, even then when they are in their greatest fears, and most sensible
of their own vileness, and that not without sufficient war^ant; Psa. 62. 8
Trust in him at all times; God is a refuge for us, Selah; if at all times,
then at the worst of times, yea even then believe, and hear nothing against thy
believing of God in his promise; Romans 4. 18.
Abraham the faithful believed against hope; oh believe God intends thy good;
Luke 19. 10
Christ came to seek and to save the lost; such as are lost in their sight and
sense of their own vileness, insufficiency and misery.

A Collection of diverse things, from wh^n^e it is that many weak Believers are
encompassed with so many doubts, Isa. 41. 10
fears and discouragements, together with sundry especial means, which they
are to make use of, and wherein the Lord Jesus usually qui^ts and (...) a
disquieted soul in the assurance of his Love.

Negatively; the doubts, fears, and discouragements of weak Believers proceed
not from God, for his voice is peace and comfort to his people; Jer. 29. 11^
I know the thoughts that I think toward you says the Lord, thoughts of peace
and not of evil; Isa. 40. 1, 2.
Comfort ye my people says the Lord; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem; cry
unto her that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; You
see they come not from God. Nor come they from Christ; he neither troubles nor
discourages any, it was promised concerning him, that he should speak peace;
9 Zech. 9. 10.
Thy King comes; he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, this is his work, and
he does it; therefore he does not trouble, nor discourage any; He is the horn
of Salvation that God has raised up for us to guide our feet in the way of
peace. Luke 1. 69 79.
He opens the blind eyes. He brings out the prisoners from the prison, and
them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. Isa. 61, 1, 2, 3.
He is that light that is sprung up unto those that sit in darkness, Matthew. 4.
16.
and in the Region and shadow of death; he binds up the broken hearted; he
proclaims peace and liberty; Luke 4. 18
he comforts all that mourn. He gives beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garments of Praise for the spirit of heaviness; he was given
to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty poor bruised prisoners
that have been taken Captive by the Devil; and the maine end of his coming is
to abolish death, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
and to bring life and Immortality to light through the Gospel; this is his
work and he does it: Isa. 42. 3.
he is gracious and pitiful, he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break
the bruised reed, John 13. 1
his voice is full of love and tenderness, his words are sweet words, Luke 12.
32.
as Let not your hearts be troubled; fear not, it is your fathers pleasure to
give you a Kingdom; 1 Pet. 5. 7*
Cast your care upon me, I will care for you; Christ's voice unto his poor
people is; Open to me, my sister, Cant. 5. 2.
my Love, my Dove, my undefiled; his name is King of Salem, that is King of
peace; Heb. 7. 2.
It is palpably apparent that our fears and discouragements come not from
Christ; Nor come they from the holy Spirit of God; John 14. 16. 26.
for he is the great and most sweet Comforter, Romans 8. 26
he causes no discouragements, Cor. 1. 2 9. 10.
but removes them all by revealing and applying unto the soul the love of God;
G^l* (...) 5.
and carries the soul by faith from all discouragements unto God, Psa. 116. 7
who is love and peace, where the soul is to rest and be filled with sweet
peace; This is the work of the Spirit, and hence it is that he is called the
Comforter; John 15. 26.
he never caused the least fear or discouragement in the soul of any.

The consideration that our fears, doubts and discouragements come not from
God, nor from Christ, nor from the holy Spirit is sweet; for then what need we
regard them? yea we may slight them.

Affirmatively; the doubts, fears, and discouragements of weak believers do
proceed, viz.

1. From the Devil, who is a malicious adversary to the Saints; he either
tempts us to sin, and that will cause us to doubt; or else he tempts us to
doubt and that will cause us to sin: and thus he raises doubts and fears to
hinder their comfort and peace in believing; Luke 8. 12.
he also tempts them, 1 These. 3. 5
and takes the word out of their hearts least they should believe. Psalm. 42, 10.
From whence these particulars ensue.

2. From our own hearts; Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an
evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. Heb. 3. 12.


3. From the lying vanities we have chosen; Jonah. 2, 8
they that hearken unto lying vanities forsake their own mercies.

4. From ignorance, heedlesnesse, and forgetfulness of the fullness and
freeness of the promise of God, Isa 55. 2.
and his everlasting covenant of grace, Isa. 51. 11, 12, 13.
and from living by sense, and not by faith.

5. From unskilfulnesse of the word of righteousness. Heb. 5. 13. 7.


6. From the want of watchfulness against sin; the not keeping of a clear
conscience, omission of duties, and loose walking with God; these will raise
tumults in the soul.

7. From building our hope and comfort upon that which is mutable and
uncertain, Mic. 2. 10.
upon our own personal Sanctification, and not upon Christ and our free
justification by him, who is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption.

8. From ou^ own false reasonings as to conclude that we have no work ^o grace
wrought upon us, because we as present cannot see or feel any grace in our
selves; thus many weak believers, that are through Christ right precious in
the sight of God, Joh. 15. (...).
are subject to delude themselves in choosing trouble, and pre^erring it before
comfort.

9. From the bodies distemper with melancolly, and troubling your selves with
the event of things, Jonah 3. 9
and from pride, Jer. 31. 15.
which hinders a quiet submission unto God, in that condition inward or
outward, which he has led us unto; and from want of patience to wait upon him
for deliverance out of trouble in the use of means.

10. From want of consideration of the ground of the trouble, and enquiry
whether it ought to be a cause of discouragement or not.

11. From too much eying of sin, or an over-sensiblenesse of infirmities, and
not eying of Christ with them, the conscience enlighted siding with the law
against it self.

12. From the poor creature striving to get out of its dungeon by its
ownwrestling, whereby in steed of gaining inlargment, it heightens its own
distempers.

13. From unbelief, Dan. 9. 24
which takes the law, Romans 8. 2.
and applies the same with the threats thereof unto the soul, Romans 10. 4
thereby occasioning fears and discouragements

14. From ignorance of the love of Christ, Gal. 3. 13.
and when the blessed spirit of truth does once come into the soul, 8 Romans 35
38, 39.
and discover the love of Christ unto it, its doubts are immediately resolved;
and it is sweetly revived.

15 From slighting the means that God has given for our recovery; we are
indeed with thankfulness to use the means, and yet to know that means cannot
cure a soul; it must be the operation of the Spirit of Christ in the soul,
which is as God pleases. Romans 8. 16


16. From Gods not appearing to, and the Spirits not operating in the soul;
the operation whereof, discovers unto the soul, the overflowing fullness of
the loves of Christ, and brings the soul to believe in the Lord Jesus, and
trust in his mercy.

Our carnal reason, and corrupt hearts, and Satan with his suggestions are so
near us, and before our eyes, that we cannot see God; and we hearken so much
unto what these dictate, that we mind not the blessed voice of the Spirit of
Christ, which would revive and fill our souls with joy and peace in believing,
and make us so wise and strong in his time, that we should not any more cast
away our confidence in God. And as Gods love (which is free, Heb. 10. 35
full, and perfect) is discovered to the soul; Heb 3. 6. 14.
so, yea, in the same measure, 1 John 4. 18.
anr doubts and fears cast out. Perfect love casts out fear, and the poor
creature is made perfect in love.

Nine Reasons against fears and discouragements in a believer, raised from
Isaiah 41. 10.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness.

The first reason is, Because it is against Gods command for a believer to
fear or be discouraged; fear thou not.

2. Because thou have the presence of God to help thee; I am with thee.

3. Because a believer has an interest in God, which is a happiness beyond
all miseries; I am thy God.

4. Because nothing can befall him, but what God appoints, who loves him.

5. Because whatsoever befalls him, Romans 8. 28
shall do him good.

6. Because the bitterness shall be but short. Romans 16. 20.


7. Because fears and discouragements never do any good, but much hurt; they
deprive us of many an opportunity of doing Christ service.

8. Because fears are doubts are unsuitable for a Saint; Rev. 21. 8
the fearful and unbelieving, shall have their part in the lake, etc. with
S^rcerers, Idolaters, and Liars.

9. Because fears are unreasonable for a child of God; Psa. 34. 10
the Lord having given unto his many sweet and precious promises, Heb. 13. 5
That they shall not want any good thing; 1 These. 5. 16
he has said. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; they are therefore
safe, and need not to fear, but in God always rejoice, and sing praises to
him.

One and twenty several means to be used by poor weak believers, for their
settlement in the assurance of the love of God, Isa. 54. 11
when they are tossed with tempests, and encompassed with discouragements, viz.
1. Means. Commune with thine own heart, Psalm 77. 6.
and make diligent search to find out what it is that troubles thee. Psalm. 42.
5, 6, 7, 8
Reason within thy self; Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and disquieted
within me? etc.

2. Means. Prove. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8
Renounce all lying vanities, and hearken unto none of them; hearken not to the
voice of thine own heart; it is a lying vanity, and will deceive thee.

Hearken not unto sense; Thomas said, John 20 24, 25.
he would not believe, unless he might see, and thrust his hand into his side;
Heb. 5. 14
but such sensual practices are to be abhorred by us, for it is no other but to
consult with flesh and blood, which cannot discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.
14
and is condemned; some will see an holy frame of Spirit in themselves and feel
sin subdued before they will believe, Gal. 1. 16
this is sensual; for faith looks not to such things as these, but to God in
his word, 2 Cor. 5. 7
therefore we live not by sight, but by faith; blessed are they which have not
seen, Joh. 20, 29
yet have believed.

Hearken not unto carnal reason, for in so doing thou can neither believe,
submit to God, not be settled. Reason will say, a Virgin cannot bring forth a
child, Genesis 17. 16 17
and that a woman ninety years of age is past conceiving a child; Reason
contradicts God himself, Heb. 11. 30 31, 32, 33, 34. etc.
and says, these things cannot be; can reason believe that the walls of Jericho
fell down by faith? and that the Saints stopped the mouths of Lions, and
quenched the violence of fire? Yet faith did it. Is it likely or possible to
reason for a man to walk upon the sea, or Peter did? Did not Christ's command
seem vain to Peter's reason, Mat. 14. 29 29.
that he should then cast h^s net into ^he sea, seeing he had cast it in so
often, John 21. 3
and fished all night, and caught nothing? Can reason conceive how the dead,
who are eaten with beasts and fishes, and turned into dust, can be raised unto
life? or that the sea can be divided? the Sun go backwards? the Rocks yield
water in abundance? Ezekiel. 37. 1, 2, 3, 5, 10
the flint be turned into a fountain of water? Ps. 114. 8
or that dry bones shall live? Surely there can be no reason given to reason
for these things; wherefore seeing that sense and reason are so contrary to God
in his word; we may not hearken to them when they say, the soul has no grace,
because sense sees or f^eleth none, and that God will not pardon our sins,
because there is no reason to reason why he should, nor any way to reason which
way it can be; Mat. 19. 26
for with God all things are possible. Job 9. 10.
Also live not upon duties and performances, groundless hopes, nor peace,
comfort, joy, raptures, or ravishments whether true or false; live upon God
alone, and if thou live upon any thing else, as thy foundation, whatsoever
your sparks be, you shall lie down in sorrow. Isa. 50. 11.


3. Means. Give no way at all to any discouragement, although it seem never so
just and reasonable; This was David sin to admit of a P^rley with that which he
looked upon, as tending to his discouragement; Psalm. 77. 8, 9, 10.
saying, Will the Lord cast off for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?
I said; this is my infirmity. As soon as he saw his infirm^ty, he had other
thoughts of God, saying, Who is so great a God as our God? Psalm. 77. 14 19
thou art the God that d^st wonde^s, and thy footsteps are not known. If God in
his greatness, mercy, and the wonders he does, and the way he goes, were
known by us, we should admire and rejoice at that, for which we now mourn.

4. Means. Learn to know, and distinguish between the voice of Christ and all
other voices; Can. 2. 8
learn to know and say distinguishingly of Christ's voice; Luke 5. 20.
it is the voice of my beloved, and hearken to it, Luke 7. 48
for it is peace; Heb. ^0 17
thy sin^ are forgiven thee; I will remember them no more; therefore that voice
that tends to the hindrance of the Saints peace, suiteth with the voice of
Satan, Psalm. 85 ^
and is not the voice of Christ; I will hear what the Lord will speak, for he
will speak peace unto his people; Satan makes it his work to contradict this
voice of God unto the soul, and say, it is a delusion, and not likely to be
from God; yea, and alleges seeming reason for it; saying unto the soul, Art
thou a child of God and thus overpowered with corruptions, etc? And now because
this voice is suitable to carnal reason, the poor soul is ready to close with
it, and conclude against God, and its own comfort, that the voice of peace was
not from God, but a delusion of Satan; and hereupon comes to mistake Christ's
voice to be the voice of Satan, and Satan's voice to be of Christ; therefore
know oh poor soul, Heb. 3 1^
that such discouraging voices are from the devil, and not from the Prince of
peace.

3. Means. Learn to know and distinguish between the voice of the Gospel,
Gal. 3 10, 11
and the voice of the Law; the Law says, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Law to do them: when there is any
work to be done, upon pain of punishment, or upon promise of eternal life,
it is the voice of the Law: the Law requires doing something for life. Moses
describing the Righteousness of the Law, Romans 10. 5.
says, That the man that does these things shall live by them. But the voice
of the Gospel is far otherwise, as that Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13.
being made a Curse for us; Ephesians. 3. 20
and that his mercy is above what we can ask or think; The promises of life
are free and without condition, the Gospel declares what God works in us, and
freely gives unto us; I will love them freely. Hos. 14. 4
If we listened more unto the promise, which is the voice of the Gospel, and not
to the voice of the Law; we should enjoy more peace, and find less trouble.

6. Means) Meddle not with the threatenings in the word so as to apply them to
thy soul, Gal. 3. 13. 17.
for that they belong not unto thee, and are no part of thy portion; Gal. 4. 5.
they concern not the state of a believer (however they may be of use to
prevent sin, yet are of no use unto him after commission of it; yea, it is a
weakness in a believer after commission of sin, to apply unto himself the
threats of the Law against that sin, because we are not under the law, Romans
6. 14
but under grace. Romans 8. 33 35, 38, 39
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Christ being made a curse
for us, has made perfect satisfaction on our behalves unto the justice of God,
Dan. 9. 24
and brought in an everlasting righteousness: Rom 6. 7, 10, 11
Reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through
Christ Jesus our Lord. This to do, is indeed against carnal reason, sight,
sense and feeling; 2 Cor. 5. 7*
but we are to walk by faith and not by sight.

7. Means. Judge not your condition by false principles; some judge their
eternal condition desperate, for that they want those things, the enjoyment
whereof, would not prove their state good; as knowledge, memory, parts,
sensiblenesse of sins, etc. Others account their state and condition very bad,
for that they are encompassed with those things, which if they were freed from,
would not prove their eternal condition good, as passion, temptations,
discontentednesse at the providence of God etc.

8. Means. Take heed ye be not overwhelmed with sin; eye not so much thy
infirmities; beware of such a minding and complaining of sin, as tends to
discourage, oppress and trouble thy soul; David's experience speaks it
sinful; Psalm 77. 3, 4, 8
I complained, says he, and my spirit was overwhelmed, I am so troubled that I
cannot speak; to eye sin so as to be overwhelmed, and to have our spirits
drunk up in the consideration of it, is both against God, and thy own soul;
what thou see and feel^st, pore not upon; and learn to see and perceive what
is not obvious to thine own sense and sight; Heb 11. 1.
faith is the evidence of things not seen, 2 Cor. 5. 7
walk by faith, and not by sight.

9. Means. E^e Christ al^ne, mind him, meditate upon him, the riches and
freeness of his grace, and fetch all thy consolation from him, 1 Cor. 1. 30
who is made unto thee of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Ps. 116. 7
Sanctification and Redemption; eye not so much thy self, or thy sins, as
Christ's full and perfect satisfaction, Isa. 53. 5, 6 11
which was offered by him, and accepted of by God the Father for all thy
sins; oh therefore live in, and rest upon the Lord Jesus alone, and place all
thy confidence in him who will settle thee, comfort, Romans 4. 17
quicken, and uphold thee, and be infinitely better unto thee then thy self
can be. 1 Cor. 15. 45


10. Means. Learn to distinguish between thy justification, Haec voluntatis
p^rfecta impletio Sanctificatio est Christi, et hac nos sanctificat, quia nobis
imputatur, says Z^^chy.
and thy personal sanctification; the first is quite out of thy self,
consisting in the imputation of Christ's righteousness inherent in him, who
sits at the right hand of God, and far above the reach and sphere of sins
activity, and is therefore perfect and complete; yea the foundation of all
blessedness: The later is in our selves, Justificatio est actio individua
semel et simul.
and therefore weak and uncertain; he that understands not the true nature
and doctrine of justification, cannot enjoy true, Romans 5. 13
stable and constant peace. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8
In the right understanding of this point, is treasured up a fountain of
soul-reviving consolation. Psalm 32 2


11. Means. Let not thy comfort depend upon thy own personal sanctification,
because from it there can no stable comfort proceed; this is none of the least
causes of much trouble in many weak believers, viz. to seek the living among
the dead, to think to suck consolation at the breast of their own
sanctification; whereas the spiritualized Christians experience tells him, that
his sanctification has nothing to do with his justification or salvation as
any cause of it: Christus justificationem dicit esse Regenerationem. Melanct.i^
John 3
sanctification also admits of degrees; but justification neither of rules nor
degrees, and is abundantly more glorious then sanctification, nor having any
dependency upon our apprehending, or receiving it, but upon what the Lord Jesus
has done for us; justification is effected by Christ, Heb. 11. 1
and apprehended by faith; The Spirit and faith do evidence unto us our
justification. All that believe are justified, Acts 13. 39
etc. The Spirit also in another place intimates unto us, Heb. 10. 22
that it is possible to have a full assurance of faith; faith is an
unquestionable evidence, and when faith is hidden and doubtful, Justification
is not apprehended, nor sanctification evident, but doubtful; and so cannot
evidence unto us our Justification; but rather induce us to call it into
question. And that soul that apprehends its free justification by Christ Jesus
alone, Romans 4. 25
may live upon it, and thence enjoy unspeakeable peace, joy, and strength (the
sweet fruits and effects thereof) yea at that time, Hab. 3. 17, 18, 19.
when he sees no personal sanctification in himself, since Christ is made unto
him sanctification: Why may not a soul live by faith upon that at all times
and say, I have sanctification in him that has justified me; 1 Cor. 1 30
and this is perfect? my own actual righteousness often fails me, says such
a soul, but Christ's endures for ever; Psalm. 111. 3
therefore will I fetch all my comfort from Christ and from my free
justification by him. And as we are not to conclude our justification from any
effect of sanctification, Tit. 2* 14
so we are not to conclude, that apprehension of Justification to be from God,
which takes us off the means, ways, or rules of sanctification; for when the
grace of God appears, it teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and in our souls, bodies and conversations to honor and magnify the God of
our mercies, who has justified us freely by his grace.

12. Means. Allow not your selves in any sin, but in the strength of God hate
and abhor, all sin, and the appearance thereof, yea, with the greaest
indignation; it is better to die then to sin; there is that in sin, which
strikes at a poor believers peace and comfort, and joy in God; it will damp and
straighten the soul; yea is a let to our faith, and brings unsettledness and
disquietness to the poor soul.

13. Means. Mind seriously those promises that are suitable to thy condition,
and apply them to thy own soul; God has imparted himself, and engaged his
faithfulness in the promise, and it is our duty, and would be our wisdom, to
rest thereupon: in order whereunto, Prove. 18. 2.
separate thy self to meditate thereon; thou know not but that God may
reveal the promise more and more in thy meditation of it, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20
and settle it by his almighty power upon thy soul; Psalm. 19. 20
let not the precious promises of God be strange unto thee, be not willing to
leave a promise, Ephesians 2. 9
until thou art refreshed by it; Psalm. 130. 7
yea, raised and ravished with thankfnlnesse for the exceeding riches of his
mercy and plentious redemption held forth in them; as for example, that one
promise in Heb. 10 17. Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. This
is enough (if accompanied with the Spirit of Christ) to quiet and settle a
troubled soul.

14. Means. Treasure up experiences of Gods goodness unto thy soul;
Philosophers say experience to be multipl^x memoria.
Remember the days of old, says David. I have considered the days of old,
and the years of ancient time; thou have been my help. ^sai. 77. 5
I was brought low, and he helped me; Psalm. 63. 7
therefore thy God who is unchangeable, 2 Timothy 4. 17.
will help thee still, Ps. 89. 49
and be thy refuge in the time of thy trouble. I tell thee, oh disquieted
soul, that the calling of the experience of the goodness of thy God into thy
mind, will be a notable means of quieting thy soul. Isa. 42. 23
This duty the Lord knows a poor believer is backward to; But who among you
will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for time to come? It is thy
duty and privilege oh believer, to set the loving kindness of thy God ever
before thine eyes: Psalm. 48. 9
We have thought of thy loving kindness oh God.

15. Means. Slight not, nor refuse the consolations of thy God; let them not
seem small unto thee; Job 15. 11
Are the consolations of God small unto thee? oh disowne not the comfort that
God gives out for thee, lest thou live to complain as David, Psalm. 77. 2. 10*
my soul refused to be comforted; and to wish that thou had not despised nor
refused it: be thankful unto the Lord, for what thou have received, hold it
fast, improve it to the glory of the Donor; and let nothing go that may tend to
thy peace and establishment.

16. Means. Rest fatisfied in Christ's righteousness, Psa. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24
and add nothing to it: Ps. 119. 142
I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only: Thy
righteousness (says the Psalmist) is an everlasting Righteousness, See Psalm
31 and 50. 6. Jerem. 33. 16. The perfection of Christ's righteousness is held
forth unto us, and always lies before us for us, that we may be ever comforted
in it, and rejoice with thanksgivings for it. Oh it is completely perfect, and
full of divine consolation; yea it is a welspring of life to refresh and
satisfy all the Lords people to the days of eternity; so that we have enough,
we need no other, nor any more righteousness to live upon.

17. Means. Let not thy comfort depend upon Gods actings or dispensations
toward thee, whether inward or outward; for so doing, thou can not be
settled; for these are often changeable, and contrary each to other: one day
thou may have peace, joy and strength, another none of these; to day perhaps
God shows himself unto thee, and in a moment he may hide himself; to day
perhaps thou art rich, and enjoyest health and many friends, and yet to morrow
thou may be poor, Heb. 13. 8
sick and thy friends alienated; Isa. 45. 7, 8 15
Gods actings in us and upon us, Cant. 5. 6.
are not always as he is unto us, Isa. 8. 17
God is unchangeable, and ever the same, however he may seem to be, therefore
make a good construction of all his dispensations toward thee, and know that
his actings in us, or upon us, are the accomplishing of his will for his own
glory and the good of his; that which I think worst for me, may be best for
me; How ever it be, Psalm. 73. 1
yet God is good, and good to me. Thou oh Lord art still the same. Heb. 1. 12


18 Means. Frequent those whom God has settled in the assurance of his love;
these are able to direct and inform thee in the knowledge of the grace of God
revealed in them; wherein is peace and joy unspeakable and full of glory; 1 John
1. 4
many hear and confer with such as are ignorant of the grace of God, and find
success accordingly.

19. Means. When our spirits are never so much dejected and sadned, we should
with Isaiah, wind up our affections, and stir up our selves to take hold on
God, and remember that Christ is our resting place, Isa. 64. 7
whose spirit whispers in, and unto us as it did unto David, Psa. 116. 7
return unto thy rest oh my soul, etc. If thou have sinned thou have done very
foolishly; it being done, it cannot be undone; what shall the soul do, but
remember that sweet and gracious promise, Heb. 10. 17
their sins and iniquities I will remember no more? and consider that there is
not any sin a believer can commit, Rom 8. 1, 33
that should cause him to cast away his confidence, or so much as question the
love of God unto him, for any thing he has done, or can befall him; All that
know the name of the Lord, Psalm. 9* 10.
will trust in him, and cleave unto him for strength, yea* to be their strength
against sin for the time to come; it is but a foolish conceit, that brings a
poor child of God to cast away his confidence, and renders him culpable of the
reprehension of our Savior, Luke 24. 25
oh fools, and slow of heart to believe, etc. A poor believer is commanded to
come boldly to the throne of his Fathers grace; Heb. 4. 16.
he may not in any wise admit of such a disquietnesse in his sorrowing for sin,
as shall discorage and hinder him in obeying another command of God; 1 These. 5.
16
Rejoice evermore.

20. Means. Know and remember the happiness of a believer in Christ, Gal. 3. 28
though never so weak; 1 John 1, 7
he is clean from all sin by the blood of Christ, they are removed from him,
so that he is accepted of God in Christ, Ps. 103* 12
as perfect, 1 John 4. 17
righteous and comely, as Christ is; Col. 1. 28
says Christ, who is on with his Father, unto a poor believer, Thou art all
fair, Cant. 4. 7
my love, there is no spot in thee; go the ^ore in much assurance and
confidence, unto the throne of his grace who having given thee his Son, Romans 8.
32
cannot but with him freely give thee all things, that he in his wisdom and
love sees fit for thee, whether for soul, body, or both: Having therefore
Brethren boldness to enter into the hol^^st by the blood of Christ, Heb. 10.
19 20, 22, 23
by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the veil,
Heb 4. 15 16.
that is to say, his flesh. And seeeng that we have not an High Priest, which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted, like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto
the Throne of grace, Heb. 10. 22 23
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need; and let
us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; let
us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering (for he is faithful
that promised.) Romans 8 33 38, 39
When shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. Meditate on these precious truths, until then sweet influence
through the Spirit of him, who raised up Jesus from the dead, have warmed and
enlivened thy soul

21. Means. Lastly, know and remember, that though these means, tending so much
to the souls settlement: in, and assurance of the love of God, are to be used;
yet means alone are (...) sufficient to quiet and settle a tro^^l^d soul; it
is the work of Christ spirit to answer all doubts and remove all
discouragements. Isa. 57. 19, 20
God creates the fruit of the lips peace, peace to him that is afar off, and
to him that is (...), says the Lord, and I will heal him. 1 Cor. 1. 21
In the use of means, we are to look unto, and wait upon him who will in his
own time (which is best) free all his from all their discouragements, doubts,
and fears, and satisfy their souls with his love, which is better then wine.
These things I write unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 21
that your faith and hope may be in God.

A Collection of many the fears, doubts, and discouragements, that a poor
weak believer, either in or about conversion, or desertion, takes up against
himself, together with their several remedies, resolutions, and answers.
Weak believers are like melancholy people, who think things far otherwise
then they truly are; rightly smoking flax, where there is more smoke then
light, more ignorance then true discerning; and thereby they expose themselves
to manifold fears and discouragements, when there is not the least cause: as
for example, Mary was troubled and afraid; Luke 1. 29, 30
all the matter was, the Angel saluted her and told her, that she had found
favor in the sight of God; Luke 2. 9, 10
the shepherds were afraid even then when the Angel brought them tidings of
great joy. Luke 5. 8, 9
Peter was afraid when he had drawn up much fish; by which their
discouragements they highly dishonored God, hindered their own peace.

The fears of weak believers are usually of these kinds. Viz.
1. They cannot be persuaded their sins are pardoned: indeed they would and
they would not believe it; they cannot from the spirit that is in them, but
close with Christ, and claspe about him for salvation; yet then they are not
sure they have him; they may be deceived they think in that; in a word, They
are, and they are not persuaded their sins are pardoned.

The Remedy to this fear.
We are commanded to believe forgiveness of sins in Jesus Christ thoroughly,
Acts 10. 43.
and not in part: Through his name, Ephesians. 1. 7.
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

2. If faith carry them on to believe a little more, or better of their
condition; yet the pride of some sins will not down with them; some of their
sins, which they have made their darlings, more then others, and cherished
themselves in; oh these they think are either too great, or too often
committed to be all forgiven and at once; the remainders of these sins are like
dregs in the bottom, and their consciences cannot be satisfied that God has
fully pardoned them. Briefly; They are persuaded some sins are pardoned, but
not some others, which they have most sinned in.

The Remedy.
There is indeed a large disproportion between sins, in regard of their
causes, Isa. 61. 10
effects and adjuncts, yet the robe of Christ's Righteousness is so large that
it covers the greatest sin as easily as the least; Isa. 44 22
And we are to consider that one sin cannot be forgiven but all are forgiven.
Heb. 9. 26
Jesus Christ has done away all sins. 1 John 1. 7.
For this man, Heb. 10. 12.
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, Dan. 9. 24.
sat down on the right hand of God.

3. They look not upon God in the pure simplicity of his word and promise, but
suspect and are jealous that God has some reckoning still behind, because they
see themselves sinful, and know that God is of purer eyes, then to behold
iniquity; and they cannot believe that God can bear with all those corruptions
and transgressions in them. Briefly, they fear still God does not intend them
such grace, as he proffers and speaks of in his word, and suspect the Gospel.

The Remedy.
We are to believe God in the plainness and simplicity he speaks in, in Gospel
promises, the word of his grace, even unto our souls, as if he spoke out unto
us by name from heaven; 1 John 5, 10
he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son.

4. They think, though God may be reconciled unto them, and love them at
sometimes, (for they (poor souls) only reckon the seasons of the Spirits
comfortings and breathing for the times of forgiveness) yet God may be
provoked again, and angry again for new sins and failings, and then they are
as much troubled how to come at any peace again, as they were before; and then
it must be only another sunshine of the like comfort must warm them into
peace and believing. In a word, they think if God do pardon them, yet they may
provoke him again soon after.

The Remedy.
We must know, Mal. 3. 6
that God is not as man, Number. 23. 19
that he should be angry and pleased, as we carry our selves; I will be merciful
to their unrighteousness, Heb. 8. 12. and 10
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more; I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a people. There is no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1
etc. The apprehension indeed of pardon and salvation is variable, Remissa
culpa remittitur poena.
but yet the pardon and salvation it self is immutable; and as the Gospel needs
to be given but once, so a man's sins need but once to be forgiven; once is
enough because if once, Hebr. 10. 12, 14
then for ever.

5. They cannot persuade themselves how they can sin, as they do daily, but
that they are countable for all the breaches, and set up new scores of sin in
their consciences; and keep reckoning for God, and disquiet themselves in
vain; in a word, they suppose they cannot sin as they do, and not be
accountable, and they cannot but be sinners in Gods sight, as well as their
own.

The Remedy.
We must remember, our sins are no more ours, Rev. 1. 5
but Christ's; and his righteousness is ours; 2 Cor. 5. 21
God reckons and accounts us as one now; so though we sin, Heb. 9. 26
yet every sin was accounted for in him: Jer. 23. 6
And now there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 10. 4
and 8. 1, 33
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies.

6. They think every affliction or trouble that befalls them, Jer. 50. 20
is a punishment for some sin they have committed; and they look on them as
messengers of wrath from God, sent upon them in judgment; Quod tegiur non
videtur, quod non videtur non imputatur, quod non imputatur non punietur.
as if God were satisfying himself upon them, and pouring forth some wrath
upon their heads to satisfy his justice against such sins. In a word, they
think afflictions are sent upon them for their sins, and they cannot look upon
God in them, Romans 4. 7
but as angry, Jer. 50. 20
and so help the afflictions to afflict themselves. 2 Cor. 5. 19


The Remedy. Isa. 53. 11

We are to consider, Heb. 12. 10
that although afflictions come in with sin, Isa. 43. 25
and for sin, and are the wages of sin; yet to the righteous and believers,
they are not judgments, for every thing of justice against sin was spent upon
Christ, so as to believers, they are only trials and temptations. James 1. 2
My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations: Rev. 3. 19
They are chastnings of love, to prevent and imbitter sin unto us. As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten, etc. The rod of afflictions is a teaching rod;
David found it good for his soul that he had been afflicted, and God afflicts
his own children. Non studio nocendi, sed desiderio sanandi.
the fruit of affliction to believers, is the taking away of sin; And the
Spirit tells us expressly, Isa. 27. 9
If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons; Hebr. 12. 7, 8
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.
Afflictions are (in a word) a diverse way or dispensation of love and grace
unto the poor soul, love working by that which is evil in it self. Heb. 12.
10
We know that all things do work together for good, Romans 8. 28
unto them that love God.

7. They mistake the Gospel in the doctrine of it; and every Scripture that
threatens for sin, they apply unto themselves, because they have committed
that sin.

In a word, They interpret every curse in the law and new Testament for sin,
their own, if it be against their sin.

The Remedy.
We are to consider, that though the Scriptures do often set forth the
righteousness of God against sin, and his justice against iniquity; yet the
justice of God being satisfied by him, Isa. 53. 10, 11
who made his soul an offering for thy sins, Justice it self has no more
power against thee for thy sins, then the pursuer has to do with the murderer
in the City of refuge. For sin shall not have dominion over you; ye are not
under the law, Romans 6. 14
but under grace.

The Discouragements of poor weak believers, herein mentioned, are as
follows.
I fear I am but an hypocrite, 1 Discouragement
notwithstanding all the fair shows I have made for the Lord, his ways and
people.

It is contrary to the nature of an hypocrite to fear that he is such an one,
and it is a Character of a sincere heart to see, and seeing, to bemoane its
own deceitfulness, Psalm. 26. 2 and 129. 23, 24
to desire sincerity, and to embrace and most highly to prize that word of the
Lord that is most searching in its own soul, to thirst after that word that
is most powerful, Heb. 4. 12
and keen, and pierces even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit,
and of the joints and marrow, and to examine it self; it is the prayer of a
David-like spirit, Examine me O Lord, Psalm. 26. 2
and prove me, try my reins and mine heart. It is as dangerous for a soul to
skin up its wounds before they are searched, as to press it self down with
discouragements, and help the affliction to afflict it self. Take it rather
for granted, that thou art an hypocrite; and if so, what is that but a sinner,
though of a deeper die then an ordinary sinner is? Hos. 11. 12
We read that Ephraim compassed the Lord about with lies, and the house of
Israel with deceits etc. and that he was a cake not turned, Hos. 7. 8.
that he fed upon wind and followed after the East wind, and provoked the Lord
unto anger most bitterly: Hos. 12. 1.
and that yet Gods bowels did still work toward Ephraim, so that he could not
destroy him. The Lord is exceedingly gracious unto such wretched creatures of
his, though they compass him about with lies; Hos. 11. 4. and 14. 5
Let such poor believers consider, that a sinner can never be too foul for
his Savior, too much wounded, and too sick for this Phisician to heal and
cure, nor too filthy for a fountain opened to wash; and that the whole need
not a phisician, but those that are sick; and that Christ came unto the world
to justify the ungodly, and to save the chief of sinners; he came not to call
the righteous but sinners to repentance; and let such a soul that cannot as a
Saint, stick close unto the Lord Jesus as a sinner: and his hopes in Christ
through the enjoyment of his spirit within him, Jonah 2. 2* 4, 7
will lead him forth in the strength of Christ to purify himself as Christ is
pure.

Had the Lord Jesus by his Spirit wrought an effectual work of grace upon my
heart, 2 Discouragement
I should have grown in grace; but I do not so, my life is not holy, nor am I
like unto the Lords children.
1. Consider whether thou art a child, 1 John 2. 12, 13
a young man, or a father in Christ; for as there is a great difference
between a child and a man in Christ, so between a babe in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.
1. and a man in Christ.

2. Consider whether thou art a babe in the womb, Heb. 5. 13
or borne; that is a babe that is unskilful in the word of righteousness; as a
child being begotten and alive, is in the womb, before it is borne; so a soul
is spiritually alive, and begotten from above, before it be born; Gal. 4. 19
Christ must be formed in us before we can be new born babes, before we can
desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2^ 2
that we might grow thereby.

When thou art delivered out of bondage, darkness, and fears concerning thy
eternal condition, thou art born and brought forth, for as the womb is a place
of bondage, so is a doubting condition; and therefore thou can not look for
those seize in this condition, as others find in another; and also in
case thou art newborn, there cannot be that expected from thee, which is from
a man in Christ; there is a great difference you know to be put between a
child and a man.

3. Learn to distinguish between the fruits of the Spirit, and the exercise
of them; it is not the having of the fruits of the Spirit, but the exercise of
them that attains an holy conversation: and know, that it is one thing to be
the Lords, and another thing for God to convey his power into the soul, whereby
to make it conformable to his will, Gal 2. 2. 20
and to live by faith in the Son of God: the first is where the later is not.

4. Know that the time of doubting is a barren time; men cannot fight and work
at such a time. And yet as trees in the winter season grow in the root (though
not in the branches) so may thou grow in humility, love, etc. though thou
may unto thy self seem to decay in those and other graces of the Spirit. Non
progredi est regredi.


But when a soul is delivered from its enemies, that is to say, from Satan's
errors and its own doubtings, then it begins to serve; being delivered we
serve; Luke 1. 74*
there must be deliverance before working; therefore a time of doubting and of
bondage is not a season of growing in holy services.

5. Believers are of several growthes and states. 1. Babes or children in
Christ. 2. Young men. 3. Fathers. Can babes work? Yet if babes die in that
state, they shall not miss of glory; it is one thing to be justified, and
another thing to be sanctified, as it is one thing to live, and another to be
borne; and to work distinct from both. There is a great difference of degrees
of the Lords own people, some are spiritual, but others are termed carnal, as
appears by Paul's epistle to the Church of Christ in Corinth. And I brethren
could not speak unto you, 1 Cor. 3. 1
as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even unto babes in Christ: thou may
be begotten, and yet not borne, not a new born babe.

6. If thou be ignorant or in temptation, then thy heart is clouded and
dist^mpered with fears, Job 23. 8, 9
and thy self not a competent judge of thy own growth; is a newborn babe
able to judge of its own growth? Consider also, it may be, thou do not use
the means, or not rightly, in Gods way.

And when grace is as seed newly cast into the earth, and a weak believer
(while a babe) for want of exercise and experience scarce knows what he has;
then as the land newly sown little differs in show from other ground which was
never sown, so a poor babe in Christ seems little different from the men of
the world who lie in their sins; and as childrens complaints are not always to
be taken for rules, so the complaints of such babes, that they grow not in
grace, do not so much evince their want, as the sensiblenesse of their want of
the growth of grace, and of conformity to the will of the Lord Jesus, which is a
certain fruit of the in being of the spirit of Christ in the poor soul; it
is the spirit that convinces of sin; Ne^em. 1. 11
and spiritual desires cannot possibly proceed from our selves, but from faith.

In a word. Let such a poor doubting believer hearken unto what God says unto
him; From me is thy fruit found. Hos. 14. 8.
The righteous shall flourish like the Palm tree, Isa. 48. 17
he shall grow like those Cedars in Lebanon. Psalm. 92. 12 13* 14
Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts
of our God; they shall still bring forth fruits in old age, they shall be fat
and flourishing; Hos. 14. 5. 6
And unto this end, the Lord has also promised, I will be as the dew unto
Israel; he shall grow as the Lily, and cast forth his fruits as Lebanon; his
branches shall spread, Isa. 31. 15
and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon; the Lord
has also further promised, that he will turn the barren wilderness into a
fruitful field, Isa. 41. 18.
he will open a fountain of pure living water, and pour it forth upon the
barren wilderness, and the dry ground. The barren, dry, and unfruitful ground
of unbelievers, is by by the unction of the Spirit made the garden of the Lord,
and being trees of the Lords own planting, shall be watered every moment; yea,
refreshed and comforted with the stream of that river that makes glad the City
of God, Isa. 35. 6, 7
In the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert, and the
parched ground shall become a pool, Judge. 5. 31
and the thirsty land springs of water. Job 17. 2
I say, believers (however it may seem) do always grow in faith, love, or
humility.

My heart is so adamantinely hard, that I can be affected neither with the
chastisements nor mercies of the Lord. 3 Discouragement

There is indeed much hardness of heart in the dear children of God, Jer. 5. 3
their hearts have been as hard as a rock, Ezekiel. 3. 6.
adamant, or flint, they and they only feel it, Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27, 31
complain of it, and mourn under it, and this is tenderness; or the effect of
an heart of flesh. It is the frame of a new heart and the temper of an
experienced gracious spirit to lament from the sense of its own hardness of
heart; Isa. 63. 16, 17.
O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? Doubtless thou art our father, etc. Their hearts were hardened
from Gods fear, and yet they were the children of God.

Poor soul I would be acquainted how thou came to know thou have an hard
heart; who told thee so? art thou certain thou art not mistaken? if thou
replyest that thou see or feel it. I reply, if it be so, then thou art
happy, for thou ha^^ the inbeing of the Spirit of Christ; it is none other then
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus that discovers to a man his own darkness, Isa. 6.
5
and convinces him of his own deadness, Ephesians. 5. 13
and hardness of heart, Gal. 5. 17
yea none but this Spirit lusts against the flesh, John 16. 8.
and thou live to God truly, Romans 7. 9
though not so holily and sensibly as thou might and ought; for how
should a senseless stone feel its own hardness, or he that is soundly a
sleep, perceive himself to sleep; or the dead man feel himself to be so?
Sense or feeling is an evident demonstration not only of life, but of life in
action. Consider thy self as thou art in Christ, in union with him, what is
his is thine. Christ's fruitfulness is thine, in him is thy fruit found; and if
he has not as yet poured forth plentifully of the Spirit of grace and
Supplication upon thee, Zech* 12. 1
thou have his promise for it; he has offered up strong cries and tears unto
the father for thee; Heb. 5. 7.
thou daily committest sin from a body of death and corruption thou carriest
with thee, Romans 7. 23 24.
let thy glory and rejoicing be, that thy sins are forgiven, Heb. 8. 12.
and shall be remembered no more, 2 Cor. 5* 19
and rest satisfied (in point of salvation) in what Christ has done. Thy best
works cannot save thee nor thy worst destroy thee. Romans 7. 25
Thanks be to God, who has given us victory by Jesus Christ, Fetch thy comfort
from him, and not from what thou find or possibly may find or feel in
thy self. We are not to judge of our eter^all condition and of Gods love to us
by the hardness or softnes of our hearts, or by what works of righteousness
we see and feel in our selves; but to live by faith in the son of God,
Ezekiel. 36. 29.
who has promised, that he will take away the stony heart out of thy flesh,
Ps. 114. 8.
and give thee an heart of flesh, 4 Discouragement
and that he will turn the flint into a fountain of waters

Because I feel not my self sanctified, I ^eare I* am not justified*
Believers must not say they have no sanctification because they see and feel
Et quod ipsi omnino nequ^unt, alius nimirum Christus praestaret and legi
prorsus satisfecit, l^gis maledictio omnino perituris. Luth.
none. David cried out in the bitterness of his soul that his sin was ever
before him, and then his sanctification was out of his sight, Psalm. 77. 9, 10
and that God had forgotten to be gracious: but afterward he said of it, This
is my infirmity. You know in an house, when it is dark, there may be all
things that were there when it was light; but you see them not till the candle
be brought in: The woman's grote in the parable was in the house, but she found
it not till she had lighted her candle; therefore say with David, Light my
candle Oh Lord; Pro. 20. 27
and the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord. Sanctification, or the fruits
and effects of the spirit in a believer, do indeed comfort our faith in their
kind and degree; they are given to be a light in some measure to our own
consciences and to others. Matt. 5* 16
Let your light so shine before men: 1 Cor. 6. 20
And glorify God in your bodies and spirits; Jam. 2. 1^
Show me thy faith by thy works; they are the bracelets of the Spouse, they are
the beams of Christ the sun of righteousness, but they are not Christ; now
clouds may hinder the beams from inlightning a room, but the Sun is still
where it was; the tree you know, is there where it was, when the Apples or
fruit thereof may be blown down by the wind of Temptation, spoken of in the
Parable; Luke 8. 13.
yet then such promises as these are laid in for such a season. Isa. 50. 10.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
that walks in darkness, and sees no light? let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. And the vision is for an appointed time, Hab. 2.
3, 4
but at the end, it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it;
wait for it, because it will surely come and not tarry. But the just shall live
by faith.

Consider seriously, how can any good assurance arise from the change that is
in any child of God in this life, or his sanctification, it being not such in
any particular act or work, wherein is no spot of sin? is it not a mixture of
flesh and Spirit? why then feel thou after it as thou do? Since the best
and most through sanctification in any, is not pure enough for the eyes of the
Lord; why then make you it any bottom for assurance? Lex data est ut gratia
quaeratur, gratia data est ut lex impleatur. Luther on Gal. 3. 2.
Observe, that all the while you or any others have so done, you and they, like
Noah's Dove, Romans 8. 4.
can find no resting place the soales of your feet; for the Spirit of Christ
tells us, Luke 17. 10
when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants: and that all
our righteousness is but as menstruous clothes. Isa. 64. 6
And while we gaze upon the work of sanctification in us, we find still a
rottenness in every part of it, call all into question, and find fault with
our repentance, mortification, 1 Cor. 1. 30
new obedience, Haec voluntatis perfecta impletio, Sanctificatio est Christi,
and hac nos sanctificat quia nobis imputatur. Zan.
etc. therefore let us be sure still to take Christ in here, who is a believers
sanctification, as well as his righteousness.

In order to the removing of this discouragement, consider a few particulars.

1. If you suppose that God takes in any part of your faith, Heb. 10. 5.
repentance, new-obedience, or sanctification as a ground, upon which he
justifies, or forgives you; Ni^i gratuita, non est gratia.
you are absolutely against the word, for if it be of works it is no more of
grace, Romans 11. 6
otherwise work is no more work.

2. It must then be only the evidence of your being justified, that you seek
for in your sanctification.

These two things thus premised, I proceed.

1. We must allow any believer to take in any thing of his sanctification to
help his assurance, which the word allows of, as the Spirit and the fruits
thereof, that is to say, repentance, mortification of sin, new obedience, etc.
but then it must be done in the Scriptures own caution and way, the surest
knowledge that any one has, that he has received the promise, is the closing
of his heart with Christ, the real receiving and believing, and relying, Romans
1. 17
and going out of the heart upon Christ; 2 Cor. 5. 7
The Just shall live by faith. We walk by faith, Gal. 2. 20
and not by sight. This was the assurance of the father of the faithful, Romans
4. 20
who staggered not at the promise, but gave glory to God. There is yet
something in man, besides faith to be satisfied; reason will have more light to
see by, and therefore the workings of the Spirit in new obedience; love,
repentance, and self-denial; these may be compared to the tokens and change of
raiment, whereby Jacob was persuaded that Joseph was alive. The word says,
that we are complete in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 22*
and righteous in Christ: hereupon says the soul (being a reasonable and
discoursive spirit) when I repent, Romans 8. 16
love, The way for assurance.
or obey, I believe I am in Christ; and therefore my love, repentance and
obedience are such, Ephesians. 1. 13
as I may believe (though not in themselves) yet in him, Ephesians. 4. 30
to be good and spiritual. Heb. 10* 22


2. The Scriptures lay down these following things, that is to say, Christ's
sanctification, or his true holiness to be ours, and faith about our own
sanctification.

1. Christ is revealed to be our sanctification: 1 Cor. 1. 30
Christ is made unto us Righteousness, Gal. 2. 20
Sanctification etc. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Ye are
Christ's. 1 Cor. 3. 23
But ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus. Ephesians. 2, 5, 10 20
He has quickened us together with Christ. Ephesians. 3. 17
We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Ephesians. 4. 24.
Jesus Christ being the corner stone. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith. The new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. Ephesians. 5. 30
We are members of his body, Phil. 3. 9
of his flesh, and of his bone. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness. Phil. 4. 13.
I can do all things through Christ that strenthens me. Col. 1. 28.
That we present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 3. 11. 3.
But Christ is all, and in all. Your life is hid with Christ in God. All these
Scriptures set forth, and declare Christ the sanctification, Heb. 5. 7, 8
and the fullness of his; the all in all. Romans 5 19
Christ has obeyed perfectly, Quae in lege data sunt facienda, per fidem
ostenduntur facta.
he has mortified sin perfectly, and all are ours, and we are Chrsts, and
Christ is 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. 2 Cor. 5. 7 Romans 1. 17
Gods.

2. The other thing is, faith about our own sanctification, we must believe
more truth of our own graces then we can see or feel; Ephesians. 4. 8.
the Lord has in his infinite wisdom so ordered, Isa. 53. 4
that here our life should be hid with Christ in God, Isa. 26. 12*
that we should walk by faith, and not by sight; so as we are to believe our
repentance true in him, who has repented for us, Isa. 26. 12*
our mortifying of sin true in him, through whom we are more then conquerours;
our new obedience true in him, who has obeyed for us, Romans 8. 37
and is the end of the law to every one that believes. Romans 5. 19
Our change of the whole man, Romans 10. 4
true in him, who is righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and true holiness; and thus without faith, Heb. 11. 6
it is impossible to please God.

This is the Scripture assurance, for a child of God, or a believer, to see
every thing in himself as nothing, and himself every thing in Christ; Heb.
11. 1
faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.
It is our leaving out Christ in our Sanctification, that is the foundation of
all our doubts, Luke 17. 10
fears and distractions, and he that looks on his repentance, Isa. 64. 6.
love, humility, obedience, and not in the tincture of the blood of Christ,
must needs believe weakly and uncomfortably.

I cannot see God, 5 Discouragement
and if I were one of his Children, he would not hide himself from me, Romans
8. 24
as he does: surely he has forsaken me.
Is Christ the Sun of Righteousness set in thy soul? Surgit post nubila
Phoebus.
Remember the Psalmist, though sadness come at night, joy may return the next
morning; Psalm. 30. 5
And in the mean time, Syd^ra n^cte mica^^.
there shall be moon and star light, and these (though they cannot make day)
are some comfort to travelers. In Christ's withdrawings you have faith, V^ra
Virtus non apparet in prosperis, eminet in adversis.
the evidence of things not seen, and all the promises, as stars about her, a
glorious spangled canopy over you; so that you shall live by faith, and adhere
to Christ in such a condition; the seed of Christ remains in you; the suns
heat is felt when his light is not seen. Luke 24. 15, 16. 31
Saints may have grace when they want comfort from Christ; ^ant. 3. 2.
the Spouse thought she had lost Christ, Non deserit etiamsi deserere videatur.
yet still she had a principle of love to him, and a resolution to seek him;
thy love unto Christ shall continue; Isa. 60. 2.
he will be as good as his word. The Lord shall arise, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee. Psalm. 88. 14.


1. Sometimes God hides himself from his, Isa. 8. 17.
and seems to leave the poor soul for its sins, Isa. 64. 7.
and sometimes only to exercise his own graces in the soul; Isa. 49. 14 15.
But always in much love unto it; Jsa. 45. 15.
Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self; Cant. 5. 6. Jer. 51. 5. Jsa. 54.
7. 8.
I opened to my Beloved, and he had withdrawn himself. Behold, I go forward,
and he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him; Job 23. 8. 9.
on the left hand, where he works, but I cannot behold him; on the right
hand, but I cannot see him; yet he does but hide himself behind the Curtain,
he cannot forsake thee; for thy maker is thy husband (the Lord of Hosts is his
name) and thy Redeemer the Holy one of Israel; Jsa. 54. 5
etc. The Lord in another place, to condescend unto the weakness of our
capacities, holds forth his love unto us by the similie of a Fathers love; I am
a father to Israel, Jer. 31. 9,
and Ephraim is my first borne:

2. When God hides his face, Jsa. 8. 17.
wait upon him, and look for him, for he will return again; But Sion says,
the Lord has forsak^n me, and my God has forgotten me. Can a woman forget
her sucking child? etc. yea she may, yet will I not forget thee, says the
Lord. Isa* 49. 14 15. 16.
Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands: thy walls are
continually before me: Jsa. 44. 7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather
thee. And the Spirit of the Lord bears witness, that Israel has not been
forsaken, Jer. 51. 5.
nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hosts, though their Land was filled with
sin against the holy one of Israel; And the Lord says in another place,
Hosea 2. 14.
Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and
speak comfortably unto her. -- I have seen his ways and will heal him: Isa.
57. 18.
I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners;
Although the Lord absent himself from his, yet his love to, and care for them
is the same as when he manifests most of himself unto them; when the Sun of
Righteousness sets with us, he manifests himself to others of our Brethren
and fellow Members, he rises in their Hemispheare; And what though thy sins
have eclipsed the love of thy God unto thy soul? The Lord only bids thee to
acknowledge thine iniquity, Jer. 3. 13* 14.
that thou have transgressed against the Lord etc. What a poor recompense is
this? Turn oh backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you
etc. Poor soul! the love of God remains still as sure and as great as ever,
and in his due time shall shine forth again upon thy soul, the thick clouds
will blow over, and the soul reviving light of his love will arise upon thee;
Isa. 60. 2.
He will take away all iniquity, Hosea 14. 2.
and receive us graciously.

I thought I had true faith, 6 Discouragement.
but since I fell into an heinous transgression, I am persuaded that if I had
been the Lords, he would not have left me to sin as I did.

This is a deplorable case indeed, and the fruit of unbelief, and of the want
of watchfulness: yet consider, the Lord has suffered such, or as great (if
not greater) spots to overtake his own dear children: 1 King. 11 9.
David sinned in adultery and murder, Solomon sinned greatly after he had
obtained mercy, and Peter denies Christ with an oath: these examples are
recorded to hold forth the glory of the riches of Gods free grace, that men may
be acquainted with the mirror of his grace, Ephesians, 2. 4 5.
long sufferance and forbearance; that so great sinners might not despair and
faint under their sins. John 1. 2. 1.


2. To despair of the mercy of God because our sins are great, Isa. 55. 8, 9
were to limit God in his mercy; which is to add sin unto sin, and a greater
sin then the former: The Lord Jesus takes much pains, and lets out merciful
power for the raising of sin-weakened souls, and for the gathering of wandering
Lambs. Poor soul, know this, that the greatest sin a believer can commit, ought
not to make him mourn without hope; for no sin can put him in the state of
condemnation, Romans 8. 1, 2 3* 4, 3^, 39
or bring him under the curse. While we live here below, God heals not our
sinful nature wholly, Romans 10. 4
nor takes it quite away; the flesh lusts: Gal. 5. 17.
God ever looks upon his, Ephesians. 1. 4
as they are in Christ, and not simply, as they are in themselves; says Paul,
^ Cor. 1. 30
I my self keep the Law of God, Romans 7. 15 17, 20*
but with my flesh the Law of sin: flesh and sin do the evil. Consider Nehem.
9. 16, 17. 1 Jo^. 3. 9.
The Spirit also tells us in another place, that he knows our frame, and
remembers that we are but dust; Ps. 103. 14
God has in much wisdom and love left sin in his to humble them, Gal. 5. 22,
and to exercise the fruits of the Spirit in them, and that we might long to be
where we shall not sin; also that we might the more dearly love Christ, in
that it is pardoned, and depend upon him to subdue it; and that we might not
scorn, nor insult over any poor sin^ weakened ones, but restore them with the
spirit of meekness; and that we may admire the more that rich grace of the
Lord Jesus whereby (notwithstanding all our provocations) we have access unto
the Father by him. Romans 5. ^, 2
The Lords people are indeed taught by his spirit, Ephesians. 2. 18
not to sin that grace may abound, Ephesians. 3. 12.
but to love, and to love with the more vehemence of affection, Romans 6* 1, 2 3,
8
the God of their incomprehensible mercy, Romans 5. 20
and to use all means against sin, ^ Cor. 12. 9
and not to be over-pressed and sunk in despair under it. Rev. 3. 7, 8
They also know that they are the more happy, in that they were sinners; else
how could they be capable of union with God, of mercy and heaven? If there were
not evil, it would not be known what is good; Justice and mercy had not been
known: the wisdom of God could not have been known in drawing good out of evil;
or his love in sending the dearly beloved out of his bosom to die for us, and
man had not come unto that happness in Christ which the Saints have, and shall
enjoy.

3. God is never an enemy to his, though they greatly sin against him. Psalm
51.
We are not beloved for our own sakes, Ephesians. 1. 5.
nor for any thing in our selves, but in Christ: 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Who has made us acceptable in the beloved; Therefore nothing we do can
cause God to love us more or less; his love is as himself ever the same, Heb.
13. 8
therefore a belivers hope, joy and confidence is to be ever the same in
Christ. Psalm. 5. 11.
Hence it is that such are always to rejoice. Psalm. 32. 11
Rejoice always* Rejoice evermore. 1 These. 5. 16
Again I say rejoice. Phil. 4. 4.
Let them exceedingly rejoice. The joy of the Lord is our strength. Ne^. 8. 10
Oh there is enough in the Lord to satisfie^ thee at all times, Psalm. 40. 16
he is an unchangeable object of true joy, in him is all our hope and
happiness, therefore let not thy fall cause thee to question the love of God
unto thee; thy salvation depends not upon thy repentance and holiness. See
Romans 9. 15, 16. Isa. 43* 24, 25. Ezekiel. 16. from 1. to ver. 9. See also and mind
what the Apostle says in this case, 1 Jo^. 2. 1. 2
My little children, these things write I unto you, that you sin not. And if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the righteous,
and he is a propitiation for our sins, etc. These things are written unto us
indeed that we sin not. But as for such as turn the grace of God into
wantonness, whom the mercies of God encourage in their sinful practice, Joh.
8. 44.
these are led by the spirit of the devil, he is their father, and his works
they do; these are not at present in any wise to be numbered with those who
through temptations and weakness are overtaken with the sin they hate; Romans 7.
1^
if fallen, be not out of hope; If the Lords children have fallen into sin,
they are to rise by faith. Shall a man fall and not arise? Jer. 8. 4.
Who is a God like unto thee, Mic. 7. 7, 18 19, 20.
that pardonest the transgression of the remnant of thy people? Heb* 8. 1^.
God subdues the corruption that is in his, not all at once, but by degrees;
and thereupon says, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, Gal. 3. 13*
and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more; 2 Cor. 5. 21
God has nothing in charge against those who are in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30
and therefore commands us to go boldly to the throne of grace in full
assurance of faith. Romans 8. 33
Heb. 4. 16.
Heb. 10. 22*


If I were fitted with Qualifications, as humbleness, brokennesse of heart, (7
Discouragement.
etc. and took delight in hearing, and praying, Opera ante fidem inania, ut
cursus cel^rimus praeter viam.
as others, I could then entertain hope that God has thoughts of love and
mercy toward me: but it is not so with me.

Such an objection in some, Romans 14. 23.
may be the product of the sweet operation of the Spirit of grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9
which has showed them some amiable and desirable thing in the precious
promises and ways of God, Quicunque salutem non ex mera gratia per fidem ante
omnia opera percipit, nunquam attinebit.
so as they pan^ after them.

But more usually this is a whining because the work of preparation is more
sensible then the work of faith, which is often greatest when feeling is
least; and ^aith being more spiritual and heavenly* has her work about
another object, without and above the Creature; and the reason wherefore many
poor souls plod so much about their own Qualifications, and feel after the
breasts of their consolation, is because our self love renders us most prone to
catch at these, being plants in natures garden, whereas the desire of a
spiritual Paul, Phil. 3. 9
is to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness; and a spiritual
believer (if he had the greatest measure of inherent righteousness attainable)
would not behold himself in it. Gal. 2. 20
I live, yet not I, but Christ in me.

Gods thoughts of love and mercy unto thee can possibly be no otherwise then
through Christ; Isa. 55. 1
and he does not sell his Christ; Job 9. 10
he was given freely: Evangelium assert remissionem per imputationem justitiae,
(...) vitam aeternam ^ine condition legis aut operum nostrorumpunc; Melanct*
Come, buy without money etc. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life
freely. The Lord is a great King; he does great things past finding out, and
wonders without number; oh therefore measure not the Lord by thy self. For my
thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your ways, Romans 3.
says the Lord. The wise will not fix their eyes so much upon their own
baseness, Isa. 55. 8, 9
as upon his greatness, Isa. 9. 6
rich goodness, Zech. 9. 17
and faithfulness: Romans 8. 1
And certainly while we walk after the flesh, after the law, we continue weak
creatures (for flesh is here put for weakness) we shall tug, yea, and tire our
selves, and when we have done our all, (which is just nothing) we shall remain
not one jot the nearer heaven; yea, if such should continue here a thousand
years, they would be no better then wishers and woulders; whereas one poor
believer, that is truly implanted into Christ, and in whose heart the Gospel
has really taken place, has more strength then five hundred of the others,
because the Spirit of Christ dwells in him, works in him, and teaches him to say
with Paul, Phil. 4. 12 13.
I can want, and I can abound through Christ who strengthens me*

Let the poor souls, lying under this discouragement, consider six things.

1. It is but a delusion to think that qualifications can Sola est Dei adoptio
quae nos efficit idoneos. Calvin
^it a soul for mercy: Poor heart, while thou look for, or restest upon
such things as these, thou seek the living among the dead; and if thou had
them in the greatest measure, that ever any had, Col. 1. 12
they could neither procure thy happiness, Luke 24. 5
nor stand thy soul in any stead, as to salvation; Filio nato debetur
haereditas, non ex merito ipsius eum nihil fit meritus; sed quia est natus
^ili^ pa^ri.
nothing but Christ Jesus can do that, nor any thing but he and his
righteousness truly comfort thee.

2. That righteousness which justifies us in the sight of God, as it is not
our own, so it is not in us; but it is Christ's righteousness, and in him.
Surely shall one say, ^orn. in Gal. 3.
In the Lord have I righteousness and strength etc. in the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be justified and shall glory. Isa. 45. 24. 25
The state of a believer in Christ (as considered in him) be the poor creature
never so weak) is a state of perfection, Col. 2. 10 and 1* 28.
We are complete in him. The poor soul indeed has no righteousness in it
self; yet being united to its head, and married to its husband the Lord Jesus,
Jer. 3. 14
it is perfectly righteous; Romans 8. 4
As Christ is, so is a believer in him; Gal. 2. 19
and the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in him, 1 John 4. 17
and he is dead to or free from the law; Romans 10. 4
What is Christ's is the believers, and what is his, is Christ's. Ps. 32. 1, ^
The poor believer is as righteous and acceptable unto God through Christ, as
Christ's righteousness can make him: God sees no sin in his poor children;
for says Christ to the Spouse, Romans 4. 7
Thou art all fair my love, Jer. 50. 20
there is no spot in thee; says the Prophet Isaiah, 2 Cor. 5 19
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, Heb. 12. 10
my soul shall be joyful in my God, Isa. 43. 25
for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, Cant. 4. 7 and 2. 10
he has covered me with the robe of righteousness etc. Isa. 61. 10
The weakest and the strongest Saints are alike clothed with this robe, Psalm.
103 12
and are Gal. 3. 28
equally acceptable, Dan. 9. 24
yea perfectly righteous and glorious in the sight of God, as they are in him,
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning; see all that is in thy
self as nothing, and every thing thou standst in need of, to be in him; for
that he is thine, and thou art his; Cant. 6. 3
I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, etc.

3. What qualifications (except sinful ones) had they in Ezekiel? Ezekiel. 16 3,
4, 5, 6
and what Qualifications had they for whom Christ died, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10.
who were yet enemies, yea enmity against him?

4. What need have thou of Christ, Isa. 61. 1, 2 3
if thou have what thou need without him?

5. As in nature, before they have life, so in grace none can work before he
live spiritually; Heb* 11. 6
Christ must be in the soul, before it can believe, and the soul must believe,
before it can find any work of sanctification* Consider also, that there is
nothing to be done by the creature in way of preparation to sanctification.
Romans 14 23
See Romans 4. 5. and. 5. 8, 10

6. Thou go the wrong way to work; Romans 10. 3
thou go about to establish a righteousness of thine own, and hence thou
thirstest so much after qualifications: but it must be utterly renounced; it is
a hard thing for a soul to be taken off its own works, and self concurrence:
here strip a man of his own, and ye take away his life; he must and will have
something, some humbleness, some concontrition, some tears; or otherwise he
thinks he cannot be accepted, pardoned, and saved. But every poor creature
unto whom, and in whom the mystery of Gods rich love, and free grace is
revealed, these cry, Grace, grace, Romans 10. 4
Christ is all in all unto them; Col. 3. 11.
their prayers, tears, humbleness, brokennesse of heart, and every thing of
their own, Romans 4. 5
is but dross and dung unto them, in point of acceptance and salvation; Psalm.
8 19. 96
these have seen an end of all perfection, and all their own works (in
reference to attaining any happiness by, or from them) are vanished* yea
drowned in the infinite ocean of Gods free, and heart-astonishing love, that
God may have all the glory, and that man might not boast, but obey and serve
him freely; our works can be no sure ground of our own faith, Luke 1 74
seeing it is proper to faith to vilify our best performances. Isa 64. 6
Therefore the best preparation for Christ, Ezekiel. 36. 31
is to see in our selves no preparation for him at all: Phil 3. 8, 9
for believers are most made and built up, Isa. 6. 5, 6
when they apprehend themselves in themselves most cast down and undone. Matthew.
8. 8


I cannot be persuaded that God has wrought any supernatural work in me, Job
40. 4, 5.
because I have not so great a measure of sorrow for sin, Job. 42. 5, 6.
as some of the Lords children have. 8 Discouragement

Consider Eight things.

1. It is Gods method in his gospel to make the pardon of sin apprehended by
faith, a ground of the deepest humiliation that can be expressed. I will save
you, Ezekiel. 36. 29
says the Lord, from all your uncleannes; what is the effect of this? v. 31.
then shall ye remember your own ways and doings that were not good, and loath
your selves in your one eyes for all your abominations* Zech. 12. 10, 11
thus the Lord brings his people to repentance. And I will pour upon the house
of David and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and
supplication, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn,
etc. That is, I will give them such a spirit as shall abundantly manifest unto
them my rich love and sinne-pardoning grace and this produces mourning, yea
bitter and solitary mourning, such as of Hadad rimmon in the valley of Megiddon,
where the nobles of Israel cast away their musical Instruments, and clad
themselves in sable or sacke-cloath and breathing forth their mournful elegies,
Lam. 5. 16
cried out, our Grown is fallen from our heads; woe, woe unto us, we have
sinned; Sorrow for sin in the glory of the gospel, proceeds from Christ's
peircing, wounding, and melting the heart, from Christ discovering sin, pouring
water upon the dry grounds, and dropping the dewes of Hermon hill upon the
thirsty lands.

2. Consider that God deals not with all his alike; he knows best what is
meet for us: Physicians know that such a physical potion is necessary for one
as will kill another. All that believe have not the same measure of sorrow for
^inne; Act. 16. 14 29
Lydia received the word with joy; but the Jailer trembled being in fear.

3. The greatest measure of sorrow for sin that ever any had, was not the
least cause of their being loved or saved; it is a great mistake to think that
God delights in fears or tears Regnum coelorum non servorum stipendium; sed
filiorum est haredi^as. Calv. Luke 5. 8


4. A deep sensibleness of sin proceeding from fear and terrors, hinders
the souls believing, and drives it from Christ, and makes it say with Peter,
Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

5. If God deals with thee as with Lydia, more gently then with diverse others,
thou have no ground for complaint against it.

6. That sensibleness of sin that flows not from the apprehension of pardon
and love, is of no value. And remember we to look to Christ and not unto our
sensibleness of sin.

7. Our best and greatest sorrow for sin is not free from sin, yea and
deserves nothing but death.

8. If thou have seen thy self lost and fatherless, so as nothing could
satisfy thee but Christ; this is a sweet supernatural and glorious work of
the gospel, and such as is wrought upon none but such as shall be ^aved; by thy
renouncing thy own sufficiency, it appears that there is a greater, a better
come in places.

I fear I have no work of grace wrought upon me, 9. Discouragement.
because I feel not its power, and am not able to subdue my passions and
corruptions.
Thy complaint of the want of a sense and feeling of the power of the work of
grace upon thee, and of thine inability to subdue thy passion and corruption,
declares a weakness of grace, and not a defect of the truth grace in the
soul. If thou do what thou would not, mind what Paul says, See Romans 7.
from v. 15 to the end.
that which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I etc. The strongest and most spiritual Christian is in himself
very weak, Gal 6. 1
imperfect, falls often, and is not able to stand alone Among Christians, some
partake more of natural choler then others, and they accordingly are more or
less hasty and passionate; a wicked man may naturally be patient, and a child
of God sinfully passionate; Elias was a man subject to the like passions we
are. Jam. 5. 17


2. Thou must not measure Gods love to thee, nor the truth of his work in
thee, Rom 7. 14 15, 16* 25.
by thy mortification of sin.

3. God may for ends best known unto himself, leave thy passions and
corruptions unsubdued, yea suffer them to be too strong for thee; it may be,
that thou may be abased more in thine own eyes, and that thou might see
thine own weakness, and be thereby the more sensible of thy necassity of
Christ's strength, and depend daily upon him for it, and that thereupon we might
love and prize him the more, in that we have such necessity of him to pardon
and heal us; and that he might hold forth the glory of his power in keeping
alive a ^mal spark of grace in us in the midst of the vast ocean of our
corruptions* God may leave thy personal sanctification the more imperfect, that
thou may the more mind and behold Jesus Christ and our righteousness in
him, Romans 4. 6, 7.
and live the more upon him and his fullness, Romans 3. 24
and joy the more in our free justification by him.

4. It is one thing to have thy sin forgiven, or not imputed unto thee, Psalm.
32. 1, 2.
and another thing to have thy sin subdu^d in thee: the first may be where the
later is wanting.

5. The reason why sin so much prevails, is because we live so much in
discouragements: Live in the apprehension of the love of God, and down goes
sin and discouragements; but while we lie in our discouragements, sin
prevails; as appears by 77. Psalm. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. verses.

6. Thy comfort and happiness depends not upon thy feeling, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
but upon Gods never-failing covenant and promise, Gal. 2. 20.
confirmed by his oath, and we are not to live by sense and feeling but by
faith in the Son of God; we are not to fetch our comfort from our subduing of
sin, but from Christ, who is made unto us both righteousness and
sanctification. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Thanks be unto God who has given us victory by Jesus Christ: Romans 7. 25
when we are at the best we may not live in our selves, nor by sight, but by
faith; and when we are at the worst, 1 Cor. 1. 6. 19.
we are to remember that we are not our own, but Christ's, and that we ought
to live upon him by faith, 1 Cor. 3. 23
and derive strong consolation from him, and his leading of Captivity Captive.

I find within my self no relish of spiritual things, 10. Discouragement.
nor willingness to duties, and I often omit them.
God may have begun his work in thee, although it be thus with thee; though
this be an argument of much corruption in the soul.

This distemper may arise from diverse causes, Luke 1. 74.
as 1. From unbelief. 2. From doubting of the acceptance of thy person and
duties. 3. From want of love to Christ. 4. From loving of temporal things,
which deadens the heart and makes it carnal. 5. From weakness of grace. 6.
From sloth and ease which slay the soul. Prove. 19. 15.
7. From ignorance of the sweetness in spiritual duties. 8. From the souls
sickness and distemper; for as the body when sick, often cannot relish its food,
so this soule-distemper hinders its relish of spiritual things, and thereby
brings weakness, a known enemy to action; Psa. 73. 26
My flesh and my heart fail, but God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever. He never fails.

I fear that that work of grace, 11. Discouragement.
which I once felt, is now decayed.
Poor heart, I would have thee consider these five things, viz.

1. The ground of our faith is God in his word, Cor. 2. 5. 7
and not our sight and feeling* That is sensual; 2 Cor. 5. 7
we live not by sight, Gal. 2. 20.
but by faith in the Son of God.

2. Consider that as long as thou maintainest fears and jealousies of Gods love
unto thee; Ps 77. 5, 6
it is no wonder if thy condition be no better then it is: Jam. 1. 17
Call to mind the days of old. John 13. 1
And remember that with God is no variableness nor shadow of turning; ^er. 31.
3
whom he loves, Ps. 103. 17
he loves for ever: Isa. 54. 8
his love is an everlasting love. Jer. 2. 2.
And remember that a poor believers consolation depends not so much upon his
knowing Christ, as upon this, that we are known of him, and held fast by him,
who has taken the charge of us.

3. A child of God may decay in parts, sight, feeling, and exercise of faith; 2
Cor. 12. 10
these are sometimes more, and sometimes less, as God sees best, that we might
rest and rely upon Christ alone. Cant. 8. 5.
The graces accompanying salvation, no saint shall ever lose; but a present
sensible and continual exercise of any grace, God has not promised: the
exercise of grace in the Saints, ebbs and flows; the Lord often withdrawes the
exercise of one grace, that so another may shine forth with the greater luster,
Psalm. 62* 7
and that we may in faith and humility depend up on him who is the rock of our
strength and our portion for ever. Psa. 73. 26


4. Consider, That it is a principal part of the new covenant of Gods grace,
Jer. 32* 40
that he will write his law in our hearts, and that we shall not depart from
him. And the Lord also says, The mountains shall depart, Isa. 54. 10.
and the hills be removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of my peace he removed. And in the Prophecy of
Jeremiah, Jer. 33. 20.
he says further, If thou can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant
of the night, that there shall not be day and night in their season, then may
also my covenant be broken.

5. Consider, that we ought to believe that which we neither see nor ^eel;
Romans 4. 18 19.
we are to believe under hope, against hope. Heb. 11. 1
Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Romans 8. 1* 2.
To live by faith, is to walk after the spirit, and to live by sight, sense and
feeling, is to live after the flesh.

Were it not a groundless thing in nature to fear that there is no sin in
the firmament, because that at present its face is masked with a cloud, and we
feel not the warming and inlivening influence of its beams?

I fear that the opposition in me against sin, 12. Discouragement.
is not between Christ and Satan, or the spirit and the flesh; but between my
corrupt will and my enlightened conscience.
It is granted that every opposition or striving in men is not from the
antipathy between Christ and Satan, or the flesh and spirit; which reciprocally
lust against each other; yet the difference between the antipathy of the flesh
and spirit, and of the corrupt will and enlightened conscience, is very
discernable.

1. The natural conscience (though enlightened) acts only in a natural way;
at the most it is but moral, as not to lie, steal, swear etc.

2. It stirs not unless forced, and then unto that only whereunto it is forced;
as a Justice of the peace having issued forth his warrant to a drunken
constable to search for drunkards; this constable dare do no other then* search
for them (though his heart be with them.)

3. Conscience enlightened strikes only at the branches, but not at the root of
sin.

4. It sets one faculty against another, as the will and affections against the
understanding.

First, But the spirit of Christ causes an opposition in the same faculty, as
in the will, etc.

2. The spirit^ of Christ makes a free, full, constant and impartial resistance
against all sin.

3. It discovers to the soul her secret corruptions in their colors; this
spirit overpowereth the soul, causing it to hate sin and leave it.

4. This spirit causes the soul to be so much the more glad by how much
sin is the more discovered.

5. It teaches the soul to oppose all sin, even the appearance of evil, equally
proportionably and orderly.

6. This Spirit teaches the soul not to turn the grace of God into
encouragement to sin.

I cannot pray, nor do any thing that is good, therefore God has not done my
soul good; and I have many suggestions that I have no work of grace wrought
in me, 13. Discouragement.
which much weakens my confidence.
1. Poor soul (...) thy grace is weak, and thy weakness proceeds from
infidelity, which deadens the heart, and hinders thy living upon the strength
of Christ.

2. It is thus with thee, Joh. 15. 5
that thou may see thy necessity of Christ's strength, go to, and wait upon
him by faith for it, and live upon him who has promised to be a full supply
unto his.

3. If God has given thee a desire to obey him; say not, that it is nothing,
God says it is something; he that gives this, 2 Cor. 8 12
accepts it; for if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a
man has, Psalm. 145. 19.
and not according to that he has not; and he will grant thy desire in his
time; Isa. 42. 3
he will (...) the desires of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry,
and will save them; Christ will not quench the smoking flax; though we see no
fire, yet we know there is some by the smoke; it is a Character of a servant
of the Lord to desire to fear his name; spiritual or holy desires cannot be in
a soul that has no grace; Neb. 1. 11
desires after grace and of spiritual things is an act of spiritual life; an
act is from a faculty, and a faculty is a concomitant of life; a man that is
dead in trespasses and sins, cannot (while dead) have a spiritual desire;
spiritual desires are the productions of faith and love, and many times a will
to obey is all that a spiritual believer can find. Romans 7. 18 19, 20, 21.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find
not, for the good I would I do not, but the evil I would not, that do I; the
strongest saint is but weak. Paul was an eminent Saint, yet consider what he
says of himself, Romans 7. from 14. to 25. Romans 8. from 37. to 39. he had no
power to do what he would; yet he lived by faith in the Son of God. Gal. 2. 10*


4. We should do all we can to obey God; yet we must know that our all will be
infinitely too little to justify us in the sight of God, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9
for by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of our selves etc. not
of works, lest any man should boast.

Then as to the second branch, viz. That God has not done thy soul good.

Certainly, God has begun his work in thee, if he has convinced thee of sin
and of righteousness: it is none other then the work of the Spirit to
convince the world of sin, Joh. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and of righteousness; to be convinced of sin, is for the soul to see it self
utterly lost and undone by reason of its sins. They confess they are vile, and
abhor themselves, they loath themselves for their deeds. Job 42. 6
And to be convinced of righteousness, Ezekiel. 20 43
is to see that our own best performances and righteousnesses are but dung and
dross, and as menstrous clothes; for a man cannot come to expect life and
salvation from Christ alone, until his own righteousness be as vileness to
him, in reference to the attaining of any happiness therefrom; this vision of
God brings the soul to see it self, and to cry out, Isa. 6. 5, 6
There remains no strength in me, Dan. 10. 8
My comeliness is turned in me into corruption. Certainly, it is a principle
of grace, that takes us off from nature, and an effect of our being born of God
to be unbottomed from our carnal principles; and when the soul is taken off its
own bottom, it must have another to rest upon, or it sinks. Therefore
whenever God takes away the poor souls sandy foundation, which is its
false and groundless hopes of the mercy of God, he then gives it a better in
himself.

As to the last branch, viz. That thou have many suggestions, that thou have no
work of grace wrought upon thee.

It is Satan that tempts Christ's babes to cast away their confidence, Heb* ^0.
35
which to do, is directly repugnant to the mind of Christ; therefore if Satan
suggest unto thee, that thou have no faith, thou may answer, If I have it
not in the act to my own knowledge, yet I may have it in the grace it self; and
if he reply, that both he and your self know that you have no grace at all,
make this defense to his replication, that he knows not. And if I should
entertain such a thought against my self, I may be deceived; for as fire
raked up in the ashes, appears not either by light or heat; so grace raked up
in the ashes of corruption may not for the present appear to others or thy
self, 1 Cor. 3. 1
though it may be there all the time.

2. Evade the devils suggestions further, as thus, If I have no grace, why
let thou me not alone, as thou do others, and as thou did me, when I
took my fill of sin? Then thou toldest me I had faith when I had none; I
have found you a liar, therefore I will not hearken unto you; and I am the more
confident that I have grace, John 8. 44
for that thou tellest me I have none; he is a liar, and the father of lies.

3. And suppose I have no grace, there is no reason why I should despair;
because every one of the Lords dear ones were once without grace, Ephesians. 2. 12. 13
and in the state of nature. At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers, having no hope, and without God in
the world. But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were afar off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ, Which in times past were not a people, but are now
the people of God. Which had not obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10.
but now have obtained mercy. Many are ordained unto eternal life which do
not yet actually believe; put the case at the worst, there can be no ground for
despair; Luke 18. 27.
But I will use the means, wait upon God, Jer. 32. 17
and trust him with my soul, Math. 8. 2.
if mercy come, I shall magnify his name: there is nothing too hard for God;
Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

My soul is filled with terrors; 14. Discouragement.
I have an Hell within me, I feel the wrath of God in my soul, and have for
a long time remained in this condition.
1. Consider, That though this be a very sad condition, yet it is no other then
such as has attended the dear and precious Saints of God; and it should not
be a strange thing unto us, but expected and prepared for by us. Look back
upon David (a precious and dear child of God) who, reckoning upon such a time,
when by dismal desertions he should take a turn in the dark and dampe
valleys of the shadow of death, and be encompassed with dreadful terrors and
sore trialls; Psa. 23. 4.
treasures up a word of comfort in readiness; Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil, for thou art with me;
thy rod and thy staff comfort me; Isa. 50. 10.
and the blessed Spirit of Christ invites thee to stay thy self upon thy God;
and we may indeed feel his almighty arm sustaining us, when we behold not
his face shining upon us: And though Christ the Sun of Righteousness do set
in thy soul at night, yet He shall arise in the morning: Psa. 30. 5.
and this Sun cannot suffer a total eclipse as the worlds comforts often do,
Sol nunquam totus obscuratur, quod Luna minor sit.
or as the Moon, because the Moon of our sins and corruptions, which
interposes between us and Christ, is far lesser then Christ.

2. Consider if Hemans, Jobs, David's and Jeremiahs condition did not run
Parallel with thine; says Heman, Lord, why castest thou off my soul? Psa. 88.
15 16.
Why hidest thou thy face from me? I am ready to die, whilst I suffer thy
terrors. I am distracted, thy fierce wrath goes over me; Job 19. 10 11
thy terrors have cut me off. Job cried saying, he has kindled his wrath
against me, and counts me to him as one of his enemies. And David in temptation
judging himself according to the law, sense, and feeling, Psa. 31. 22
said, I am cast out of his sight, horror hoth overwhelmed me. Psa. 55. 45
And Jeremiah said * Ps. 77. 8, 9
He has lead me into darkness, Lam. 3. 2. to ver. 19.
and not into light; he has broken my bones, and compassed me with gall; He
has made my chains heavy, he has filled me with bitterness, thou have
removed my soul far off from peace; and I said, my strength and my hope is
perished from the Lord. Some conceive that if God loved them, there should not
be any tempests in their souls, but in stead of wrath and terrors, a sweet
calm of peace and joy, not remembering that the Lord has his way in the
whirlwind, Nah. 1. 3
and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet; Some of Gods
people enjoy peace and comfort, and yet his righteous servant Job wants them:
says he unto God, Job 7. 20, 21
Why do not thou pardon my transgressions etc. Thou have set me as a mark
against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self. Our comfort and firm
consolation consists not in our freedom from terrors, Job. 21. 13 14, etc
but in the spirits revelation of truth unto the soul.

3. The Angel of the Lord said to Gideon; The Lord is with thee. But Gideon
said, Judges 6. 12, 13.
Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this fallen upon us? etc.
The poor soul is ready to say; if the Lord be with us, why then is all this
befalne us? why then are we so full of terrors? The Lord may now be with
thee, Luke 24. 15 16, 31.
and thou may be as well mistaken as Gideon was.

4. Consider, that the greatest peace any saint enjoyes, is not any ground of
encouragement for him to believe; and likewise remember, that no terrors that
ever take any of Gods Jobs, David's, or Jeremiahs, ought in the least to
discourage them in believing; for our happiness consists not in any thing that
we can ^ee, feel, or apprehend in our selves, but in the word and promise of
our God; and in that we are known of him, who loves us, and comprehends us in
himself, Psalm. 32. 1.
not imputing our trespasses unto us, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
but his righteousness without works.

5. Hearken what the Lord says by his Prophet Isaiah, Romans 4. 6.
and cast all thy fears of hell upon God in a promise, Isa. 26. 3, 4
and trust in the Lord; when thou art in the flames of this fire, Isa. 43. 2, 3
4.
thou shall not be burnt. With God nothing is impossible; Luke 1. 78. 79
oh troubled soul, the day spring from on high has by the tender mercies of
our God, visited us; and so it will visit thee also, and give light to thee
that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide thy feet in the
way of peace.

6. Consider whether poring too much upon thy sins until thou were filled with
despair, has not brought thy terrors upon thee* consider whether thy
omissions and commissions against conscience have not augmented thy horror;
and look that thou skin not thy self again with thy performances and duties;
and remember, that what is a great cause of mourning, is not the least ground
of despair. Oh therefore cast not away your confidence; Heb. 10. 35, 37, 38.
for yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. And say with the Prophet Micah, When I sit in darkness, Mic. 7. 8, 9
the Lord shall be a light unto me. He will bring me forth into the light,
and I shall behold his righteousness.

I have no love to Christ, 15 Discouragement.
I am an enemy to him, and not fit for him.
1 The reason why thou love not Christ, is because thou live not in the
apprehension of his rich love because thou have not the heartbreaking sight
and sense of the pardon of thy sins by him, 1 John 4. 19
We love him because he loved us first, the manifestation of this love unto a
poor soul constraines it to love him again. 2 Cor. 5. 14


2. Do thou apprehend thy self an enemy to God? so were the dearest of Gods
children: Romans 5. 8.
While we were yet enemies we were reconciled to God Ephesians. 2. 12, 1^.
by the death of his Son, etc. Enemies cannot deserve nor desire a Christ, yet
God gives forth a Christ unto such.

3. It is impossible for thee to fit thy self for Christ. If thou see such a
necessity of him, as that without him thou art undone; and hereupon pantest
after him, he has brought thee absolutely under his promise; oh then go to
him, and thou shall speed, he is faithful that has promised. He will draw thee
unto him with the cords of a man, Hos. 11. 4.
with bands of love, Jer. 31 3.
and with loving kindness. He says also, He that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37
And Christ adds further, Joh. 10. 30
I and my Father are one. Isa. 40. 29. 30, 31.
And we give power to the faint, and to them that have no might we add
strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they
shall walk and not faint.

Remember this, that if God has wrought in thee to hunger and thirst after
righteousness (that is Christ) he himself has pronounced thee blessed; Mat.
5. 6
a desire after Christ and his righteousness is no other then the offspring
of the Spirit and life of Christ in the soul; Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. 14.
the best persuasion for Christ, Isa. 6. 5, 6.
is to see in our selves no preparation for Christ at all. Isa. 61. 1, 2.
None but fitted or prepared ones will take Christ; Matt. 9. 23
yet is no preparation to be forced on any as man's work, in any sense.

There are indeed many sweet and precious promises in the word, 16
Discouragement.
but those who have a propriety in them are believers, and I am none.
Poor soul! Consider three things.

1. Consider, that you may be mistaken in your self, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.
and think you do not, when you do believe; and herein may you err on the one
hand, 1 John 5. 1^
as the carnal man does on the other: he thinks he does believe, when he does
not; and you think you do not, when you do believe; as a cheater would put off
his brass for gold, so an honest man may suspect his gold to be brass. It is a
great sign and symptom of faith, Isa. 6. 5.
to have a sight and sense of our own infidelity and unworthiness.

2. I grant, that none may apply a promise of life, but such as believe; yet
the promises are for all the elect, thou know not but that thou art one of
them; when God shall give thee faith, thou shall know thy interest in the
promises. In the mean time, Act. 13. 48
stay thy self with this, that the Lord Jesus gave himself for enemies, Romans
5. 8. and 4. 5. and 5. 6.
and to justify the ungodly. Be not dismayed, God may save you; hearken unto
what the Lord says, Hos. 2. 23
I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say unto
them, Thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my God. Oh sweet place!
then by no means yield to thy fears, nourish not jealousies against the love of
God, Psa. 119. 49
but resolve in the strength of Christ to cleave unto him in his word, hold him
fast with the Spouse, Cant. 2. 16
saying, My beloved is mine, and I am his.

3. Consider, that if ever any of the light of Gods soule-astonishing love, and
sin pardoning mercy dawned upon thy soul, if ever he has made any
spiritual discoveries of his love unto thee, and in thee; remember, with him
is no variablenes nor shadow of turning: he changes not, Jam. 1. 17.
and therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3. 6.
And though you find your self unbelieving, yet you are not to question the
truth and certainty of the accomplishment of Gods promises, that are in him yea
and amen, that are sure, and not grounded upon your faith, but upon his own
grace, and upon his Son, and his righteousness and faithfulness; it is not
thy unbelief that can make the faith of God without effect; Romans 3. 3
if we believe not, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
yet he remains faithful; he cannot deny himself.

I have no assurance of salvation, I am not sealed up to the day of redemption,
17 Discouragement.
and therefore have no faith.
1. Consider, that faith and assurance are distinct; assurance cannot be
without faith; but faith may be without assurance; assurance is not properly an
act of faith, but an effect of it, Ephesians. 1. 13.
and indeed above it: After that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy
spirit of promise; the seed of faith may be in the soul before the soul know
it; and by how much the greater our feeling and assurance is, by so much the
lesser is our faith

2. Consider, that besides the illumination which wicked men and devils may
have, as well as a believer, there is a twofold act of faith: viz. a direct act
and a reflect act of faith. 1. A direct act of faith is to believe that Christ
is, and that life and every good thing is treasured up in him; this is to
believe the record that God has given concerning his Son; 1 Timothy 1. 15.
And that he came into the world to save sinners; and thereupon for the soul
to look unto Christ that it may be saved, Isa. 45. 22.
and so to long for him, rest upon and trust in him for life, 1 John 5. 13
from an hope, though not from an assurance of mercy; Ephesians. 1. 18 19,
a man may believe, and yet not know that he has eternal life; yet those who
have such faith as this are blessed: Mat. 16. 17
Turn ye to the strong hold, Zech. 9. 12
ye prisoners of hope; and these are really possessed of Christ, though at
present they themselves perhaps know it not. Ps. 147. 11
Those are blessed that hope in Christ's mercy. Psa. 33. 18


The reflect act of faith, is to believe in Christ* the soul knowing its
propriety in him; for thee to believe that Christ came to save thy soul from
thy sins, Mat. 1. 21
this is to trust him from a knowledge of our interest in him, Romans 8. 16
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, John. 6. 69
that we are the children of God. Romans 8. 33 34, 35, 38, 39.
We believe and are sure, etc. He that has this act of faith, has also the
former; but there are diverse precious souls that have the former, and yet have
not attained this; though they are under the promises of it: They shall know
that I the Lord their God am with them, Ezekiel. 34. 30.
and that they, even the house of Israel are my people, says the Lord.

3. Consider, that there are diverse that have this direct act of faith, Heb. 5
13. 14.
who yet (being babes) do through ignorance, Heb. 10 15
unskilfulnesse, and want of experience of the order and manner of Gods dealing
with his; call it into question whether they have any faith or not; yea, and
when Christ does not clearly appear, and faith not lively act in the soul,
they resolve it in the negative: but when the Sun of Righteousness shines
forth again upon this poor creature, with his beams of soule-reviving, and
soulraising love, then are these clouds dispelled, and the soul satisfied, and
armed for the future with experiences of God against giving way unto doubts of
such a nature.

I fear that my faith is not the faith of Gods Elect, 18 Discouragement.
but a presumption, it being attended with so many doubtings.
Poor heart, consider five things, viz.

1. Consider, * Certane in me de meipso cujus potissimum esse videar.
that though faith is not doubting, and doubting not faith, yet both of them
usually lodge in one soul. Thy fears and doubts are indeed the effects of
unbelief, but do argue only weakness of faith; and sure it is, that faith may
be true and lively, when weak and small; yea further, there may be not only
true, but great faith, Luke 8. 47, 48.
where there is fear and trembling; so that you neither put faith for
unbelief, Isa. 5. 20
nor light for darkness.

2. Consider, that to doubt, because of doubting, is to rely rather upon our
faith then upon Christ; it is not the greatness of our faith, but Christ whom
faith receives and apprehends that makes us accepted; and this a weak faith
may do, as truly as the strongest. Those that were stung of the fiery
Scorpion, Number. 21. 9
and looked up to the Brazen Serpent, though with the weakest eye of faith,
Isa. 45. 22.
were healed; Christ is the same to the weak, Gal. 3, 28
that he is to the strong in point of justification; yet the more of Christ,
and of faith, that a man has, the more strength and comfort he enjoyes. It is
our duty in the strength of Christ, Mark. 9. 24
to withstand doubting (it being a weakness, and a fly in our box of
ointment) and to endeavor to be strong in faith, Heb. 6. 18 19
and lay hold on that everlasting Covenant, which God has made and confirmed
with an oath.

3. Consider that none is able to persuade a soul that it does believe, but he
on whom it believes. God shall persuade Japheth; Genesis 2. 7.
who can more principally, and with clearer satisfaction, persuade the Spouse
of the good will of him she loves, but himself? Can all the love tokens, or
testimonial rings, and bracelets? They may concur and help in the
manifestation; But it is the voice of the beloved, that efficaciously does the
work. My beloved spoke and said unto me, rise up my Love, Cant. 2. 10
my fair one, says the Spouse.

4. Consider, that we are to believe, that we may know we believe, Ephesians. 1. 13.
that we may be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, for the witness comes
by believing; 1 John. 5. 6, 10.
The Spirit bearing witness. And he that believes, has the witness in
himself. Romans 8. 16
We believe and are sure; John 6 69
the way to be warm, is not only to ask for a fire, or whether there be one or
not, and hold out the hands toward it, and away, and wish for a greater; but
to stand close unto that fire there is, Heb. 3. 12.
and to gather heat: Take heed, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God. Heb. 4. 6
They entered not in, because of unbelief. Heb. 3. 19.


5. Consider the happiness of a believer in Christ; feed thy faith with
suitable promises; live upon Christ above; Luke 11. 23.
pray in faith, ask his Spirit, and thou shall have it, which will revive and
fill thy soul with joy, and peace in believing: In the same measure that God
reveals his love to a soul, in that measure doubts and fears are cast out;
perfect love casts out fear. 1 Jo^. 4. 18


I cannot believe that I am elected, 19 Discouragement.
therefore nothing can do me good.
1. This is a secret, and to be left unto God, and not meddled withal by us,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Secret things belong unto God, and revealed things to us.

2. Consider that it is most certain, that these thoughts come from Satan, Genesis
3. 2, 3
being so directly contrary to God in his word; and Satan is most especially
not to be hearkened unto when he tempts to unbelief, the stalk upon which all
other sins grow: says Satan, if thou are elected thou do believe, and this
faith brings forth the pleasant fruits of righteousness. This is one of the
grand polices of Satan, wherewith he nonpluses poor souls; for by this he
sets on the soul for evidence of its justification from things, which he
knows, can afford little but questionable assurance at best; as persuasion most
upon marks and signs of our own sanctification or good works, which can not
hold good without love to Christ, and without faith it self to bring down
Christ upon them; we know that every piece of coin is valued according to the
image and superscription that it bears; and if Caesar be not there (though it
be silver still) yet it is not coin, it is not so current, and he that has
it, cannot make such use of it, and so assure himself to trade with it, as
otherwise he might; so there is not any thing of sanctification current and of
solid comfort to a believer, unless Christ be there and his image, which is
righteousness and true holiness.

3. Consider that it is a usual delusion of Satan to tell a poor soul that
God has no mercy for it, when the soul has obtained mercy, and this mercy
not far from it, yea at the gate as it were* and that it is the nature of
unbelief to be inquisitive and curious to find out any colorable pretention
whereby it may seem to do well, in excluding it self from grace, and in not
harkening unto what God says in his word.

I would gladly believe, 20 Discouragement.
but I dare not; besides I cannot believe.

Consider four things, viz.

1. Consider with thy self, and examine what reason thou have or can have to
doubt or be afraid, since Christ cries saing, If any man thirst, let him come
to me and drink; John 7. 37.
The spirit and the Bride say, Rev. 22. 17
come; and whosoever will let him come. Does God invite you to come, and are you
afraid? oh come, Mat. 12. 20
he will not quench the smoking flax. Psalm. 147. 11
Hope thou in his mercy, and know that the Lord takes pleasure in them that
fear him, in them that hope in his mercy. Examine thy soul why it would fly
unto the hills of its own preparations, Psalm. 11. 1.
seeing that God, who is a strong hold, has invited thee unto himself; and
indeed the first thing that a poor soul that sees it self lost and
fatherless, Act. 16. 31
is to do; is to believe in the Lord Jesus; he expects no previous
qualifications; Isa. 6. 5, 6
and indeed the best preparation for Christ, Matthew. 8. ^
is to see in our selves no preparation at all for him. Luke 5. 8


2. Consider, that if thou desire to believe, thy will is in part regenerate,
and thou do in some measure believe, Mark 9. 24
(though weakly) Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. And remember, that the
heart in a mystical and spiritual acceptance, is seated in the will, and in
the understanding, but more principally in the will; so that that object, or
thing unto which the will is most inclined, or the desires run out most
after, unto that is the bent of the heart said to be; Romans 8. 5, 6, 7
if our wills be renewed, our hearts are renewed: Says Paul, to will is
present with me: Romans 7. 18 19 compared with 21 and 15 verses.
good I would do: so then, with my mind I serve the law of God: whereby it
evidently appears, that the will is one with the mind, and that the heart is
one with them, and that these three are one, and are alike spiritual; where
your treasure is, Mat. 6. 21.
there will your hearts be also; there will be your mind and your affections,
and by affections the heart is meant. Set your affections on things above; Col.
3. 2.
Gods servants are in Scripture described by a desire to fear his name. Neh.
1. 11
Those desires that work toward God, Psa. 145. 19
came from him; The Spirit returns to him that gave it. 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3
If thy desires be spiritual, thou art spiritual; they flow from faith, and
from the Spirit, and are a part of the work of grace in us, which he having
begun, will perfect to his own praise. Ignoti nulla cupido.
A man cannot desire that which he does not believe to be, nor love. To will to
believe and repent, is an evidence that the soul does believe and repent; to
will to be regenerate, is an effect and testimony of regeneration. It is God
that works in you to will, Phil. 2. 13.
etc. Spiritual desires cannot possibly be in that soul that has not
spiritual life; Psa. 145. 19.
for to desire after Christ, or to a believe in him, is an act of spiritual
life; Romans 6. 20.
a dead man cannot desire, and nothing but Christ can possess the soul of a
sense of its want of him; 2 Cor. 3. 5
the depraved will of man being wholly inthralled unto sin, Genesis 6. 5.
can contribute nothing hereunto, but is altogether insufficient for, and
averse unto it, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
and also to the perceiving and receiving of the things of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
they being spiritually discerned: God must give eyes to see and an heart to
understand. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.


3. Considert, Ephesians. 1. 18 19.
hat many do believe, and yet know not whether they believe or no, 1 John 5.
13.
and thereupon they do as the blind man did, call their faith unbelief;
Mark 9. 24.
many give God their hearts and know it not, being ignorant of what is meant by
the heart, and where it is seated, viz. in the will, understanding, desires,
affections and delights, though principally in the will. Romans 8. 5. 6, 7.


4. Consider, that it is not in the power of the Creature to believe, Phil. 1.
29.
and that faith is not any condition of the covenant of grace required on thy
part, but a grace of the covenant on Gods part to be given; for this covenant
is not made with us, but with Christ for us: Gal. 5. 22
to believe is a fruit of the Spirit of Christ; John 15. 4
we must be in Christ before we can bear fruit, therefore we must be in
Christ before we can believe; Rom 8. 9, 10.
he that has the Spirit of Christ has Christ; we have the Spirit of Christ
before we believe, therefore we have Christ before we believe; Acts 13. 48.
and men are ordained unto eternal life before they believe.

I am afraid the day of grace is past, 21. Discouragement.
and so nothing can do me good.
1. You must not give way to such discouraging thoughts, Jonah 3. 9
answer them with Jonah; who knows but the Lord may return?

2. For which of Gods loving kindnesses and rich mercies have thou taken up
such hard thoughts of him, to nourish Jealousies against his love? Psa. 139.
17, 18.
remember what David says; How precious are thy thoughts to me, oh God? great
is the sum of them; If I should count them, Mark 5. 36.
they are more then the Sands: Luke 15. 1, 2.
and what Christ says; Be not afraid, only believe: and what he did, he
received sinners.

3. If thou think the day of grace is past, because thy sins are great;
that argument will not hold; hearken what God says; I have spread out my hand
all the day to a rebellious people that provoke me to anger continually to my
face. Isa 65. 2. 3


4. Consider, That if thou have an heart desirous to return unto God, thy day
of grace is not past; Christ knocks still; Rev. 3. 20.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
1 John 1. 9
etc.

Says a poor drooping believer, I fear that when persecution comes, 22.
Discouragement.
I shall not suffer, nor hold out unto the end, but dishonor God, betray his
truth, shame and grieve his people.
Cast all these cares and fears upon the Lord; Phil. 4. 6
In nothing be careful, Phil. 2. 20
he will care for thee; Phil. 2. 20
he that has engaged his own faithfulness for the making good of every
tittle of his promises, has promised; I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee; Heb. 13. 5
God will take care for his own glory, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
truth and servants; his wisdom, power, Love, and faithfulness shall order
all.

I am discouraged because that of all the spiritual things I hoped for, 23.
Discouragement.
none are made good to me; I do not possess any.
1. If thou be included in, and art under the promise of them, thou shall
possess them.

2. Consider; they may be made good to thee without thy sensible enjoyment of
them; there is neither faith nor hope exercised upon what we possess; to have
a right in, or to a thing, and to possess it, are distinct; Heb. 11. 17, 18.
They died in faith, they possessed not what they believed they should enjoy;
Romans 4. 3. 17, 18.
Abraham believed he should have a son; here was his faith; yet did he not
then possess his son; To make enjoyment essential to faith is a very great
mistake, 2 Cor. 3. 7 8.
we being united and married unto Christ do through faith by him bring forth
fruit unto God, Gal. 3. 2. 1
yea perfect obedience, Romans 7. 3. 4.
imputatively, Ephesians. 4. 22* 23, 24.
and through the operation of his Spirit.

I have many discouragements, 24. Discouragement.
for that I am not filled with joy, and comfort and peace in believing.
Consider two things, viz.

1. Faith may be strong, when joy is absent; Psalm. 51. 12
David had faith, when he had not joy: Psalm. 77. 2.
Restore to me the joy of my salvation; he had refused comfort before, but now
he came to want it,

2. Such as judge their condition good, because they are filled with joy, build
upon a sandy foundation, in that they are not founded upon Christ alone. If
some had joy, they would make it a Christ to them, they would live upon it, and
thereby abuse Christ, themselves, and their joy: It is a mercy unto such poor
creatures, that they have not joy, til they better know how to use it.

I cannot believe that I am in Christ, 25 Discouragement.
for that I fall back into sin.
Consider three things, viz.

1. That no sin can make one less beloved of God, Romans 4. 2, 5.
or less in Christ; Isa. 55. 3.
for the mercies of God are called sure mercies; Jer. 31. 3.
his love an everlasting love, his covenant an everlasting covenant. Romans 8.
35, 38, 39
I am persuaded (says Paul) That neither death, Heb. 13. 20
nor life, nor principalities, nor powers, etc. shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: So that to whom he is
once merciful, he is ever merciful; whom he once loves, he ever loves; when he
once takes poor creatures into covenant with him, he is ever theirs; Mal. 3. 6
I am the Lord, I change not.

2. That whom the Father loves, he loves in his Son in whom he is well pleased,
and his Son is always alike beloved of him: The same yesterday, to day, Heb.
13. 8
and for ever; and whom he loves in his Son, he accounts as his Son; 1 Cor. 1.
30.
he is made unto us of God, righteousness, sanctification, and redemptiin; so
as we being not beloved for our own sakes: nothing in us can make God love us
less, because he loves us not for our selves, nor any thing in our selves, but
in and through his Son, in whom he is well pleased with us.

3. Consider, That if God should love us less or more, as we are less or more
sinful; Numb. 23 19
then he should be as man, and as the Son of man; and if believers stood upon
these terms with God, Romans 4. 25
then how are these Scriptures said to be true? Romans 8. 33 34
He arose again for our Justification. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? Romans 8. 1.
Who shall condemn? 2 Timothy 2 19.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Heb. 7. 25.
The foundation of God stands sure, Romans 8. 26
he ever lives to make intercession for us; so as God is ever the same that
loves, and his love is as himself, ever the same; and Christ in whom we are
beloved ever the same, and our righteousness ever the same. Isa. 54. 17.
Thy righteousness is of me, says the Lord.

Says a poor drooping believer, 26. Discouragement.
I having lain a long time under, and used the means of grace, grow still worse
and worse; therefore I cannot but conclude, That God will not do me good.
Poor heart, 1. Do thou know Gods means, and the number of them? Have your
ends been good, and rightly placed? Have you used the means in a right manner,
measure, time, and in sincerity? Have you not rested in the means? Have you
used them in faith, waiting for Gods blessing upon them? Heb. 4. 2
The word they heard profited them not for want of faith.

2. It is not good reasoning, to say, because God has not as yet given me my
request, therefore he never will: mind what the Lord says; But ye are a chosen
generation, 1 Pet. 2, 9, 10.
a royal Priesthood, etc. Which in time past were not a people, but are now the
people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. Isa.
64. 4.
They shallnot be ashamed that wait for me. Isa. 8. 17.


3. Consider, that it is just with God to blast the means, yea, it is a mercy
to blast it, that yet still using them, we might look more unto Christ, for his
blessing upon them, and to be all unto us.

4. Consider, If thou have a will that Christ should save thee, and rule in thee
and over thee; he that has begun this good work in thee, Heb. 12. ^
will perfect the same. Thou shall one day know that thy sins are pardoned, and
not imputed unto thee, and subdued in thee.

5. Consider, God may have mercy for thee, though thou know it not; for men's
sins are first forgiven, 1 John 5. 13
before they can know it, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19
believe it, or be assured of it; thy sins may be pardoned though thou know
it not; faith believes the pardon of sin, but our believing neither pardons,
nor procures the pardon of any sin, but faith brings into the soul the
apprehension of the pardon of those sins which were pardoned before, though not
by us known so to be til then.

I fear that my motions Godward, 27 Discouragement.
do flow from a principle of self-love, and not from pure love unto the Lord
Jesus.
Consider, though they do not, yet the Lord Jesus promised to his people Israel
of old, who were encompassed with as many Aggravations of sins and
infirmities as thou, Hos. 14. 4.
that he would love them freely; and as he loved his people Israel of old, Hos.
2. 19.
so he will love thee freely, and betroth thee unto himself in loving kindness
and mercyes; he has also promised, Deuteronomy. 30. 6
and his faithfulness is engaged; I will circumcise thy heart (says he) and
thou shall love me; he will give thee an heartbreaking sight and sense of the
free pardon of all thy sins through the spirits manifestation of the riches of
his superabundant grace and love; 2 Cor 5. 14.
and thy apprehension thereof through faith ingages thy heart, and constrains
thee to love him again: 1 John 4. 19
We love him because he loved us first.

Says a poor deserted soul, 28. Discouragement.
I cannot believe that God will pardon my sins, they being greater and heightened
with many more circumstances of aggravation then the sins of others are.
This is the effect of thy unbelief, and of thy low and finite thoughts of
God, his grace and mercy, whereas they are infinite. Oh measure not the Lord by
thy self, Quod vitium per legem demonstrandu^ per gratiam sanandum.
but remember, that he, whose Character is, The Lord, gracious and merciful
etc. He does great things past finding out, 2 Cor. 3. 18
and wonders without number. Isa. 55. 8, 9
Fear not, the Lord will do great things. Job. 9. 10.
Worlds of sin, Joel 2. 21.
are in the vast Ocean of Gods love, Luke 1. 37.
swallowed up as nothing.

But says the poor soul, 1 Aggravation.
my sins are many.
So were Isreal's and Judahs, Jer. 3. from 21 to 25
yet God notwithstanding pardons them all.

But mine are great and heinous. 2 Aggravation.


So were Isreal's, and Judahs, and Manasses, 2 King. 21 4, 11, 16.
and so were the woman's mentioned in Luke, so were Paul's, yet God pardoned them
all, Luke 7. 47
as he has also many others; 1 Timothy 1. 15.
if thou art a wonderful sinner, Isa. 9. 6.
Christ is a wonderful Savior.

But mine are after the receiving of many mercies. 3 Aggravation.

So were Solomon's, 1 King. 11 9.
his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him
twice.

But I have sinned against Gods entreaties to return. 4. Aggravat.


So did Israel and Judah aforementioned. Jer. 3. 7
I said, after she had done all th^se things (says the Lord) turn thou unto
me, but she returned not.

But I have sinned against the reproofs of the Lord. 5. Aggravat.


This was their transgression still; Jer. 3. 3. 8
Thou have a whores forehead, thou would not be ashamed; when I saw how that
by all occasions, rebellious Israel had played the Harlot, I cast her away, and
gave her a bill of divorcement; yet her rebellious sister Judah was not afraid;
but she went also and played the Harlot.

But I have sinned not only against the mercies of the Lord, 6. Aggravat.
but against his fatherly corrections and chastisements.

So did they. In vain have I smitten your children. Jer. 2. 30.
They have received no correction. Jer. 6. 29.
Thy bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire: the founder melts
in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. For his wicked covetousness.
Isa. 57. 17 18.
I am angry with him, and have smitten him; I hid me and was angry, yet he went
on frowardly in the way of his own heart: yet for all this, the Lord says, I
have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore
comforts unto him and his mourners.

But I have committed one sin often. 7. Aggravat.


So did they: Jer. 3. 1. 6
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers.

But I have continued a long time in sin. 8. Aggravat.


So did they: Jer 3. 25
We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, from our youth unto this day.

But my sins are against knowledge and conscience. 9. Aggravat.


So did David concerning Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11. 3, 4, 15, 17
and in putting Vriah to death; and so did Peter sin, Matthew. 26. 70, 72.
when he said and swear, That he knew not the man, and that he was not with him.

But I am fallen back from what I have been. 10 Aggravat.


So were they; Jer. 3. 6, 12
Return thou backsliding Israel.

But I have willingly and resolvedly forsaken God. 11 Aggravat.


So did they: Jer. 2. 31
Oh generation, take heed to the word of the Lord. Have I been as a
wilderness unto Israel? or a land of darkness? Wherefore says my people, we
are Lords, we will come no more unto thee?

But I have willingly chosen sin. 12 Aggravat.


So did they, saying, We have loved strangers, Jer. 2. 2^.
and after them will we go.

But I have seduced others and caused them to sin. 13. Ag^gravation.


So had they; Thou have also taught the wicked ones thy ways; 2 Jer. 33.
And King Manasseh seduced the people to do more evil, 2 King. 21. chapter 9. 11.
16.
then did the Nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel; 26
Acts 11. 16.
and made Judah also to sin with his Idols; 2 Chronicles. 33. chapter 18 19, 22, and
23. verses.
Yet Manasseh obtained mercy, when Amon his son (a lesser sinner) perished in
his sins. That men may know that the Lord will have mercy upon whom he will
have mercy; 9 Romans 15 16. 18. ver.
and whom he will he hardens.

But I have sinned as much as I could. 14. Aggravation.


So had they: Behold thou have spoken and done as evil things as thou could.
3 Jer. 5.


But my sins are committed notwithstanding many vows and Covenants against
them. 15. Aggravation.


So were theirs; 2 Jer. 20.
Thou said, I will no more transgress, but like an harlot thou runnest about
upon every high hill, and under every green tree, thou wanderest playing the
Harlot.

But I have justified my self in all my sins. 16. Aggravation.


So had they; yet thou say, because I am innocent, surely his wrath shall
turn from me! 2 Jer. 35.
Behold I will enter into Judgment with thee; because thou say I have not
sinned.

But I despair, 17. Aggravation.
having no hope of mercy.

This is worst of all, yet so did they! Thou said, there is no hope etc. And
says Jeremiah in his Lamentations; 2 Jer. 25.
when I cry he shuts out my prayers; 3 Lam 8. 18.
And I said, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; 19 Job 10
and Job says My Hope has he removed like a tree. Abraham believed in hope, 4
Romans 18
against hope; Ye were sometimes without hope and without God in the world,
says Paul, 2 Ephesians. 12
to the Church of Christ in Ephesus; these had been in thy condition and yet
found mercy; be therefore of good cheer: says David concerning his and thy
God; 116 Psa. 6
I was of his low and he helped me; 9 Psa. 10.
The riches brought grace is unsearchable: All that know his name will trust in
him, etc.

2. Consider that it is thy selfe-deceit, which dictates unto thee that thou
might plead for mercy, if thy sins were fewer and smaller, or thy self
better; the sicker thou art, the more standst thou in need of such a Physician
as Christ is; oh make the more have unto him; he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance: Romans 4. 4, 5, 6.
He will save none but the ungodly, and these without works, or any of their
previous Qualifications.

3. Consider, that God makes his grace to superabound, where sin did but
abound; And if thou art a greater sinner then David, then art thou dearer to
Christ then him, for he paid more for thee then for him. Genesis 29. 30.
As Jacob loved Rachel more then Leah, because he suffered and endured most for
her; And as the Prodigals father rejoiced most in his lost and dead son,
though he had spent his own and his fathers substance with Harlots; Even so
thou who art the greatest sinner did cost Christ most, and art certainly
become dearest unto him; we have an eminent example of this in the Prophecy of
Jeremiah: Jer. 31. 20.
Is Ephraim my dear son? he is a pleasant child: for since I spoke against
him I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels earne toward him;
I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord.

4 Consider, that for a regenerate person upon commission of sin, immediately
and directly to have an eye to the covenant of grace, and to believe the pardon
of his sins, is the way to get such assurance, as brings true and solid
comfort; such a course was taken to heal men stung of the fiery scorpion, Number.
21. 8
they were to look upon the brazen serpent; if once, twice, yea seven times a
day, so often as they were stung, so often looking, were healed. Joh. 3. 14.
This the Apostle Paul exhorted the Hebrews to in the like case; Isa. 45. 22
they had backsliden and come near to the sin against the holy Spirit, and the
root of this (as it should seem) was infidelity, therefore he exhorted them
to use all diligence to the full assurance of faith and hope unto the end, Heb.
6. 11. 18, 19.
and to believe whatsoever is contained in the covenant of grace, of which
remission of sin is one main thing; we must therefore (after commission of
sin) fly for refuge unto the covenant by a true and lively faith, it being
confirmed by an oath, and ratified to us in the blood of Christ; and thence
fetch pardon, solid comfort, and strong consolation.

5 Admire such wisdom and love as sparkles forth in that God, who made not a
covenant with us for our good works, nor can it be broken or disanulled by our
sins, nor is it in our keeping, nor stands it upon the rotten and sandy
foundation of self and duties; but is grounded upon the word and faithfulness
of that God, with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning.

6 Consider (as concerning thy objection against thy self upon the account of
thy unworthines, whereof thou art sensible) that the Lord charge the Angels
with folly, Job 4. 18.
and thou being sensible of thine unworthiness, Christ invites thee immediately
to himself: it is nothing but ignorance and pride that keeps poor souls
from coming to Christ, Romans 10. ^
they will not be beholding to him for all, and therefore would stay til they
have something of their own to commend them unto Christ; But if they will stay
til then they shall never come to Christ; but now for that thou see no good
thing yea nothing but evil in thy self, Zech. 13. 1
thou should the rather go unto Christ, who is the fountain set open for
sin and for uncleanness, wherein thy unclean soul must be washed: John 13. 8
for Christ says, unless I wash thee, thou can not be clean, nor have any
part in me

Surely if I were not an outcast, and a reprobate, 29 Discouragement.
I should not be left as I am, in a wilderness condition.
Israel was accounted an outcast, yet God was then a God unto her, Jer. 30.
17, 22.
and she a people unto him.

True, 30. Discouragement.
says the poor soul, were I a branch in Christ, and a true member of his
house, then could I believe these precious truths and promises of his; but I am
neither of both, but separated from him and his people.
Be not arrogant in any false conclusion against thy self; but hearken unto
what the Lord says, Let not the Son of the stranger that has joined himself
to the Lord, Isa. 56. 3, 5
speak saying, The Lord has utterly separated me from his people; neither let
the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. Even unto them will I give in mine
house and within my walls a place, and a name better then of Sons and Daughters.

A believers comfort, hope, joy, confidence, etc. should be in God the same at
all times.
The Lord has various dispensations of providence, as well relating to the
outward as the inward man; Nah. 1. 3.
He has his way in the whirlwind: 1 King. 19 12.
And he is in the small still voice: his dispensations are many times contrary
one unto another; to day perhaps thou enjoyest peace, Eccles. 9. 1 2, 3
joy, strength, riches and honor, with health, prosperity, and many friends,
and to morrow all these may be blasted; to day God unbosoms himself unto thee,
and shines forth upon thee, Cant. 5. 5. 6
and there is a sweet intercourse of love between him and thy soul, but in a
moment he withdrawes him self, Job 23. 8, 9
as blessed Job and diverse other of the children of God experienced. And we
find that David reckning of a day of desertion, says, Though I walk in the
valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23. 4
I will fear none evil; for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort
me: wherein he holds forth his resolution to encounter with such a wilderness
condition, where by desertion, he should take a turn in the dark and damp
valleys of the shadow of death, and be encompassed with dreadful terrors, and
sore trials. Gods actings in and upon his people, are not always as he is unto
them, but he being unchangeable, is to his ever the same, however he may seem
to be: his actings in us, or upon us, are the accomplishment of his will for
his own glory; and the good of his people; therefore make we a good
construction of all his dealings with us; remembering, that what we think to be
worst, may be best for us; However it be, Psalm. 73. 1.
yet God is good. Gods children are to carry an even spirit through the various
dispensations of the providence of the Almighty.

In order to thy confirmation in this truth, peruse and seriously meditate upon
the ensuing places of Scripture, and crave the assistance of the blessed spirit
of truth in the opening and understanding of them, wherein is treasured up much
of the marrow and fatness, yea, and of the glory of the Gospel.

Hos. 2. 19, 20. Deus promittendo se fecit debitorem.
Jer. 3. 14, 1. Jer. 33. 8. Isa. 62. 5. Heb. 8. 10, 12. Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63. Heb.
3. 6. Jer. 33. 20, 21 Hos. 14. 5. Isa. 61. 10. Isa. 54. 5. Jer. 31. 9. God in
promising has made himself our debtor
Hab. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 6. 17, 18. Romans 3. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 13. Romans 8. 28, 33, 35,
38, 39. Isa. 41. 10. Isa. 57. 18, 19. Isa. 54 7, 8. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22. Psalm.
46. 1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 6. 5
Romans 8. 1, 2. John 13. 1. Romans 3. 3
Zech. 3. 9. Isa. 63. 16. Josh. 1. 5. Psalm 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. 2 Timothy 2.
13.
Ezekiel. 16, 14.

Six Reasons of the Point.
1. Reason. Because that God, who has loved thee with an everlasting love,
Isa. 43. 25.
loves thee in his Son; thou art not beloved for thy own sake, Mic. 7. 18, 19,
20.
or for any thing in thee, but upon the account of the Lord Jesus, in whom God
is well pleased; Mat. 3. 17
therefore no corruption in us, nor all we do, can make us to be loved more or
less: believers are never the more just before God, Number. 23. 19.
for their own integrity, nor the less just for their iniquity. Ro^. 4. 2, 5.
God may well say of himself, Isa. 38. 14 17
I am the Lord, and change not; his love is as himself, Mal. 3. 6
ever the same; and Christ in whom thou art beloved, the same yesterday, Heb.
13. 8.
to day, and for ever; and hereupon thou art commanded to rejoice evermore, 1
These. 5. 16
to rejoice exceedingly. Psalm. 32. 11


2. Reason. Because whatsoever thoughts thou have of God, he is unchangeable;
if he does withdraw himself, if he does allure thee into the wilderness, Hos.
2. 14, 15
it is, that he may speak comfortably unto thee; and all this while, thou have
his promise with thee, and his faithfulness is engaged unto thee; Isa 54. 7, 8
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee; in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, Jer. 51. 5
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, Neh. 9. 16 17
says the Lord thy redeemer. Having loved his own which were in the world,
John. 13. 1
he loved them to the end.

3. Reason. Because God considers his to be in Christ, before they had a being
in themselves, Ephesians. 1. 4
and indeed they are never out of Christ, John 6. 56
they dwell in Christ, Col. 3. 3 ver. 4
and he in them; they live in Christ; their life is hid with Christ in God;
Phil. 3. 9
when Christ, who is our life, 1 Cor. 15. 17
shall appear then shall we also appear with him in glory, Act. 13. 39
and be found in him not having our own righteousness, etc. And also in the
mean time, God ever looks upon his, as they are in his Son, and not simply as
they are in themselves; For that which I do, Rom 7. 15 16, 17, 20, 25
I allow not; for what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I. Now
if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells
in me; with the mind I my self serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law
of sin; sin does the evil, Gal. 5. 17
the flesh lusts. He knows our frame, Psalm. 103. 14.
and remembers that we are but dust; God looks upon his as they are justified,
or in covenant with himself; and they are pure in his sight as the
uprightness of Christ can make them Quia quae in lege data sunt facienda, per
fidem ostenduntur facta. Ambr. Romans 6. 14 Gal. 5. 18.
, though impure and vile in their own eyes, that there might be work for
faith. And indeed, Deus non nisi perfecta justitia Remunerat^r.
were they not in such a perfect righteousness, they could not be beloved of
him, who charge the Angels with folly, and is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity; or to love a sinner as a sinner.

4. Reason. Because a believers happiness depends not upon his own doing but
upon Christ, who is of God, made unto him righeeousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30
sanctification etc. 2 Timothy 1. 9
Who has saved us and called us with an holy calling, Heb. 13. 8.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. etc.
If a believers faith fail, yet God remains faithful; when he cannot apprehend
God, Isa. 53. 11
yet he is then comprehended of God. 2 Samuel 12, 13
Our sanctification has nothing to do with our justification, or salvation,
so as to be the least cause of it, (but the effect of it:) sanctification
admits of degrees, but justification neither of rules, nor degrees, being
abundantly more glorious then sanctification, and has not any dependencie upon
our apprehending, or receiving it. Romans 5. 18
In a word; our justification is quite out of self, and consists in the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ unto us; which righteousness is
inherent in him, who sits at the right hand of God, far above the reach and
sphere of sins acttivity; Qui in nobis peccatores sumus, in Christo, et per
Christum justi sum^.
and is therefore gloriously perfect and complete: though thy actual
righteousness be but as menstruous rags, and often fails thee, yet consider *
thou have the righteousness of Christ; Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength; Isa. 45. 24.
their righteousness is of me, says the Lord; and this righteousness, Psalm.
111. 3.
as it is ours by imputation, so it is perfect and endures for ever, Romans 5. 13
and is the foundation of all blessedness; Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.
therefore rest satisfied with Christ's righteonsnesse, Ps. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24.
and add nothing to it; let thy heart say with David, I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. And wait upon him in faith, prayer,
and patience, who has promised that He will be as the dew unto Israel, and
that he shall grow as the lilly, Hos. 14. 6, 7.
and cast forth his fruits as Lebanon.

5. Reason. Because Christ and all true believers are one, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.
and 6* 17.
they are but one body, one spirit, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone;
Ephesians. 5. 30.
what union is like unto this? Heb. 2. 11.
What Joh. 17. 11, 23. Joh. 5. 5* 7.
union so full, real, entire, wonderful, glorious, spiritual, eternal, and
infinite? poor believers by virtue of their marriage unto, and union with
their husband and head (the Lord Jesus) have in him perfectly kept the whole
law of God, perfectly satisfied every demand that the Law can make: and though
they be not in themselves, yet in Christ they are just, and the Law of God can
never come upon them, nor the sergeant (the Devil) arrest them for one penny or
farthing* Romans 8. 4
the weak believers may say with Paul, Gal. 2. 19
the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us: Romans 7. 4
and we are dead to the Law; that is, we are as free from the Law, as a man
that is dead; when a man is dead, the Law goes no further upon him: in this
sense it is further said that believers are delivered from the Law, and freed
from the Law: and hence it is that our salvation is put upon the account of the
righteousness of God; Romans 3. 25, 26
and believers are acquitted from their sins, and justified as well in the court
of Gods justice, as in the court of his mercy. Were our faith in Christ as
full, strong and real as our union with him; we should ingrosse and possess
all that is in heaven, and nothing on earth could trouble us; yea the loss of
our all on earth, if its all were ours, could not have any uncomly influence
upon us

6. Reason. Col. 1. 28
Because the state of a believer in Christ (as considered in him) is a state of
John 17. 23 Hebr. 10. 14 1 John 1. 7. Isa 35. 8 and 38. 17 Ps. 103. 12 Dan. 9.
24 Ezekiel. 16. 14
perfection: he is clean from all sin by the blood of Christ: they are
removed from us; thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. As far as the
East is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.
Seventy weeks are determined upon the people, and upon the holy City, to finish
the transgressions, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation
for iniquity, and to bring in an everlasting righteousness, * which shall
certainly be accomplished, etc. Hereupon the soul begins to exult in God: Isa.
61. 10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord. My soul shall be joyful in my God, Col. 2.
9, 10, 13.
for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, 1 John 4. 17.
he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, etc. We are complete in
Christ; Isa. 53, 11, 12, 5.
as Christ is, Joh. 17. 23
so are we in this world etc. Thy sins are all laid upon Christ, Cant. 4. 7.
and he is Jehovah our Righteousness, Psalm. 45. 13
his righteousness is ours. Romans 8. 33 38, 39.
And hereupon, says God, Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
Christus ut solus justus est, ita suam justitiam in nos transferendo, justos
nos reddit.
The perfection of Christ's righteonsnesse is held forth unto us, and does ever
remain before us, that we might at all times suck the breasts of its
consolation, rejoice in it, and be thankful for it; there is enough to refresh
and abundantly to satisfy all the Lords children to the days of eternity Heb.
10 19, 20, 22, 23, 35. Romans 8. 1, 2. 33, 35.
. There is not any sin that a believer can commit, Matt. 14. 30, 31.
ought to be a ground for his questioning of the love of God unto him; nor
ought he to cast away his confidence in God, for any thing he does, or can
befall him.

I omit here to mention such reasons of the point, as might be deduced from the
Covenant of grace, and the nature of the same, having written upon that subject
in the former part of this Treatise.

Four things, from whence it is that the children of God have not their
comfort, hope, joy, confidence, etc. the same at all times.
1. From living by sense; Gal. 1 16.
I say, from a sensual practice of consulting with flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 2.
14.
which cannot discern spiritual things, and is condemned of God, Gal. 5 4, 5, 6
whereby they are led forth to weigh their state of grace, Gal. 3. 9 10
only in the scale of mortification of sin, as it is commonly taken for dying
to particular Acts; and in so doing, they unavoidably come short of that
comfortable persuasion (as to the eternal condition of their souls) which
others, Jam. 2. 23, 24.
who place their assurance in Christ, and his free promise do enjoy, because
sin has a stronger side in us, then the Spirit; and for that the spiritual
condition in this life, consists more in being justified from sin, Romans 7. 24 25
then cleansed from it; and our blessedness more in having the curse of sin
removed, Gal. 3. 13
then the corruption; our justification being more glorious then our
sanctification; and our forgiveness of sin is far more glorious then our
cleansing from sin, for the just shall live by his faith; Hab. 2. 4
which is not a life by sense and sanctification only, Gal. 2. 20.
but a life by believing for life in another, in Christ: and thereupon our life
is said to be hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3, 4
and Christ is called our life; When Christ who is our life etc. I speak now
to the weak and wounded believers for sin, not to the carnal and unregenerate
in sin. God will have Christ to be our life, and our all, 1 Cor. 12. 11
that our all, that man may be nothing. And as the light of the Sun damps the
fire, and extinguishes its light, as not enduring any light, but it self; so
when Christ (the Sun of Righteousness) arises in a poor soul, Mal. 4. 2.
out-goes all fire and candle light, yea and spark light of its own kindling,
Gal. 1. 16.
wherewithal the soul had compassed it self about; Isa. 50. 11
it leaves not one spark remaining to walk in, or for the heart, to derive
comfort from: Says such a soul, what if all the fire which I have heretofore
kindled and compassed my self about withal, be extinguished and annihilated?
Christ is infinitely a better light, heat, and comfort, and sparkles with the
brightest luster, when alone.

2. From ignorance of the ends, that God many times proposes unto himself, in
suffering corruption to be strong in his dear children; 1 John 2. 1
Millemali species, mill salutis erunt.
God has in wisdom and much love left sin in his, to abase them in their
own eyes, and to keep them humble in the sense of their transgressions, Romans
7. 14
and that we may know what we are, Ps. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
and our strength, and that our God might thereby exercise in us the fruits and
graces of his own spirit, Isa. 63. 7.
faith for pardon, wisdom, watchfulness self-denial, meekness* ^umility, etc.
and that we might love Christ the more, in that all our sins are pardoned;
which graces (had we no sin left in us) we should not have such occasion to
exercise; as also that he might inure us to live upon him by faith, that we
might long to be in heaven, where we shall enjoy perfect freedom from all sin,
and that we seeing our selves to stand in such need of Christ to manifest unto
our consciences our pardon thereof, and to heal us, might love and prize him
the more, and depend upon him for strength against sin, and live upon his
fullness; and that the power of Christ might the more palpably appear in the
miraculous preservation of a little spark of grace in the midst of the ocean
of our corruptions, and that the power of his grace in subduing of our so
strong and so many corruptions, might be made manifest. Says Paul, 2 Cor. 12.
9, 10.
I glory in my infirmities, not simply as they are sins, Cant. 8, 5
but in that the power and goodness of God, is the more seen both in
pardoning and healing of them; if there were not evil, it could not be known
what is good, justice and mercy had not been known. And when thou sinnest
against the Lord Jesus, albeit he will tell thee of thy fault in thy
conscience, to humble and abase thee in thine own eyes; yet he still remembers
the grace that is in thee: The sinning Church in Sardis has but a few good
names (among many bad) and Christ records them; Rev. 3. 4.
thou have a few names even in Sardis etc. And falling Philadelphia has but a
little strength, and yet Christ eyes it, and blazons it. Thou have a little
strength, and have kept my words, Rev. 3. 8, 10
and have not denied my name. Because thou have kep^ the word of my patience, I
will also keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Christ will not forget thy weak
grace, though mixed with strong corruptions, he turns all his childrens sins to
their good; he makes Samsons riddle a truth in believers souls. Out of the
Eater, there comes forth meat, Judge. 14. 14
and out of the strong sweetness; Christ makes the devouring corruption in
believers to become meat for their faith to feed upon; while he is killing of
one sin, he gives ground to believe the ruin of another; and he brings forth
sweetness out of their strong sins, in making his grace to superabound, where
sin did but abound. The Lord Jesus kindles the Spouses love, Cant 5. 2, 8, 10,
11.
even by her coldness: does he not cause her sleeping, while he knocked, to
end in a healthful fit of love-sicknesse when she awaked?

3. From their ignorance, or forgetfulness that they are in all their dealings
with God, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
to draw near and come unto him, as having put on Christ and sonship first,
and not as sinners and unrighteous. A believer is to consider himself thus in
Christ in the first place; Isa. 61. 10.
and to put on the relation of Sonship and righteousness, 1 John 1. 7.
and to look at, Heb. 9. 26
or consider sins no otherwise in himself then as debts paid and cancelled
by the blood of Christ; Isa. 53. 11
and never to conceive himself and Christ as two, Dan 9. 24.
but endeavor clearly and constantly to see that whatsoever good there is in
Christ, Heb. 9. 26
is his own, Isa. 43. 25.
as if it were in his own person; and by this, all bondage, fears and
doubtings are removed, and his spirit is free; Joh. 8. 36.
For the Son has made him free indeed And now he comes in the Spirit of
Adoption and calls God Father. Gal. 4. 6.
And here begins all faith, hope, confidence, love, liberty; when as others
dare not believe themselves in such a condition, til upon terms of
humiliation, sorrow for sin, and works of righteousness; they have (as they
think) a reasonable price, or satisfaction to come with, and then begin to
believe, hope, and be confident. And thus in way of compounding and bargaining
with God, deal with him at all occasions; but such submit not to the
righteousness of God, and the free gift of Justification by grace, Romans 10. 3
and give not glory to God; Romans 5. 15 19.
we must either have all in Choist, Romans 4. 20 22
or nothing in him; hearken what the spirit says of every true believer; Cant.
1, 5.
she is black but comely; he is clothed with the white robes of Christ's purity
and holiness, Rev. 3. 18.
and therefore comely in the sight of God; Isa. 65. 10.
though in himself in the glass of the Law, Deus no^ non nisi in ea
perfectione, in qua Christus resurrexit intuetur.
reason and sense, he appears black, yet in Christ through the Gospel* he ever
remains beautiful, Olev.
and comely to an eye of faith, 2 Cor. 5 (...)
whereby he sees himself in the righteousness of Christ made perfectly and
everlastingly righteous, yea presented in the body of Christ's flesh through
death holy, Romans 5. 19
unblameable and unreproveable in the sight of God. Col. 1. 22.


4. From ignorance of their glorious Gospel freedom. Gal. 5. 1. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13, 14.
etc. that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. Romans 10. 4
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes;
Romans 3. 19
Now we know that what things soever the Law says, Romans 6. 14
it says to them who are under the Law. But no true Believer is under the Law,
but they are all under grace. In the first Adam we had to do with God only in
a way of subjection and righteousness; but now in our second Adam, in a way of
Sonship or adoption, free grace and love. For what the Law could not do, Romans
8. 3, 4
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. That
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has made us free from the Law of sin and death. 8 Romans 2.
We are delivered from the Law, 7 Romans 6.
that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the
Letter: 2 Col. 14.
Christ has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us,
and taken it out of the way nayling it to his Cross. 4 Ephesians. 8.
He has led Captivity captive. That he might deliver the creature from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: 8 Romans 21
the Spirit says that no Curse can come nigh our dwelling place. 91 Psa. 10
The glorious beams of Christ's grace and love now shine forth upon the souls
of his poor children, like the Sun in the spring time, which light carries a
virtue, causing the earth to spring and blossom as the garden of the Lord.
Christ has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, 1 Luke 74 75.
that we might serve in newness of Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life; Romans 8. 15
The Spirit of Christ does indeed set a believer as free from hell, Gal. 3. 17.
the Law and bondage here on earth, as if he were in heaven, nor wants he any
thing to make him thus free, but to bring him to believe that he is so; Gal. 4.
5.
for Satan, sin, sinful flesh, Hos. 14. 4.
and the law are all so near, and about him in this life, that he cannot so
walk by sight, or in the clear apprehension of it: Hab. 2. 4
but the just live by faith: 2 Timothy 1. 7.
and faith is the evidence of things not seen.

Two ways for a believer to hold stable comfort, hope, Joy and confidence in
God at all times.

1. To live in Christ, Act. 13 39.
and not in our selves. A believers condition is twofold (yet as a believer, he
has but one) in Christ, in himself; yet he ought ever to consider himself in
Christ by faith, Col. 1. 28
and not in himself. In Christ he has perfectly obeyed the whole law, Romans
10. 4
perfectly suffered and satisfied for all his sins to the justice of God, Joh.
17. 23
and in Christ is perfectly just and righteous; and thereupon it is said, Col.
3. 3.
that our life is hid with Christ in God* Ephesians. 2. 6.
And we are raised up with Christ and made to sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus, even already: but in himself there is a body of lust, Romans 7.
24
corruption and sin; and there is a law revealing sin, accusing and
condemning; so as if a believer live only by sense, reason and experience of
himself, and as he lives to men, he lives both under the power and feeling of
sin and the law; Verse. 25,
but if he by the eye of faith looks upon himself to be within the walls of
that strong and impregnable City of refuge (the Lord Jesus) the law and divine
Justice of God, cannot pursue him for his sins Expiatio Christi viget in
aternum.
; if he live by faith in Christ, and in the apprehension of his love, believing
in the life, Heb. 10. 12 14
righteousness, obedience, satisfaction, and glory of him, whom the Spirit
calls ours; Romans 8. 1
Christ is ours, we are Christ's, 1 Cor. 1. 3. 23.
and Christ is Gods; he then lives out of the power of all condemnation, Romans
10. 4
and unrighteousness, Romans 8. 33, 34, 35, 38, 39.
Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness, etc. And thus a believer
is blessed, only in a righteousness without, Ps. 143. 2.
not within; and all his assurance, Gal. 2 16.
confidence, and comforts are to flow in unto him through a channel of faith,
and not of works, believing himself happy, Isa. 45. 24. 25.
for what another, even Christ has done for him; not for what he has done, or
can do for himself; for when we are at the best, we are but unprofitable
servants, and may not live in our selves, nor by sight, but by faith; and when
we are at the worst, we are to live upon Christ by faith, and derive all our
comforts from God in in his everlasting and inviolable covenant of grace, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
which is an inexhaustible fountain of divine consolation for a poor believer
to have recourse unto, 2 Timothy 2. 19
for the stability of soul^satisfying joy, and comfort sparkling from the face
of God upon him; and indeed, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
the glorious joy of a believer would be always unspeakable, Romans 8. 1, 2, 5,
11.
did he always apprehend his happiness in, 2 These. 2. 16.
and by Christ Jesus.

2. To live by faith, 1 These. 5 16
which consists in the souls communion with God in Christ, and the souls
enjoying of Christ in his promises, both spiritual and temporal. Heb. 11. 11,
21, 16
Faith supplies all wants, it honors God, and God honors those most that live
by it. Job 13. 15


By faith we live to God a life of joy in him, our righteousness, as if we had
never sinned; by faith we live above sin, infirmities, temptations,
desertions, sense, reason, fears and doubts; faith sweetens the sweetest
mercy, and the bitterest miseries; it renders great afflictions as none; it is
the Bulwark of the souls strength and comfort. By faith we obey God, it makes
the yoke of Christ easy and sweet; it states the soul in the possession of
heaven, while the bodo remains on earth: By says we view the glory of heaven,
and know our selves to be happy, even then, when to a carnal eye we seem most
miserable. By faith we can cheerfully part with, and suffer deprivation of the
sweetest outward comforts and enjoyments, and welcome death, knowing that we do
but exchange the worst place and things for better. Those that live by faith,
live upon God, and are feasted in his banqueting house, which is plentifully
stored with all desirable dainties, having this welcome; Eat O friends, and
drink abundantly. It is, oh believer, thy portion, duty and privilege to
refresh and exhilerate thy soul with his dainties, and to enjoy Christ in them
all, that so thy joy may be full.

To live by faith in effectual calling; Mat. 11. 21
and that is, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
for the soul to cleave to, Mat. 21. 5.
and depend upon God in Christ for life and salvation upon such places of
Scriptures as these. Joh. 3. 23


To live by faith in justification; The Lord Jesus having spoken peace to the
soul, that he has paid all for it, Isa. 53. 5, 6,
and that its sins shall be remembered no more; Jer. 31. 34. 11
now the soul knows its happy, Romans 8. 33 38, 39. and 3. 24. 28.
and enjoyes the comfort of it, is filled with joy and peace in believing; his
life is a life of comfort; beholding and enjoying Christ's righteousness as his
own, Act. 13 39
lives upon it whatsoever befalls him; Rev. 1. 5.
he is comforted in his interest in the righteousness of Christ as sufficient
to satisfy him at all times, Romans 5. 1 and 4. 25
living upon such places of Scripture as these. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7


To live by faith in Sanctification, Romans 5. 9. 10.
which is twofold. Heb. 10. 10 to 14.
2 Timothy 2. 13


1. For the soul to cleave unto Christ, its sanctification. 1 Cor. (...). 30.


Secondly, 14 Hos. 5.
for a Believer to cleave unto God in his promise, 57 Isa. 18 19.
to cleanse and renew his heart and life, 7 Micah 19.
and to be a quickening Spirit in him. 17 John 17. 19.


To live by faith in Infirmities;

And that is, for the soul to believe that God will be to us, according to his
own gracious promise and Covenant, for ever a God of love, grace, and mercy,
notwithstanding all our daily omissions and commissions, excesses and defects,
according to that blessed word of his, 89 Psalm. from 30. unto 37. v 9 Nehem.
16, 17.
If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my
statutes and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgression
with the rod and their iniquities with stripes: 43 Isa. 25
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, 42 Isa. 2 3
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; 1 Samuel 3. 10.
My Covenant will I not break, 7 Characters of one that lives by faith in
infirmities.
nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, etc. He that lives by faith
in infirmities may be thus characterized. First, he will hear Christ and not
the voice of a stranger. Secondly, he is not offended at whatsoever Christ
requires. 11. Mat. 6.
Thirdly, 1 John 5. 3.
the revealed will of God in the Scripture is his rule. Fourthly, he will trust
God, and rely upon his word, he eyeth the promise and says, Surely in the Lord
have I righteousness and strength, 45 Isa. 24
etc. 3 Jude.
Fifthly, 20 Acts 31.
he will contend for the truth. Sixthly, he will do others good. Seventhly,
his sin does not sink him into despair, though he may have many doubtings; yea
he is not by any sin or trouble reduced unto despair. He will (and indeed
the weakest Believer ought in the midst of all his imperfections) say, I have
as much of the love of God, acceptance and perfect righteousness in Christ as
the best Saint ever had, 3 Gal. 28.
my state is as happy as any of theirs: 23 Jer. 6.
And say with Habakkuk, 35 Job. 7.
Although the figtree shall not blossom, 3 Hab. 17 18.
neither shall fruit be in the vines: The labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation.

Such as live by faith in infirmities, live upon Christ in his promise for
strength against all infirmities in such places of Scripture as these.
In deadness of heart 35 Isa. 5, 6. If fallen by passion, not to sink under it
5 James 17. 14 Acts 15. 17 Job. 9.


They rely upon God for ability to obey him, 84 Psa. 7.
and for fruitfulness in season 17 Jer. 8. 45 Isa. 24
1 Psa. 2, 3. 40 Isa. 29, 30.
92 Psa. 13, 14. Phil. 4. 13.
61 Isa. 9. 62 Isa. 12. Psa. 84. 7.

If they are under temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
they have a promise, that no temptation shall be above their ability to bear;
1 Jam. 12.
and to have a good issue.

To live by faith for Protection, and supply of all wants.
They who live by faith for these things, 121 Psa. 8
rely upon Christ in such Scriptures as these are: 36 Job 7.
if in sickness 41 Psa. 3. 17 John 15.
103 Psa. 3. 27 Ps. 4, 5
to be hid in times of danger, 3 Zeph. 16, 17. v. for a supply of every thing
we need, 4 Phil. 6. 19. if in Prosperity, 29 Jer. 5, 6. till God see it good,
we shall meet with no change: our condition may be changed indeeed, but our God
i^ Jehovah that changes not, 13 Heb. 5, 6. If in adversity, to be contented in
a hard or low condition, 13 Heb. 5. 18 Joh. 11. 4 Phil. 11. 12. it is appointed
1 These. 3. 3. John 16. 33. Joh. 7. 30. We stand in need of such a condition,
if our need required it not, our God that loves us would not afflict us with
it. 1 Pet. 1. 6. and the time cannot be long ere they shall be no more.

And they live upon Christ and his presence in times of trouble, in such places
of Scripture as these, Psalm 91. 15. Psalm. 9. 9. Psalm. 37. 39. That the
troubles shall not be too great, Jer. 30. 11. and that they shall profit by
them, Heb. 12. 11. for deliverance out of them, Job 5. 19. Psalm. 50. 15. for
speedy deliverance, Psalm. 31. 2. Psalm. 69. 17. Isaiah 58. 8.

To live by faith in glorification;

Which is, Act. 26, 18
by the eye of faith, to behold hold the rest, Act. 26. 18
joy, peace, and perfect happiness, which is provided for us in heaven, 1 Pet.
1. 4.
firmly believing that God will after this life, give us all those things with
himself, which he has promised his.

For the resurrection of my body, 1 These. 4. 16. To have a spiritual body, 1
Cor. 15. 43, 44. To have a glorified body, Phil. 3. 21. The Sun in the
firmament is not so glorious, as the bodies of the Saints shall be, because the
Sun is but a natural body.

To have fullness of knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. To have fullness of joy and
pleasure. Psalm. 16. 11. Such as shall be internal, pure, full, spiritual, and
eternal; no misery, hunger, cold, nakedness, pain, grief, nor weariness,
but rest without labor, 2 These. 1. 7. In rest, tranquillity, in tranquillity
contentment, in contentment joy, in joy variety, in variety security, in
security eternity. To see the Lord as he is, 1 John 3. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 13 12.

To behold his glory John 17. 24 with him in glory. Col. 3. 4. And to be
changed from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. To have fullness of communion with
God, Ephesians. 3. 19. Sight is a degree higher then presence, union then sight,
communion then union, and full communion is more. We shall have as much of
God, as we can desire; be filled with him, and enjoy the Quintessence of all
sweetness, fullness* and goodness in God; yea, we shall be raised, inflamed,
and ravished with him, in admiration of the perfection of his beauties; and
this shall coninue without intermission, or weariness; this is our Summum
bonum, our chiefest good, and the end of our being, viz.

To be for ever with the Lord. 1 These. 4. 17.
1 These. 4 17. and enjoy the things which eye has not seen, neither ear
heard, 1 Cor. 2. 9
neither came into man's heart to conceive, which God has prepared for them
that love him; this transcends the expectation of the most enlarged heart.
Faith in the midst of troubles and anxieties, believes these promises of glory,
and sweetly inclines the soul to live in a comfortable expectation of the
fruition of the glorious things promised, when faith it self shall be
swallowed up of vision, and hope of fruition: and in the interim, as faith
believes it, and the soul (through faith) in a sense enjoyes it, so hope
expects it, and patience waits for it, with an, It will not be long e're glory
come Knowing that he who raised up the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 14, 15, 16
shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things
are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of
many, redound to the glory of God. For which cause we faint not, but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

FINIS.

