THE FULL PARTICULARS OF The last great and terrible Sea Fight between the two
great Fleets of England and Holland, under the Command of the Lord Genesis Monk,
and the Lord Admiral Vantrump; on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday last: With the
manner of this lamentable and bloody Engagement; the perfect Narrative of each
days action; and an exact List of the loss on both sides: Together with the
sinking of the Dutch Admiral; the blowing up of the famous Dolphin; the burning
and taking of 38 men of War more; the taking of the Standard, and 7 stately
flags; the total routing and dispiersing of 132 sail; the pursuing them close
by Genesis Monk; and the burning of two gallant English ships.

woodcut depicting a naval battle

London, printed for G. Horton, According to Order

A great and bloody fight at sea between the English Navy, commanded by his
Excellency the Lord Genesis Monk; and the Dutch fleet commanded by the lord
Admiral Vantrump, on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday last, etc.
Right Honorable,
IF ever there were a Season of Observation, or rather Admiration, certainly it
is the present; wherein we have bin eyewitnesses of so many outgoings of
God's presence among Us, and the many miraculous Turns of Providence within a
short Revolution. Some memorable hints I gave you of our last Engagement; but
for this it is most excellent for Tongue or Pen to express the greatness of the
Action, suitable to that magnificent appearance of God in behalf of his people
in England: Our last Engagement with the enemy wrought mighty glorious Effects;
but this far greater; And although they took an opportunity to bear in upon us,
having the Weather-gage; yet great was the Lord, and marvell^us worthy to be
praised for his glorious appearance on our behalf; the particulars whereof are
thus evidenced.

Upon the 29 of July, about 9 in the morning, the wind at North-west, having
weighed Anchor from the Texel the night before, a fleet was discovered by our
Scouts a head, which within 2 hours appeard to be the Dutch fleet come from
the Weilings, consisting of 97 sail, whereof 90 were men of war; but upon our
bearing up to them, the enemy tacked about; so that it was 5 in the evening
before any of our frigates could come up to engage with them, which for^ed the
enemy to make a halt, whereby in the evening at 7 a clock this ship with as many
ships and frigates as made up 30 sail, or thereabouts, engaged with them; the
rest being astern, could not get up; however we fell to the work, and continued
fighting till night separated, which was about 9 a clock; after which time,
being dark, all hands were awo^rk to bring some new fails to the Yard, and
mend our riggging, wherein we had suffered much for so short a time: there were
killed outright in this ship by this Evening about 16 or 17, and 25 wounded,
whereof 14 dangerously: This night the enemy got the weather-gage of us, by
standing to the Northward while they stood to the Southward, supposing they had
been under our Lee, which appeared to the contrary the next morning, for they
were got much to windward of us: The next day, being Saturday, little was done
as to an engagement, both fleets finding it work enough from a Lee shore,
having the wind at West Northwest blowing hard, with thick and dirty weather,
which was theworse for us being an enemies country; in the evening it began to
clear up; and on Sabbath day morning, being fair weather, and little wind, both
fleets prepared for a second Engagement; the enemy bore in upon u^, having the
wind, and conjunction with 25 great ships from the Texel; and about 7 in the
morning there began a very hot dispute, which continued till one, the scales of
Victory being even laid in the balance, so that neither could tell which had
the Victory; their fire ships were somewhat annoying; and our good ship called
the Oak was burnt, and another, whose men perished with her.

This Dispute was fought with various successes (to speak the truth) in each
days action; but still hopeful on the behalf of the behalf of the Commonwealth
of England, and inauspicious to the enemy; of whom, I dare presume three to one
were slain, although I must acknowledge and aver, they fought like so many
Alexanders, Caesar's, and Pompey's for many hours together; but at last it
pleased God so to dispose of his divine series amongst his weak instruments,
that in the end it became an absolute Victory, determinated by a tryumphant
possession of diverse of their best ships, with a total ruin and dispiersing of
their whole Armado, consisting of no less then one hundred and 50 sail; besides
two and thirty fire ships, and commanded by four distinct Admirals, viz.

The Lord Admiral Trump. Wit Wittense. Michael Ru^tier. Jan ^varson.
Vantrump with his Orange flag, and bloody Pendants gave the Onset, and
pre^ented our Admiral with many hundred shot, which fell like hail from the most
high Canopy upon the Ambral, called the Resolution, who indeed was engaged in
the very thickest of action; and disputed the Conflict from the mouth of the
Canon with abundance of galantry and resolution: during which time, his
Excellency deported himself with incomparable courage and magni^icency of
spirit, at the head of the ship, seriously ob^erving the motion of the enemy,
and by his audible and never to be forgotten expressions, in b^half and defense
of his Native Country, and ^or the illustrating and preservation of this
glorious Cause, wrought such a spirit of courage amongst the soldiery in
general, that the new raised forces performed singular good service, for which
they deserve a most high estimation and acknowledgment. About 3 in the
Afternoon the enemy began to decline engagement, making all the sail they
could; but we are in persuit of them, some of our best sailing frigates being
almost up with them. The Enemy had 9 Flag ships when we first engaged, and now
but one left; As for the particular loss, I shall refer you to the enclosed
List, and remain

Your most affectionate friend, Jacob Smith.
From aboard the Assurance, Aug. 1. 1653.
A List of the particular loss on both sides.
The Lord Admiral Trumps ship sunk. The Dolphin burnt. 8 More burnt and sunk.
30 Taken. 1 Orange Flag taken. 2 Blew Flags taken. 2 black Flags taken. 1
Bloody Flag. 2 Green Ones. 132 Men of War dispiersed, and now in pursuit by the
English. Loss of the English. The Oak burnt. One more, and most of her men
destroyed. Diverse ships battered, and many men slain.
FINIS.

