The Exhortation of Mr. ROGERS To his Children, which he wrote a few Days
before his burning; being Martyred in Queen Mary's days. Being Gody
Admonitions, fit for a Christian to follow.

man being burned at the stake, while others look on

^rinted for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger, 1681.

An Exhortation that a Father gave to his Children, which he wrote a few days
before his burning.
THere is no Ingenious Nature that will not lend an ear unto wholesome Words,
though they Proceed from the Mouth of an Enemy: but if they be uttered of a
Friend, or Kinsman, we do not only hearken, but listen with attention: But if
a Father speaks, there is no Child so ungracious as to stop his ears; yet if
all this might not prevail with you (my Children) to persuade you to be
attentive, yet hearken, because they are the words of your dying Father; which
I persuade my self shall not be only heard by you, vill also reverenced and
remembered when I am gone; the glass of my life is now almost spent, for the
last sand is running out, therefore seeing that I have not much time to spend,
let me not beat-the air, or spend my words in vain, but let them sink into your
hearts, as rain into the parched earth, and so you shall not only abandon all
sterility and barrenness, but also be happily fruitful in the works of Piety.

It was said of Old, and that saying holds true, That only Virtue and piety,
is the way to felicity. It is the narrow way of virtue, (in which too too few
do walk) that leads to happiness. This the Romans of old did plainly show by
their two Temples of Virtue and Honor: None could get into their temple of
honor, but they must pass to it through the temple of virtue: intimating
thereby, and stirring up others to be virtuous, that they may be happy. And if
you my children do desire to be happy, as I know you do (for nature has taught
us all to he so indulgent to our selves, as to wish our own welfare) following
virtue and Piety, and your desires shall not fail, neither shall you be
disappointed of your hopes, but if on the contrary, you shall walk in the broad
and common road of sin and error, you will not only deprive your selves of the
blessings of this Life, but also for the future purchase to your selves endless
miseries.

Thus having given you a general caution for the avoiding of sin, I will
particularize in some few, which I would have you especially to take heed of;
the first and chief, is covetousness; it is this that is the root of all other
vices; if riches do increase among you, set not your hearts upon them: but if
it shall please God to bestow a Benjamins Portion of earthly blessings upon any
one of you, as he shall be mindful of you, be not you unmindful of him: and as
he has not forgotten to be gracious unto you, so be not unmindful of his poor,
but cast a part of that portion to those that are in want. Beware of that sor
did and sottish sin of drunkenness, which deprives a man of his sense, and by
which, man that is the exactest and most curious piece that ever God did frame,
is made far inferior to the worst of heasts: for they be sensible Creatures,
but those that do dedicate themselves to Bacchus, have neither reason, nor
sense, so that they are one degree lower the the simplest beast: take heed of
flothfulneis Man is an active creature and therefore should be active and not
idle: Ye are to labor the refore, it is but your duties to be still bus^ed
about the employments of your callings. Be not proud of your own worths,
neither of any Garments that you shall be Master of; for this will breed
contempt in your Superiors, scorn in your equals, and cause those that are
your inferiors to deride and stout you. Other sins there are to be avoided,
but the remainder of my legacy shall be in verse, which is not only more
delightful then Prose, but by reason of that delight, apter to make a greater
impression in your minds.

A fathers Exhortation to his children, which he wrote a few days before his
Burning.
monarch on throne, surrounded by four kneeling men

GIve ear my Children to my words,
whom God has dearly bough;
Lay up my Laws within your hearts,
and print them in your thought.
For I your Father have foreseen,
the frail and filthy way,
Which flesh and blood would follow fain
even to their own decay.
For all and every living Beast,
their Crib do know full well,
But Adams heirs even from the least,
are ready to rebel.
And all the creatures of the earth,
full well do know their way,
But Adams heirs even from the least,
are apt to go astray.
For earth and ashes is our strength,
our glory and our gain,
And into ashes at the length
we shall return again.
For Flesh does flourish like the flower,
and grows like the grass,
And is consumed in an hour,
as dar^y comes to pass.
For I, the I mage of your years,
your treasure and your trust,
Am dying now before your face,
and shall consume to dust.
For as you see your Fathers flesh,
consumed into clay,
Even so you shall my children dea^,
consume and waste away
The Sun, the Moon, and eke the Stars,
that serve both day and night,
The earth, and every living thing,
shall be consumed quite.
And all the Worship that is wrought.
that has been heard or seen,
Shall clean consume and turn to naught
as it had never been.
Therefore see that you follow me,
your Father and your Friend,
And enter into that same Land,
which never shall have end.
I leave you here a little book,
for you to look upon,
That you may see your fathers face
when he is dead and gone.
Who for the hope of heavenly things,
while he did here remain,
Gave over all his golden years,
to prison and to pain.
Where I among my iron bands,
enclosed in the dark,
A few days before my sa^ death,
did dedicate this work.
And in example of your youth,
to whom I wish all good,
I preach you here a perfect truth,
and seal it with my blood.
To you my heirs of ^arthly things,
which I do leave behind;
That you may read and understand,
and keep it in your mind.
That as you have been heirs of that
which once shall wear away,
Even so you may possess the part
which never shall decay.
In following of your Fathers steps
in truth and eke in love,
Ye may be also heirs with him,
for evermore above.
Have God always before your eyes,
with all your whole intent,
Commit no sin in any wise,
keep his Commandment.
Abhor that arrant whore of Rome,
and all her blasphemies,
And drink not of her Decratals,
nor yet of her decrees.
Give honor to your mother dear,
remember well her pain,
And recompense her in her age,
the like with love again.
Be always at her hand,
and let her not decay,
Remember well your Father all,
that should have been your stay.
Give of your portion to the poor,
as riches do arise;
And from the needy naked soul,
turn not away your eyes.
For he that does not hear the cry,
of those that stand in need,
Shall cry himself, and not be heard,
when he would hope to speed.
If God has given you increase,
and blessed well your store,
Remember you are put in trust,
to minister to the poor.
Beware of foul and filthy lust,
let such things have no place;
Keep clean your vessels in the Lord,
that he may you embrace.
Ye are the Temples of the Lord,
for ye are dearly bought,
And they that do defile the same,
shall surely come to naught.
Possess not Pride in any case,
build not thy house too high.
But always have before your eyes,
that ye be born to dye.
Defraud not him that hired is,
your labor to sustain;
But give him always out of hand,
his penny for his pain.
And as you would another man,
against you to proceed,
Do ye the same to them again,
when they do stand in need.
And part your portion to the poor,
in money and in meat,
And send the feeble fainting soul
of that which ye should (...).
That when your members do lack meat;
and clothing to your back
You may the better think on them
that do both live and lack.
Ask counsel always of the wise,
give ear unto the end,
Refuse not thou the sweet rebukes,
of him that is thy friend.
Be always thankful to the Lord,
with prayer and with praise,
Desiring him in all your works,
for to direct your ways.
And sin not like the Swinish sort,
whose bodies being fed,
Consume their time upon the earth,
from belly unto bed.
Seek first, I say, the living Lord,
have him always before,
And then he sure that he will bless,
your (...) your store.
And thus if you direct your ways,
according to this book,
Then shall they say that see your fare,
how like me you do look.
And when you have this perfectly
upon your fingers ends,
Possessing all within this book,
then give it to your friends.
And I beseeth the Almighty God,
replinish you with grace,
That I may have you in the Heavens,
and see you face to face.
And though the sword has cut me (...),
contrary to my kind,
That I could not enjoy your love,
according to my mind.
Yet I do hope that when the (...);
shall (...) like a stowl,
I shall receive you in perfect shape,
in body and in ^oul.
And that I may enjoy your love,
and you enjoy the Land,
I do beseech the living Lord
to hold you in his hand.
Though here my body be adjudg'd,
in flaming fire to fry,
My soul I trust will straight ascend,
to live with God on high.
what though this carcass smart a while,
and this life decay,
My soul I do commend to God,
to live with him for aye.
I know I am a Sinner horn,
from the Original,
And that I do deserve to dye,
by our forefathers fall.
But by our Saviors precious blood,
which on the Cross was spilt,
Who freely offered up his life,
to fave our souls from guilt.
I hope redemption I shall have,
and all that in him trust,
When I shall see him face to face,
to live amongst the just.
Then why should I fear grifly ^eath.
(...) he for me did dye,
For King and Caesar, rich and poor,
the force of death must try.
When I am chained unto the stake,
and faggots girt me round,
Pray to the Lord, my soul in heaven,
be with thy glory crowned.
Come welcome death the end of fears,
I am prepared to dye,
These earthly flames will send my soul,
straight to the Lord on high.
Farewell my children to the world,
where you must yet remain,
The Lord of Hosts be your defense,
till we do meet again.
woman

Farewell my true and loving wife,
my children and my friends,
I hope to God to see you all,
when all things have their ends.
And if you do abide in God,
as you have now begun,
Your course I warrant shall be short,
you have not long to run.
God grant you so to end your days,
as he shall think it best;
That I may have you in the Heavens
where I do hope to rest.
monarch on throne, surrounded by four kneeling men

THus has my failing and faultring tongue endeavored to discover uuto you
those virtues which will lead you unto happiness, you have heard those sundry
and several documents which I have given you, but it is not enough to hear
them, it is not your audience only that I crave, it is your Obedience that I
require; for as it is with the body of man to eat much, and not to keep it,
argues a good Appetite, but bad digestion: so it is with the divine part of
man, to hear only, and not to keep it, shows quick ears which is little or
nothing worth without retention: therefore these my Fatherly admonitions, if
you my children shall observe, and duly exercise, as I hope you will; I shall
be happy in giving these instructions, and you more happy in receiving them,
for you shall find that the prosecuting of these forementioned virtues, and the
avoiding the formerly specified vices, shall be comfortable unto you here, and
procure eternal glory for you hereafter.

I will end my Legacy with my life and both life and Legacy with a blessing:
The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, bless you all in this life, and make you
all heirs of that blesse^dness of the life to come, Amen.

FINIS.

