ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND UNITED, DISJOINED.

OR, A gentle Corosive, and healing Plaster, applied to two dying KINGDOMS:
WITH Some Balsamum for wounded Ireland; HUMBLY Presented to both Kingdoms, and
communicated to all good Subjects, that wish Peace and good to the Kingdoms, or
to either of them.

Wherein is represented, The Grievances of the PEOPLE, and their several
Murmurings.

By Ethog Grimes Gent.

Read before you judge: Read all or read none. 2 Samuel 2 16. Then Abner called
to Joab, and said, shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it
will be bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be then, ere thou bid
the people retur^ from following their brethren? Isa. 1 5. Why should ye be
smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the
heart is faint. Ier. 8. 22 Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician
there? Why then is not the daughter of my people recovered? London, Printed for
Laurence Chapman, and are to be sold at his sh^p, next door to the Fountain
Tavern in the Strand, near the Savoy. 1648.

England and Scotland United, Disjoined: OR, A gentle Corosive, and healing
Plaster, applied to two dying Kingdoms: WITH Some Balsamum for wounded Ireland.
BY your leave Gentlemen, give me leave to step in among you, and excuse my
boldness, I have a little interest with you in the Kingdom, as well as you,
which I would not lose, nor do I know how to save; deem me not an intruder,
though I crowd in, I truly confess I scarce know where I am, things are so
promiscously shuffled together, men and things are so metamorphosed; men know
not themselves, nor their own, the world seems as it were turned round, or in
confusion: Law is changed into Looseness, and Liberty into Licentiousness, where
Order was, there is Confusion, and Fancy or Will, is come in the place of
Conscience; Conscience is shrank or seared with an hot iron, or has quite
suffered shipwreck; sacred Truth analized, judged, misinterpreted, eclipsed,
and comdemned by Humane Reason, men and things all out of their places;
conquering Mars threatens the Islands with new War, Jupiter casts ill aspects
on men and things, love is departed from men, and malignity of spirit
increases, horrid Pride, Ambition and Covetousness, have contracted
destructive divisions, in Kingdoms, Cities, Societies and Families, The son
dishonoreth the Micah 7. 6.
father, the brother is against the brother, etc. and a man's enemies are the
men of his own house: is Christ a Prophet? then conclude, a Kingdom, a City, a
House so divided cannot stand. Mark 3 24.


What Is the matter? is all the world grown mad? the effects show the cause, are
not Englands brainsick distempers, conceited fancies, unparalleld headstrong
passions, and unreasonable actions, the effects of the inflammation of the
brain to madness? What Bedlam fantacies, whimzeys, and self-fooling affections
are discovered in men, raging in all Societies and Families? violence
overspreads all, as if there were new Nimrods on the earth, or as if the people
were building new Babels; Midsummer-moon has been apparently operative all
this year: What influence the Moon, the Planets, or Comets have upon men's
bodies or fancies, I know not; nor did ever regard, no more then some old new
Prophesies lately discovered, which I heed as Necromancers predictions.

But I cannot tell what to think, that Herod and Pilate are made friends, and
yet love not one another, that M^rs should be in conjunction with Venus, and
Vesta forsake her chastity; is honesty a fool? Minerva and Pall^ce were wise,
how is it they usurp Menesis and seek their own revenge? it is strange to me,
and is no less then madness; or is it a mystery? but whether madness, or
mystery, those are symptoms of Mortal-sickness in a Kingdom, and at this time
predict a period to three kingdoms, all lying at this day upon the bed of
languishing, tortured with the pain of these distempers, and the infected
members of each, are worse then Solomon's madman, Who (says he) cast
firebrands, arrows Prove. 15. 18.
and death: It is mad-mens pastime to do mischief, they care not who they hurt,
whether themselves or others, so they fulfill their phrantick fancies; a few
such madmen may destroy all: But if all shall be mad, who shall prevent
destruction? it was a curse threatened upon the rebellious Jews (and is verified
in truth upon England and Scotland) The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and
blindeness, and astonishment of heart, and thou shall be mad for D^u. 28 ^. 2^,
34.
the sight of thine eyes, that thou shall see, etc. Self-pride, Ambition,
Covetousness, and extreme Oppression, have put three Kingdoms into an extreme
mad condition: Oppression (says the Wise man) makes a wise man mad; the heart
of the oppresser is mad in oppressing, the sweet of gain has destroyed his
heart, though otherwise a wise man, and like the horseleech he cries, Give,
give: On the other side the oppressed, under the burden of pressures lying
long upon him, forgets his wisdom, and patience, and grows into desperation,
stark mad, throws himself upon any danger, counts it the smallest hazard (in
way of revenge) Vid. S^nec^ Cl^n. lib. 1 cap. 12. ult.
to venture his life in every attempt, counting himself deprived of the benefit
of it, whilst wounded by galling pressures: Ill causes we know too often
produce worse effects.

No man is born for himself, but for others good as his own, not for the hurt
of any: We ought to do good to every man, but much more to seek to do good, by
laying out our selves for the public Weal; and in cases of necessity to the
uttermost of our ability, without grudging, else were men ingrate to God, and
betrayers of the Commonweal. But when Princes, or Magistrates, shall extort
treasure from a willing and free people, and convert their public moneys to
private uses, self-purposes, to particular ends, it cannot be well endured,
especially when accounts of such moneys are not made to the Kingdom: This
kindles a fire of jealousy, and makes men cry against it, as grinding
oppression, and Robbing the Commonweal It was a reproof against the house of
Jacob, and the Princes of Israel, That they built up Zion with Mic. 3. 10
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity; not only killing by the sword is counted
bloody (of which England stand guilty) but when The ve. 11, 12.
Heads of the people shall judge for reward, and the Priests teach for hire,
the Prophets divine for money, yet lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord
among us, none evil can come to us: consider what follows, Therefore shall Zion
for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, etc.
likeness in sin, brings likeness of judgment.

You shall see that because the two sons of Samuel that judged Israel were not
just in all the ways of their father, but turned aside after lucre, took
bribes, and perverted judgment, all the Elders of Israel gathered themselves
together, and came to Samuel, saying, Make us a king to judge us, like other
nations: the thing 1 Sa. 8. 3.
displeased Samuel, and was a sin against God; Why? not simply that they
desired a King, that was not a sin, but because in discontent, with revenge
against Samuel and his sons, they rejected the government that God had set over
them, therefore the Lord says, They have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me: Doubtless David should have been their King, though they had not
Upon this ground the Army is not justifiable in their disobedience to Ordinance
of Parliament, etc. Rom 12. 19.
asked a King, their sin was, that they would not stay Gods time: Private
persons may not cast reproaches, nor calumniate the office, nor persons of the
Magistrate, nor of the Ministry, nor prejudge Counsels, nor Actions, much less
rise in Arms against them, but make humble address, and pray unto God, and wait
Gods time for redress of such evils, Vengeance is mine (says the Lord) and I
will repay it, etc. obedience is better then sacrifice, And rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft: Although the Magistrate fail in his duty toward the people
(says judicious Calvin) the people may not transgress in their duty to the
Magistrate, but pray unto God for his or their amendment and conversion, and
amend their own faults, considering, that God often punishes the sins of a
people by corrupt Magistrates.

It may be some will object, that if this be good Divinity, we the people of
England and Stotland ought not to have taken up arms against the Kings
Authority, etc.

I Answer, We did it not as private men, but by Authority; therefore I say with
Mr. Calvin, There is a time when God will raise 1 Samuel 15. 22. Cilv. in
institut. lib. 4. cap. 20 sect. 30.
up open revengers of the unjust Government of Princes and Magistrates, such as
he will arm with authority and command from himself, like as God stirred up
Moses and Aaron, to deliver Israel from the bondage in Egypt, and several
deliverers at sundry times to free his people from their several pressures, as
Ehud, Barak, Deborah, Gideon, Sampson, Jepththah, and others mentioned in the
book of Judges; and such a deliverance God raised up to his people of England
and Scotland, when he by his providence established this Parliament, at such a
time when we thought our selves past hope; We know it was contrary to the
design of His Majesty's Counsel then acting, and we know it was not in our
power to do it without the King, therefore it was of God only, who so ordered
the Kings heart, and infatuated His evil Counsel, that the King did it by His
own Act, according to the Law of the Kingdom, and the Rights of the Subject,
and in which the King is vertually present, though personally absent; we know
also, that His Majesty passed several Acts of grace, for which we did, and do
honor, and thank Him, but have no reason to thank that evil Counsel, who
intended thereby only to sweeten the people, and steal away their affections
to join in a war (being so deceived) to dissolve the Parliament, and Null all
that they would, But Job 5. 12.
God disappointed the devices of the crafty so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise.

Again divine Calvin, the great supporter of Magistracy, and the Authority of
Princes, the most earnest presser to obedience, says thus of Parliaments
(being once called) If they (says he) shall wink at Kings wilful raging over,
and treading down the poor Calv. institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 31.
Commonalty, it is a breach of Faith in them, because they deceitfully betray
the Liberty of the people, whereof they are protectors by the Ordinance of God.

While Israel lay under the sore pressures and bondage of Pharaohs taskmasters
in Egypt, they groaned under their heavy burdens, as insupportable, and cried
unto God, God raised up Moses their deliverer; but quickly they forgot the
bitterness of that bondage, and meeting with some momentary hardship in the way
through the Wilderness, to the Land of rest and peace, (which way God brought
them to humble them, and to prove them: Deuteronomy 8. 2 verse 16.
and that he might do them good in the latter end) they grew impetuous,
murmured, and rebelled against God, and against Moses that led them,
notwithstanding they had been spectators of Gods Almighty power, wonders, and
outstretched arm against the Egyptians, for their deliverance, and sang praises
unto God, that had triumphed gloriously, and thrown the horse and his rider
into Exodus 15. 1.
the Red Sea.

Consider, I pray, can it be well with us of England and Scotland, or with our
great City London, or mutinous Counties, if we shall parallel the Murmurings
and Rebellions of rebellious Israel: Can you, or either of you, forget how you
have groaned under the pressures of an unlimited Prerogative, even whilst it
was but in the infancy of it? Can ye forget how your Laws were stretched upon
the tenters of Prerogative, till they were thin, and weak as spiders webs, and
served only as snares and nets to catch small flies, through which stinging
hornets, and hurtful wasps, brake at pleasure; your Parliaments were broken in
pieces, disgraced, rejected, made useless, as having no consistence with lawles
Prerogative, you know how the ill Counsel of those times bought and sold
Justice, Judges were displaced for doing justly, and for refusing to do
unjustly: They were made to buy their places dear, and suffered to sell their
service dearer, that they might be gainers; No Bribe, no Justice; and the
greatest Bribe, or best Friend, most times prevailed, whether just or unjust:
men's Estates were forced by illegal Taxes, Loans, Knight-money, Forrest-lands,
Timber, Woods, Buildings, Compositions for Cottages, Coat and Conduct-money,
etc. also extreme Taxes by Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, Ship Money, and
infinite Monopolies of all sorts of Commodities, to the overthrow of Trade,
Commerce and Traffic, and ruin of several established Corporations, the whole
Kingdom (as well as London) was sensible of the misery, and groaned under the
burden: What Tradesman in the great City (Master or Apprentice) in those
times, cried not out (in a feeling sense) that they should be all undone? many
thousands complained they were deprived of their Livelyhoods, and of their
Trades for which they served, all looking upon those burdens as remediless,
all Gunpowder, and Arms of defense was at that time denied to the Subject,
Bands of Soldiers were billeted upon the Kingdom in most of the great Towns,
and some Villages, Horses and their Riders were contracted for, and coming from
beyond sea; What to do? but to awe the Kingdom, and to enslave Posterity, no
Foreign was then either envading nor threatening us: How many of our gallant
fideal Gentlemen were drawn by pretenses to the Isle of Ree, and to Cardise,
there lost, betrayed and murdered; ships lent and sold to serve against the
Protestants of France, the Town of Rochel and other places lost, all means used
to weaken us at home, and the Protestants in other Countries, all done to give
way to Popery.

Nor can our Brethren of Scotland forget, how a new old Mass Liturgy was forced
upon them, such as was contrived at Rome, prepared by the arch Enemy
Canterbury, which they refusing, were threatened by an Army; a Parliament in
England was called to raise money to engage in a War with Scotland, the
Parliament refused to contribute in that War, and was presently dismissed, yet
an Army was raised, and Scotland in their defense brought their Army into
England; how much they were engaged to England, for their brotherly love, and
good affections (the people generally refusing to contribute any thing to hurt
them) they cannot but remember; nor can they forget what humble supplicants and
petitioners the Lords and Gentlemen of all Counties of England were in their
behalf, which I hope shall never be repaid by any ill from that Kingdom: I
would reminde them of these things.

Let me again put England in mind of the Plots and Designs of the Hierarchy,
to corrupt our Religion by Superstition and profaneness, you had Canons,
Articles and Lyturgies, given you as gilded pills, to purge out sound Doctrine:
And to plant profaneness, a Book was commanded to be read in all Churches, to
give liberty to profane the holy Sabbath, forbidding afternoon Sermons; and
there was injunctions penal to keep holy Popish Saints days, all Church Service
was adulterated: In a word, Religion was choked with the lawn of Heirarchy,
the mouths of godly Ministers stopped, their persons persecuted, imprisoned,
banished (Bishop Wren will not deny it) as it was with Jeremiah and Baruch in
the days of Jehoiakim, and with Micaiah in the time of Ahab, so was it unto
them, because they spoke the word of God to the people, and said, Go not up to
Ramath-Gilead.

Good men were also cauterized, pillory'd, and stigmatized for like causes; and
who knows but the Protestants in England should intentionally have acted the
first scene in that Bloody Tragedy that Ireland has done; it was not that the
common Enemy had greater love, or more pity to us, but Gods mercy to us; And
shall we now destroy one another?

Consider how we cried out in those times for a Parliament, a Parliament, a
Parliament, saying, Nothing but a Parliament could deliver us, and keep our
posterities from bondage; God gave us a Parliament, and made our Parliament a
blessing to us, till we idolized them; and now because we find they are not
Gods, but men, and men of infirmities, you cry out against Parliaments, and
calumniate them, ready to stone them: O ungrateful people! because God tries
you, as he did the Israelites in the wilderness, to humble you, and will not
suffer the Parliament to establish your peace, so soon as you desire, you will
like the Jews murmr, and sin against God, notwithstrnding God has done very
great and miraculous things for you: Why do you lust and look back to Popery,
and say as the Idolatrous Israelites, It had been better for us Exodus 14. 12.
to serve the Egyptians, then to dye in the wilderness; you would eat the
sweet, but you will not endure to taste of the sour; you would have your sore
healed, but will not endure the plaster; you say many Members in Parliament
are self-seekers, not minding the common good; I pray who sent them thither? If
you were fools in your choice, your backs must bear the fools reward: will you
therefore destroy Parliaments, and make your posterity-Slaves? will nothing
satisfy you now but a King, and a King upon any terms? Truly, I wish and pray
that we may have a King, and a blessing with him, But why do ye cry out as ye
do, A King upon any terms? Is this less then madness in you? you have forgot
the bondage of Egypt, and think only upon the fleshpots, onions and garlic,
etc. O silly men! why do ye break your Covenant with God and men? Take heed ye
be not like Israel in sin, lest ye be like Israel in punishment; they murmured
and were disobedient to God, but therefore they were destroyed by the sword of
the destroyer, Number. 14. 37.
by the Pestilence, by Serpents; Korah and his company were swallowed up by the
earth: consider that the Apostle tells you and me, even all us at this day,
that All those things 1 Cor. 10. 11.
happened for our ensamples, and are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come. Now we know that the many thousands that came out
of Egypt, dyed all in the wilderness, except Joshua and Caleb, and their little
ones that were born in Number. 14. 34. 35.
the desert: Let not us flatter our selves, to think though we do the same
things, that we shall escape; but let us be admonished and do our duties in all
obedience, that it may be well with us in the later end.

I blame none simply for desiring a King, nor for petitioning for a Treaty with
the King; for I wish honor to his person, and bliss to his soul, and so shall
ever pray: But I cannot Idolize any King; Kings are but men, and all men have
failings; what has been, may be again, the burnt child dreads the fire; and
men once deceived, trust not again without assurance: Though Kings cannot err,
their Councels have erred, and for ought we know, will err again; first let
the Kingdom have its rights, which Nature and Law has given to free Subjects,
then make the King as great as he can be, that his Honor and just Greatness may
be ever splendant in Justice and Clemency: God forbid, that because (through
evil Counsel) he has erred, and infringed the Subjects Liberty, that therefore
we his Subjects should utterly cast him off, or take from him or his posterity
any of his or their Rights: I hope none will say, that because his Majesty's
Council (put on by Romes Hierarchy) has caused a War, that we will have no
more a Peace. We know our War was to defend Privileges of Parliament, our
Liberties and Religion (all which are involved in Parliaments) not to destroy
the King, nor his posterity.

But it highly concerns us to take heed what peace is made, and how; for there
is a destructive peace, as there is a depopulating war: And herein we have made
our respective Members in free Parliament, our Judge; and so long as a free
Parliament, and of free Election, we are not to judge their actions, but are
bound to maintain their Freedom and Privilege, for therein stands our Peace
and welfare to our posterities; you know what Jehu said to Joram when he asked
if it were peace, What peace, 2 King. 9. 22.
so long as the Whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so
many? There is no peace says the Lord unto the wicked: Will Isa. 48. 22.
God give peace to a wicked Nation, when blood and oppression, and horrible
hypocrisy cries for vengeance, and for desolation? Blood has defiled the
Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed, but by the
blood of them that shed it: Number. 35. 33.
God is surely making inquisition for blood, and for injustice, as well in
Subjects as Princes; if therefore God will make his arrows drunk with blood,
from the beginning of revenges upon his Deuteronomy. 32. 42.
Enemies, who can withstand it? We have looked for peace, but no good came: and
for a time of health, but behold trouble: For Ier 8. 15.
spoilers and robbers are come upon us, and the sword of the Lord devoureth
from one end of the Land to the other: Therefore we must seek God, repent of
our blood guiltiness and secret robbery, our hypocrisy, and our idolatry, and
purge the Land of polutions, and erroneous damnable Doctrines, or God will cut
off both branch and rush in one day; policy and craft may prosper in a man's
hand, Dan. 8. 25.
and he may magnify himself in his heart, and by peace destroy many; but he
shall be broken without hand: We like Jerusalem have not known the things that
belong to our peace, and they now seem to Luk 19. 42.
be hid from our eyes: but whilst there is life, there is hope, let us
therefore repent and do our first works, lest we, like Judea and Jerusalem, be
destroyed.

Why are we divided in our judgments, and in our practices? some cry out for
the King, and peace upon any terms; other say, Not the King, because he has
against the Law and his Oath, broken his trust, by which three Kingdoms are
imbrewed in their bloods. Peter de la Primanday in his Accademy (who was French
Accadem. par. 1. cap. 39.
Chancellor and Steward of the French Kings house) says, No fault is more
detestable in a Prince then Perjury, for if he that is debtor and pledge for
justice be disloyal, there is no more trust to be given to him in all his
Oaths, but if he be upright, his bare word ought to be to him for a Law: God
himself (says the Master of sentences) is bound by his promises.

Now consider, what answer his Majesty sent to the House of Commons, 31 Dec.
1641. to their desires as touching a Guard; promising by the word of a King,
that the security of them, and every one of them, was and should be as much his
care, as the preservation of himself and children: Yet by the influence of evil
Counselors on Tuesday the 4 of January, 1641. but four days following, (as by
the Declaration of the House appears, touching the breach of privilege of
Parliament) a personal force was made upon the House by about Five hundred
Armed men, who, if his Majesty's clemency (through Gods providence in that
particular) had not transcended their mercy, they had (as some of them then
said) cut See the Declar. of the House of Commons touching the breach of
Privilege, Jan. 17. 1641. See Declar. of Commons 11 Feb. 1647.
all the throats of the Members of the house of Commons: we know also that the
Pacification concluded between the King and our Brethren of Scotland, was by
His evil Council made Null after he came to Court: Protestations and Vows have
been made, That no consent should ever be given to the toleration of Popery,
nor to the abolishing of any Statute made against Papists; yet it is too
evident, that evil Counsel prevailed, so as His Majesty under His own Hand
promises the Queen and the Earl of Ormond, to take away all penal Laws made
against Papists in England and Ireland: Many other things of breach of promise
might be instanced, which I take no delight to divulge; Mercy and truth (says
the wisest of Kings) preserves the King, and is the upholding of his Throne. It
was a good saying of Seneca to N^ro Caesar, Nature, Right and Justice commands
to spare Captives, and such as are bought with money to be Slaves, are to be
justly dealt with; Seneca of clemency l. 1. c. 18.
much more just is it for thee (says he) not to abuse freemen, ingenuous and
honest, but to entertain them as under thy Government, to defend them as
Subjects, etc. In the next Chapter he draws an inference from the King of Bees,
who has no sting, saying, Nature has denied it, because he should not be
cruel, nor seek revenge; he says further, That Clemency will secure a King in
the open field, and his impregnable Fortress is the love of his Subjects,
Seneca of clemency l. 1. c. 19.
when he so behaves himself, as that the Commonwealth is not his, but he the
Commonwealths. The mutual love between Princes and people, is the upholding of
a Commonweal: Well says Seneca to Nero, The King in safety, all men live in
peace,
The King once lost, then Faith and Truth does cease.


Others there are like Lords of the first head, that cry, No King at all, but
Kingly Subjects; but these men know not of what Spirits they are: Let these men
examine themselves, what is become of Conscience, of Charity, and of their
Engagement by Covenant, which binds so to accept of the King with honor and
safety, so far as we may do it with security and preservation of our Laws and
Religion.

Yet let not men be so eager of a King, and of peace, but upon good terms, for
God may give us a King in his anger, and take Hos 13. 11.
him away in his displeasure; let us hold truth with us, though we lose all
besides, and not be like profane Esau, Who sold his Birthright H^b. 11. 16.
for one morsel of meat; nor like the Gadarens that would rather part with
Christ, then their swine: The mad multitude seem like him whose abode was among
the tombs, could not be restrained, nor bound with chains from violence;
consider the saying of the Prophet, If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of Isa. 1. 19. 20.
the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

I know your allegations against the present evils, are in effect what you
complained of under prerogative power (viz.) Arbitrary and Illegal power used
over you, your money exhausted, divided, and given to private purses,
Receivers, Collectors, Committees, Soldiers etc. not brought to strict Account
for the vast sums received, a supernumerous Army maintained by continued Taxes
and Free Quarter, guiltless men accused, and guilty men not questioned, Faction
and Self-interest preferred, public peace and safety neglected, Law and
Covenant wrested, Religion discountenanced, Ministers contemned, Schisms,
Heresy and Blasphemy cherished (at least connived at) public prejudice done
by protections, etc. all which (you say) could not be born with in a King,
therefore cannot be endured by any Subject; from all which you hoped a
Parliament would have freed you, but the remedy is worse then the disease, and
your pressures increased: All great Offices of profit in the Commonweal, are
engrossed into particular men's hands (whose service and attendance ought to be
employed to public benefit) which if executed by private men (reasonable
sallery being allowed them) who have lost their whole livelihoods by the Enemy,
for their fidelity to the Parliament, would in overplus much benefit the
Commonweal, have paid poor windows, mained Soldiers, and much Arrears, etc. but
(as the Prophet says in another case) This is a people robbed and spoiled,
they Isa 42. 22.
are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in Prison-houses, they are
for a prey, and none delivers, for a spoil, and none says, Restore.

Besides, the people are brought into jealousy of a ruling overawing Army, as
it were forcing a Toleration and Liberty to all Sectaries, and their just
Liberty is infringed, etc. The Righteous Amos 2. 6. Isa. 13. 14
are sold for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, therefore the Lord
enters into Judgment with the Ancients of the people, and with the Princes,
for they have eaten up the vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in their
houses: These are your allegations, all which I cannot excuse, for God and men
know many things are not as they ought to be, nor as they might have been; but
for what is now under Parliament pressures, some necessity may be pleaded; and
what was by the Kings evil Counselors, was Will, and their voluntary act to
enslave, that would have been for ever, this is but momentary: It Is true, the
Army in all things are not justifiable, they are but men, and have erred as
men, in Judgment and practice, but have been, and are happy instruments (under
God) to save us from destruction, faithful and victorious, deserving Honor and
Recompense; let the people forget, and the Army repent, God will forgive and
redress all grievances: The causes and cures I shall give you in the proper
place: First give me leave to tell you a Story;

In the time of Romulus King of the Romans, he made a hundred Counselors of
the best and honestest Noblemen; these (when together) were called Senatus, to
whom there were afterward a greater number added, and called Senators; these
were Patrons, Helpers, Defendors and Councelors to the People, counted then a
shame to them to take any Bribe or Reward of the people; this caused great love
and unity among them, the one were Protectors, the other were obedient: But
Romulus growing great and successful, began to be Tyrant-like, the Senators did
nothing, but were called a Council for fashion, not for any Advice or Counsel;
for when assembled, they only heard the Kings pleasure and commandment, and so
departed: This put them upon a desire to have a free State, and not to be
subject only to the rule of a King; shortly after Romulus making Oration to the
people, at a place without the City, the Sun was suddenly darkened, and there
was terrible Thunder, flashings of Lightenings, and mighty Winds, which
separated the people every way one from another, the Senators remaining
together, in which time Romulus vanished away, Plut. life Romulus.
was no more seen alive or dead; when the Storm was past and the day cleared,
the people asked for the King, the Noblemen wished them not to enquire after the
King, but to honor and reverence him, for he was taken up into heaven, some of
the people liked it well, others not satisfied, accused the Senators of making
away the King; after much ado and discontent, one of the Noblemen of good
esteem among the people, whom they held for an honest man, Arguments and by
Oaths affirmed, the King was taken up by the gods into Heaven, to dwell with
them, having built that famous City, and that Romulus should henceforth be
their god, so he appeased all the people: The people afterward not contented
without a King, caused another tumult, about choosing a King, they being of
diverse Opinions; the Senators also were in suspicion one of another, but all
agreed of a necessity to choose a King; and to prevent greater confusion, the
Senators concluded that every one of them should by turns carry the State of a
King, six hours in a day, and six hours at night, the next day another, and so
in order: suspicion still grew in the people, who said, This was a device to
get all Government into a few men's hands: At length to appease all, the people
agreed to choose Numa Pompilius a Sabine, a man of virtue, and wisdom, free
from tovetousness and vice, addicted to divine study, and the exercise of
Justice: Messengers were sent to Numa to entreat him to accept of the Kingdom;
he answered, the change of a man's life was ever dangerous, and for him that
wanted nothing, it was folly to leave a certainty for an uncertainty, casting
many dangers and perils in being a King, with other Allegations of his own
unfitness, etc. The Messengers besought him by many Arguments to accept of it,
and not give any cause of new trouble among the people, seeing all had so
freely chosen him to be their King.

After long perswation Numa accepted of it, came to Rome, the Senate and people
flockt to meet him, the women blessed him, and sang to his praises, Sacrifice
was done for him in the Temples of their gods, and with great joy he was
brought to the Marketplace, where his Election was Proclaimed, and he chosen by
the voice of all the people. Having received the Royal Seat, he dismissed the
guard of Soldiers that was to guard his person, saying, Plut. in life of Pompil.
He would not mistrust those that trusted him, neither would he be King over
people that should mistrust him. Then he began to work upon the affections of
the people, to draw them from violent warlike desires, to quiet life, civility
and meekness in manners, and to the service of the gods; by which peace was
established at home, and with all Nations, all Numa's days.

Let men make their own Application; only observe this, That Differences and
Commotions have been in all Ages, and under all Governments, whether
Monarchical, Aristocracy, Democracy, etc. all have been subject to Tyrannical
Oppression, Injustice and Commotions, by Kings, by Senates, and by the People:
But certain no Kingdom nor Commonweal in the world, had ever any better
Government, for the constitution of well regulated Laws, then England, by King,
Lords and Commons; That there are miscarriages in this Government, is neglect
of Execution, arising either from greedy Oppression and Ambition in the
superior, or from Pride and Disobedience in the inferior, both which are the
defects of this Age.

Now I shall truly show you the causes of all these Distempers, as they are at
this day: We use to say, the disease once known, the cure is easy, if men
will; the first cause is the Devil, he suggests evil surmises, suspicions and
jealousies, leads men into errors, and propounds false ends in designs, by this
we are divided and confounded; the Scriptures term him to be an Adversary, a
Tempter, and a Murderer, etc. he is subtle in tempting, therefore called the
Old serpent, the Red dragon, he is a fawning Fox, and a devouring Lion, his
Government is only in this world, therefore called, The god of this world, and
he rules only over such men 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. 1 John 3. 8. Ioh. 1. 44
Ps. 52. 3.
as are in darkness, therefore called, The spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience; and they that (willingly) commit sin, are said to be
of the Devil, therefore wicked men that are his children (like him) love evil
more then good, and delight in lies more then to speack truth; he has also
many baits to ensnare men, sometime he propounds Honor, sometime Riches,
sometime Praise and Pleasure, etc. his mouth was full of this when he came to
tempt Christ, All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me
(or if we will but worship God in his way) yea he brings this Scripture too, It
is written, says he, thus and thus: When men give way to any temptation of the
Devil, they forsake the truth, and not receiving the truth in the love of it,
is the 2 Thessalonians: 2. 10, 11.
cause why God sends strong delusions to believe lies, and are given over to
their own lusts; then God says of a man or a nation, as of Israel, Lo-ammi, Ye
are not my people, and I will not be your God. Hos. 1. 9


The second cause of our distempers is, our corrupt nature, which is prone to
rceeive all evil from Satan, as the earth the seed cast into it, or the tinder
at fire every spark; the Devil casts in the seed, corrupt Nature brings forth
increase, he strikes the flint, and corrupt Nature makes it a flame; corrupt
Nature is prone to delight in new things, and Satan always puts fair and
specious shows upon every error, he casts them by the mould of truth, but ever
adds or adminisheth, and that he brings under the notion of new truths, for
Satan can be (and doubtless is at this day) transformed 2 Cor. 11. 14. Mat. 24.
24.
into an Angel of light, and so works upon men's fancies, That if it were
possible, he should deceive the very Elect.

The third cause is, evil men, Papists, Jesuits, Jews, Libertines, profane
Worldlings, and all other seduced Schismatical Seducers that hate all
Reformation, because they love not the truth; these are Satan's instruments,
children of darkness, and hate the children of light, they hold counsels
against them, make conspiracies, use diabolical divinations, pretend
prophesies, revelations and miracle; some to broach false tenants, seeming to
be zealous for Christ, but are his enemies, others to raise discontents and
disobedience in the people, against the powers ordained by God, they invent
lies, scandal, and foment jealousy, to make factions and divisions both in
Church and State, and have influence into great Councels, Societies and
Families, yea, into our Victorious Army, where by division they have staggered
more, then any power of the sword could ever have done; these are interwoven
with us in disguised shapes, they are Presbyterians in the extremes, and
Independents to all looseness of liberty and slighting of duty, tell you that
you are in Christ (if you be as they) and cannot sin, nor ought to pray for
pardon, that Christ dyed for all equally, for Judas as for Peter; that
Revelations, and the motions of the Spirit (not Scripture) are your Rule to
walk by, denying the Morallity of the Law, question whether the soul be mortal
or immortal; that men have free will to repent, and to be saved; that the
Christian Sacraments are no way necessary, and that rebaptizing is lawful and
necessary; that the Lords day is no more to be observed then any other day;
that our godly Ministers are not Ministers of Christ, but their calling
Antichristian, with a hundred more gross errors, destructive to the foundation
of true Religion; all which they have spirits abroad to infuse into men, as
they find their natural lusts inclined, by which they have brought confusion
not only in Counsels, Societies, Cities, and our Victorious Army, but in all
families, so as we err, and err exceedingly, both in judgment and practice:
Take it for certain, there are many hundred Jesuits at this day among us, and
have overspread the whole Kingdom of England (I will not believe Scotland is
free) they are in all places like the frogs of Egypt, even in the Saints
conventicles (as some call them) and it may be in our common pulpits sometimes;
these are they that speak evil of Authority, and cast reproaches upon the
Ministry, to bring Law and Gospel into contempt, and to set up new lights, and
new Government in the world; they spread the failings of Parliament abroad to
the ears of all countries, and belie them grossly, make every mole^il a
mountain, seem to divine their intentions, and belie the very truth, set the
kingdom in hurliburly, put whole counties to petition in unseemly manner, to
command Requests, and to request things not to be granted without ruin, and
thereby think to work ruin by the denial, all to hinder setlement, reformation
and peace, and to bring in Popery in the crowd, among the rest of their old
heresies newly revived; these like Jannes and Jambres, who withstood Moses,
withstand and resist 2 Timothy 3. 8.
the truth, being armed with all the power and policy of hell and Rome; but
their great Masterpiece has been to break the union between England and
Scotland, as it was Romes endeavors for many years to hold them from
conjunction, and was no small disheartning to them when they became conjoined:
What our brethren will do I know not, I will not prejudge a Kingdom, they have
been true, and I hope will be ever, but Barwick and Carlisle ought not to be
held in Garrison; our Covenant is with God, as well as one with another, and the
Kirk to their everlasting praise uphold it, If it were but a man's covenant, yet
if it be confirmed, no Gal. 3. 15 Lev 26. 25.
man disanulleth, but God is a just God, and will avenge the quarrel of his
Covenant on him that transgresses: I would say to England and Scotland, as
Abraham said to Lot, Let there be no Genesis 13. 8.
strife between you, for you are Brethren, and so are your Armies too^ if you
jar to blood, you will commit two great evils, you will both fight for your
enemies that will destroy you both, and you (or one of you) will incur Gods
judgments upon your posterities: I pray remember what the Lord himself says,
I will give the men Ier. 34. 18, 19.
that have transgressed my Covenant, and have not performed the words of the
Covenant which they made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, etc. I
will even give them into the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of them
that seek their life, and they shall be meat for the fowls, and for beasts,
etc. Will you destroy your selves, because the enemy could not do it? consider
the saying of that wise and able Soldier Sir Jacob Ashley, when Routed and
taken near Stowe, speaking to Colonel Morgan, and to gallant Major Hawksworth,
and others, Gentlemen (said be) you may now put up your sword, for the War is
done, we are able to do no more by the power of an Army, except you fall out
among your selves; this was a fair warming, he was more our friend in speaking
it, then we to our selves in contending: Know that this is the Jesuits Maxim,
First divide, then conquer: History tells us, Rome by this means has gained
more Kingdoms then by the sword, and this is the design at this day.

Now let England and Scotland say as Joab said to Abishai, If the Assyrians be
too strong for me, then thou shall help me, but if ^am. 10. 11.
the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, I will come and help thee; thus
you have Covenanted, and woe to you if you do it not: Whether one or the other,
whilst united, none can hurt you, once disjoined, you are both destroyed.

There is yet one cause more, and that is God, he is the cause of all causes:
Let the instrument be what, or who it will, by which a man, a family, a people
or Kingdom is afflicted or destroyed, God is the effecient cause, men nor
devils can do nothing without God; they are but Gods executioners of wrath, and
judgment for sin, but the rod in Gods hand, Assyria is but the rod of Gods
anger: Isa. 10. 5.
Sickness, pain, imprisonment, loss of goods, war, pestilence, famine, and all
afflictions whatsover, are from God; to some for chastisement, by which they
learn righteousness; to others as judgments, to punish and to destroy, Is
there any evil (says God) Am. 3. 9
in the city, and I have not done it? (that is, evil of punishment, not evil of
sin) God forms the light, and creates darkness, makes peace, Isa. 45. 7. Is. 42
24
and creates war, Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did
not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? when God will punish a sinful
people, by the ill Government of Kings and Princes, He leads away Counselors
spoiled, and makes Judges Job 12. 17
fools; when Israel will be hypocrites, to draw near unto God with their
mouths, and remove their hearts far from him, God will make the wisdom of the
wise to perish, and the understanding Isa. 29. 14.
of the prudent shall be hid: When God will punish a King for oppression, that
King shall hearken to evil Council, and refuse the good Counsel of grave and
wise men; so did Rehoboam, and los^ ten tribes, the text says, The thing was
done of the Lord: When 1 King. 12. 18 4.
God will bring the sword upon wicked Counselors, and upon a Nation together,
he can make void all the Counsels of Judah and Jerusalem; When Israel devised
mischief, and gave wicked Counsel, Ier. 19. 7.
God turns that wickedness to effect his own purpose, and by it brings a sword
upon themselves and the people: The Princes Ezekiel. 11. ver. 2. 8.
of Zoan became fools, and the Princes of Noph were deceived, that they erred
in every work, the text says, It was God that mingled Isa. 19. 13, 14. Job.
34. 29.
a perverse spirit among them: When God gives quietness (says holy Job) who
can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who can behold him? whether it
be done against a nation, or against a man only.

When the sins of an impenitent people provoke God, to bring destroying
judgments upon that nation, he withdraws his common restraining grace from
men, and leaves them to their own lusts (he will punish sin with sin) wicked
men shall act according to their own several lusts, and grow more wicked,
oppressing, killing and reviling one another, till they be like Judea and
Jerusalem, Vid. Josep. bell. Jud. lib. 6. and lib. 7
destroyed one by another, and at last made a spoil and a prey to the enemy:
When a lying spirit is put into the mouth of a Ministry, as in Ahabs 400.
prophets, expect speedy ruin and desolations; or if men and Armies will go
against the word of God pronounced by the mouth of Gods messengers, they are
not likely to prosper, but like Ahab miscarry in their confidence; but to all
that are godly, and of upright hearts, I say with the Prophet, Fear Isa. 45. 4.
not, be strong, behold your God will come with vengeance, even God, with a
recompense he will come and save you: This is the time of Gods indignation, he
will punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, the earth shall
also disclose her bloods, and shall no more cover her slain, it will be but for
a moment (the time is appointed by God) and the indignation shall be overpast:
Believe in the Lord 2 Chro. 20. 20.
your God, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets, so shall you
prosper.

God (now in special manner) calls his people to humiliation, to repentance, and
reformation of sin; when Gods hand was upon whole Israel in the days of David,
he enquired the cause (he knew it was for sin, for God only punishes for sin)
and the Lord revealed to him that it was for Saul and his bloody house, because
2 Samuel 21. 1.
he slew some of the Gibeonites, contrary to Covenant; it was many generations
before Saul's time, that Joshua and the Princes of Israel had made a covenant
with the Gibeonites, Saul swore not to it, and Joshua was forbid to make any
league with them, yea, the Gibeonites engaged Joshua and the Princes by craft;
and further, the people of Israel swear not unto it, but after three days (when
their craft was discovered) murmured because of the Oath; not withstanding all
this, Joshua durst not make null that Covenant; And why? Least (faith he) wrath
be upon us because See Joshua chap. 9. 8
of the oath, not so much as put one of them to death, who had by craft
deceived them.

We know when our Enemies were strong, and we very weak, the Kingdom of England
invited the Kingdom of Scotland to our assistance, they as wilingly came, but
desired a perfect union of both Kingdoms, and to that end a Solemn League and
Covenant was entered into by both, and joyfully received, not only sworn unto
by our Nobles, Knights and Gentlemen, but generally by all the people (or by
sinful negligence omitted) the command is warrantable by Scripture, Whosoever
would not Covenant to seek the 2 Chro. 15. 13.
Lord, should be put to death, whether small or great: In our Covenant we swear
Reformation, Ecclesiastical, and Personal defense of Religion against the
common Enemy, Reformation in Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, etc.
according to Gods word, and the best Reformed Churches: And we have sworn
(every one for himself) to endeavor the nearest conjunction that can be in the
three Kingdoms in Religion, Form of Government, Directory of Worship, etc. as
shall be found most consonant with Scripture, not as it is established in
Scotland, or any other Reformed Church, except in trial they be found the best;
and herein the Kingdom of Scotland is to alter (as well as England) any thing
not fully agreeing with Gods Word: Now he that has not endeavored this, and
does not still endeavor it, has broken his Covenant; but such as have opposed
it (let their pretense be what it will) are guilty of perjury before the high
and holy God.

2. We have sworn to endeavor to extirpate Popery, and Prelacy, and Church
Government by Prelavical Bishops, etc. and also to extirpate Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine,
and the power of godliness: Therefore, he or they who look back to Popery, or
that endeavor not to the uttermost to abolish all Popish Superstition, and
suppress, Heresy, Schisms and Blasphemy, violate their Oath; but they that
endeavor to support either Popery, Prelacy, Heresy or Schism, are injurious to
God, to his Truth, and to the Kingdom; and of such God will surely avenge his
Covenant.

3. We have sworn to endeavor with our Estates and Lives (every one for
himself) mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and
the Liberties of the Kingdom^: Consider, how many among us may be taxed in this
particular, for false swearing and for prefidious persons; 1. They that
endeavor not to assist the Preservation of Parliament Privileges: 2. They that
make breaches, and join with them that do, as too many have done, of Soldiers,
Apprentices of City and Country: 3. The Liberty of the Subject, which many for
Self-interest infringed; this latter we know is involved in the former: 4. They
that shall or have endeavored to bring His Majesty to the sole rule of the
Kingdom, till assurance be given to the Parliament, of the Preservation of
Religion, and of the Subjects Liberty for future, are Covenant-breakers, and
may be deemed as enemies to posterity; but security once given to the
Parliament, God forbid that Parliment or people should desire to diminish any
thing in His Majesty's just power and greatness.

4. We swore, that we wo^^ endeavor that all Incendiaries, Malignants, evil
Instruments, that hinder Reformation of Religion, divide the King from His
People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or that make Factions and Parties
among the People, contrary to the Covenant, may be brought to condign
punishment, etc. What shall we say or think of this, when any one Kingdom shall
not only not bring to punishment such persons, but connive at them, and suffer
them among them, though they are, and have been known Enemies and Incendiaries,
Hinderers of Reformation, and Dividers between both Kingdoms, to set them
together in blood, and that make Factions and Parties among the People,
contrary to the Covenant, Is not this a breach of the Covenant, and dishonor to
the most high God before whom we have sworn?

5. We have acknowledged it a great mercy and blessing, that the Peace is
concluded and settled between the two Kingdoms (such as God denied to our
Progenitors) and therefore swore to endeavor, the two Kingdoms may remain
conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterities, and that Justice may be
done upon the wilful opposers thereof, if so, Who dare break this Union,
whether Kingdom (without perjury) can attempt a War, or draw a sword against
the other, except first he were set upon, and that no pacification could be
made (and I hope neither Kingdom will blame me for what I write) I have entered
into the same Covenant, and am bound by my Covenant to endeavor the Peace and
Union, though it prove my prejudice, it is my duty, which to neglect were to
incur Gods displeasure, and just judgment upon my self.

6. We did swear, In this common cause of Religion, Liberty, and peace of the
Kingdoms, to assist and defend all that entered into this Covenant, in pursuance
thereof, and not to suffer our selves by persuasion or terror, to be divided or
drawn from this conjunction, nor to be neuters in this cause, but to continue
in it all the days of our lives against all opposition: Now let every man, and
both Kingdoms lay it to heart, and consider how base and cowardly they have
been (I mean not all) to own this Covenant, and to act according as they have
sworn, I utter it with grief; I know many that have taken it, are quite fallen
from it, some to the left hand, some to the right hand; all w^^h God sees, and
will once exact an account of every man, For God is not mocked; deceive not
your selves, Gods Honor and Justice is engaged in it, Judgment Hos. 10. 3
shall spring up (upon them) as hemlock in the furrows of the field, that have
sworn falsely in making a Covenant.

I find recorded in the Turkish History a remarkable story, That after a long
War between Vladislaus King of Hungary, a Christian, (but a Papist) and Amurath
Emperor of Turkey, Vladislaus made a Pea^e with Amurath, and entered into a
Covenant, which was interchangeably given in writing; but the King of Hungary
was persuaded by Julian a Cardinal, to violate that Covenant, which he did, and
at great advantage, secretly and speedily prepared a mighty Army, and fell upon
the Turks territories; the Emperor of Turkey hearing of it, as soon as he could,
prepared to oppose him, they came to a field hatrel, and the Turks lost many
men, so that the Emperor and his whole Army were in danger, at last the Emperor
seeing a Crucifix in one of the King of Hungaries Banners, he plucked forth of
his bosom the Writing and Covenant which he had received from the King of
Hungary, and holding it up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to heaven, said
these words (Behold thou crucified Christ, is this the League thy Christians in
thy name made with me which they have without cause violated? if thou be a God,
as they say thou art, revenge the wrong done unto thy name, and to me, and show
thy power upon thy perfulious people, who in their deeds deny thee their God:
This said, the battle grew fierce on both sides, Vladislaus was wholly and
totally routed, himself slain by a Janizary, and great numbers of the
Christians slaughtered: Consider this example, England and Scotland: and as
Christ said to his Disciples, Remember Lots wife; So say I, Remember Vladislaus.

Tissaphernes, Lieutenant to the King of Persia, broke a truce which he made
with the Grecians; the Grecians sent him thanks by his own Herald, saying, he
had thereby engaged the gods, in whose name the truce was sworn, to be on their
side: Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia made a truce with the Argians for seven
days, but did it with deceitful equivocation, meaning to take advantage of the
night; And so did, for the third night when the Argians were secure, and
asleep, he fell upon them, and was afterward beaten, and his Army scattered by
the women of the City of Argos, in revenge of their husbands that he had
treacherously slain, and after this, Cleomenes killed himself with a knife.

It would be great happiness, if England would enquire as holy David did,
wheter Gods hand now against us, be not for our breach of Covenant, (though not
National, for I hope better, but as to particular men it is manifest) Consider,
I pray, why is it that the common people of England rise up tumultuously
against Authority, and Privileges of Parliament, contrary to their Covenant?
is it not a just Judgment from God, because Authority have been remiss in
their Covenant, and many have absolutely broken it with God; therefore God
suffers a Covenant Breaking people to break Covenant with them, now
tumultuously risen against them in ESSEX, SVRREY, KENT, etc. that God may
destroy the one by the other: If it be so, it concerns every man to humble
himself before God, renew his Covenant, and in the strength of the Almighty, to
resolve to keep it to the death: or let it be done to the persisters in
breaking, as to the seven Sons of Saul; for if we suffer the Covenant to be
broken, We cannot prosper, nor shall we be delivered: Besides consider, Ezekiel.
17. 15. Isa. 26. 9.
we are not only reformed, Nor have learned righteousness, though Gods
judgments are in the earth, and upon our selves; but are grown more impious in
finning then before; I will Instance in ten particulars, for God which is now
in controversy with us.

First, Pride; pride of the inward man, or of the outward man, is a sin
transcendent to what it has been, witness men's and women's high conceits of
themselves, boastings of gifts, etc. Their high looks, antic gestures, etc.
Their new invented fashions, rich Clothes, painted and spotted Faces, costly
Coaches, and empty Purses, etc. Pride we know is a sin of Sodom, God hates it,
makes war against it, He resists the proud, therefore says, He Iam. 4. 6. Ier.
13. 9 2 Chro. 32. 25.
will mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem: God says, for
the pride of the women, the men shall salt by the sword, and mighty men in the
war, the pride of Hezekiahs hear caused wrath upon all Israel.

Secondly, Covetousness; This is a sin no less hateful to God, then hurtful to
men; but never more evidently seen to rage in men, then at this day: Witness
men in places of trust in the Commonweal, see if (as the Prophet says) From
the least to the Ier. 6 13
greatest, every one be not given to covetousness; Covetousness is a sin that
excludes men from the Kingdom of Heaven when they dye, Ephesians 5. 15 Ier. 8. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
and covetous men are burdens to the earth while they live, The love of money
causes men to err from the faith, and pierce themselves through with many
sorrows.

Thirdly, Oppression; This sin and the fear of God are opposite, they dwell not
together in one Kingdom, Thou shall not Levit. 25. ^7.
oppress, but thou shall fear thy God; Where the fear of God is, there is no
oppression; where oppression is, there is no fear of God: Oppressors are in
Scripture set forth by nature and names of cruel Beasts, Bulls, Bears, Wolves,
Dogs, Kine of Bashan, etc. Now let me appeal to all men, if there were ever
more beasts of this kind in this Kingdom, Are there not sound amongst us
wicked Ier. 6. 26, 27, 28.
men that lay wait as he that sets snares: they set a traps they catch men,
their houses are full of deceit, they are become greats and waxen rich, etc.

Fourthly, Robbery is a sin abounding in England, open and secret Robberies are
committed and connived at; many more have been Executed for Robbing then now,
but never so many Robbers as now; they that will crucify Christ, will set
Barra^^^ free; there are men not only like the men of Shechem, liers in wait
in the mountains, but those that rob the Kingdom by a kind of Toleration, yea,
that rob the poor and the fatherless, That turn Isa. 10. 2.
the needy from judgment, that widows may be their prey; yea, they will be
found to be robbers of Gods people distressed in Ireland, and some will even
rob God himself. Mal. 3. 8.


5. Murder; This is a crying sin, it cried to Heaven against us, before our
great afflictions came upon us, and now it cries double as much as before; it
called the Sword upon us, and the Sword has increased our guilt: God stirred
up the Caldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and children of Ammon against Jeboiakim, to
avenge the blood that Manasseh had shed in his days; the blood of Rochel, and
of Germany, still cries against England, and the blood of Ireland will not be
satisfied, but blood for blood: Ireland once bled by Massacre, now bleeds by
flattery; we feed them with words, but destroy them by withholding actions; the
contenders for Self interest, and unjust Stewards in England, are the
slaughtermen of consumed Ireland: Not to save, is to kill, this is not to
cleanse the Land of blood, but to make it more bloody; we would not endure to
be so dealt with.

6. Excess; In eating and drinking to gluttony and drunkenness, it has long
been Englands sin, but is now greatly aggravated by the circumstance of time;
God by his great scourge calls us to humiliation, To fasting, and to weeping,
but behold feasting and drinking Isa. 22. 19.
wine in bowls, lie upon beds of ivory, invent instruments of music, eat the
lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall, for this
cause God said, He hated the excellency Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. Verse. 8.
of Jacob, and abhorred his palaces, and says, Therefore will I deliver up
the City, and all that is therein: God may as justly deal so with us, and will
if we reform not, And lay to heart the afflictions of Joseph, and relieve the
objects of pity, every hour before us, who have lost all, but they give nothing
that have gained much.

7. Whoredom; A sin punished by death by Gods Law, and the sinner shut out from
heaven by Christ's Gospel, but in England neither punished, nor excluded from
the seat of Justice at this time; he is counted gallant company, that will
whore, and boast of it when he has done; remember Zimri and Cosbi, that sin
cost Number. 25 ^.
twenty four thousand lives, themselves also slain for that sin by Phinehas.

8. Profanation of the Lords day; A sin of which this Kingdom has been much
guilty in many parts of it, and is at this day, by doing the works of our
calling, using sports, and recreations for pleasure, idle speaking, and
omission of holy worship, contrary to the precept, Thou shall not do thine own
work, nor speak Is^ 58. 13.
thine own words, but shall honor God wholly on that day. But of late days men
are so impious, that they deny the Command to keep it holy, as if God had
neither appointed a time for public worship, nor required any worship of us,
but after our own wills.

9. Contempt of the Ministry; What opposition corrupt nature has made against
the Ministry, we know in all times; but when, or in what Kingdom was it ever
more opposed then now? except in Jerusalem, till Gods wrath arose against them
without 2 Chro. 36. 16.
remedy, and in Germany (a little before the desolation of that Monarchy) by
the Anabaptists, who have been cherished in England for such a purpose: Those
Ministers by whose Ministry they were converted (if converted at all) are by
them contemned and despised, their Ministry abhorred as old truths, common
things, nothing but new errors and heresies will serve them; these men do but
their kind, and I complain not so much of them, as that they are suffered to
disturb a Commonweal, and be a stumbling block to weak Christians (I mean not
such as only dissent in matter of Ceremony or Circumstance, but such as err
in Doctrine) some are to be cast out according to the Apostles rule, by
excommunication, that is, such as are Church members; There are others, such as
are not properly Church members, yet live within the pale of the Church,
turbulent to the State, and the peace of the Kingdom, that seduce souls to
error, and to rebellion, under the notion of Religion; these are to be dealt
with by the Civil Magistrate, and that sharply, I would Gal. 5. 12.
(says the Apostle) they were even cut off that trouble you; he means not by
Excommunication, for that he and the Church had power to have done, but not to
punish as a Magistrate ought in such a case: The Prophet that did seduce any to
false Worship, was by the Law put to death, not by Aaron, but by Moses; If
Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Verse. 9.
any Brother, Son, Sister, Wife, Friend, etc. should entice any man to false
Worship, he or they was to be put to death without pity: I say not that error
nor all heresy is to be punished with death, though all to be suppressed by
penal Laws, and punished according to the offense and nature: The Apostle Peter
urging the duty of Christians to the Magistrate, says, It is the will of God
to submit; he means not Thieves, Murderers, Blasphemers, etc. but Christians
within the Church, such as Christ had made free, therefore he says, As free,
and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15
There is a liberty left in matter of Discipline, but no liberty given to
particular men to repugn that Discipline that is established by the Magistrate,
not disagreeing from Gods word, much more in matter of Doctrine, nor do I say,
any particular man doubting shall be compelled or punished, but exhorted from
day to day, except he labor to draw others, and thereby the peace of the Church
and State be disquieted; if so, such ought to be curbed by the sword of the
Magistrate, and this cannot be said, is to punish for conscience, nor for
opinion, but for turbulency.

The Church of Thyatira is reproved for suffering that woman Jezabel, that
called her self a Prophetess, to seduce the people to error: Pergamos for
suffering erroneous Doctrine, is threatened sharply; The error of the seven
Churches of Asia, caused God to depart and to remove the Candlestick from them;
Rome once Christian, by permitting one error then error begetting error, she
became Antchristian: There is a propinquity between error and error, and
between error and heresy; one ushereth in the other, and a multitude follows
at their heels, experience shows it and we know (except any be wilful igno
ant) that our present errors and diversity of opinions, have been spread by the
subtilty of the common enemy, whilst they have united themselves against us,
and is their sole refuge and ground of their confidence, that by which they
have divided the Parliament among themselves, lost the peoples affections to
them, alienated one friend from another, and made one man jealous of another,
that we are grown to discord, and scattered as a people without a head, like
sheep without a shepherd.

Lastly, The sin of Self-love, a known iniquity of all times, and mother of
Mischief, now a destroying sin in this Kingdom, I may say of three Kigdoms, all
lying upon the bed of languishing; it is a sweet sin, whilst the sinner
pleases himself in it, but afterward fills the mouth with gravel: it produces
most bitter fruits, Prove. 20. 17.
like that which Eve eat in the garden of Eden, kills all; Selflove is said to
be blind, it sees not to Judge it self and in Judging others is always
partial; How then can it be well when selflovers judge all things? If any man
(says Christ) will follow me, let him deny himself; he that denies not himself
cannot be Christ's Mat. 16. 24. Mark 8. 34.
Disciple, and he that is not Christ's Disciple, is not one of his members
therefore cannot be a good Member of the Commonweal; other Members may dye, the
body be sick, but he knows it not, he owns it not: As was said of Ephraim, so
may be said of England Gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it
Hos. 7 9.
not; Self-love and self-interest has devoured his strength, and he is brought
to the last gasp.

The remedy is clear, if the forenamed sins be the cause; take Ps. 25. 10. Isa.
57. 15
away the cause, and the effect will cease: Keep thy Covenant with God and man
conscionably, Extirpate Pride, and plant Humility Isa. 58. 6.
in the room, Hate covetousness, Do good to all, Oppress none, Loose the bands
of wickedness, Undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, Take
nothing from any man; if Luke 19. 8. and 3. 14. Ps 51. 14
you have taken any thing falsely, restore it as Zacheus did; Let the Soldier
offer violence to none, neither to Law, nor to Religion, but be content with
wages; Seek pardon from heaven for Blood guiltiness, redeem the time past by
vigilance, and double endeavors for time to come, to preserve the lives of them
yet living, especially those in Joseph's afflictions, now in jeopardy in
Ireland; Be temperate in the use of all Gods creatures; use every 1 Thessalonians. 5.
6. Ephesians. 5. 18 Pro 2. 16 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
thing with sobriety, moderation and thanksgiving; Let not that which God gave
to cheer the heart, destroy the soul; Keep thy self from the evil woman, from
the flattering of the tongue of the strange woman; Abstain from all fleshly
lusts, and from all appearances of evil; Worship God in Spirit and in Truth,
Sanctify his Sabbath, and sanctify your days of Humiliation; Humble your
selves, and afflict your souls, they are days of atonement and Lev. 23. 27.
Reconciliation, then make them not formal only, as mock-Fasts, but holy
convocations, reverence Gods Ministers, sent of God with 2 Thessalonians. 5. 13. Mat.
10. 41. Mark 8. 34.
tidings of peace, Honor them for their Office, and for their works sake, as
those that labor and watch for your souls; Receive a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, and you shall have a Prophets reward; Deny thy self, take up the
cross, and follow Christ: Happy were it if all that are in Authority would deny
themselves in action, as in words, Deny their profits, their self-honor, and
all self-interests, Pro. 13. 10.
and seek the public good; by pride comes contention, and self-interest
causes quarrels, humble your selves before God, and 1 Pe. 5. 6.
he will exalt you: but if you seek honor, it will fly from you; God will honor
them that honor him: Consider this promise, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
If my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves, and pray and
seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will 2 Chro. 7. 14. Pro.
16. 7.
I hear in heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land: when a
man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him:
This is the sure and never-failing healing Plaster; apply it, ye Physicians,
and heal the Kingdoms before they be past cure.

In the next place, because there is a Disease that men call The Kings Evil,
which they say none can heal but the King; and because His Majesty has offered
some (...) to it, let Addresses be made unto Him again and again, in the Name
of three diseased Kingdoms: In the morning (says the Wise man) so^ thy seed,
Eccle. 11. 6.
and in the evening withhold not thine hand; for thou know not whether shall
prosper; this or that etc. All blessings are from God, The Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord, (...) Pro. 21. ^.
soever he will: If Kings have a gift to heal, Kings being nursing-fathers to
their People, you that are Physicians, that cannot agree upon the cure, humbly
supplicate to the King for a touch: if he shall refuse, tell his people, to
secure just Rights, for people chose Kings to defend them, to maintain their
Rights, and to heal their sores, not to destroy them, or infringe their
Liberties, nor to hurt them any way, against which Parliaments are the peoples
security, and may not be prejudiced: If the King secure the peoples Rights, and
the people and A^my obey the Parliament, the work is ended: but sores neglected
often ulcer, and become incurable. Add hereunto, the change of country,
Committees, tyrannical as Pharaohs Taskmasters over the people, that create
Malignants, as Pick-pockets make Tumults: so long as Oppression is kept up,
Insurrections and Rebellions cannot be kept down: The Wiseman says, For the
transgr^^sion of a Land, many a^e the Princes thereof: Pro. 28. 2. Chap. 28. 15.
As a roaring Lion and a raging Heart, so is a wicked Ruler over the people:
Many Rulers is a burden, and one roaring Lion is fearful; case the one, and
take heed of the other, lest we be torn in pieces, and there be none to deliver
us: A Lion has roared, Amo. 3. 8
who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? There is a
time to kill, and a time to heal, a time to break down, and Eccl. 3. 3. Eccl.
8. 6.
a time (...) And because to every purpose there is a time, (man not knowing
that time, ^isseth it) therefore the misery of m Eccele. 9 12.
n in great upon the earth: And the sons of men are snared in an Eccle. 9 12.
evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them as fishes that are taken in an
evil net, and birds that are caught in a snare: As men, so Monarchies and
Kingdoms have their ebbes and flows, and their periods too. God has appointed
their times of change, and the means of their ruin; He increases the Nations,
and destroys Job 12. 23.
them; he inlargeth the Nations, and straitneth them again. At what instant I
shall speak concerning a Nation, to pull down and to destroy it, if that Nation
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them:
And at what instant I shall Ier. 18. 7. 8, 9, 10
speak concerning a Nation, to build and to plant it, if that Nation do evil in
my sight, and obey not my voice. I will repent of the good wherewith I said I
would benefit them: Yet let not him that puts on his Armor boast, for the
battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift.

FINIS.

