BLOODY NEVVES FROM IRELAND, OR The barbarous Cruelty BY the Papists used in
that KINGDOM.

By putting men to the svvord, deflovvring Women, and dragging them up and
down the Streets, and cruelly murdering them, and thrusting their Speeres
through their little Infants before their eyes, and carrying them up and down
on Pike-points, in great reproach, and hanging Men's quarters on their Gates in
the Street, at Armagh, Logall, at the Fort of Lease, and diverse other Places in
Ireland.

As also, the Bloody Acts of Lord Mack-queere their Ri^g-leader, and Cousin to
that Arch-Rebell Mack-queere General to Tyron, in the time of Queen Elizabeth
of never dying memory.

Related by James Salmon lately come from thence, who has lived there with his
wife and children, these 10 years last past, and now to escape the
Bloodthirsty Rebels, made an escape away by night, who is here resident in
this City, December. the 1. 1641.

London, Printed for Mark Rookes, and are to be sold in Grubstreet, ne^^e to
the Flying Horse, 1641.

FIrst, the reason of the unprovidednesse of the Protestants in Ireland, to
defend themselves against the Rebels.
THe Lord Deputy Wentworth (in his lifetime) disarmed the subjects there.
There was a Proclamation set forth by him at the Parliament in Ireland: that
neither English nor Irish, should either sell or keep in their houses any
powder, upon the loss of goods and life; neither any Arms whatsoever: save
only what was allowed, and to be had with leave from the Kings Storehouse in
Dublin, pretending thereby to keep the Natives under, and to prevent such
mischiefs as might arise, if they were not thus curbed, and kept down.

By this means, the Protestants could not have any provision for defense; for
powder they could not have, without danger of life, and goods as aforesaid:
only except they could procure a License from Sir John Burlacie, and after
great friends and trouble, they could have but 5 pound of powder at the most,
and that at two shillings a pound. So that whereas the English formerly had
Arms, shot and powder, to defend their houses, lives, and estates: now it
being taken from them, and they left naked, it proves thus the ruin of the
poor Protestants there.

2 The cause of their sudden rising.
The cause or their sudden rising, as it is supposed by the English inhabited
in Ireland, was by their taking exception at a Petition drawn by some reverend
Ministers in Ireland, presented to the Parliament in England, to this effect.

That in every parish where there is a protestant Minister, there is likewise a
popish priest, which is very true, and more then that, there is also in every
parish a Friar, a Monk, and an Abbot: besides, with many more in several
Abbeys, do resign three or fourscore in a Friars house.

Also, in every Diocese whereas the King has a Bishop, so has the pope also
another: which has caused this lamentable effect there, that whatsoever the
King does command, the popish Clergy do forbid, the consideration whereof made
a worthy Judge there, not long since to say ( Judge Cresey by name) this is
quoth he a miserable case, desiring the Gentlemen of the Gran-jury to present
that grievance.

It is also reported in Ireland, that there is fifty two thousand pounds a
year, that goes out of Ireland to the Pope: that is 1000-l. a week, a great
sum of money, and of dangerous consequence.

3 The first rising of the Rebels.
The first rising was in the County of Farmanar, the Lord Maquare being the
chief Agent in their Rebellion, who lived about 13 miles from Beltur bit
Northward, toward Eniskillen, which Lord Maquare is since taken, and now
prisoner in the Castle at Dublin, he is of the blood of that great Traitor,
Maquere the General of Terhones Army, that great Rebel to Queen Elizabeth.

The first morning which was of their rising, was suspected from the words of
one Daniell Caton of Mountragh, which was to this effect: that the times were
better when the strongest men had most, and that he (being a great Irish
papist) did hope to see it so again ere long: whereupon he was examined by Mr.
Vlmstid, Minister of the said Mountragh, and Justice of peace for the County,
and by him committed to prison, till the next Sizes: at which time he was
censured to stand in the pillory, which he did at the Fortilesse in the Market
place, which he would not confess any thing: only what was gathered upon
comectures.

Another, one Dono Glay was hanged, drawn, and quartered, at Bandon bridge,
for saying that the Crown of Ireland was too good for the King of England,
or to that effect.

And now have the Rebels camped themselves, rising in rebellion, to do what
they can to ruin the Protestants in that Kingdom.

They rose in the night, and marched toward Belturbit with a running Camp,
which Town they took and also the L^die But^ers Castle, where she and her child
en were; but (by the providence of God) made an escape, and got away. Mr. Rodes
the Minister with some other also m^de an escape, and fled into a wood near
the said Castle and there hid themselves, and the rest of the English remaining
in the town, were forced to yield it up to the Rebels.

Others of the Rebels marched to Armagh the same night: for they are a running
Camp scattered up and (own the Country, which Town they prefently took, and
burned the same night also, which was a Town full of rich Merchants, both
English and Scottish, whom they murdered in a most cruel and bloody manner,
with their wives and children: first deflowring many of the women, then cruelly
murdering them, and pulling them about the street by the hair of the head, and
dashing their childrens brains out against the posts and stones in the street,
and tossing their children upon their pikes, and so running with them from
place to place, saying, that those were the pigs of the English soves. In like
manner have they dealt with the Inhabitants at Logall, a town five mile from
the said Armagh, an English Plantation.

4 The continuance of the Rebels cruelty.
The Bishop of Kildare is in great danger, against whom they threaten with
great words, that they will make him, and all the rest of the puritan Dogs (as
they call them) to leave railing against their holy Father the Pope in their
pulpits, as they do.

This running Camp of Rebels do scatter themselves up and down the Country,
murdering the English in great cruelty: not only the Protestants, but even the
very papists also in many places. In which rage and cruelty of theirs, when
they have most bloodily slain diverse good Protestants of worth, they have
hanged them up upon the Gates in great disdain, and driving others out of
their estates, which is the least injury they use to any where they come.

5. The cruel usage of Mr. John Treadwell, at Kildmurrey.
There came some of the Rebels to the house of one Mr. Treadwill of Kildmurrey
in the night, who broke in violently unto him, and would have killed all that
were in the house, but that one of their own company called Bryan of Demshie, a
base son to the Earl of Claumelero, that he had by his own daughter, by whose
persuasion, the rest of the rebels were persuaded not to kill them, but yet
they were very cruel to him; for they took him, and stripped him naked, and
bound his hands behind him, and so set him upon a little narrow bridge, or
rather a post cross a brook, where they left him; till it pleased God he was
afterward relieved: and it pleased God, that some of them were taken, and
Bryan of Demshie is now in prison at the Fortinesse.

But Mr. Treadwell was feign to remove to Dublin, who dare not adventure to
live in Kildmurrey during this their rebellion, which God in his good time
grant to cease.

FINIS.

