The Sisters of the Scabards HOLIDAY: OR, A Dialogue between two reverent and
very virtuous Matrons, Mrs. Bloomesbury, and Mrs. Long-Acre her near Neighbor.

Wherein is Discoursed how terrible, and costly and Civil Law was to their
Profession; and how they congatulate the welcome Alteration.



PRINTED, 1641.

The Sisters of the Scabards holy day, OR A dialogue between two reverent and
virtuous Matrons Mrs. Bloomsbury, and Mrs. Long-acre her near neighbor.
Wherein is discoursed how terrible and costly the civil law was to their
profession, and how they congratulate the welcome Alteration, etc.
Blomesbury. MY great friend mistress Long-acre, you are very happily met.


L. My large friend Mistress Blomsbury, not so great as your self, though (thanks
to our fat-feeding ale) I am pretty well grown, I am pretty plump In Faith.


B. So it seems, for your belly is plumped up as big as a Bucking-tub.


L. And yours is not much less, for in my opinion any one might judge your fat
Ale, (as you call it) had engendered a Land Porpus in your belly, but I pray
thee let us leave off this discourse, and tell me what news you hear, what is
the cause you look so pleasantly?


B. Better news then ever I looked for.


L. I pray thee kind sister proceed let us hear it.


B. All the Civil Lawyers, the Judges, Doctors, Advocates, Proctors, Registers,
and all their Coney-hunting Clerks, that love handsome wenches so well as
their Masters, shall now ready pay for their venery, if they have it, they
shall be no more privileged.


L. Why neighbor Bloomsbury, did not your Civil Lawyers use to pay ready
money for your commodities, I hope they did not use to stop in with you for
their fees; for my part, I never privileged them; and if at any time they
traded in my ware, (as many times they did) I would never trust them without
ready money no more then they would me for their fees, yet I used them ever
more conscionably then they did me.


B. But what had you always ready money of their Clerks too?


L. No apoxe on'em, those were the basest fellows, they were worse then
Apparators especially in a long vacation, yet many times (to give the Devil
his due) at the latter end of a Michaelmas Term, they were more liberal then
their Masters.


B. Good neighbor Long-acre, tell me what these Gent. in the cut-finger'd
gloves would do in a long vacation.


L. Why I tell you, in either term or vacation, these Gentlemen were more
curious with what ware they dealt then their Masters, for many times we could
put off any Commodities to them, and they would be content (though they were
fain to employ a Surgeon when they came home) but these Gentlemen Clerks they
must have fresh wenches and handsome ones too (though their faces were
plaistered half an inch thick or beautified with Ladies face Physic) those
same mackereltaild Gentlemen would swallow up whole bottles of strong water,
and when they were got a little in drink would kick me and my whole family out
of doors, both male and female, young and old, pimps and rogues, whores and
bawdes, and go their ways and pay me not one farthing.


B. Truly they used you unconscionably.


L. Nay this was not all, the very next day they would send an Apparator, who
would warn both me and my whole harmless household to appear in Paul's the
next Court day, to answer for keeping a common bawdy house, ready furnished
with mercenary whores, who daily commit the carnal act of incontinency, and
for many other misdeameanors.


B. Trust me Mistress Long-acre, I have been served in the like manner; but I
pray how came you off.


L. First I must pay the Apparator his whole fees, with large considerations
for his extraordinary pains and attendance, then must I repair to these
Gentlemen who had so abused us, and invite them to a breakfast forsooth, and
make my composition with them and give them larger fees then their Mr. to take
off the business, or else leave off the trade and be utterly undone, I assure
you sister Blomsbury, there is I know not how many of those Clerks about
Doctors-Commons that live upon nothing else every long vacation, then upon such
projects as these; but now (thanks to the impartial Parliament) their trading
begins to fail them.


B. Is that possible, sister Long-acre?


L. It Is true as I tell you: And all the smel-smock crew of Messengers,
Sumners, Apparators, and Promooters whatsoever must now either turn
shoulder-clapper Bailiffs, Setters, Knights of the Post, or else go hang
themselves; I intend to pay no more quarterage to these skruing Gentlemen
In Faith.


B. As I am here, I should rejoice more at the downfall of these Gentlemen you
named last, then of all the rest, for I paid them constantly ten pound a year,
and yet still was in fear of them for all that, and was sure to ride once a
year in a single Coach with two wheels up Cheapside, where I make no question
but you know how I was used.


L. Yes truly, for it has been my own case many times. But let these things
be forgotten, lets think how to increase our trading: for my part I intend to
do this for the renewing of my trade, what Gentlewomen I have I will keep: And
I will send Henry Hackester my chief pimpe to collect, gather, and bring home
all my fugitive and straid Gentlewomen, viz. Mistress Lacy, Mistress Skinner,
Mistress Butler, Mistress Webster, Mistress Glover, Mistress Symmons, and Mistress
Clayton, if she be not spoiled already, for she has great resort to her
lodging at a Barbers in Fetterlane) with many others, whereof he has a
catalogue; And for the further upholding of our trade, if it please you to
join with me (sweet Mrs. Blomsbury) when we grow rich which I doubt not but
it will be ere long, we will build an Hospital for all of our society that
are old and not able to keep up trade, and for these that are young and fail
in their trade by their overmuch practice or immoderate dealing in their
trade, wherein we will have twenty Apothecaries and forty Surgeons gallantly
maintained, and other necessary instruments to our trade belonging.


B. But stay there sweet Mistress Long-acre, for though the Civil Law be
likely to have a fall, and the greatest part of our enemies break, yet I
believe our profession (though never so necessary) will have new enemies, our
prosperity will be envied; we shall stand in awe to one or other, by whom we
shall be corrected in case we transgress.


L. That is to be considered truly: However lets at the downfall of our
enemies, rejoice and send proclamations through Turnmill-street, Goulding-lane,
Beech-lane, Pick-hatch, and in all other places where any of our society
remains to proclaim a general feast, and

Let Doctors Commons, and our foes do what they may,
We Sisters of the scabard will keep holiday.

FINIS.

