THE Unskilful Skirmisher rebuked FOR BLASPHEMY: Being a Brief Answer to a
Pamphlet entitled, A Skirmish made upon Quakerism.
I have read over a Book put forth by John Cheyney, called, A Skirmish made
upon Quakerism, which he says, is a brief Confutation of a most gross
Principle, or Point of Doctrine maintained by one William Penn a Quaker. A mere
Brag, as in time will be made manifest.

William Penn's Words are these following (to clear his Position) Such Commands
are either relating to Ordinary, or Extraordinary Cases; by Ordinary Cases I
mean, such as chiefly concern Faith and Holy Life, which are General, Permanent
and Indispensible.

By Extraordinary Cases I understand, Moses going to Pharaoh; the Prophets
several manner of Appearances to the Kings, Priests and People of Israel, with
other temporary Commands relating to outward Services; and so we do say, that
what is commanded to one man, is not binding, as such to another.

But when the Lord shall say, if thou sinnest thou shall dye, if thou keep
my Commandments thou shall live; be ye holy; for I the Lord your God am holy,
quoting these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2.21. Heb. 13.7. 2 These. 3. And in these
following Words says, These Precepts and Examples are obliging upon all; why?
because they more or less meet with a Conviction in the Consciences of all; for
(says he) I am persuaded none that has a reasonable Soul, who has not out
lived their Day, and on whom the Night is not come, amongst the Indians
themselves, but would readily say, these are true and weighty Sayings; for
Faith in God and an holy Self-denying Life, are necessary both to Temporal and
Eternal Happiness.

This with much more, besides a dozen pages (in his Rejoinder) of sober
Confutation has he bestowed to clear this Passage from such ungodly
Consequences; and in those Pages brings William Tindal that ancient
Protestant-Martyr, whom John Fox calls the English-Apostle; John Jewel Bishop
of Salisbury, and Thomas Collier an Eminent Man amongst the Western-Separatists
in Confirmation of this Position, which John Cheyney takes no notice of.

But the very things he charge against the Quakers, is he guilty of in every
particular himself, and greater Blasphemy did I never meet with in so few
Lines, then is asserted by John Cheyney; besides, such Contradiction, as none
but a Novice durst have ventured to have published to the World.

The Apostle Paul who was a faithful Minister of Christ, his Doctrine was (as
all his Ministers at this day is) to turn People from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, Acts 26.18.

John Cheyney questions this Doctrine by saying, What if the Light be idle,
negligent, sleepy, unfaithful, bribed and will let the Sinner sin, and dye in
Sin.

The Scripture says, John 3.19. This is the Condemnation that Light is come
into the World, and men love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds
are evil; for every one that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the
Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved, but he that does Truth comes to the
Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.

Now J. C's Doctrine is quite contrary, he says, The Light may be negligent,
idle, sleepy, will let men sin and die in Sin. O horrid Blasphemy!

Job says, Those that do wickedly rebel against the Light, Job 24.13. Is there
any Number of his Armies, and upon whom does not his Light arise? Job 25.3.
David says, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? Psalm
27.1. But John Cheyney says, The Light within gives the Drunkard leave to be
drunk, the Worldling to be a Worldling, the Impenitent man to be Impenitent,
when the Scripture says, The Life of God was the Light of men, John 1.4. and
John came to bear witness to the Light, that all men through him might believe,
John 1.7. But J. C. rather bears witness against it, saying, The Light within
takes Part with the Flesh and Satan against God, and says, There is never a
Soul in Hell but he may blame the Light within; for if the Light within were
faithful to God and the Soul, it would not suffer any man to live in Sin, and
dye in Sin. I do think greater Wickedness never came out of a Priest's Mouth.

Now in Contradiction to himself, he says, It Is true, I grant that without the
Light within we could not come to the Knowledge of the Scripture, which indeed
is Truth, for the Light of Christ was the Original of the Scripture, and is and
will be forever the Authority of the Scripture; for the holy men of God spoke
as they were moved of the holy Ghost, in which is Light, Life, Power, Strength
and Ability to all that believe in the Light, to perform those things that the
Lord requires of them, according to the Scripture of Truth.

But says J. C. Penn and all his Partakers conceit strange things of the Light
within, and set it above the Scriptures (and what does he less in saying, that
without the Light within we could not come to the Knowledge of them) and this
is their very Principle (says he) that the Light within should be our Rule,
and the Scripture inferior to it.

Now let any moderate serious Persons, whose Consciences are not given up to
believe Lies consider whether that which gives a right and true Understanding
of the Scriptures (which John Cheyney grants we cannot come to know without
the Light within, which is the Light of Christ) be not the more sure Word of
Prophecy, unto which we do well to take heed, till the day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in our Hearts, as the Apostle says; for God is Light and in him
is no Darkness at all; and it is the Inspiration of the Almighty that gives
Understanding; for we cannot think a good Thought of our selves, much less do a
good Deed; for it is the Lord that works in us both to will and to do of his
own good Pleasure.

I do affirm in the Name of God, that it is preposterously absurd for any man
to charge the Rebellion of wicked men to the Insufficiency of the Light within,
as John Cheyney has done, comparing it to a negligent drunken Coach man, who
sleeps and the Horses run Wood, or he drives into Pits and Bogs; so, says he,
the Light within takes Part with the Flesh and Satan against God, and suffers
the Soul to be sensual, worldly and ungodly, and so is at least the permissive
Cause of the Sinner's Sin and Damnation.

This I do affirm is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; for
their Doctrine was to turn People from Darkness to Light, from the Power of
Satan to the Power of God, Acts 26.18. In him was Life, and the Life was the
Light of men, John 1.4. and this is the true Light that John bore record of,
that lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9. and it is in this
Light that we believe, by which we are certainly persuaded that there is no
Salvation nor Redemption from Sin, but by him who is said to be the true Light,
that lights every man that comes into the World, which does reprove in
secret, when no Eye sees, as it is written, All things that are reproved are
made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephesians.
5.13. And if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all Sin, 1 John 1.7. And God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness has
shined in our Hearts to give us the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ; so that we dare not blame the Light of Christ within, if men
through their Rebellion bring Destruction upon themselves, the Light is their
Condemnation, John 3.19. But if the Light within which should be man's Guide,
be so unfaithful both to God and man, as through its Negligence and Idleness
(as John Cheyney blasphemously says) should give leave to sin, then could not
the Light be man's Condemnation, but must condemn it self; but I do affirm in
the Name of the God of Israel, that the Light, with which Christ has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, is God's faithful and true
Witness, that never suffered Sin to go unreproved in the Consciences of those
that hearken to it, and many can set to their Seals, that this is the Reproof
of Instruction, which is the Way of Life.

John Cheyney says, now comes Penn and a Sect of People called Quakers, and
cry up the Light within, and tell us we must hearken to this in all things, and
further then this Light within shall teach and lead us, we are to give no
harkening to what the Scripture says.

Now observe, he has confessed that it is true, that without the Light within
we cannot at all come to the Knowledge of the Scripture, and if he would be
faithful to what he grants to be true, what cause has he to find fault with
the Quakers for minding and crying up the Light within, whenas himself suith,
we cannot come to the Knowledge of the Scripture without the Light within.

But I perceive J. C. was ambitious to be seen to do something in print against
the Light, and the People whom God has blessed; but it is my Faith in God,
that it is to little purpose, except to publish his own Shame and everlasting
Contempt unless he repent; for Truth is not his Covering, but Falsehood and
Deceit, which will be stripped off him, and he left naked and bare to all whose
Senses are exercised to discern betwixt Good and Evil; for certain I am he does
err not knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God: Many other things I have
in my Mind against what he has written, but believing ere long he will receive
a more full Answer from some that are more particularly concerned, I conclude,
having nothing in my Heart but Love to his Person, but I am an Irreconcilable
Enemy to his pernicious Opinions of the Light within, which will be too hard
for him to strive against; for the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in
the Light of the Lamb, Rev. 21.24. which is the Light that the Quakers direct
People to, and exalt over all.

Warrington the 3 d. of the 8 th. Month, 1676. Bryan Sixmith.

THE END

