Excceding certain and true NEWS FROM Munster. Lemster, Waxford, Ulster,
Conough, Tiperar^y, AND DVBLIN;
Otherwise called the English Pale.

Being the true Copy of a Letter sent From a Merchant in Dublin, a man well
known in London, one Captain Scout, a Dutchman, living on the Merchants Key,
near Sir William Parsons, one of the Lord Justices of IRELAND To his worthy
friend Mr. VAN HOOKER.

Bearing Date, January 2. 1643.

January 9. Printed by T. Fawcet, for J. B. 1643.

The last true Intelligence from the Kingdom of IRELAND;
THe Distractions of England has bin and yet is so mighty dangerous, and so
horrid fearful, that we have neither Ears to receive Calamities of our
afflicted poor Brethren the Protestants in Ireland, nor searce Christian
hearts to pity them, being every man fearful to endute the like here, if not
worse, without the infinite me^ey of God be pleased to stop it, with the
se^tling of his true Church in order, I mean the reformed Protestant Religion,
with abollishing of Papists, Atheists, and other vild Sects, that choke the
true Gospel, and the peace of these Kingdoms, the which poor Ireland has,
and still lives in, with that continuance of grief, that is insensible to any
but those which lately have. to give a feeling relation of the same, for those
Protestant Gentry that through good hap has escaped to Dublin, from the
barbarous cruelty of the murdering Rebels, men both well landed, and Moneyed,
yet have they bin in Dublin, (after their moneys have been gone) glad to fell
their Plate, such as some by stealth could get thither, for half a Crown, and
two shillings an Ounce, yea, and for eighteen pence an Ounce, Gold Rings of two
and twenty shillings weight, for seven shillings, and glad any man will so
befriend them, Pewter threepence, and two pence half penny, and two pence a
pound, and the best Brass the same, Bedding and other Household stuff worth
nothing, so that English Protestants that have a long time been livers in the
Kingdom, Citizens of Dublin, who have by gathering all their lise times a
competent subsistence for them, and for their Children, hare by the lessing of
Soldiers put upon them, for pay they have not had, nor their Commanders to
give them, by which means they have been eat and drunk out of all mon^ies
and goods to relieve them with, as by the sad relation of an Englishman, a
Cook who kept an Ordinary at the sign of the Bell, as many here can witness,
was a man very able only by his pains taking and trade, yet be had such a
Company seast upon him, that it utterly undid him, for by his owre confession
now in London to many of the Parliament, had but run layne upon his charge,
he could have maintained both him, them and his Household well enough, likewise
so all the City more and less do thus complain, Markets they have, but flesh
very poor, sqashey. and unwholesome, which has as many conjecture, bred
fluxes, and diseases among them, Bread scarce and coorse, Butter very little,
and as dear, and that place so plentiful heretofore for Eggs, one sold for
a penny, yet is that Town by the strong supportrance of the Castle, impossible
to be taken, and for treachery they have and still take a good course to have
no dealing or commerce with the Irish or Papist, though English, is there are
some, yet thanks be to God for it, they have had good relief by the Sea for
Fish, as from Rulloch the only Herring-place six miles from Dublin, have be^n
sent up by Boats, infinite of Cod, Haddocke, Place, and like Fish, Herrings
thirty for a penny, for the porer sort that have nothing to do, but their
pains (may have them for fetching) as for the Rebels in all parts of the
Country, as namely the Pr^vi^ces of Munster, Connough, Limstar, Vlster, and the
li^e by reason of our distractio^s here in England, (h^ping that it will have
no cessation of Arms) or unna^urall War one with the other will be still,
have in all those parts, being lest alone by the English, Plowed, Tild, and
sown great store of Corn, as Whea^e, Rye, Oats, Barley, Beans, Pease, and
Fetches, but the most part is Oats and Barley, in hope of a plentiful Crop,
and enjoying the Harvest to themselves, with Summars Aid from Spain and other
places, for some of their Commanders have stole away, since the Earl of
Warwick left his Charge upon the Sea, to come unto the Parliaments employment
on the Land, now the Rebels being there, intend to raise Forces, and transport
them out of Spain, into Ireland, if they can get them over.

But God I trust as he has still will ever frusterate their ill intents and
make the sea their grave that thinks to kill and bury us on land, who as they
suppose have all save Dublin in their possession, who come not nere it, nor
has such intent, because their Devilish Priests of antichrist, that were the
sitst incendiaries of this evil, still fats them up with promise of their land
and all shall be their own and they to live happy, I fear happier then when
their patron blessed Saint Patrick made all almost in common in their Land, and
did so holy sanctify the same, that all ill moving Creatures from that earth
as Frogs, Toades, Adders, Snakes. blud-wormes, Mules, and Asses, he charmed
down from a mountain to the sea, and as their ill tutard ignorance reports,
he sent them into England, Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of man, Shepey
Garusey, and other Islands seated in the sea, but had saint Patrick b^n worthy
of that name he would a banished them into the Sea being wors^r vermin and the
evil natured, who since there wilderness of wolves have bin destroyed, they
have drawn their natures and conditions from them and are the same themselves,
and now live in that self security, as they were Isreal's Children and that
Land were their promise, and poor Roges, that always naked lived on
mountains, or on moors half starved, and eaten up with lice, which vermaine
their Saint Patrick left enough off, now play on Tabers and on Drum beds for
handfulls, and for purses filled with silver and with gold, which they have robbed
and murdered English for, and vows as it is credibly reported, before the
English ere should reposesse their own again they would chock^e themselves with
it, or throw it in the sea, or bury it in the earth, so mighty is their hate to
those that have reformed them from bad, as beasts into humanity, tell now they
lost it, and now them selves in midst of all their wealth does even no more but
tantalise upon it, for in all parts is sedition raised amongst them round.

There friars in their disputattons Iarr with each other.

Father against Father, Doctrine against Doctrine.

And many of the wisest and the noblest of them have drawn forth heads and
meetings with each other, cursing the first begetters of this Rebellion for
they them selves term it no better now.

Together with their sad Relations, of their suture happy lives, both they,
their fathers, and their granfathers, before them, and how with peace and
plenty, they were blessed, each Raining as a King over his own.

This in all parts is took into consideration of their wisest, who thinks to
find favor by suppressing the rest.

Some Skirmishes they have had, and as it credibly reported, they are very like
to destroy themselves.

Which if God of his mercy send a true and firm uniting betwixt the King and
Parliament, they have but short continuance, or time to rain in these cruel
outrages.

Your Friend to Command J. Skout.

FINIS.

