An Alarm: To the last warning piece to LONDON By way of ANSWER: Discovering
The danger of Sectaries suffered: and the necessity of Order, and Uniformity to
be Established.

Wherein The Presbiterian way of Government, and the Independent Liberty, is
compared.

Levit. 9. 14. Vlt. Ye shall have one Ordinance, both for the stranger, and for
him that is borne in the Land. Col. 2. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh;
yet am I with you in the Spirit, Joving and beholding your order, and the
steadfastness of your faith in Christ. Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one
another, and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching. LONDON. Printed
for L. Chapman.

An Alarm To the last warning piece to LONDON: By way of answer.
A Printed Pamphlet that passed without License or name, Entitled the last
warning piece to all the inhabitants of London; was some few days since
brought to my hand, which I examining found to be full of malevolency, and
sedition, which the Author cunningly obscureth in himself, by subtle
sophestry, to ludifie well meaning people, like a Wolf in sheeps clothing, He
appears to be no Covenanter, else a Covenant breaker; and by Scripture example
liable to confiscation of goods, or death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. Ezra 7. 26. Amos 1.
9. He at first salutes with insinuating flattery, like the Devil to Eve, Genesis
3. These are his words, Well meaning people (such as you are) are ever most
liable to be deceived, because you trust those that give you good words, etc.
you see how Serpent* like he comes, telling them they trust in good words, and
are liable to be deceived, when himself means to deceive them, like a
canting Fortune teller, that tells you you are near an ill turn: When he is
picking your pocket: and farther to exercise his Sophistry, and please his
seditious humor, he would persuade the people that they are possessed with
two unreasonable humors; The first for maintenance of a Kingly government; The
second for Ecclesiastical Government, he inveieth against all Government, to
make an open way to sensual and licentious liberty, and so goes on with
Sophistical, and seditious expressions: full of bitterness and scandal,
against the Presbyterian Government, endeavoring to kindle a fire of
contention between the two Kingdoms, and to divide both the Parliament and
City: I shall give you his own words in order, with some answer thereunto, to
discover his seditious intention, and to satisfy the weak, by reason, and
texts of Scripture: I begin with the first.

YOu have an unreasonable humor in you for the maintenance of Kingly
Government, and he that will nourish this humor in you, though he cannot show
you any good act that ever any King did voluntarily for good of the people!
though your selves if you will examine stories, or your own experience, may
produce thousands of oppressions, murders, and other tyranies, though no
condition of mankind ever did so many, so intolerable mischiefs, though it
cannot be said to what use they serve, or that there is any use of them, except
to debauch and vex the people, etc.

This is an Anabaptisticall tenent, contrary to Scripture, which warranteth the
Government of Commonweals by Kings, and the lawfulness of the Kingly Office:
I say not that Kings are Jure Divino, but the Office of a King is lawful,
useful, and warrantable by the Ordinance of God: By me Kings Reign, and
Princes decree justice, Prove. 8. 15. Kings are called nursing fathers, Esaias 49.
23. They bear the Image of God as the supreme Magestrate, and are styled by
his name: I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. John 10. 34 35. we are
commanded to fear God and the King, Prove. 24. 21. and to fear God and honor
the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. That Kings have done good, and voluntary Acts of good
for the people is clear: Example in David* Asa, Jehoiadah, Amaziah, Hezekiah,
Josiah, Iehosaphat, etc. also in those Heathen Kings Ahashuerus, and
Artaxerxes, Darius, etc. besides if we examine other stories, we shall find
other examples, and in our own Chronicles, we shall Read that Kings have done
voluntary Acts of good for their people; as they have bin moved thereunto by
the providence of God.

On the other side we know it is true, that many Kings have bin oppressors, as
Solomon and Rehoboham, of whom one was by God rejected from being King, the
other forsaken by his people, many have bin murderers, and Tyrants, as
Manasses, and Hazaell, Antiachus, Nero, Charles of France, and others of that
name, and in England we have had some so bad, that by the just Laws of the
Kingdom, they have bin deposed, example in Edward the Second and Richard the
Second, as our Chronicles tells us.

It pleases God oftentimes to punish a wicked people by the wickedness of a
King, therefore God is said to give a King in his anger, and take him away in
his wrath: But the use of Kings is to be protection and safety to the people,
and for that cause the people first made Kings to go in and out before them.

Merely worldly Covetous wretches, Fraudelent overreaching verlets,
Patentees, brawling projectors, are your only Counselors, and put into Offices
of trust, and lead you whither they please! cause you to hate and abhor those
that would purge this humor out of you, and show you a more just and rational
way of Government then that of Kings, etc.

We make not worldly covetuous fraudulent men our counselors; not put them
into Office oftrust but men fearing God, men of justice, wisdom, and honor,
we know that some that have bin projectors, Patentees and are coveteous over
reaching men, that are now sectaries, are made Counselors (but not by us) and
are put into chief places of command (but not by us) we see it, but cannot
help it, the whole Kingdom observes the course of Sectaries, they are wiser
in their generation then the Children of light, and these lead us whither we
would not go, like a second captivity! Simple people are seduced by them, good
men are hated for goodness, and order sake, which is repugnant to their
Malignant humor. These are those that are selfe-willed, that despise
government (as the Apostle foretold,) and are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10. these promise liberty to others, while themselves are
the servants to corruption; and that is the greatest bondage* the Apostle Jude
describes them to be such as turn the grace of God into laciviousnesse, Jude
4. Murmurors, Walkers after their own lusts speaking swelling words etc. He
says, these are they that separate themselves, sensual! having not the
Spirit! verse. 19. we know the fruit of the Spirit is love, Joy, peace,
long-suffering, meekness, etc. Gal. 15. 22.

Others are troubled with an other unreasonable humor concerning
Ecclesiastical government, they are undone ruined torn in peecees with rents
and divisions, if all the people may not be compelled to worship God as they
do, or in one uniforme way by the state established etc.

We know where there is not Order, there is confusion, and where there is
disagreement in discipline, there is want of love, devine precept Commands us
to be all of one mind and love as Brethren, 1. Pet. 3. 8. again let all things
be done in order, and decency, 1 Cor. 14. 40. The Apostle sharply reproved
disorder in the believing Corinth! 1 Cor. 11. 33. 34. And he left Titus at
Creete to set order in the Churches; and to ordain Elders [to execute that
order] in every City, Titus 1. 5. consider in nature; is there any disorder or
disunion in the Members of one body? they are many members, but all make but
one perfect body! 1 Cor. 12. 20. and God has so appointed it, that there
should be no schism in body, Verse 25. much more should the Members of the
spiritual body be one, that there should be no schism in the Church; Christ
is the head of the Church, every Christian is a Member, the Church the body,
the head has not many bodies, but the body has many Members and by many
Members, the body is made perfect.

God has appointed order to, and in all things; among Angelis, and men, yea to
all creatures, by order of things, the universe is continued, by order among
men, Kingdoms, Cities, and societies are maintained, God has commanded order
in every house And has he left his own house without order? The Church of God
is called a house; that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of
God, which is the Church of the living God; 1 Timothy 3. 15. nor is Christ less
faithful then Moses who was faithful in all his house as a servant; in
appointing order: But Christ is a son over his house, whose house we are,
Heb. 3. 5. Therefore the Apostle calls the Members living stones, that build up
that spiritual house: but there is no building without order: every stone must
be hewed by the workman, it must pass the hammer to be fashioned: it has a
fashion of it self, as a stone, but to make such a building, it must be
fashioned to another fashion according to order, else there will be confusion,
but God is not the God of confusion, but of peace, in all the Churches of the
Saints: Else how shall we be all of one mind, and how shall Schisms and
Heresies be prevented? if men be not compelled to worship God in one way, where
is order? if a liberty be given to every man as his erring conscience shall
guide him, what error, or heresy, or blasphemy is there in the world or that
hell can envent, that will not be preached in Conventicles to seduce the
people? Therefore although none can be compelled to be holy (for holiness is
only wrought by the Spirit of God) yet all ought to be compelled to lawful and
holy uniformity in publik worship, for time place, and manner: and to be
punished for neglects, except necessity constrained, and for this cause is the
sword put into the hand of the Magistrate, who is the father of our flesh: and
is to punish all the evil works of the flesh in us! Idolaters, hatred, strife,
varience, emulation, sedition, heresy, etc. these are all works of the flesh:
which if the Magistrate do not punish, but tolerate; he sins against God,
and does Gods work negligently.

The Word of God aloweth every one to be fully persuaded in his own mind, and
declares that to be sinful that is done otherwise, etc.

This Caveler has learned some of the devils Sophistry to mis apply
Scripture: for so the devil did to Christ, Matthew. 4. 6. That which the Apostle
intends one way, this Caveler would interpret an other, to serve his own end:
The Apostle, Romans 14. 5. speaking of the observation of Jewish days and
feasts, etc. which some weak in knowledge (not knowing their liberty) thought,
they were still bound to observe, therefore that they might neither do the one
nor the other, doubtingly, he exhorts every one to g^t assurance, and to be
fully persuaded in his own mind, what was duty! according to that in Romans 4.
21. not that they must (because they are not fully persuaded) use their own
liberty, at large, to do as they list: for it is sin to refuse, as well as to
do, if not of faith: for a man either to do or refuse to do a thing doubtingly
is sin, every man ought to look to God in every action and to please God in
doing, or not doing: therefore men must not live according to there sense, be
of what Religion they will, worship God in their own way, be a rule to
themselves: but according to God, to his will, and in his way, and to make the
word of God, and the lawful command of the Magistrate, his Rule: He that
seeks to live to his own will, and allows such a liberty as to Sectaries,
shall neither please God, nor advantage the public.

These Clergy men that animate you herein are such as complied with the
Tyranny and suffistication of Episcopal Prelates, and now aim to establish
the like Tyranny in the hands of Presbyterian Prelates, etc.

Mark how the envi^us Pamphleter, does calumniate those holy men, which were
chief, and standing Pillars in the Church of England, in the time of the
Churches affliction, and oppression under the tyanny of Episcopacie, when those
men (whom he and those of singular opinions do n^w asperse, because they stand
for the Presbyterian Government,) supported Gods people by their prayers,
presents, and preaching, and suffered in their persons, and estates: willingly,
and cheerfully for the liberty of the Gospel; At which time many others (that
now accuse them) for fear fled from us, and hid themselves in corners, or
unnaturally left their mother that bear them: and went into other Countries,
for their own safety; now the chief Champions for Sectaries: and by them
cried up as the only men for holiness: These though they ran from the
battle, many of them returned to the spoil, and wear the Laurel as others;
when they went from us they past hard censures on us, and deemed us as the
people of Sodam, themselves as so many lots taken out from among us, And since
their return, they have disturbed our peace, hindered the blessing of
Reformation, by unnatural and unchristian divisions, as if like Jonah they
were angry, that God has spared us: I speak and write this with grief of
heart and wish it were not too true: I am sure some of them have, like
Samaritan adveriaries, hindered the building of the Temple: and with like
pretenses! though I hope not with the same intentions; but my hope and
confidence is that God will bring good out of it: both to us, and them; and by
these contests boult out real truths, or put us into such a way (not yet
spoken of) as shall be acceptable to God and content to us, and them, if we
would beg humble hearts, and seek verity rather then victory, which yet we
doubt not; it is pride that is the cause of our contention.

Nothing tends more to the disolving of that Army that under God has bin
your preservation, or can so miserably tear you into rents and divisions,
leaving you all a naked disunited prey, to those that of purpose have begotten,
and nourished these destructive honors in you, etc.

You see where charity is wanting, Envy abounds and breaks out into sedition,
he is not contened to cast divisions in Familyes and Cities, but into the Army
of peace, where I dare say he has few friends (for sectaries seldom do any
act of public good) I know there are in the Army Independants as well as
Presbyterians [not Sectaries] Godly and gallant men, which together make an
Army like the host of Israel, when Jehova went in and out be ore them, God
has done great things for them, and for us by them But sectaries like the
evil Spies bring false reports to cause murmuring in the Camp, let those that
sow sedition reap the fruit of it as God shall recompense it unto them
according to their humor, etc.

EIther of these two unreasonable humors [of Kingly authority, or Presbyterian
Government] are enough to undo you, and to perplex, if not frustrate all the
labor of the Parliament to preserve you: and is likely to bring a n^w
confusion upon the Commonwealth, etc.

I told you the Pamphleter was either no Covenanter or a Covenant Breaker,
observe how he persuades the people to practice against Covenant, that instead
of a blessing he might procure a curse upon them: his Council is like Baalams
to Balak, or like Iobes wifes (in his misery) curse God and di^; he would
expunge that clause of Covenant for preserving the honor of the King, etc. And
that for Reformation, according to any rule, either Gods word or reformed
Churches: nothing but liberty, like beasts, without Law or Government: This is
indeed the way to ^rustrate all the care and labor of the Parliament to
preserve us, and to bring upon our selves, confusion and swifter destruction:
When the Saxons had conquered England they divided it, and made it into seven
Kingdoms, differences of Government quickly cause contentions, so as they
destroyed one an other, the strongest get all, and yet quickly lost all, but
the suffering of several religions, or discipline in worship, will be of no
less dangerous consequence.

By the first humor you are prepaired to receive the King in again upon any
conditions, notwithstanding all his bloodshed and perfidiousnesse, whereby you
encourage and assist under hand workings, and projects against the Parliament,
and occasion horrible plots against the City, and crafty devices to divide
between the Parliament and City, and to receive the King whether the
Parliament will or no, etc.

Reason commands to receive the King as a King, but reason and Religion ^orbids
to receive him but upon safe and good conditions, or upon any other conditions
then the Parliament shall in their wisdom think fit.

Nor could any Agents for the King work any underhand workings, nor effect any
design against the Parliament or City to divide them, if not furthered by
Sectaries under whose protection the enemies designs are now carried on! and
colored under that Notion the Jesuits plot and seek to divide Kingdoms,
Parliaments, Cities, all one against another, it is all the hope the Enemy has
left as Sir Jacob Ashley ingeniously confessed: And were it not for these home
divisions the Enemy at home would crutch for mercy, and foreign Nations sue
to Great Britain for friendship, as the Island beloved of God, a people
conjoined in holy covenant established in Unity. Order and Peace, within it
self, whose King is the Lord of Hosts, more admired and honored by other
Kingdoms, then Solomon by the Queen of the South, when she heard of his
wisdom, and see the order of his servants.

To this happiness there is no greater impediment then the pride of man, by
obstinate contention* willing rather to consume three Kingdoms in such a fire,
then deny themselves or quench one burning Lust.

The second unreasonable and unchristian humor, provoking you to be
importument with the Parliament to establish a Presbyterian, or compulsion
Church Government, all things considered, threaten a more eminent danger then
the former at this time can do; for if the Commons in Parliament should do a^
some have procured the Common Council to Petition, see in what a sad condition
you would immediately be in for all the Independants, and Sepratists, of all
sorts (then whom the Parliament and you have not found more constant and
steadfast friends) all these must necessarily withdraw their assistance, for if
they cannot be free to worship God (every one of them) according to their
particular conscience, all liberty to them is taken away, for what is all other
liberty where that is not, also the Army (that has recovered you out of a most
languishing estate) thereupon will instantly be scattered, if not dissolved, so
you would be extremely divided and distracted among your selves at home, and
destitute of any assured strength abroad: and whose work should be effected
thereby? even there is whose maxim it is to divide and master you, etc.

One would think the Author of the Pamphlet were a mere Jesuit, (for many
such are incorporated among our London Sectaries] he complains of the
Presbyterians importunity to the Parliament, that he might make them odious,
though they petition for nothing but what the Parliament have Voted, and
granted, just things in case of necessity may be unseasonably asked: and yet
the fault is pardonable, but audatious bold threats deserves severe censure:
[for so I take the Pamphleters: words] that if the Commons should do [which
they have declared to be there intentions as some have Petitioned, it were more
eminent danger to the Kingdom then the former troubles, as if he would deter
the Parliament from their just intentions. He cunningly puts the Independants
and Sectaries together as if they were all one; but we know they are divided
in opinions more then Herod and Pilot, though like Herod and Pilate they agree
against the peace of the Church: they al would have liberty right or wrong.

For my part I cannot in judgment nor charity rank our de^senting Brethren
called Independants] who hold all fundamentalls of truth with us, with
Sectaries, who all in some things differ from us in fundamentalls, more or
less: therefore no marvill though we agree not! But that Christian Brethren of
the household of faith should disagree about trifles, as if they were Enemies,
is strange, where is love? where is peace? where is charity? or for what do we
contend? not for the faith we both profess it, not for the bread of life, we
both enjoy it; But we contend how it shall be carved to us! surely God is not
in this; except as he is angry against our pride, and wantonness, do we not
all set our faces toward Zion, why then do we fall out about the way, God is
able to bring us together, and the Parliament have power to enjoyne it, that we
may serve God with order and comeliness in one way, if we would but deny out
selves and seek God, God would bring it to pass.

That Sectaries and Heretics should have a liberty, or tolleration to worship
God according to their wills, and erring conscience, would be the greatest
dishonor to God that may be and necessarily would be the ruin of Church and
state! if all should have liberty, then why not Papists (who have assaulted us)
why not Turks and Pagons? have not they conscience to plead for as well as
others? what were this but to set up a nursery, or Accademy for all Heresies;
would not God then spew us out of ou^ land and remove his Candlestick from us;
God and Beliall cannot dwell together, if such withdraw from us we shall be the
stronger, not the weaker.

As for the Army it consists not of such, they are and will be friends to the
public they fight for God, and their Country, to settle peace, not to begin
War, nor to give it over, till they have perfected what they have (by Gods
blessing) been prosperous in; the l^sse of Sectaries cannot make us distracted
at home, nor destitute of friends abroad: but contrary, for Sectaries are but
the Jesuits Apes, to bring fuel to the fire of contention, at home and
abroad; or the Jesuits stalking horses by which they ensnare us, who seek to
^ffect their work thereby; it is their maxim, by dividing us to master us; it
concerns two Kingdoms to be wary and discreet, the design is against both,
therefore me thinks a Nation that really intends to help, should not
obstruct in any case at such a time, when the prejudice will return upon it
self, while united both are safe, but divided both are ruind

IF you have a mind to be vassallzed be still importunate to suppress all
private meetings, or Conventicles, and compel all sorts of beleivers to worship
God, as you and your abbettors shall approve; you cannot want the assistance of
them who are, or would be Lords over their Brethren, and when by your means
they have prevailed over those [you and they are pleased to call Independants
or Sectaries] your selves must be the next in order to be their slaves and
Vassalls, etc.

That we may not be vassallized, nor circumvented by false Brethren who are
crept in to Spy out our liberty, to bring us into a bondage, by useing liberty
as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. and a cloak of malitiousnesse, 1. Pet.
2. 16. we adresse our selves by Petitions, and humble supplycations to the
Parliament into whose hands we have committed our selves, betrusted them with
out Religion, Laws, Liberty, lives and all! And to petition is the peoples
Birthright: The stander by some times sees more then the gamster; And he that
wears the shoe best knows where it pincheth, it is the subjects liberty to
make known his greivances, and that time is fittest when apparent prejudice is
intended: Then to supplicate is unseasonable.

Nor do the Presbiterians petition to suppress all private meetings of the
Godly, Godforbid, for it is the joy and rejoicing of Christians to meet
sometimes in private, to confer, to read, to pray, to sing Psalms, etc. But
those that meet at Conventicles at the time of public worship (such as wholly
separate from the great Congregation) to hear erroneous Doctrines, and to
preach their own fancies; and gross heresieis; where ignorant uncalled, and
ungifted men usurp authority, and creep into Widows houses under pretense of
long prayers devour them, and sow seeds of sedition in the Kingdom, These the
Presbyterians do petition against, as dishonor of God! and obnoctious to the
State, who live like Stoics to their own will: Judge all men vile and
unclean but themselves, these ought to be suppressed, my prayer shall ever be
for their conversation, and endeavor for their suppression, that God will
work the one, and the Parliament command the other.

If it were the sin of the Church of Pargamus to suffer them that held the
Doctrine of Balaam, who caused Balak^ to cast a stumbling block before Israel,
and those that held the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans Reu. 2. 14. 15. Then it is
the duty of the Church of England to suppress them not compel the conscience
of any to worship God, as the civil, or Ecclesiastical power shall approve,
but to suppress their turbulent practices: it is one thing to compel the
Conscience, and an other thing to punish a wilful obstinate fact: a man may
refuse to do a thing out of scruple and weakness, but he that will do the
direct contrary, is obstinate, and turbulent, and liable to the sword of the
civil Majestrate, this is not to Lord it over their Brethren, for among
Brethren there must be destruction of persons for place and command in
discipline and order; all that are godly will assent thereunto and be assistant
to execute just punishment upon obstinate offenders, nor shall we thereby
enthrawle our selves, but the contrary, for while such seducers and wilful
offenders are suffered, we shall incur Gods displeasure, which is the way to
be made slaves, and Vassalls to the worst of our enemies: For remedy hereof we
cast our selves on the Parliaments wisdom by advice with the Learned and godly
Assembly called together by the Parliament to that purpose.

But there is good hopes the Commons of England now in Parliament, who are
chosen for the preservation of all just liberties, will in no measure
countenance so unjust and dangerous a design, certainly they cannot so soon
forgot the vigorous assistance they have always had in the greatest
necessities from this people, etc.

Observe how he winds himself like a Serpent by insinuating sophestry, for
thus he argues the Parliament are the preservers of all just liberties,
therefore they will maintain any unjust liberty to licentiousness: but thus
is truth, the Parliament are preservers of the subjects just liberties, but
they are suppressors of all unjust liberties, therefore they will surely
suppress licentious libertines: the pamphleter is so audatious, that he dares
call the Presbyterian way of government* a dangerous, and unjust design;
though the Parliament (as he knows) have after several debates* voted it,
and ordered it, and since declared to the world to be the way resolved to
settle: Sectaries make great boast of their vigorous assistance to the
Parliament* that which is but little in substance has need of helps by
Orations like the blowing of a Pharisaicall Trumpet: Those that have out done
any sectary, say nothing of their doings, it is sufficient to them that God
sees and knows.

The Parliament neither are nor can be be trusted to make laws, to rule men in
the practice of Religion, and that he that is most vassallized in his judgment,
with an opinion of uniformity and of a necessity of suppressing all private
Conventicles, or ways of worship but his own, if he have any use of his
Conscience in his worship of God he must acknowledge that if the Laws of the
Land should bind him* in the least, to practice contrary to his own
understanding, he cannot obey them* without being guilty of wilful sin against
God: for whatsoever is not of faith is sinful.

The Parliament is betrusted to make laws to rule men in the practice of
Religion, and it is the Office and duty of the supreme powers so to do the
Civil Majestrate is to command order in the worship of God by a Law, with this
limitation, that it be either in such things as are commanded in Scripture, or
in things of indifferency not forbidden, tending to decency and order, and this
is warranted, 1 Cor. 14.40. Titus 1. 5. Now it is understood that these
commands or Laws of the Magestrate must be in nothing but for order, not
urged as matter of ho^inesse, nor necessary to salvation but decency and
comeliness: as may most conduce to the glory of God, peace of the Church,
winning of them without, and agreeable to the constitutions of the Kingdom,
and this is proved, Romans 13. 5. and 1 Pet. 13. 14. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme or unto the Governors, or unto them that are sent by God for the
punishment of evil d^^^s and for the praise of them that do well, for so is
the will of God.

No man endued with right reason but will say there is some necessity of a
Government: if of a Government then a uniformity; else it will be confused,
therefore there is necessity to suppress all Conventicles, and that all men
shall hold sound Doctrine, observe such order, time, place, and public gesture
as the Parliament (by advice of the Assembly) shall appoint, and no man that
has any use of conscience in any thing, but will acknowledge that he is bound
in conscience to obey the laws of the, Land, in which he lives, in all
indifferent things, or he is turbulent and deserves censure, even for matters
concerning worship: he that has the use of conscience, will make conscience of
the duties of both Tables as well as of one; there is doubtless a conscience
toward God, and a conscience toward man, this was the Apostles practice, and
must be our Rule. I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of
offense, toward God and toward men, Acts 24. 16. but if a man have an erring
Judgment, and so an erring Conscience causing doubt let him search the
Scriptures not stand on his own wisdom, but he^re reason from other with
patience, (without prejudicate oppinions,) as desiring satis^sfaction in the
truth, till he be fully persuaded: we must not seek to bring truth to our
understanding, but bring our understanding to the truth, that we may have
assurance what is duty, and what not, that so what we do, or not do may be of
faith; and neither sin against the Laws of men, nor against our own
consciences.

REgarding more that themselves be pleased by uniformity, then God displeased
by Hypocresie, etc. and this makes you liable to be wrought upon by mere state
religious persons, such as only personate Religion to bring their own ends
about, whose Religion is indeed prudently to desemble, these frame Oaths, and
Covenants for you in such ambiguous expressions like Delphian oracles, that
they shall seem to be bound to do or establish any thing they shall desire,
etc.

We are pleased with Uniformity, as it is pleasing to God, but displeased with
hypocrisy, because it is hated of God, but because hypocrisy is always
cherisht among Separatists, and Sectaries, therefore they ought not to be
tolerated, the Apostle commands to mark them that make divisions and avoid
them, Romans 16. 17. and our Savior Christ brands the Pharisie for an
hypocrite, that stood praying and justifying himself, That he was not as
other men, Luke 18. 11. uncharitable separation from the Assembly of the Church
has of old been observed as a badge of hypocrisy, thus did those hypocrites
spoken of by the Prophet Esaias 65. 5. Stand by thy self, for I am holier then
thou: Hence it is that our Sectaries at this day boast of their holiness, they
need not confess sin, they cannot sin, they have the seed of God in them,
etc. others boast of the over flowing of the Spirit in them, and of new
Revelations, etc. others exault themselves in the highest garb of pride, in
uncharitable censorious Judging that they d^clare themselves as Sodom, but we
know where God is, there is love, where Gods spirit is there is meekness
humility, and peace.

There is a unity of the Spirit in the blood of pe^ce, Ephesians. 3. 4. therefore
there ought to be uniformity in spiritual worship, without conformity there
cannot be unity, therefore the Apostle calls soundness of Doctrine a form of
Doctrine Romans 6. 17. and a form of s^und words 2. Tim. 1. 13. God is one,
Christ is one, the Spirit is one: three, and but one; one Lord, on faith, one
baptism! there is but one head Christ; but one body the Church the head cannot
be divided, nor may the body, this is the apostolical Doctrine, and he that
walks contrary is branded by the Apostle Romans 16 It is not state Religion, (as
sectaries would have it) to bind men to holy uniformity: nor to frame other and
covenants to bind men to endeavor for Reformation of evils whether in
practice or in Judgment to bind us to one way of uniformity in worship, we
have not only Divine precept, but Gods own promise that he will give us one
heart, and one way, for our good, and the good of our Children after us Jer.
32. 29. he that goes on in a contrary way is seduced, or he is a desembler
these are no Delphian Oracles but divine truths, though it please the
Pamphleters Ethnickticall humor to use heathenish alligories.

The Pamphleter falls upon the Scotch papers lately printed, and truths
manifesto, etc. things published by private men not by the Nation* he accuses
the Nation as endeavoring to alienate the affection of the people from the
Commons of Parliament, and to engratiate the endeavors of that Nation, etc. I
believe the Pamphleter speaks the sense of the rest of his faction, to accuse
awhole Nation by particular men's Acts! to raise difference though I will not
Justify the printing those papers, nor any other thing to the prejudice of the
Parliament or any of the English Nation; but think it better that such things
had been forborne: And am bound to justify all just exceptions by the
Parliament of England against them, but the Parliament has never charged the
Nation of the Scotts, with evil, as seditious Sectaries do, who foment
jealousies on purpose to make differences, that they may carry on their own
design, of lawless liberty, to which our brethren of Scotland, and our
solemn Covenant are opposite, and to which we must stand.

As for their Nation we are beholding to them, and they are beholding to us an
oath of the Lord is between us, which I hope shall be observed to all
posterities with brotherly union: in despite of Sectaries, and Royalists, that
seek to dissolve it: But woe to him or them that wish or endeavor it, whether
a man or a Nation, for God will surely avenge his Covenant of all and every
person, and it concerns both Nations to consider duty and Conscience, without
regard to the envious designs and plots of wicked men, though some cause of
discontent may arise to both by their hellish subtilty! yet it is not a cause of
division where wisdom and godliness have any sway.

All there zeal and covenanting with the most high God you will find is for no
other end, then to bring this easily deluded Nation under the same bondage, to
Presbyteriall Lords and Taskmasters; This is the thing intended when you are
provoked against Sects, when you are put upon petitions, after petitions! all
to keep you in a forward humor against that season, etc.

Our Covenanting with the high God has been a visible blessing to us, as in
the days of As^. 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. and it will be an established mercy to both
Kingdoms, except we procure wrath, by our conniving at so many that have
re^used to take it, and by over much Clemency to sectaries, whom we are bound
by it to exterpate: by whom (for ought I know for that neglect) God seems to
threaten us with farther misery, and new troubles, Our Covenant no way draws
us into bondage, nor brings us under Taskmasters, but free us from both, The
way of the Presbyteriall government is most congruent to holy Scripture, most
orderly, and uniforme neither Tyrannical, like Episcopal, nor loose, like
that of the Sepratists: therefore we are bound to Petition for the one, and
against the other, which is indeed the only obsticle to Church reformation, and
of all reformation, but the Presbyterian way is without prejudice, holy and
safe.

It will be then time no longer to dispute the Gariso^^, but to profess the
holding of them for those who will keep and (...) their covenant according to
the Scotch interpretation which will serve our English Masters purposes, as
well as there is.

That there is any dispute about Garrisons, is the business of the higher
powers to give the reasons, not my pen: though (I conceive) seditious sectaries
have given some offense, conducing to such disputes: That there will ever be
any professing to hold them, I am confident the affermers thereof will be
proved liars: And that they shall be kept for any English Covenanter except the
Parliament is scandalous, false and most seditious: What I may say of F^rts
Castles, and Garrisons kept by others, I will omit, and it shall be my prayer
that those that contemn the Covenant, do not really plot, and intend to act
what they scandalously charge upon others: I will forbear, and hop^ the best,
though with fear; For I am confident they are not wanting in all designs to
make themselves masters of England, who by uncharitable censures bind us over
as slaves to hell and Satan.

You cannot be ignorant of a prophecy foresaid cunningly to forespeak the
bondage of this Nation, as first it must be conquered by the Romans, then by
the Danes, and Saxons after them the Normans, but the last must be the Scotts,
and this prophecy is now more frequent in their mouths then ever.

Sectaries will seek matter to foment strife, though it be from old Mother
Shiptons prophecy, any thing serves that will beget jealosies, and raise
contentions, leave no coal unblowed, are more troubled in conscience to obey
any Ordinance of God that tends to order and peace, then to belly their brother,
or speak lies in prophecy to seduce silly souls, as if their conscience were
seared with a hot iron, as the Apostle speakss, 1 Timothy 4. 2.

The Covenant cannot bind you to force conscience, or to molest your brother
under pretense of heresy or schism, what you conceive is truth may be an
error, do as you would be done unto in all things! you would not be enforced
therefore enforce not observe rather the ways of Christ, then the Scotch
Presbyterians, if you have taken the Covenant in a worse sense, it calls rather
for repentance then p^rtinacy therein, etc.

Neither our Covenant nor our wills are to bind or force any man's conscience,
but our covenant and Gods word binds as to endeavor conjunction and
uniformity in Church discipline, according to Gods word and the example of
other the best reformed Churches, not to the Scotch Presbytery, except as
aforesaid we are also bound to exterpate heresy, Schism, profaneness, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and to discover those that make
faction or parties among the people, etc.

Men of weak consciences and such as have been seduced, we will with all
gentleness admonish as brethren, instruct with love and meekness, till God
shall give them repentance to the knowledge of the truth 2 Timothy 2. 25. and be
tender to tender consciences to the uttermost: so long as they make not parties
Sects, Conventicles, nor labor to seduce others, and draw them from their
obedience to lawfu^l authority, if so, law must punish them according to the
degree of their offense* and this is not to force conscience, but to punish
fact, in obstinate and turbulent persons.

Nor will the Presbyterians molest any Brother under any pretense, but upon
apparent heresy, and Schism, not in one person, but as it shall appear by
holding parties and factions, nor will the Presbyterians be their own Judges,
but the word of God shall judge between both, from whence we are able if
Sectaries were not wilful, or would compare Scripture with the Scripture to
show that many things that Sectaries hold for truths, or manifest Errors: And
we shall ever hold that rule to do as we would be done unto, and would
persuade Sectaries to practice that lesson which they do not toward us: for
they, would lay intolerable burdens upon us, but not touch them with one of
their fingers.

We shall ever observe the ways of Christ, and his Apostles for our example,
not make any one Nation nor person our rule, This is the Covenant we have taken
it in this sense and in no other. And in this we must per^ist, and not repent;
except that we have not bin so vigorous in pursuance thereof as we ought.

MInd the own good, cleave fast to the House of Commons, let no sorcery or
Sophestry divide you from them, enforce not, nor be importunate with them for
Church Government, leave it to their wisdoms, to measure out of the Clergy
what may be for the quiet and profit of the people, etc.

We mind the good of others or our own, and desire to bring home erring
sheep to the sheepesold of uniformity, and shall ever cleave to the house of
Commons for redress against Seditious Sectaries, nor need that honorable
house be importuned to do justice: submissive requests in making our greivances
known is not importunity. We have betrusted them withal and we leave all to
their wisdoms and care, to settle Order and Government in the Church and
Commonweal, for the peace and benefit of both, and wish there were no
underhand dealing used by those of contrary judgments to disturb the peace of
both and to traduce us: But God will defend the just truth seeks no corners,
nor pretends any thing she professes not to deceive any.

THe Lords are not to go before the Commons in determining what concerns the
Nation. Their large answer to your last Petition for Church Government, and
suppression of Conventicles, insinuates they would allure you from the Commons,
therefore observe them watchfully, and trust them accordingly etc.

The Lords and Commons make but one Parliament, but we petition them a part as
two distinct Houses. We bless God for the happy concurrence that is between
them, for public peace and benefit and thankfully accept their answer to our
last, and last petitions. But the pamphleter snews the envy of sectaries, their
seditious endeavor, to devide between the two houses* and between two
Kingdoms, care not how or whom they belly* to make quarrels: because in times
of destraction looseness is a Law, to disordered and lawless persons. It is
better such men be observed then trusted.

THe Clergy you kn^w most of them that now stickle against the Sepratists or
independants, do it for their own ends to retains their Glory in a distinction
of Clergy. Their domination in judging of Doctrine, Discipline, and
Ecclesiastical Censures, and their profit in pretenses of Tithes, all with the
sepratists dis^^^^^ and oppose, which is the true cause of the quarrel between
them, etc.

The Presbyterian Clergy we know are men of conscience, learning, piety, and
holy life, by whose prayers and sufferings (as a means) we are preserved to
this day, they stickle not against Sepratists, or Independants in displeasure
against their persons, but their erroneous opinions: Nor seek they glorious
distinctions, nor domination in judgment, as any end to themselves, but as it
shall be found consonant to the will of Jesus Christ: They aim not at their
profit in the right of Tithes, but as it has bin an Ecclesiastical right, and
due to the Ministry, held out in holy Scripture, Heb. 7. 5 6, etc. continued
since the Primitive times, And as it is established by the Laws of this
kingdom: The labourer is worthy of his hire.

That the Sepratists or Independants deny any of these, I deny; except for
self end, for there more honor and greater profit: For the glory, domination,
judgment, censuring, etc. that the dissenting party assume, is more every way
then the Presbyterian has or seeks, Separatists maintain that there is an
entire power of all government in every single Congregation.) of which the
Clergy is chief) there censures right or wrong admit no higher appeal, is not
this domination equal to a King? has a Pope or more? Or what can he ask more.

And for their profit they aim at unknown benefit, not contented with the
Tithes, which customarily have bin paid, and is a certainty, for convenient
subsistence, but expect from every one of there, Congregation, a far larger
gratuity, not so little as double the value of tithes, nor hold him worthy a
Disciple that does not by private offerings exceed it* I might instance
particulars, but I will forbear, and shall desire all rational men to observe
but generals look upon the men, their wives, children, etc. note there garb,
ga^lantry, fashions, riches, and increase of wealth within 3. years past and I
shall need say no more, let the juditious Judge: it may be it will be objected
that the Presbyterians are not exempt in all this, and seek pluralities too:
my answer is modest for I cannot call evil good it is possible some such there
are but it is but for the present they are subject to command and will obey:
There loss have been much and there labors are great, by which expenses ri^e
high, we neither allow such things, nor justify them, but desire a holy
reformation in these things as in other, according to that of Tim. 2. 11. and ^
Tim. 3. 2, 3, 4. etc.

Nor is this the cause of quarrel or difference between the Presbyterians and
them, as they would pretend to delude the people [except as they make it there
quarrel for self ends] The contest between us in concerning things of order,
wherein Gods glory and the Kingdoms peace is chiefly concerned, by a holy
uniformity which is the thing the Presbyterians seek and Sepratists oppose.

The former would have all Congregations governed as one Church in one order,
according to divine right. The latter would be left at liberty, that every
Congregation may have power and government within it self. The Presbiterian
would have only porochiall Congregations, the Sepratists would have select
Congregations, out of all the parishes of a City (or County) if some out of all
will enter themselves, some to this Church, some to that (fewest to the
Congregation or Parish in which they live) as their fancy (which they call
conscience) leads them; and not only so but they would that every person in a
family, Son, or servant, etc. shall by the same fancy claim liberty to be of
what Church they will, if there be ten in a Family, those ten may be of ten
several Churches, and so be made incapable of Society, and family duties, what
is this but confusion? and against the rule of Scripture, or example of all or
any reformed Churches; what is this liberty but libertinisme? and it must needs
end in looseness, and profaneness; besides it must needs be destructive to the
peace of the common weal.

Now that which the Presbyterians would* have and for which they supplicate, as
that which (doubtless) is consonant (...) the holy Scripture, is, that every
Minister, as a shepherd should be over his porochiall flock: as they that are
appointed over them, of whose souls they must give an account, Hebr. 13. 17.
these he is to keep, feed and cherish* The 7. Churches of Asia had seven
Angels; that is, seven Ministers over them: Rev. 1. 20. and each Church had
his particular Angel over it; not confusedly as the Independants would have it
but one Angel was over the Church of Ephesus! one Angel over the Church
Smerna, an other over the Church of Pergam^^, etc. and each Church was (...)d
to one and the same order, as appears in compa^ing that (...) Ephesus,
(commended, that they hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans, Rev. 26.) with that
of Pergamos, blamed for suffering the doctrine of the Nicholaitans among them,
Revel. 2. 15. and that of Thyatira reproved for suffering those that by false
doctrines seduced the people, verse. 20. and the sin is aggravated, because they
were forewarned, and time given to reform.

The Shep^eard, o^ pasture over a parochial flock has them ever in his eye,
may see which straggles, and which is weak and is always ready to help them;
but select Congregations that are scattered all the week some a mile, some five
miles from there shepherd, cannot be observed, tended nor cherished, but are
left to live (as too many such do at this day) to their lusts, in disorder and
scandalous manner; under the notion of Religious men; yet void of civil
honesty, and justice: How disagreeable such a way is to the rule of Gods word
or to the peace or laws of a well constituted commonweal; and how agreeable
the Presbyteriall way is to both: I leave to all juditious, or rational men to
consider; and advise all men as they love the honor of God, and the good of
the Kingdom, to be wary of rash conjunction with such private Congregations,
least they foolishly ensnare their Consciences; and after much heartbreaking
return, by weeping cross.

This is one maine difference, and cause of the quarrel between us if it be a
quarrel, but I never counted it a quarrel but a dispute: only I use the
Pamphleters own word, who it seems, and the rest of his society mean to make
a quarrel of it: There are diverse other particulars wherein we disagree, which
for brevity I must omit my aim in this tract, ^e^^ing only to give a short
answer to his seditious Pamphlet, to undeceive seduced people, that mean well,
but are ensnared in their consciences by Sectaries, who as the Prophet says;
set Trappes to catch men.

Nor should I have undertaken to set my pen to paper to Answer him but that
after three weeks time or more, I see it was omitted by all of more
abi^lities, my end is Gods glory, and my aim the public good, to which I
devote my self, neither seeking favor, nor fearing frowns; Conscience and
Covenant command thus much. From

George Smith Gent.
Imprimat. Io. Downam

FINIS.

