A Complete PRACTICE OF Physic.

Wherein is plainly described, The Nature, Causes, Differences, and Signs, of
all Diseases in the Body of Man.

With the choicest CURES for the same.

By John Smith, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, for Simon Miller at the Star in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WHen I consider that men (in this our scribbling age) care not what foolish and
nonsensical stuff, they obtrude upon the world; so that thereby there may but a
little profit accrue unto themselves: I am almost deterred from presenting to
thy view this Treatise; lest thou should at first sight conceive it to be of
the same Genius; yet I hope, nay am confident, to find thee more ingenious then
inconsiderately to pass censure without perusal of the Book it self; which, I
presume, is such as cannot but give the most judicious Reader satisfaction:
containing in it self, not only most select Remedies for every Disease,, but
also laying open to the meanest capacity, the Causes, Symptoms, or Signs of
them: so that any one (that is not either wilfully, or maliciously blind)
cannot but plainly see this Treatise most wonderfully conducing to the public
good, and such as may (by Gods blessing, which is in all things the Primum
mobile) be a means to help many at their need, who either by reason of their
own wants, or distance of place cannot conveniently repair to a Physician. Of
those remedies the Author here makes use of, I hope no one will have cause to
doubt; They are such as contain in them, all the marrow of Sennertus, Riverius,
and all other Authors, any way Famous or Excellent; a Catalogue whereof, you
will find hereunto adjoined.

The method of the Book is new, and never before attempted; but such as thou will plainly perceive is best, for the ease and satisfaction of the Reader. One
thing more I have to say, which also is one main reas of my publishing this
Treatise: that is, The earnest desires of many learned friends of the Author,
that this work of his might not any longer ly in private hands; or the public
be hindered of so great a benefit: and that also my learned friend Doctor John
Smith might be had in perpetual remembrance for his good will to his Country
and Commonwealth.

April 6. 1656. Which also is the earnest desire of your real friend, J.
Ridgley.

Authors made use of in this Treatise.
A
Arantius. Arculanus.
B
Bauhimus.
C
Crato. Celsus.
D
Doringus.
F
Fabritius. Faber. Forestus. Fernelius. Fuchsius. Florentinus.
G
Galen.
H
Hippocrates. Heurnius. Hollerius. Hen. de Bra^. Helideus. Horstius. Dr.
Harvey.
I
J. Lipsius.
L
Laurentius. Lobelius.
M
Dr. Maynard. Massarias. Mnesitius of Athens. Mercatus.
P
Paraeus. Platerus. Paracelsus.
R
Rulandus. Rondeletius. Riverius.
S
Schenkius. Sennertus. Spiegelius. Scaliger. Sanenarola. Schrekeros. Smetius.
T
Trallianus.
V
Valesius.
W
Wierus.
A Complete Practice OF PHYSIC.
ABORTION is a symptom of things thrust out.

The Cause is the expulsive faculty, provoked; or the retentive, hurt: which is
done by the air, too much voiding of excrements, motion, Venery, diseases,
natural debility of the womb, or the child; of the retentive faculty, by the
first birth; the stinck of a candle put out, Castoreum Galbanum, from the child
diseased by naughty seed; from want of superfluity of nourishment from the
disease of the mother, distempers, sharp fevers, looseness of the Ligaments, the
womb gaping, shortness of the Intestins, dissolved unity of the parts
adjoining, from swooning, convulsion, pain, sneesing, slipperiness of the
matrix from a flegmatic* humor. Aph. 45. s. 5. Diagnostick Signs, Aph. 37, 38,
-- 52. 53. Prognostics. In Abortion women are in worse condition then in
natural birth: for unripe apples fall not unless they be pulled often times,
especially the first Abortion, causes barrenness. Abortion is most dangerous
in the sixth, seventh and eighth months.

Preservation. The cause must be resisted; it often times proceeds from a
stegmatick humor, Internal and Topical remedy must be astringent. Specialties
are Corals, cochineal, shaving of Ivory.

Take Red coral prepared I dram, Pearl prepared half a dram, shavings of Ivory
I dram, Mastick half a dram, Manus Christi with Pearls 2 drams; make a powder.

The Cure. If you cannot prevent it, you must by all means procure Abortion.

Question. Whether straightness of the Matrix can cause Abortion? It is
affirmed: as straightness of the stomach may case vomiting.

Affection Hypochondriacal is a sink of humors melancholic, and often times of
slegmatick and choleric collected in the branches of vena porta, the Caeliaque
artery and the Meseraiques, especially in the left hypochondre, by reason of
the concoction of the spleen hurt, without putrefaction from whence vapors
that have the nature of these things, and part of the humor, do stir up
various symptoms, as loathing, vomiting, belching, sour corruption, and burnt
like sut, (whence it is that Senn. will have the case of Fabr. Cent. 4. obs.
32. not to proceed from the seed, but to be hypochondriacal) many winds, which
Senn. will have to be contained in that cavity of Spiegelius on the left side,
sadness after meat, costiveness by the drines of the vessels, heat of the
hypochondres, urine sometime thick sometime thin, troubled panting of the
heart, swooning, thirst, difficulty of breathing, Vertigo, falling sickness,
palsy, Weariness, troublesomesse, it differs from hypochondriacal melancholy,
because in the affection hypochondriacal, many are not melancholy.

The Cause is a sink of humors collected, by reason of the cold of the
stomach, weakness of the spleen, hear of the liver, dryness of the intestines,
and the Pancreas, obstruction of the vessels, especially of the Pancreas, and
fault of the milky veins, chiefly in virgins, and in women by the fault of the
womb, and stopping of their Courses.

Diagnostick signs. If it come from the Spleen, it is stretched out and hard,
the face is ill colored.

If from the Liver, that is stretched forth.

If in the Mesentery vessels, etc, there are winds, noyses, and hard nesse.

If in the stomach, concoction is hurt.

If from the womb, there is a noise of the womb, and the Courses are stopped.

Prognostics. The disease is obstinate by reason of a contrary temper of the
bowels and grosnesse of the humor.

The Emrods, Melancholic veins, the Courses do often cure it: also bleeding of
the left nostril, black urine.

Women are seldom troubled with it but never cured.

Thick urine is best.

The Cure. The first Indication is, that the humors must be evacuated by
gentle moistures and coolers, by opening the Emrods, by vomit, by diuretics.
If this be fruitless, we must respect two things, 1. Steel, which is the best
for all obstructions and melancholic diseases, by reason of the brimstone it
abounds with: wherefore we must see to it, that it be not over calcined; for so
it will rather bind, the brimstony part being taken away: the filings of steel
or prepared steel is given, which is done, if the filings be steeped in
vinegar, dried, and powdered: or else the crocus, or tincture, or wine, or
oxymel, or syrup, or electuary, or roles of steel. The dosein substance, for
middle age is 1 scruple, or not under 2 scruples, nor above 1 dram and half be
administered. It is given best in the Spring and Fall; for in Summer the hear,
in the Winter the cold hinders. Let it be taken fasting, and after that, let
the Patient walk one hour or two; if the party be weak, walking may be omitted.
Let him dine four hours after. At first let it be given every third day, and
afterward every day. Some the first days cast it off again: but sometimes it is
conveniently given to 30 days. We must see that the steel pass thorough the
Belly, which is known by the black Excrements; and if it come not so, every 4.
day we must purge with pills, or Clysters. After the tenth day, purge gently,
and abstain two days from the use of it. That it may descend the sooner, you
may add purgations to it and correctors, and give it in pills, 2. The Patient
may go to the sharp waters and hot baths, they that drink of them purge forth
black excrements by reason of the vitrials. The sour waters called
Swalbacenses, Griesbachienses, Egranae, the hot Baths of Baden, Carolius. Also
medicaments made of Tartar.

2. The weak parts must be corrected and strengthened by internal and topical
means: so a cold stomach by inward heats, a hot liver by topicals, or by
cooling Clysters, or give the pulp of the citron with the shell for so it will
longer stay in the stomach, or whole grains of pepper. Or to a man that is long
fasting give some Cooler, which will presently go to the Liver, especially if
he do not exercise moderately, or give such heats that are below the heat of
the Liver, and which for that do not increase its distemper, as Egrimony
Fumitory, Succory. So the stomach being strengthened, you may safely give cool
things that concern the Liver; or give such things to drink, the mixture
whereof is not discovered by a new and first concoction, but by the second and
third, as Spirit of Vitriol.

If it come from the Courses stopped, a vein must be opened.

ANEURISMA, Is not a humor from the running forth of the arterial blood, as
Galen and Platerus etc. will have it; for so the blood should as well spread it
self broad ways, because it would color the skin, because it would easily
putrisie; but it is a humor by the opening of the inward coat of the Arteries,
and by dilatation of the outward coat: it is opened either by unskilful opening
of a vein, when as the outward coat which is the softer grows together again,
and the inward coat remains open: or from some external cause. Sen. l. 5. p.
1. c. 42. Fabr. obs. 44. cent. 3.

Diagnostick signs. It is a soft humor yielding to the touch, sometimes with,
sometimes without pulsation; it differs not in color from the other skin, it
yields to the touch, and sometime not. Prognostic, New Aneurisms may be
cured, but old not. Section is most dangerous, it proceeds often times from hard
childbirth, also in the throat.

The Cure. Lay on an astringent, and some repelling remedy. A plate of lead any
way. The manner of cutting, see in Sen. l. cit. but it must not be attempted.
See Pareus l. 6.

APPETITE Wanting: the Cause, Because there is either no sucking, or it is not
perceived. 1. When nourishment abounds in the whole body. 2. When raw humors
and gross, stick in the stomach. 3. When there is obstruction of the veins. 4.
From the use ^f far, sweet and clammy things. Sucking is not perceived. 1. When
the brain is hurt. 2 By reason of some disease in the mouth or the stomach, as
from distempers which whether it be hot or cold, exceedingly, causes want of
appetite: Often times it comes from drinking of wine, from worms, from the
matrix. Some will have the Devil to be the cause of long abstinence, who
conveyeth meat into the body, and yet there are no signs of it; and the same
things does naturally happen to Beasts. Some say, it comes from some hidden
quality: some, they are fed by the air; but what shall be changed into the
nature of the body wasted? Some say, they are fed by vapors that are inherent
in the air: but why then are not all men nourished the same way? Some live by
drinking water, but many drink no water. Some say that fleame sticks in the
body that cannot be wasted; but many of these were not phlegmatic, but rather
dry and costive, and so old men would live long without meat. Some will have it
that they live by their grease melted and turned into blood; but it is false
that their grease is melted and flows to the stomach, and is changed into
blood, and by hunger it is not changed into nourishment, but is discussed,
Fort. Liceous says, that there is no necessity of nutrition: because neither
the soul, nor the body stand in need of it: so old men are less nourished:
also generation and augmentation cease. Senn. says, that the cause is, by
reason that nothing (or else, not but in a long time) is consumed, because of a
certain proportion of the humor to heat: So Scal. Ex. 328. writes that coals
of Juniper will keep fire a whole year unwasted; but that disposition is
brought upon the humor, when by diffusion of a melancholy humor it is fixed,
that it cannot receive the activity of heat. Now a peculiar quality is
communicated to a melancholic humor from the Matrix; for they were almost all
maids, at those years that the Courses are wont to break forth.

Signs Diagnostick. If there be no sucking, the forces cannot fail, and there
are signs of repletion; but if it come from obstruction, the Belly is loose. If
sucking be not perceived, the forces are cast down. Progn. Aph. 33. s. 2.
Respiration, Appetite in the sick is is excellenr. Aph. 6. s. 6. Want of
appetite in children is dangerous; but if want of appetite fall upon the
beginning or vigor of the disease, it is not so dangerous; for they want
little nourishment, and if they eat well, they are the worse. If it fall upon
the declination, that is ill. If in a disease the appetite be cast down, and it
suddenly come again, that is deadly; for the Brain is hurt unless a Crisis
went before it.

The Cure. The cause must be taken away: sharp and sour things cause hunger,
as also scowring things, as figs, sauce. If it proceed from the matrix, there
are signs of the matrix affected, Symptoms sometimes abate, and there are many
symptoms present. How aid shall be given to the matrix; See (concerning
Suffocation and distemper of the matrix) Senn. l. 3. p. 1. s. 2. c. 2.

ANTHRAX, or a Carbuncle, is a Tumor that rises from adust blood that is
extreme hot, making an eschar on the part affected, of a diverse color like a
rainbow, with a little wheal on the head.

The Cause, is gross adust blood, or black choler. Signs Diagnostick. It
begins from a small push, or from many; pricking going before: in a short time
by way of fluxion it always increases with extreme heat and pain; especially
toward the evening: then follows a Fever, and a Troup of most naughty
symptoms. Prognostic. That is most pernicious, pestelential, black, wan, which
vanishes away, which is fastened near a principal part, which had a Fever
going before it. That which is red, small, not pestilent, is the safest.

The Cure. The first Indicant is a cooling of the blood by general means, as
Diet, opening of a vein, alteratives, but not purgatives. 2. The heart must be
freed from the malignity, by internals and topicals, chiefly by the urine or
water, or decoction of Scabious. 3. The cause that is joined with it must be
voided, with scarification deep enough, with cupping glasses, Leeches; yet if
the humor flow thither too much, lay plantain boyld with bran upon the
Carbuncle, to repel, especially if it be near a noble part, and then wash the
wound with salt water. Lay not on the scarified place emollients, but dryers,
and such as resist putrefaction, as Egyptiac, or meal of Orobus with oxymel, or
scabious or devils bit green, brayed with old hogs grease, the yolk of an egg
and salt. Pareus l. 21. has proved often this following.

Take S^ot. 4 ounces, Common salt 2 ounces, 2 yolks of eggs, mingle them.
Radish roots cut in pieces, draw the poison mightily. Paracelsus.

If all be fruitless, lay on a caustic, for the sense is lost. The Eschar
must not be taken away by emollients, or when the Carbuncle it self makes a
crust. Senn. had rather use roots of Scabious and Comfrey, Radish, Treacle,
Soot, Mithridate, Leaven, Figs, Rue, wallnuts that are old, vitriol, etc. and
with these remove the crust if it impostumate round about, and there appear a
red circle it is a sign of future safety; for the crust being taken away, the
ulcer will be cleansed with honey of Roses, and juice of Smallage, etc.

The Cure of a pestilent Anthrax differs. For a vein must not be opened,
unless perhaps under the Carbuncle for evacuation: always attractions must be
applied, as Pigeons dung, Soap, Doves-foot, Onions roasted under the embers,
and the uppermost of them. Some say if a circle be made about a Carbuncle with
a Sapphire, that will stop it from spreading any farther, and quench the poison.
Senn. l. 5. p. 1. chapter 11.

APOPLEXY is a symptom whereby all the animal actions perish.

The cause is not, obstruction of the ventricles of the brain; for they breed
no animal spirits, experience is against it, in those that are opened: nor do
those fall into this disease, that are sick of water in their head, in whom
only the ventricles of the forepart are obstructed; but first fleam or a
melancholic humor stopping the beginning of the marrow of the back, as it is
demonstrated in the Varolian Section. 2. Blood, either running forth by a
stroke, or some other way, and stopping that part. 3. A phlegmatic disposition,
where in the vessels of the brain extended by plethory, press upon that part.
4. If a contusion of the skull press on that part of the brain. 5. From a
narcotick vapor, whence arises stupidnesse in those that are cured. 6. A
wound of the brain, and from thence an effusion or troubling of the spirits.
Aph. 58. s. 7.

Differences, The strongest i^, wherein breathing cease, and there is neither
froth nor snorting: the weaker is, where there is froth with snorting. The
weakest, where breathing is violent unequal with intermission: Weakest of all,
when breathing is ordinate.

Signs Diagnostick. It differs from a Lethargy, because such as are in a
Lethargy may be wakened, and fall asleep again, there is a Fever with it;
Those that have an Apoplexy cannot be awakened, but when they are wakened,
they fall into a Palsy without a Fever. This differs from Carus, for in Carus
breathing is entire, it creeps on by degrees, being pricked they feel; but it
is otherwise in an Apoplexy, It differs from the suffocation of the mother,
because in this the color of the face is changed and made more wan, but not in
an Apoplexy, in this the power of feeling often remains, nor is the breathing
hurt: and if breathing should be hurt, the pulse would be hurt also: but not in
an Apoplexy. It differs from swooning, because in swooning the color of the
face is changed, the teeth, the mouth, the hands are fastened; but they are
loose in an Apoplexy: in swooning there is no breathing and no pulse: it
differs from a strangling distillation, because this strangleth a man that is
sound in his sense and motion. Prognostic. An Apoplexy of the first and second
degree, is mortal. Aph. 43. s. 2. An Apoplexy is from the first cause which
Hippocrates means, Aph. 42. s. 2. An Apoplexy which comes from the third and
fourth cause, is easily cured. Apoplecticks must not be buried before 72 hours
be past, because all the humors are moved within that time.

The Cure. The first indicant is, freeing from obstruction, which is done if
they can be awakened. The second is, the fortifying of the brain, head powders
described by Senn. l. 1. p. 1. c. 2. If it come from the first cause, means to
awaken them being premised, if the forces will bear it, and there be plenty of
blood, in summer, spring, and the party be young, a vein must be opened by
turns in the arm, with a large orifice, Or if we may not do this, cupping
glasses with scarification must be applied to the Legs, Arms, Loins, Shoulders;
but not to the back part of the Thorax. After this by general and by topical
means, the matter must be derived and voided from the head; yet vomits must not
be given, because they would put the party in danger to be choked: Strong
purgations must be administered, as Pills dissolved if he can swallow them. 2.
The brain must be fortified, but if it come from the second cause there is need
to open a vein, or to apply cupping glasses with scarification, and to use
diversion, evacuation, and strengthening.

Question. Whether repulsives may be used? Galen uses them: Forest us denies;
because this disease hastneth most quickly to its state; because there is no
defluxion. Sen. distinguishes, and says, that it belongs to an Apoplex from
the third cause.

ARTHRITIS is a pain or swelling with a pain, of the joints from a sharp watery
humor, which partly by extending, partly by sharpness, does rend the
membranous parts, and causes them to endure pain.

The Cause is a watery, sharp, salt, lactaceous humor, as is collected by the
pain* the hard swellings, and the indisposition of them to come to suppuration,
heat and dryness of the Liver and Spleen, the diet, an Arthritical disposition;
for though there be the same temperatenesse in diet, yet one man will be
Arthritical, another not. A suppression of urine and of sweat, which always
almost gooth before the paroxisime. Pareus l. 17. says, It is a malignant
matter: because the pains are sharper then in an ulcerated Cancer: because when
remedies are applied, it is often more violent. Galen prescribes Theriac.

Signs Prognostical. Arthritis preserves from many diseases. Aph. 49. s. 6.
Swelling or melancholy veins appearing are good; If it return not again, it is
mortal. They that are costive can never be cured of it. It is taken away either
being dissolved, or else it is changed into bloody watery matter, or to hard
knots, or is carried to the principal parts. Laur. says it is sometimes
brought to suppuration, if the humor by ligature be pressed forth into the
fleshy parts.

The Cure. 1. Revulsions must be applied: as if there be plethory, fevers, and
strength, a vein must be opened, of the same side, or if the hand be ill, in
the opposite hand, by cupping glasses with scarification, blood-suckers by
chasings, ligatures. 2. Means to evacuate. After that, give one purgative at
the beginning, before meat, whilst the forces stand, of such things that are
indifferent strong. Whilst the purge works, the foot, or part affected, must
be laid higher, or must be guarded with defensatives. Vomits are excellent.
Then diaphoreticks at first, and colder diuretics, as Hartshorn, and the root
of the Clot burr 3. Topicals that are Anodyns. Forestus praises Duck-weed and
flowers of Camomill with Barley meal boyld in milk, that they are wonderful
good. Spiegelius commends the distilled water of the roots and flowers of
Meedsweet. Fat things are hurtful, we must often proceed to Narcoticks. See
Aph. 25. s. 5. First use resolvers and moderately repecussives, of Plaintain,
Frog-spawn water, Housleeke, Purslane, Roses, with moderate resolvers in any
form; but the repellers must be cold and moist. Resolvers are the water of the
flowers and leaves of Mullens, Earthworms, decoction of Mugwort roots in sea
(or salt) water. Spiegetius commends the Urine of men, salt of Urine, and the
spirit of salt tempered with water of Meede-sweet, anointed on the part with a
feather. The liquor of Snails resolved with salt in a copper vessel, or boyld
in vinegar and oil of Roses. Resolving suffumes are profitable: Pigeons dung
boyld in vinegar is good, and nettles boyld in wine.

Hard humors are cured with softning cataplasmes of old cheese, juice of
Tobacco, and by Fumes. Rotten cheese with the broth of a gammon of bacon, Scal.
adds the powder of a fire-stone burnt. See Senn. concerning Arthritis.
Storks-dung boiled in Hog's Grease. Schrekevos. The Sciatica requires only
resolvers and attractives.

If the pain be stretching forth, if the part will not retain the print of the
finger pressing it, wind with fleam does seem to be a true Arthritis. Some
unexperienced Chirurgians, supposing matter to be under; have opened it, with
great hurt to the patient. Fabr: Cent. 1. obs. 79. Cent. 4. obs. 84. saw the
Gowt cured by torture.

The Physician is often times deceived thinking the cause to be hor. 1. If he
say, He is helped with hot means therefore it is cold, whereas by opening the
pores hot things may be cooled. 2. The pain is assuaged by cold things,
therefore it is hot; because cold things take away the sense, but not the
cause. 3. The pain is intense, therefore it is hot; since cold things by a
malignant poison can do the same. 4 The color is yellow, therefore it comes of
choler, because much fleam is died with a very little choler. 5. There is a
Fever and fiery colored Urine, therefore: but by reason of watchings and pain,
a Fever may arise. Pareus l. 17. Rulandus cured it by purging, sweating, with
the roots of Afarum 2 ounces, Centory the less two handfuls, a lath of Juniper
wood 1 pound, Juniper berry half a pound.

Preservation is made by diet: dunghill cocks and capons must be avoided, for
they are gouty by eating sand. Senn. Fat things must be eschewed, and things
that are fried; all must be seasoned with Mugwort, as it is wont to be done,
and Parsley. To ride and walk overmuch is very hurtful. The feet must be put
into new hot liquor of grapes pressed out. Some every month open a vein in the
great toes, or the feet: others, every month before the full moon, set cupping
glasses to the soles of the feet; without scarification one may purge.
Medicaments against the Gowt are profitable, which see in Senn. The joints must
be strengthened many ways.

Question. What is the cause? Fernelius says, that the antecedent cause is
without the Scull: 1. Because many Veins end there, and there is heaviness of
the head. 2. Because the excrement gathered in the brain is purged, forth by
the nostrils and the palate. Laur. and Senn. argue against this; But should it
be collected within the scull, and should run from thence by the palate,
always nauseating, vomiting, a cough should go before Arthritis. If it come
from the Heart or Liver, bubo's in the groins and arm-holes, should go before
it; for there are properly the emunctories.

Fernelius will have the matter descend, not by the vessels but under the skin:
Laur. denies it. 1. Because Fevers end in Arthritis, whose causes are in the
veins. 2. It is often cured by opening a vein. 3. Because before the paroxysme,
the veins swell and are red. 4. It should cause shivering.

Fernelius will have fleam to be the cause: it is not blood, for that without
the vessels would corrupt, and putrefie; not melancholy, for that would go to
a scirrhus, nor would it suddenly affect us; not choler, for that would turn to
matter: not salt fleam, for that would exulcerate.

2. Whether every pain of the joints be Arthritis? I deny it: for so disjonting
and pains of the pox, and pains of the hips in maids, and women in childbirth,
also a humor bred by degrees in the joints should be Arthritis, which is
false; for as oedematous humors is rather caused by it then Arthritis: so by
the drying up of humors in the joints there grows pain in the joints, Aph.
16. s. 3. yet not Arthritis.

3. Whether may we purge, when the pain is? Crato denies it: Ep. 167. also he
denies that causticks are convenient in the feet, because we may not evacuate
the part affected: whence Erastus says, that the Leprosy is ill cured by
diaphoreticks, and Crato says, the same of a dysenterie by Clysters, but
Pareus calls it an opinion full of error. l. 17. Hollerius.

Arthritis that is vagrant is Scorbutical, and a pain of diverse parts.

The Cause. It is a thin watery matter of all the humors, swelling and
malignant. The parts affected are the Nerves: because it is very luxuriant in
the back and the loins, by reason of the marrow of the back that lies under,
because the action of the nutritive faculty is hurt: because it is cured with
remedies good for the Nerves.

The kinds. 1. It has Tumors about the joints, which if they last long they
bring forth spots, as in the Scurvey, which sometimes coming to suppuration,
are turned unto a malignant ulcer: chiefly about the feet, whence worms like
Cantharides are brought forth. Sometimes the whole matter lies upon one part:
whence the whole body is freed from pain, an Impostume grows, which ends in
a Fistula.

2. Without swelling: this often causes learnesse, with weakness of the
joints.

Diagnostick signs. There are wandering fierce pains all the body over,
especially in the back and the Loins. First, It seaseth on one part only, then
suddenly it fasteneth on the next: the most are bound in their bellies: their
Urine is like to those that are well; but that sometimes little worms, like
those thar breed in rotten cheese, swim in the bottom of the urinal, and are
mingled with the excrements of the belly. Some have a good stomach, others not.
Prognostic. The cure often extends to some weeks.

The Cure. Empiricalls are: Earthworms provided diverse ways. Some give the
ashes of a quick Mole, burnt with wine at the decrease of the Moon.
Dogmaticalls. Take Serna powder 2. drams, infuse this 12 hours, in Betanywater
6 ounces, strain it hard, add Diacarthamum half an ounce, mingle it.

Take roots of Devils-bit 1 ounce, round Birthwort 3. drams, Sage, Betany of
each one handful, Southernwood, Rue, Perwinkle, Savin, of each 1 pugil, boil
all in fair water, with 4 ounces of this decoction for a dose; pass through a
colender 5 Earthworms, thrice washed in wine and powdered; then mingle Treacle
half a dram, cinnamon in powder 1 scruple, Sugar what may suffice: drink it, and
sweat upon it, repeat this for some days together.

The Impostume is broke with Plantane and salt, beaten in a mortar, and
applied; the Impostume being broken some lay on a Cataplasm of Salomons seal
with Ale, with the roots of the Oke-fern. Others do strew on the powder of a
Mole. H. de Bra.

ASTHMA, is the hurt of Breathing, without a Fever, with a noise, and
frequency of breathing, from the straightness of the windpipe: if it be taken
properly the disease is stubborn and long.

The Cause. use increased by the straightness of the windpipe, obstructions
from the plenty of the humors, the thickness, stone, hard swelling, that
matter is seldom sent from the head, it is often collected by degrees: it is
most commonly sent by the veinartery, or the arterious vein; for should it flow
often from the head, there would be a cough: because those that are asthmatical
are commonly Cachecticall, and their feet swell, because it often cease
without expectorating: because by suppression of the Emrods arises
constipation from some swelling humor, compression by sinking down, and
growing together, constriction by gross vapors rising from the womb.

Whatsoever is troublesome to the instruments of breathing, if it cannot easily
be removed, it causes one to Cough; if hardly, it causes Asthma; for there is
not strength enough to cough it out: but if more hardly, it causes Orthopnoea;
and if it cannot be cast out, it is a strangling Catarrh.

Diagnostick signs. If it come from a thick cause bred by leisure, an Asthma
comes by degrees, and it is continual. If it flows thither, it increases at
sometimes, an in Autumn, winter, in the night. If it come from the Brain, there
be signs of a Catarrh. If it come from the Liver, there is a swelling of the
Feet, and an ill habit. If a thick humor stop the Wine-pipe, there is a Cough
with a noise: it is bred by degrees, there is Catarrh, the Patient is sound. If
the fleam stick in the stomach, there is a Cough with a sound, and seldom any
thing is expectorated, and the disease being obstinate, and lasting long
kills a man.

If it proceed from the dryness of the Lungs (so Heurnius saw a man's Lungs so
dry, that they were like a dry Apple) there is no spittle, the whole body is
lean.

Prognostic. It strangleth children, old folk cannot be cured, Aph. 40. s. 2.
young people hardly. It is dangerous in a sharp Fever. It is sometimes changed
into Peripneumonia, a Dropfy and an ill habit of the body.

The cure. In the Paroxism the cause must be pulled back, by chafings,
Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Clysters, and opening a vein if the forces will
admit; if the humor be thin, they must purge, Topicals must be emollient and
resolving. When the Paroxysm is extended beyond the fourth day, Vesicatories
must be laid to the Back, against the region of the Lungs.

Out of the Paroxysm, the matter prepared must be evacuated, then expectoratir
^eans must be given. The Breast mu^^ be anointed. If it come from a Catarrh,
the Brain must be purged. The Catarrh must be hindered. Use of old Treacle is
excellent, as of Diacalaminth, as of Aqua vitae with Elecampane: then dry the
matter with a decoction of Guaiacum, let the diet be attenuating: the drink
thin wine, water and honey; motion before meat, must not be sudden or vehement;
for so many have been choked.

APHTHAE. The cause is sometime a fault in the Mouth, when humors are
collected in it; or of the whole Body, as in malignant acute Fevers, or of
some part, as of the Head, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Belly, Matrix; in children
sharp milk corroding the Tongue, also milk corrupting which sends forth sharp
vapors.

The difference: Some are new, some old; some malignant, some not: some are on
the Tongue, some come on the Palate: some from Blood, some from choler.

Signs diagnostick. Little swellings are seen, sometimes red, sometimes black,
sometimes white, sometimes black and stinking.

Prognostics. Stinking, black, ulcerated, crusty, inveterated in children are
mortal: because you cannot apply means to them, by reason the parts are soft,
moist, whence they easily corrupt, corruption, of the bone in those that are of
years is dangerous. If they happen in acute pestilent Fevers, they are deadly.

The cure. For children, take away the sharpness of Milk from the Nurse by
general and Topical means. Give the child a draught of Honey of Roses, Diamoron
with Oxymel. First give astringent Syrups, then add discussers, if the Milk
concoct ill, suckle it not so often. If that be in vain, bring them to
suppuration, laying Figs on them; or boil Bran in water til it grow clammy,
strain it, and add Honey to the liquor; or with Milk or Mucilage, or syrup of
Juleps, or Gargarisms, or Pills to hold under the Tongue, and Lohocks for
Infants.

Where the Patient is of years, the humors must first be temperd. 2. The
conineut cause first requires astringents, and then Resolvers; If they be
malignant, Actius prescribes the Green water or Aegyptiac, or to dip the Probe
in scalding Oil, or in Aqua fort is which is not strong enough to work on
metals; this following, repelleth.

Take water of Honey suckle, Plantaine, Nuts, of each 3 ounces, Flowers of dry
red Roses 1. pugil, strain it, and dissolve in it syrup of Pomegranats and
Diam^ron, of each 1. ounce, mingle them.

The Spirit of Vitriol 2 drops, and of Honey 1 ounce is good. Crato Ep. 183.
For inveterate Aphthae, the ashes of Fennel-root burnt, either alone or mixed
with Honey are most profitable. Least, they should proceed from being anointed
with Mercury, Forestus bids to anoint the Mouth with oil of sweet Almonds. But
if a Gangreene or suffocation be feared, Repulsives may be used when they are
malignant.

BELLY STOPPED. The Cause: Want of choler as in Jaundies, and after purgation,
the choler and excrements being voided out: when the choler by a sedentary
life, and perpetual bending of the body flies back to the stomach: from
hunger, when all moisture is sucked from the starved parts, which happens
also to those that grow well: Fleam, covering the Intestins. So in the life of
J. Heurnius we read that J. Lipsius voided fleam by siege like to Guts: a hot
Liver, hard Excrements, the Palsy. Laur. c^ns. 7.

The cure varieth as the cause is. If from hardness of Excrements, a purging
Clyster brings forth the thin, and leaves the thick behind; wherefore you
shall give two or three Clysters merely emollient. After a purging Clyster,
emollients in meat are good, Whey, Malloes, fat things; much drink. Savanarola
persuaded the Duke of Ferrara when he was bound three days, to walk barefoot
on a marble pavement that was sprinkled with cold water: when he had gone fifty
paces, he went to stool exceedingly: But Brasavola says, This was a dangerous
remedy; for Torments and Flux of the Belly might follow. Some loose the Belly
with rear Eggs, some with the smell of Purgatives, others hold them in their
hands. Platerus used coughing and sneezing. Things are also profitably laid
outwardly to the Navel. In children it is stopped by Milk which is phlegmatic,
a weak stomach, error in Diet but not continual, with fainting and Diet, heat
of the Liver, and they seldom live healthfully.

The Cure. You must oppose the cause. The child's Nurse must use emollients,
Honey of Roses solutive may be given; If the Passage for ^holer be obstructed,
the decoction of the Roots of Grass, Fennel, Asparagus, is convenient; the
Belly must be moved by Suppositories and Clysters: The Belly must be anointed
with a softning Ointment, to which you may add sometimes some grains of
Scammony and Coloquintida: let him drink such things as are loosening.

A BOTCH is a Tumor or inflammation of the glandulous parts in the Groins,
Armpits, and under the Fars. Phyma and Phygethlon differ little from a Botch.

The Cause is faulty Blood, a Crisis, a Fever.

Signs Prognostic. If they are not malignant, they are not dangerous: if they
are long before they come to suppuration and continue long they commonly make a
Fistula; they are soonest ripe under the Armpits, later in the Groins, latest
under the Ears.

The Cure by general means. A Vein is good to be opened when the defluxion
cease, purging in the beginning and the end. Topicals must never be
Repellers, but Drawers and Resolvers, as cupping glasses, Leaven, Rosin,
Diachilum with Gums. It is best to cause suppuration, for being resolved they
soon return: the suppuration must be opened and consolidated. The cure of
Pockey botch is the same, but that the Pox must be cured also. The cure of a
Pestilent Botch. The tumor must first of all be scarified; for so the venom
is let out, and the humors are attracted by pain, or lay on a vesicatory after
attractives, as Ammoniacum, Roots of Li^ies, Scabious, Onions, filled with
Treacle and roasted: Cock chickens, young Pigeons, made bare at the Fundament,
Whelps cut in two: then lay on ripeners, and then digestives; but the wound
must be carefully kept open. If you fear it will Gangreen you must hinder it.
See Sennertus l. 4. c. 6. d. pest. l. 6. p. 4. c. 23. l. 5. p. 1. c. 6. Laur.
de Lue Ven. Paraus l. 21, and 18.

BULIMIA is Appetite increased, but dejection of forces. A dogs appetite is
always with vomiting, as in dogs, or in Diarrhaa.

The cause, is sucking in the Mouth of the Stomach; a humor that is
melancholic, sharp, sour, want of nourishment, because the heat consumes it,
by reason of Worms, use of scowringthings a long time; as Figs and Sauce, which
Rondeletius found true in himself. It often times comes from the Womb.

The cause of Bulimia is the cold of the stomach: But how? it is not credible
that a phlegmatic humor should prick, press forth, bind fast; because in
living Man there is no actual cold. Platerus says, It proceeds from the
contraction of heat by reason of the cold round about it; therefore we eat most
in Winter. Also Senn. thinks that the cold that encompasseth, does rend the
Orifice of the stomach; but does this disease happen always in Winter?

Signs Diagnostick of a dogs appetite: If it proceed from a sour humor, it
causes sour belchings, if from want of nourishment, the sick grow lean.

Prognostic. It easily passes into a constant vomiting, the Cholick, a
Dropsy, great hunger after diseases, threateus the making it to come again. In
chronical diseases, as the Quartane and Quotidian Fevers, and in a Dropsy, it
is mortal.

The cure of Dogs appetite: The cause must be evacuated, chiefly by vomit.
Meats must be given that bridle hunger, fat and clammy, Ox flesh, Hogs flesh,
the Brains of living creatures, new white starch; but they must be taken
sparingly. The most commodious alteratives are Wine, Spirit of Wine, Sagewine,
Treacle, Mithridate. Evacuating with Hiora, and then corroboratives.

Cure of Bulimia. If it come by fainting, it happens in the very paroxysm:
when the paroxysm is over, we must not presently feed the sick, but when the
forces are recollected; and then it is cured as is the Dogs appetite.

BLOOD-SPITTING. The cause is either a breaking of the vessel, which is known
by the great flux of Blood, and coming forth by heaps, and by the precedent
cause, as a blow, a fall, anger, much coughing or a corroding: and then some
sharp distillatives went before, or eating of sharp things, sorrow: little
pieces are cast forth with the Cough, bloody spittings are cast out but at some
times, or an^stomesis, and not by heans, but by little and little, some little
blood is cast forth, as from Venery. The other signs are absent.

The remote cause is the stopping of wonted evacuations; the fault of the
Spleen or of the Liver.

The Subject. If it come forth by spitting alone, it proceeds from the Gums; if
by scrawing, from the Throat; if it be voided more plentifully, and there be
signs of the Head affected, it comes from the Head: If by vomit, from the
Stomach; If by coughing, from the Breast.

Diagnostick signs. If the Cough be long it comes from the Breast, by reason of
the length of the way: If short, from the sharp artery: If mean, from the
Lungs; Blood black clotted, and sometimes stinking come forth of the Breast.
Like froth between white and red from the substance of the Lungs. A little
blood from the sharp Artery. A dull or no pain shows the Lungs to be
affected; a great pain, the Breast.

Prognostic signs. Spitting of blood from the Breast is dangerous, from the
Lungs more, from the sharp Artery less: because the vessels of the Breast are
smaller, and the corrption is poured into the Chest. The worst of all is
ulceration, Rupture is a less evil; an opening is easily cured. An ulcer of
the Breast is curable, but not of the Lungs.

The Cure. If it come by rupture or opening, the only Indication is to stop the
blood, and to heal it. Therefore, if a Vein be broken by coughing, let the
Catarrhs be stopped by all means. [See, for the Catarrhs.] After that, the blood
must be stopped by all kinds of revulsion: the quality of the blood that exceeds
must be tempered, the Choler must be purged, by mild remedies; Aloes and
Scammony must be for born: let Honey be mixed with all medicaments, because it
opens the Passages. Then we must consolidate with Syrup of Comfrey, Fennel:
which see in Senn. Take for six days every morning 4 ounces of juice of
Nettles, 1 dram of bloodstone, with the water or juice of Knotgrasse.
Trallianus gives 4 Scruples. It is given in Roles, Electuaries, infusion until
the liquor be red. See bleeding at the nose. If all be in vain, you must give
Laudanum opiatum, or some other Narcotick. The continual use of Germander is
most profitable. Crato ep. 184. Rul. Nettle-seed, Manard. commends the Roots
of the sharp Dock. If matter run out by corroding of a Vein in the Breast, or
else spittle with blood; it is cured as a Consumption, which comes from the
Lungs being corroded.

BLEEDING at the Nose, The cause is either the mouths of the Veins opened, or
plenty of blood and there are signs of plethory, of some urging of the
expulsive faculty by some sharp humor: and then there are signs of Cacochimia:
or the weakness of the Retentive faculty, and then often at times, and for
very small causes the Nose bleeds: or from outward causes, as provocation,
tickling, anointing with hot things, or from diairesis, or diapedesis if the
blood be watery, if phlegmatic Cacochymia do trouble the Patient.

Differences; It either comes from the Veins of the Nose; or of the thick
membranes of the third: sinus: and then for revulsion, Banhinus admonishes
that Topicals must be applied to the hinder part of the Head; often times it
comes forth of the Artery. If it be critical, it must not be stopped.

Prognostical. Melancholic and phlegmatic People endure it the worst.

The Cure. If it come by the mouth of the Veins opened by Plethory, that must
be taken away, and the blood must be pulled back from the Nostrils by opening a
Vein on the same side, and make a narrow Orifice: draw away at times one ounce
or two or sometimes four, by cuppings, ventoses must be applied to the Liver.
They stop it better if they be applied to the Foot on the same side, and to
both Feet, if blood run out at both Nostrils. Yet this caution must be used,
that they must not stay long on the same place, but before they cause fainting
they must be taken off. Forest. will have them with scarification to the Legs
and Shoulders, painful Ligatures must be made to the Limbs. Use chafings with
Salt and Vinegar. You must not stop the blood by internals and topicals, until
revulsion be made. Internals are good in any form. For. gave Hogs dung mixed
with Bole Armenick, that it might not be discerned; for this often times stops an
uncurable bleeding at the Nose.

Take seeds of Purflane, Plantain, Sorril, Endive, white Poppey, of each one
dram, Roots of great comfrey* ounce: boil these in sufficient water to nine
ounces, to the strained liquor add the syrup of My^^ils, Pomegranates, Poppey,
water Lillies, of each half an ounce, mingle them; the juice of Nettles and the
seed, blood stone. The last help Narcoticks. These that follow Heurnius holds
for secrets. Take white Poppey seed half a dram, of white Henbane one scruple,
blood Stone one scruple, red Coral one dram, mingle them, make a powder and
with Conserve of Roses six drams, for one Dose. Also water of Nettles one
ounce, powder of Man's Skull one scruple, mingle them; the juice of Nettles,
Purslane, Plantain, Yarrow.

By Topicals: Hogs dung applied to the Nose, cold water poured upon the Wrists,
if there be a Fever. Let the Mouth be kept full of cold water, if any thing be
drawn up into the Nose, this serves at all times. Juice of Nettles and
Plantain must be put into the Nose. Also glutinous medicaments, and Epithems,
and Fomentations; the ashes of white paper burnt must be put into the Nose. A
piece of chalk held in the ring finger on the same side. The Testicles must be
fomented with cold water, a sponge wet in Oxicratum must be put under the
Armpits, a Prony root must be held under the Tongue: the Stone of a Carp held
in the Mouth, the root of Nigella chewed held to the Nose; a Bank doller must
be bound close between the Eyebrows with bands; the flowers of the lesser
Dasie must be held in the Hand. The same taken inwardly do suddenly dissolve
clotted blood. Moss, water of Frogs spawn.

If it come from Acrimony of the matter, the Choler must be purged out and
temperd.

If it proceed from diapedesis, the watery humors must be purged; use the
decoction of Guaiacum, the meats must be thickning, etc. Heurnius uses first
Cupping glasses, and Ventoses to the Feet and Liver; afterward to the second
spondil of the Neck: then he uses chafings, Ligatures; after that,
bloodletting, then Internals and Topicals, that Moss which is called
Crepituslupi.

BLEEDING of Wounds. This proceeds from solution of continuity of the Veins and
Arteries. It is more hardly cured if the Artery be cut long or
overthwart-waies, then if it be cut cross in two; for often times Physicians
persuade that if the blood cannot be stopped, the Artery shall be cut cross
asunder.

The cure. Those things being used we said before, first the Orifice of the
Wound, or rather of the Vessel must be stopped; either by pressing of the Fingers
till it clots, or when this in Arteries has no place, in which the blood
congealeth not, and but seldom in Veins, the Vessel must be stopped with the
Fingers, or with medicaments. The most convenient is that Toadstool which is
called a Fuss, or that Matter beaten. Intercipients must be laid upon the part
affected. If in vain, Par. bids to take and bind the mouth of the Vessel toward
the root with a needle or a thread with as much of the flesh as the part will
suffer; for which end we are sometimes constrained to divide the skin that
covers that part, and to be long before we unbind it. But if the condition of
the part will not admit of this, we must apply Causticks, that may make a
crust, which Sen. allows not, and coo^mends rather in the place of them
Vitriol, which is not escharotick, but when it is burnt; but when it is Crude
it binds vehemently, and burns but little. Some strew on it powder of Crude
Vitriol. Others conveniently dissolve it in liquor, and apply it, unless
Nerves be undet. Sometimes we are forced to cut the Vessel in sunder being
brought to light, that the heat of the parts may compress the end of it. Some
when the Spring comes, that Frogs first cast forth their spawn, take a coorse
linen cloth so much as may serve, and wash it often in this spawn, and lay it
in the Sun to dry, and this they repeat three or four times, and so the cloth
being dried, at the time they need it, they cut a piece off twice greater then
the wound, and lay it on the wound.

BARRENNES. For. prescribed this that follows.

Take Saffron, long Pepper, Cardamnum, Pellatoty of Spain, of each half a dram,
tails of Scincus with the Reins 2 scruples, Galanga 4 Scruples, Rape seed,
Parsnip seed, Rocket seed, Nettle seed, ash-keys, of each one dram; Leeks,
white Ginger, choice Cinnamon, of each 2 drams, Electuary diasatyrion of Mesues
description 6 drams, with syrup of preserved Ginger, make an Electuary; keep it
in a Vessel of glass; Take one hour before supper the quantity of a Nut, and
drink a cup of wine upon it; Let the Patient take about bed time one dram of
this following powder with wine. Take white Ginger 1 dram, Gallinga 2 drams,
Bulls pisle 3 drams, make a powder.

Root of Egyptian Bean raw, or boiled eaten, Oil of Marjoram, with Hares runnet
and a little Musch. The secret of Lobelius. Schrekevos commends this following,
as revealed by God. Take yolks of Eggs, fresh butter, Bulls pisle, Chiches,
Galanga, Satyrian, Zedoary, Ginger preserved, Mints, Cocks and Wolfs testicles,
of each 1 dram; Rocket seed, Cloves, Ginger, Pepper long white and black,
Anniseed, Ash keys, Cinnamon, of each half a dram: brains of Pigeons and
Sparrows well boiled, and roasted, of each half a pound, the heart of the
Indian Nut, Pine kernels cleansed, Fistich nuts, sweet Almonds cleansed, Mallow
seed, Mercury, Haslenuts shaled, Dates, of each 2 drams, boil all in sheeps
milk and water, bruise them strongly; and add Tails of Scinci half a dram,
make a Confection with Honey of Roses, or Sugar what may suffice, boil all at a
soft fire for an Electuary.

Helidaus holds this for a secret. Take Pennyroyal, Origanum, of each two
handfuls, boil them in Malligo wine, adding musk three grains; let both be
perfumed. Also the fume of Sage boiled, received. The same Author gives one,
or at most three grains of Amber in a rear Egg in the morning, shavings of
Ivory and powder of Sage, of each alike; the decoction of Eringo roots in wine.

CACHEXIA is a cold and moist distemper of the body, with a symptom of the
color changed, and a disease of magnitude by the swelling of the Feet.

The Cause is a watery Phlegmatic raw blood; the fault is of the Liver, the
Spleen, of the stomach, of the Brain, an nicer of the Reins, because the
wheyish humor running back has infected the blood, stopping of the Courses,
too much glutting and craming themselves.

Signs Diagnostick, A pale leady color, a soft tumor about the Eyes, Cheeks,
Feet, Hands.

Prognostic. It often afflicts children by too much greediness, old men and
women. It may be cured unless it come from an incurable disease.

The Cure. The vicious matter must be evacuated; The cause must be removed. The
distemper must be taken away, by general remedies and topicals. The Powder
called Cachectical is profitable as some other powder of filings of Steel,
steeled wine. Senn. l. 3. p. 6. s. 2. c. 2. Fer. l. 9.

A CANCER is, a hard Tumor, sharp, unequal, round, unmovable, wan, sticking
deep in the Veins that swell with a black humor, and are spread in the body
like to a Crab.

The Cause, is black choler. Heurnius in Aph. 38. s. 6. says, there is a
double poison, one putrefying, which is enraged by suppurating remedies:
another corroding, that is enraged by Cleansers.

Signs Diagnostick. The Tumor is hot and painful, and is ulcerated. The Ulcer
is foul and stinking; the lips of it are swollen, thick, wan.

Prognostic. Aph. 38. s. 6. by hidden Cancers are understood such as are not
ulcerated. Senn. Fabr. cent. 3. obs. 87. No Cancers, though they be of the
Breasts, are cured by cutting off, but they will grow again. Cancers of the
Lips, How they must be extirpated Pareus teaches. l. 6. c. 29.

The Cure. It is performed by exact cutting away. The increasing of an
ulcerated Cancer must be hindered, and of one that is not ulcerated, that it
come not to ulceration. Palliative is made, 1. By Diet. 2. By evacuatives and
alteratives. 3. By revulsion and derivation by Issues. 4. By Topicals. The
juice and decoction of Nightshade, Endive, the flesh of Snails boyld, River
Crabs, green Frogs, Oil of Frogs: (See Senn. l. p. 1. c. 20.) ashes of Crabs,
Senn. Scabious, heath Robert, Chervil, Dill, Honey-suckles, Man's dung in
powder. For. l. 17. ashes of Mullens, of the lesser Celandine, of Robert, Oil
of Eggs and wan, mixed in a leaden Mortar with water of Nightshade, with a
leaden pestle; Asses milk is good, and Treacle; Wild Cresses bruised, or in
fomentation: also blood-suckers, laying on of Cats and young Whelps divided;
Powder of Galls, of burnt Crabs mingled with Oil of Roses, and laid on with
Lint. Pareus his Plate of Lead anointed with Quicksilver, is excellent. and an
Antidote for all malignant Ulcers; but because it keeps in vapors, Forestus
likes it not. Par. l. 8, bids that it be made full of holes. Crato Ep. 59.
Crabs eyes, ground small on a Marble, taken in broth or wine, can do much in the
greatest pains of a Cancer.

Aegyptiac is mortal for cancerous Ulcers. Fabr. l. 3. obs. 86. An old woman
cured a Cancer, laying on Sage chewed with her Teeth. For. l. c.

The Cure of that is ulcerated is done by Minerals, with Unguent of Tutty,
Diapampholigos, or juice of Nightshade clarified, and stirred in a leaden
mortar, with a leaden pestle, 8 ounces; of common Tutty, ten times washed in
Nightshade water, 2 drams; of burnt lead, washed likewise, 1 dram; Oil of
Roses, half an ounce, juice of Nightshade what may suffice; make a Liniment in
a leaden Mortar with a leaden Pestle. Some lay on daily a Hen which the Cancer
eats. For. l. c. Emplaister of Ceruss; it is truly cured either by Section, or
burning, or burning means. If there be good blood and matter that runs from it,
the cure is perfect. See Senn. l. c. No Atractives or Digestives profit, nor
Oils or fat things, except Juyces, white wax, and Goats suet. For. l. 28. A
small Cancerous push growing slowly about the Chin, Mouth, Nose is called
Nolime tangere. A Cancer in the Legs and Shanks, is called a a Wolf. Senn. l.
c. Blood is sometimes commodiously drawn by distance of time. The herb Carduns
benedictus, and also the Eyes of Crabs Magistral is given succesfully in water
Arsemart; Senn. l. 4. p. 3. s. 1. c. 7. See there, the manner of Section. See
what must be looked to, concerning the Muscle of the Breast, in the Anatomists.
A Hen cut through the middle, is excellent to lay on, being every day renewed.
Famous is the Receipt of Antonius Fuchsius an Italian, which see in Senn. l. c.
the excellent water of Fab. and many more: see Senn. l. c.

CARUS is a deep sleep, with loss of sense and motion, the spirits being
hindered; yet the breathings remain free.

The Cause is the compression of the Scull and the Brain: So Fern. saw a man
for three months in a Carus, not remembering that the Scull must be opened.
Forestus cured one that lay in a Carus fourteen days. Obstruction of the Brain,
overcooling concussion, motion, troubling the animal spirits by a stroke or
fall, hurting the temporal muscle, and the Carotick Arteries, Narcotick force,
worms, the Matrix, the fume of coals, the Moon beams.

Signs Diagnostick. Deep sleep, if pricked they feel, draw themselves in. If
there be a Fever, it follows the fits. It differs from an Apoplex, and
Swooning, as before: from a Catoche, because in Carus the Eyes are shut, nor
does a man abide in the same stare he was taken. From a Lethargy: because a
Lethargy is always with a Fever. In a Carus ask questions, and the sick will
not answer.

Prognostic Carus coming upon a Fever is mortal.

The Cure. If it come from the first cause, it is cured as a depression of the
scull; If from the second, as an Apoplex, and phlegmatic Headache; If from the
third, as a commotion of the Brain; If from the fourth, it is cured according
as the hurt is; If from the fifth, it is cured by Antidotes, as poisons are;
but they must be raised the common way. A vein must not be opened. There is no
better remedy then the eating of Cresses in saller, either boiled or leasoned.
Forest.

CATALEPSIS. The sick remain stiff in the same fashion they were taken; yet
sometimes they hear a little, see, remember, and tell it afterward; if any
thing be put into their Mouths, they swallow it, and go if they be driven by
force. The Soldiers in the siege at Mets held their Spears in their Hands, the
Horsemen followed the Troop; both of them no less then almost quite frosen.

The Cause is a freezing vapor, fixing, rising from Minerals in the ground, or
from a melancholic humor, fixing the spirits, not those which already are
flowen to the part, but such as are subservient to the imagination in the
Brain: but the cold Air brings not a Catoche, but a Sphacelus and stupidity.

The Cure. First, they must be raised. 2. It is cured as head melancholy.
Vinegar must not be mingled in Topicals; for that fixes them also. A vein may
be opened, if there be Indications, Senn. Forest.

A CATARRH, is a Symptom in things put forth, whether it be taken generally
for any kind of defluxion, or specially for a defluxion upon the Lung.

The The Cause of the defluxion is known, yet the pain draws not, but by the
weakness of the part it cannot discuss it. Lau. de Catarr. The humors are
things natural, not natural, and preternatural: a hot Liver, a cold Brain,
which is often the cause of a hot defluxion, when salt steam is gathered in it;
and so contrarily.

The chief difference is from the place whence, so it may arise from the
Spleen, or otherwise by consent, and then many medicaments are in vain laid to
the Head. It is with or without a Fever.

Signs Diagnostick: or the causes are proper, and collected by concourse, as
color, taste, motion, heat, pain, sostness of the part affected, or that sends
the matter. If it come from the Brain, it afflicts easily, long and
continually. If there be Intermission, and if there be signs of some other part
affected, as the belly or Courses stopped, they are caused from some other part.

The Cure. If it come by consent, that part must first be respected. Revulsives
draw not from the Head, but pull from the part first affected; yet the Brain
must be strengthened. If it proceed from a proper passion of the Brain, and fall
with force upon the Breast, things that derive and stay are useful. If not, the
1. cause must be evacuated, by generals, and then by topicals. Also in a cold
Catarrh a Vein may be opened, if the Liver be hot. 2. The humor prepared being
evacuated, the Head must be dried by Internals, and Topicals. Also in a cold
Catarrh, conserve of Roses is commodiously mingled with hot Cephalicks,
Revulsion must be made by setaces, chafings, cupping glasses. Gallen lays on
a plaster of new Pigeons dung for three hours, left it should burn too much
upon the place shaved; for it heats and dryes wonderfully. One grain of the
whitest Frankincense taken at bed time, is a secret. The decoction of Guaiacum
wood, drying Cephalic powders. Senn. l. 1. p. 1. c. 11. Med. Pract. If the
Catarrh be hot, give a purge, a Vein must be opened, Purgatives after
preparatiues must be administered, and Topicals that dry and corroborate must be
applied. If there be danger of choking, we must draw it back by all our might,
with Pigeons dung, Causticks, Clysters, Lotions, Ligatures, Chafings, Cuppings,
Vesicatories, Errhins, Topicals and Generals. We must stop it by internals,
also by Laudanum opiatum, and Narcoticks. Let the diet be drying, the supper
little, sleep sparingly; change his manner of lying: if we will hold the
Catarrh in the Head, let the Head lie backward; if it do more harm in the Head
then in the Breast, let the Head be lifted higher. Laur. de Cat. For. Senn.

CHOLERIC Passion moist, is a continual and immoderate casting forth of a
naughty humor both upward and downward.

The Cause is, a sharp humor corrupted, struggling about the stomach and
Spleen, and mesentery and Veins, or poison taken.

Signs diagnostick. There is no Fever, but pain, Inflation, vomiting, purging.

Prognostic. It kills in three or four days; if it end in 18. hours, it has
been often healthful.

The Cure. 1. If the vomiting be little, it must be furthered by drinking much
warm water; for a little will turn to choler, Decoction of hulled barley with
Sugar or syrup of Roses, Goats whey, or of Cows with syrup of Roses. 2. If
vomiting be immoderate, the belly must be moved; therefore give whey or broth
with Manna, or syrup of Roses solutive. Cast in a Clyster emollient and cooling
with Diacatholicon Cassia. If the belly purge too much, cause vomiting. 3. If
they void too much, Revulsives are profitable, as Ligatures of the upper parts
if they vomit, of the lower parts if they purge too much. Also the matter must
be temperd by internal and topical means. A most present remedy is half a dram
of Crystal alone, or mixed with other things, laudanum opiatum must be given
often if we fear swooning. 4 The Forces must be strenthened by Internalls and
Topicals.

CHOLERIC dry Passion, is the casting forth of a windy vapor, above and
beneath, with Inflation of the Belly, and noise, with the pain of the sides and
loins.

The Cause is the weakness of the stomach which breeds winds, or a clammy
tenacious humor, with a strong heat of the stomach and Intestins, which
resolves the humor into winds, or else windy meat.

Signs Prognostic. This is not so dangerous as the moist is.

The Cure. 1. The winds must be brought out, discussed, tempered with Clysters
of sweet oil, or of linseed, or sweet Almonds, with a decoction emollient and
Carminative: also by Topicals. Oil and wine must be given, if nothing hinder.

2. The matter must be evacuated by syrup of Roses solutive, and tempered by
broths. If it be from poison, it is cured by Antidotes.

The COLIC, in general, is a pain of the Guts, violent, and wandering.

The cause 1. Is wind, either from feebleness of heat, or from strong heat,
and tough fleam, or from a windy melancholic humor, or from windy meats.

2. The dung hardened, the Stone, worms, a Hernia, all which by dissolving
continuity, cause pain.

3. A wind or humor collected between two coats.

Signs diagnostick. It differs from pain of the stomach, for that is always
above the Navel, and often comes to the Back bone between the Shoulders,
because the stomach is bound to the Back bone of the ninth spondil. It is eased
by parbreaking. It differs from pain of the Mother: because the pain of the
Mother is communicated to the Groins and Hips, and goes no higher then they,
Childbearing went before the Courses are stopped.

Prognostics. The Cholick often follows the Jaundies, coming by obstruction
of the Passages that choler passes in: so the Jaundies often follow the
Colic for the same reason.

If it lasts long, it causes a Dropsy, a Hernia, and Rupture of the Navel.

The cure. 1. The cause must be taken away. 2. The pain.

The pain is removed by Internals, and emollient Topicals, Baths: also by
Narcoticks if the cause be hot. But if it be cold, they make the cause of the
disease worse, and shortly after greater pains arise. Seldom must things be
given by the Mouth. It is safer to give them by Clysters, as one scruple of
Philanium Romanum. For. gives laudanum opiatum, to three grains. Specificals,
are, the whitest dung of a Wolf to one dram, or hanged outwardly; The guts of a
Wolf to one dram, in liquor. A roasted Lark in powder, Hartshorn one dram in
drink; Guts of a Hen dried to one dram, or half a dram of the powder of the
stones of an horse washed in water and dried in an Oven. Whilst the pain
lasts, they must eat nothing.

A COLIC, from Excrements, from wind.

Signs diagnostick. There went before it a stopping of the Belly, with weight
of the Belly, pain, headache, and palpable hardness.

The Cure. 1. Cast in emollient Clysters, and lenitine; and by degrees strong
Purgatives are to be mixed, until the excrements be voided: if they awake not,
a lenitive may be given by the Mouth, as Manna one ounce and half, Oil of sweet
Almonds one ounce, with Hen-broth, Oil of Galbanum is good with the plaster of
Bay Berries applied outwardly. The last remedy is Hippocrates Bellows, whereby
the Intestins are so blown, that they are separated from the internal
Excrements in their Superficies. After that, a Clyster is given.

If it come from worms, it is cured as Worms.

If from Hernia, as a Hernia.

Cupping glasses applied to the Navel have cured it miraculously. The Belly
must be bound with broad swathbands.

This following Clyster has helped wonderfully. Take Maligo wine, Oil of Nuts
(which also For. commends) of each three ounces, Aqua vitae one ounce, Oil of
Juniper and Rue of each three drams, give it hot.

The COLIC from a cause between the Coats.

Signs diagnostick. A most sharp pain it is, fast as a stake.

The Cure. Clysters emollient and carminatives must be given: take heed of
vomit by all means, after let the Clysters be made sharper. Carminative
dissolvers as Garlic, may be exhibited by the Mouth. Outward Remedies help.

If it proceed from a sharp humor, as in the Scurvey, sticking in the Veins
and Coats of the Intestines, it is cured by Coolers, moystners, Internals, and
by Topicals that void choler, etc. as in the dysentery.

If it come from inflammation of the Intestines, it is cured as an Inflammation.

Question. Whether purging Clysters are convenient? I deny it, because they
draw to the affected, nor are they evacuated; for the Belly is stopped. Senn.
For. Pareus.

A COMA that is slepy, is an action diminished, the influence of the spirits
being hindered.

The cause is, a Narcotick force, obstruction of the Brain, worms, the Matrix,
compression of the Scull.

Signs diagnostick. The sick sleeps long and profoundly with his Mouth open.

It differs from Carus: because in Coma, if you ask them they answer; from
syncope by the pulse; and the face in Coma is not like to one that is dead.

Prognostic. Aph. 1. s. 2. 3. s. 2. in continual Fevers it is mortal. That is
less dangerous, that comes by consent.

The Cure. He must be raised, purged, Revulsion made, the cause must be
derived, the Brain must be dried and strengthened.

If it come by consent, the parts that first offend, must be cured.

COMA that is waking, is, when the sick with his Eyes shut, striveth to sleep
and cannot, with a delirium or without: so, one sick of a Coma, cut off a Monks
head that was his Keeper when he slept, as Heurnius says.

The cause is a Narcotick vapor, but it is turbulent also, or joynd with a hot
vapor that hinders sleep.

Signs Frognostick, It usually changes into Lethargy or Frenzy.

The cure. Since it always enters almost with a malignant Fever, besides the
cure of it, we must oppose the malignity and venom of it, make revulsion, and
strengthen. etc.

COMBUSTION. The differences: either heat is only felt in the part, or only
bladders arise, or an Eschar is made.

Prog nostick. From Thunder commonly it is mortal; In the Abdomen it is hardly
cured; the deeper the Eschars are, the less do they pain.

The cure. 1. The Empyreuma, or Atoms of the fire must be called forth, which
is done by heat. If the burning be small, presently put the part to the fire,
or stove it with hot water; then beat Onions in a Mortar with salt, and lay
them on. Or, take raw Onions one ounce and half, salt, Venice soap, of each
half an ounce, mingle them in a Mortar, pour on Oil of Roses, and of sweet
Almonds what may serve. Fab. obs. 93. cent. 4. Fresh horse dung, Sage, Dwarf
elder, Elder leaves beaten with Salt and Oil of Nuts, Quick lime washed nine
times with Mallow water, and Butter. Oil of Linseed, juice of Onions, May
butter, juice of Elder Hogs grease, Camphir, Oil of Olives, Lime to washed is
mingled with oil of St John's Wort, or juice, or some Cream. Take Lard, cut one
pound, melt it in Rose water, strain it through a fine cloth, wash it four
times in water of Henbane or Plantain, three new laid Eggs, mingle them.
Unguents for scaldings, must be so made that they stick not too fast, but may
easily be wiped off.

If bladders be raised, they must not be opened before the third day, nor
after, but about the third day; but if the burning be in the third difference,
all the bladders must be cut, and the Eschar must be taken away by the
emollients: or if it be great, by scarification deeply even to the quick, that
passage may be made for emollients, and the dark fumes may breath forth or take
it off with a pen knife. Lay a defensive on the part. If a Gangreen be feared,
we must prevent it. Par. l. 11. Unguent of Alabaster is excellent to bring it
to Cica^rise.

Combustion by Gunpowder leaves a filthy color with grains of powder, which
often times can be put out neither by scarification, nor cuppings, nor
vesicatories.

Combustion by thunder, is most cured by internal Cordials, and Topicals of Rue
leaves, Onions, Theriac; etc. All Topicals must be made of Antidotes; If the
bone be broken withal, common glutinatives restrain the venom, etc. Lay on
medicaments of Angelica Roots, Swallow-wort, Rue leaves, and also a defensative.

Burning of the Eyes: drop in warm milk. Forestus cured his son by an Emulsion
of Quince seeds made in Rose water: the other emollients are useful.

Combustion of the joints, will admit of no sharp remedies, but softness,
first premising generals.

CONCUSSION of the Brain, is made from an external cause. So Hippocrates tells
us of a woman killed with a box on the Ear.

The signs are vomiting as in the fracture of the Scul.

Prognostic. If the Blood be poured forth between the pia and dura matter, it
is past hopes.

The cure is made by Revulsives and Repulsives, as by opening a Vein in the
Arm; give a Clyster. A repelling Cataplasm laid on, of Scordium, Beans, of each
six ounces, Oil of Roles three ounces, Vinegar what may serve, the use of this
is until the fourth day. Cupping glasses fastened to the shoulders, the next day
open the Vena puppis, which is above the Lambdoides. The next day a Vein in the
Forehead, under the tongue; from the fourth day we must use Resolvers, as the
Cerate of Vigo, or unguent of Alabaster, a plaster of Ivy gumm. The last
remedy is to open the Scull, after the second month. Fabcent. 4. obs. 2. Par.
l. 9. Senn. l. 1. p. 1. c. 20.

CONTUSION, with running forth of blood, is, when the blood is pressed forth of
the Vessels by extension or breaking.

The cure. The blood gone out of the Vessels must be evacuated, either
sensibly, as by opening a Vein, by cupping, scarifying, Leeches, so the sick
have not a continual and vehement Fever; or by internal Resolvers, and
sweating Baths, thin Diet: So Galen opened a Vein commonly, though there were
no fulne's, then he exhibited 4 ounces of Oxycratum.

Topicals must be first Repulsives; then dissolvers as Unguent of Alabaster,
which is always good, but at the beginning of a Fever.

If a Gangreen be near, which is known by the hardness of the Tumor, and
wanness, (for if it be soft, it is a small contusion) it must be strongly
resolved with a little bag torrified etc. or scarify it, or open it with a
knife; cure it as a Gangreen. Effectual is the root of Solomans seal pressed,
bruised, and laid on, or steeped in wine. If it be with a wound, first lay on
an astringent, after a digestive to the parts about, causing suppuration, Par.
l. 11. otherwise a suppurative has no place on the part affected.

If it chance to infants, Caesar Arantius was wont to use Section, whereby by
their crying and pain he brought them into very great danger. Afterward
growing better skilled, the first day of all, he laid on a linen cloth wet in
whites of Eggs, and Rose vinegar; which must be often made wet: after that
until the ninth day he laid on a Cataplasm of flowers of Red roses, leaves, and
berries, of Myrtils, of each two ounces, meal of Beans and Barley, of each one
ounce; Wormwood and Betony, of each half an ounce, Cummin seed with black wine;
make a Cataplasm, add oil of Roses and Camomil, of each one ounce; lay it so
great, that it may lie on the neighboring parts also. After the tenth day he
laid on the plaster Diapalma or Diacalcithcos. Senn. l. 1. p. 1. c. 21. and
concerning swellings.

Contusion with a fracture, or wound of the Scull.

If much blood be run out between the Scull and the films, which is known by
the blood running forth at the Nostrils, Ears, by the heaviness of the Head,
stupidnesse, sleep.

If the Bone be pressed down, and press on the Brain, which is proved by the
Fingers.

If pieces of the Scull prick the Films, which is known, if while the sick
blows his Nose he feels them prick; or or there be a delirium, the Scull
must be opened or lifted up.

But if there be none of these; first opening a Vein, and giving purges of
choler, it is cured by a plaster of Ivy Gum: So Forestus cured one, by only
oil of Hyperici. Vidus Vidius, Lanfrancus, say, That it is oftener cured by
Medicaments, and safer, then by the drepane.

Contusion with flux of blood, by and upon the upper parts.

In this case 4 things are feared. First, Least the blood should run out too
much. 2. Lest it should strangle the sick. 3. Lest it should congeal. 4. Lest
it should putrefie: and seeing that congelation requires Dissolvers, Ruptures,
means that consolidate, we must apply to that which urges most. Wherefore
after opening of a Vein, when blood is more seldom cast forth, and seems not
so fluent, exhibit a resolvent, as Posca allayed with water, or Medicaments of
the Hares runnet, or Kids, Avens, Mugwort, Red cole^ Betony, Rhabarb,
Rhapontick, Terra sigillata, Sperma ceti, Crabs eyes, Hearts horn, Coral
prepared, Bole armenick, Chervil water, Decoction of our Lady, leaves of the
lesser Dasie, Hyericon, Fumitery, Scabious, Angelica roots, Swallow-wort, Seeds
of Carduns Benedictus, Madder. Mumie is not useful; for it causes vomit, etc.
Par. l. 11. Afterward we must join together with all we can do, as in spitting
of blood. Amber. If there be pain of the Belly from congealed blood, purge it
forth with Rheubarb: etc.

If there be a Cough stop the Rheum.

CONVULION is a depraved motion of the Muscles.

The cause is not Emptiness: because Hellebour will do it: because it seldom
happens in hectic and burning Fevers; nor is it Repletion: because in
Plethory it comes not, nor does Hellebour fill.

The subject is the Muscles, especially the nervous and fibrous parts of it,
when their expulsive faculty is urged, whereby the animal faculty is drawn into
consent: as in vomiting and coughing, etc. If it stick fast to the part, it
causes Convulsion; but if the vapor or matter be moveable, it causes a
convulsive motion. If the muscle that is one or of one kind be affected, as the
bending Muscles, there is a Convulsion; but if two that are contrary, there is
made a convulsive motion. In a convulsive motion the Brain is affected also;
but in a Convulsion but seldom. If convulsion come from a wound, it comes from
the sharpness of the matter: when parts are contracted beyond their extension,
they are dislocated, distorted, that they cannot again be extended.

Prognostics. In Hippocrates Aphorism: a Convulsion, growing suddenly, if a
loosnesse of the Belly or a Fever come upon it, it is ended: If they escape
four days, they are well.

The cure. If it be by consent, the part that principally offends must be
cured. If it: be by essence, opening a Vein is good, or cupping-glasses with
scarifying; If the Legs be drawn, set them to the Hips; if the Hands, set them
to the first Vertebra of the Thorax; If the Tongue, the Eyelids, set them to
the first Spondils of the Neck. Purging, chasing, sharp Clysters, anointing of
the Back bone are good. Topicals must be resolvent beginning from the milder,
oyis of Camomil, Dil, etc. Goole-grease, etc. Internals must be as in the
Palfey. The Mouth drawn awry must by no means be opened with Instruments.

If it be from a wound, the soul matter must be wiped away, and Inflammation
must be cured.

If from eating Mushroms, Galen gave Hens dung with Oxymel for a great secret;
The Nerves hardened by too great dryers cannot be cured.

CRISES, Though they be imperfect, the matter being not yet concocted; yet are
they good. For. saw, when a Crisis was often repeated, yet the sick escaped: so
from an Apoplex, a Palsy; from a Lethargy, swellings under the Ears is good.

Fern. l. 2. c. 1. says that profitable Crises are not made by bleeding. 1.
Because always red blood runs fresh. 2. Because it pulls not away the root of
the disease without an irregular flux. See Aph. 25. s. 4. Zach. answererh, l.
1. histor. 64. that that blood appears red, because it droppeth out by drops,
so that the heat of it is taken away by the ambient air, wherefore the cold
will not suffer the Heterogeneous parts to be separated from the good; So the
blood remains red: In the Arm it flows out by heaps, so that the heat
remaining, the gross parts are separated from the good.

CHILDBIRTH. In hard labor some have the bones of the privities stretched
out. Paraeus will have it that the bones without names are separated from the
Os sacrum. Also they may be distended with the Perinaeum, and the bone of the
Crouper; Wherefore those that are in labor must not bear upon the Perinaeum.
And Topicals must be applied to the Perinaeum, and to the Crouper bone, and of
the Privities.

Signs: A most grievous pain, which if it cease suddenly, the Child being not
delivered, the Mother dies.

The Cause. Hard labor is either the fault of the Mother, when the expulsive
faculty is weak; or of the Child, when it is greater and not well postured; or
of the Passage, namely when the membranes are too strong, the Neck straight
from air too hot or cold; In women of the first Child, from plenty of
Excrements, dryness. If the Child be dead, or the Physicians hand put in, not
the Mother seeleth any motion, the water runs forth. If the Secondine be thrust
forth before the Child. If the pain be greater, the breath stink, the Perinaeum
be cold. If the Mouth of the Womb be soft and hot, it is the Birth.

The cure. The places must be softened by all means. The Childbed Woman must be
placed in a Bed, as in cutting of the Stone, or in a stool, that she may lean
on the side of the Bed. Let her hold her breath, and not cry. Cause her to
sneeze, give her Clysters, sharp suppositories. Put stinking things to her
Nostrils. Let her drink Beer with Butter, and oil of sweet Almonds, one ounce.
Let her Belly be empty, feed her sparingly, anoint her with oil of Amber; Give
her one drop of it, with Vervain water. Also let her take first of all Cinnamon
water: or take white Dittany, Amber, of each one dram and half; give half with
hot wine. Oil of Cinnamon, oil of Hasle-nut tree, the powder of the Secondine
torrified, five or six berries of Juniper, taken with Figs five times,
wonderfully helps forward delivery: Dittany, Cassia lign^a, Myrrh. Many have
been delivered by taking half a dram, or one dram of pills of Asa foetida,
Powder of Ladies. Bind to the thigh an Eagles Stone, which also draws the
Matrix to it; wherefore use it not long. Also Coral, Roots of knot-grasse,
green Coriander bound to the soles of the Feet, or to the Hips. Use none of
these till the Moon of the ninth month be past. They that have broad shoulders
bring forth great children; with the Child let the Secondine be taken out
gently, or presently after, lest the Matrix follow. If there be many children:
so many Secondines there are. If it stay behind, it must be taken forth with
medicaments, or by the hand. The Navel being tied, the Womb must be swathed
with a swathband. The Secondine being drawn forth, put in the Matrix. It is a
wonderful secret to drive out the Secondine; for the Terms stopped, strangling
of the Matrix, the dead child, a Mola; bruise the green leaves of Lovage, and
drink the juice pressed out, with wine or Mugwort water. In the Winter give
Lovage seed, boiled with Mugwort water. Also one scruple of the Trochis of
Mirrh, with two ounces of wine. If it help not, it must be taken forth with the
hand, (see Paraeus) or by incision. The oil of Hazle-nuts. Bitter things kill
the child.

If the after burden come sparingly away by chafings, etc. they must be drawn
in the lower parts to the womb. A vein must be opened in the Ankle; Topicals,
Clysters must be emollients. If some days after childbirth be past, a Purge of
Rheubarb and Agarick are good. Give things to attenuate the blood, and the five
opening Roots, etc. If they flow too much, cure them as Diarrhaea.

Pains after childbirth, are either in the belly or in the womb, which are
like to a Tenesmus, when the force of expelling is prolonged. They proceed
either from the cold Air or clots of blood, or blood too sharp. Senn. cures it
by removing the cause; he prescribes not purgatives, but internal heaters, and
Topicals. For. holds for a secret beer boyld with Camomil flowers, or without
purging, the Ladies powder, or the infusion of Camels meat, Cinnamon etc. If the
privy member be broken, when it is cured again, at every child bearing it must
be opened with a rasour.

Fevers of one day, continuing sometimes many days, called Fevers of milk, do
commonly go away of themselves; if they be really continual putrid Fevers,
they proceed from the suppression of the Terms, or the vicious provision of the
humors.

CHILD-BLANES are an inflammation of the Feet by the Winter cold. Preservatives,
are socks wet in Aqua vita, and keep them warm. They are cured as Aples and Eggs
congealed if they be put into cold water, or rubbed with snow: So the cold
being drawn forth which is known by the pricking pain abated, the part must be
fomented with milk boyld in Rosemary, etc. The Feet and Hands must be bathed in
water wherein Turnips (especially frozen) are boiled; or anoint the part with
oil of wax or Bays: also with Honey, Turpentine. If they be ulcerated, anoint
them with oil of Roses, boiled in the root of a Rape or Radish made hollow; or
with the ashes of Crab-fish with Honey and Oil of Roses. When the part is
mortified, it is cured as a Gangreen.

Child suffocated, may be known if it were very well before; if the Mouth and
Nostrils be wet with froth; if the Lungs diffected be frothy.

The COUGH. The cause is 1. a naked distemper, and then there preceeded
Procatactick causes. 2. A humor: now what that is, is known by by the spittle,
a Catarrh. 3. Dissolved unity of the Lungs. 4. Inflammation of the Liver,
Spleen, Dropsy. 5. Smoke, dust, sour things, and many external things, Worms.

The cure. The cause must be taken away: and the Cough, if it be from a
Catarrh, is cured as a Catarrh, and by expectorating means. If it come from a
thin, hot, sharp matter, after generals, we must cool, moisten, thicken: also
this that follows is good. Take Honey, Butter, of each half an ounce;
Cumminseed, 1 dram, mingle it, give it by a spoon. Forestus often prescribes
to short-winded people in a Consumption, Take juice of Coltsfoot, half a
pound; Mucilage of Marshmallowes drawn with barley water, one ounce; Sugar what
may suffice; make a Lohock; fumes of leaves of Alchoof drawn up by a pipe are
good. 1. Generals being premised. 2. If there be no Fever. 3. Whilst the
forces remain. 4. Fasting, 5. Let it be first tried in the smallest quantity.
6. If there follow difficulty of breathing, it must be cured by moistness. If
there be fear, lest by coughing a vein should break, or the sick should be
choked, or the Lungs corroded, being forced to it, we use Narcoticks;
especially if there be long watchings, as syrup of Poppies, Juice of
Houndstongue. For. proved this that follows often. Take juice of common
Parsley, half an ounce; Woman's milk, one ounce; powder of Cummin, one scruple;
give it a boy to drink warm, and anoint his stomach.

DIABETE. The Cause is the retentive faculty or the Reins hurt either by plenty
or by quantity of the Urines plenty of Urine is made from heat of the Liver,
Spleen, melting the watery humor: from the weakness of the stomach, looseness
of the passages. It comes chiefly in burning and malignant Fevers.

Signs Diagnostick. It begins by degrees that it can hardly be known, there
is heat in the bowels.

Prognostic. It brings consumption and death, if not cured at first.

The Cure. Opening a Vein, purging, vomiting, sweating, are not good, but
internal and topical astringents, and coroboratives which moderately cool. Also
Narcoticks may be used.

DIARRHOEA, is a flux of the Belly caused by excrementitious humors.

The cause is the obstruction of the Veins of the Liver, or weakness of the
Liver, or a preternatural disposition of the whole body with, or without a
Fever; or a hectic Fever, burning, Consumption, Inflammation of the bowels,
whence follows a Syntectick or melting flux; or corrupt meat, or worms, or
the Liver and choler, or the Spleen and a melancholic humor, or the Matrix,
or the Brain, or hypercatharsis, or toothing of Children. Signs Diagnastick.
See the signs of obstruction, and the weakness of the Liver.

If from corrupt meat, such kind of meat was eaten, or the stomach is weak. If
from the Liver or the Spleen, there are signs of their infirmities, and signs
of any other part hurt are not.

Prognostic. The Belly to be loose for one or some days is healthful, so
there be no Fever, and it stop in seven days.

The cure. If it come from obstruction, first we must open by things that are
good for the Liver; then we must cleanse, then we must bind and strengthen.

If it be from a sharp humor, corrupt meat; first we must cleanse, and take
off the acrimony of the humor, as, Take the decoction of unhulled Barley three
ounces; syrup of Roses, one ounce; Violets, half an ounce. A vein may be
opened. Then we must gently evacuate by Clysters, Potions, Pills of Rheubarb,
Mirobolans, Mastick, whereof make Pills, which are safely given in all fluxes.

Take Citron and Chebul, Mirobolans, of each half a dram; Mastick, one scruple;
Spick, fix grains, with Honey of Roses; make Pills. Take first half a dram,
then I scruple; not but when the greatest part of the matter is voided, and if
the Forces be much weakened; In these two cases we must bind, which is done
within eight or twelve days; first by Topicals and Diet, after that by
internals, and all derivations, as opening a vein and Ligatures, to take away
the flux.

If it come with a Fever and be critical, we must do nothing but prescribe
Diet. Yet if it be too much, the acrimony of the humor must be removed, and we
must bind and strengthen. If it be more sparing, we must help it forward. If it
be symptomical, it must be cured as before.

If there be melting, it must be cured by Restoratives and a little astringent;
also with Narcoticks, as three heads of Poppy may be boiled in a Clyster.

If it happen to Children toothing, it comes either from salt fleam flowing
from the Head, or from the Milk corrupted by a Fever. Give Honey, syrup of
Roses, syrup of Succory with Rheubarb. Then bind by Topicals.

DYSENTERY is an exulceration of the Intestins with a frequent bloody
dejection, and mattery, with pain and torments of the Belly, rising from a
sharp eating matter, peculiarly an enemy to the Intestins.

The Cause, chiefly is a choleric humor offensive to the Intestins, by a
hidden quality; the remote cause, eating of Grapes, drinking sweet wine, or
cold water, the humors being Coagulated, and after that corrupting, obs. 46.
cent. 3. water running through leaden pipes that are old, drank, by reason of
the plenty of Mercury and lead Ore: Purgatives mingled with meat: Poisons as
Quicksilver, Clouds, malignant air, contagion.

Differences, There are three degrees. 1. Wherein are fat bodies mingled with a
little moisture. 2. Wherein are shavings of the Intestins. 3. Wherein is the
substance of the Intestins voided like pieces of flesh. The last of these is
meant, Aph. 26. s. 4.

Signs diagnostick. They are known by the definition: A Fever is not always
joined. Aph. 3. s. 6. It must be diligently distinguished from an Impostume in
the Guts. If the small Intestins be affected, it makes a pricking pain; blood
is perfectly mixed with the dung, or voided after it. If the great guts, either
corruption swimeth above, or sticks outwardly unto them.

Prognostic. These happen out chiefly about the Summer, and beginning of
Autumn. Black spots behind the Ear, with great thirst is mortal. Women, old
men, children are more greivously afflicted.

The Cure. 1. The cause must be evacuated, and tempered, by opening a vein, and
purging by turns, as with syrup of many infusions of damask Roses, or rather
first, with simple infusions of Mirobolans, Tamarinds, Rheubarb; the infusion
whereof we give to purge, the substance to bind. Mechoacan, Senna leaves,
Diacatholicon, Diapheaenicon. Clysters: in great quantity if you would scowre
the guts; but small to glutinate. Antidotes against poison, as Bole armenick,
etc.

2. If the pain be vehement, sometimes we must cast in such things as ease
pain; Give broth of oil of sweet Almonds, apply internals, topicals, narcoticks.

3. We must bind, yet not before seven days unless it be with gentle means. A
powder of Elder berries, of Turtles, and Hares burnt, is commended. Also the
juice of ground Ivy taken. The use of Wax in a roasted Apple. The Apple is made
hollow, and filled with white and yellow Wax, it is roasted, it must be eat
before meat: by external topicals also, whatsoever many would have: by
revulsives.

4. The Ulcer must be cleansed, and filled with flesh.

The Diet. Much drink is naught for a Dysentery; and if they grow well, too
much exercise.

That snotty white matter is not the fat of the guts, nor fleam, nor crust; but
the humors coming out of the Veins, changed by the part hurt, as in the whites
of women.

Question, Whether Purgatives may be given? Valesius denies it, com. 4. in 4.
Epid. Fuchsius. Massarias. because Galen uses them not: because they bring the
humor to the part affected.

Senn. affirms it: Galen knew not Rheubarb, Mirobalans; yet he used Honey,
Milk: and Crato for the second reason denies that Cauteries can be good in the
Gout, Ep. 167.

Whether milk be good? It is not good if there be a Fever, and where the Body
is impure. It must be given warily; if whey be much it cleanses, if whey
evaporate with long boiling, it binds.

Whether drinking water, milk, steeled wine be good? Crato denies it. Ep. 261.
Doringus obs. 42. cent. 3. says, That water of fresh steel, that was never yet
quenched will trouble the Belly; but if it be drank from steel often quenched,
it binds the Belly. Wherefore if you will bind, cast away the first water.
Senn. will not allow this; because it is of an Homogeneal nature; but thinks
that steeled water must be drank sparingly; for the more iron is communicated
to the water, the more it troubles the Belly, and moves vomit; neither let it
stay long, but quench it suddenly; for if it stay long in the liquor, it is
turned as it were into rust, and troubles more. Wherefore the first water must
not be poured forth. Crocus Martis made by reverberation alone is good, but not
by dissolving by water.

DYSURIA is diminishing of Urine, it differs from Ischuria in degree only:
sometimes it is with, but often without pain: it comes not forth by drops, but
sometimes in due quantity by heaps.

The Cause, is the sensitive faculty or expulsive of the Bladder hurt, or some
other diseases of the Bladder.

Signs Diagnostick. If it proceed from fault of the Ureters or Reins, there is
no pain, no heaviness about the share. It is called hot piss: which is not a
diminishing of urine, but when the urine comes forth as it should, only with
heat. See the Strangury.

The Cure. When the cause is taken away. For. applied to the Secrets of a woman
in a Fever great with child; Take green Pelletary, 2 handfuls; Chetvil, one
handful and half; Oil of Scorpions, one ounce and half; Butter, two ounces; it
seldom fails. You may first give a Suppository or Clyster. He cured another
with oil of Camomil and of Scorpions, first anointing with oil, a decoction of
Rue and Dill. Fernelius says, That one Ureter being stopped, the Urine comes
forth by the other. For. observes the contrary.

DRUNKENNESS.

Preservatives, Bitter. Almonds are commended, five, six or ten before meat, as
also Peach kernels; which seem to help by their diuretic force. Arculamus
writes, That if any man eat tops of Wormwood or Rue in the morning fasting he
shall be defended from drunkenness. Coleseed eaten before meat is good.

Platerus avoids drunkenness, by drinking very sparingly at first.

Mnesitheus Athen. says, three things must be observed. 1. To drink wine
mingled. 2. Not to fill your self with Junkets at the second Course. 3. Sleep
not before you vomit.

The cure. Vingegar drank recovers drunken men, and other sour things. For.
gave small beer to drunkards, and bad them sleep; if they sleep not, they
recover not but by abstinence the next day, and by taking syrup of the
decoction of garden Currance.

Leaves of Coleworts wet in Rose water cure a drunken man, if after drink you
lay them to his Head. Those that are dumb after drunkenness will dye says
Hippocrates, unless a Fever come upon it.

DANDRAFF. It proceeds from a salt watery blood, and also choleric. Some hold
it for a sign of a sound brain. It portends no danger.

It is cured by Generals, Topicals, softesse, afterward with Detergents, as
with urine, pickle, with the decoction of Lupius, with Soot, with the juice of
Squills; Scarification and Leeches are good.

The DROPSY called Ascites. Is a tumor of the Abdomen, Scrotum, Thighs, Feet,
from a watery humor, which sometimes presses the Diaphragma, often times it
sweateth through into the Chest, whence grows a little Cough, and in time it
corrupts, whence comes a Fever, and thirst, from salt vapors. The water is
engendered by the parts between the stomach and the Reins; the Liver in
Anasarca, but not in Ascites: for the whole body should be hurt, unless we
shall say that it is affected in the end. The water is collected in the cavity
of the Abdomen, not by fault of the Liver, nor by reason of the straight
passages to the Reins; but because of little urine. They make water sparingly,
because the water stays in those places. It holds up, by reason of the
attraction of the Spleen hurt, and obstruction of the Vessels of it: or
Scirrhus. For the smallest part of the wheyish humor is carried by the Veins
to the Reins. The greatest part is drawn by the Spleen from the stomach by the
short Vessel, and from thence by the Arteries, it is derived to the Reins. It
cannot be made from the faculty of making blood only hurt; for though the
Chylus may changed into raw blood, as in Anasarca; yet it cannot all be changed
into water, and if it were changed, yet the Reins can vent it forth. It flows
down into the cavity of the Abdomen, and the caul by the veins, by way of
anastomosis and diapedesis and dissolved unity: the water is often times yellow.

Signs. There is always swelling of the Feet, especially toward the evening,
and after exercise. The feet often swell when men recover from sharp diseases,
and long, from plenty of meat or some outward cause. This tumor is not
dangerous if you timely help it.

Prognostics. Anasarca is the safest, because the natural faculty is less
hurt; and the blood comes nearer to natural blood then water. Ascites if it
proceed from a Scirrrhus, is more dangerous then a Tympanum; for the rest,
Tympanum is worse then Ascites. If it proceed from a faulty Liver, a Cough is
easily moved, and the Belly is hard. If the Belly be loose and moist without
ease, the parts, as the veins about the small guts, are affected with a hectic
heat, and are the cause of it. In which case purgatives are often mortal. If it
follow melancholic diseases, it comes from fault of the Spleen. They that are
in an agony hope well, which is wonderful: it is sooner cured in servants then
Masters, young men then old men. Those that have their bowels sound, they in
the beginning are freed of the disease by vomit, scowring, sweat urine.

The Cure. 1. The remedies must be varied. 2. They must abstain for some days
between from Physic. 3. We must not proceed to stronger remedies, unless the
milder be in vain. 4. Let the form be rather dry.

The continent cause is evacuated by purging, feldom by vomit; If it wander in
the Abdomen and the Mesentery, by sweat and urine: if it be on this side the
Liver, Purgatives are, besides the common, the juice of the root or middle
shell of the dwarf Elder, pressed forth, not boiled with Barley water or
Raysins; for should it be boiled, it vanishes. The Dose is one ounce, Oil is
pressed forth of the berries of Elders as out of Linseed, it is given to one
dram. The extract of the berries of dwarf Elder. The grain or seed of Ricinus,
one or two hulled: they are called grana Tilli. gutta gummi, which some think
to be the juice of Ricinus. The juice of our Orris with Honey, Raysins, Gum
traganth, for given by itself it burns the Throat. The juice of wild
Cucumber, is not so vehement as they commonly report, Mucilages are added to
it. The golden Spirit of life of Rul. which many say is nothing else then the
essence of Trochis Alhandal. For. commends or prescribes these that follow;
Take the species of the lesser Indi, one dram and half; root of Mechoacan, four
scruples; roots of Elecampane, Burnet, of each half a scruple, make a powder,
give a third part with wine. Or, Take roots of Orris, dwarf Elder, Parsley,
Smallage, Kneeholme, Elecampane (fern) of each one darm; Hysop, Centory,
Wormwood, leaves of Elder, which are the best; Savory, Finger-ferne dodder, of
each one handful; the middle barks of Elder, Gratiola, Betony, of each half a
handful, Madder roots, sweet Cane sliced, of each two drams; Anniseed and wild
Carrot seed, of each one dram and half; seeds of wild Saffron bruised, half an
ounce; leaves of Senna, one ounce, and half; Polypod of the oak, half an ounce;
Broom flowers, half a handful; Juniper berries, one dram; Sea cole half a
handful; Raysins, one ounce; Liccoris scraped, half an ounce; Cinger, Cinnamon,
of each one dram; boil all in sufficient water to one pound and half: to the
straind liquor add syrup Bizantine, or Eupatory and Calamine, of each one
ounce; make a decoction. Or, Take Senna leaves, half an ounce; Anniseed, one
dram; leaves of Mountain Pepper, half a dram; Roots of green Orris a little
bruised, three drams and half; Sea cole, half a dram; infuse them in nine
ounces of whey, boil them and press them out; add honey of Roses, two ounces,
for to take at twice being first strained. If there be a Fever. For. puts for
Mountain Pepper 4 drams and half of Rheubarb, Spicknard, one scruple: Or, Take
juice of Orris, half an ounce; whey, two ounces and half* raw Honey, one ounce
and half; boil them and strain them: add Spicknard, half a scruple; Cinnamon,
one scruple; Diagridium, three grains. Apply purgative Topicals. Liverwort and
juice of Scurvey-grasse, taken daily to one ounce strengthen well. Crato Ep.
123. gives with great success the extract of the root of Orris. He puts
Henbane under the feet, in the same Epistle. For. with the only use of Garlic
cured many.

Topicalls are. Take unguent of Agrippa, two ounces; juice of dwarf Elder, or
Elder, 1 ounce; boil them to consumption of the juice; make an ointment for the
Belly and the Feet. If there be a Scirrhus, apply emollients. A certain old
woman cast Frogs, called land-roads alive into a pot, and boiled them with oil
of Olives; she anointed the Belly and Feet with that, miraculously. This
following is a secret of For. Take of the roots, of dwarf Elder green, six
handfuls; roots of Briany, one pound; outward bark of Elder, four handfuls;
leaves of wild Cucumbers, two handfuls; Red cole, six handfuls; Mallow leaves
two handfuls; Marsh mallow leaves, three handfuls; gross Bran, five handfuls;
Camomil flowers, three handfuls; Mellilot flowers, two handfuls; dry Wormwood,
three handfuls; boil them sufficiently in sufficient quantity of water, beat
together: add unguent Agri three ounces; Barley meal, half a pound; make a
Cataplasm for the Legs unto the Knees. Or take juice of Orris, juice of the
roots of dwarf Elder, and of Elder, juice of Briony, of each one ounce; unguent
of Agrippa, three ounces: boil them for a soft ointment. A woman died by a
Vesicatory applied to her Feet. Fab. obs. 49. c. r. Gradus says, that it
wonderfully draws watery humors to it, if living Frogs be put into an
artificial Bath. Paracentesis, has only place when the forces are strong, and
the Bowels safe; otherwise the Belly quickly swells, and other remedies are
but vain, when the Navel is lifted up into a large and light bladder.
Sanctorius says, That the Vessels of the Navel may be so dilated with an
Instrument, that they may void out the water. If it swell not below the Navel,
on the right side; if the Liver be ill, on the left; if the Spleen, let it be
cut three or four fingers from the White line, and put in a Pipe closed with
linen, that nothing may come forth but by little and little when the Physician
pleases, as in Empyema. The Scrotum is conveniently (...) as is taught of Feb.
cent. 1. obs. 48. In an that are Hydropical, Rondelet saw the Pancreas hardened.

Sweat, unless Nature brings it to that of its own accord, will hardly profit.
Internals are and insensibly take away water Theriacal salts for to sweat. Let
Steel, topical Resolvers, and Fomentations alone. A sponge steeped in Wine,
wherein Salt, Bran, and Mugwort are boiled. Thirst is not taken away by water,
but by Oxycratum.

If there be a Fever, mingle cold things with hot, burnt braffe made up in
Pills, from one dram to one dram and half. Above the Ankle four days skin is
profitably opened with a penknife, a little deeper then when a Vein is opened,
and it must be rubbed with salt, least the blood grow together, and so the
water is happily let forth. Put Henbane leaves under the Feet. A Dropsy from
melting comes in a hot burning Fever: from burning heat, it is cured by things
that cool heat, and by such as void water.

The Dropsy Tympanites, it scarce differs from Ascites; for you shall seldom
find wind without water, and so contrarily. It is also called a dry Dropsy.

The Cause is wind shut up in the Abdomen, and also in the Intestins, by
Platerus observation, and Smetius. Winds are made of gross matter; especially
of black choler and heat, strong enough of it self, but weaker in respect of
the matter. In Tympanites the heat is almost burning, but the matter is
melancholic.

Signs Diagnostick. The Belly gives a sound like a Drum.

The cure. The matter must be cause of the wind must be taken away, the wind
must be discussed. Always let Carminatives exceed Purgatives. Arculanus thinks
it were a singular Remedy, if in a Clyster you dissolve three drams of the
Electuary o^ Bay berries; you must discuss by Internals, and Topicals, by the
Plaster of Bay berries; If heaters help not, we must pass to Coolers; the beer
of the decoction of Camomil flowers is miraculous.

In Leucophlegmatia or Anasarca it is good to open a Vein; if it come from
stopping, it is cured as Cachexia.

A DROPSY of the Womb, is either in the cavity of the Matrix, or in the Coats
of the Marix, or in the Vessels of the Matrix, or it is shut in a Vessel or
not. It is either with Child or without. Often times it kills the Child, most
frequently it makes belief of being with Child.

The cause is either sent from some other place, or is bred in the Womb:
stopping of Courses.

Signs. It is distinguished from Conception because a Dropsy of the womb is
equally extended according to the largness of the womb. If it last above ten
months, it continually waxes greater in the following months. In great with
child it is contrary: the Symproms that afflict in the first months, grow
milder in the latter. The Breasts that are hard, are made soft. In a Dropsy of
the womb, some blood runs forth. It is distinguished from Mola, by the
weight; from Inflation of the womb, by weight, and sound; from a Dropsy of the
Belly, because that rises from the superior parts, and goes down to the
lower parts; In a Dropsy of the Matrix, it is contrary; When it remains in
the cavity, the Mouth of the Matrix is shut: when in a Bladder, it seems to be
shut. If the whole Body be well, and childbearing were very tedious, it comes
from the fault of womb.

Prognostics. If the water be not corrupted, nor sharp, which is collected
from the Symptoms, it is cured by length of time.

The cure. If it proceed from stopping the Courses, they must be voided, also
by opening a Vein; but in other cases it is not profitable. The water must be
voided by injections, Diuretics, Purging Pessaries, Externals, Vomit,
Sneezing, Clysters. Fontanels are not good.

A DROPSY of the Breast is seldom knownz and yet it is frequent. It is not
likely that so much water should fall from the Head, but it is either bred in
the Breast, or sent thither.

Signs. A pain of the Breast that is weighty, and a sound when the Body is
moved. A dry Cough. There is danger of being choked, chiefly about the first
sleep, thirst, lost appetite, pale visage; the Feet often swell.

Prognostics. It is seldom cured. Once cured it easily returns into a Dropsy.

The Cure. The water must at several times be evacuated by Purgatives.
Hippocrates orders the Incision of the Breast if the Bowels be sound. By
Diuretics, wherewith Maximilian the 11. Emperor cured himself for twenty
years, and when that motion was hindered, he was strangled. Crato Ep. 137.
Senn. commends Incision at the beginning.

DROPSY of the Head, Is either within or without the Scull. It runs out by
Anastomosis and diapedisis, of the Veins: It happens to children from the
violence of Mid-wives in delivery.

Signs. If it be without the Scull, it is proved by the touch. If within, the
Eyes weep and are hardly shut, and it is mortal.

The Cure. Generals premised that evacuate if the age will suffer it, the part
must first be softened then we must use Resolvers; Spirit of Wine with a fourth
part of Scabious water. Also Aquapendens commends for children water of quick
Lime, the Lime being thrown away. If these fail, lay a Caustic to the hinder
part of the Head. The manner of cutting, see in Senn. Lastly, lay on remedies
that dry the Brain. Fab. obs. 10. c. 1. found in the fore Ventricles of the
Brain, 18. pound of clear water.

DISTEMPER of the Spleen hot, has with it, thirst, a dry Tongue, yellow
color, red Face, dejected Appetite, a cold distemper contrarily. They that
have a weak Spleen are properly called spleenetick.

The Cure. The Spleen cannot endure Attenuatives nor Relaxatives, but things
that bind moderately as Wormwood; yet moderately lest they make a Scirrhus,
sweet things taken any way are hurtful, and so is Vinegar. Wherefore the rinds
of the five opening roots must be steeped, not in Vinegar, but in Wine. It can
endure stronger Remedies then the Liver. Stoppers must be chiefly avoided. It
is evacuated by the Piles, Vomit, Purging, Urine: bitter medicaments are the
most profitable. The milt of an Ox burnt in an earthen Vessel; the milt of a
Kid to one dram. All outward remedies must be made with Posca, that they may
penetrate.

DISTEMPER of the Stomach. If it be cold it is cured by Generals, Topicals.
Topicals must be laid to the pointed grissle toward the Navel, and to the back
to the twelvth and thirteenth Spondils. Corals are most profitable, Myrobolans,
Chebulae, and the extract of Galanga. Other cold distempers of the Shoulders,
Matrix, Intestins, are cured by Generals, Topicals: as in the Dropsy, Anasarca;
chiefly with the decoction of Guaiacum, China, etc.

DEAD BODY, If it ly in the house or field, and it be a question how it died,
either by Thunder, or some other mischief: If it be from thunder, the Body
smells of Brimstone: so as Dogs etc. will not touch it. Under the part whole
or wounded, the bones are broken, the wound is black: If he fall on the side
that was stricken, Beasts fall on the contrary side. If he were smitten waking,
his Eyes are shut: if sleeping, contrarily. The Body is not corrupted.

If the Question be, Whether he that was wounded, received the wounds, dead or
alive? If alive, the Lips of the wound are red, bloody, swollen, wan round about.
He that was drowned if he were thrown in living, the whole Belly swells with
water, snotty matter comes forth of his Nostrils, frothy matter from his Mouth,
the ends of his Fingers are supposed to be excoriated.

DEAFNES. The Cause is either the fault of the Spirits and Brain, and so the
other senses suffer also, or the outward ears are wanting, or the passage of
hearing is stopped, or the Tinpanum or Nerve is hurt. Platerus saw an Abbot who
by the Pox was blind, deaf, dumb.

Signs. If it follow other diseases, and the other senses be well, the Nerve is
affected. If the Tympanum, the Cause was either internal or external. It is ill
in Fevers unless it show a Crisis.

The Cure. The cause being removed, it cease. If it be from fleam, that must
be dried and removed. The water of Origanum is commended, distilled with wine
from the dry herb. Gall of Patridge with equal part of oil of Amber. Water of
an Ash with its salt is specifical. Querc. Crato Ep. 59. Carduus benedictus,
four handfuls; infuse them twice in two pound of Carduus water; distill it,
after 24 hours infusion, he puts a clout into the Ear dipped in that water:
Water of bread. It is seldom cured after six Months. An old woman put one or
two grains of musk into the Ear succesfully with cotton. Another used the oil
of young mice steeped newly littred, miraculously. Juice of I^y clarified,
dropped in with wine. Juice of Onions with some convenient liquor. Oils of bitter
Almonds, Marjoram, of yolks of Eggs, of Hempseed, of Turpentine, Wax, Juniper,
Mustardseed, Guaicum, juice of Tobacco; Let all be warm, put in no new till the
former be well purged; to which end serves coughing, sneezing; three or four
drops of the medicament is enough to drop in at once; let the sick, ly on the
sound Ear. Stop the Ears with cotton. Avoid unctuous things as much as is
possible.

ECSTASIS is either true, as when the mind is drawn away to contemplate
heavenly things: or Demoniacal, as the dancing of witches, to which belongs
the Ecstasis of Cardan, and those of Lapland:

Or Natural, whereby men think their dreams were so indeed, and that they saw
quires of Angels.

ELIPHANTIASIS of the Greeks, or a Leprosy of the Arabians, is a Cancer of the
whole Body, or a disease in augmented magnitude, from a hot dry distemper, and
solution of continuity.

The cause is black malignant Choler; the remote, is Conception whilst the
Terms flow, a hot and dry distemper of the Liver and the Spleen.

Signs Diagnostick. A Nose wan, red Cheeks, cleaving of the Nails, a shrill
voice, stupidnesse in the Legs and the whole Body, that they can scarce feel
the prick of a needle. If some grains of salt be cast on the blood of a Leprous
person, the salt dissolveth; if the blood swim on clear water, he is infected:
If the Ashes of burnt Lead swim on his water, he is Leprous. Lemn.

Prognostic. It is not cured but at first.

The Cure. Diet is prescribed, opening of a Vein, purging, Cordials, Baths;
after bathing, give the Ashes of a Kites Head, Feet and Bowels burnt in a pot;
but the flesh must be eaten for three days together, which some hold for a
secret.

That the use of Vipers will not suffice, Palmarius observed. Fernelius,
Erastus, That it is sufficient, and whereby Gisb. Horst. said, He cured himself
and many others. See Vidius Schenkius. Palmarius his greatest hopes lies in
Quicksilver.

ELEPHANTIASIS of the Arabians, is a swelling of the Foot, wan, and looks like
an Elephants Foot.

It is cured at the beginning, but old cannot be cured. Senn. often observed,
that the Hands also will swell so, that pressed by ones Fingers they leave pits
like Oedema. It is cured as before.

EMPYEMA, is a collection of Matter in the hollow of the Breast.

The Cause. It follows chiefly the inflammation of the Tonsils, or the Pleura
of the Lungs, etc.

Signs diagnostick. If such an Inflammation went before which could not be
cured, there is a weight about the Diaphragma, fluctuation when men change the
side they lie on. At last a Fever comes softly, which is partly putrid,
partly hectic, about the evening and morning it is fiercest. A continual
Cough, bloody spittle; if they lie hid in the right side, there is felt heat
and weight. Hippocrates bids to lay a wet cloth to both sides, where it is
soonest dried, there lies the matter.

Prognostic. Thirst, lost-Appetite, loose Belly, stinking spittle are deadly.
Often times it degenerates to a Consumption; then the Temples are mightily
extenuated, the Feet swell, the Nails are crooked. If the matter lie on the
left side, it is the more danger. Aph. 44. s. 7. 27. s. 6.

The Cure. The matter must be let forth where Nature carries it. For. gave a
Clyster of a decoction of Barley, and honey of Roses, anointed the Breast with
oils of Camomil, Lillies, Cats grease, Whelps grease: using an emollient
fomentation: then he gave Cassia, and when the urine grew thick Diureticals:
then a Purgative; with these the Patient was cured; If there be a Cough,
expectorating things must do it, as juice of Ivy, four ounces, thrice or four
times in a day. If all be in vain, Incision must be made whilst the Forces
last. If the Lungs be not ulcerated, cut between the four and five, or five and
six Rib of that side where the greatest pain is.

EPILEPSIE either is essential to the Brain, or by Sympathy from the Stomach,
Marrix, Worms, outward parts, in children, and those that are of age.

Differences, There are three degrees. 1. The fall is felt before hand, they
foam not, it lasts not long, and the sick after the paroxysm remembers all;
in a great Epilepsie it is worse, in a mean it is betwixt both.

The Cure. Let the sick be freed from the paroxysm, which is done, if so soon
as the fit comes, you give one Pill of laudanum opiatum, with a fourth part of
oil of Camphir: or the Antepileptick Pill of the roots of Piony, man's scull, or
oil of Amber. The Head must be laid higher, a wedge must be put into the Mouth;
the sick must not be moved violently, but not at all, for the fit is prolonged
by it. Let him be raised.

After the fit he is cured, as Headache from fleam or melancholy, by
preparatives, evacuatives for some time, even continued for a whole month, by
Sweatings, and other general means; by Topicals that are proper. A Partridge
Liver powdered at the fire in a por, and distilled with water of Yarrow in a
glass vessel. Crato Ep. 104. Syrup of juice of Carduus, with the extract of
sweet Cane, Ep. 140. Man's blood is allowed by Zac. l. 1. hist. 23. because milk
is good: always hang on an Amulet: as, Take Piony root, half an ounce; seeds
of Male-piony, one dram and half; also roots of Briony.

Diet. Goats blood, Heart of a Goat, of a she Goat, of an Eel, are the worst,
eating of Turrles the best; Quails are naught, the Feet must be kept hot;
drunken people beget such as are troubled with Epilepsies.

If the disease be proper to the Brain, the fit is more violent, it comes about
the new and full Moon; there are signs of the Brain affected, the other are
well; Setaces are principle good, applied to the Neck.

If an infant be affected, it may be prevented, if as soon almost as it is
born, you give it the Epileptick powder with milk; if after milk you procure
vomit, which is done by pressing down the child's Tongue, and put a feather
anointed with oil of sweet Almonds, or some other in the Throat. The Nurse must
be cured as though she were sick of the Falling sickness. The infant must be
purged with honey or Raysins. Holl. In the paroxysm they must be cured as elder
people. If it be from worms, they must be killed and driven forth.

ERYSIPELAS. The Rose, or Holy fire, it is made, not of pure Choler; for that
exulcerates, and it would become the Shingles: but from the Choleric or more
hot part of the blood.

Signs. A Fever with quaking, shivering, great pain and heat, a Rose color.
It is distinguished from Phlegmone.

1. Because if you lay your Finger on the Rose, the part grows white, the
blood flying away; it is not so in Phlegmone unless the part be pressed.

2. The heat, pain and Fever are greater; so that the part is often lifted up
into a little bladder.

3. The color of Phlegmone, seems blackish, but of Erysipelas yellowish.
Prognostic. Aph. 26. s. 6, 7* 2.

The Cure. If there be Plethora, the antecedent cause must be evacuated by
opening a Vein and purging; aster that the endeavor of nature must be
furthered by sweating Antidotes, with water of flowers, and Rob. of Elders,
Theriac. etc.

Some roast a Nutmeg wrapped in Flax or Hemp, in the Embers, and with Colambine
seed, so roasted they give it with Scabious water, for an excellent Antidote.

Commonly they lay on a linen, or woollen red cloth, or Barley meal. The common
people abhor moist things; yet a linen cloth wet in Elder water, and strongly
wrung forth, is fitly laid warm to it.

Topicals, as for Scaldings, if they be cold they easily cause a Gangreen:
better therefore is the oil of Elders, which they call golden milk, then the
water of Elder flowers: also the water of all flowers, lean bran. Wierus writes
for a secret, That the Gall of a Carp anointed warm, with a Feather upon the
part affected, and then a dry linen cloth laid over it, will do it. If you
will use cold things, use them so long till the heat be something abated which
the Patient will declare.

The Diet must be cold and moist which also serves for Preservatives.

The EYES Affected, either the Coats Adnata and Cornea are affected. as,

EYES inflamed, which if it be but light, from smoke, heat of the Sun, drinking
of Wine, it is called, Taraxis; if it be very great, so that the white swell
above the black, it is called Ch^mosis; if it proceed from Plethory or Choler
only, that is known by the signs; it is cured by Generals, by those that pull
back, the precedent cause first being removed. The temporal Veins must be tied.
Letting blood is good in the Arm of the same side, though it come from Choler:
the Choler altered must be purged. Open the Vein of the Forehead. A Setace is
most effectual for a long disease. These first done, you must come to Topicals.
Most often it is taken away by Generals alone, and Mercurial. Galen, Mercatus
warn us, that we do not apply Topicals in the beginning to an Inflammation of
the Eyes; for many have been blinded with multitude of remedies: Apply them very
sparingly, yet to the Forehead and Temples Repellers are safely applied at the
first. Milk dropped into the Eyes corrupts and grows sharp, unless it be
changed every hour. Always add to Repellers Scowrers, as to Milk, Saffron,
Sarcocolla. Opiats thicken the optic Spirits, let them be seldom used. Always
mingle such things that are proper for the Eyes. Cold things are good for a
sound Eye for preservation; warm things inclining to cold if you would repel,
to heat if you would discuss; You must not at the same time apply a Repeller
to the Eye and to the Temples. For. dropped into the Eyes the white collyrium of
Rhasis without opium, half an ounce dissolved, sometimes in Milk, sometimes in
Rose Water: also with opium in extreme pain. In the declination, Sarcocolla
alone soaked in Milk to one dram, or dissolved in water of Fennel; Ey-bright
oil made of the flowers of Succory, or Blew bottles made by setting them in the
Sun. An Emulsion of Poppy seed, Saffron, Opium, of each three grains with a
Cataplasm. Fon. commends Crocus metallorum. Ruland. with Ey-bright water.
Hipp. commends Wine. But Zwinger in his Theater, reports that P. Ramus at Paris
by too much watching fell into an Ophthalmy, who, when as J. Sylvius bad him to
drink wine according to the Aphorism, the disease increased mightily, that he
grew almost blind. Gallen commends a Bath after Universals. Sarcocolla is
soaked in milk often, and sparingly powered on lest it grow sour. If Chemosis
be made, beat the yolk of an Egg with the flesh of a Fly, and with a clout lay
it on. Gal.

EYES inflamed being dry, if it be without pricking, it is with hardness of
the Ey-lids, it is called Sclerophthalmia. If the Eyes itch with pain, and swell
not, but are red, it is called Xeropthalmia. If they itch with a little flux,
it is called Psorophthalmia. It is cured with Generals, softning Topicals. One
gave counsel to his Patient, to lay the white of an Egg with Rosewater to the
Eye. Roots of Celandine bruised laid on with leaven, and the leaves and roots
bruised to be laid to the Soles of the Feet. In all Inflammations of the Eyes
that are very great, that which follows is profitable before other Remedies.
Take white lead washed, one ounce; white Starch, six drams; Gum Traganth,
Sarcocolla, Tutty prepared, of each half an ounce; Camphir, Opium of Thebes, of
each one dram; Rosewater what may suffice, make a Mass. Dissolve a little of it
in Rose Water, and drop it into the Eye with a Feather. Infinite have been
cured with it.

A HAW in the EYE is a little nail: it is a nervous membrane, commonly rising
from the inward corner, sticking close to the Coat adnata; sometimes stretched
forth to the Apple of the Eye, rising from Ophthalmia, the small Pox, or some
continual Flux. The Skin is not membranous, but something made up of the
swelling Veins. It is often Cancerous, it is discerned from the weeping flesh,
because the roots of the Nail ever inclines most to whiteness.

Prognostic. If there be a beginning of suffusion, the nail may not be cured,
that which touches the pupil of the Eye, should it be taken away by
Surgery; yet the scar will hinder the sight. Those that are white and with
narrow bottoms are more easily cured.

The cure. Besides Generals and Astringents, Topicals applied to the Temples
must be first emollient, then detergent. The powder of Egg-shells soaked in
Vinegar, and dried are effectual, if you strew the powder into the Eyes. For.
says, there is a red nail that is moveable: He prescribed first of all this
that follows. Take Mallow leaves, four handfuls; Night shade, two handfuls,
by reason of the Inflammation if there be any: Violets water, Lillies, flowers
of red Roses, of each one handful; make two little baggs, boil them in the
water, wring them out; and moderately hot lay them to the Eye four times. After
this, Take Camomil flowers, Melilot, of each one handful; Fenygrec seed three
ounces; make two little bags, five times in a day foment the Eyes with them.
After fomentation a Collyrium was still dropped in of the juice of Mallows,
Fennel, Rue very well clarified. Purging was continual with decoction of
Mallows, Fennel, Rue, Ey-bright, Fumitory, Rheubarb, Senna, made like Claret.
After softning detergents, as juice of Mallows, Fennel, Rue, clarified with the
Gall of an Eel and Sugar Candy; afterward also a little white Vitriol was
added: After that juice of Rue and Celandine, double; of Fennel, less; of
Vitriol, one dram and half; Verdigrease, five grains; and the party was cured.

A certain Matron cured the poor with this following water. Take the Entrals of
a Pike, and, together with the Gall, Liver, Bowels, cut them small in pieces;
add one handful of Fennel, and distill them; The juice crushed forth of
Pismires. The green of brass corrodeth less when it is burned, then unburned.
That which Covers the whole Pupil the Surgeon must not meddle with. Par.

A Cloud, wherein the sick seem to look through smoke, is from a humor
compacted in the Cornea. A white spot is made either from a scar, and it is
incurable: or from fleam collected between the Cornea. They are cured by
Generals, Topicals emollient and detergent, with the juice of Pimpernel, with
a blew flower; and first with Rosemary flower water, water of Honey: if it
cannot be cured, the white color is taken away with the juice of sweet
Pomegranates. If a yellow color in the Jaundies seize on the Cornea; receive
the vapor of Vinegar cast on a burning tile, by the Eyes: the decoction of
Rheubarb, if Choler; of Agarick, if fleam; drop into the Eye, snuff up into
your Nostrils.

Blood-shot, is an effusion of blood in the Adnata and Cornea, from a stroke, a
fall. It is cured, if it be greater with topicals, revulsives, repelling, and
then with discutients alone. With the decoction of Fenygrec exactly cleansed,
or in the form of a fomentation. Pigeons blood, Colewort leaves boyld and
applied, new Cheese. If it be old, it requires stronger means: tops of Hysop
beaten, tied in a sinnen cloth, let down into boiling water, laid warm to the
Eye, takes out the blood, that it will stick to the cloth. Root of Devils-bit,
Root of Solomon's seal, Vine, water.

Hypopion, is when Matter is gathered under the Cornea; there went Blood-shot
before, running of the Eyes, inflammation. Fern. cures that as the Haw. Galen,
Paraeus, by opening the Cornea to the Iris: Or they affect Wea. as,

The falling down of the Wea, by reason of the unity of the Cornea disolved.
If a small part of the Wea fall down, it is called Myocephalus; if a greater
part, Staphyloma; the greatest is called Clavus, when it is grown a Callous. No
man has cured Staphyloma, but a little pipe artificially drawn may derive them
by Channels.

If it be from an Ulcer of the Cornea, it is curable; if it come from a Rupture
or wound, it is also cured.

Dilatation of the Pupil, called Mydriasis, when the Apple is greater then it
should be. It is either natural or comes from extension, from dryness, or
flowing thither of humors, from a stroke, a fall, too much holding their
breath in women with child. All things seem less to these men, but the humor
does not affect the whole Wea, otherwise the Apple would be made less, for
the weight of the Wea would contract it; but the Pupil. The same is to be said
of dryness. If it come from dryness, it must be softened; if from a humor, it
must be evacuated, revulsed, resolved by Topicals, it must be restrained. Fern.
uses this following, Take dry Roses, dry Mints, Spicknard, of each two drams;
Bark of Frankincense, Mirrh, of each half a dram; Saffron, one scruple;
Pompholyx, Acacia, Spodius, all of them washed, one dram; washed Aloes, half a
dram; powder them, sift them, make Trochis with Gum Traganth; dissolve one of
them in Rose water.

A Cataract, Suffusion, is the obstruction of the Pupil by a humor. Paraeus
says by a skin. It grows between that space, that is between the Cornea and
the Crystaline humor. It is counted counterfeit by the Ancients, The black is
incurable. Copulation makes for this, about the break of day they see clearest:
because a few spirits are dispersed by a great light; by a less, they are
collected. It is made also from the subtilty of the spirits, from the finenesse
of the Body, from Dilatation of the Pupil. Generals premised, Revulsives,
Topicals, resolving, the hot breath of one that eats Fennel must be often
received, the Eyes being gently rubbed with the Fingers. If it be old, see first
if it be ripe, the sign where of is, if he can see nothing but light, can
distinguish nothing. Those are incurable that are not dilated by rubbing the
Ey-lids so. That which is with a consumption of the Eyes, that which follows
great diseases, those that are green, black, yellow wan, plaister-colour:
Contrarily, those that are chest-nut color, sky color, sea green, are
curable. 2. Let the Moon decrease* let it be two or three days after the full,
let her not be in Aries, let there be no pain of the Head, nauseating, Cough;
Let the Needle be of iron, let the sick look with his Eyes toward his Nostrils;
then the needle must be thrust in the middle space between the lesser Cornea
and the Iris, avoiding the Veins; and the Cataract must be thrust down from
above downwards, laying on the white of an Egg, with Rose water. Let the Eyes
stay bound up to the eighth day.

Or they affect the weeping piece of flesh: as,

Excathis, which is a Tumor of that flesh from blood. It is cured by Topicals
corroding, by Generals, with the Iron.

Rhyas is a diminishing of it, which follows other diseases. It is cured by
Sarcotick remedies. Squinting comes from a Convulsion of the Muscles. It is
either natural, or from a faulty situation of the Crystalline.

Or without any manifest cause they hurt the sight: as,

Amblyopia, which is called Gutta serena, wherein the Eye and the Apple
remaining clear, the sight is depraved.

Myopia is when they see only what is before their Eyes.

Nyctalopia is when men see nothing in the night, sometimes well. These are
cured by Generals* rather then Topicals. If the cause be in the Brain, the
other senses suffer with it. If it began suddenly, it is obstruction: If by
degrees, it is either distemper or restraint. It begets too great light in the
Eye by the heat reflected, and so hurts. A white color is by dilating of the
Pupil. Topicals are, the secret of Maximilian the Emperor, namely, distilled
water of fresh Goose dung, a Goats Liver eaten roasted, the vapor of it
boiled, the liquor droping from it in roasting; it must be anointed. Rondelet
found this to be more effectual, if the leaves of Fennel, Celandine, Rue, be
stuck into it. The powder is strued into the Eye. The meats must be seasoned
with salt of Eybright: Saphyr water, called so from the color. See Sennertus:
the species of Occonis, etc. also the Collirium or Sieff. that follows, is
useful. Take water of Fennel, and Ey-bright, of each four ounces; Tutty
prepared, one ounce and half; the best Aloes, one scruple: infuse them all
night, wash your Eyes with the water. Water of bread, kneaded with powder of
Rue, Fennel, Ey-bright. Use of Spectacles weakneth the sight, unless you wear
them for need. Dud. Ep. 27. Fab. cent. 1. obs. 27. by often washing the Eyes
with cold water, the sight is darkened; from too much sneezing voluntarily,
grows blindness. Often times things actually cold may be applied to the Eyes,
but not to the Ears. Zach. l. 1. hist. 56. For. prescribes three medicaments
for the Eyes.

The first is of Crystal, which he would use to read with.

The second of green glass, which he would use sometimes.

The third like a Pyramid not bored through, of thick green glass, whose Basis
should be broad enough to cover both the Eyes.

For. used this following secret in many. There is a muddy Fish greater then an
Eel, it is called Aelpuick, the Liver whereof bound to a tyle, must be set
against the Sun, and the liquor dropping from it must be received by a Vessel
underneath; With this anoint, not your eyes, but your Ey-brows, and upper
Ey-lids. Concave glasses profit by the circumference; for those thick glasses
represent all objects greater* as Unequal glasses make them less: and plain
glasses equal. They that have Owl eyes* desire but little light. They that have
plenty of humors in their Eyes, have black Eyes: because the plenty of the
humors cannot be transparent enough. Cat-eyed, that have but little humors,
cannot bear much light. See the Ulcer of the Eye.

Epihora, it is a thin watery humor, like to tears in the Eyes. It is cured by
Generals, Driers, Revulsives, astringent Topicals, etc.

EY-LIDS Roughness. It is the ruggedness of the inside of the Ey-lids with
itching and redness, and often times with pushes like Millet seed, from a sharp
humor. A callous roughness. Besides Generals, Revulsives, Intercipients,
Topicals must be emollients; afterward Coolers, as Rosewater, or water of
Dandelion; lastly, detergents. Par. says this that follows is best of all,
If you dissolve a little Vitriol in much water of Roses, Aloes, Myrrh, Saffron.
The Ey-lid inverted may be rubbed with Fig Leaves.

Hordeolum is a little swelling on the top of the Ey-lids near the Brows, which
suppurating is like a Barley corn. It is contained in a Vessel. Foment it with
white wax, or hens grese, or fasting spittle, or rub it with the body of a Fly,
the head being cast away. For. premising Generals, foments it with white wax,
or Hens grease* washed with Rose Water hot, then with the decoction of Barley
and Camomil. Then with the blood of a Tuttle, Pigeon, Patridge. He used on
himself, Rose Water, two ounces; Vitriol, one dram; he dropped one or two drops
in a day into his Eye: Or Rose Water, two ounces; Aloes, half a dram; If this
help not it must be cut. If the matter be stony as hail, it is called Chalazion.

Ectropium, is when the inward part of the lower Ey-lid appears inverted,
from a Palsy, or Convulsion, or wound ill cured.

For. cures this with Astringents, as Rose Water, where in burning iron has
been quenched; that which follows, he often times proved. Take new butter nine
times washed in water sufficient, then wash it nine times in juice of Plantain,
then three in Rose Water, two ounces and half; Tutty prepared, once washed in
Rose Water, and Aloes washed in Plantain water, white Sieff. with Opium, of
each one dram and half: Camphir washed, one scruple; make an unguent, anoint
with it in the Evening, and wash with hot water.

Hares Eyes, is when the upper Eylid is shorter then it should be; it is either
natural, or from a scar or Convulsion, or when Infants in their Cradles look
always backward, or upward. It is cured by Emollients: If it be from a scar,
Incision is made above it, in form of a hooked Moon. An unguent must be put
into the wound.

Aquap. contrarily with rains fastened with glue to the Ey-lids, joins both
Ey-lids together.

Hydatis, is a fat substance, as a piece of fat lying under the skin of the
upper Ey-lid, whence the whole Ey-lid in Infants becomes Oedematous. The cure
is made by cutting that part. The whole Eye must be covered with the white of
an Egg and Rose Water. Lay on salt chewed with Cummin seed and Sage, to dry it,
unless pain hinder. Hydatica are bladders full of water in the Lungs, and the
Liver, etc.

Essere, are little swellings something hard, with exceeding itching; they
suddenly seize on the whole Body like stingings of Bees, they vanish of
themselves. They are made from watery humors: They foreshew a Tertian, and
must be cured as a Tertian.

FASCINATION, Is a bewitching, whereby, by the sight, praising, or touching,
Men, Beasts, Corn, do dye.

Fascinations of the first and second kind, prevail not by force of words, but
by the Devil.

Signs. If the learned Physicians doubt of the cause of the disease; if it be
forthwith in the state, if preternatural things, as stones are voided.

It is cured by prayers, by purging the melancholic humors, by vomit.

A FEVER of one day, is a Fever risen from the heat of the vital spirits: to
this belongs Synoche of many days, rising from the overheating of the
Spirits, and the thinner part of the Blood.

Signs Diagnostick. 1. It begins from a precedent cause, is a sign
inseparable. 2. The Urine is like to those that are sound. 3. The pulse is next
to natural. 4. The heat is mild, easy. 5. It seizes us without cold or
shaking. The causes of the heat are, 1. Motion. 2. Corruption. 3. Nearness to
heat. 4. Constipation of the Body. 5. mingling of hot things.

The Cure is made by Bathings, frictions, unguents.

A Putrid FEVER. Cause of putrefaction is concoction hurt by natural things,
and things not natural, and preternatural. 2. Stopping of the Pores, either by
Astringents, or dryness, or heat of the Sun, or stopping of the Vessels by
plenty of clamminess or the humors. 3. The calling forth of natural heat, by a
one days Fever, anger, etc. 4. Nearness to a putrid thing.

Signs diagnostick. 1. The heat is sharp, biting. 2. They begin without a
procatarctick cause, which is a proper sign. 3. The Urine, Pulse, differ much
from natural. 4. They begin with cold, a proper sign. 5. It returns by fits,
a proper sign.

Question. May we purge in putrid Fevers?

I deny, Because Purgatives are hot, and inflame the Fever.

2. Because, before and in the dogdays, Purgations are difficult, by reason of
the hot ambient air, how much more by reason of a Feverish.

3. Because Purgatives are contrary to nature.

4. Because neither in the beginning nor in the augmentation, for all things
are crude: nor in the state: for nature is troubled from digestion, and rest is
better. Aph. 29. s. 2. nor in the declination: for in that no man dies, etc.
It remains that it is best to purge in the end. Zach. l. 1. hist. 6. 3.

Whether a Fever may rise from putrefaction? It is denied.

1. Because putrefaction is no heat.

2. Because all putrid things are cooled at length.

3 Because those vapors are not so hot as the heart. Zach. refut. hist. 84. l.
1.

A FEVER putrid continual, is distinguished from an intermittent: because an
intermittent always comes with cold and shaking: but that seldom, with the
least. An Intermittent seldom lasts above 24. hours: a burning Fever has
always a black Tongue joined to it: whence it is that Surgeons foolishly
cure only the Tongue. For. l. 2.

A Tertian intermitting Fever. It intermits, because every fit, the matter is
discussed, which is proved by the departing of the Fever. 2. Because it can
easily be discussed. 3. Because the Symptoms, as quaking, nauseating do show
that in one day intermitting new matter is recollected.

Differences. An Exquisite differs from a bastard Tertian. 1. Because an
Exquisite never exceeds twelve hours, seldom seven. 2. Because the cold is
vehement and short. 3. Because straight way signs of concoction do appear.

Signs diagnostick. It is known from a Quotidian by the cold: for in this there
is only shivering: by the lasting of the fit, Aorimony of the heat, by the
Urine and pulse.

The Cure. Fern^l. 2. m. m. c. 3. approves of long opening a Vein in choleric
Fevers.

1. Because both Choler and Blood are evacuated.

2. Because sometimes choleric Fevers end by bleeding at the Nose.

3. Because it cools.

4. Because Plethory is often the cause of it. Zach. denies it, because the
boiling of the Choler is to be feared: whence in too great bleeding at the
Nose. Hippoc. says Convulsions may be made, in Aph.

In the end Purgers of black Choler must be added. Cold water may be allowed to
those are used to it, in the state, and the matter being convicted.

A double Tertian Fever. It is often mistaken for a Quocidian: but the fits of
a Double Tertian which fall out upon unequal days, are unequal to themselves in
their manner and time; but the fits falling upon equal days, are equal to
themselves, and differ from them.

It is cured as a single Tertian, Specificals are given, flowers of Camomil,
lesser Centory, Scabious, Devils-bit and Plantain.

A Semi-tertian Fever, or a Hemitriteus, is either less, which rises from an
intermitting Tertian, and a continual Quotidian, or betwixt both, which rises
from a continual Tertian, and an intermitting Quotidian; or greater, which
rises from a continual Quartan, and an intermitting Tertian.

S^nn. says, there is an Intermitting Fever of all kinds, which afterward,
either by malignity, or some other cause, makes inflammation of the stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Lungs, whence grows a continual Fever, or a
continual Fever symptomatical, from the inflammation of the part, and
intermitting; for Spiegelius found it out in bodies always inflamed. They
follow con tagious Dysenteries: they end in Fluxes of the Belly and Colicks,

The cure. That must chiefly be respected that causes a continual, not
neglecting that which causes the intermitting; Wherefore some for both, mingle
hot and cold things to serve for both Fevers; but this way neither Fever shall
be cared for. Let them therefore be given by turns, let the Purgatives be
gentle, not-strong.

A Quotidian Fever. A continual is not ended before fourry days, often not
before sixty. If the fit be long the stomach cast down, sleep long; this
threatens death. Often times it changes to Cachexia, a Hectic, a Dropsy.

A Double Intermitting. whereof For. has but one example; that lies hid, and
is slow, wherewith For. was sick, together with a Hectic. 1. Let Diet be
opposed to that which urges most. 2. Let digesters respect the Hectic, and
the Quotidian. 3. Let vacuations and vomit be moved: let meat be given at the
time of the least access. 4. Use Restoratives.

A Quartan Fever continual, is almost always mortal. For. saw one, who so
grew melancholic, when he would admit no Physician, and for 12. weeks and
three days never went to stool: at last he went by himself, and died.

Intermitting, is distinguished from others; because at the first and second
fit it is hardly perceived; there is no pricking cold, but as it were breaking
of the bones, with a wonderful slowness, and scantness in the Pulse. Opening of
a Vein for trial is here good. The use of Peach kernels, and decoction of Rape
roots are good. Crato Ep. 103. anoints the back bone with oil of Camomil; and
he gave the juice of Carduus in a syrup; then a little boyld with butter. He
purged with syrup of Violets, of Aples, of Hellebour, one scruple. Ep. 112.
Also he laid a linen cloth dipped in Aqua vitae, upon the stomach when the fit
was coming. Monavius Ep, 229. sets down such a secret for a Quartan. Take the
Heart of a Hare, and prepare it as ye do a Fox lungs: then powder it, and
divide it into three equal parts, give it at three several times, one hour
before the fit, with white wine or some other liquors, if manifest signs of
concoction appear. Specificals are, roots of Gentian, Plantain: as also one
dram of root of Masterwort, juice of Verven, Wormwood, Steel.

A Quintan Fever: For. saw two that followed a Quotidian. Hence Authors will
have this to proceed from adust fleam; it is cured as a Quartan with a Dropsy.

A wandering Fever, is made 1. By transmutation of the humor, as when yellow
color degenerates into black. 2. By error of Diet. 3. By confusion of the
mixed matter.

A Hectic Fever, it either follows other diseases, as a one days Fever, or
a putrid Fever, or it begins of it self from a Procatarctick cause, as from
anger, heat; it never happens unless one days Fever go before. It is either
single, or has a putrid Fever, or some other disease joined with it; and then
it is deadly, except with Anasarca.

Differences, There are three degrees.

1. When the dew, or dewish moisture, which is spread through all the small
spaces of the similary parts, is consumed; and it is called a Hectic without a
consumption, and may be cured.

2. When the fleshly and fatty parts are consumed, it is called, a Consumption
Hectical, but not Exquisite, and may be cured.

3. When the fibrous parts are dried, wherein the heart is burnt and made dry,
it is called, a Marasmus hectical, or an exquisite Consumption, and is
incurable; for a Marasmus, or a burning Hectic, or a dry and cold, as in a
Hectic of old age, or called old from the disease: Another is Syncoptical,
which is hot in respect of the Fever, and cold in respect of the Syncope.

Signs diagnostick. The heat is equal, so that the sick perceive not that they
are sick. One or two hours after meat they grow hot, though they eat five times
or more in a day, as it is with Lime, or if upon burning stones in a Bath water
be poured. The Pulse is small and swift. Fat Urine is an inseparable sign of a
Hectic of the second degree. etc. Fern. cured one, whose water was so thick
that the fat might be taken off with ones fingers.

The cure. In a single Hectic, to open a Vein, or Purge, is mortal. We must
only moysten and cool; yet lest the little heat should be choked; we must
refresh; meat must be given every four hours. All are by Internals and
Topicals. The Ancients gave cold water to the full after meat at the beginning;
for in the stare he would die of it, or fall into a Hectic of old age; it is
better to give Barley water, small beer. They gave milk, from two ounces to one
pound, rising by degrees.

Fever Hectic pestilent. The signs are, a weak Pulse, small, swift, swooning,
tossing, restlesness, watchings, a delirium, sleepiness, an equal Fever: so
without any pain, they die, their forces being spent. For. Senn.

A Fever Quartan is known three ways from a Quotidian; because in that the
first fit is strong, the second milder, the third most mild: and so the first
fit answers the fourth, the second the fifth, the third the sixth.

A Fever Symptomatical. 1. Such as accompany the Inflammation of some of the
Bowels; as a Fever called Phlegmonodes, typhodes; Lypyria, which is cured by
opening a Vein, by Coolers, Moystners, Internals, Topicals. Fern.

2. A slow Fever, from a humor out of the Vessels corrupting in the substance
of the Bowels.

3. That which accompanyeth the corruption of the part, as a Consumption.

4. When either from Milk, Seed, Terms corrupted or Worms, a Fever grows; to
which appertains the Convulsion of the Brain in children, or in the
Hypochondres: windiness from raw humors collected in the first passages, which
begin to putrefy, and are changed into winds.

A Fever called Epialos, is when in one and the same part cold and heat meet.
It is an intermitting Fever, they say commonly that it is made from the
coldest or glassy fleam putryfying. Platerus says better, that it is made,
when the beginning of one fit falls upon the end of another, or an intermitting
comes to a continual. For. cures this as a Quotidian.

A Fever Syncoptical, is either choleric, and continual, or intermitting, or
phlegmatic; and that again continual or intermitting. A continual is deadly.

The cure varieth, as the cause is, always give cordials which may correct the
diseased humor. By all means refresh, by Internals, externals, raise them from
their swooning. If need be of purging, do it quickly by Manna, Honey of Roses
solutive, Cremor, Tartar, etc. Frequent swooning comes from the weakness of
the upper Orifice.

A Fever Assodes is, that wherein the sick are troubled, they are very hot and
unquiet, they cannot be pleased; they are vexed, they loath all things, they
have most vehement pain of their stomach, and stretching of the Hypocondres.

The Cause is a sharp choleric humor soaked into the Coats of the stomach.

It is cured with a Detergent decoction of Barley, with Syrup of Roses;
moderate Diet, cold and moist: For.

A Fever called Elodes, of which few have spoken, is that wherein the Body is
dissolved by continual sweating; for where there is long sweating, the Body
must needs be dissolved.

It is cured by Dryers, and such as void the Serus humor, General, Topical.

A Pestilent Fever differs from the Plague, by the vehemence of the mischief
and contagion, which is greater in the Plague. A malignant Fever is yet less
dangerous, and few dye of it, none are infected by it. There are no Pestilent
Fevers of one day, but putrid Continuals, and some Intermitting, according to
Pareus, L. de Peste.

Signs diagnostick. In the beginning there is a greater weakness of the Forces
then the nature of a Fever, or heat do cause, a small pulse, urine like to
those that are sound, and often times also crude, and the face says Hippocrates
sleep or waking oppress them, a delirium, Vertigo, Convulsion, Vomiting,
Scowring; It is observed that bleeding at the Nose in the beginning of a
Fever, shows that it is malignant: spots of diverse colors, dryness of the
tongue, blackness, inflammation which they call D^e Breun.

The Cure. Since two things do urge, either Malignity or the Fever; If that
urge, most Antidotes are necessary; if this, we must go about the cure of it;
wherefore presently give Diaphoreticks, as much as we can, temperate; for the
matter admits not concoction* Then a Vein may be opened; gentle Clysters,
and such as bring forth the dung are useful; Vomiting is sometimes good, etc.
Then come again to Antidotes. This following Electuary is excellent. Take two
Pome-citrons sprinkled well with Rose water, and with Sugar what may sweeten
them; boil that to the consistence of an Electuary.

A Spotted Fever. The spot differs from Freckles, and other Pushes, in a
Fever in greatness; for they are not high* nor long but round, like Flea
bites; It differs from Flea bites, because in Bites there appears a bite in the
middle, which remains still, though you drive away the other redness, by
pressing or rubbing it. Spots if they be pressed vanish but return; they are
seldom in the face, by reason of the smallness of the Arteries, and the cold
air driving them back. They are without ulceration, pricking, or risings-up.

Signs Prognostic. If they come forth plentifully on a critical day, and there
follow ease, it is good: but if when the matter is raw, as they often do, they
are mortal. The few or many spots do not certainly show life or death. They dye
whose spots are black: they that have them seen in their face; they whose urine
is stopped.

The Cure. First give a lenitive, open a Vein before the fourth day, but after
the fourth forbear it. Give sweating means. If a Flux of the Belly come upon
it, stop it not unless it be too much, but leave the whole work to Nature. In
the mean while use Alteratives and Corroboratives. Apply Theriac to the Heart
and Pulses with juice of Lemmons, oil of Scorpions; and use an unction of
Nitre, as before, by Vesicatories, the poisoned vapors are fitly derived from
the Heart.

An Hungary Fever, or a disease of Hungary. It is a Pestilent Fever, and
comes near to the Plague. Crato refers them to putrid continual Fevers,
Langius to a Causus; for the heat is extreme: Others to a Spotted Fever. Yet
here, though sometimes, yet always there are not spots. It began in the year
1566.

The cause. Rulandus and Jordanus say, There is the highest malignity, and the
highest Cacochymia, and that rightly; but they say, the Cacochymia comes from
fleam. 1. Because at the beginning Purgers of fleam profit, but not opening a
Vein. 2. It is more sharp about night. 3. It is more violent when the South
wind blows, and it spreads in cloudy weather. 4. Because there is pain of
the stomach. 5. Because it ends by sweat and urine. 6. Because it lasts beyond
seven or fourteen days. 7. Because it often ends by an Aposteme. Sennertus
holds it to be Causus, yet so, that there is great quantity of fleam, yet not
as the cause of it.

Signs Diagnostick. An extreme pain of the Head: the spitting moisture of the
Tongue is dried, and the Tongue becomes black by the black smoke of the blood:
which effect is called, Die Breun, it comes with shaking. As led by the Hand,
they show the pain of the stomach, and cannot endure to be touched there; for
it is hard. There is an unquenchable thirst, and a delirium. They, almost all,
fall into deasnesse, and swelling behind the Ears.

The Cure. If it come by contagion, giving a gentle remedy to bring forth the
dung, give presently an Antidote; but if there be pain of the stomach, anguish,
heat, nauseating, those humors must first be taken away by purging or vomiting
with Agarick, Senna leaves, Diaphaenicon Rosarum Mesves, etc.

Vomits here are often the most profitable. The humors being voided, or if
there were no such, the first or second day open a Vein, though the first day
the spots should appear, so there be strength. Almost all who neglected
bleeding at the first, died. If there be Vomiting or Scowring, it is more
safely let alone. Open the Liver or Medias of a Vein in the Foot, which is most
commodious of all, chiefly in women. Also it may be done on the third day.
After the third day, Vomits and Purges; for opening a Vein is mortal. Cupping
glasses instead of opening a Vein, may be set to the lower parts, then we must
fight with Antidotes, yet with such as do not increase the Fever. One dram of
Species liberantis, Bezar stone, Hearts horn, flowers of Brimstone, Amber,
Zedoans, all things of a Pome-citron; The roots a part, and Bezar a part are
all most effectual. Afterward Diuretics may be given. The drink must be
neither wine nor beer; let it be the decoction of Hartshorn, with spirit of
Vitriol: or Barley water with juice of Lemmons.

Symptoms of Fevers. Pain of the Head is cured by general means, by Topicals.
Many commend a Radish root cut in slices, and laid to the feet, first washed
with Salt and Vinegar. Juice of Housleek, and Alces of America; For Housleek on
houses is full of juice in the greatest heat, but flags in a cloudy air;
because it draws the dryer vapors for its nourishment. The root of Rhodia is
commended, one ounce with Rose water, half a pound; boil them, and apply the
decoction with a linen cloth to the Head. The unguent of Alabaster with
Populeum must be anointed on the Coronal suture.

Dryness of the Tongue is cured with scraping of cuttle bone, and moystners
that are of the strongest, as with the water or juice of Housleek, Sal
prunella; spirit of Vitriol, Barley water.

Thirst if it be from heat of the Lungs, the Mouth is dry, they can hardly
speak; which cannot be quenched with drink, but it will presently come again.

Here it is better to take in the coldest Air than to drink. It is good to
hold cold water in the Mouth, preserved Cherries; Lettice leaves, Purslane
preserved, or sprinkled with cold water. Oxycratum, pieces of Pome-citrons,
conserves of Sorrel, pieces of Cucumbers, Gourds, first sprinkled with Sugar,
Crystal, Tamarinds, Strawberries, garden Currence to hold in the Mouth; The
decoction of the Roots of Sorrel, which will look like red Wine; Give drink in
the vigor. If the cause be in the stomach, the humor must be voided, namely,
that is hot and sharp.

The white Fever, is a disease or a symptom with a pale color of the Face,
languishing of the Forces, heaviness of the limbs, loathing of meat, panting
of the heart, difficulty of breathing, sadness, a phlegmatic swelling of the
Face, Hands and Feet, from depraved nourishment; and plenty of crude humors
proceeding from an ill disposition of the Bowels, Liver, Spleen; Stomach, and
so from obstruction of the Vessels about the Womb, and the Bowels that are
near, and from thence the Courses being stopped.

The cure is the same as for Leuc^phlegmatia, yet so that the Womb must be
regarded; and as in the stopping of the Courses, yet so that the Bowels must be
looked too. A lenitive, opening a Vein unless the disease be inveterate, the
Blood, and Forces being corrupted, Purgatives, Aperients, Diaphoreticks,
Marriage, unless the Cacochymia be too great, are good; chiefly Steel, after
general Remedies: The root of Scorsonera taken any way, Bezar stone.

A FICUS cancerated. Fab. obs. 1. c. 1. A cancerated Ficus in the right Ey. A
fit Diet being prescribed, a Clyster given, water of Borrage, Sorrel, Betony
being drunk with syrup of the juice of Lemmons, and Pomegranates, a Vein being
opened, and Leeches set behind the Ears, on the same side, and cupping glasses
applied to the Shoulders, an infusion of Rheubarb and Senna being given, made
of waters of Betony, Eybright, Agrimony with syrup of Roses, and the Feet being
washed in the decoction of hot things; he washed the Ey with distilled water
against the Cancer, and applied an Intercipient to the forehead. Yet the Tumor
increasing, when out of it at once there flew 73. ounces of blood and a half,
by Surgery he took out the Eye. The fear of the Patient stopped the Flux of
blood, and a painful Ligature about his Limbs; wherefore a Lenitive drink is
ordered, and a Cordial, or water of Buglors, Roses, Violets, balm, of each one
ounce; syrup of Citron pills and Sorrel, of each one dram; confectio Alkermes,
one dram; Powder of Diamber, half a dram; and to the Heart was said an Epitoeme
sowed between, of flowers, leaves, seeds, cordial powders, made up with Cotton
on red Sarsnet. The stomach was anointed with a stomach ointment. The
Chirurgical part being done, a powder of the Author to stay blood with the
white of an Egg was plentifully cast on. A defensative was laid to the
Forehead, and a Digestive to the wound. And lest nature should again send the
humors thither, he set a Settace between the first and third Spondi^.

A FISSURA on the Nipples or Chaps; It proceeds from violent sucking, and a
choleric humor. It is not credible that it comes from dryness here, as it
does in other parts; It is prevented if in the three last Months, or the last
Month only, two cups of wax, like to Acorn cups, or Fox gloves, be made and
filled with Rosin of the Firr tree, and laid to the Nipples, and held there
with linen cloths: when the Rosin is spent we must put in more. Topicals must
be emolient, also the juice of Crab-fish with Cream. If they cause pain when
the Child sucketh, lay on the Nipples a cup of pewter, or silver, peirced
through and covered with the Dug of a Cow new killed: for so the Child will
suck, and yet not touch the Nipple with his Lips. General remedies are Coolers,
and such as purge choler. The same way all other Chaps, are cured.

A FISTULA, is a winding Ulcer, white, straight, callous, from dried fleam, and
often times is without pain.

Signs Prognostics. Fistulaes with notable rottenness of the bones, as of the
Huckle and the Hip-bone, which pierce to the Bowels, which are in a part that
has principal Nerves, the Body being weak, are to be left by Prognostics.

Signs Diagnostick. Prove them by a leaden Probe, a wax Candle. If there be
many of them, make injection of some liquour, which if it run at once through
all the holes of the same color, it is one Fistula.

If it has lasted many years, and do shut suddenly, it is mortal.

The Cure is either Palliative, when by General means, Revulsives Settaces, and
by Topicals the matter is voided and pulled back.

Lime water, and also Ly, Treacle water: or True, which is accomplished,
general means being first used, and by vulnerary potions. The Callous must be
removed, and first the Orifice of the Fistula must be enlarged, either by fire
or Steel instruments, or which is more commodious, with Tents made of Sponge,
Elder piths, Gentian roots, Bryony, Rape roots, as in Issues. Perhaps it were
not unfit to make an Issue in the opposite part, long before the cure, to make
diversion. The Callous is afterward taken away, either with fire or the
Instrument, or Medicaments, as Unguentum Apostolorum, ashes of Figtree,
decoction of Bryony root and Centory the less especially: or with stronger, as
Aegyptiac. They differ according to the age of the Patient, and temper, etc.

The root of black Hellebour is not safe, the green water, whereby sometimes
the whole Callus is taken off like to a Sheath. If this be in vain; in a part
that can admit Incision, open the whole Fistula with an Instrument, take off
the Callus with a knife or with fire, yet lay a good defensative about the
part. The rottenness of the bone must be cured, if there be an Eschar it must
be taken away. Nicol. Florentinus says, that this which follows will draw
forth broken bones, and such as are rotten, will eat off the dead flesh, and
cure the Fistula. Take burnt Salt, Tartar, Agarick, powder them, mingle them
with Honey. See F. 570. l. 5.

A FISTULA of the Chest: It is almost incurable. 1. Because the Muscles are in
perpetual motion. 2. Because the Pleura is without blood. 3. Because it cannot
be cut.

The Cure, is by drying Diet, vulnerary Drinks, by general and Topical means: a
little Aegyptiac may be added to the injections; If there be very much
corruption, a golden, silver or leaden pipe may be put into the Breast, full of
holes straightly bound, fitted with a great Sponge dipped in Wine and Aqua vitae,
set to the Orifice, that the sick, having his Nose and Mouth stopped, may,
through that, void out the filth.

A FISTULA of the Gums is cured by generals, a decoction of Agrimony with
Alum, or by a Caustic, or by pulling out the Tooth as Celsus thinks. A drop
of Ammoniacum is an excellent remedy: For. Honey of Roses, one ounce; and one
or two drops of oil of Vitriol mingled, is excellent. Crato. Ep. 183.

WOMEN'S FLUX. It is distinguished from an Ulcer, for that which flows from an
Ulcer of the Womb, is thicker and more stinking* comes forth not so much, will
not admit copulation; from the Seed, because in the Flux the humor is thin, or
watery blood, and runs always. The Cause is the fault of the Matrix, or the
whole Body, or some principal part. Some have fallen into this by some purging
Medicament taken, some after Bathing.

Prognostic. It brings the Patient to a Dropsy, a melancholic Ulcer.

The Cure. First the cause must be evacuated: the distemper of the part must be
taken away: the matter must be dried by general and topical means: also by
Diuretics. See Senn. Then it must be dried by Astringents. Senn. For.

The Form, in the first Creation was given to natural things, which, as it is
communicative of it self, is multiplied either by Seed, as in living Creatures
which are said to generate, not when they generate their young, but their Seed:
but there are in Plants, forms that are distinct from the Soul, as the
purgative force left in the Carkase of Rheubarb shows. Those forms may be
mingled as the form of a Pear, grafted on an Apple tree, also the form of an
Ass and a Mare, also of a Man and Woman according to Senn. or, it is
communicated by Atoms which contain the forms in them; hence is the beginning
of all things that breed of their own accord.

A FRACTURE. The signs are, that we can feel the pieces of the broken bone by
the touch, we hear the crackling of them, the part is hollow which the bone
left, bunched where it came in, it is painful, and unlike to the sound part.

Signs Prognostic. That which is longwaies, is soonest cured, for there needs
no reduction; If it be in the joints, it is most dangerous.

FRACTURES of the Nose, Cheekbones, Canal-bone, Breast, Shoulders, Ribs,
Backbone, Ankle, Heel, Hand, Foot, fasten again in twenty or twenty four days,
of the Legs and Arms in forty days. Marrow bones are sooner fastened then hard
bones.

The cure. The first scope is to reduce the bones, which is done by extention,
which those that are moist will best endure; and to set them again either by
the hands or by Glossocomion, wherein, when the bone is sufficiently extended,
the coard stretched, must be let slack; You shall know that the bones are
restored if the pain suddenly cease: If you feel no inequality, if it be like
to that is sound. 2. That the bones restored may be kept so, by Medicaments of
the white of an Egg, what is sufficient, and Bole-Armenick, half an ounce: by
forms made of linen cloth three or four double, which fill up the hollow, as
in the Ham, or make the slenderness of the part equal, as in the Wrist; by
Splints, which because at this day we want, they are made of much paper, and
thin Chips of Wood; yet so that the Wood be not green. Fab. c. 4. obs. 98.
makes of soles of Shoes, of plates of white Lead or Iron: about the ends let
them be always thinner, and where they lie upon the Fracture, let them be
thicker, by wispes or wreaths made of small sticks, about a finger thick, wrapped
up in linen. For a Fracture of the Leg or Thigh, two are laid on, from the
Heel to the Groin, that by their stiffnesse they may hold the part unmoved; by
boxes made of plates of Iron or Wood. The use of them is in the Bed, or when
they are taken out of their bed; by Swaths, which are either of leather, as in
a Fracture of the Nose, or of woollen as in Inflammation, where there needs no
Ligature, or linen. Every part must be so bound as we would have it remain. If
on the right side the Fracture be more eminent, or in the outside; you must
begin to swath on the outside, and bind it harder on that side; but if in the
inside, now-adays contrarily, the first band is put upon the part disjoynted or
broken, and there they bind it fast with thick rollings toward the Body. The
second band laid on they swathe with fewer rollings toward the extrem parts.
The third is put upon the end of the part that is hurt, and is rolled gently
upward, cutting the rollings of the first and second Swath-band cross-wise, and
restores the Muscles removed by the first and second from their places.
Afterward they apply Splints. The binding being done, the sick must be asked
whether the Limb be not too hard bound? If he say I, unbind it, and bind it
looser. Too loose is unprofitable, too hard causes defluxion. It is a sign of
right swathing, if the next day the part swell with a phlegmatic Tumor. If the
part swell hard, it is too straight; if it swell not, it is to loose; If it be
too straight, next day bind it more loose; Foment the part with water and oil:
otherwise before the fourth day nothing must he moved. From the third to the
seventh the part grows smaller; wherefore on the seventh day it must be bound
closer then before, because there is no more fear of Symptoms. If it be a
simple Fracture, wet the bands and plagers in Oxycratum, or in red wine, if it
be with a Wound. In Summer wet them oftener; when the Symptoms cease, leave off
wetting them, lest the breeding of the Callous be hindered. 3. Cure the
Symptoms, and prevent them by Generals and Topicals. Clammy nourishment
generate the Callous, yet Fab. obs. 92. cent. 1. disallows this; because some
by this means have fallen into a Dropsy, and many have been cured without it;
taking the juice of Primroses, and the powder of the root or the juice of
Agrimony: Also the powder of the stone Osteocolla to one dram, with water of
the root of Comfrey, Ptisan, or some broth every day taken fasting, wonderfully
makes the Callous, especially if it be mingled also with Topicals. Fab. obs.
90. cent. 1. Topicals are, Emplaster Diapalma in Winter, barbarum or the black
plaster in Summer. In progress of the disease some wet the swaths with
Rosemary water, which they write to be most effectual for Fractures.

General. If the ends of the bones prick the Periosteum, or flesh, the place
must be opened, and the splinters taken away; if they stick only to the
Periosteum, but do not prick it, they must not be taken out; If they stick
neither to the bone, nor the Periosteum, take them out; We must often move it
up and down for fear it should be crooked. If there should be inflammation,
strive not to restore it for fear of Convulsion; yet never stay beyond four
days before you reduce it. Place the parts in that posture that is lest
painful. Fab. cent. 1. obs. 93. Give them a bottom of thread to hold in their
fingers, that they may remain in a mean posture. The Arm must be carried in a
scarf, bent at right angles, not higher lest nothing should come forth, not
lower lest too much. 1. Always let the part lie easily. 2. Equally. 3
Something high.

A FRACTURE with a wound, is more hard to cure; for the bones must be reduced,
and the wound must be cured. If there be inflammation, reducing must be
deferred, till that is over; the bone being reduced, the wound must be cured.
Binding is done either with larger swath-bands, and looser then in a Fracture
without a wound, and in the bottom of the Plaster or Cataplasm in the middle
of the Swathbands a hole is left, that the wound may be cleansed, the bands
shall only hold the bones together. Splints must not be laid on: there is no
use for Chests. Or the binding is made with one Swath, and once coming about;
which is woven with a double or treble linen cloth like a plager, and sewed
exactly at the borders, so broad that it may cover the whole wound. Pareus l.
13. the coming forth of the matter is not hindered.

A FRACTURE of the Leg with a wound, Pareus l. 14. for a wound of the Leg
applied the white of an Egg, Butter and Meal, and bid to extend the Foot; If
the wound was not open enough to take out the Splinters, to enlarge it with a
rasour and to try whether the Splinters could be taken out with the Fingers to
crush out the clots of blood with the Hand, to bind up the cavities of the Ham
and Ankle as it must be and fill them up with hards wrapped in linen, lest by
the hardness of the wisps the heel should be inflamed, that he should place his
Foot foftly, equally and something high, defended by a Cover, to draw out three
small Porrengers of blood, from the Liver Vein, on the left side. At the second
dressing he anointed the edges of the wound with oil of Roses for six days;
used longer it stops up the Pores, he sprinkled the Plagers with Oxycratum and
red wine; for nine days the Patient eat nothing but twelve Damask Prunes, and
six mouth-fulls of Bread. The drink was nothing but sugered water, or water
alone; he was purged with a Bolus of Cassia and Rheubarb. On the eleventh day a
Fever and a defluxion came upon him, which came to be an Impostume flowing
forth with much matter, from the portion of the corruption suppressed, and more
loose Ligature; a convulsive motion also threw the bones reduced out of their
place, so that they were to be reduced again; the Fever ended the seventh day;
after that he laid on a Detergent digestive, when the matter should break
forth. He laid in the bottom a Bed of Onions, their Pills taken away; He
hastened the Callus with clammy meats, and so in four Months he was cured.

A FRACTURE of the Scull with a wound of the Membranes. The signs are, if the
Patient fell with the blow, without sense or hearing: If by his Nostrils,
Mouth, Ears, Eyes, the blood run out: Lastly, if he Vomited: If with the Probe
the roughness of the bone may be felt; If Ink (of Galls alone, if we fear
Vitriol) being anointed, and scraped with rasping Instruments, it leave a line.

Differences. 1. If there be a Fissure with a wound, for two or three days we
must leave the work to Nature, shave the Hair, apply something to stop the
blood. The next dressing the musculous skin with the Pericranium must be cut,
yet missing the Temples and Sutures, it must be pulled from the Scull, and
either by the scraping Instrument or Ink, the Fracture must be searched out;
but to be more sure, whether the Fissure has passed both places, the sick must
be bid to shut his Mouth and Nose, and to breath forcibly: for then by the
Fissures will come forth bloody matter. Then with most soft cloths with
Cephalic powders, the whole wound must be filled; we must strive to ease the
pain, and unto the fourth day, we must apply a repelling Medicament of Barley
Meal, and Bean meal, of each six ounces; oil of Roses, three ounces; make a
Cataplasm. The second dressing, the Fissure must be made clean by the scraping
Instruments, or the Trepan must be set on. If it be a small Fissure of but one
Plate, whether we must follow it exactly to the end. Aqua Pend. Celsus denies
it. When as Galen warns us, that if the Fissure be long ways, that we must not
follow it to the end. Also in Europe those wounds are not so dangerous. To the
scraped Bone, never apply moist or oily Remedies, but Cephalic powders,
unless there be fear of inflammation by extreme pain. If the Membranes be hurt
also, when the Skull is opened; if it be not open enough, the Membrane must be
uncovered, something must be applied to stop the blood, chiefly that excellent
remedy of Galen, of Aloes, one part: Frankincense half as much. To ease the
pain, power in Pigeons blood which is also detergent, and for to wipe off more,
use Honey of Roses with the juice of Smallage, and if need be Egyptiac.
Mathiolus commends especially oil of Eggs. Oil of Hypericon is good, Mastick
and the Cephalic ointment, which you may find in Senn. Turpentine with Aqua
vitae, juice of Calamint, Nip. Many apply to the Dura matter, Oil of Roses, and
other Moistners, because it strengthens, and hinders the defluxion. Others
require only dryers, because the Tympanum, and Nerves delight in dryers; so do
all Ulcers: because oil offends the Nerves: because cold is an enemy to the
Nerves. Senn. distinguishes: If the Membrane be white, pure, unhurt, driers
are useful, as Honey of Roses with four drops of Aqua vitae; but if the
Membrane be touched, and there be fear of inflammation from pain, Oil of Roses,
Omphacine is good; then it varieth according to the temper, as in soft Bodies
and Children, Oil of Roses is good; for strong Bodies, Rosin of the Firr-tree,
or oil of Hypericon mingled with it: if it must be drier, put in more Rosin
then oil; In Summer, oil of Roses: in Winter, Rosin of the Firr-tree. The Dura
Matter by reason of the air, always loses its motion, and the superficies of
it resolves into scales; sometimes with a stink, which frights those are not
skilled by practice in it; but this is common and superficial, it is washed off
with Honey of Roses. Senn. in this case prescribed in alClyster, roots of
Piony, one ounce; seeds of Piony, two drams. The scales of the bones must not
be pulled away by force, but we must further the motion of them, not the
falling off, we must further the Callus to come.

2. Is a Contusion when the bone is pressed down; yet so, that it is not broken
into many shells. It is reduced with a Cupping glass with a great flame, but
this causes fluxion; the sick with his Mouth and Nostrils shut, must force his
breath upwards, which succeeds in children; or lay on a cleaving Plaster, or
raise it with a Trepan, or a Trefine. A Plaster of Ivy Gum sodders bones
wonderfully.

3. Is Effracture, when the bone broken into Splinters, is thrust inward; those
Splints must be taken out, or the bone must be cut away either with Beaks or
Rasps, or with Pullers, and with a leaden hammer, it must be broken. Sometimes
a Bone so pressed down, settles to his natural equality.

4. Is Seeds, when the print of the blow remains in the Bone: it is reduced as
a Contusion.

5. Is Resounding, when either some other part or place is cleft then where the
blow was, but the place of the Counter-Fissure is guessed at; If the hair being
shaved off, a Plaster be laid on of liquid Pitch, Wax, Turpentine, Aloes: for
hence if any place appear to be more swollen, moister, softer, it is likely the
Fissure is there; so that the Patient also, thinking of no such thing, is
compelled now and then to put his hand upon that place.

Signs Prognostic. There are four Fractures wherein a Surgeon may be
deceived.

1. When the Fissure under is very small as a hair.

2. When the inward place is Fissured, the outward remaining unhurt.

3. When a Bone pressed down, forthwith returns to its natural posture.

4. When the Bone receives the blow in one place, and the Fissure is in
another. Fab. cent. 1. obs. 17. In a Fracture of the Scul anger was mortal.
Obs. 19. A venereous act. obs. 20. Too great noise, langhter immoderate,
sneezing. obs. 24. Let the air be most carefully hot. Fab. c. 3. obs. 22. A
Cucupha is common for the wounds and contusions of the Head. Also the roots of
Aveus, the leaves and flowers of Betony. etc.

FUNGI. Often times by the hole made with the Trepan comes forth Sponges, namely,
a Fungus red flesh. The Subject of them is the Membrane hurt.

The Cause are gross vicious humors. They are cured by evacuatives, also by
Topicals. Take Savin in powder, two drams; Ocre, one dram; make a Powder, which
sprinkled on them consumes them. Par. Faby. has another Powder.

FURY of the Womb, is a delirium, with an unmeasurable desire of Venery,
growing from the heat of the Seed, and of the Matrix, communicated to the whole
Body.

It is cured by Coolers, opening of a Vein, and purging of black Choler.
Specificals are such as quench the Seed, as Lettice, Water Lillies, Willows,
Purflane, Agnus castus, Rue, Dill, Hempseed:. chiefly Corals, Emralds. All
these beaten anointed to the Teflicles, extinguish Venery. We must cool by
Internals and Topicals. See the water of Chastity in Senn. l. 1. p. 2. ^. 10.
l. 4. p. 2. s. 3. c. 5.

The FROG. It is a swelling under the Tongue that is common to children,
seldom it has the nature of Inflammation but rather of Oedema. The filth of
it is like the white of an Egg, and sometimes yellow.

The Cause is a Tartareus humor or fleam coming from the Head.

The cure is by Generals, besides Topical Resolvers, as powder of Salt, Hysop,
Pomegranate Pills, of each two drams; rub it with this. Senn. requires Cutters
and Resolvers. For. nseth the powder aforesaid, as also Plantain water, half a
pound; Honey of Roses, half an ounce; flowers of wild Pomegrantes, one dram and
half; Alum, half a dram; let them boil: these are Astringent, and (may be) are
good at the first. Senn. looks to the declination or the state. If in vain,
Pareus provides a Plate of Iron-bored through, equal to the Mouth when it
gapeth wide, and he applies it so to the Mouth, that the swelling may be
answerable to that hole; afterward by the hole make a burning with an Iron,
crush out the filth, and wash the Mouth with a decoction of Barley, Sugar and
Honey of Roses, leave none of the humor: for it makes it come again. Gal. will
not willingly open it with an Iron, for fear of a Flux of blood. A wound also
made under the Chin, the matter will presently come forth; which is done, if
the Mouth cannot fitly be opened. For Children, Senn. mingleth powder of Sage
or Origanum, with Honey of Roses and spirit of Vitriol, two drops; or
Cuttle-bone, Sal gemmae, Pepper, of each one dram; make a powder: he lays
under the Chin or upon the Chin a Plaster of Goose dung.

FRECKLS, Either come from heat of the Sun, namely, where the color is changed
into swart; It is prevented if the Face and Hands be anointed with the white of
an Egg beaten with Rose Water, or with the emulsion of the four cold seeds. It
is cured in women, by rubbing them with the green leaves of Cherry-tree, or
with Rose Water, wherein Camphir has been dissolved. Others use Cherrytree-gum
dissolved in Vinegar, with a little Oate-meal.

Or, from an inward cause, as in women with Child, in Maids from their Courses
stopped, eating of roots of red Beets, etc. The spots are swart, sometimes as
broad as ones Hand, they are cured by an emulsion of Hemp Seed, and the juice
of Bugloss root, pressed out.

A FELLON, Is a swelling at the ends of the Fingers, with inflammation, pain, a
Fever, tossing, from a venomous humor; it is held incurable. Pareus often
made Incision in the inward part of the Finger, even to the Bone, according to
the length of the first Joint; it is effectual, so it be done before it be
ripe. Let much blood run forth. Then the Finger must presently be thrust into
strong and hot Vinegar, wherein Treacle is dissolved, to call out the venom,
to assuage the pain. Fab. obs. 97. c. 1. In the beginning very often, cut by
degrees the only Superficies of the Skin, when spots appeared, which being cut
the watery blood ran forth; he laid on Aqua vitae with Treacle, and he cured
all.

GANGLIUM is a Tumor about the Bones of the Joints, which are covered only with
skin. The Cause is the weakness of a Nerve or a Tendon, from a stroke or
labor: so that it cannot concoct its nourishment. It belongs to Scirrhus
Tumors, not to Oedema, as Scrofulous Tumors do. It differs from Atheroma, by
the inequality and resisting of the Tumor. It is cured by Generals. The
Topicals must be emollient, then apply heat to it to discuss the Ganglium, or
break the Bladder with your hands: lay on a Plate of Lead, cut or burn it if
you may; on the Joints you may not. Bring it to suppuration, if the rest be in
vain.

A GANGRENE, The hot fire, as a Sphaecelus is a cold fire: It is first made by
too much cold. 2. From a venomous quality. 3. Transpiration being hindered, or
from superfluity of humors, as in Inflammation. 4. From too much outward heat.
5. For want of nourishment, and influence of heat; which causes exstinguish al
natural heat. Signs. If it come from the 1. cause, there proceeds a pricking
pain, redness, then coldness, numnesse.

If from the 2. there is swooning, a continual Fever, a delirium.

If from the 3. the pain and pulsation is diminished, without any resolution or
suppuration of the Matter; the color is wan, and it stinketh. The part, if it
be black is colder then a Marblestone, and most soft. If it neither move nor
feel at all, if it stink much and green corruption flows, it is a Sphacelus;
yet often times some motion is perceived even in a Sphacelus; namely, when the
head of the Muscle is not hurt, it moves the benumbed Tendon, we must beware
we be not deceived by it.

The Cure. Evacuate the humor if there be any, prescribe a Diet. The Heart
must always be corroborated by inward and outward means.

If it be from cold, and the Gangrene be not yet, either rub the frozen part
with Snow, ( Senn. of a Gangrene) afterward give Theriac with wine to make him
sweat; when the cold is something abated, gentle Chafings with oil of bitter
Almonds, and with Milk of the decoction of Rosemary are profitable. But if a
Gangrene be, you must rather scarify, as in that which follows etc.

If it come from the second cause, besides Generals, opening a Vein, Purgatives
not violent, sweating means and Cordials take place. And 1. Incisions must be
made if it pierce to the bone, eschewing Vessels, or scarification will
suffice, or we must burn it. 2. The Incisions must be washed with a sharp
decoction that is detergent, of Scordium, which is principally good here, roots
of Angelica. 3. Put in Aegyptiac with Tents into the cuts, so often until the
dead flesh be consumed to be cut off with a rasor; which the smell, color,
sense of the part will show. 4. Apply over the whole part a Cataplasm, that is
drying and resolving. 5. Upon the part affected an Astringent.

If it be from the 5. cause, repelling means have no place, unless there be a
manifest Gangrene.

If there be a Sphacelus, some make incision in the sound part, some in the
dead: because in this there is no fear of symptoms, or bleeding. Senn.
distinguishes: If the putrefaction spread no farther but cease, which when
it falls out, there appears a Circle exactly red, and very tender about the
part affected; let the incision be made in the dead part, otherwise not. Senn.
likes Pareus his way how he stops the blood: See Senn. Often times the sick
many days after complain of the pain of their Foot that was cut off.

Also there is a Gangreen Scorbutical, which begins commonly from an
internal cause, without any manifest cause, about the end of the Foot, with
black and blew spots; with a crusty dry Ulcer that yields no matter. It lasts
sometimes above six Months; It seizes on the Tendons, which do not so soon
corrupt as the flesh, it is with most bitter pains.

GONORRHEA comes either from the retentive Faculty hurt, from a cold and moist
distemper, or from watery sharp Seed provoking the expulsive Faculty. It is
insensible. If it be from distemper, it is corrected by contraries, chiefly
with the water and juice of Mints, Astringent. Baths, Driers, by Generals, and
Topicals; yet we must distinguish well, whether it be Seed, or a phlegmatic
humor that runs forth; It makes a consumption of the Back, which always
accompanyeth Gonorrhea.

GONORRHEA Venereous, is an inflammation of the Parastatis, from unclean
copulation, with sharp matter, pain, heat of the urine, extension of the Yard,
which may last at the least ten years.

The Cure. At first you must cool and moisten, by Clysters, Lenitives, opening
of a Vein, Generals, Topicals; In the declination use Resolvents, as
Turpentine; If in making water the heat be intolerable, let the Patient make
water with his Yard put into a Pot full of warm Milk or water. If there be an
Ulcer, cast in detergent means, as Barley water, syrup of Roses, Plantain water,
Honey of Roses; Pareus often times adds a little Aegyptiac. Make it cicatrise
with a drying and an Astringent injection. If in vain, then make recourse to
Guaiacum.

GUTTA Rosacea. Sometimes it is a preternatural redness without Pustules,
Bladders or Ulcers: Sometimes with Pustuls and Bladders: Sometimes with an
Ulcer, which lastly also is called Noli me tangere. It infects the Nose chiefly.

The Cause, is hot thick Blood, bred from the fault of the Liver, which by its
thickness can neither go back nor be discussed; It is hard to be cured.

The Cure. The blood must be cooled by Diet, opening of a Vein, Cupping glasses
with scarification, and general means: as purging the choleric humor; the
Topicals are, the water of all flowers, which is distilled from Ox dung; first
let the Face be softened with the vapor of warm water. Lac Virginis, water of
white Lillies, Solomonsseal, Bean flowers. etc.

GALLING is cured with the juice of the herb wild Tansey bruised, with Dears
suet, Goats suet, a tallow candle, with oil of Roses, yolks of Eggs, Goose
grease, Mucilage of Gum Traganth, made with Rose water.

GUMS SWOLLEN, is an inflammation of the Gums; it is cured with Generals.
Topicals must neither be strong nor sharp. Poison must be avoided, if it
suppurate, open it with a Lancer, etc.

Gums with flesh growing too much about the Cheek-teeth, are often times with
pain, and a Fever. This follows inflammation, It is cured, by binding it
daily with a thread till it fall off, or else by an Instrument of Iron.

HEADACHE. The cause is either a bare distemper, and then there is no
heaviness of the Head, the Eyes move easily, there went before some
procatarctick cause.

Or Matter, from the common and proper signs; so blood possesses the fore
head, fleam the hinder part of the Head, Choler the right side, melancholic
the left.

Or winds, There is extension without heaviness, it quickly rises, and
remits, there is tinckling.

Or watery humor: The pains are wandering, distillations frequent, much spittle.

The subject. If the hair being lifted up the pain is increased, which comes
not to the roots of the Eyes, it is without the scull.

If it come to the roots of the Eyes, it is within the scull.

The differences. It is either by essence or by sympathy from the stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Courses, Emrods stopped, or from Ulcers shut up, which is known if
it come at distances of times, if it be intended by the increasing of some
other disease, if there be signs of some other part affected, the forepart be
most affected.

The Cure. If it come from a naked distemper, the indications are for contrary
Alteratives, by General Topical means.

If from Matter, that must be voided, revulsed, the Head must be strengthened
and altered by General, Topical means.

Unguent of Alabaster is of wonderful force; opening a Vein is always good, if
by too great pain there be fear of inflammation. Also Potions must be given in
great quantities, ten ounces at a time. Let Sugar for pain of the Head be the
whitest, for that which is not so pure, does hurt. In all Cephalic means, for
every humor, you must add such as bring forth fleam.

That which is called Clavus, is a pain in the Ey-brows from sharp matter with
wind, shut up between the scul and the Pericranium. In Cephalic melancholy, a
Vein may be opened for to make proof of it. Arthritick powders dry excellently,
which see in Senn. l. 1. p. 1. c. 11.

F^rnelius says, He never met with any Head-pain which he cured not. Take
Aloes the best, half an ounce; Species Electuary de gemmis, Trium santal, red
Roses, of each six granes, with syrup of Wormwood and of Violets; make a mass.
The dose is 1 dram twice a week, two hours before Supper. Scholz Ep. 121.

If it be from drunkenness, it is cured as Choler in the Head.

If from watery humors, as fleam in the Head, especially by sweating and
diuretics.

Topicals must be laid to the forepart of the Head, about the Forehead,
Temples, the Coronal suture, to which always add Vinegar. The hinder part
cannot bear it by reason of the Marrow of the Back.

Actual cold things may be applied, yet carefully in old people and children,
etc. If they grow hot or dry, remove them. Also hot means in hot Headache are
convenient, and seldom cold things.

Veiven is commended, a crown also of Roses, Knot-grasse, Clivers worn,
Plantain root hanged on.

Put under the Feet Colewort leaves, beaten with Pigeons dung, and Elder
Vinegar: lay Leaven, Soap and Salt mingled upon cole leaves to the Feet, it is
approved. See Symptoms of Fevers.

HERNIA of the Intestines. The cause is either the falling down of the
Peritonaeum, or rupture, or loosening. Fabr. denies the first, Ep. cent. 3.
annexed: because in Aneurisma, the starting of the Navil, swelling of
melancholic Veins, Arteries, the Peritonaeum and the Vein is dilated: because
in cutting for Hernia, binding and Ligature of that falling down cannot be
made, for the parts broken are drawn one from the other.

The Signs. A hard swelling, sometimes great, sometimes almost quite gone in
the Scrotum, pressed with the Fingers goes back with a murmuring noise, and
pain: if the Peritonaeum be broken it comes suddenly; if it be loosened, by
degrees. Often times by the sluggishness of Nature, the Testicle resides in the
Groin, causing pain and swelling, supposed to be Hernia. It is cured by
leaping, etc. Epiplocele is driven in without pain or murmuring.

The Cure. The Intestin must be put up again, if by reason of winds and
hardness of the Excrements it cannot be sent back, it must not be forced by
violence, but first we must apply emollients resolving. If in vain, cast in a
resolving Clyster; If this be also to no purpose, by consent of the friend
incision must be made in the Scrotum, that the Rupture of the Peritonaeum may
be made greater: So the Intestine being put back again, the Peritonaeum must be
shut by stitching. If the wind be from fleam the cure is difficult; for strong
discussives increase wind, in which case some give oil of sweet Almonds.
Suppositories and Clysters do more safely bring forth the fleam. Incision I
spoke of before does very seldom good. Senn. It often makes the Physician
suspected of man slaughter.

The Intestin put in, is kept in with a Truss; let the Diet be healing and
astringent: and all internals also must be the like. Then we must be careful
that the Excrements of the Belly be soft: So often as the Patient goes to
stool the Intestins must be kept up with the Hand; let him ly upwards some days
in his bed. Topicals are, great Comfrey, Sanicle, Panfies white and black,
Solomons-seal, Cinque-foyle, Tormentil, Cypress nuts, Female fern, Mous-ear,
Through wax, Rupture wort; the herb called Holleriana, because Hollerius says,
that the juice of that herb for nine days drank in red wine does perfectly
cure Herniaes. The root of Aveus, of which internal remedies may be made under
any form as well as Topicals.

The Cure by the golden paint, as they call it, is performed three ways: either
with a thread of linen, or by a leaden rod, or a golden rod. Par. l. 7.
Paraeus never would subscribe to take out the Testicle, unless a Gangrene, or
fleshly Hernia befell them. Platerus has another way, whereby Herniaes are
cured without incision. See Senn.

A HERNIA of the Groin, is a round swelling in the Groin, which is easily
thrust inward.

The Cure. For. l. 27. cured it with a gentle purging Clyster, with an
emollient and resolvent fomentation, the Intestins being thrust in again: the
place is anointed with oil of Eggs, Myrtils, Hypericon, of each what may
suffice; then for many days, he applied the Cerate against Rupture, and a
Truss. The drink was Beer of the infusion of great Comfrey, with Sugar, or
Claret of the decoction of Solomons-seal, Liccoris, of each half an ounce;
Valerian, Nip, the lesser Comfrey, water Fern, Plantain, flowers of red Roses,
of each half a handful; Anniseed, one dram; some give Marigold flowers with
wine, in a rear Egg; there was one that gave the powder of Earthworms: For.
happily uses Solomons-seal.

HERNIA of the Matrix. It is not found in Authors. Senn. has but one example:
Doringius in Epist. ad G. Fab. records two more. It is when the Matrix lies
down on the Groin, and there by degrees, as the Child grows greater, it is
augmented to a greater Tumor. It is cured by Section only.

A Windy HERNIA. Signs. The swelling of the Scrotum, without weight or
heaviness, with a sound: it is easily cured.

The Cure, is by Generals that take away Wind and Fleam, by Topicals, that
Resolve; it is not cured by Incision.

A watery HERNIA: It often follows the Dropsy, or rather accompanies it. It
is seldom bred in the Scrotum. It flows by the Veins from the Reins. When
only one side is affected, the right Testicle never, but the left is seized on
by reason of the Spermatick matter.

Signs. It is distinguished from a fleshy Rupture by the only clearness of it,
the Tumor goes not into the Abdomen, though it be pressed. If it be in the
Scrotum, the Testicles may be felt; the Scrotum swells. If it be between the
Erythroides Coat, the Tumor is like to an Egg, the Testicle can neither be seen
nor felt, if the Tumor be but on one side.

The Cure. If the left Testicle be affected, and the lefr Kidney be faulty, we
must either wholly abstain from the Cure or the Scrotum must be cut only in the
lower part, that the watery humor may come forth; which every year Griffonius
Ap. Fab. did successively on one that was threscore years old. If the Reins be
not affected, the water is resolved insensibly by Resolvers, and discussive
means. If in vain, besides universals, the Scrotum must be opened with a
Penknife, if the water stay in the Scrotum: If it be in the Coats, it is not
safe; if with a watery Rupture, flesh grow about the Testicle, as in the sick
man of Fabr. it must be handled warily. Cent. 4. ob. 65. Let the Testicle be
cut away, it can be done, as also if the Testicle putrify by water, which is
known by the stinking smell.

A fleshy Hernia seldom rises on the left side, by reason of the Spermatick
vessels. It proceeds from gross blood as Warts do.

Signs. It is a hard Tumor without swelling of the Groin, increasing sensibly,
the figure is like the Testicle. It is known from a watery Hernia by the
clearness. A young man that held back his Seed in copulation, because a friend
came to him, fell into a fleshy Hernia. obs. 64. cent. 4.

The Cure. Generals premised, at the first we must use Repellers, afterward
Driers, or by Surgery take away the whole Testicle. For. cured some. He that
undertakes to cure a Cacochymical person, or a weak old man by incision, does
apparently desire to be called a murderer.

Authors say it is safer not to attempt the cure. The powder of the root of
Rest Harrow taken is most profitable.

A HERNIA called Varicosa, or a Rupture of swollen Veins with ill blood, or
Circocele, is a crooked Vein swelling with melancholic blood: It is proved by
touch and sight.

The Cure. For. besides Generals applies the Plaster of Mucilage and
Ammoniacum. Paraeus cures it by incision as Varices. Senn. says, this is
dangerous, and the Testicles should rather be carried up with a Truss, and
Astringents to be applied, as the water of Cypress nuts. Others soften it, and
after resolve it, as For.

A HERNIA of the Navil. It often times happens, when the Intestines and the
Caul, ly down upon the Navel loosned.

Signs. If it be from the Intestins, the swelling is neither soft nor hard,
when the breath is stopped it increases; When the sick lies on his back, the
Intestins often times return into their place with a noise and roaring. If it be
from the Caul, the Tumor is broad at the bottom, but narrow at the top.

Prognostics. In Children easily, in Men of years it is hardly to be cured.

The Cure. Besides Generals and Topicals as before, For. for Children makes
four Rolls in the form of a stiver of red leather, moistened with Oxycratum, the
Intestins being first put up. The first he applies for four days; and this
being taken off, he lays on another. He praises oil of Eggs. A Swathe for the
Navil is safe, but incision is not so: especially, in children. When a
Surgeon opened the Tumor in a Child, the Guts with the Life came forth. Par.

A HERNIA of the Navil that is watery.

Signs. A lank swelling with waving up and down; being pressed, it neither is
diminished nor increased. At the Candle it seems clear.

Prognostic. In a Child it has no danger; in one of years with a Dropsy it is
dangerous.

The Cure. The Nurse must use a dry Diet. In one of years, the water must be
purged forth. Topicals must be Resolvers. For Children a Cataplasm of Plantain,
and Lintels boiled together is good. If in vain, incision must be made, which
is approved by Laur. Fabr. Hild. Senn.

A Windy HERNIA of the Navil is cured as Hernia before, but with difficulty.

A fleshy HERNIA of the Navil.

Signs. It is a Tumor that yields not to the touch, though the sick lie on his
back; it admits no cure by Surgery. Pareus, Benivenius. Fabr. cent. 5. obs.
62. consumed a spongy flesh like a Cancer, by a thread, bound by degrees more
close.

A HERNIA of the Throat called Bronchocele, is a swelling between the sharp
Artery and the Skin, wherein, sometimes a dull flesh, sometimes some humor
like honey or water, is contained, and often times with Hairs. Platerus says
that wind is only the cause of it: but the remote cause to be the pulling off
of the Skin with the Membrane from the sharp Artery. Senn. denies the first.
In the first place, apply Astringents, then Driers and Resolvers.

HARE-LIPS are cured, 1. By excoriation of the Lips that are parted and gape 2.
By future of them being excoriated. 3. By vulnerary means.

HAIRS fall off, either from the whole Head equally, or from some one or other
part, and it is called Baldness, Ophiasis, falling of the Hair. That, proceeds
from want of nourishment, sharpness, dryness of the Pores, as in those that
out of Germany go into Italy, or from loosnesse: This, is from a sharp humor,
and by this the outward Skin* grows dead; if it be purged, the blood will be
watery; it waxes not red by rubbing. The Hairs are made by the hairy Faculty,
and are truly parts according to Senn.

The Cure. Generals premised, and a Ly of Maidenhair; Forestus applied a
liniment of Bees ashes, and oil of Myrtils to a Bald-head, another be rubbed
only with powder of Bees: another he covered with a plaster of Flies beaten
with Turpentine and yolks of Eggs: another with the liquor of Snails strewed
with salt, the place being first rubbed with a sharp cloth, he cured with oil
of Nuts, decoction of Southern wood, Mugwort, oil of Juniper, Conies-fat, Goats
dung, ashes of Walnut shells, Mouse ashes with Honey: Fat of green Frogs dried,
first using the Ly of the ashes of Frogs, produces hairs every where, even in
those that are Lepers; ashes of Nigella with goldsmiths water, cured one that
was bald by Quicksilver. For. used Goats milk, and nervous things, hot urine.
The fat of a Pike, the froth of lean flesh. Monav. Ep. 284. commends Ladanum
chiefly.

HAIRS are made black by the decoction of astringent things, by Internals
purging fleam. By Topicals, the green shells of Wal-nuts, Cypress-nuts, Galls
boyld, oil of Nuts, Cadmia, a Ly wherein Coliquintida is boiled, Myrobolans as
well inwardly, as applied outwardly, Cloves, Bean-stalks.

They are made yellow, if they be washed with Ly of the Ashes of the old
Cole-worts adding Barley straw: Some to that Ly add green wheat, Liccoris,
shavings of Box, or put Saffron in the Ly: the decoction of Broom flowers,
Mullens with yellow flower, Citron Pills, water and oil of Honey.

They are made to curle, if you wash them in the decoction of the root of dwarf
Elder, or anoint them with Hartshorn and oil of Olives.

The ends of the Hairs cleave from a burnt humor. It is cured by a cooling
Diet, by purging black choler, by an emollient fomentation.

Worms which shorten the Hair, are described by few, they can scarce be seen by
the Eyes; they eat the ends. They are killed by Vinegar of the infusion of
Nettle-seed: also by Scabious, Southern-wood, Centory, etc.

Platting of the Hair, Die Mahrflechten, it troubles Men and Horses. It began
in Poland: It is hereditary, springing from the water and air. If the platting
be cut off, the poison slips in again, and makes dangerous affects. Opening a
Vein and purging are useless here.

HICKOP. The Cause is the rending of the upper orifice, which proceeds from
humors, vapors rising from the Womb, Hypochondres, dryness, inflammation of
the Liver, a Wound of the Membranes of the Brain.

The cure. The Ancients held their breath, held cold water in their Mouth, they
sneezed. If it be vehement Hickop, cure the symptom, neglecting the cause, by
Narcoticks, as by syrup of Violets, Poppeys, or this following of For: Take
seeds of Dill, or Carways, one dram; white Poppey seed, two scruples; Manus
Christi with Pearls, one ounce; make a Nodulus, infuse it in small Beer. If it
be by consent, take away the cause, if from cold, by heaters; if from wind,
likewise. If it be from too much evacuation, it is cured by sharp moistners; If
it be from plenty of meat, evacuate it; If it be from poison, first give a
Detergent, then Specifical to drink; If from worms, drive them out. Castoreum,
Cumin bound to the left Wrist. For. anointed the Backbone against the Region
of the Stomach with oil of Violets; he gave syrup of Violets to moisten, and
syrup of Mints to strengthen, Astringents of syrup of Mints, Wormwood, are not
good till the matter be evacuated.

YELLOW JAUNDIES, is a spreading of the Gall.

If it come from the straightness of the Passages, or from the Vessel of the
Gall, the Excrements of the Belly are white, there is no Fever, but
heaviness; it comes suddenly without loss of strength. If effectual remedies
do not profit, the straightness proceeds from the stone. If there be signs of
the Liver affected, that is affected. If it lasts long, it threatens a
Dropsy.

The cure. First we must open, and chiefly by Dodder, than which there is
nothing better. Saffron, Agrimony, Hore-hound, Centory the less, Germander,
Wormwood. The yellow stone found in the Gall of a Bull is profitable. One dram
of Earthworms; with juice of Succory, roots of greater Celandine, Elecampane,
Tartar Vitriolated, Cremor, Tartar dissolved in steeled Wine, spirit of Salt; A
decoction of Straw-berries, 3 handfuls, Raysins, four ounces; Hore-hound, half
a handful. For Children, seeds of Columbines. Openers and Purgatives may be
mingled. After that we must evacuate. Gal^l. de vi purg. denies here to open a
Vein. For. uses it in Plethorick Bodies. The Purgatives may be strong. For.
gave a woman with child that had the Jaundies, half an ounce of Electrary of
the juice of Roses, Rheubarb, one scruple; Diagridium, one grain; Spicknard,
three grains, with water of Balm Hops, Fennel, of each one ounce at once. It is
a sign the obstruction is opened, when the excrements of the Belly are again
yellow colored, and the urine is not so yellow as it was.

If it proceed from the Colic, when the Passage for Choler is stopped by st^am
and winds, it is cured as the Colic. From the Colic come the Jaundies from
the Jaundies the Colic.

If it come from heat of the Liver without a Fever, here is too great quantity
of choler, and from thence grows a Fever; the Urine and dung are yellow, the
hands and Feet are hot.

The Cure. Opening a Vein is convenient if there be Plethory; the distemper
must be corrected, and the cause evacuated.

If it be critical, the urine and dung hold their natural color; it must not
be cured. If it be symptomatical on a day that is not critical, the matter not
concocted invadeth. It is taken away the Fever being cured.

If it come from inflammation of the Liver, it is cured as an inflammation of
blood.

If it be from poison, it is cured by Antidotes.

Rondeletius promises health to women with child, if these things following be
laid to their Wrists and Feet. Take the leaves of Missleto of the Oak, two
handfuls; Celandine, Hore-hound, of each half a handful; beat them in a mortar
with a little wine. Par. uses this that follows, Take goose dung, two drams;
white wine, three ounces; drink it, two hours before meat. Querc. gives Goose
dung, one dram: or half a dram; or dung of a white Hen, half a dram, for four
days.

BLACK JAUNDIES. It is commonly thought to come from the Spleen, when the
melancholic humor is not attracted. Platerus says, preternatural Choler is
the cause of it, which is collected in the Vessel of the Gall, and is corrupted
in the meseraique Veins; and gets a green and black color from corruption:
Because in the Spleen there is no cavity, no hollownesse, nor can it be carried
to the hollow Vein: because it invadeth suddenly; It is cured as the Yellow
Jaundies, by steel, etc. If the color cease not, it must be discussed by
sweaters; also by a dry Bath, and after the Bath rub the Body with emulsion of
Hempseed. A Tench cut through the back laid to the Abdomen, or Soles of the
Feet, draws forth the yellow and black humor.

The ILIACK Passion, is the motion of the Guts turned, wherein the Chylus is
not rightly distributed, and the dung is retained, and at last are cast forth
at the Mouth.

The cause, is said commonly to be the inflammation of the Intestins, from the
hardness and plenty of dung, also from a Hernia, or from poison. Yet Senn.
does not believe it can be from obstruction of the small Guts; for the
Excrements could not come forth at the Mouth: but he says, that as in vomiting
the circular fibers of the stomach; so in the Iliack Passion, the cause is in
the winding of the small Guts; because Clysters in the Iliack Passion are often
cast forth by vomit, and Suppositories also.

The cause of that motion is, 1. The inflammation of the Intestins. 2.
Retention of the dung. 3. Ulceration; Most commonly it seizes on the small,
but sometimes the great guts also.

Signs Diagnostick. The Belly stopped, Vomiting more then in the Colic, the pain
less. If the small Guts be affected, vomiting and nauseating is greater.

Prognostic. All Iliack Passions are dangerous. When the dung is vomited up,
it is mortal. Aph. 44. s. 6. Aph. 10. s. 7. it kills in four days.

The cure. Emollients are useful, internals and Topicals. One ounce of oil of
sweet Almonds is singular. Let the Fundament be always fomented with
Emollients; Apply Emollients to the Abdomen. A Bath is good, fat broths,
softning Clysters.

If it come from inflammation, it is cured as inflammation of the Guts. If from
the dung hardened, it is cured as the Colic. If it cannot be cured; Hippocrates
with a pair of Bellows separates the guts from the dung by blowing them, and
then gives a Clyster. If it come from Hernia, it is cured as a Hernia.

IMAGINATION, of it self neither alters nor moves, because it is an
apprehending power, and the action of it is immanent; but only by accident so
far as it makes for desire or hate; and so the natural Faculty of moving is
drawn into consent, which either sends or brings back the humors and the
Species. It produces diseases only by frights and fears whereby the humors
are moved and corrupted. But if the imagination be of a great Nose, a great
Nose is not made. It cures not a disease by it self, but so far as it makes
confidence and joy. It affects the Infant with ill conformation, by the
Passions of the mind, and the motion of the humors and spirits proceeding
thence, whereby the forming faculty is troubled. In a determinate conformation,
when bloody spots are made like Mulberries, the Imagination does represent such
forms to the forming Faculty, as the soul of the Mother so affected, affects
the soul in the Seed; and that, the Infant.

Regiment of INFANTS. The Navil string being cut off, if the Infant be
plethorick, let the blood run forth; if it be lean, let the blood be pressed
inward with the Hand; yet the Infant will have fewer Smallpox, if the blood be
not pressed in with the Hand: as Riol. observed. If it be of a reddish color,
and cries aloud, it is sound. Let it be washed with wine of the decoction of
Rose leaves, Myrtils, etc. Galen bids strew it with Salt, but amiss. An
Excrement like to chalk sticking in the Mouth, must be wiped out with a stick
tied in a clout, wet with oil of sweet Almonds, Honey and Sugar. All the common
Joints must be unfolded. Before the Tet be offered to it, give it Honey or
syrup of Roses with oil of sweet Almonds and Sugar. Some say that the Mothers
Milk is not good for the Child, till the excremental blood that is with the
after-burden be purged away. But the condition of the Milk must be considered:
if it be bad, give it not; if it be wheyish, Spiegelius says it cannot hurt,
but it does much profit. Put no great light nor a candle near the Child: Let it
ly one Month on the Back, and afterward on the side: Let the light be right
over against the Eyes; wherefore the sides of the Cradle must be veiled, that
the Child may look only straight forward. Hanging Cradles are the best. Let
them sleep more then wake. The Body of the Infant must be daily rubbed gently.
After four Months the Hands and Arms may be let loose from swath-bands. Let it
never accustom it self to one Breast only; for so it will use but one Hand.
After some months make it Pap of Wheat-meal a little dried at fire, or of the
whitest Bread: before it have teeth, solid meats must not be given it. When the
teeth come forth, use it to more solid meats. Let it not stand too young. Put
it in a little Cart to learn to walk: put a roundle about the Head. The Child
must not be removed from sucking till the number of its teeth be complete. It
is best weaning it when the Moon increases, in Spring and Autumn.

INFANTS Fevers. They proceed either from corrupt Milk, or breeding of Teeth,
or Worms. The Nurse or Mother must be purged with Diacatholicon, syrup of
Roses, etc. Give the Infants Alteratives, as the juice and syrup of Violets,
syrup of juice of Lemmons, water of Endive, Succory, Violets. The Backbone
must be anointed with the Mucilage of Flea seed, with oil of Violets and Wax.
Lay an Astringent as oil of Quinces to the stomach. Heurnius commends this
which follows, Take conserve of Violet flowers, two ounces; Borrage, half an
ounce; Pulp of Cassia new drawn, one ounce; Mucilage of Flea seed, half an
ounce; the Dose is one or two drams. Syrup of Roses, Violets, of Succory with
Rheubarb, Cassia may be given, etc. Senn. saw a Child die by 3 drops of oil of
Amber given to it by an old wife; the Belly is loosened most conveniently by
suppositories and clysters, whey and syrup of Roses:

A disease of Infants called Siriasis, which is an inflammation of the Brain,
and the Membranes, which there follows upon, a hollownesse in the forepart of
the Head and the Eyes. It comes from phlegmatic blood corrupting, also from milk
too hot. Women call this Das blatt Schissen, because the Membrane of the
Fountain falls and causes a hole. In three days commonly it kills: the
Belly must be loosned, with oil of Roses the Fountain must be anointed,
afterward add oil of Camomil; the Nurse must use cold and moist Diet, and
dwell in a colder air.

Fear in sleep, if it come from worms, or a Fever; it is cured by a particular
way: If it come from corrupt Milk, Vomit removes it. Give Honey of Roses
solutive with Milk, confection of Jacinth or Coral. Hang upon the Infant
outwardly, a Wolfs tooth, Corals, the horns of Italian Beetles, which they call
the flying Heart.

Watchings. If they proceed from corrupt Milk, take that away; if from worms,
remove them. The Nurse, but not the Child, must take sleeping Medicaments.
Washings of the Feet, are rather profitable, of Dill, Mallow leaves, Willows,
Vine leaves, etc. The soles of the Feet are profitably anointed with the marrow
of Hearts bones. Oil of Dill new, is safely applied to the Head: to the
Nostrils, oil of Violets, with a little juice of Lettice for an Ointment.

Moisture of the Ears, which unless it be cured, the Bones corroded will cause
deafness; the pain must be mitigated with warm Milk, oils of Roses, Violets,
Saffron; To wipe away, Honey of Roses is good, and water of Honey put in by a
Tunnel. Also Orris root, Myrrh, Saffron, All um melted in wine. Inflammation of
the Tonsils is cured by Repulsives, as by syrup of dry Roses.

The Ligature of the Tongue is often loosned by Mid-wives, with their nails or
the edge of money, but they do this often times where there is no need: be it as
safe as it will, it has been sometimes mortal. Often times there is no need of
Incision. Nothing of flesh is cut but only what is Nerves. If it grow again
together it must be cut again. Fa^r. cured his own brother that was dumb to
(...) years old, by cutting the string, so that he ever spoke plain. Cent. 3.
obs. 28.

The Catarrh is cured, if Diet be observed, give the Nurse a Pectoral
decoction; to the Child a Clyster, or Suppository, or a Vomit with oil of sweet
Almonds; give expectorating means. Anoint the Stomach, cause sneezing, etc.

Gripings of the Belly. Heurnius in the first spoonful of pap, gave one scruple
of Anniseed very profitably, Clysters, Solutives, Topicals are good. The
decoction of water of the herb Cardiaca is given by Mid-wives for gripings of
wind, and that very well; for that herb mightily helps the pain of the Heart:
whence it has the name.

Scowring, when they breed Teeth proceeds from a Fever, watchings, pain. The
heat of the Fever troubles the humors. It is cured as Diarrhea.

Maw-Worms. Signs, The Mouth is full of spittle, sleep is troubled, they
scratch their Noses, they chew often, there is a dry Cough.

Preservation is by Diet. Before meat give the decoction of Sebestens, or roles
of Diaturbith with Rheubarb, decoction of grass roots, Mous-ear, juice of
Lemmons, Citrons, two drops of spirit of Vitriol. Infants cannot away with
bitter things. They are cured with Corallina, Worm-seed, Roots of white
Dittany, Hartshorn: the water and decoction of grass roots. Remedies against
the Epilepsy, are fitly mingled with them. If there be a Fever, we must give
cold things, as juice of Lemmons, Pomegranates, Oranges, Vinegar, Hartshorn,
Bezar, a Clyster of Milk. Apply bitter things outwardly. Heurnius commends
this that follows for Children. Take syrup of Succory with Rheubarb, from two
drams to half an ounce; water of grass, one ounce; it is given for one Dose
every other day. See, Worms.

Little Dragon, Because they are like little dragons the Indians are troubled
with on Midsummer day. Senn. says, they are true Worms with heads like black
hairs; Their back is pricked as with a Needle, they toss themselves up and
down, and wax lean. Heurnius says, you must rub their Backbone and Shoulders
till they wax red; next, only with skin pulled from fat Bacon, and the hairs
will appear. Paraeus cured them, with a fomentation of warm water, afterward
with anointing with Honey and Barley meal. The heads that peep forth, must be
pulled out with Pullers.

Dudith. Ep. 27. cured his Children from them with a Bath, into which he cast
crumbs of Bread rubbed out, one handful, and a little ashes; The Children being
washed with the strained water, the Bread showed forth innumerable hairs, the
second day fewer; then he anointed the shoulders with meal mingled with
Vinegar, which being washed away, there appeared little swellings, which being
scraped away with a knife, they were called little dragons, but unless they
were presently scraped off, they hid themselves within; they are thought by old
women in Poland to be little worms.

INFLAMMATION is Phlegmone, a swelling with heat, redness, stretching out from
abundance, with resistance and pulsation, which are the marks to discern it
from Erisipelas. It is either Resolved, or comes to suppuration, or grows to a
Scirrhus or a Gangrene.

The Cure. The antecedent cause, namely, blood must be altered, evacuated,
revulsed, intercepted. It must be altered by cold and moist things by reason of
a Fever. It must be evacuated by hunger, opening a Vein, purging, if there be
Cacochymia: it must be revulsed by opening a Vein, Cupping, Ligature; it must
be intercepted by Astringents laid on the part, and a thickning Diet. If it
flow from heat and pain, this must be assuaged, that discussed. Topicals at
first must be Repellers, in the increase add Resolvers; yet so, that the other
may bear the sway. In the state, let the Forces of Repellers and Resolvers be
equal: in the declination use only Resolvers. Also consider the temper of the
part affected; for it must be cured in the flesh one way, in the Nerve another:
the dignity, so the heart must not be tried by vehement remedies: Situation, so
things lying deep require stronger means. The shortest way must always be
chosen; Morning sleep is allowed, for then the blood moves which by sleep is
called inward. If the blood neither change to matter, nor be resolved,
Scarifications are very necessary; if it come to suppuration, cure it as
suppuration.

INFLAMMATION of the Brain, or Frensy, comes from Inflammation of the Brain, or
of the Membranes, or both; it proceeds from choleric blood: sometimes the
memory is hurt: sometimes the Fantasy alone.

Signs. A continual Fever, delirium, virulent vomiting, insensibilitly,
sharpness of the Tongue, breathing great and rare, urine sometimes fiery,
sometimes white: In a bastard Frensy, the breathing is sometime little, there
is a stretching forth of the Diaphragma, there were no signs that foreshewed a
Frensy. If the Brain only be affected, all the Animal actions are abolished,
except most violent motion.

Prognostic. It often degenerates into a Lethargy, also into Convulsion, and
Dysentery. Clear urine, and white dung are deadly. If they were mad before, and
suddenly grow quiet as if they slept, they die. We must not sit near to Frantic
or mad people, or to those that are sick of the Plague, nor let them put their
Fingers to our mouths. For. says, that Lud. was so hurt by mad people. Fab.
cent. 1. obs. 84. tells how he was bitten by a Frantic woman.

The Cure. The cause must be pulled back by opening the Liver Vein, then the
median-Vein, it must be derived by opening the Veins of the Forehead,
Nostrils, under the Tongue. The Orifice must be made straight. Also after the
third day, if there be strength to endure it, For. used Cuppings with
Scarifications, Ligatures, etc. Iutercipients must be applied to the Temples.
We must evacuate by true Purgatives when the disease is sharpest, and the
matter swells. If there be Cacochymia, it must be altered by such means as
prepare Choler. Topicals at first must be Repellers, sor strong people in
Summer they must be cold, otherwise warm; in the augmentation we must add
Resolvers, etc. Lay cold Epithems to the Liver and Heart: Let sleep be
carefully provoked by sleeping remedies. The Chemists commend the Spirits of
Terra sigillata, distilled without any addition, being yellow and sour, it is
given to one scruple. They must be admonished to make water. The Secrets must
be fomented with the decoction of Pellitory, etc. If the sick be offended. with
light, he must be laid in a dark place, and so on the contrary.

INFLAMMATION of the Windpipe. Gorgareon is a pendulous kernel, which if it be
swollen below and small above, it is called the Uvula; If it swel long-waies
above and beneath it is called Columella.

Prognostics. The Surgeon must not meddle with it if it be blackish. If you
cut it, there is notable danger of bleeding; If you cut it our, there is fear
of a Consumption.

The Cure. Generals being premised, the first Topicals must be repellers; yet
Honey may always be added: in the declination add Resolvers and softners.
Outward means, before the Flux must be Astringents, laid to the sides of the
sharp Artery. When the Flux is made, you must soften outwardly; yet the
Gargarisms at first must be Repellers, etc. If it suppurate, it must be helped
forward by a Gargarism. If it open not of it self, it must be opened with an
Instrument. And if a Gangrene be near, Aegyptiac is good. If it be in vain, the
Uvula that swells no longer, must be cut out by the Hand, which is the last
remedy. Before and after the Gargarisms, must be Astringents. When it waxes
red, it threatens choking by bleeding: or let it be tied every day straight
with an Instrument and a thread. The bleeding is hindered by a Cautery. Rul.
makes a fume of one dram of white Amber to take at the Mouth; and lays on the
Head, one ounce of old leaven by day, and another at night. Cherries eaten
cause this Inflammation.

INFLAMMATION of the Jaws, is the first kind of Quinsey, when the inward
compass of the Jaws is inflamed; the Tumor appearing inwardly and outwardly.
2. When the outward muscles of the Jaws, of the Neck, of the forked bone of the
Wesand are inflamed, the Tumor spreading it self to the Breast. 3. When the
inward muscles of the Larynx are affected, so that the Tumor appears neither
without, not within. It causes shortness of breath, and the sick loll forth
their Tongues, like Dogs, whence it is called Cynanche. The second is called
Paracynanche or the Mumps: neither of these is the Quinsey with Dod: The first
is called Cynanche, That which is made by the luxation of the Vertebras of the
Neck, is a bastard Quinsey.

Prognostic. The mumps is the least, then the Quinsey, then Paracynanche,
which is the fourth kind, when the outward muscles of the Throat are inflamed;
the Tumor appearing inwardly, the worst in Cynanche. An obscure voice, froth
about the Mouth, a black Tong^e, raw spittle are mortal.

The Cure. Revulsives being premised, and derivers, as opening a Vein in the
Arm, and under the Tongue. If a Fever went before or invaded at once, because
the matter is wandering and swells, experience teaches us to purge. If
Inflammation went before, and a Fever follow, it is not so convenient; but
this must be quickly done: as in the morning open a Vein, and purge at night;
for the fourth day it either suppurates, or Resolves, or kills; but you must be
very careful that the medicament move not vomit* for there is fear of
strangling; wherefore Clysters are safer to be given. Gargarisms must be
Repellers at first, as, Take water of Honey-suckles, Plantain, Nuts, of each
three ounces; flowers of dry Roses, one pugil; boil them in the strained
liquor; dissolve syrup of Pomegranats and of Mulberies, of each one ounce;
mingle them. For^ for Children licking medicaments are good. Fumes are not
good. The juice of green Wal-nut shells clarified with Honey is commended by
Galen. We must begin from lighter Remedies. The decoction of Oats, leaves of
Cherry-tree. Physicians warn at the beginning to add at first some discutients
least the humor should be thickened too much. In the declination also
Astringents must be added, lest the part that is soft of it self should grow
too soft. For. in the declination prescribes for a Gargarism, one Swallows
nest, cut with the feathers. Others hold for a secret, ashes of Crab-fish, or a
Dogs dung, or Hens dung anointed with Honey. Always mingle detergents: In all
Inflammations which are covered with a thin skin, there sweats something
through, to be washed away with detergents. Rondelet, when the humor flows
thither, cured himself and many more from the Quinsey, and scrofulous swellings
with Astringents, which though it may be done where the body is clean, and the
Flux but small, so in a great Flux it is mortal. Topicals must be emollients,
after that discutients. Apply Cupping glasses to the Chin, or to the second and
fourth Vertebra, if the Jaws or their muscles be affected. If it suppurate, lay
on ripeners: afterward; open the Impostume by crying aloud, and the Head
down-wards, lest the corruption run upon the Lungs. Some when the disease is
desperate, make deep scarification under the Chops, or above the Neck, by which
the sick have been eased, by blood or matter running forth. Ivy wood is held to
be specifical, if you use a spoon or dish made of it. The last remedy is
cutting off the Larynx about the third or fourth ring. Liquid nourishment is
cast in by a Pipe put in the Throat, and a Hogs bladder, Erysipelas coming upon
the Face is a good sign.

INFLAMMATION of the Lungs; The Cause of this disease is also choleric blood;
for though it be said by others to penetrate the Lungs by its thinness, yet
when Inflammation of the Lungs comes from a Pleuresy, which often proceeds from
choleric blood, it does no hurt to it; for as water sticks in a sponge, so
does this here: but the cause of the Flux are, as in other internal
Inflammations, il humors, which when Nature sends away, she drives forth blood
also with them.

Signs. Difficulty of breath is greater then in a Pluresy, which Hippocrates
calls sublime: The pain is burdning, unless perhaps the Pleura be affected
also, which is often found. The tongue is yellow covered with much clamminesse;
the Cheeks are red, Thirst is great, a Palsy is often made, the matter flowing
back into the Arteries, between the sides that press the Nerves. The spittle
is first colored with matter, and shortly after with blood, with a kind of
snoring.

Prognostic. It is more dangerous then a Pleurisy. There is no spittle or but
little; if it ease not the pain, it is naught. Aph. 16. s. 6. Sneezings are ill.

The Cure. Revulsives being premised, if it proceed from the Quinsey, a Vein
must be opened diverse times; then spitting must be procured by all means.
Oxymel mingled with the rest is the most convenient. Topicals and other
Remedies must be as for the Pluresy.

INFLAMMATION of the Pleura, not always, but only when the upper part is
affected, has Inflammation of the Lungs joined with it. Every pain of the side
is not the Pleuresy, as that which Heurnius puts us in mind of, Quere. c. 8. it
grew from Worms in the Smallpox, in the Scurvey from wind. Now the Plurisy is
an Inflammation of the side and Mediastinum, from over hot blood, with a
pricking pain, a continual Fever, or else every third day, or every other day,
or every day, according as the cause is, so it afflicts us, with difficult and
small breathing, a hard pulse, a violent Cough.

Signs diagnostick are fetched from the spittle, and drawing-in the breath. If
there be no Fever, nor Cough, nor spitting forth, is is from wind.

Prognostic. If presently on the first day there appear matter concocted; and
that is easily cast forth, the disease will be short or will end in seven days.
All clear spittle is naught, except it be blood. Ill urine is naught, good not
always a good sign. It is worst to spit out nothing, but less evil to spit
only clear spittle. It either passes into some other disease, or it is
resolved, etc.

The Cure. The humor that flows thither, must be pulled back, derived: that
which has flowed already must be taken away; you must cure the pain and the
Forces. Wherefore if the Plurisy be gentle, an emollient and resolving
fomentation may be used: or rather, if it be greater, the Liver Vein for
revulsion, must be opened in the contrary side, after the Flux is ceased, ^^e
same must be opened in the same side to derive. If the blood flow out of an
Artery, to open a Vein does little good; to repel or intercept we may not. For.
on the same side, not only before, but after the fourth day, and also upon the
eighth day opened a Vein: also in the time it grows ripe; he draws a
little, but warily, if the Forces be strong and extreme pain urge him to it.
For Children, Cupping glasses may be applied. If it be long ere the Physician
be called, it is good to open a Vein on the side affected. If it come from
Courses stopped, and the time of the Courses to flow be at hand, and the stopping
be suddenly made, a Vein must be opened in the Ankle. If the time be not at
hand, and the stopping come by leisure, open a Vein in the Arm the usual way.
After this a fomentation emollient and resolving, may be applied; and if there
be a Fever and malignity, care must be taken of them. These things premised,
if there be Cacochymia, and the matter inclines to the Belly, which is
conjectured by the noise, liquid Excrements, and the anguish; we must purge the
second, fourth, fifth day, namely till the Flux is ended, which is commonly on
the fifth day. For. also on the seventh day gave Diacatholicon, six drams;
Cassia, half an ounce; six ounces of pectoral decoction; syrup of Maidenhair,
one ounce; Rheubarb, Senna; Mechoacan* agaric, and medicaments that bring forth
but the dung; are good. By Pills and Vomits many have dyed. Rondeletius
commends Clysters. Alteratives are for the Fever, Antidotes for the Malignity
yet such as secretly respect the disea^e. These being premi^sed, Specificals
may be exhibited; for though the disease be manifest, yet there is a peculiar
malignity, which is cured by Specificals. Also expectorating Remedies, that cut
o^ thicken, as the spittle is. After the seventh day, if the pain remain,
Aetius and Celsus apply Cupping glasses with scarification to the side
affected. Whence Senn. says, we may look for extreme good or extreme mischief;
few will endure this, it must not be used but on a strong Body. After the
fourteenth day, if it neither resolve nor suppurate, we must help forward to
suppurate it. If it cannot be resolved, the Impostume must be broken. If those
things profit not, use something to open the Impostume, some open the part. But
the Tumor feldom shows outwardly: yet it is done most profitably, if the part
affected can exactly be found. If the matter fall into the Chest, it is cured
as Empyema. The Diet must be thin, Fab. obs. 31, 32. c. 5. he bids open a Vein
on the side affected. To a Boy of seven years old that had a looseness of the
Belly, with a Pleuresy, he gave Bezar-stone, five grains; red Coral prepared,
Terra sigillata, of each half a scruple: make a Powder. Take the Mandible of a
Pike, half a scruple; Seeds of our Ladies Thistle, red Coral prepared, of each
six grains; flowers of Corn-Poppy, four scruples: make a Powder. A pectoral
unguent, pectoral Rolls.

INFLAMMATION of the Liver is known by a heavy pain, and sometimes pricking, by
reason of the Ligament tied to the Diaphragma. For. A Fever also comes
presently with it, Thirst, a dry Cough, Hickop, difficulty of breathing, the
easiest lying is on the Back, the Tongue is red, the Belly is bound, unless
there be weakness of the Liver joined with it: for then often times the
Excrements are moist or choleric, or like the washings of flesh. There is
choleric vomiting if it affect the Unequal part of the Liver, the Tumor
appears round outwardly, and it follows not the fibers of the skin, whereby
it is discerned from an Inflammation of the Abdomen.

The cause. Fab. cent. 2. obs. 46. from hot Topicals of Cardamomum, Cinnamon,
laid to the stomach may cause Inflammation of the Liver. obs. 47. c. 2. From
Cupping glasses set to the Region of the Liver for bleeding at the Nose, an
Inflammation of the Liver has followed; wherefore Senn. lays Astringents
rather then Cupping glasses to the Liver.

Prognostics. It is often mortal, that which is on the Unequal part, causes
rather short windednesse and a Cough: that which affects the Concave part,
causes Vomit; that is the more dangerous by reason of Symptoms. It is
sometimes terminated by bleeding at Nose. It is critical from the right
Nostril, much sweat and much urine if the Unequal part be affected; if the
Concave, by Excrements, and Vomiting. If they be cut, and there is matter like
to Lees of oil, it is deadly.

The Cure. Make revulsion by opening of a Vein, before the fourth day,
For-Aetius also after four days, also in the Liver Vein on the right side. If
the Unequal of the Liver be ill, Remedies that only bring out the dung are good;
if the Concave, only Clysters; If that, Diuretics are good, but here not.
Internals must be Coolers, chiefly, Succory, Endive, Dandelion, juice of
Lemmons,. If it be gentle, Agrimony, Mayden-hair may be added, sweet things are
hurtful, being concocted, it must be broguht forth either with diuretics, as
syrup of Endive, Byzantinus, etc. or with Eccoproticks according to the part
affected; in the declination add Mechoacan, Agaric, etc. Topicals, presently
after opening a Vein must be cooling Repellers, or hot, but lest a Scirrhus
should be made, add oil of Capers: And such Astringents are convenient also in
the declination mixed with Resolvers. Topicals actually cold must not be
applied: we must take care by all means that it suppurate not. If that cannot
be, let the Topicals be suppurative. If the matter be carried into the
Intestins, give Remedies to temper the sharpness of the corruption. If it be
not perfectly evacuated, you must give a Clyster of the decoction of Barley and
Honey of Roses: where the matter goes, there it must be evacuated. If it flow
into the Abdomen, it is mortal.

INFLAMMATION of the Spleen. There is pain, swelling, heaviness on the left
side: which yet often times affects the right side; and does as it were compass a
Man. There is a continual Quartan Ague, the Feet and Knees look red, there is
difficulty of breathing, the Nostrils and Ears look pale; it differs from
obstruction because here is no great dissension, it is without pain or Fever.
If it proceed from wind, there is no heaviness, exercise ends the pain, it
is contrary in Inflammation.

Prognostics. It seldom suffers Inflammation, but most seldom an Ulcer, it is
changed into a Scirrhus.

The Cure. Open a Vein in the left Arm, or in the Ankle if the Courses be
stopped. Then apply a Repeller, as oil of Roses, with which mingle cutters, or
Vinegar, Oil of Camomil. After that, evacuate the humors prepared with true
Purgatives. Thirst must be endured so much as we can. Afterward Topicals must
be Resolvers, as the custom is.

INFLAMMATION of the Breasts. It is cured by opening a Vein, Purgatives and
Alteratives. Let the Topicals be Repellers, but yet weak ones, lest there grow
a Cough, difficulty of breathing, Consumption, Scirrhus. Afterward add
Resolvers, but such as are moderate, lest they make a Scirrhus. If it
suppurate, it must be helped forward: if it open not of it self, open it with a
pen knife. The Ulcer is not cured, if the other Breasts Milk be not dried up,
which will be done if she do not let the Child suck, and lay on a woollen cloth
wet in cold water.

INFLAMMATION of the Stomach. Signs. There is a sense of extending the Tumor
often appears outwardly. If it be the outward part, the pain after meat is
not so sharp, but when the meat is digested, the appetite is better, nothing is
cast forth of the Impostume. If it be the internal part, the pain is sharper
after meat; if the external, when the meat is digested, all the Symptoms are
more vehement. There is heat, thirst, a most hot Fever, delirium, swooning,
vomiting. It is very hardly discerned from Inflammation of the Abdomen about
that Region, but only by vehemence of the Symptoms.

The Cure. Revulsion, Clysters, internal Repellers, and outward, those almost
actually cold, these hot. After that, add Resolvers: yet always add
Astringents and strengthners. Help the pain with one ounce or two of syrup of
Poppy. If it suppurate, cure it as suppuration, and let the Diet be almost as
Topicals. From hot Topicals applied to the Stomach, grows Inflammation of the
Liver. Fab. cent. 2. obs. 46.

INFLAMMATION of the Reins. Signs. Heat, great pain spreading to the Bladder,
the Testicles and the bastard Ribs; by sneezing motion the pain is increased,
the sick cannot lift themselves up. There is astonishment of the Leg by
compression of the Nerves; the outward parts are cold, the Urine is at first
thin, in the increase red: there is choleric Vomiting, and a vehement Fever.
In Inflammation of the Colon, the pain goes inward, and there appears a
change rather in the dung then in the Urine. If the Emroids come upon it, it is
good.

The Cure. Revulsion, a Clyster in a less quantity. Alteratives without
diuretics, Purgatives. In the declination, milder Diuretics are good.
Topicals must be as before. The matter must be evacuated by Urine.

INFLAMMATION of the Mesentery. It is not seldom, yet is it seldom known. Often
times it has a Semitertian for company, there is pain of the Lungs, which
extends it self above and about the Stomach, the Belly is stopped. If it stick
about the more ignoble parts, the Fever is slow, without thirst, the matter is
often voided by the Belly. It is cured as before. Also the same way is the
Inflammation of the Bladder and the Peritonaeum.

INFLAMMATION of the Testicles. This is cured the wonted way. Let all Topicals
be so applied that the Testicles may hang down less. Lay an Intercipient at
the side of the privities. Verven boiled in Wine is commended in the
declination, or bread with oil and water.

INFLATION of the Stomach. It comes from wind bred from causes related in the
Colic: There is a resisting Tumor, also belching and windiness. If it come
from weakness, the signs are perceived, if it come from windy nourishment the
sick will declare that. If it come from other matter, there are often times signs
of Hypochondriacal affection. In one that grows well, it threatens to
return: If it last long, a Tympany.

The Cure. If the Inflation be small, apply Carminatives without and inwardly,
as oil of Carways, three drops; Plaster of Bay Berries. First, take away the
cause by Vomit, Purging, etc. There is no heaviness felt: the pain is not
continual, with a noise, etc. The same way the windiness of the Liver and
Spleen are cured.

Pain of the Spleen, is not in the Spleen, but in the Peritonaeum and Muscles
of the Abdomen, from wind, water, causing also a windy Cramp, Camomil,
Hierapicra, are good.

ITCHING of the Ey-lids, is cured by Generals, Coolers, Moistners. Topicals,
first emollient, as warm water, then more sharp, as water of Honey, three
ounces; Sugar, one dram; Aloes, one dram and half, mingle them. Or, Aegyptiac,
one dram, dissolved in Plantain water, and dipping a soft linen rag into it,
touch the Ey-lids bewaring the Eyes. Or, Take White Wind half a pound; common
Salt, one dram; let them stand in a Barbers basin for six days, or let the
Urine of the sick stand for a night in the Basin or sharp Vinegar. For.
prepared unguent of Roses with a little Tutty.

It is taken away with long time swathing, if every third day the Swathe be
taken off, and the part be fomented with warm water, or water and oil or with
decoction of Camomil, Balm: in Wine or Pickle; the Bladders must be opened,
they must be anointed with white unguent of Rhasis, red Desiccative etc.

Of the Yard and Matrix, is taken away with one dram of gold Lytharge infused
twenty four hours in the sharpest Vinegar; oil of Violets; sometimes one ounce,
sometimes but half half an ounce; make an Unguent. The juice of dwarf Elder
extracted and dried, with oil of Roses made thick in a leaden Mortar.

KING'S EVIL, is a Scirrhous Tumor of the Kernels, shut in a bag. Often times it
possesses all the Kernels: seventy have been found in the Mesentery. If it be
in the Throat, it is called Bronchocele; These differ from other Tumors in
number for they are many, and take deep root. Often times it fasteneth in the
Groin, and under the Armpits. It is a hard Tumor, that yields uot to the
touch, is painful.

The Cause is fleam, or melancholy hardened. Platerus says, it is made of a
limentary juice hardened, when as they are not changed into matter, nor corrupt,
but last long.

The Cure. The antecedent cause is taken away by Generals; the weakness of the
Bowels ingendring fleam must be corrected. Topicals must be Specifical
Resolvers, as Viper-grasse, Pilewort, Crowfoot, Root of Sword-grasse; If it
will not be resolved, it must be suppurated, cut it, burn it; a Plate of Lead
must be laid on the Tumor rubbed: also it is taken away by Ligature with
Horse-hair, which must be tied every day straighter, till it fall off for want
of nourishment. The Kings of France cure them by their touching.

LETHARGY, Is an invincible necessity of sleeping, and the sleep is heavy, with
a delirium, and hurt-memory, and a continual Fever.

The Cause with the Ancients, was fleam collected in the Head, which by its
moisture and cold breeds astonishment, and by its putrefying heat, causes
watchings; but this is impossible. The cause is rather a Narcotick vapor
elevated in concomitant Fevers, as a Quotidian, Continual, bastard Tertian,
and Semitertian: or if it come on without a Fever, from phlegmatic blood
causing Inflammation; When, as For. observes, there is such an Inflammation,
often times which ends in Sphacelus: and so there is a double cause of Lethargy.

Diagnosticks. Being stirred up, they scarce answer being asked, they forget
all; the pulse is great by reason of breathing, but small from forgetfulness.
Their Urine is like Beasts urine. It differs from Carus by a Fever.

Prognostics. They die in seven days: if they pass them, they escape. Sweat
often, Trembling, Convulsion, Hickop, are mortal. Swelling, a Palsy, swellings
behind the Ears succeeding a Lethargy; if the Lethargy cease, it is good: else
mortal. If a Leach set to the Forehead will not stick, or if you rub your Fore
head with Bread or fat Bacon, and offer it to your Dog, and he refuse it, it is
mortal. Men say the same holds for all pains in the Head.

The Cure, Consists chiefly in Revulsives, and opening a Vein, which must be
quickly ordered: sometimes more sparingly, in cold weather, when it comes from
phlegmatic blood, sometimes more largely. Opening a Vein of the Forehead or
Foot, Cupping glasses, Scarifications, Chafings and Ventoses set to the Neck,
Suppositories, Clysters, Leaches are useful. Purge afterward: for it is a
sharp disease. Then apply repelling Topicals. In a phlegmatic Headache, For.
uses no Repe^^ers; but in the Lethargy they must be wakened, we must not leave
off Revulsives; after this it is cured as a phlegmatic Headache, both outwardly
and inwardly. If in vain, lay Synapisms to the shoulders and the crown,
strengthen the Head. The Chemists commend sweet oil of Vitriol, extract of
Castoreum, and chiefly the Brimstone of silver. Hairs burnt anointed on with
Vinegar, Castoreum, Hares-brains roasted, and Bisquet are Antidotes.

LIENTERIE, is when the meat is sent forth raw not concocted. It proceeds
either from the retentive Faculty of the Stomach and Intestins hurt, or the
expulsive faculty of them provoked. If the first, the Colic went before, no
pain is felt: if the latter, the Colic did not go before, and bitings are felt.

Prognostics. Aph. 1. s. 6. It brings to a Consumption. If the latter, it
foresheweth a Dysentery.

The Cure. If the first, if there be matter it must be evacuated by the Belly
or by Vomit, of the decoction of Barley unhuld. Myrobolans, Rheubarb, Agarick,
etc. Corobboratives, Astringents. Fern. at last gave the yolk of an Egg, spread
over with the powder of one Nutmeg, roasted on a hot tyle. If the latter;
detergents, moderately dryers, Purgatives must be given. The Acrimony of
humors must be tempered as in the Dysentery.

Lientery, is a continual flux, it is the Colic by turns.

LUXATION. The cause is either internal, as the humors, or external as a fall,
or heriditary as when the Cups are not hollow enough, or the Ligaments too
loose.

Differences. 1. When the head of the bones fall out of their Cups.

2. When bones joined, gape asunder, as the Shoulder blade may recede from the
Shoulders: the cubite bone from the Radius: the major fossile from the minor.

3. When with Luxation there is a fracture joined, as when the Epyphysis is
pulled from the Bone; that is more easily restored, this never; because the
Ligaments are either broken, or weakened: this is altogether incurable.

Diagnosticks. The same as in Fractures. True Luxation causes loss of motion,
partly so, difficulty of motion; If it be from the loosnesse of the Ligament,
Luxation is made by degrees, and is easily driven the contrary way. The Finger
goes into the joining, no Body resisting.

Prognost. Dry Bodies are more hardly put out of their places, and harder to be
reduced; moist Bodies contrarily.

The cure. If there be Inflammation, let it be taken away before you reduce the
Bone. If there be a wound and a Fracture together, Hippocrates thinks it best
not to go about to reduce it; for to try that, brings death certainly; if you
let that alone there is only fear of lamenesse. Old dislocations before they be
attempted to reduce, must be softened with Topicals: Or if you reduce a
Dislocation with a Fracture, and Inflammation come upon it; the Bone restored
without violence must be put again out of the place. First of all you must
extend, wherein first you must see that you hold it straight: So when the
Shoulder is out, or the Spondils, or the Bones of the Thigh, the whole Body;
but in a Luxation of the Throat-bone, of the Elbow, the Hand, the Knee, the
Foot, the Leg, the part affected must be held very straight by him that
helps, lest the whole Body follow the extension. 2. That you may pull either
with your Hands or Instruments, so far until the head of the bone be placed out
of the Region of his cavity, and be free; let there be a distance betwixt the
bone dislocated and the Cavity, that so the Lips of the Cup may remain unhurt.
3. That the heads of the Bone gently moved before and carried about, may be put
into their cavity, the same way that they fell out, which you shall find to be
well done by the crackling; and whilst this is done, the stretching of the cord
must be slackned, otherwise it is not possible. Secondly, it must be fitly
bound with an astringent medicament. as in a Fracture. 3. The Symptoms must be
corrected. The channel Bone being dislocated, many are deceived supposing it to
be a dislocation of the Shoulder.

LUXATION of the Spondils inwardly, is death. Yet Fabr. teaches a way to cure
it, but not a safe one. Outwardly it is a bunch, it must be cured by putting it
back again, with an iron Breast Plate made full of holes. It proceeds either
from Asthma or some outward cause, or abundance of humors. Hitherto belongs
that mischief, when the sick has tried to lift too great a weight: here the
eleventh Spondil is commonly shaken; it is not dislocated but remains shogged.
There is a pain of the Back about the stomach, the appetite is cast down, with
vomiting sometimes, the Headache, in children chiefly; there is a Fever almost
malignant. In people of years this is cured as Luxation by some. The red
potable ointment, is given with profit, Crabseys. Senn.

The Shoulder is reduced either with a Napkin with a neck knit fast, or with
the Chirurgions heel, or with the higher shoulder of one that helps, or with a
Pole or Ladder, or an Instrument to set bones, called Ambi. Dislocation of the
Channel-bone is taken by many for Luxation of the Shoulder: for the Symptoms
are the same: Also in 3 days the binding must be unloosed, and the part must be
moved variously, but gently, lest it should grow crooked; The Thigh dislocated
forward, the Groins swell^ the Buttocks are wrinkled, only the hinder part of
the heel touches the ground, the urine is stopped. If backward, the Buttocks
swell, there is a hollowness in the Groin. The Leg is shorter then that which
is sound, the Knee cannot be bent, the Heel touches not the ground; the sick
stands by a staff. If outwardly, after some time the pain abateth, the flesh
about it grows hot, the head of the Bone in a near place makes a new cavity,
so that the sick can go without a staff; the Leg is made shorter, the knee and
Foot look inwards, he cannot go on his Heel, the Leg can be bent, the whole Leg
is something less. If inwardly, the lameness is less, they cannot bend their
Leg, the Foot is longer; they go with their Leg athwart outwardly, leaning on a
staff, they rest more on their Heel then their Toes; at last a new Cavity
being made they go without a staff.

The night MARE, is the hurt of breathing and of animal actions, with an
Imagination of weight.

The Cause. Senn. will have the cause to be often times a gross vapor stopping
the hinder part of the Head. But Plat. and Fern. say, it is fleam and
melancholy sticking about the Midriff, which swells either by drunkenness or
crudity, pressing the diaphragma and the Lungs, and the gross vapor exhaling
into the Throat and Brain stops the Voice, and troubles the senses. These two
causes may be joined together.

Prognostic. It threatens an Apoplexy or Melancholy. It is evil if it
oppresses those that are partly waking, and if a cold sweat follow.

The Cure. The sick must be raised from the fit: he must be cured by General
and Topical Remedies, as is the Apoplex, a Wolfs skin is commended for a
covering of the Head. Anniseed strewed in the Bed, is thought to help by the
smell. It is familiar to children by over-eating; wherefore they must not sleep
presently after eating. Honey is good for them to lick. One dram of Piony roots
must be infused in Beer for to drink.

MILK. The more whey it has, the more it cleanses; the more Cheese, namely
when the whey is evaporated by long boiling, the more it binds and gleweth.
Medicaments made of Milk, in Summer every day, in Winter, must be renewed every
other day, for it will grow sharp and cause pains. Milk has a hot spirit in
it, and will make one drunk. Scal. ex. 87. says that the Tartars use the thin
part of Milk separated by subliming, to make themselves drunk; for all fat
things afford spirits for Chemists, and oils differ from spirits scarce any
thing but in the manner of their substance. The first note of good Milk, is
that if you pour one drop on the Nail, it will stick and not run off. If it
run off hardly, it is too thick. 2. A milky color. 3. Taste. 4. Smell.

MILK wanting. If it be for want of blood, it is cured by meats of good juice,
by Medicaments that breed Milk, and open the Passages, these are moderatly hot
and attenuating. The leaves, roots, seed of Fennel, all green and new, which
must be observed of others, also Parsley roots new, Dill, Basil, Anniseed,
Rocket seed, one dram or two of Earthworms, soaked in juice of Fennel burnt;
Powder of Cows udder. By Internals and Topicals.

MILK too much, is taken away by Revulsives, Diet, moderate Repellers, not laid
to the Breasts, but above the Breasts by the Arms, to those Veins. Resolvers laid
to the Breasts. If there be Inflammation feared, you may lay Repellers to the
Breasts also. Some happily anoint the Breasts with Honey. Some put in a linen
cloth wet with Vinegar of the decoction of Saffron; green leaves of Nut-trees:
Others lay on a linen cloth smeered with Rapeoyl, and they put another over
this anointed with Honey, and they bind the Breasts moderately. Singular are
leaves of Sage, Smaliage, Rue, Chervil, cut small, incorporated with Oxycratum,
laid on warm thrice a day: Topicals are also made of Mints, Calamints,
Smallage, Agnus Castus, Coriander, Hemlock.

MILK cloddering, it is made by a fermenting humor; but whether this be made
in the Breasts Senn. is doubtful; because there is no hollowness there, and he
thinks that if Milk stay long in the Breasts, the whey exhaleth, and the rest
clodders. It differs not from curding of Cheese.

The cure. The Diet must be resolving: Topicals, besides Generals must be
Resolvers, as in a Scirrhus, beginning, as oil of Lillies, coming by degrees to
stronger Remedies of Fennel, Dill, Parsley, Smallage, Balm, Mallow-leaves,
Coleworts, etc. Inwardly, give Fennel-seed, Cumin, Smallage, Agnus Castus,
Eringo roots, Mints, Saffron, Coriander-seed, etc. Screvelius also often cured
it with green Chervil and Fennel of each a like fried in a Pan with Butter, and
applied.

MADNESS. The cause is the heat of the animal and vital spirits, whereby they
very easily endure cold, yet it makes no Fever though it last many years.
Platerus will have it to be a hidden quality; The antecedent cause is either
the Seed corrupted or burnt blood; and the sick sing. There are signs of
Plethory or burnt Choler, and the sick are rash, bold; or black Choler, and
there are signs of Melancholy, or poisons, as the blood, of a Cat, or Love
potions: Wine thunderstruck congealed. Men possessed with devils speak things
unknown, or Emroids stopped or an Ulcer shut up.

The Cure must be begun by opening a Vein, so Platerus saw many cured who were
kept in Bedlam-houses by letting them blood threescore times here and there
repeating it. Choice of Veins is not necessary; you must open the Emroids and
Ulcers closed, then you must alter. Give them Whey to drink, purge them; the
Heart must be cheered, as we shall show in melancholy. Sleeping Medicaments.
Emperical things are the Brain of a Ram that never leaped a sheep, the Brain of
a Dog of but one color, Boxleaves Roots of yellow water Lillies. Amulets are
roots of Eringo, Briony, St. John's wort, Nitre is commended because it fixes
volatile things. Spirit of Vitriol. Let Topicals be Coolers, and rather
Moistners, as oil of Roses, Camomil, etc. warm. The juice of live Crabs, is
held for a Topical that is specifical.

MARASMUS, one is burning or a Hectic Marasmodes, another is cold and dry. It
is called a Hectic of old age, or a disease from old age: a third is with
swooning, which is hot in respect nf the Fever, cold in respect of the
swooning.

MELANCHOLY, is the vexation of the Mind, fastened upon one thought, without a
Fever or Fury, proceeding from a Melancholic Phantasme. The immediate Subject,
are the Brain and the Heart, as the affects show. For. saw Melancholy with a
Fever.

Differences. 1. When the Brain is primarily affected. 2. By consent of the
Heart and the whole Body. 3. Hypochondriacal. 4. From the Matrix. That which
comes from the Emroids, the Spleen, etc. belongs to the Hypochondriacal. The
first proceeds not from a bare distemper, for else the actions should not be
diminished, and if it came from cold, it would affect old men: It comes from a
humor in the Head that is too earthy. Hitherto belongs mad love, or doting
from too much care of the Mind, hunger, watchings, anger.

The second is made from a melancholic humor, either sticking in the branches
of the hollow Vein, and of the great Artery, and from impure vital spirits,
whence it is almost continual; there is present cold of the Heart with
dryness: there went before it, frights, watchings, etc.

The third is made of a Melancholic humor, sticking in the Vena porta, whence
it afflicts by turns, about the Liver, the Caul, the Spleen. If the vapor be
not communicated to the Brain, it is a bare Hypochondriacal affection. Hitherto
conduces rest, and the Belly bound.

The fourth is made in Widows that are lusty for men, from stopped Courses, and
a melancholic humor.

Diagnosticks. If it be the first, there is a continual doting, vehement, the
Hypochondres are well, there is tinkling, a Vertigo, heaviness of the Head,
etc. they trifle. If it be from mad love, they are merry. If it be the second,
the whole Body is melancholic, the delirium is not continual, etc. they easily
fall into Madness, Epilepsie, etc.

The Cure. The cause must be altered, evacuated, the distemper must be taken
away at times, the Head and Heart must be strengthened. If it be mad love,
things that extinguish seed must be given, they must change the Air, etc.
Vervin carried about exstinguish lust. Also Mints, whence grew the Proverb: In
time of war neither sow nor eat Mints. Opening a Vein is good. Mingle with all
medicaments moistners and strengthners. Confectio Hamech is not so convenient;
Vomiting, Whey in abundance, for a little profits not. Decoction of Wormwood,
Steel, sour waters, mineral Baths, and baths wherewith Galen cured many,
Topicals laid to the Spleen and Heart, the Diet must be moist. Some use the
Trepanum taught by chance. For. cured many with a Lenitive, after a decoction
of Pennyroyal and the lesser Centory. Sometimes with syrup Byzantine, some
times with Mints, sometimes Wormwood, sometimes with Borrage, Apples, Bugloss,
easy Vomits, easy Purgatives, decoction of Wormwood, and with Diuretics. Aph,
11. s. 6. Scholtzius. Ep. 241. where Monavius speaks of a certain noble
Bohemian who died of a love potion.

If it be the fourth, the pain is various, chiefly on the left side on the
Region of the Heart, which sometimes seizes on the whole Breast; there is a
manifest pulsation in the Back, about the Diaphragma, the Courses flow
sparingly. Let a Vein be opened in the Arm if there be Plethory; If the time
for the Courses be at hand, in the Ankle. Purge wandering melancholy, which the
Arabians call Kutubuth. It chiefly troubles men in February. The sick cannot
stay an hour in one place, but wander always, not knowing whither they go. It
comes from the proper passion of the Brain; they must be cured the ordinary way.

MEMORY. It is weakened by a cold moist distemper. It is cured as phlegmatic
Headache, by alteratives, Purgatives Strengthners, Confectio Anacardina is
good, which is called a Confection of wise men, whereby many have gained an
admirable Memory: the Dose is half a dram, and less. It dries vehmently:
wherefore if any principal part be hot, they get Memory indeed, but they cannot
live long. It may be made without Castoreum that it may be more pleasant. Every
morning rub hard the hinder part of the Head and Nape, with Ivy water distilled
from the Tree, three or four times in a glass Still. A secret, oil of
Frankincense Myrrh, etc.

MEASLES. They have always a putrid Fever with them, sometimes Continual,
sometimes Intermitting.

The Cause is the menstrual blood, the Air, the Diet. If the blood be thicker,
they are the Smallpox; if thinner, they are the Measles; they break forth
critically the fourth day. Scowring, straightness of the Breast, bloody urine,
hoarsness are mortal. For they either die of a Quinsey, or Swooning or scowring.

The Cure. Before the Pox break forth in those that are not exceeding young; if
there be a continual Fever, it is good to open a Vein, otherwise not. Give
Lenitives or Clysters; In the augmentation and the state, Cordials and such
things as expel: Mitigaters are useful, either temperate or cold, as the nature
of the Fever requires. For. prescribed such a one. Take Barley cleansed, one
pugil; Liccoris scraped, half an ounce; red Chiches, two drams; all the great
cold seeds, of each half a dram; Cordial flowers, of each one pugil; three fat
Figs, boil them, in the strained liquor dissolve syrup of Pomegranats, half an
ounce, for two Doses. Infants should (according to For.) be wrapped in red cloth:
yet so, that it touch not their skin. The decoction of Lintels is good, but not
in substance, Turnep-seed, Citron-seed, Columbine, Carduus Benedictus in form
of emulsion. Epithems have proved mortal. Or never, or cautiously must they be
ripened. Butter has often done hurt. They must not be opened unless they be
very Malignant. The ripe wheals must be anointed with oil of sweet Almonds, so
they leave not filthy holes. The eyes are preserved with Rose Water, and a
little Saffron. Afterward you may add juice of Fennel, Rue, Vervain,
Straw-berries. A Saphir stone put to childrens Eyes preserves them. Crat. Ep.
160. The Nostrils are preserved with Rose water, with juice of sour Grapes,
Posca, etc. Into the Ears drop oil of Roses, Myrtils. The Throat is wonderfully
preserved by a Gargarism of Goats milk and Plantain water. The Lungs with this
following, Take syrup of sweet Pomegranates, two ounces; Sugar Penidiate, three
ounces; Syrup of the infusion of Roses, Diamoron, of each half an ounce;
Diatraganth frigid, three drams; Purest white Starch, two scruples; make an
Electuary. It is a secret. Give children Figs with syrup of Pomegranates.

OBSTRUCTION of the Liver, is made when the Veins and Arteries, are stopped in
the substance of the Liver.

Diagnosticks. The sick feels heaviness, and by and by after exercise or meat
he feels pain in the Liver. When he ascends a steep place, he is pressed with
an unusual difficulty of breathing, the Excrements of the Belly are moist and
plentiful: If it be the hollow part, there is thirst, nauseating; if the round
part, the Diaphragma is more pressed. It comes from a vapor; and there is
weight, or from wind, if the hollow part be affected, it is more easily cured.

The Cure. If there be Plethory, opening a Vein is good, that the use of
aperients may be the safer, all which are hot. Purge the Body, give aperient
means; be the cause hot or cold, give openers, as Succories, Lettice, the four
great cold seeds, with other things that are hot. The most useful are Wormwood,
Southern-wood, bitter Almonds, also Columbine seed. The opening syrup of
Sennertns, of Scholtzius, of Dodder. From what cause soever it came Tartar
Vitriolate is good, which Crollius calls, a general digestive. Crystals of
Tartar, Steel. Extreme mischief may come from too much use of openers. When the
sick has taken an Opener, let him ly on his right side. Let the Topicals, be
aperient also. For. writes that this following helps miraculously, Take of a
Wolfs Liver prepared one dram and half, species of Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diatraganthon frigid, of each half a dram; Rheubarb, Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, of each four grains, dissolve it in the decoction of Dodder;
Maidenhair with water of Fennel, Bugloss, Scabious hops, with Sugar what may
serve; make rouls of three drams. The Ancients gave one dram of a Wolfs Liver
with Wine, when there was no Fever; with a Fever, the juce of Endive, Cremor
Tartar, Troches of Capers, of Hart's-tongue. Topicals are unguent, Fomentations,
etc. The same way is to cure obstruction of the Spleen.

OBSTRUCTION of the Passage of hearing. If it be from a worm slipped in, that
must be, if it can be, drawn forth alive with sweet things, as with a sweet
Apple roasted, or laying on leaven, Honey. If this do not, we must kill it with
juice of Wormwood, Peach-kernels, Centory the less, oil of Hazle-nut-tree,
Philosophers oil, Spirit of Wine, juice of the Leaves of Elder, Hemp dropped
in, or with Oil and Vinegar. When it is killed, it is brought forth by pouring
in water, Oil, Wine, or putting in Tents dipped in Turpentine; for it will stick
to that or the like.

If they be hard things, to make the Passages slippery drop in warm Oil; but if
the thing swell from the humor, moist things must not be applied. Sneezing
must be procured, the Nostrils and Mouth being shut. If in vain, you must take
it out cautiously with Pullers. Pareus moreover with the Ancients, appoints
cutting of the Ears, which Aquapendens condemns utterly, as hurtful.

If it be any watery thing, the Ancients poured in Oil, the Ear lying downward;
the sick must hop on the Foot on that side the Ear is affected, inclining the
Head upon that Ear. If in vain, sneezing must be provoked, or a dry Sponge must
be put into the Ear. There is also another manner in Senn. Also it may be
sucked forth with the Mouth, a Pipe being put into the Ear; but the Ear must be
stopped with Wax.

OBSTRUCTION of the Throat by a hard thing it must be taken out with Pullers,
if the thing can beseen. If it cannot be seen, strike the Patients Neck with
your fist. More Vomit with oils, as of sweet Almonds or fat broth. Some bid to
swallow down great gobbets. A Wax-candle, or a leaden rule bended, anointed
with Honey or Oil, is thrust in, and the thing is driven forth. Cough must be
moved by injecting sour things. Fab. obs. 36. cent. 1. has described a fitter
Instrument. See Senn. If in vain, you must commit the matter to Nature and
Time, and by Topicals emollient Plasters cause it to ripen: for the
Inflammation being ended, the thing is cast forth.

If any thing slip into the sharp Artery when you eat, sneezing is good, strike
the Patients back with your fist. If sand fall into the Eye, Clary seed,
Crabs-Eys, Pearls, must be put into the Eye; let the Eye be shut under the
Ey-lid, and the thing sticking to Crabs-Eys will fall out together. If in vain,
take it out with Pullers. Fab. wife took out Iron with a Loadstone.

OEDEMA, is either Phlegmonodes, Scirrhodes or Erysipelatodes.

The Signs are a whitish color, a soft thin Tumor, the Finger pressing it
leaves a print; If it be otherwise, it is from wind. Besides Generals, and the
nature of the part, Topicals must not be applied until the part be first heated
by Chafing. It is cured either by Resolvers or Suppuratives or by Section, as
also Atheroma, in the Vessel whereof there is matter like Pap. It is more
loose, and returns slower; it is not so hard as a Wen, nor so unequal. And that
out of which stones, horns and nails are taken, is harder, and resists the
touch. Meliceris yields quickly, and returns. The matter is like to Honey.
Testudo and Meliceris are on the Head and Skull. That which is called Talpa,
differs from Testudo only by hardness, and belongs to Atheroma-Natta ost times
is bred in the Back, the Shoulders, and belongs to Steatoma. Lupia. Pareus cut
a Lupia from the neck that weighed eight pound.

OSSACRUM excoriated, is cured. Take Sheeps suet, Cream of one night, of each
one dram; white chalk, half an ounce; mingle them, or add oil of Roses or
Quinces what may suffice. It is prevented, by rising with a cord hanging over
the Bed; let the parts be born up with a hollow pillow; lay on linen osten
anointed with unguent of Roses.

PAIN is the action hurt, or the sensitive Faculty, a sad sensation.

The Cause. It is no distemper, as appears in Section, extention, nor dissolved
unity, but when as of one thing there is but one next cause, solution of
continuity is made from heat, cold, dries, with and without matter; but not
from moisture alone: from extension and a Malignant humor:

The Cure. All things that gently affect the sense of the part, take away the
pain, as Arodyns: the pain is not felt, but the cause: or they take away the
distemper of it; so cold things take away heat: or they evacuate the matter, as
Cuppings purging, Topicals: or they tame the malignity as Aegyptiac: or take
away the feeling as Narcoticks.

Question. Whether heat of the Air can cause pain in a Nervous part, as in the
Ear? I deny it: because the ambient air is always colder then the heat of the
Brain.

Whether Pain attract? Laur. denies it: because Nature should more hurt then
profit, but the humors more easily fall down on the part weakened, and the part
weakened cannot discuss the humors.

PAIN of the Loins; In Fevers it proceeds from a diseased cause, sent into the
large Veins of the Loins.

The Cure. opening a Vein, Cupping, Unguent of Roses, etc.

PILES of the Fundament, are of two sorts that are outwardly, and but one
internal from the Vena porta.

Differences. They are either open or blind in the Fundament or Intestin, or
the sphincter. The blind are either bladders from fleam, or warts from
melancholic blood, or Grapes, or like Mulberries called Mariscae. The Pain is
not in the Veins that want feeling, but in the adjacent parts from distention.

The Cause is, the opening of the Mouths of the Veins provoked by gross burnt
blood, hot Purgatives as Aloes: they that deny this are worthy to be whipped. The
internal Piles cannot be searched but by Speculum any.

Prognostics. Aph. 11. s. 6. In the pain of the Piles, if there be not present
help, there grows Inflammation or an Ulcer. The blind swelling Piles, unless
they swell mightily, and cause vehement pains, it is best to commit them to
Nature rather then to open them. Great effusions of blood are from the outward
Vein.

The Cure. The blind Piles if they swell, we must take care to void out the
blood, Chafing with sharp things, with leaves of Mercury, Pellitary, Borrage
cold, with juice of Beets, Sowbread, Centory the less; yet lest the pain
should increase, we must add Anodyns. Oil of Elder, and the liquor that is made
of the flowers of Mullens in a glass set in the Sun is great help if you
anoint them with it. Pilewort, the lesser Celandine inwardly, outwardly works
marvelously.

But if the pain be great and there be fear of Inflammation, open a vein in the
Arm; after that in the Ankle, if the pain cease not. After the opening of a
Vein set on Leeches; when they are fallen off, let the blood run till it stop
of it self: or let the sick sit over a Bath of hot water, by the vapor whereof
the blood is moved; let a vessel swim in the water to receive the blood: or let
it be drawn with a Cornicula. The pain is appeased with cooling Axodyns, both
injected and applied: Also with Moistners, chiefly oil of Violets injected to
one ounce. A certain woman applied the ashes of burnt Cork with the yolk of an
Egg, and oil of Roses mingled; and it was miraculous. Section is not safe,
because it will easily ulcerate. Purging by Hiera will provoke heat and Tumors
in the Fundament, and the Piles. Solen. Also Chafing of the nether part. Fume
of Mother-wort boyld in Wine: the same. But if they were never wont to run, nor
there be hoeps that they will run, we must use means (premising Generals and
Purgatives of the second sort, For.) that they may dry up by digestives and
driers, as with Bole-armenick, Mulleus, Pilewort, Plantain, Yarrow, Hypericon,
Scabious, Dogstongue, root of the lesser Celandine, in Fomentations,
Insessions, Vapors, the smoke of Brimstone; Onions boiled with Butter. Amatus
when all other remedies failed, took an Orange made hollow, filled with oil of
Roses, and Lavender-seed upon hot embers, and laid it on hot, and often times
renewed it. If they run but little the ways must be softened, and Aloes must be
given. If they run too much, the cure must be with Revulsives, Alteratives,
Astringents. Prevention is by Purgatives, etc. Rulandus stopped them on himself
with little red bags applied by turns, filled with Acorns beaten, or Oak leaves
boyld a long time in Wine.

Senn. observed; so did Plat. and Fern. that often times without blood or pain,
snotty and whitish filth, which some falsely take for putrefaction, was sent
forth for a long time after long melancholic diseases riding. The matter is
made of corrupt blood as the Whites in women are, like to whites of Eggs. See
Topicalls.

PILES of the Matrix. As in the Fundament, so in the neck of the Womb Piles are
found: if the Veins in those parts are extended, they are found out by Speculum.

The Cure. Generals premised, the pain must be abated every way, by Insession,
etc. If the pain be not, or abated, if they bleed not, but swell, the Ancients
did only Scarify them; but rather let them be dried by Generals, and by Driers,
If they swell much, we must use means to evacuate them, by Softners in form of
vapor, and by Chafing, setting on of Leeches: The last means is Incision,
which yet is dangerous.

They are painful and by their pain alone are they known from the Courses.

FRENCH POX, is an occult disease of the Liver and the other parts: whether it
be cold or hot, with plenty of naughty humors, it is bred from unclean
copulation. Fiorav. says, it was bred from eating man's flesh. Leoninus from
the Stars, and moisture, in the year 1493. Others say from a Leprous man lying
with a whore. Hurtenus l. 6. de Guai. thinks it was brought from Spaniola.

It is cured, 1. By Guaicum, China roots which want smell and cast, and are not
hot, Sarsoparilla, leaves of Saponariad as, Take bark of the wood, one ounce;
pour on water six pound. Zwinger op. 234. or, Take shavings of the wood, one
pound; the bark, one ounce; infuse them in ten pound of pure water, boil them
till three parts be wasted, Laur. With the froth kept, anoint the Forehead,
the Temples, etc. Drink every morning, eight ounces. To the relics add of the
wood two ounces: water, twelve pound; boil all to five pound for drink. Boil
the dregs again, to wash the Hands etc Forehead. 2. By Quicksilver, which
Senn. thinks to be hot. See Fern, Laur. Par. who acknowledges two parts to be
in Quicksilver, which thing Senn. rejects. It is poison, though quick; it
does less harm, because it soon runs through. It is pressed through a Rams
skin, then it is given to a Dog who shits it forth; it is cooked in Vinegar
with herbs for the Nerves. Senn. thinks this profits little, with Hogs grease,
etc. Let them stay on the skin, and not pierce so deep to the bottom. Take Hogs
grease, six ounces; fresh Butter, three ounces; oil of Worms and of a Fox, of
each one ounce and half: boil in these Sage, Rosemary, etc. Quicksilver
prepared, six ounces, Wax what may suffice: anoint the insides of the Feet and
Hands, and the Joints and back, lest spitting should cause Ulcers in the Mouth.
For. prevents that with a Gargarism of oil of sweet Almonds. When you are
anointed hold a gold Ring in your Mouth: give Pills of gold dust, so the
relics of the Quicksilver will stick to the gold: Mercury does not cure the
disease, but takes away the cause by a Purgative quality. 3. By Plasters. 4.
By Fumes, which way is the most dangerous: as, Take Vermilion, one ounce;
Mastick, Mace, Tutty, of each two drams; Benioni, Myrrh, Storax, Frankincense,
of each half an ounce; make them up with Turpentine, and take a fume of it. If
an Infant be affected, the Nurse for five days must preserve her self with
Treacle water, let her always wash her Nipple. The pushes of the child must be
anointed with Unguent of Elecampane and a little Mercury. Paercus for the
Plague and spotted Fevers, used an ointment with Mercury. If they refuse the
decoction of the wood. Take Sarsaparilla, three ounces; Bark of Guaicum, one
ounce; Cinnamon, one dram and half; Senna leaves, half an ounce; Sugar, six
ounces; make a powder: the Dose is half a dram. The quantity of Senna is
variable; Let him sweat in the morning upon it own hour, and beware the North
wind. Monav. cp. 242. and Zac. l. 1. bist. 72. holds the Spanish disease to be
well known, and to proceed from too much Venery. Unguent of Mercury must be new
made, for by fermenting it loses its Porces. Par. l. 20. c. 5. holds that the
Pox is poison by it moisture only. Let not the diet be thin to lessen the
Forces, because the disease is chronical; only in acute diseases which are
short, a thin diet is profitable. Small Wine is allowed. Vehement motion has
cured many. Out of Guaicum, oil is not distilled; a Spirit, with difficulty, An
extract is made with a convenient Menstruum.

PIMPLS Red. They proceed from a vapor of burnt blood; The best Remedy is,
water of Pilewort, distilled from the whole plant, Costus, Colewort seed, and
Paints.

PISSING Involuntary, proceeds from the resolving of the Bladder and the
sphincter Muscle, stopping of Urine is only from resolving of the Bladder.
Solenand. commends as a secret the powder of a Cocks Throat broiled, raken with
red wine, or soaked in Posca, about night: also the Testicles of a Hare burnt
are commended.

PALPITATION of the Heart; comes first from something troubling the Heart, from
vapor, humors, water collected in the Pericardium, the Stone, etc. 2. From
some small defect of Vital spirits. 3. From preternatural heat increased which
often times has broken the Ribs. See Fern. For. says, the cause is hot or cold.
Galen says, in his time they all dyed before sixty years.

Signs. If it be from wind, the fit is sudden, short. If a humor be the cause,
it is longer and slower in coming: It comes often from Hypochondriacal Passion,
and stopping of the Courses. If it be from water, the sick say they swim in
water.

The Cure. In young Men, or in declining age, opening a Vein is good, and
evacuating the cause. The cause is discussed with oil of Citrons or true
Rhapontick, two scruples; that which follows is a secret of Forestus. Green
Balm bruised, laid on fire-hot Tyles, sprinkled with Rose water and Vinegar,
laid to the Heart. Conserve of Balm, Treacle, water of Hearts heart, or an Ox,
is Rondeletius way.

The PAPS. If they ly hid, they are called forth according to Amatus, with a
glass Vial, that has a straight Mouth, which being filled full with scalding
water, the water poured forth again, it is laid hot to the Paps.

The PALSY is made when the Nerves are either cooled or moistened by fleam,
choler; for all Choler is not sharp, as appears in those that have the
Jaundies; for either their Forces are laid asleep, or pressed by weight by a
melancholy humor, or their continuity is dissolved.

Prognostics. If a Member with the Palsy be made less, it is not, or is hardly
curable; But if it should proceed from cold or a humor, the disease cannot be
so violent, nor would it resist the most vehement Remedies, and those that are
Cacochymical should be Paralitique, Nor yet from dryth, for so hectical people
should be Paralitique. If the feeling cease, the motion remaining sound, then
the Nerve, which is fastened into the Membrane of the part is affected, that
being safe which goes into the flesh.

The differences, Weakness differs from the Colic, and from the Palsy,
because in this the Head and marrow of the Back, in that the Limbs only are
affected as the cure shows; for medicaments are laid to the part affected,
and the Intestins. 2. In that there is often times great pain, and it goes often
into a Convulsion. 3. That is cured at first in a short time: the same is the
condition of a Palsy, Scorputick, only that in those that are sick of it,
there remains some motion, and soon goes away and returns. The cause of
weakness is often Choleric and raw; it comes not from the Head, because that
is seldom affected in the Colic, nor would the Colic cease; But the very same
matter is carried through the Veins into the Limbs, as a Pleuresy comes from a
dysentery stopped.

But Erastus says, Wherefore should not nature provoked by Clysters, rather
cast forth the matter by the Belly?

Answer, The Passage is not free. Spiegelius will have it done by the Arteries,
and by them the purgative force of Clysters is carried to the Heart.

The Cure. If it be from fleam that must be evacuated by Generals, taken away
by Topicals. The same cure is for stupidity. Topical Resolvers.

If it come from a sharp humor, as from the Colic, in the Scurvey, in that we
must not dry so much, nor respect the Brain. Generals and Topicals are all
useful. Monav. ep. 242. says, that this that follows is good in weakness.
Take the fat of a Gray, a Fox, a Hen, a Duck, a Goose, a Stork, of each one
ounce; juice of Sage and Wormwood thickened, of each half an ounce; oil of Bays,
one ounce; anoint after Bathing. Specificals are, Marigolds, Lavender, Berries
and shavings of Juniper, Meadsweet, Primroses, wine of the infusion of
Marigolds, Lavender for one Month, one or two spoonfuls; It must be set in the
Sun at an open window. If it come by way of Crisis, the Flux must not be
stopped.

In the Palsy of the Tongue, after Generals, For. opened a Vein under the
Tongue: Cupping glasses without scarification must be set under the Chin. Vomit
is not good. Gargarisms must be first attenuating, then add such things as draw
fleam. Cauteries to the Neck. The juice of Sage alone rubbed on the Tongue,
recovereth the speech.

In a Palsy of the Weasand, soft things can hardly, but gross things may
easily be swallowed.

In a Palsy of the Bladder, add torrefied Turpentine, Trochis Alkekengi,
without Opium. An astringent fomentation to the neither part. A Potion of the
roots of Cyperus, Galanga, of each two drams; Lignum Aloes, sweet Calamus,
Cypress nuts, Balaustia, Pomegranate Pills, Myrtils, Acorn cups, roots of our
Ladies Thistle, great Comfrey, of each one dram; Galls, Frankincense, seeds of
Agnus Castus, Rue, of each one scruple; etc. If all fail, use this that
follows approved. Take Acorns, I ounce and half; Galanga, half an ounce; boil
them in 2 pound of red Wine and Smiths water; Frankincense, 2 drams; boil and
strain and drink them. Topicals. If the Yard, it is cured with a Fomentation of
a Ly, of the ashes of a Heart and Bulls pisles. Foment the Spondils. Prescribe
such things as take away barrenness. If the Fundament, use drying Clysters and
astringent; apply Cupping glasses to the Buttocks. Make Fumes of the bark of
the Pine Tree, one ounce; bark of Frankincense, half an ounce; Pix, Colophonia,
Frankincense, Mastrick, of each three drams; Castoreum, one dram; shavings of
Hartshorn, half a dram.

If it be from a fall, apply to the part Coolers, Astringents, for fear of
Inflammation, and hot Resolvers.

If it be with wasting, Topicals and Internals must be moderate.

The PESTILENCE. The Cause is divine, Hipp. Which Erastus ep. 275. affirms to
be a hidden quality of the Air. And Ep. 269. he says purrefaction is the
cause; not in making, but already made, which cannot be corrected by altering,
but must be taken away by evacuating.

Signs. It infects many, is contagious, it suddenly casts the Forces down, the
Pulse is deadly, a Fever, Smallpox.

Prognostics. To be well in mind, and the appetite to remain, is good. If
Vomit be absent; other signs are deceitful.

Differences. If it proceed from infection of the air, it is very contagious,
it quickly kills; few have Botches, or Pushes breaking forth. The Urine is
like to sound men's; there did precede signs of the Air affected, for Beasts
have died, Fishes, they have left their dens the waters, being half dead, etc.
If it come from corruption of humors, that is known by the signs, there are
Spots, Botches, Pushes. The Urine is naught, a vehement Fever afflicts, also a
Tertian, a Quartan intermitting, witness Pareus. l. 21. Those that are scabbed
are less troubled with the Plague. A Botch to go before the Fever is good; to
follow, naught. The Moon decreasing is deadly; for the Terms come forth weaker.
Arist. l. 7. de H. Anim. c. 2.

Preservatives. Chambers must be clean so much as we can. A sign of this is, If
Eggs shaked, be not corrupted and stink in 24. hours in a place infected, or
new Bread from the Oven. So if shaked Eggs be put between him that is infected,
and one that is sound, the Eggs, but not the sound party, will be infected. So
to those that are about to die, they put hot bread to their Mouths, that the
Chamber may not be infected. 2. Let the Body be cleansed with moderate
Purgatives, and such as expel poison, as Agarick, etc. By convenient Diet. 3.
We must preserve by taking Antidotes, as Pills of Ruffus, half a dram; yet in
old men, childing-women, and such as have the Emroids, cauttiously. Elixar
vitae of Paracelsus* For. commends this following, even for Infants every day
so much as a nut. Take Nuts, Figs, Rue, of each alike; beat them severally in
wooden Vessels. Mingle them with syrup of juice of Citrons, it is very good.
Also this that follows is to be taken to the quantity of a small Nut. Take
confection of Nuts, one ounce and half; old Treacle, Mithridate, of each two
drams; right Bole-armenick, Terra sigillata, of each one dram and half; with
syrup of Lemmons, or in Winter, with syrup of Citron Pills, mingle it. He gave
it in the Winter with Wine, in the Spring with Carduus water, or Scabious: in
Summer with Sorrel water; Sometimes he added half a dram of Confectio Liberans.
Every morning he washes the Face, with water and Vinegar of Roses, with a
sweet Nodulus. An unguent for the Nostrils, as oil of Scorpions, to anoint the
Wrists, Temples, Heart, Nostrils. Troches to be held under the Tongue. A little
bag for the garments. Epithems Fab. obs. 34. c. 2. Monavius ep. 248. approves
the powder of Arsnick, Toads. Crato is against it, Ep. 167. In the Pestilence
at Lausanna, none died that had an Issue. Fab. had two c. 4. obs. 23. We must
anoint under the Nails, the Armpits and Groins. Bags must be kept in the
Wardrobe of cloths.

The Cure. To open a Vein is not good, if the Plague arise from contagion or
fault of the air; If twelve hours be past, if there be spots, a Flux or
Botches; otherwise before the eighth hour, giving first a Lenitive Clyster, you
may do it. When there is a Botch or Carbuncle, draw blood on the same side,
setting a Cupping glass to the Botch, lest the venom be drawn inward. Fern.
opens the Head Vein in the Arm if the Carbuncle be under the Armpits, the
Liver Vein of the same side; if it be in the Groin, Thigh, Hip, Leg, Ankle,
with scarifying and cupping, yet he always did it before eight hours. After
two hours he gave an Antidote; if it were vomited up, he gave it again. He
purged not before the third, often times the fourth day, with Lenitives as
Rheubarb, Agarick, Epithym, etc. Cassia is not convenient by reason of its
moisture, nor Rose water for its Astringency. To drink cold water in the Plague
and malignant Fevers is deadly. Let them eat lustily though they have no
stomach. The first day he will not let them sleep; on the second and third he
willingly provokes it with unguent Populeum. Senn. Once he moves sweat, after
he opens a Vein if need be. All before eight hours past. Par. commends salt of
Mugwort. If spots comes forth, Paraeus anoints the sick with Quicksilver, as
if they had the Pox.

PTHYSICK. It either follows the Pleurisy, or it proceeds from a sharp
Distillation, or the breaking of a Vein. See Aph. 16. s. 7. Rondeletins holds
it comes most from the third cause, by ignorance of the Physician, who
neglecting Revulsives, will cure spitting of blood with Astringents. There is a
lingering putrid Fever joined with it, or a Hectic, from an Ulcer of the
Lungs, which lasts sometimes twenty years.

Signs of the beginning of it are a long during Cough, then something bloody,
then mattery is cast forth, the Body wastes, there is a lingering Fever, hard
breathing, matter coming forth by Coughing, the Hairs fall, etc. How matter is
distinguished from fleam; See Aph. 81. s. 4. 11. s. 5.

The Cure. The cause must be purged by Rheubarb, etc: and Lenitives, not
strong, Clysters; It must be revulsed, intercepted. The disease or the Ulcer
requires detergents, and Mundificatives, or Expectorating means, (for the
spittle must be bound up no way) afterward we must glutinate. Fracastorius
comendeth a Lohock of Turpentine with Myrrh and Bole to be miraculous. Laur*
the juice of ground Ivy, half a pound; Sugar, six ounces; make a syrup, let him
take often with a spoon. Water of Alehove with Sugar of Roses. To use old
conserve of Roses, or Species Haly against the Prhysick. Erast. ep. 272. says,
that all who had an Ulcer in their Lungs, though it were not discerned, yet
they died by the use of Vitriol waters, Conserve of Roses must be often given
in great Doses. Vulnerary Potions, as also the decoction of Guaicum, China, are
much commended, unless there be a Hectic Fever. Fumes are good taken at the
Nostrils. (See Cough) Also the smoke of Tobacco. Topicals, let him often take
Conserve of Roses, or a little preserved roots of great Comfrey. For. gives by
turns, things to expectorate, and glutinate, and at last remains upon them that
consolidate.

PRIAPISM, is a stretching of the Yard without lust, and it is not assuaged by
Venery. It is cured as the Fury of the Womb, with Mints; Especially with the
root of water Lillies, by hunger, Vomit, Chafing of the upper parts.

A PUSH, A Fellon, differs from Phlegmone, by the smallness, blood, thickness,
it suppurateth of it self, it paineth, is an acute little swelling. It is cured
by suppurating medicaments; after that, by Sarcoticals.

Psydracia, are red Pushes of the Forehead, and the Head. They are cured with
Driers, as with white Chalk, with juice of Housleek, and with Vinegar and
Lytharge, Ceruss and oil.

Phlyctenae, called wildfire, they are little blisters from a yellowish
matter, and sharp, they last to the fourth day. Besides Generals, Topicals must
be Coolers and Moystners. They are opened with a Needle, the Ulcers must be
dried.

Pushes of the Cornea, are cured as Ophthalmia.

All these coming again are most dangerous, because they set upon the Forces,
cast down by the former matter* because those that grow well, require much
nourishing, and diseases returning require slender Diet, we must deal warily
here, and rather fight with medicamentary aliments, then with Medicaments.

POISON, must always be brought out the same way it went into the Body.
Opening a Vein, purging, have no place before the third day. All unctuous
things, as Oil, Butter, etc. are good. So Causticks will not ulcerate the part
anointed with Oil. If it were taken by the Mouth, the first care is to cast it
forth by Vomit, with fat things, adding Antidotes against Poison. If it be got
to the Intestins, then cast in fat Clysters, or give Purgatives with Antidotes,
as Scorzonera, Citrons, Sorrel, Agarick, Aloes. Lastly, give Specificals.
Outwardly on the Arteries beating, anoint the oil of Caravita, often proved:
the Basis is Hypericon and Scorpions, hide it in a hot carcass. Sweaters. Milk
for meat. If it were communicated outwardly, let it be cured as these that
follow: so if one have taken Cantharides sublimate, or the like, use
injections, drinks, decoctions, Baths.

Topicals and all Internals must be Coolers, Moystners.

If it be the biting of a mad dog, close not the wound before forty days, but
as often as it would cicatrice, keep it open with ashes of a Vine or Fig Tree.
First of all, make hard Ligature above the wound, that the poison spread no
further. Secondly, Call it forth: wherefore let the blood run out largely,
scarify the wound, and enlarge it by cutting, set Cupping glasses to it: also
other Artractives; to which always add Theriac, juice of Hypericon, etc. as
Doves-dung, Urine, Pickle, Ducksgrease, Aqua vitae, Wine, Vinegat, Salt, old
Treacle, Mustard. Wash it with most forcible Chafing, Garlic, Onions, Leeks,
Rue, Germander; hot Fowls dissected laid on hot: but nothing does so much good
as an actual Cautery, so the Poison be not sunk too deep into the Body. The
Eschar scarified deep, must not be removed by oily means; because they hinder
transpiration. Fab. obs. 87. cent. 1. old Treacle dissolved in Aqua vitae
surpasses all Remedies. Par. with this wash the part strongly, and let linen
cloths wet therein be laid to it, on which lay attractives. Sorrel, sharp Docks
beaten, and laid on, the juice, the decoction is good. Use these till the pain,
and various color cease, and laudable quitter be made. 3. Specificals, also
Coolers must be given as cause shall be. With Galen, above all is the ashes of
burnt river Crabs, two spoonfuls, with one spoonful of the powder of Gentian
root, and strong Wine. Cauteries after the third or the seventh day will not do
good. An Issue is profitably made on the place affected.

If it pierce to the inward parts, we must purge forcibly by Hellebour: also by
Antimony, says Paraeus. Wash all the Pulses every six hours with oil of
Caravita, which they of old called the oil of the great Duke of Hetruria, or
with the oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus. Pliny above all, commends the root of
the Eglantine, Eat Garlic, Diaphoreticks are most profitable; Bird-lime of the
Oak, the wood is most effectual, taken or applied. If madness be at hand, lay
Sinapisms to the Arms and Thigns. Give Antidots in a double Dose, whether they
will or not. Sleep must be avoided, till the force of the poison be broke. Let
them eat their fill. They that come to fear the water are past cure, unless
they know themselves in a glass. A mad Dog seeing the water, is afraid of it,
other dogs fly away; If they be taken, they fawn on him. If a house-Dog refuse
to eat or smell to a piece of Bread sineared with the filth of the wound, the
Dog that bit was mad.

RENUNCIATIO, is called a great wound, 1. For the greatness of dissolved unity.
2. For the principallity of the part. 3. For the ill custom of the Body hurt.
Let the Surgeon suspend his judgment until the ninth day, lest he be
deceived.

RINGING in the Ears. The cause is some matter sticking in the Ear that moves
the Faculty. Often times it is wind lifted up from diverse parts.

The Cure varieth. Generals premised, some bid take the Fume of Hemlock-seed
boiled in Vinegar, Fumes of Vinegar, and the vapor of it with one Gall. Some
apply hot bread sprinkled with Spirit of Wine to the Far, resol^ing oils,
sneezing before supper, and in the morning apply Topicals; for when they are
fed, the head is filled.

STONE of the Reins.

The cause is Tartar, a andy and stony constitution of the Reins. Fernelius
faith, a dryness of the Reins; Platerus, heat. Also Venery, exercise presently
after meat: Meat, Air, Drink, Concoction hurt.

Signs diagnostick. A burning and painful making of water, snotty Urine, Belly
stopped. Fab. obs. 63. c. 1 Sense of pain in the Glans. obs. 66. c. 1.
Astonishment of the Leg on the side affected; because the Muscle Psoas is
pressed, or the Nerve of it, there is Nauseating, and Vomiting from the Nerve
of the sixth conjugation. It is distinguished from the Colic pain. 1. Because
in the Colic, the pain is most acute, because the pain is extended above the
Reins. 2. Pain of the Colic is moveable; of the stone, fast. 3. In the Colic,
rather the Belly; in the Stone, the water is stopped. 4. The Nephritick pain, by
reason of the Ureters descends often times to the Testicles, but in the Colic
not so. 5. The Colic is most commonly sharpest on the left side, by the
straightness of the Colon there.

The cure. In the Paroxysm, cast in an emollient Clyster, evacuant; or give
such a Potion of Bolus, etc. 2. If the Body be Plethorick, open a Vein in the
Arm; but if it flow to the part affected, in the Ankle. 3. We must use all
emollient internal means, and external, as a Cataplasm of the leaves of
Pellitary, Mallows, beaten and boiled with the Mucilage of Linseed, Fenugrec, a
Bath of Marshmallows, and a Semicupium of softning things. Internals are syrup
De Althaea Fernel. Also that of Eorestus so much approved.

Take seeds of mallows, Marshmallows, of each 3 drams; red Chiches, 3 drams;
the four great cold seeds, of each 2 drams; hulled Barley, 2 ounces; far Figs,
12; Sebestens, 7, scraped Licoris, 1 dram; boil all in four pound of water to
two pound.

Crato applied Crab-fish boiled in Milk, Milk with crumbs of Bread, or:

Take juice of Purslane thickened, one dram; Gum Arabic, half a dram; make
Pills. The Passages thus loosned, give Diuretics to the Patient, sitting in a
Bath, that the Stone may be moved. Crato used this that follows.

Take Marshmallows, 2 drams; great Raysins stoned, 3 drams; Veronica and
ground Ivy, of each one Pugil; boil them, and give a draught thereof:

Or another of Turpentine, etc. If this be in vain, give such things will break
the Stone, as blood of a Goat, or of a Kid hot, applied outwardly, also oil of
Scorpions. The Patient must ride two miles upon a trotting horse, or must go up
many stairs till he be weary, having taken a Diuretic, or chafe him from above
nether-wards with oil of sweet Almonds; set on a dry Cupping glass to his
Reins; then a little lower, and then one and another obliquely even unto his
Groins. But when the pain is extreme, they must nor be used. This must be done
until the Stone fall into the Bladder. Paraeus L. 16. For. Lib. 14.

STONE of the Bladder. When the Stone is fallen into the Bladder, the pain
abates. Therefore then, if the Forces will endure it, the sick must ride, or go
a journey on soot: also he must drink freely, and forbear to make water after
it as much as he can, that the water being augmented, the Stone may be driven
forth with it. In the mean while outwardly and inwardly Diuretics must be
applied. When in is come into the Ureter we must be careful that it get not
back; but with the Fingers it must be brought to the utmost Glans, the Passage
being made slippery; if it stay in the Glans, it must be pulled out with Hooks;
if that be in vain, it must be bored out with a piercer included in a Pipe. But
if it be far from the Glans, and can by no Art be got out, then the Yard must
be cut on the side with a straight line: nor above, because of the Vessels; not
beneath, for it is a Membranous part: In the mean time the Ureter must be tied
with a Thread that it get not back again, and the foreskin must be drawn out
as much as may be that it may cover the whole Glans. Incision being made, and
the Stone taken forth, the skin must be let go again, that the whole skin may
cover the Yard that is cut; for so the uniting will be the easier. The last
remedy is cutting for the Stone. See Senn. Paraeus Surgery, I. 16 The
extreme means are Narcoticks, but warily exhibited. Crato ep. 121. cured the
greatest pains, discussing the winds by Clyster; the heat of the Bowels being
increased, he so anointed the Navel with oil of Turpentine, Juniper, Nutmeg;
the Stomach with only oil of Nurmegs; he gave by the Mouth the decoction of
Veronica with Wine, or the decoction of Turnips, with Sugar Candy, Butter, or
Oil of sweet Almonds; but the shell must be taken off, and the water of the
first boiling must be thrown away; he anointed also with the water of whites of
Eggs.

Fernelius says, that all Stones of the bladder come from the Reins, because
al slimy matter is voided from the Bladder by-Urine: wherefore every Stone of
the Bladder, if you break the shell, there is a Kernel in it that was wrapped
up by it, it is of an ash color, and rough. Fab. cent. 4. obs. 5. see Hist. of
Guilh. Laurembergius, who cured a Stone of the Bladder with Medicaments. Senn.
l. 3. p. 8. s. 1. c. 2. Waters sent to the Bladder by a Catheter can break a
Stone there, and one may make trial of it by stones taken out of the Body.

The SHINGLES, rise from yellow pure thin Choler; it eats because the choler
is sharp, it causes small creeping Ulcers, and excoriations that are not deep
with wanness. Some call it Formica, but not properly.

The Cure is by Generals. The continent cause must first be cooled, as by
Lettice, etc. It shows, when the heat is abated, digestives, discussives,
which are useful. If there be Pushes, the Coolers must not be moist but dry, as
Willow leaves, Knot grass. Aquapendens used this following; Take the juice of
Tobacco, three ounces; yellow wax, two ounces; Rosin of the Pinetree, one ounce
and half; Turpentine, one ounce; oil of Myrtils what may suffice; make a Cerat*
For. applied leaves of Coltsfoot. Paraeus found unguent of Elecampane with
Mercury to be a sure remedy. The oil of Birch branches dried, collected in a
pewter vessel is commended. If it spread daily touch the edges of the Ulcers
with the oil of Vitriol or with Aqua fortis: So Pareus cured uncurable Ulcers.
Par. l. 6.

SHIVERING. It differs in degree from vehement cold. The Subject is the Muscle.
The Cause, the expulsive Faculty moved: and so it belongs to the Symptoms of
the natural Faculty; but because the animal faculty rises up also to expel the
mischief, it is referred to animal Symptoms. Gal. and others make the remote
cause to be cooling, and the motion of the influence of heat from the Center to
the Circumference, and contrarily; but in vehement cold stirred up by Choler:
also where sharp things are put into an Ulcer, or a spark falls upon the Body,
vehement shaking goes before cooling. Therefore the cause is some troublesome
thing suddenly rending the sensitive parts in the circumference of the Body,
and stirring up the expulsive faculty. The opinion of Galen is sometimes true.
In Fevers, extreme shaking comes from the rending of the sensitive parts, as
of the stomach. etc. yet so that it draws into consent the parts in the
circumference of the Body: as also by the vapors sent thither.

Cure particular is not requisite for this, for it follows other di^eases. In
Fevers the back must be anointed with hot things, as with oil of Camomil.

SPOTS natural, according to Senn. are bred from imagination of the Mother.
Par. l. 23. they are made from a part of the menstruous blood, sticking yet to
the sides of the Matrix, from a fresh Flux, or from a kind of dew distilling
out of the Veins before the time: the greater sort incurable, also those that
are like Warts, and wan; they are to be washed with the blood of the secondine,
also with the Courses, or the Mothers fasting spittle.

SPITTING often, is of that spittle which is bred in the first concoction, and
in the third, in the Brain and which falls upon the Tonsils, it is concocted
and voided by the Mouth: sometimes it is sharp, sometimes white, etc.

The cause is fleam from the Brain or stomach, chiefly falling in the morning:
it comes not always from cold, but often times in diseases from burning heat; It
comes also, especially that which is made after meat, from affection of the
Hypochondres, and the Scurvy; It often times preserves from diseases.

It is cured, if the cause be taken away as the Catarrh, by Dryers and
Evacuaters.

SAHAFATI must not be cured in an Infant, for it preserves it from the
Epilepsie; yet if we must do something, let the Nurse be purged gently: wash
the Head with decoction of Mallows, Borrage, Barley; this being done, lay on
warm Cabbadge leaves anointed with Butter, or of Ivy; also the leaves of Orache
anointed, or roots of Marshmallows boyld in Boys urine: Topicals are allowd, or
the juice of Fumitory* Scabious, Elecampane, Lytharge, oil of Nuts, Hogs
grease. For. has an infallible remedy for Boys and Infants, Take the yolks of
Eggs roasted hard, sixteen; Mirth, one dram; root of Cuckoe pint, half a dram;
black Hellebour, six grains; fry them in an iron frying pan, without flame
until they froth, then press out the oil, and fry them so often and press
them out till they will froth no more, cast away the dregs, and keep the oil in
a close vessel for your use.

In those that are of years, it is cured by Digesters and chiefly by remedies
that evacuate fleam and melancholy. Till these be often used, Topicals are not
good, which must be to soften the crusts afterward the juice or decoction of
Fumitory, sharp Dock, Celandine, Ivy leaves, Scabious, Bean-meal. Galen only
used burnt paper soaked in Vinegar, and anointed the part affected, and so
cured many, Urine, Brine. For. puts this following for a secret. Take Salt
butter, Hogs grease, of each one ounce; Brimstone, half an ounce; Quicksilver
killed with spittle, one dram; (a certain Boy was killed by Quicksilver laid to
his Head) and Vitriol, one scruple; then Butter, Hogs grease, Brimstone must be
melted a part in a Mortar: then add the rest. Cresses fried or beaten with Hogs
grease. Lastly, it is cured as the Smallpox, with the the decoction of
Guaicum, fasting spittle, with liquor dropping from green wood in burning: Plum
tree Gum, things that expel the matter, or Carduus Benedictus and Hartshorn
are good. Balsam of Peru, or Turpentine, boiled with water or juice of Tobacco.

The SCAB. A certain woman did happily cure all Scabs with juice of Cresces,
and Goose grease.

SCIRRHUS is a Tumor which is made of melancholy or natural fleam dried by
degrees in the part, and is without pain. Platerus says, that it may be made
from nutrimental juice, thickened and hardened.

Diagnosticks. It is hard, and without pain, though it be pressed. The color
is wan; if it be from melancholy, it is cold.

Prognostic. That which has lost all feeling is past cure. They are cured
either by resolution or suppuration; this is more rare, and more dangerous. It
follows Erysipelas, Inflammation, etc.

The Cure is wrought by Emollients, we must never moysten, or resolve alone;
but either by Courses it must be moistened and dried: or together, as the
Ancients warn us. A fume of Vinegar, with a fire-stone resolves excellently.
The antecedent cause must be evacuated.

A SCIRRHUS of the Liver follows obstructions frequently. It is seldom known,
there is an ill habit of the Body, little Urine, without a Fever; See the rest
in Obstruction of the Liver. It is cured as before, ever adding Spicknard,
Saffron, Mastick; If the Unequal part be so, Topicals are principal, Goose dung,
Sarsoparilla, Fern root, Succories Emollients, Steel.

SCIRRHUS of the Spleen, is known by the touch, there is difficulty of
breathing, a wan color, weight on the left side; when the Belly is full, there
is straightness about the Spleen. If the Mouth stink, the Gums be eaten; Ulcers
in the Legs will not be cured, it is an old Scirrhus.

The Cure. Lenitives premised, Alteratives, Evacuatives, Opening of a Vein is
seldom convenient. Aperients are good, to which add Vinegar and Oxymel.
Coolers are, Succories, four great Cold seeds, etc. chiefly Fern root. Amatus
denies Hearts Tongue to be good for the Spleen; We must purge by course. For.
exhibited this following opener for fifteen days, after the use of Generals,
Take Fern roots, half an ounce; of Dodder, two drams; boil them in eight ounces
of White Wind and Beer, to the wasting of a third part; strain it, and drink it
at once. The most effectual means is, the decoction of the Tamarisk wood, as
Guaicum is wont to be boiled, especially if it be boiled in steeled water.
Steel, water of quick Lime, Ammoniacum with Hemlock. See Senn. Some tried
waters natural, others drink of the wood: they were preserved from falling
further, but not cured; these were made worse I think by too much drying. For.
values much the following Topical, Take of oil of Cappars, one ounce; oil of
Lillies, sweet Almonds, Camomil, fresh Buttet, of each half an ounce; juice of
Bryony, Sow-bread, of each half an ounce; boil them to the wasting of the
juyces, adding Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, two drams and half; Hens grease,
Marrow of Calves Legs; Man's fat, of each half an ounce: Powder of bark of the
roots of Tamarisk, Cappars, Miltworst, Fern root, of each one dram; Powder of
the seeds of Agnus Castus, Broom, of each one scruple: a little wax* make an
Unguent, or a fomentation of water wherein firestone is quenched: Fumes, motion
before meat is good. If it be incurable, they are kept alive by Diet, and by
purging, in Spring, and Autumn.

The SCURVEY, Which in the year 1486* invaded Germany, as Spangenb. says, is
an ill habit of the natural parts, from a melancholik humor, especially
corrupted. The Subject, is that hollowness of Spiegelius into which the Liver,
Spleen, Stomach unload their Excrements. The fountain is in the Liver, the
Spleen; yet the Liver often times, and often times the Spleen has been safe; The
seat are the Veins and Arteries.

The Cause immediate, is a tanateous humor, bred from concoction hurt, either
of it self, or by outward error: a watery blood often times mingled with other
things; if it become malignant, is the next cause, if it be not already the
antecedent cause, for it is malignant. It is generated by reason of concoction
hurt, by things natural* not natural, preternatural, and by the volatile salt
that is in meats, and ventilation wanting. So Platerus determins, that meat and
drink may become blood under the form of vapors. So it is cured by remedies
full of volatile salt, as by Scurveygrasse, out of which, if either by length of
time, or by boiling, the volatile salt should exhale, they grow unprofitable.
Wherefore juice and conserve are most profitable. So meats that breed the
Scurvey, abound with fixed salt, to be cured by volatile; Vinegar makes for
this, and meats hardened by smoke.

Signs. There preceeded gross Diet, sorrow, which if did precede, there will
be no disease but will be joined with the Scurvey. Signs at the beginning are,
willing laziness, heaviness of the Abdomen, difficulty of breathing after
exercise, weakness of the Legs with pain, the color grows wan, a man seems
to grow fat. Afterward happens an itching redness of the Gums, a small
Pulse, the water sometimes clear, sometimes troubled; after this stinking of
the Mouth, a bloody swelling of the Gums; the Teeth are loose, the Legs have
lead colored spots and purple, specks innumerable. The appetire seldom fails.
The sick say they are sound: some on certain days with and without a Fever are
more afflicted. Some are boundin their Bellies, others loose. The Feet are
spotted, sometimes they swell, are made less. There are Ulcers on their Legs,
a crooked melancholy vein under the Tongue. All symptoms of the animalfaculty,
Dropsy, Gangrene, often times Scabs, a bastard Pluresy, bleeding at the Nose,
bloody stools, opening of Veins in the Legs. The Jaundies, shortness of breath
Wildfire, heat, pain of the soles of the Feet, noise of the Bones moved,
spongy flesh under the Ey-lids. In hard breathing, the sick show the cause to
be under the Diaphragma, red little sands in their urine, also Tartareous
matter, pain of the whole Body, pains increasing about the Joints, pain of the
Belly often times with breach of the Peritonaeum. That pain differs from the
Colic, because this, when the Belly is loose vanishes, the Belly is lifted
up. These pains often times last beyond forty days; they make hollow the Belly,
they pull the right Intestine upwards, so that Clysters cannot be injected but
byforce; the matter often times sticks between the two Coats of the Intestins*
pain of the Loins, pain of the Kidneys, the Joint Gout, with a Small Palsy and
a wandering pain. A Palsy growing suddenly, quickly moveable, wandering sudden
Tumors, trembling, Convulsion, sudden blindness; suffocation at the first
morsel of meat, from a styptick vapor affecting the sharp Artery, and Weason.
Vomiting, spitting, heat, sudden redness of the Face, and suddenly down. All
scorbutical people have a stinking breath, wandering Fevers, wherein the cold
fit often times dureth six ot seven hours. The Pulse, besides the reason of
Fevers is slow, the urines various, Tertians are frequent, often times without
cold. Erysipelas, Ulcers almost incurable.

Prognostics. A most slow Pulse must not affright us; for it is not mortal by
it self in the Scurvey. At first it cured by only changing the Air. It bath
been often mistaken for the Pox. Want of speech often comes, with a kind of
Epileptical Convulsion, from the Muscles of the Larynx contracted. In the
beginning of Fevers, often times Carus grows, that cease of it self.
Swelling of the Knees are hardly cured. It is an ill sign for the spots to
vanish without being better.

The Cure ^ Premising a Clyster, if there be Plethora, and nothing hinder, also
in progress of the disease a Vein must be opened directly in the Arm with a
broad Lancet. For. opens the salvatella of the left hand; we must often times
open in diverse parts sparingly. The spots indicate contrarily: the matter must
be altered, and after that, at several times we must Purge gently. It is
exasperated with stronger means. Many have been cured without Purging. If with
a good urine the disease increase, it is a sign that the Remedies are weaker
then they should be; We must open by turns adding Specificals. For. Syrup
against the Scurvey, is made of the juice of Scurvey grass, and Brooklime with
Sugar. Senn. Powder of Senn^ is this* Take choice Senna leaves, one ounce and
half; Cremor Tartar, six drams, Cinnamon, three drams; Cloves Galinga, of each
half a dram; D^agridium, one dram; infuse for one night two or three drams of
this powder in Whey, strain it, drink the infusion, Sweet Milk, the decoction
of Brook-lime, Cresces, Mustard seed, evacuations and alteratives repeated, we
must give Specificals, as Scurvey grass, all kinds of Cresses. Brook-lime,
which is less hot, and is moist, is good in Fevers; Mingle Scurvey grass with
Brooklime it is excellent: Horse Radish, lesser Celandine. The third kind of
Howsleek, which is not safe, some only commend. Mustard, Cuckoe pint, Succory,
Endive, Sorrel, juice of Citrons, Lemmons, spirit of Salt, Vitriol, Brimstone,
are given most fitly in Whey by reason of their heat. The decoction of
Wormwood, Birkmans powder with salt of Scurvey-grass, Cresses, Rocket seed, or
spirit of Scurvey grass, etc. which will take flame as well as spirit of wine,
sour waters; then Diureticals and Diaphoreticks, as Rob of Elder to three
drams: then Coroboratives.

Symptomatical diseases, as the Jaundies, Dropsy, Fevers, are never rightly
cured, and are often cured to no purpose by Physicians, unless the Scurvey be
cured; the fault of the Gums is cured by abstergents, as Columbines, spirit of
Vitriol, and specificals in Gargarisms: also by Scurvey grass water,
Brook-lime, Tobacco, Masticatories, powder of burnt Salt, ashes of the tendrils
of Veins, Sage leaves, Allom.

The Spots are taken away with resolving Topicals, eating Oranges with their
Rinds is very good, Milk.

SPHACELUS of the bones is made either from the contagion of the Air, or
matter, or moist medicaments. It is known by sight, when they grow wan, partly
by the Prbe, when no slippery thing, but many sharp things meet with it, and
when it easily enters their spongie substance; yet often times rotten bones
are most hard.

If flesh brought over the bone be too soft and fluid, having almost no sense;
if out of a wound, the matter run more then it is wont or should run: if the
brims of the Ulcer be turned inward: we must first strew in the powder of Orris
root, Gentian, Birthwort, Centory, Pine bark, burnt Wax, Myrrh, Ceruss. If it
be very great, scrape it off with Raspers; yet Fab. cent. 8. counts this
dangerous, not to be used, but in great rottenness of the bones. He rather obs.
92. cent. 2. strewed, even in children also, with great success, the powder of
Gum Thistle very safely, upon Ulcers with rottenness of the bones: the lips of
the Ulcers not having any defensative; Whence he collects, that Diosc. was
deceived, or else we know not the Gum Thistle of the Ancients: Or if scraping
Instruments be in vain, the scales must be removed or taken away by a Trepane,
except in the Hip bones, Thigh, Head, Spondils, etc. If it be to no purpose,
give a vulnerary Potion, to expect the scaling of the corrupt Bone, and not to
force it off: or the scales being ready to fall, hasten motion, but not the
falling.

SNEESING overmuch is taken away by Lenitives, Preparatives, Evacuating, etc.
by smell of cold things, as Violets, Roses; snuff up the decoction of Poppies,
Roses, water of Violets, avoid all spices. The Nostrils must be stopped, the
breath held, smell of Bread, smell of opium, of Mandragora root: also sneezing
coming upon a mortal disease presageth safety; put your Hands into cold water,
snuff up Milk. See Aph. 13. s. 6.

STRANGURY, is wherein the water is made by drops with pain. Dysuria, is
otherwise taken for only diminishing of urine, either with or without pain, as
before; otherwise, when the urine is not made by drops, and in a due quantity,
without interruption, but it is with pain.

The Cause. A sharp humor sticking fast to the Sphincter of the Bladder, as in
Tenasmus: also a stone, inflammation, an Ulcer, sharp urine, either of it self,
namely when by reason of crudity contracted in the Liver, either the coldness
of the Bladder is corrupted, and becomes sharp, or by the mixture of sharp
humors: if it be from thinness of drink, exercise; the raw drink is drawn to
the Reins, and driven forth. Aph. 44. s. 6.

The Cure varieth as the cause is. If the urine be sharp, we must soften, cool,
by Internals, Topicals, Emulsions. For. cured himself and others, when all
failed with a decoction of Mallows and syrup of Violets, Whey of Goats-Milk,
injections, candle tallow anointed, Nutmegs. The cause of Dysuria is the fault
of the urinary passages, not of the Sphincter, also of the Bladder.

STRANGLING of the Womb. The cause is a malignant vapor sent from the Seed,
menstrual blood, and other humors sticking in the Testicles and the Pipe.
Fallop. his Pipe, and the Testicles; when these hang down, that being light,
and stretched by wind, they often ascend upwards, and are taken for the rising
of the Mother, which is always fast bound. This is proved by the observation
of Riol. Also often times the Body ascending, is known by the touch, and is
mistaken for the Womb. Three Symptoms urge, swooning, suffocation and
Convulsion: and sometimes this, sometimes that: sometimes lightly, sometimes
grievously torment them.

Signs. Weariness precedeth, a sad look, they are easily taken with horror. It
is cured by putting stinking things to the Nostrils, and sweet things to the
secrets. It differs from swooning, because swooning is more sudden, the Pulse
is small in strangling, as in swooning, there is a cold sweat, they are often
joined. Swooning lasts not long, suffocation sometimes for three days. They
must not be buried before seventy two hours past; for in that time all the
humors absolve their motions; put a feather to their Mouth, a dish of water to
their Heart, or a glass to their Mouth, Sneezing Remedies are more certain.

Prognostics. It afflicts most in Winter, sneezing is good, cut them not up
before seventy two hours. Vesalius learned this by his own example, witness
Par. l. 23. 46. yet in his Ep. 30, and 31. he says, Vesalius dyed not of
grief, but when he had ended a sacred Voyage, he died in the way, of a burning
Fever.

The Cure. Loosing all Ligatures, raise the sick; put stinking things to the
Nostrils, as fumes of feathers of Partridge, Hairs, Lether, Horns, Castoreum,
underneath sweet things, chiefly a smoke of Horses warts dried. Clysters for
the Womb, Pessaries; outwardly oil of Rue, Treacle etc. an unguent for the
Nostrils and Ears, oil of Amber, Sage, etc. pour in Galbanum dissolved in
Vinegar, and spread upon a round piece of leather, apply to the Navel. Make a
nodulus of Asa foetida, two scruples; Castoreum, one scruple. Some are cured by
only chewing Lovage seed and swallowing it down. See Childbirth, wine is
hurtful. Powder for the Muther is this, Take Dittany root, seeds of Carrots,
one dram; choice Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Balm, of each two scruples; Saffron
oriental, half a scruple: fat Castoreum, one scruple: Dosis, half or one dram,
with Beer or water of Camomil. Treacle with Mugwort water, root of Angelica,
juice of Garlic rub upon the Navel with Aloes, it is a secret; put the leaves
of Bur-dock under the Feet. Fecula of Briony made in Pills to ten or twelve
grains, with a little Castoreum; extract of Elder-berries dried, made with Aqua
vitae, and spirit of Vitriol by distillation to one scruple. Preservation is
wrought by Generals and Specials, of Balm, Pennyroyal, Angelica roots, etc.

SUPPURATION, is not to be opened before it be ripe; for it will turn to a
Fistula in a part that wants blood, as the Pleura: and, if the matter be
malignant, and sharp.

If it be from a cold matter, it must not be opened before the concoction of
the whole matter. The Signs are, if the pain, heat, tumor, a Fever be
increased; when the heat, pain, Fever are remitted, and the tumor is lifted up
into a point, the matter is concocted. Suppurative medicaments are necessary,
when the humor is so impacted, that it cannot be repelled, either by reason of
the nearness of some principal part or so thick that it cannot be resolved. It
must be opened on that part it rises to a point, according to the straightness
of the Fibraes, that the matter may not run forth by heaps. Suppuratives shut
the Pores that the heat cannot breath forth; and so they differ from
Emollients. It must be opened either with an Instrument o^ a Medicament* either
with a hot iron, seldom, or cutting iron, as in a Ring. Medicaments are either
potential Cauteries, or more gentle, as leaven, Onions roasted in the Embers,
Garlic, Pigeons dung, black Soap, Mustard Seed, Salt, Figs, Diaquilon, Dogs
dung, Nitre, coughing, crying, sneezing, vomiting, Scabious, Horehound, Carduus
benedictus. Add some of these to ripening plasters. Give syrup of Hore-hound,
with water of Scabious.

STITCHING. 1. A little Pipe with a little hole is put to receive the point of
the Needle, to hold the lips of the wound immovable, then make a knot; yet the
lips must not be wholly draw^ together, that the matter may come forth. First,
give a stitch through the middle of the wound. In great wounds take in much
flesh. 2. A dry stitch with a sticking plaster. 3. That which belongs to
Hare-lips. 4. Stitching of the Peltmongers which belongs to the Intestins. 5.
Stitching of the Belly for wounds of the Peritonaeum.

SWOONING. Is a sudden failing of the Forces by reason of the vital spirits
affluence denied: or because they are not bred, for want of matter, or great
heat, or are consumed by heat, malignity, vacuatives, grief, or strangling by
some crude humor, as in a Fever with Swooning, or by frights, etc.

Diagnosticks. There preceeds a languishing Pulse, and small; the Face is pale,
the outward parts are cold, they sweat; in fainting there is no sweat, and the
Pulse remains. It is distinguished by the Pulse from strangling of the Womb.
Prognostics. Aph. 4^. s. 2.

The Cure. The spirits must be preserved, sprinkle the Face with Cinnamon water,
Rose water, Wine, Vinegar. For women, always use stinking things. Apply
Epithems to the Liver, Heart, little Bags, Ointments, Balm sprinkled with Wine
that is pleasant, heated on a hot tile: give bread dipped in Wine, chiefly
chafings of the ends of the Fingers is most profitable, and other Revulsives:
lying down. Tormentil and other Cordials. Take two Pome-Citrons, pouring on
Rose water, and Sugar sprinkled on them; boil them, to an Electuary. If it be
from wasting of the spirits, Chafings, etc. are not fit, but Rest. So, Take the
best powdered Sugar, what you please, moisten it with the best Cinnamon water,
that it may be a little fluid, to which add some drops of spirit of Vitriol,
oil of Cinnamon four drops, of Cloves, two drops; Mace, Nutmegs, Anniseeed, of
each three drops, Give it in a spoon at pleasure.

TEETH, rotten and black are made so by over-hot, cold, sweet, sour things, or
paintings of Mercury.

Preservation. If after meat the Mouth be washed* with wine, and Cyprus, or
Mastick be put into the Teeth.

The cure. If one every Morning hold a grain of Salt under his Tongue, and when
it is melted rub his Teeth with it: The spirit and oil of Vitriol mixed with
water makes the Teeth very white. A Pumex stone fired, and quenched twice in
white wine: and the third time fired, and so left until it be cold, then
powdered and washed, makes the Teeth exceeding white: also not fired. For. l.
14.

Some use only tosted bread, Paraeus L. 16.

Cuttle-bone, Hartshorn, Cinnamon, Coral, Crabs-eys, Egg-shells, Snails shells,
the Jaw Bone of a Pike Mastick; roots of Birthwort, Orris, Rosemary flowers,
Lavender, Roses, white sand most fine. Some use only oil of Vitriol with Honey
of Roses. The ashes of Rosemary branches. Tobacco ashes.

TEETH are pulled out with Iron, either by reason of extreme pain, or because
they are rotten, and make the breath to stink: or if a tooth stand out of
order, great dexterity of the Hand must be used lest the Cheek-bone be removed
from its place, or broken with the hole; whence may follow a Flux of blood, or
the Bone may always remain wrested: that the sound be not pulled forth for the
unsound. The Tooth being taken out let the blood run freely, wash the Mouth
with Oxycratum, and avoid the wind. That Teeth may be pulled forth without
violence, put in Ivy Gum, or the roots of wild Cucumber steeped in Vinegar
three days. Henbane seed, or root of the same roasted, must be laid hot to the
root of the Tooth; but touch not the Teeth that are near. Keep the Mouth open
that the spittle may run forth, but swallow it not.

TEETH astonished. The cause is a sour taste.

The Cure. Purslane chewed, the juice of it is good; bitter Almonds, small
Nuts, Wal-nuts, Mastick, dry root of Liccoris, Wine, Salt.

TEETH Pain. It proceeds from a hot or cold cause, or Worms in the Teeth, that
watery humor flows thither from the Head, or from some other part.

Signs Prognostic. A Tumor after pain is good.

The Cure. The cause must be evacuated, pulled back and derived by all means,
the Veins behind the Ear, may be cut, by Vesicatories, etc. Astringents must be
applied to the Forehead and the Temples. Topicals in a hot cause, Rose water
with a third part of Vinegar, juice of Plantain, Housleek, of Lettice, Sorrel,
etc. Rul. uses water of Nightshade, with water of Vitriol.

If the Gums be affected also, Vinegar must be left, because of its acrimony:
unguent of Alabaster. Senn. root of sharp Docks, cut in pieces, and put into
the aching Tooth, helps wonderfully: also the decoction of the leaves of
Bur-docks. Fer. Paraeus with three remedies cured the greatest pains of the
Teeth.

1. Setting on Leeches, the swelling Gums being gently scarified.

2. Open a Vein under the Tongue.

3. The Veins behind the Ears.

If it be from a cold cause, Garlic roasted in the embers, put into the aching
Tooth.

Aqua vitae, Pepper, Juniper Gum, half an ounce; Rhenish Wine, eight ounces;
boil and strain them: hold the strained liquor hot in the Mouth; hot oil of
Juniper and smoke of Tobacco, has been often approved. Senn.

Take root of Fern, Cinquefoil, of each three drams: Bistort, two drams; leaves
of Rue, Sage, Betony, flowers of red Roses, of each half a handful; boil them
in red Wine and water, of each a sufficient quantity, to wash the Mouth in any
cause. The last means are Narcoticks. Rul. puts in some oil of Camphir, or some
drops of the Hazle-nut tree with Cotton.

The last remedy is pressing a hot iron to the roots of the Teeth, or
Narcoticks, or drawing them out; yet first use the milk of Spurge and
Frankincense, mingled with white Starch, or touch the Tooth with the distilled
water of salt Ammoniac.

We have seen the greatest pains of the Teeth cured, so soon as the Patient
has Vomited. Crato, ep. 182.

TEETH loose. It either comes from too much moisture, or the Pox, or anointing
with Quicksilver, or from the Scurvey.

The cure. If from moisture, premising general dryers, use Topicals, hot and
astringent, but forbear such as black the Teeth, as Pomegranate shells,
Balaustia, Galls, Vitriol, binding with a golden thread is often followed with
Inflammation.

TOOTHING of Children, is about the seventh Month.

The Cure. The Nurse must be cured, and if it be feverish, things actually
cold must not be put into the Child's Mouth. By all means the Gums must be
softened with a Liccoris stick, or with oil of sweet Almonds or Hens grease, or
Butter. For. stamps the Brain of a Hare and Honey together, and rubs the Gums
with it: the Brains of Chickens, and Birds; also the juice of live Crabs
bruised, is commended, drawn forth with the water of the flowers of Beans, if
the Gums be washed with it. Par. l. 23. c. 67. opened the Gums with a
Penknife. The right Dog tooth of Wolf, is wont to be hanged on with a silver
chain.

TETTERS of the Greeks, is nothing but the Leprosy. Gelsus also calls the
Leprosy, Tetters; but with the Latins, as Pliny, Tetters or Ring-worms, is a
sharpness of the skin with dry pushes, and great tickling creeping to the next
parts. Fern. makes four kinds of Tetters. 1. Itching. 2. Tetters. 3. The Scab
with Pustuls. 4. The Leprosy.

The cause. (Fernel.) is Choler or corrupt fleam; Senn. a thin and sharp juice
mingled with a thick.

The Cure is the same as in Saphatus.

Falling out of the TUEL. It comes from too much straining in Childbed, from
Acrimony, as in a Dysentery, weakness of the Sphincter, from a moist distemper,
cold, cutting for the Stone, from a fall.

It is cured according as the cause is. In old folks it is hardly curable: it
is put up either by the Hand of the sick or of the Surgeon: If there be a
Tumor, it must be discussed by Resolvers, it must be continued by taking away
the cause, and by Astringents, in the form of Fumes also and Insessions. Aetius
often times somented the Tuel, with only Brine. Paraus applies a Sponge to the
Tuel, wet with an astringent decoction. Let him stand to do his business; for
so it will not fall out. Hipp. bids to shake the sick hanging of his Feet; for
so the Intestin will go up again. Anoint it with the spawn of red Snails.

Falling out of the Womb is from the same cause. It is cured, if you first give
a Clyster of Mallows and Oil, and the Bladder being emptied, let it be put up
either by the Hand of the sick or of the Midwife, or of the Surgeon; let her
be set, as in cutting for the Stone. If it swell it must be fomented that it
may be done the more easily. Let the Surgeon hold a great actual Cautery in
his Hand, and fain as if he would burn the Matrix with it: so by a fright it
will reduce it self. It is retained by taking away the cause: also by Cupping
glasses with much flame set to the Navel, with sweet things to the Nostrils,
with a rotten Egg applied to the parts. Lay on Bur-leaves to the Head; Vomiting
is good. Topicals must be astringent Pessaries, Sarcoticks must be given
inwardly and used outwardly, fumes of an Eels-skin seasoned with Salt.
Fomentations, let inward means be drying, as roots of China, Guaicum. Note that
at the time the Terms should flow, Astringents must not be used. See Pessaries
in Senn. If it corrupt, that must be cut off, the rest must be burnt with a
Cautery.

Of the Uvula. Some cut a new hard Egg, and strew it with Ginger, laying it to
the crown of the Head: others Oak leaves with Honey, others Wallnuts bruised
with Aqua vitae, others leaven, others Mugwort, others burnt Salt. See
Inflammation.

Of the pointed Grissle. It is depressed, not broken from a blow, a Cough,
humors, and so presses the stomach. Signs. The meat is swallowed with some
pain, nausearing: after meat they feel weight, their appetite abateth. There is
difficulty of breathing after labor Cachexia, Consumption, Jaundies. It is
cured by swath-bands; Let the sick take up a heavy thing with his Hands, it is
retained by Cupping glasses and Astringents. From hence may grow what the
Germans call, Dasz. Wehe thun; See Senn. of Dislocation.

TONGUE great, or a Tumor: sometime, it is without pain, from the plenty of
profitable nourishment flowing to it: sometimes, from Cacochymia, and then it
is either Oedema or Cancer, or Inflammation: and sometime from the French Pox,
from anointing with Quicksilver, from biting or touching of some venomous
creature.

The cure. If it be from plenty of blood or Inflammation, it must be pulled
back, and evacuated as in Phlegmone. In Galen, it was revealed to a
Countryman in his dream, to use a double cloth of linen wet in juice of
Lertice. If it be Oedema, or from the French Pox, or Poison, it is cured as
Oedema. If it be a cancerous swelling, it is incurable.

TERMS of women flowing. It is made the same way as bleeding at the nose, etc.
The signs are the same. It is often incurable. Diapedesis is most easy,
Anastomosis easy, corroding is hard to cure

The Cure We must by times make Revulsion, by opening a Vein, Cupping glasses
set to the Breasts. 5. Aph. 50. Choleric humors must be temperd, purged. We
must bind by inward and outward means. A certain old woman cured one that was
incurable, giving nine times one dram of powder of men's bones with red Wine. If
it be from ill humors, we must not stop suddenly. Guainerius gives for a
great experiment, one dram of the ashes of Goats dung. If such an irregular
Flux follow childbearing, women use this secret: they dry a Wal-nut, and
powder it, and give it at thrice in red Wine, or Martlemas flesh above a year
old, tosted and dried in an earthen dish. For. used this that follows with
profit, Take red Coral, Bole Armenick, Datestones, of each half a dram; give it
at twice in a rear Egg. Let all Topicals be astringent, Injections are good,
and the juice of Yarrow, Plantain, Bloodwort, etc. Pessaries, washing the Legs
with cold water, roots of Nigella held under the Tongue, Boodstone, roots of
Corn-Poppy, Tree moss, bound under the Armpits, Sanicle and Straw-berry leaves
bound under the Feet.

TERMS stopped. It proceeds either from the fault or want of blood, or from
straightness of the Passages. It differs from Conceiving, because women with
child for the most part keep their natural color, are merry; but in Terms
stopped it is contrary. Symptoms that befall great-bellyed women, at the
beginning to grow less, but not so here: in great bellyed women, the motion
and situation of the child is perceived the third Month; but not so here. If
it last fix Months, Hipp. says it cannot be cured. Straightness procceds
either from gross humors, or a swelling or an astringent Bath:

The Cure. They are not to be provoked in starved Cachectical people, who have
but little blood; They must be moved when they were wont to run before. In the
Inflammation or falling down of the Matrix, move not the Courses. If it come
from Obstruction, as it often does; and there be Plethora, open a Vein in the
Arm to take away Plethory; for if that remain, to cut a Vein in the Ankle will
do no good; for being that all blood is so drawn to the Womb, one hinders and
detaineth another. Contrary to this, Zach. hist. 76. l. 1. uses Cupping
glasses with Scarification, Ligatures, Chafings of the lower parts. Mercurialis
mightily commends Causticks below the Knees, which Sen. denies, because they
derive other humors from the Womb. Afterward we must purge, alter, and that
often. Lastly give things that move the Terms: as the powder of Ladies. Take
seeds of broad Cummin, Ammeos, Cinnamon, of each two ounces and half; Cumin
seed, three ounces; seeds of Fennel, Smallage, Carways, Nutmegs, sweet Calamus,
Galanga, of each one dram and half; Ginger, Mac^e, Cloves, of each one dram;
Saffron, three drams and half; make a powder.

Let the Topicals be Emollients, and such as move the Terms: as Baths, Oils,
Fumes, Evaporations, Clysters, Pessaries. For. in the stopping of the Terms
with Cachexia, first exhibited Pills of Hiera with Mugwort water; then a long
Purgative decoction, then a Purgative Potion, Treacle, one dram, with two
ounees of white wine; the first decoction was repeated, such a Potion: Take
Diacatholicon, six drams; Electuary Indum majus, three ounces; syrup of
Maidenhair and Mugwort, of each half an ounce: with three drams of the
decoction of Mugwort, Rennyroyal, Balm, for one Dose. A Bath of things fit for
the Matrix, after the Bath, he anointed the Thighs with an unguent. Take oil of
sweet Almonds, Lillies, Butter fresh, Marrow of Calves Legs, of each one ounce;
oil of bitter Almonds, Mucilage of Marsh-mallow seeds, Linseed, Fennygreck, of
each two drams; juice of Rue, Mugwort, of each half an ounce; a little Wax,
make an unguent. After give one dram of Treacle, with one ounce of the broth of
red Chichs. When the first quarter of the Moon was at hand, he opened the
Saphena: but when the Veins did not appear, he set Cupping glasses with
Scarification to the Legs, and so cured it. If these had not helped, the
Author would have proceeded to the decoction of the wood, mingling Dittany,
the force whereof Jacchinus often proved. Savin. Nigella seed, one dram, in the
decoction, or the meal of it bound in a woollen cloth and set under is
excellent. See Difficulty of Childbirth.

TERMS dropping. This proceeds either from thickness and sharpness of blood,
straightness of the Passages, and it causes pain: or from the weakness of the
retentive Faculty, and thinness of blood, and it is without pain. It is cured,
the sharpness being allayed, the Faculty strengthened, the straightness removed,
etc.

TENESMUS. The next cause is something provoking the expulsive Faculty, the
remote cause, is stone of the Bladder, sharp Medicaments, Worms, salt humors:
a Dysentary, an Ulcer of the Sphyncter, long Hickop is deadly, Dysentary.

The cure. The humor must be softened with Clysters, evacuated as the variety
of the humor requires; they must be injected in small quantities. The pain
must be assuaged by Topicals. Suppositories are profitable, also fumes; if from
an Ulcer, Dysentery, it must be cured by fumigations under.

The TREPAN has place only in three cases. 1. When the Bone presses the hard
Membrane. 2. When it pricketh. 3. If matter be gathered within the Skull; Never
apply it to the Bone wholly broken, but to the sound; yet as near as may well
be to the fracture. It must not be used, 1. In a Bone so broken, that for the
greatest part it is divided: for so it would be pressed into the Membrane. 2.
On the sutures, for then rather two or three small Trepanes, should be applied
on both sides the future. 3. On that Region of the Forehead which is near the
Ey-brow, by reason of the hollow between both tables. 4. To the lower parts of
the skull, lest the Brain fall out by the hole. 5. To Childrens forepart of the
Head; 6. To the Temples, but set it near by them. In the Winter and full Moon,
Trepaning is more dangerous; for the Brain swells. It must be done in three
days; yet Paraeus in Winter and Summer, used it after ten days. When it comes
to the second Table, the blood runs forth, but not always; for in some
places the Skull is thin.

TREMBLING. The cause is a preternatural moving Faculty burdened by the fault
of the animal spirits, or Nerves, or nervous fibras in the Muscle. If the
spirit, by reason of disorderly motion has not its influence from the Brain,
as in anger, joy, fears, frights; for from hence the vital spirit is variously
moved, and so the generation of animal spirits is wanting; a distemper cold and
moist of the Nerves, or from malignity, as trembling from Quicksilver,
Vermilion, in Goldsmiths, which For. cured with only Goats milk, and nervous
remedies, from Obstruction, wine.

The Cure. If it be from a want of the spirits, it is cured by Restoratives; if
from a humor with distemper, it is cured by Generals, Topicals. Chemists
commend the essence of Balm in cordial water. A Bath, wash the trembling parts
in water of Cinque-foil, or decoction of Juniper berries with Wine; let them
dry of themselves, or with water of infusion of Mugwort. A Lotion with their
own water. Sage beer, meat seasoned with Sage, flesh of Storks, wood Pigeons, a
Hares brain fried; Infuse Juniper berries all night in water, then let them
infuse in Aqua vitae eight days, swallow ten berries every day: the decoction
of Guaicum. Monav. ep. 240. after Generals, gives the extract of Calamus, he
foments the hands with a decoction of Wine with Sage and Aqua vitae.

VEINS swollen with melancnolick blood, are cured by Surgery; for above and
beneath the Vein it is bound, and when it is made naked of the skin, the Vein
is cut, and the blood being let out, it is cured. But since this cure is
difficult, and often times leaves malignant Ulcers, Hier. Fabric. cuts the vein
bound, not with great Incision, but by prickings that are small. Then he lays
on Medicaments of Bole armenick, Dragons blood, Mastick with Gum Traganth
steeped in Wine of Pomegranates or Verjuyce made like a Candle, and he lays
this long ways on the Vein, and upon the Medicament a reed made hollow, to
hold on the Medicament, for so the Vein consumes. If there be an Ulcer joined
with it, the Vein must be cut out.

VERTIGO is, when all things seem to turn round. Scotoma is when over and above
the sight is darkened. Why they than look down from on high, should be taken
with a Vertigo, the cause is natural, for that by looking on a thing that
breeds fear, the spirits are dissipated, and from terror the spirits are
drawn in again; whence follows a contrary Motion: the common sense and
imagination, are primarily hurt.

The Cause of Vertigo is the circulation of the spirits animal by a thin
vapor: Scotoma is from a thick. The antecedent cause sticks either in the
Brain, and there be signs of the Brain affected: or in the Liver, Spleen,
Hypochondres, and there be signs of them affected: or from some outward cause.

Prognostics. They that in a Vertigo see a green or purple color, incline to
the Epilepsy; they that see black, to the Apoplexy; they that see red, are
thought to be more subject to madness.

The Cure. Let the Patient alone in the fit, and if the cause ascend from the
lower part, Revulsion must be made by frictions, the Face must be sprinkled
with Wine; give Suppositories, Clysters, put sweet smells to the Nostrils, hot
or cold: rub the Nostrils with oil of Amber, etc. rub the Temples with Rosemary
water, the Forehead with wild Marjoram, anoint the Palate with Theriac. Senn.
allows also opening a Vein, but with caution. If an Apoplex be feared, for
preservation, is Carway seed soaked in Wine, and then dried, if daily half a
spoonful be long chewed about bedtime, and lastly be swallowed.

When the fit is over, open a Vein, as the Head Vein. It is cured as the
Headache by Generals, Topicals. Bearsear is commended, the water or extract of
Scorzonera; a dried silkworm is strewed on the Crown. Take dung of a male
Peacock for a Man, or a female for a woman, one dram; infuse it all night in
white wind, strain it through a linen cloth, give it for a Vertigo from a new
Moon till a full Moon. If it come from some other part by consent, the humor
prepared must be evacuated, the Vapor intercepted, revulsed, discussed; we
must strengthen.

VOMITING too much, is cured by Revulsives, Clysters, Oils, Frictions, and
principally by heating the extreme parts. Give Astringents before meat; put
Cupping glasses to the bottom of the stomach. Topicals, A crust of bread
infused in Mint water and Vinegar of Roses, sprinkled with Mastick powder,
baked opium.

An ULCER is the solution of continuity, from something that corrodeth, with
the taking away of some parts: they differ in form; one is circular, etc. in
subject, in cause.

Diagnosticks. The cause is known by the signs; when raw thin quitter runs
forth plentifully with pain, pricking, it is then beginning. In the increase,
the matter is better and more sparingly, etc. If the Rest diminish, it is the
declination.

Prognostics. White matter, or rather ash color, light and equal, is good,
See Aph. 45. 4. s. 6. Aph. 65. 67. 2. 21. s. 7.

The Cure. The humor must be evacuated by Generals, we must apply Digestives;
yet it is safest even at the beginning, to mingle Detergents with Digestives
unequally, as Turpentine, with juice of Smallage, yolks of Eggs, oil of Roses,
Saffron. The part affected must be observed as in Phlegmone. If the Ulcer be
scowred too much, it becomes dry: the flesh is consumed, the Lips grow red,
there is a sense of biting. If it become more dry, and there be a good color,
and neither quitter nor matter run forth of the Ulcer, we must use Sarcoticals.
The purer the Ulcer grows, so much the more mild must Detergents be. A scar
is made with Powders or Emplaisters that heal, but not in a moist form.

If there be, for example, a dry distemper, the Ulcer being so long let alone,
the dryness must be cured, most fitly with a fomentation of water and oil warm,
and by Emollients. If the distemper be with matter which is known by the
swelling, pain, and plenty of Excrements, before all, the matter must be
evacuated, the parts strengthened, the humor re^ulsed, intercepted, repulsed;
the best Repellers are Issues made in the opposite part. And without these often
times Ulcers cannot be cured: and old Ulcers cannot be closed, unless an Issue
be made in the opposite part. Lay Sarcoticks on the Mouth of the Ulcer; yet,
without biting, stronger then otherwise. The circumference must be washed with
Repellers, or some resolving Cataplasm laid on. The Medicaments must be often
times changed. Guido brought on the skin with a Plate of Lead.

If it be foul, the filth shows plentiful and clammy. If it be corrupt, and
that from too weak a Medicament, there is a stink, and the Ulcer appears
whitish. If it corrode* there is pricking pain, always increasing. It is cured
by Generals, Topicals detergent, as with spirit of Wine.

Fleshy excrescence in Ulcers, comes either from too much blood, or because
Sarcoticks are laid-on that dry not sufficiently. If the first, the flesh is
good; if the latter, loose and spongy. If the first, it is cured by fasting,
etc. The latter, with greater Dryers, Epuloticks and Corrosives without pain.
The green water is good, which Senn. oftimes commends: as, Take raw Alum,
Verdigrease, of each two* drams; boil them in eighteen ounces of Wine, till a
fourth part be consumed; strain it, then add Camphir, one dram; dissolve it in
spirit of Wine, one ounce; and add it to the former.

If the Ulcer be with a hard Circumference, and the hardners will not yield to
Emolients; the hard and wan flesh, is most fitly cut out to the quick flesh,
that scarifying may be made, and strong Detergents used.

If the Ulcer be with a Tumor, eating not only the Cucula, but also the flesh,
it is called an eating-Ulcer. It comes from a sharp humor, not so thin as in
Wildfire, nor so thick as in a Cancer. It is cured as an Ulcer with tumor and
distemper. That Ulcer, is very ill bound up three or four times a day, unless
it be* by reason of extreme pain.

Let there be an Ulcer within the Leg, alittle above, the Ankle, afflicting
with great pain, that is hollow, corrupt, joined with corruption of the Bone,
circular, with brawny swollen Lips, compassed with inflammation, and swollen
melancholy Veins. Suppose this be propounded to be cured, Generals first
premised, first of all you shall ease the pain, taking away the cause of it, by
Softners, Coolers, Narcoticks: so the pain with the Inflammation being
assuaged, wash away the rottenness. In the mean time, by the way you shall make
the Ulcer corner-ways, you shall cut off the brawny substance of it, you shall
correct the putrefaction, you shall make the Bones scale; the Ulcer being
cleansed, must be filled with flesh, and brought to cicatrise. Par. Querc.
commends the Sugar of Saturn to be miraculous. Vulnerary drinks.

An ULCER of the Eye, is known by sight, and if it be in the Cornea, there
preceedeth a white Push, a little Ulcer, the Cicatrix is made white; if it be
in the Adnata, it will be red. It is cured by Generals, Revulsives,
Intercipients, laid to the Temples, Anodyns, Detergents, as with Sugar, Honey,
Myrrh, Saffron, Frankincense; water of Strawberries, three parts; Sugar, one
part distilled, when they have been eight days in digestion in Balneo; Rue,
Horehound, Ey-bright water. Infusion of Sarcocolla, Aloes, etc. bound in a
linen clout, and pressed forth. Take Frankincense, Mastick, of each one
scruple, Myrrh, Aloes, Succotrine, of each half a dram; Tutty prepared, one
dram; Sarcocolla infused, half a dram; powder them, mingle them with the white
of an Egg, and juice of Quinces, make Troches, to be dissolved in Fennel water.
Give internal means to restore the sight: as, Take Conserve of Ey-bright, one
ounce and half; Betony, Rosemary, of each one ounce; roots of Elecampane,
candied, two drams; Fennel candied, half an ounce; extract of Rue seed, half a
scruple; the essence, extract or spirit of Valerian roots, half a scruple;
Siler mountain, one dram; Sage; Rue, Vervain, of each half a scruple: with
syrup of Betony or Staechados; make an Electuary, let it be taken at Bedtime.
Strew salt of the powder of Ey-bright on their meats. Montan. ep. 75. relates
that he saw one use it by the Nostrils, because the Ulcer was not well cured;
Vitriol in small quantity, dissolved in much Rose water, serves instead of all
Detergents. For. premising a Lenitive, purges with Fennel, Ey-bright, Senna
leaves, Pillulae Lucis to one dram. Opening a Vein, Cupping, Scarifying,
fomentation of Mallows, two handfuls; flowers of red Roses, one dram and half;
Quince seeds, one dram and half; cleansed Barley, one pugil; boil all in ten
ounces of fountain water: add water of Mallows, Roses, of each half an ounce;
soment it twice in a day, he dropped in the Collyrium* following, Take Troches
that are white, of Rhasis for the Eyes, without opium, two scruples; Rose water,
two ounces; mingle them, and drop it in; lay upon it a double, linen cloth wet
in the former fomentation: after that, in the fomentation was infused Fenugrec
seed, exactly washed, two drams and half; of Quinces, two drams in a Nodulus:
after that Ey-bright water, half an ounce was added to the Ey water: after
that, in the same Collirium, was put a little Sarcacolla, soaked in Breast milk;
then a little Frankincense, Saffron, with the Mucilage of Fenugree seed. At
first let the sick sleep on the opposite side, until the matter break forth in
the side affected. Venatius for an Ulcer of the Eye ill cured, was commanded to
forsake Padua.

An ULCER of the weeping flesh, namely an Aegylops. For. because of the danger
does not willingly undertake the cure of it. If it were not yet ulcerated,
after Generals, there is need of repelling means; after that, add Discussives,
as, rank nuts. If it be suppurated, open it in time, cleanse it. Verdigrease of
it self, is a secret. If it be with rottenness of the Bone, there is need of a
Canstick. Fab. cured them with Setons.

An ULCER of the Ear. Signs are, pain, burning, great pricking in the Ear,
matter. This sometimes is sent forth from the Brain inflamed, which is easily
known. Sometimes, as in children, from the impurity of the Brain, without an
Impostume; in the Veins of the Brain, and Passages of the Ears, matter is bred,
and there is no pain, and the matter once spent, is heaped up again.

The cure. By Generals, Topicals, Detergents, as juice of Betes, Horehound, oil
of bitter Almonds, juice of Onions, with Honey of Roses, or Mel Rosarum; the
side is anointed with unguent of Alabaster, juice of wake Robin, Briony; the
matter that comes forth must be put-by with wool, with Honey-water: afterward
with Wine, then with Oxymel. The Probe must be wrapped with Wool. The pain is
taken away with a piece of Frankincense infused in Milk till it be dissolved,
and dropped in by drops. If there be Plethory and the matter runs not yet out
of the Ulcer, pain urging, a Vein is fit to be opened. Galen for old Ulcers
ufeth scales of Iron powdered, beaten with Vinegar, and seven times dried, then
with Vinegar it is boiled to the thickness of Honey. The matter must be drawn
forth by a great Syringe, unless it come forth it self.

An ULCER of the Nostrils. If it be new, and stink not, it is easily cured; if
old and stinking, hardly; it is called Ozaena, which often times gives suspicion
of a Cancer; It is most difficult to cure. it has crusts.

The Cure. Generals premised, also the decoction of Guaicum and a vulnerary
drink. Let the Topicals be Astringents, and Discussives mingled. The Head must
be dried by all means. First of all, let the Crust be removed by a vapor of
warm water with Fat; Butrer washed in Rose water; the Crusts must be cast out
by sneezing. Afterward Verjuyce with Honey is good, juice of Hore-hound,
Calamint, juice of Pomegranates boiled in a brass vessel, Mirrh, Alum.
Rondel. cured Ozaenas, which neither French men nor Italians could cure, by the
fume of Candles made of red Wax lighted, received at the Nostrils through a
straight Tunnel. Celsus commends juice of Cresses with Alum. The juice of
Calamints, or Galens powder. Some commend this that follows:

Take red Roses, Myrtils, sweet Calamus, Angelica, Gentian, Mace, Cloves, of
each half a dram; Camphir, Ambergrease, of each four grains: Musk, six grains:
make a powder. If that fail, Salt Ammoniac with Vinegar.

An ULCER of the Stomach, is cured by Generals, as opening a Vein, Lenitives.
Vomit is mortal. With easy meats. Raw Honey is detergent, when you must glue
together, add Gum Traganth, with an Astringent decoction, without Acrimony. Let
the meat be moist, a decoction of Figs, Dates, Prunes, Raysins, milk, yolks of
Eggs, drink Hydromel, and a vulnerary Potion.

An ULCER of the Bladder, comes also by Cantharides. Yet Senn. though he had
applied them to all parts of the Body a hundred times, never observed it.

Signs are pain in the Privities, so often as the sick makes water, matter,
blood, a Tenesmus, difficulty of urine, Priapismus: The matter is more
tenacious and clammy then matter of the Reins.

It is cured by tempering the humors, by Coolers and Moisiners; then we must
scowre by Internals and injections; Principally the Troches of Gordonius are
profitable. See them. Conserve of Roses, Bole armenick. Milk: oglutinate.
Vulnerary drink.

ULCER of the Reins. The urine is made without impediment, matter is mixed with
the urine, it stinketh less. See Aph. 76, 77. 81. s. 4.

It is cured as an Ulcer of the Bladder. Whey; Make an Emulsion of the four
cold seeds with Milk; If the matter come forth sparingly, glutinate, use
vulnerary drink.

WEARINESS. One kind is, not natural or drying, which follows labor;
another, natural: this is either ulcerating, which makes a sense of pricking in
the circumference of the Body from a sharp vapor or humor, as from choleric
or black Choler, or extensive from Plethory, or any humor that is not sharp,
or from hot blood, which they that feel, complain that their parts are as it
were bruised or broken, and it arises from Plethory, and Cacochymia together,
or of leanness, when motion is difficult by reason that the flesh and fat of
the Muscles is consumed, after long diseases.

The Cure. When Weariness rises from the humors about the Muscles, and in
the circumference of the Body, they must be taken away; If from Cacochymia,
that must removed, by rest, sleep, spare diet, and that breeds good juice, and
by moderate drinking of Wine. In ulcerating weariness, Purging, in extensive
opening a Vein, in Phlegmonodes, both these are good: if it be from labor, it
is not only cured by rest, but by labor, but not-so-much.

WHEALES angry, or Pimples of sweat rising in the Neck, Breast, Arms, etc. they
proceed from choleric sweat exasperating the skin: of which, see Aph. 21. s. 3.

WHEALS rising in the night, that vex us in the night, and are of diverse
colors. It is never greater then a Bean, it exulcerateth, it is cured as the
cause is.

WORMS. A Lotion of bitter things kills Lice: a shirt stained with Saffron, and
worn a while; wonderfully, a washing with Lavender water. Barley bread and Paper
burnt, of each a like quantity, made up with Bores grease, takes away Cyrones.

WORMS are either round, or the Bots, or broad; these either Gourdfashion, or
less like to a Gourd. Signs of round worms are pain and great prickings, of
broad worms an obscure pain, other signs are common.

They are cured, by things that kill worms, as by Corallina to one dram in
powder: Tanfey seed, roots of Primrose, Wormwood, Hore-hound, Citron seeds,
Angelica, bitter Almonds. Powder of worms is suspected by Tabexnae Montanus.
Water of the decoction of Graffe, Hartshorn, shavings of Ivory, juice of
Lemmons, Plantain, Purssain, Endive, Sorrel. To children give grass water, one
ounce, with syrup of juice of Lemmons: or some grains of Salt are put into the
Mouth. Spirit of Vitriol, Elixar proprietatis; broad worms require stronger
Medicaments, as many Walnuts, chiefly roots of Fern of which powder, half a
dram may be given to an Infant; to those that are grown, one dram or two drams.
Treacle dissolved in juice of Lemmons, Hiera. Yet sweet things must be mingled
here, and Clysters that are sweet must be given to allure them downwards; being
killed cast them forth with Diaturpeth, with Rheubarb in rouls, Sebestens with
a decoction of syrup of Peach flowers, Aloes, Agarick. The Bots are cured by
suppositories. For anointed the Belly with this following, Take oil of Eggs,
Lillies, Oxgall, juice of Onions, fried with new Butter, of each two drams;
mingle them. He gave this following: Take Aloes, half a dram; red Coral or
Diatraganth frigid, ten grains, with Scabious water: make three Pills, lest the
Aloes should cause heat, let him sup upon it one spoonful of juice of Citrons.
He gave a child of three years old more then one scruple of burnt Hartshorn.
Those things that are applied outwardly, as Gall, etc. must not be laid to the
stomach. Heurn, used this following for children: Take syrup of Succory with
Rheubarb, two drams to half an ounce; Grass water, one ounce, for one Dose
every other day. For. cured a Boy that for one year was miserably afflicted,
with the decoction of Wormwood, and little Centory: to another he gave juice of
Pomegranates, one spoonful; oil of Olives, half a spoonful; mingle them. It is
a secret of the French Queens. The same gave what follows, for one Dose to a
great bellyed woman in a Fever: Take Hartshorn burnt, seeds of Zedoary,
Purssain, of each half a scruple: mingle them. For children, let Hartshorn
burnt be put into Raysins without stones. For the Bots the experiment of Aetius
is good, namely a Suppository made of old salt Bief, the fat being taken off.

WARTS. A Nail, a swelling of the Fundament, namely, when a wrinkle of the skin
grows hard. Thymus, namely a Wart with a narrow bottom, and a large
supersicies, of a color reddish, like Thyme flowers. A Fig wart, is a great
Thymus: a Crest from preposterous Venery. These are often times malignant.

The cause is thought to be a phlegmatic, melancholic humor. Platerus takes
it to be the moist nourishment of the skin, and the Cuticula. Warts are often
times contagious.

The Cure. By Medicaments, as Fallop commends the leaves, and juice of
Willows, Purstain stamped, being wet with its juice: also leaves and flowers of
Marigolds, Figwort, roots of Cuckoe pint, Sow-bread, fresh Celandine, Nigella
with urine. The liquor that runs from the flowers of Mullens set in the Sun in
a glass, of its own accord. Gum Succory, the juice running from Dandelyon,
stronger remedies are juice of Spurge. They are cut off, either by a Ligature,
or Cautery, or Iron. Schrekev. Take ashes of Walnut leaves burnt, Garlic and
Suer, mingle them: and when the Moon decreaseth, apply them. Others lay on Hens
dung, Garlic juice, of Snails, of the Oak wood in burning.

A WOUND, is unity dissolved in a soft, by some cutting thing, wherein nothing
is corroded by matter.

Prognostics. Made in the full Moon, also on the forepart of the Head is more
dangerous, because they abound with moisture, and the situation holds in the
matter. That wound that was ever cured cannot be said absolutely mortal; or
that which kills by Symptoms that are only sometimes present: Nor those which
are long a-curing, and at last degenerate into some other disease that is
mortal, as a wound of the Lungs into the Phtysick. Those are absolutely mortal
that kill within some hours or days, and can be cured by no Art; but those are
incurable, which cannot be cured, and yet the sick may hold out some years. The
spirits are suddenly suffocated, or dissipated. Wounds of the Marrow of the
Back are mortal. Senn. saw a Butcher who did not knock down his Oxen, but with
a little knife, where the Head is joined to the Spondils, he thrust it into the
marrow of the Back, successively. They are more easily cured in the Spring. For
wounds, also critical days must be observed: Some have been invaded on the 20.
day by Symptoms, and not before. A round wound is the worst. If a Fever grow
before the seventh day, it is from matter, and we need not fear it so much. If
after seven days, it is from corruption, and dangerous. A Fever from
Erysipelas is not so dangerous. Cold, Venery, anger, too much joy, fear, are
deadly; Pushes swelling by the Tongue are deadly, from a dropping of sharp
matter, through the hollow of the Palate upon the Tongue, and Convulsion of the
opposite part.

The Cure. 1. Take out all strange things. 2. Join the parts severed. 3. Let
them grow together. 4. Keep the strength of the part. 5. Take away the
Symptoms. First therefore, let the blood run away freely, shave away the hairs,
wash out with Wine all extraneous small things, clotted blood must be taken
out, but not all the first dressing, if there be fear of a Flux of blood. Take
out all pieces of Arms, unless there be fear of great pain or bleeding at hand
to hinder it; for so it is better to commit the whole business to nature for
some days. If there be no hopes that the sick will live, if the weapon be taken
forth, let not the Surgeon take it out, lest he have thereby the report of a
manslayer. For some, as in the wound of the Heart, Brain, the Weapon, being
let alone, live for one day, but so soon as it is drawn forth, they die. That a
thing that is extraneous may be drawn out, the sick must be left in the same
posture he was in when he received the wound. It is taken out with the Fingers,
or Bekes, with or without cutting, or making incision in the opposite part, it
is thrust out thereby. Fab. obs. 88. cent. 1. shows Instruments whereby
bullets are taken out without pain. If a stick fastened in the flesh cannot be
taken forth, it is taken out by Medicaments made of Pitch, Galbanum, Sagapenum,
Ammoniacum, Rosin of the Pine Tree, Dittany of Crete, round Birthwort: or the
whole business is left to Nature. Let him be seated softly, equally, so much as
can be by reason of pain, in the same posture we would have the part to abide.
Unless it be very great, use no stitching. Suture with glue is convenient: but
it will not stick fast until four hours. Senn. uses this Plaster. Take Bole
armenick, Mastick* Dragons blood, Frankincense, of each one cruple; Gum
Tacamahack, two drams; Make a plaster to glutinate. Caesar Magatus did not
stitch but made the plasters so long, and those many and thin, so that one
part sticking, be might lay the other also over the wound to the opposite part.
I would Chirurgions would use this stitching ordinarily. The first kind of
suture is called, Intersection. Tents carry the Medicaments, and so keep the
wound open. If there be a Nerve in the bottom of the wound, let not the Tent
touch it. Fab. obs. 76. Where the wound is straight, smaller Tents must not,
says he, be put in, because of their flexibility. He wraps up a silver thread
in a Tent, and anoints it with a digestive obs. 83. and 84. We must (says he)
mark well whether the wound be but one or doubled backward, so that being but
one outwardly, it may be two inwardly. Afterward if a fleshy part be hurt, the
quitter must be provoked by Digestives, or Suppuratives, as by oil of Roses,
yolks of Eggs, Turpentine, Rosin of the Firr-tree, Wheatmeal, Frankincense,
etc. If it be a dry part, by and by apply Sarcoticks, those being set aside;
and truly the Medicaments must be changed often, and always Sarcoticks must be
mingled with Suppuratives. When the matter appears good, we use Sarcoticks.
C. Magatus and Septalius, think the wound should seldom be uncovered, because
the ambient air corrupts the temper of the part, whence grows plenty of
putrefaction, and difficulty of cure. 2. That Tents are useless. The Flux will
be driven away, if the heat of the part, the pain, the heat of the humors and
thinness, be prevented by opening of a Vein. If there need purging, give it at
the first; when a Fever comes, it is not safe. Always let it be done by the
gentler Purgatives.

A WOUND of the Nerves. The Signs are pain, hurt action, matter, pricking is
most dangerous; for the straightness is hardly large enough for the
Medicaments to enter, or the filth to get out. If the Symptoms appear not
before the seventh day, there is good hope; let the Medicaments be temperatly
hot, but dry. Not only the part affected, but also the beginning of the Nerves,
and the whole part must be considered. If the wound be not large enough, it
must be enlarged. Let Topicals ease pain and make way for the quitter to come
forth. These things ease pain here, Oil of worms, Bean-meal, Barley, Lupius,
flowers of Camomil, etc. with a Ly or Oxymel. Fly from cold, moist, astringent
things. For the quitter, which Cneuff. dasz glidt wasser calls Synavia, are
convenient, oils of worms, Rue, Castoreum, of Turpentine of the Firr-tree,
Euphorbium, which the older it is, the weaker it is. Wherefore if a wound look
red, etc. lay on a milder medicament, oil of Hypericon, spirit of Wine, Gum,
Tacamahac, Caranna. Paraeus for such a wound in. Charles the 9. laid on a
Plaster of Basilicon, which should recard the healing of it: also he laid on
double linen cloths in the whole Arm, with an expulsive swath-band, even to
the shoulder. The second dressing, he poured into the wound oil of Turpentine
with Aqua vitae. And he laid on the whole Arm, the Plaster Diapa^ma, dissolved
in oil and Vinegar of Roses, with an expulsive swath-band. Take oil of
Turpentine, one ounce: Aquae vitae, one dram; a little Euphorbium may be added:
or, Take Venice Turpentine, one ounce; oil that is old, one ounce; Aqua vitae,
a little. After that, they cured the Tumor, the pain, with a Cataplasm. Take
Barley-meal, and of Orobus, of each two ounces; flowers of Camomil and Melilot,
of each two pugils; new Butter without salt, one ounce and half; Barbers Ly,
what may suffice. If the pain ceased not with these, either he cut off the
whole Nerve, or poured on it scalding oil, and dipping a linen cloth in it,
bound to the end of a Spatula, he would touch the bottom three or four times.

A WOUND of the Ligaments and the Joints. The Cure, is the same as for the
Nerves, only the Joints require more drying, and the Ligaments more then they.
Par. Balsom is profitable, if the Dose of the powder be augmented, we must
diligently take heed of the cold, the Air; lay on things actually hot. If the
wound be on the forepart of the shoulder, we must put a thick or double linen
clorh under the Arm-pit, and the Arm must be carried in a scarff. If the Wrist
or the hollow of the Finger be half bent, it must be sustained with props
diligently brought about it; for so they may always be drawn in. If it be the
Hip or Thigh Bone, we must not let it stir a Nails breadth from the hollow of
the Thigh, which is performed by Swathes, and lying down on the Backbone; when
the Scar is made, move it for fear of being crooked. In a wound of the Join,
the Leg must be placed out right. Signs of a Bone parting, are, 1. When more
matter comes forth. 2. When the Bone is exposed to the Air; for, that
parts. 3. If it will not unite again, and soster flesh is bred.

A WOUND made by bullets, is not venomous, nor always bruised. It is ill
scorched with oil of Elders. It is hardly cured, by reason of the contusion,
and circular Figure. A sign is a small eruption of blood from the wound: for
the Lips swell presently. First, if it be necessary and possible, the wound
must be enlarged. The ball must suddenly be taken out of the wound with an
Instrument, Fab. cent. 1. obs. 88. then we must suppurate, besides Generals, as
with oil of Whelps; but if the part be dry, we must take more Turpentine, and
less oil. If there be putrefaction, add Mercury praecipitat, or Aegyptiac, oil
of Linseed, Hempseed of Hypericon, of Eggs. Those Setons, whereby the wound is
cleansed, by drawing them here and there, are not profitable, since the same
thing may be done by Pensils. At the beginning, let it be bound but once a day:
when the matter begins to run, twice a day: also thrice a day; and
afterward but twice: then again but once. The matter in these wounds come
forth slowly. Vulnerary drinks, To take forth the Splinters, this that follows
has been long approved, Take roots of Orris of Florence opopanac, Cappars, of
each two drams; round Birthwort, Manna, Frankincense, of each one dram, with
Honey of Roses and Turpentine, of each two ounces; make it up. A certain Man
cured these desperate wounds with a suppurative made of melted Lard, the yolk
of an Egg, Turpentine, and a little Saffron. After suppuration use detergents.

A WOUND of the Eye. First lay on a Repulsive, all things warm, to the Temples.
Narcoticks are, Lungs of a Weather and the Caul boyld in Milk, and laid on
hot. Woman's Milk, the suckling being a daughter. Turtles blood, or of Pigeons
or Hens, a Vein being opened under their wings. If these profit not, we must
come to stronger Remedies. Detergents for the Eyes are, Galls of a Thorn-back,
Hare, Partridge, in waters of Ey-bright, Fennel, Sugar Candy, Saffron. This
that follows is sarcotical. Take the Mucilage of the Gums of Olibanum,
Arabicum, Tragacanthum and Sarcocolla, drawn with Barley water, of each two
drams; Aloes thrice washed in Rose water, one dram; Ceruss burnt and washed,
Tutty prepared, of each half a dram; make a Collirium. A scar is made with
Ey-bright water, Sugar, and Tutty prepared. If the Flux cannot be stopped, use
the Seton. To open a Vein is most profitable at the beginning.

A WOUND of the Tongue endures no stitching; but make Lohocks, and give syrup
of dry Roses, Honey of Roses strained, etc. or a Gargarism. For. Take a raw
yolk of an Egg, boil it a little that it may harden a little: add one ounce of
syrup of dry Roses make an ointment; afterward, Take waters of Plantain,
Honey-Suckles, of each four ounces; syrup of dry Roses, infusion of Roses, of
each one ounce and half; make a Lotion for the Mouth, let him hold in his mouth
sugar of Roses, syrup of Quinces. Paraeus adds a Suture, whilst the Assistant
holds the Tongue in a soft cloth of linen.

A WOUND of the Ear, will not endure heavy oily Cataplasms, but dry
glutinatives: If suture must be made, let not the Needle touch the grisle; for
it will Gangrene.

A WOUND of the Thorax; If it has penetrated into the Cavity, the breath will
come forth at the wound, if you stop the Mouth and Nostrils; the sick can
scarce take his breath: it is tried by a Probe. Let the sick be set in the same
posture he was when he received the wound. That blood is fallen into the Cavity
of the Thorax, it is known, if there be a Fever, if the weight of the
Diaphragma, and difficulty of breathing be troublesome. If blood be sent forth.
If nothing have run into the hollow of the Chest, we must make all haste to
consolidate for fear of a Fistula. If blood stick in the Thorax, keep the wound
long open by Tents. Therefore when you undertake to cure such a wound, you
shall not shut it up the first dressing* but must hold it open two or three
days, when then you observe that the sick has no pain, weight, Fever, nor to
spit blood, take out the Tent and heal it up so fast as you can. If there be a
Fever, weight, etc. besides Generals stop the blood by inward and outward
means, also by opening a Vein. The Tents, and all Topicalls must not be too
long, lest they offend the Lungs. Also let them be fastened to the double cloths
with a Thread, lest they fall into the Chest; Let them have a pretty thick
head, let the sickly on the part affected. Blood is cleansed out of the Chest,
by an Jnjection of Paraus made of the decocoction of Barley six ounces; Honey
of Roses two ounces; which the sick, his body reclining, his wind coming forth
at the wound, will return back in greater quantity then it was injected: let
this be done so long till the clots of blood be voided. Cast in nothing that is
bitter. Senn. draws it out by a great Syringe. If a wound being received, the
blood stay in the Chest, and comes not forth of the wound, let the sick hold
I grain of Musk under his Tongue: for so it will run forth: A pipe of Gold,
Silver, or Lead may be put into it, that has many holes through it, fenced
with covering, or bound back with thongs, fitted with a great Sponge, wet in
Wine and Aquavitae, wrung out, set to the Orifice, that the filth may run first
through that. To dissolve the clotted blood, A mixture of Honey may be
injected, which shall consist of one part Honey, two parts water, boiled to
thirds, dissolved in Egrimony water, etc. Let internal expectorating means be
given warm.

A WOUND of the Lungs. Signs, besides those before, is a casting forth of
frothy blood at the mouth, with a Cough; red frothing blood running forth of the
breast without pain: The Veins of the neck swell, but when the flesh of the
Lungs is wounded, there is no Cough, for the blood falls on the Diaphragma, and
presses it; but sometimes there is cold, sometimes heat, and frequent change of
the countenance. A vein must be opened for fear of inflammation, unless blood
has run out very much: If the wound be narrow, it must be enlarged, that the
matter may come forth. Apply a repelling Astringent, some things may be
injected that are liquid. Senn. strews in a Powder, the Lungs being puffed up
by drawing in of breaths; Vulnerary drinks. Let the sick use Emplastick meats.
Let him avoid all Motion. It may be cured, if the wound be not too great, if
there be no Inflammation, nor Cough. It is scoured by Lohocks of Milk, with a
little Honey, chiefly with Sugar of Roses, etc.

L. D.

FINIS.

