GREAT BRITAINS MISERY; WITH The Causes and Cure.

DESCRIBED First, as it is from the Justice of God the Author, who is now in
controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land for Sin: Especially for Eight
capital Crimes; all which are aggravated by sundry Circumstances. Secondly,
the Injustice and Malice of the Instruments of this Misery, Satan and his
Agents: Their main aim, and particular ends, moving them thereunto.

Vindicating, Plainly and Fully, (By way of Answer to several Objections) The
Lawfulness and Necessity of Raising Arms by the Parliament, and Kingdom; For
the Defense of the King, Kingdom, Religion, Laws, and Known Rights of the
Subject: Against that Viperous generation of Papists, Atheists, Delinquents,
and Licentious men, who have at once invaded all.

Showing The means how to appease Gods flaming wrath, and suppress these
insolent disturbers of Britains Peace, and destroyers of three (late
flourishing) Kingdoms. Also motives to use the Means and Encouragement, to
believe confidently, and hope patiently, for a seasonable deliverance from our
present calamities, with several Reasons or Grounds of assured success, and
glorious Sunshine of Peace and Truth.

Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts. etc. Ier. 30. 17. I will restore health unto thee, I will heal thy
wounds, says the Lord, etc. Pro. 25 5. Take away the wicked from before the
King, and his throne shall be established, etc By G. S. Gent.

Imprimatur Ja. Cranford.

LONDON Printed for Laurence Chapman, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Holborn, at Chancery Lane end. 1643.

(...) hands of the builders: Thus it is now in the building of Gods Temple,
Reformation of Religion, and of Laws.

For my self, I freely offer my self a labourer to help forward the building,
willing to bear some burden to the work; my will is good, my ability is small;
but I know God will accept a willing mind, and expects no more in performance
then he has given strength: If with an honest heart I bring but an handful of
Goats hair to the building of Gods Talernacle; or with the poor widow cast in
my mite into Gods Treasury, it shall be accepted with God. Upon which assurance
I have brought some rough materials (not fit to face the Work, as those Pieces
wrought by men of art and skill, but may serve) to strengthen the fabric in
some places where they best fit.

My end is Gods glory; my endeavor to satisfy thee (if it be possible) to
undeceive the ignorant, who are seduced, and to establish the doubtful; that
every one to his power may help forward Gods work, and cure their own misery.

Thy misery thou feel, if thou have either estate or sense. The Causes are
laid down in the following Discourse, and that truly, without envy or
flattery; as also the Cure is prescribed: which if thou read, and read all; thy
little labor in reading shall sufficiently satisfy my much more labor in
writing, for it is done for thee.

It is my Duty to admonish my Brother, and will be my Brothers greater Iev. 19.
17. Jam. 5. 20.
Misery if he refuse admonition; My warrant is from Gods Word, and Gods Word is
also thy precept to hear and avoid sin: It is true (and I confess it) I am one
of the weakest and most unworthy of all Gods Laborers, but I am bound to do
what I am able. Now God requires it of all who expect any inheritance with Gods
people: My resolution is like that of Esther (in the like case) If I perish, I
perish: I speak but truth, and that for God, the King, Est 4. 16.
his kingdoms, and posterities, and for the persecuted people and church of
God, which I am sure is no Treason, but Duty. I do it with upright Conscience
to God, and Loyalty to the King; and if I perish in Gods Work, I shall be
freed from perishing. I pass not for the judgment of man's Day, God is the
righteous Judge of me, and of him who judges me; If thou accept my endeavor,
and through Gods blessing it be any advantage to thee, lend us thy Prayers (who
shall ever pray for thee) and give the glory to God.

Thine G. S.

Great Britains Misery: WITH The Causes and Cure.
IF it be misery to lie under the afflicting hand of the Almighty God, when his
Wrath is kindled against a people, to consume and to destroy; Then is Great-
Britain miserable, now lying under that revenging hand, miserably afflicted, by
a seditious, cruel, and unnatural War, under which the whole land bleedeth,
and the inhabitants are daily cut off and consumed: Which misery, although all
men see and feel, yet few of all, are truly sensible of their misery, and that
is the greatest of miseries. It is true, the inhabitants of England and
Ireland, see the bloody distractions of the Kingdoms, and seel the P^sse of
their Estates, Liberty, and Trading; Their persons injured, their moneys
exhausted, houses Plundered, Towns, Corn, and Barns burnt; Their goods and
Cattle taken from them by violence; Their friends, kindred, neighbors and
servants slain by the sword, etc. But this is not all. The misery of Great
Britain is more; as will clearly appear when we consider the causes of it, the
ends aimed at, and neglect of the remedy to cure it.

He that knows not his Disease, seeks not for Cure; And Diseases are best known
by their Causes, being known and removed, the Cure is not difficult.

The efficient and first cause of all misery is God: And the want of serious
God only is the cause of all misery.
and due confideration of this, That Gods hand is in every affliction, augments
the Misery, and hinders the Cure. This very thing is complained of by the
Prophet; The people (says he) turns not to him that smites them, nor do
they seek the Isa 9 13.
Lord of bests. But such stupidity has possessed the most of the inhabitants
of Great Britain, in this their miserable calamity; that although they feel the
stroke, they consider not whence it comes, nor why it is: either as it is from
God, or as it is from men: We see the rod that (...) not the hand that holds
it: we (...) a^ the sma^^, as a (...); and like C^i^, complain of the
punishment: But we seek not God that us. We complain of secondary causes, and
cry out of other men's faults; but no man says of himself, What have I done.
Jer. 8. 6.


Some complain of the diversity of opinions in matters of Religion, the many
Sects and Schisines, not suppressed, but rather allowed; to the great
disturbance of the nation, overthrow of Order and Government, and cause of all
these evils and distractions in the Kingdoms.

Some cond^mn the city of London, and say, The tumultuous multitudes that daily
flockt to Westminster with importunate requests, were the cause of all; they
made the King leave London and flee to York, and to get first a guard for the
safety of his person, a^t^r, an army to defend himself and others.

Others say, The Parliament was too strict, and stood upon too high terms with
the King, raised neealesse Jealousies between His Majesty and His people,
only upon suppositions; and possessed themselves of his Castles, Towns, Navy,
etc. All his own proper and just rights; but they that ple^d this, we know, put
fair gl^ss^s upon corrupted Texts.

The rest complain of Evil Counsel'ours about the King, Bishops, and corrupt
Clergy, that had sucked poison from Rome, and were engaged by vow to set up
Popery in England; and therefore, they drew away the King from London; and from
His Parliament, and resolved to join His Majesty and the Queen i^ one
Religion, as they are one body; and to that end they incens^d His Majesty
against His Parliament, first some, then more; and persuaded him, because they
could not change Religion, except the Laws were in their own handling; and that
was not ever likely to be, so long as Parliaments were of force, therefore the
Parliament must be first broken; which they are now doing (...) Armies, one of
Papists at York; another at Oxford, of Papists and Atheists or between both;
and when that is done, the other will not bel^ng in effecting.

Thus several men of several opinions, complain of several things, as causes
of Britains misery; (and not without cause) But God the cause of these, and all
other causes, is not considered of; When indeed none of all those causes, nor
Men, nor accidents no cause of m^sery without God. Isa 45 7.
all these, if all put together, could affli^t or trouble us, if God did not
affli^ct us by them. It is God that does all things; I form the Light, and
creats Darkness, I make Peace and create evil, I the Lord do all things: If
the counsel of the wise Councellers do become brutish, and the Princes of Zoan
become souls: or if the Princes of Noph are deceived, and have seduced Egypt,
it is the Lord that has done it: He has mingled a pe^verse Spirit in the
midit thereof. All secondary Isa 19 14.
causes are directed by God, and cannot of themselves do anything at all,
either to Misery or Happiness; whether to a Kingdom or to a private man: God
leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools (says Job) Job
12 17.
he is the cause of all, whether of Misery or Happiness: God stirred up Hadad
1 Kings 11. 14, 23. Amos 3 6.
and Rezon to be adversaries to Solomon, who did much misc^i^f in Israel; Shall
there be evil in the City, and the Lord ^at^ not done it: God is the Author
of all the evil of punishment, (not of the evil of sin) he appoints every
afflection, wh^t it shall be, when it shall be, upon whom it shall be, how
much, and how long it shall be.

first, What it shall be: Whether Sword, Pestilence, or Famine; Thus says God
appoints what it shall be Jer. 15 2. Deuteronomy. 18 61. He appoints the time when,
Job 7. 1. Eccles. 3. 1. Upon whom, Deuteronomy. 29. 21. Fzek 96. How much it shall be.
Job 1 12. and 2. 6. God appoints how long every affliction shall last. Rev. 2.
10. Rev 11 11. Psa 129 2, 3.
the Lord, Such as are for death to death, such as are for the sword to the
sword, such as are for famine to the famine, etc. 2. He appoints the time
when it shall be; There is an appointed time to man upon earth (says Job.) God
has set a time to every purpose (says Solomon.) 3. He appoints upon whom it
shall be, as well every particular man, as a nation or kingdom; The Lord does
separate every particular man to ^vil, he appoints who he shall be, and he
appoints every particular man that is spared, in the time of a general
calamity. 4. He appoints how much the punishment or affl^ction shall be; When
Satan had leave from God to afflict Job (for before he had leave he could not
do any thing at all) he was limited how much he must afflict him; first, he
might afflict him in nothing but in his Cattle, Goods, and Children, not touch
his body: After, he had Commi^sion to afflict his Body, but not to touch his
Life. 5. He appoints how long the affl^ction shall last; If Satan, or wicked
men, have Commission to put any of Gods people into prison, or to try them by
any other affliction, the time is set; The devil shall cast some of you into
prison, and you shall have tribulation ten days: Yea, if they have power to
bring them to the brink of death, it shall be but for two days and a half.
David complained, That the plowers plowed upon his back, and made long their
surrows: but when the time set was expired, the Lord cut in sunder their cords,
and then they could plow no further; when the traces by which the horses draw
be cut, the plow must needs stand still. Balaam cannot curse Israel, though
Balack would give him his house full of silver and Number. 24 13. Genesis 27 33.
gold, except G^d give him leave. Holy Is^ack, cannot bless Esau, his eldest
son, if God will not have him blessed: Nor can Luban nor Esau hurt Jacob, Genesis
31. 44. Pro. 16 1. Pro. 16 33.
if God will f^rbid them, nor speak ought but good unto him; The preparation of
the heart is in man, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. The devil
may plot, and wicked men may purpose, but God despises their words and
actions. Pbaraoh may pursue the Is^aelites with a mighty host; but he cannot
Exodus 14. 3.
hur^ one of them, when his Commission is out: nor can he save himself from
Gods hand. So long as God would have the Israelites afflicted, every taskmaster
in Egypt, could make their lives mis^rable: but when the time is come that God
will have the affliction cease, Pbaraoh and all his power cannot continue Exodus
21. 7.
it one day; not so much as a Dog in all Egypt can move his tongue at man or
beast.

And as no affliction can come to Gods people without God, so Gods people Good
men cannot afflict the wicked without God. Number. 14. 40.
cannot afflict their afflicters, till God appoint the time and means. If the
Israelites will of their own heads (without warrant from God) go up to sight
against the Ammonites, they cannot prevail. If Abab will needs go to battle,
(though against the enemies of God) without Commission from God, he shall not
prosper: although he disguise himself, and arm himself completely, God can
direct an arrow out of a bow, that shall smite him between the joints of 1
Kings 22 (...).
his harness: Misery (says holy Job) comes not forth of the dust, not does
trouble Job 5. 6.
^^^ing out of the ground; That is, It is not from below, but from above; there
is no place for chance or fortune or can the miscarriages of actions and things
beget misery: but as God uses such means to effect his own will. There can be
no Peace, when God calls for War; nor shall there be any War when God calls
for Peace. When he gives quietness, who can make trouble; and when he hides
Job 43. 29.
his face, who can behold him: whether it be done against a nation or against a
man only. War and Peace are at Gods beck, so is all other calamities; If he
call for Pestilence or Famine, in a Kingdom, City, or Family; it shall come,
and cannot be hindered. He has now called for War upon the inhabitants of Isa
25 19.
Great Britain and has begun to bring evil upon the Kingdoms and Cities tha^
are called by his Name; and who but he can call the Sword back from us: If God
wound, who can make whole; when he troubles a nation, who can give quietness;
if he have purposed to destroy us, the whole world cannot deliver us out of his
hand. Every War is in its own nature destructive; but a sedicious unnatural
War, such as God has now called for upon us is most miserable and most
destructive, one of the forest of all Gods Judgments, and yet may prove more
miserable, in respect of the effects; if God should (as we have just cause to
fear) call for Famine, and for Pestilence; both which are the usual companions
of such a War: So it was in Jerusalem, as their seditious War increased Famine
and Pestilence, the companions of Civill-War. Ios J^ws wars, 1^. c 11. Ios Jews
wars, l. 7 c 8. Eusebius. Ecclesiast. hist. l. 7 c. 21.
so the Famine raged, as a double fire it waxed hot, that (as Josephus reports)
the rich by stealth, exchanged all their wealth for a measure of wheat; the
poor all they had for a measure of barley: The Seditious, Robbed, Racked, and
killed those that had any food, and hid it from them; the mothers snatched the
meat from the Infants mou^hes, yea, did slay and eat their own children. And
Eusebius relates the misery of Civill-Wars in Alexandria, accompanied by the
Plague of Pestilence; so miserable that all houses were annoyed by the dead
bodies, no house free, raging and infecting one another: And thus it was in
Germany, by their late, and still continued War. Yet this does not always fall
out, because sometimes God forbids these two latter Plagues to enter, when his
hand is seen and acknowledged in the first, and that he find the hearts of men
to se^k out the true remedy of cure; for God brings not the first, but when he
is provoked, nor will call for the latter, if his anger be appeased by removing
the causes: For God opens the ear to Discipline, and commands to return
from iniquity; and the^ who can say it shall be, when the Lord commands it
not; Job 36. 10. Lam 3. 37. Job 12. 23.
He increases the nations, and destroys them; he enlarges the nations, and
straitneth them again. The mightiest Monarchs, Kingdoms, and Cities, have their
Ebbs and Flows, and their ^e^iods too. God has appointed their times of
change, and of ruin. Ninevie once at the Preaching of Jonah was spared; but
Ninevie whose walls were in compass 60 miles, in height 100 foot, the breadth
able to receive three carts, one meeting the other, having 150 Towers of great
height and strength yet was destroyed by the Caldees: And that famous City of
Jerusalem, whose walls was trebble, and bulwarks invincible, was made an heap
of stones: And the Kingdoms of Judea destroyed by the Romans. Proud
Nebuchadnezzar, when he had felt the all disposing hand of God, confessed That
God does all things what soever he will, in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants Dan 4 35
of the earth; n^ne can st^y his hand, or say to him, What do thou. Thus
much of the efficien^ Cause.

In the next place, we are to consider of the meritorious cause of all misery,
The meritorious cause is sin. Romans 6. 23.
and of the misery of Great Britain at this day: The meritorious cause is sin;
The wages of sin is death: There was no misery, no affliction, no sorrow, till
there was sin: Where sin entered, it made way to misery; by Adams sin, all men
became sinful; and by sin all men became obnoxious to all misery; Sin is no
creature, God made it not; nor is God the author of sin, nor of any evil,
except the evil of punishment, which is the reward of sin; nor is God delighted
to punish, or make his creatures miserable: In the midst of Judgments Psalm.
73. 38. Lam. 3. 23.
God remembers Mercy; He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men; but is afflicted in all their afflictions: But God, who is essentially,
Isa. 63. 9.
and eternally just, renders punishment, as the wages and due reward for sin:
All sorrow, sickness, pains, pestilence, famine, war, etc. are the effects,
and rewards of sin: Sin makes a separation between God and a sinner; Isa. 59.
2. Psalm 66 13.
it causes God to turn away his face from him: that he will not hear his
prayers, though he make many prayers? yea, the prayers of such a man (as Isa 1.
15. Pro. 28. 9.
allows himself to live in sin) is abomination to God: Sin is that only thing
that God hates; and why he is angry with his creatures: Sin cast the Angels
down from heaven to hell; and Adam out of Paradise: For sin the old world was
destroyed by water; Sodom and Gomorrah by fire: The earth opened, and
swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for sin: And for sin Herod was Number. 16
32.
eaten with Worms. In a word; By sin we war against God; and for sin God makes
war against us: Sin sets open a wide flood-gate for all judgments, to enter,
and break in upon kingdoms, and people. Particular sins, let in particular
judgments: National sins, national judgments.

Now, if any ask, What is sin? The Apostle gives the answer: Sin is the 1 John
3. 4. The description of sin, what it is.
transgression of the Law of God: Whosoever leaves undone any thing that the
Law of God commands, or does any thing that the Law forbids; he sins
(the sum of this Law is contained in the Decalogue, or, Ten Commandments)
Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the Gal 3 10.
Book of the Law, to do them. This curse comprehends all misery, in this
life, and in the life to come; though but once committed. The Angels sinned but
once, and that but in thought, and were delivered to chains of darkness, to be
2 Pet. 2 4. Genesis 3 13. Levit. 10. 1, 2.
reserved unto further judgment. Adam for our sin was punished, in his own
person, and in all his posterity: Nadab and Abiram consumed, for once offering
strange fire; and the sword never departed from David's house, for one 2 Samuel 12
10.
act of Adultery, and Murder. Now if any one sin, but once committed, deserve
the whole wrath of God; how much more when often itterated. But there are some
sins that do provoke more wrath then others do; whether against kingdoms, or
particular men.

Touching those sins that most provoke God to wrath, and hasten judgments:
Among many, I will name eight; all which have long, and do still Eight sins
that hasten Judgments upon England.
rage in this Kingdom. Idolatry. Prophening the Lords Day. Pride. Oppression.
Murder. Drunkenness. Whoredom. Lukewarmnesse in Religion.

First, for Idolatry: This is a grievous sin, immediately against the person
The first is Idolary. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
of God: If a man sin against God, who shall entreat for him? This sin is
committed, either when we worship a false God; or the true God, in a false
manner: and is a denying of God to be God: Sets up something created, in the
room of the Creator; which is the greatest dishonor that can be to God,
(being committed by any that have ever known God) and God is most tender, Isa
42 8.
and jealous of his honor: he will not give his glory to any other; but will
surely make that man, or that nation miserable, that thus dishonor him; He
commanded his people Israel; If any man or woman did worship any Deuteronomy. 17 3 5.
other God, he should be stoned to death; if a whole city, it was to be
destroyed: And when the two Tribes and half beyond Jordan, erected an Altar,
Deu 13 12, 15
(supposed by the other nine Tribes and half to be for Idolatry) they all with
Josh. 22.
one consent took arms, to go against them: but being assured (by enquiry) that
no such thing was intended, they desisted. But when all Israel fell to Idelatry
(for it is a sin to which nature is very prone) and began to choose new Gods:
(that is, to mingle with the pure worship of God, the superstitious Ceremonies
of the heathens) presently war was in their gates, and God Judge 5. 8 Judge. 2. 14
gave them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them; and into the hands of
their enemies. See the same sin in Solomon; and the punishment of it in his 1
Kings 11 11. 1 Kings 12 25. 16. 2 Chronicles.: 4 23 24. Ant. l. 9 c 2. 2 King 21 18.
son Rehoboam: Also in King Joash, for this sin, God gave him into the hands of
the King of Assyria, by a sinall and weak army. So Joram, who had married with
Ahabs daughter, who drew him, as Josephm relates, to execute diverse mischiefs;
and amongst the rest, to adore strange gods: God punished him, by the revolting
of the Idumaans; and smote him with a grievous disease, of which he died; and
afterward was not suffered to be lamented, nor buried in the sepulcher of the
Kings. The examples of Gods high displeasure against this sin are many, both in
Sacred and humane writings.

Secondly, The profaning of the Lords day. This is also a sin, immediately The
second is Sabbath breaking. l sa. 58. 13. Lev 24 11. Jer. 17 25. Verse. 27.
against God: and is committed, either by the neglect of Spiritual Worship; or
by doing any bodily works of our callings: Also by Sports, Pastimes. idle
words, or vain thoughts, on that day. The man that gathered sticks, was by Gods
command, stoned to death. Great blessings are promised to the keeping of that
Day holy: And great Judgments threatened, if it be by any means profaned. God
threatens that he would kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, that should
not be quenched. And for this sin, in the reign of Zedekia^, ^ Chro. 36. 21.
Jerusalem was destroyed: and the people carried captive into Babylon, till the
land, for the space of threescore and ten years, lay waste, to keep her
Subbaths (for so long they were in captivity) of which sin and punishment, good
Nehemiah puts the people in mind, after their return, when they began again to
profane the Sabbath day; saying, Did not our fathers thus? And, Did not our
Neh. 13 18.
God therefore bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city?

Thirdly, Pride. This was one of the sins of wicked Sodom, that cried to
heaven for judgment; It is a sin very hateful to God and not pleasing to men.
The third is pride
In other sins men agree together in the sin, but one proud man hates another
that is as proud as he: This sin ingageth God in war against men: God resists
the proud: The Lord threatens that he will destroy the house of the Jan. 6. 4.
P. o. 15 26.
proud: Proud men are great enemies to a State. If a people their affliction
pray unto God, and are not (...); it is because of the pride of evil men: Job
35. 12.
God will mar the pride of Judeh, and the great pride of Jerusalem: The
prophet tells us, That because the daughters of Zion were haughty, Walked With
outstretched necks, Jer 13. 9.
and wanton eyes, mincing as they go, etc. The Lord will smite Isa. 3 16, 25.
them; and the men shall fall by the sword, and in the war. The pride of the
women, shall be punished by the death of their husbands: Israel for her Pride
Hos 6. 5. 2 Chro. 32. 25.
shall fall, and Judah shall fall with her: And because Hezekiahs heart was
lift up with pride, therefore there was wrath upon Judah and Jerusalem.

Fourthly, Oppression. This is one of the crying sins that hasteneth Judgment,
against a nation, or private men: Ye shall not appresse one another, but thou
The fourth sin is Oppression. Levit 25. 27.
shall fear thy God. This fear of God and Oppression, are contraries: Where the
fear of God is, there is no oppression; and where dppression is, there is no
fear of God: These cannot dwell together in one heart, nor in one kingdom; This
is a sin contrary to the nature of God, who is Mercy it self: Therefore he
hears the cry of Laborers, servants, and strangers, when their hire is kept
back, and it enters into the ears of the Lord: If the cry of the less be so
displeasing, Deur 24 15. Jam. 54.
much more of the greater: When the whole kingdom cries, as the cry of the
Israelites in Egypt: A people oppressed by authority, cries loud. Exodus 2 23.
This was in the days of Solomon, as well as Idolatry; and was as sevearly
punished in his son Rehoboam: This is a sin as well against the Gospel as the
Law; condemned by both: The Law commands to show mercy and compassion; Oppress
none; But says the Prophet, They (the Kings, Princes, and People) Zech. 79,
10, 11.
hearkened not, they stopped their ears, that they should not hear, (this
command) but made their hearts as an Ademant stone, etc. Therefore came great
wrath, from the Lord of hosts, and afterward when misery was an them, they
cried, but God would not bear, because they would not hear, when the Prophet of
God cried to them in his Name; but they were scattered with a whirlwinde among
all nations. The Scripture sets forth oppressors, by the names and nature of
cruel beasts, Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Dogs, Kine of Bashan, etc. And the Prophet
Amos tells them, That the Lordhath sworn by his Ames 2. 4.
holiness, that he will take them away with hooks, and their posterity with
(...) as such devouring beasts and fishes are taken, that bite and devour one
another; The stronger devour the weaker, and greater eat up the lesser: So the
Prophet J^remiah complained, That among the people, there were wicked
appressing Jer. 5 26.
men; who set traps to catch men: Deceit was in their houses; by it they became
great, and were waxen rich; Therefore the Lord will be avenged on such Verse.
28. 29.
a nation as this.

Fifthly, Murder. This is another crying sin: And this is committed, either
The fifth sin Murder.
by shedding innocent blood, or by withholding judgment from the shedders of
blood. The blood that is shed cries loud against both these, and ascends into
the ears of God. It is a sin against nature, forbidden long before the Law was
given by Moses; and it was punished in the first age of the world: The Genesis 9.
5. 6.
voice of Abels blood cried upto God from the earth; It is expressly commanded,
Gen 4 11.
That the blood shedder shall be delivered to the hands of the avenger of blood;
the reason is given in Verse 10. That the guilt of innocnet blood lie not upon
Deuteronomy. 19. 12.
the Land. If blood lie upon a nation, it leaves a stain that cannot be put
out, except Judgment be executed. The guilt of blood may die long upon a
nation, till men seem to forget it, but the Lord will not let it escape
punishment: If the Magistrates of the Nation do not punish it, God will punish
the Magistrate and the Nation too. Saul slew diverse of the Gibeonites
causlesly, contrary to Josh 9. 15.
the Covenant and Oath which Joshua and the Princes of Israel made with them.
And long after, in the days of David, God sent a famine in the Land (...) Sam.
21. 1.
three years, for that sin: Till David executed Justice upon the sons of Saul,
the Gibeonites were but slaves to Saul and all Israel; Yet see Gods Justice,
Saul's sons (though of the Royal blood) they must die for it: God is no
respecter of persons: Where Judgment is not duly executed by man, God will do
it with his own hand some other way, on whomsoever are guilty. Now if Great
Britain be guilty of such blood, (as surely it is) then no marvel that God
has whet his glittering sword against us, and made his arrows drunk with Deuteronomy.
32 41.
blood, to avenge the bloods of the innocnet, and to destroy the withholders of
Justice; for, he will avenge the blood of his servants, and render vengeance
Verse 43. 2 Kings 24. 4.
to his adversaries. The Lord sent the Caldecs, Syrians, Moabites, and the
children of Ammon, against Jehoiakim, to avenge the blood that Manasseh had
shed in his days: Though God be patient, yet he is just; God in Scripture is
Psalm. 9, 12.
said to make inquisition after blood; we see he did for the blood of Naboth,
which Ahab by Jezebel had shed, and made the Dogs to lick the blood of Ahab ^
Kings 21. 19. 2 Kings 9. 7.
in the same place, where they had licked the blood of Naboth; and of Jezebelt,
by the wall of Jezreel, and cut off the bloody house of Ahab, by the bloody
sword of Justice.

Sixthly, Drunkenness. This sin is of a double provocation. First, it provokes
The sixth sin is Drunkenness. Isa. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
God to wrath, as it is a transgression of his law, and is by the Apostle,
excluded from the kingdom of heaven. Secondly, it provokes men to the breach of
every Commandment of God, either to the act or guilt of all gross sins; as
Murder, Whoredom, Stealing, Lying, and Swearing, (a sin under which the Land
mourns) it takes a way the heart from God, and inclines it to all
wickedness: Woe is the portion of them that follow after strong drink; Hos. 4.
11. Prove. 23. 29. Isa. 5. 11. Verse 22. Joel 15. Deu 29. 19. 20
and to them that are strong to drink strong drink. The Prophet Joel awakes the
drousie Drunkards, and bids them weep and howl: But the Drunkard is of all men
most fearlesle, till the Judgment be upon his head. The Drunkard blesses
himself in his sin, and says he shall have peace, though he add Drunkenness
to thirst: Therefore the Lord will not spare us, but his Wrath and Jealousy
does sinoak against us, at this day: God commanded that the father Deuteronomy 2^ 20.
of a Drunkard should bring his son to the Elders, and stone him to death. The
whole nation of the Jews, for this sin, was carried into captivity, and the
Prophet Isa 5. 13, 14. Neh. 1. 10.
(speaking of the destruction of Nineve) says, While they were drinking, as
Drunkards, they shall be d^^oured as stubble, fully dry: Belsbazzars kingdom
Dan. 5. ^ Kings 20. 16
was given from him while he was Drinking and Carousing before a thousand of
his Lords: Benhadad, and thirty two other kings, his consederates, were all put
to flight, while they were drinking drunk in their Pavilions.

Seventhly, Whoredom. This is a very grievous and an unnatural sin; for The
seventh sin is Whoredom. 1 Cor. 6. 18. Heb. 13. 4.
by it a man sins against his own body: In all other sins of the second
Table, a man sins against another; but by this a man sins against himself, and
others too. This is a double sin, not actually committed, but by two; as Zimri
and Cozby. The whoremonger destroys two bodies, and two souls at once:
Whoredom Prove. 6. 32.
is of two sorts; Adultery, and Fornication: Both are hateful to God, and God
has excluded both from him in heaven, and excludes himself from them, upon
the earth, by separating his servants from them, as the Prophet witnesses; O
(faith he) that I had a lodging place in the wilderness, that I might leave
Jer. 9 2.
my people, and go from them, for they be all adulterers, etc. God is far from
them, as a protector, he will come near to them in judgment, as he threatens
by Mat. 3. 5.
the Prophet. Josephus says, There is no greater filthiness then the
unlawful mixture of our bodies. The adulterer and the adulteress were both to
be put to Deuteronomy 22 22.
death by Gods command; but this sin reigns by custom, and is practiced by
authority in England, as was described by Seneca; What woman (says he) so
Sentc benif. l. 3. c. 16.
miserable or loathsome, that will content herself with one pair of adulterers;
they are carried to one friend, and they dine with another; for every day they
have one; and count the keeping of one Lemman good Wedlock. We read, that the
least punishment that the Egyptians inflicted upon adulterers, was to cut off
the nose of the woman, and the privy parts of the man. Anthony, Duke of Venice,
caused his own son to die in prison, because he ravished a maid; and God by the
Plague of Pestilence, sinote with death of the Israelites (for this sin) three
and twenty thousand; and probably many thousands more had died, if 1 Cor. 10.
28. Number. 25. 8, 9.
Judgment had not been executed upon Zimri and Cozki, which appeased Gods
wrath: therefore no marvail that so many plagues have followed this kingdom:
And now, the mercy-lesse plague of the Sword of wicked men; if but for this sin.

Eighthly, Lukewarmnesse in Religion. This is also a sin that God hates: The
eighth sin is Lukewarmnesse in Religion.
When men are religious in profession, and irreligious in practice: When they
allow it in the form, but deny it in power: When they hate to be zealous, and
shame to be profane. This is a subtle deceiving sin, it stops the mouth of
conscience, by doing something; and yet procures Gods wrath, because they do
not all: They flatter themselves, as the Church of Laodicea, that they are rich
and want nothing; when indeed, they are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and
naked, etc. This was the destroying sin of that Church, Thou art neither Rev 3.
15, 16.
cold nor hot, (says the Spirit of God) but because thou are neither cold, nor
hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth; The Spirit uses a comparison borrowed
from a troubled stomach, that throws out that which is loathsome to it.

Lukewarmnesse, is displeasing to God in diverse respects: A Lukewarm man
Lukewarm men are unconstant men.
is an unconstant man; and that God hates: A Lukewarm Professor, will change
his Religion with the times and State; be of what Religion the King and State
is, (be it what it will) these are (as James says) like the waves of the sea,
driven Jam. 16, 8. Gal 4 18. Tim 2 14. Rev. 3. 19.
with the winds, to and fro; But God requires that we be zealously affected,
and for that end Christ Jesus gave himself for us; therefore the Church of
Laodicea is commanded to be zealous, and to repent of her Lukewarmnesse.

Again, Lukewarm men are further from heaven then such as are openly profane;
Lukewarm men are in worse condition then men openly profane.
the profane gross sinner is more liable to pricks and checks of conscience,
when the other rests with confidence upon the outside forms of Religion, and
thinks he has done well, and all, if he abstain from gross sins of
commission; but regards not the sins of omission: These men cry as the Jews,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and like those notorious
hypocrites, Jer. 7 4. Ma^^h. 23. 23.
against whom Christ denounces woe; They pay Tithe, Mint, Annise, and Cumnun;
but omit Justice, Righteousness, Mercy and Faith: Hence it is that they deride
purity, and cast reproaches upon men zealous for purity; giving them names of
Puritans, Precisians, and the new-come Name of Roundhead; a name invented by
the devil, and used only by his children: Those that called Christ Be^lzebub,
were not of the scum of the Jews, but great Doctors (Bishops fellows) Matthew. 12
34 Luke 3 22.
yet those Christ says were of their father the devil: If those called the
Master by such names, no marvel then if these, in these last times (when we
know such must be) do call them of his household as bad; but he that despises
Matthew 10. 25. Luke 10. 16.
them that are Christ's, despise Christ himself.

And which is most fearful; Lukewarmnesse brings upon men stupidity in
Lukewarmnesse brings stupidity in judgment. Rom 1. 21.
judgment; When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, therefore they
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened; They
plead for Popery, and seek to reconcile Protestants Religion with Popery; as
the Israelites did the worship of God with Baal, which is Idolatry and
Heathenish: 1 Kings 18. 21. 1 Cor 6. 14.
what fellowship (faith the Apostle) has righteousness with unright ousnesse?
what concord has Christ with Belial? What reconciliation can be between true
Protestant Religion and Pop^ry, which is Idolatry. The true worshippers of God
worship him in Spirit and Truth: God seeks such to worship him, and such John
4 23. Ephesians. 1. 17. Jude 3.
will stand fast in one spirit, with one mind strive together for the Gospel
of Christ, and earnestly contend for the Faith that was once given to the
Saints. This is not the least of Englands sins, that hasteneth Judgments, and
for which we are now soarly afflicted: And probable it was; the sin for which
our neighbor Churches and kingdom of Germany is laid desolate, who were a
people, generally formal, without the power of holiness.

But every sin is aggravated, and provokes more either by the persons that sin,
Persons and circumstances aggravate sin.
or the circumstances in sinning.

First, it is aggravated by the persons: The sins of the godly, that profess
themselves to be Gods servants and wear his livery etc. do provoke God more
then the sins of the multitude of wicked men: First, because such men are
entered into special Covenant with God; and bound to deny ungodliness and Acts
3. 25.
worldly lusts, to live sober, righteous, and godly lives: for to this end has
the grace of God which brings salvation, appeared unto all men; unto you
first (says the Apostle) God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning Tit. 1. 11, 12. Acts 3. 26.
every one of you from his wickedness.

Likewise the sins of Magistrates: Those whose place; and authority, is to
punish sin, who bear a stamp of the image of God, and are entitled by his Romans
13 4. Psalm. 82 6. 1 Pet. 1. 15.
Name: I have said ye are Gods, their actions should be holy, as their name is
honorable: Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; they ought to be patterns
and examples of holiness and justice: Their lives and actions are exemplary.
If a Ruler (says Solomon) be given to lies, all his servants are wicked. M.
Antonius Pro. 29 11.
(as Pliny reports) by excess in drinking, drew all Asia to imitate him in
Plutazeb in the lite of Antonius. Senec. in Ep 7. Josans. l 8. 6. 3.
drunkenness. Seneca says, One evil example in such men, causes much
mischief. And Josephus says, That inferiors, seeing the evil actions of
their superiors, will quickly follow their vices, as if they were professed
virtues. It is the same in Ministers, whose office and place is to reprove sin,
admonish sinners and cast them out (that are obstinate) from the Congregation
of the 2 Timothy 3 16. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Timothy 4 12. 1 Pet. 5 3. Matthew 5. 14.
godly: They should be lights to the people, to lead and guide them in holy
conversation; ye are the light of the world: But the loos^ lives of Ministers
encourage men in sin, more then their Doctrine prevail to good life. To teach
by Precept (says Seneca) is long and tedious, but examples are short, and
effectual to teach evil: Therefore the sins of such men are more displeasing
to God, and provoke him more to wrath then then the whole world, who lie in
wickedness.

First, Because all such men sin against greater means, greater mercies, more 1 John 5. 19. Sins of the godly provoke more wrath then others. Luke 12. 48. Verse
47. Ez^k 9 6. 1 Pet. 4 17.
light, more knowledge, etc. Where much is given, much is required: To whom a
man commits much, of him he will ask more. He that knows his masters will,
and prepares not to do it, shall be beat^n with many stripes. Their sins hasten
Judgments, as their prayers prevent Judgments: Therefore when Judgments come
upon a Nation, it begins with them: Begin (says the Lord) at my Sanctuary:
Judgment must begin at the House of God.

Secondly, The sins of the godly do most dishonor God; cause the Name of God
to be blasphemed, and the way of godliness to be evil spoken of: The Name
Esaias 42. 5. Ezekiel. 36. 20. Romans 2. 24.
of God, (says the Apostle) is blasbhem'd among the Gentil^s through you.
Hence it was that Gods anger was great at David's sin; thou have given great
occasion 1 Samuel 12 14.
to the enemies of God to blaspheme.

Thirdly, by their sins the Spirit of God is g^ieved, the hearts of the godly
Ephesians 4. 30. Psalm. 119 158. Jer. 23. 14.
are made sorrowful; and the hands of the wicked are strengthened. I have seen
in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they strengthen the hands of
evil doers, that none return from his wickedness.

Fourthly, The godly are of Gods own family; he has continual eye upon them,
and therefore chastises them first of all other; you have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities; he
Amos. 4 2.
does chastise them here; but usually deferreth the judgments of the wicked,
reserving them to the great day of wrath: Yet alwayts when by the sins of 1
Pet. 4. 18. Esal 51 17. Jer. 15. 28, 29.
the godly he is provoked to bring a general calamity upon a Kingdom, and
makes the wicked his instruments as usually; even then in the end, the wicked
shall bear the greatness of his wrath: God will deliver his own, in his own
Psalm 34 17. Romans 8 18. Psalm. 11 6. Psalm 75 8. Circumstances aggravate sin and
provoke more wrath.
time, out of all their misery, and will reward their short affliction with
everlasting felicity, leaving the wicked to utter destruction: thus much of the
persons.

As by persons, so by circumstances, sin is aggravated; as when sin is
committed openly, with contempt of God and Law, and not punished, this was
El^^s sons sin their open contempt made the people a^ho^ the Offerings of the
Lord, therefore the Text says, Their sin was very great before the Lord.

So to sin with deliberation in cold blood, as we use to say, against checks of
1 Samuel 2. 17.
consequence, not by sudden passion, of violent temptations: In this the sin of
1 Samuel 11. 12. 13.
David was aggravated, in the case of Vriah: So to yield to sin upon every
small temptation, to sin for a trifle; Shall a man transgress for a piece of
bread? Or to sin presumptuously, in abuse of mercy, to^^ liberty to sin because
God Prove 26. 21. Romans 6. 1.
is merciful: Or to make Religion a close to cover sin, to seem religious, to
deceive, and co^^^ it makes the sin greater, then to prosesse to be such a man,
Psalm. 10 16.
and to own the sin: So to betray men, or Towns, under pretense of friendship,
as Joab slew Abner, and shed blood in a time of peace, and under pretense 2 Samuel 3. 27. 1 Kings 2. 5.
of love: In a word, when men will offer injury to a good man for goodness
sake, as Cain and Judas, in despite of holiness: And truly these
circumstances aggravate the sins of this very time, and will be a means to
hasten destruction upon such wicked men, and to bring deliverance to them that
fear God; those that strongly oppose the Parliament, and hate Reformation,
notwithstanding Prove. 29. 1.
they have had many exhortations, and sharp reproofs.

And so the time when sin is committed is an aggravation of wrath: As to be
drunk on the Lords Day, a Fast day, etc. is more sinful then upon another day;
and to sin at such a time, when Gods Judgments are upon us; while God is
whipping us for sin, then to sin, makes the same out of measure sinful, and 1
These. 2 16. Deuteronomy 28. 20. 2 Cor. 36. 16.
provokes to wrath till there be no remedy.

Now seeing all afflictions are from God, for sin, and that some sins provoke
more then other; and those sins are aggravated by the persons and
circumstances; and that those sins most provoking, are the common raging sins
of Great Britain, aggravated by persons and circumstances; Let us consider (in
the next place) whether God have not justly suited his Judgments answerable to
Romans 2 6. Rev 2. 23. Wisd 11 16. Judge. 1. 7.
our sins; wherewith a man sins, therewith he shall be punished: Adonibez^k,
when his thumbs and great toes were cut off, confessed God has justly requited
him, as he had done to others. God usually fits his Judgments answerable to
sin, whether private men or Kingdoms: Elyes sons sinned by riot, and profaned
the Priesthood; they were sons of Belial, and for the abusing the Priests
Office, they were for ever cast off from the Priesthood; for their riot and
excess, punished by want, shall crouch to one of the Priests for a piece of
silver 2 Samuel 2. 36.
and a morsel of bread. David's sin of adultery and murder, was punished in the
same kind: The Levites Concub^ne lived in adultery, and died by adultery: 2 Samuel 12. 10, 21. Judge. 13 25. Psalm. 109. 17.
The Prophet David prophetically says of Judas (and so of all other) as he
loved cursing, so let it come unto him; and as he delighted not in blessing, so
let it be far from him.

And thus do our present miseries justly answer to our sins. First, To Our
present miseries are answerable to our sins.
instance in Idolatry our great sin; consider while it was but a little winked
at, and Idolatrous Papists suffered amongst us, God made them to be thorns in
our eyes, and goads in our sides, ever plotting treasons against us, yet we
have harbored them, and hankered after their Idolatry; therefore just, that
God should make them the instruments and actors of our misery, and were but
just to deliver us up into their hands, that as we have by them dishonored
God, we might serve them, and be dishonored by Jer. 8. 19. Jer. 5. 19.
them, God gave, them into our hands in the year 1605. as a people appointed to
slaughter or banishment; not only for their Idolatry, but for their bloody
Treason: But contrary, we have cherished them, made Leagues and Matches with
them; and mixed more of their Idolatry with the pure worship of God, then ever
before, to the dishonor of God; therefore they dishonor and ruin us. When
Ahab spared a people appointed to slaughter, God told him, His life, and the
lives of his people should go for theirs; and it was so: And is, in part,
already made good upon us; and is but the same that is threatened; That if the
people make graven Images, and do evil in Gods sight, he would soatter them
among D^^^. 6. 25, 2^.
the ^^^ions: When Israel served other gods of the nations, God made the people
of the nations rule over them.

Secondly, for profaning the Lords Day: God has showed his displeasure
Profaning the Lords day.
continually, by many particular Judgments (as some writers observe) the fall
upon the Beargarden on that day, is remarkable; January 13. 1683. where See
Stubb in Annatomy of abuse.
were slain and hurt many profane Sporters: We have had many warning Pieces
of Gods displeasure, now we have Volies of Musket, and murdering Canon, the
execution of Gods wrath; As we have sli^hted holy Ministers, so are they justly
driven from us, into corners, we have gadded from place to place, after vain
sports and recreations on that day, to (Court Maskes and Plays and) all
inventions either of profits or pleasure, to Gods dishonor: in profaning the
day of holy rest, therefore it is just, that the Land be laid wast, left
without men or cattle to till it: That whiles it keeps such unhappy rest, the
people are driven to as unhappy wandering, and hear no word behind them to tell
them the Esaias. 30. 21.
way; That blessed day of Peace is become a bloody day of Battle and Slaughter;
our Churches for holy Assemblies, are become either recectacles of wicked
seditious men, or prisons of durance and misery to the godly; and most justly,
for the irreverent contempt of the use of Churches, by erroneous Anabaptists,
(suffered amongst us) who esteem Churches no more necessary for prayer Vid. D.
Wil^^^ in Levit. 26 Conf. 3.
then a Hogsty; and say, Christ may be better worshipped in Woods then in
Churches: Thus as we have all wandered from duty by disorder, and sin, God will
drive us into order by punishments; As we have erred from the way of mercy, God
will reduce us by way of Justice, as is threatened; I will do to them Ezekiel. 7.
27.
after their ways, and according to their desires I will Judge them. Pride is
justly punished.


Thirdly, for our pride raised up to the height of swelling ambition and
disdainful carriage in all apish behavior, imitating all Nations, in fashions
and sins: God is now by the sword, justly pulling it, and us down to the lowest
humiliation or misery; Gods blessings in plenty, and peace made us fatt and
wanton, and we have like Jesurum kicked against God; glorying in our abundance,
in all profussenesse, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
and expense, upon vanity, in Buildings, Furniture, Ornaments, Plate, Jewels,
Apparel, Feastings, etc. every one above his degree, to the dishonor of God.
Now God by answerable judgments afflicts the Nation, and meets with this very
sin in every one of us, to punish us, and spoil our pride: Our eyes see our
stately buildings demollished, the Monuments of our Ancestors, in which we
gloryed are spoiled before our faces; our Plate, Jewels, Money, costly
Furniture, and apparel, taken away by force, God has stirred malignity from
the pride of our spirits, to kindle a fire of contention, to consume and
destroy one another, like those bloody seditious Jews, who would See Jos^p in
war Jews. lib. 3. Chap. 14.
have killed their Captain, because they might not kill one another: He that
destroys to day, is himself destroyed to morrow; pride and excess (says
Plato) is the destruction of Kingdoms. Pride is like a wild man, whose hand is
against every man, and every man's hand, against him. It is the son of the Genesis
16. 12.
Bondwoman, envious at his brother, and by it we find as judit^ous. Seneca
says, there is but a moment of time between Royalty and Captivity; take notice
Sencca in Tranq. cap. 11
of it, for God justly meets with this sin, and makes pride the punishment of
pride; we have by pride fought against God, and God by proud men fights
against us; and will assuredly (before he sheath his sword) destroy our pride,
or us. As God made the rich and the poor of one mould: So he is by these
judgments bringing them into one condition, as is threatened, I Will mar the
pride of Israel, and the great pride of Jerusalem. ^^r. 13. 9.


Fourthly, Oppression; we know this sin has cried long for judgment, the cry
has been loud against this Nation, and is now answered. As the sin
Oppression justly punished
has been general, so the punishment is general; all feel it, from the King
to the Plough-man. Naboths Vineyard has been taken by force, and fraud by the
one, the covering of the poor by the other, and the Law that should relieve the
oppressed, was tied up by money: Law it self was but a Cipher and so nothing;
if more, it was but a figure, and so any thing; our Judges were made on purpose
to do injustly, and unmade for doing justice: They (as all Officers of
Judicatory) bought their places deer, and sold their attendance deerer: They
bought oppression by gross, and sold it out by retail, as their brethren the
Patentees; and so grownd the face of the very poor. Now God by his judgments
pays us in our own coin; observe how the monyes received by oppression are
spent in oppression; and by that which men paid against Law, they are
oppressed, to destroy Law; those that gave moneys to oppress, are themselves
oppressed; the Oppressor is oppressed, the Spoyler is by spoiling spoiled: The
just oppressing sword of Gods wrath, (for unjust oppression) is now in the
Land, and oppresses all; They that made the Law useless, that they might
destroy others, have no Law to secure themselves from ruin; We must needs
acknowledge that the Lord is righteous in all his Ways, and holy in all his
works, and I will with confidence believe, that when God will in pity sheath
his sword, that law which wicked men seek to destroy, shall, by the ministration
Psalm. 145. 17.
of Justice, cut them off for their oppression and murder; God will plead his
peoples Cause, and will spoil the soul of the Spoyler; And Prove. 22. 23. Ier.
51, 48. Esaias 14. 2.
in the end make his restored people to rule over their Oppressors, as he has
promised.

Fifthly, the Sin of Murder, we know is the sin of Britain; The blood
unrevenged, Murder is justly punished.
has cried to Heaven a long time, and now God sheddeth the Kingdoms blood by
cruel murderers, because by foolish pity, the blood of them that wickedly
shed blood, was not shed; God punishes the impunity of murder by murder. As
Jacobs sons stained the coat of their brother Joseph with the blood of Kids,
so Britains sons (unnatural brethren) stain the garment of the earth with
the blood of men, in every place; God is provoked to use the sword of wicked
men, to punish these guilty Kingdoms: The sin is made the punishment of the
sin, and the punishment will turn to sin upon the heads of the Punishers:
Absoloms sin of Rebellion, and defiling his fathers bed, was the punishment
of David's sin, yet it was not less then sin in him. The The blood of Queen
Maryes days cry.
blood of Queen Maryes days is now required, which we have not lamented, and
therefore has since then cried against us; The blood of Queen Elizabeth's time
is not forgiven, though some of those bloud-shedders were by Gods hand cut off
shortly after, who were guilty for the blood of guiltless Essex; and at their
end some of them acknowledged Gods hand justly was upon them.

Other bloods of latter times, are fallen in with the complaint of the Marian
blood, and now must be avenged together: The blood of Germany puts in an
Indictment against us, for our neutrality, the blood of France pleads
accusations The blood of latter times in the three kingdoms cry.
of treachery, the blood of all the three Kingdoms join in one complaint, for
impunity and treachery; Some spilt in wrath, others by conspiracy and false
accusations, some by poison and other secret plots, and some by causeless
Imprisonment, etc. The bloods of all thus shed complain with one voice, that
Justice has been stopped, corrupted, and prevented. The Avengers of blood,
roughly dealt with, beaten, accused, and wholly suppressed: false evidences
has been admitted, and true. Testimony cast out: The blood of the poor is
heard cry in Gods ears, as well as the blood of the rich; the blood of Princes
and people cry, and God is come down, to see if it be according to the cry, and
will not respect the persons of men: He is come to judge the earth, and will do
right to all men: And now the bloody and deceitful men shall not live Psa. 58.
11. Genesis 18. 25.
out their days: This is the day of the God of Hoasts, the day of vengeance,
in which he will be avenged on all his enemies. He now makes inquisition for
blood Psalm. 55. 23. Ier. 26. 10. Eccle. 8 12.
and will spare none when he has used the rod to correct his people, he will
cast it into the fire to be burnt.

Sixthly, Drunkenness: the English mother sin, and master destroyer of souls,
The cause of Gods displeasure upon particular men, and the whole Kingdom,
Drunkenness is justly punished, and ye^ more is threatened.
as have formerly been observed by many: among other judgments upon the grain,
(Barley) several times smitten by drought and wet, lesser judgments are
warnings, and threaten greater, if the cause remain; but the sin remains, and
still raigns, and is at this day threatened with greater judgments, just
answering to the sin: Famine is the companion of War, and is now entering into
the Land, hasted forward by an Army of Spoylers, worse then the Locusts of
Egypt, to devour and eat up the fruits of the Land, as is threatened for this
sin: Weep and houle ye drinkers of wine, the field is wasted, the Land Exodus
10. 12. Joel. 1. 5. 10.
mourns, for the Corn is dried up, the abuse of Pl^nty must be punished with
want.

Seventhly, Whoredom; a common sin of these Kingdoms: secretly committed, and
openly known, but not punished; if punished, it is the poverty of Whoordom is
most justly punished.
the whoremonger, not the sin; The Noble (so by Title) have a tolleration by
their greatness, the rest by their money: a sin punishable by Gods Law with
death, yet suffered by men to escape without correction; It has contracted a
double guilt upon the Land, the guilt of the sin and the guilt of Impunity;
God sent the plague of pestilence among the people of Israel for this sin,
and 1. Cor. 10. 8
for it he has sent several plagues amongst us, and smitten many thousands by
death; but no Phinehas has stood up to execute judgment: Adulterous marriage
have been suffered and connived at, and strange marriages with strange Numb.
25. 7.
Nations, and strange religions, and strange rebellious broods have followed,
and (likely) are crept into some of our greatest Families, who usurp the names
Strange and Adulterous Marriages, are like to be some cause of our presens
milery.
and inherit the Lands of those that never got them. The old world was
condemned for this, the sons of God took them wives of the daughters of men,
of all that they would choose, and there were Giants in the earth; They made
strange marriages such as we in England; as that between Lord Mount-Joy and
Lady Rich, that between Lord Car and Countess of Essex: also secret
whisperings of unnatural Sodamy, never questioned: The sins connived at in
this Nation, are such as Abimclech durst not commit, nor suffer, although he
Genesis 20. 7.
were a man subject to behold beauty with desire: What absurdity were it to
believe that the Offsprings of such kind of Matches and Broods, have produced
a generation, to punish the Kingdom for this sin of Whoordom? and that God
should make them Instruments and Actors to aggrivate our misery at this day,
who set themselves to do mischief, and are mocking Ismaels, haters of the
children of promise: as unnatural as Absolon, who abused his fathers bed, and
Genesis 21. 9. 2. Sam. 16. 22 3. Sam. 13. 14.
as Ammon who d filed his half Sister: We see in nature that the creatures
that generate by couples, are tender of the good and preservation one of the
other: the young own the Male, and the Male take care of them; whereas among
those that generate promiscuously, the Male never ^^reth for the young: or the
young never own him: But we worse, and more unnatural then the bruit beast,
seek to ruin one another, the father the son, the son the father, etc. Surely
Gods hand is plainly seens in the miseries now upon us, answerable to this sin
of Whoordom, besides the former warnings we have had by lesser judgments That
is ^ot he least that God has a long time been silent, which presaged great
wrath, as he said of Israel: I will not visit your daughters when they commit
Whoordom, nor your Spouses when they commit adultery: Impunity betokens
Hosea. 4. 14.
destruction, and now the days of visitation are come, these are the days of
rec^m^ence, and England will know it; and acknowledge it is justly punished.
Hosca. 9. 7


Fightly Lukewarmnesse in Religion: England above all Nations is guilty of this
sin, never people enjoyed so glorious means of knowledge, nor never Lukewarm a
great sin and justly punished
had any people more encouragement to be zealous for God, then England; yet
England, blind, naked, poor, miserable England is grossly ignorant, or carelessly
formale: How shall God but spue thee out of his wouth, for thy Lukewarmnesse,
that art neither hot nor cold: for this sin the wrath of God is gone out
against Rev. 3: 16.
us: we have revolted from him; We have pleaded for Popery, as Israel for Baal:
we have swarved from the Covenant of our God, and are not zealous for his
Truth, nor will not contend for the faith once given to the Saints; And
therefore, because when we knew God, we glorified him not as God: Romans 2. 12.
etc.
Therefore God has given up our Lukewarm Gentry in every County, (with their
Followers) to vile affectious and a reprobate mind, to be deluded and believe
a Lie, that while they profess to defend the Protestant Religion, they 2.
These. 2. 7. etc.
lose their lives in the offensive War against it: It is a strange mystery,
that Papists should Jeopard their lives to defend that they most hate: but such
is the mystery of iniquity that now works: with the deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness in our Lukewarm (though Learned) Centry: God has for this sin
given them up to a reprobate mind, filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, Verse 10.
wickedness, coveteousnesse, maliciousness, envy, murdering, debate, deceit
malignity, haters of God, etc. to their own ruin, and their lasting infamy, to
Rom 1. 29. 30.
Posterity to come: consider it, Oh ye Inhabitants of great Brittane, for Gods
hand is heavy at this day for this sin, repent therefore and be zealous, or God
will spue us out of his mouth, and separate us from the Congregations of his
people: if for his own name sake he will preserve his Church, yet he will
dispeople the Land, if we be not zealous in time. Thus much of the second
cause, and of particular sins.

The third thing to be considered is, the isntrumental cause of great
Britains Satan is the efficient cause of sin, and the Isntrumental cause in
punishment.
misery, and that is either inward or outward.

The inward Isntrumental cause is the Devil, working upon men's corrupt
nature, and drawing them to sin: The Devil is the efficient cause of sin, but
the isntrumental cause of punishment: He casts into men's hearts the seeds of
all sins, and sin (as is before showed) brings all misery: Why has Satan
filled thy heart (says Peter to Annanias) Satan fills the heart with sin,
either by suggesting Acts. 5. 3.
thoughts into the heart, or bringing objects to the eye or ear: By thoughts
he brought David to number the people, and so brought misery: 1. Chr: 21. 1.
hence it is that the Apostle bids, that we give not place to the Devil, that
is, to Ephesians. 4. 27.
evil thoughts: By objects to the eye, he brought David to commit adultery,
and so brought misery: By objects to the ear he tempted Eve, by the voice of
2. Sam, 11. 2.
the Serpent, and by the report of the Spies drew the people to murmour in the
Genesis 3. 4.
Wilderness, and so brought misery: the Devil has no power over the will of
Number: 13. 28.
any man to compel him to sin, his power is only by such delusions to blind
the mind, and darken the understanding: and his power is great by these means
upon them that believe not the Gospel of Christ: hence it is that he is
called 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the God of this World, and a Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience. Ephe. 2. 2.


The Devil is the father of all Sedition: the original of Envy and all
contention: he is the tempter to all wickedness: first he set man at variance
with Gal. 5. 20. lames 3. 15.
his maker, and so all the creatures one against another, and for this cause
God has put an everlasting enmity between him and the seed of the woman, and
the same Genesis 3. 15.
enmity is between wicked men and the godly: By the seed of the woman is meant
Christ and his children, therefore in Scripture those that are of Christ are
called the Children of God, and all wicked men they are called the children 1.
Joh: 1. 12. John 3. 44.
of the Devil, and his works they do: Wicked men are the Devils soldiers to
make War against the Children of God, against all the seed of the woman, who
keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Rev: 12. 17.
Jesus Christ.

So then the outward cause is wicked men, the seed of that old serpent the The
outward cause of our misery is wicked men.
Devil: These are naturally stirred up to envy, and hatred against the godly:
they hate purity and holiness, as that which is contrary to their very being,
there is a direct Antipathy between their practice and holiness, as contrary
as darkness is to light: They are therefore called the children of darkness.
and Ephe. 5. 8. 3. These. 5. 5.
the godly Children of light; then what agreement between light and darkness,
between God and Belial? These are the Devils instruments that at this day
war against us and cause our misery: some act by violence, some act by 2.
Cor. 6. 16.
counsel, all are doing, and will do till God take them off: some are like
Achisopbell, when he counseled Absolon to lie with his fathers Concubines:
some 2. Sam. 2. 621
like the counselors of Rehoboam, set the King against his people, some like
the Ziphits, to flatter with Saul, they make complaints, and use treachery
against 1. King. 12. 20. 1. Sam. 26. 1.
innocent David: some by wicked actions: as the Prophet told Ahab, that he 1.
King. 13. 18.
troubled Israel by forsaking the Commandments of God. Thus Athalia the Queen,
daughter to idolatrous Ahab, she insinuated into Joram the King, and Vide Iosep
an tiq. lib. 9. ^ha. 1.
taught him to do many mischiefs among the rest, to adore strange gods, and
afterward she her self slew all the seed Royal: We see the words of Solomon
verified, the things that has been, is that which shall be, and we see no ne^
1. King. 11. 1,
thing under the sun: We cannot say this is new etc. Besides all this, the
Devil Eccl. 1. 9. 10.
has other instruments to make Gods people miserable, by robbing, spoiling,
killing, etc. Thus the Sabeans and Caldeans were his instruments to afilict
Job: Job. 1. 12. 14.
so soon as he had obtained Commission to afflict, he presently has his
instruments to act it, the Devil works in them at his will: so he has the
winds, Ephe. 2. 2.
and the waters, the air, fire, etc. which he can use for his instruments to
afflict.

Now that it may clearly appear, who they be that are the instruments of
Britains misery: I will divide them into seven sorts, when divided they may be
easily known.

First a woman, (it is pity, it is so: but it is true, and truth must not be
concealed Seven sor^^ of evil instruments the causers of our present misery.
in these times) 2ly. Jesuits, 3. Bishops, 4. Ambi ious Lords, (or men
ambitious of Lordships) 5. flattering Ziba's, (declining Lords, or rising
Clergy) 6. Athiests, men (of any religion) of no religion, 7. Delinquents of
all sorts and degrees: These are instruments of Satan, and principal workers
for themselves to accomplish their own ends, as we shall show afterward. Their
way and means to work mischief. 2. These: 2. 10. 11.


Now the means by which these instruments do work, is by a mystery, the mystery
of iniquity; that is by the subtilty of Antichrist (carried on by the power of
Satan) with power and wonders, under false pretenses, lying Policies, and
strong delusions; so that if it were possible they shall deceive the very
elect, for so our Savior Christ says of them: But none are deceived but
unbeleevers, such Math: 24, 14.
as receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, (as the
Apostle describes them.) Now the principal instruments in this work, (next to
Satan himself) are the Jesuits and Romish Priests, Satan is a lying spirit in
the mouth of all 1. Kings 12, 6 and verse. 22.
these, as he was in the mouth of Ahabs 400. court Prophets, to persuade Ahab
to go up to Ramah Gilead to Battle; These are they that have corrupted the
Clergy of England, Ireland, and Scotland, and seduced them as the lying Prophet
of Bethel did the good Prophet of the Lord, to destroy him; And these like
Locusts 1. King. 11. 18
have over spread great Britain for the space of 18. or 20. years, in the
habit Jesuits have been longplotting and working this mischief.
of Gentlemen: (wolves in sheeps clothing) some in habit of Scholars, their
receptacles have been the Papists houses of note in every country, and by those
Papists they have been brought into acquaintance with the most of the Gentry of
the Kingdom, and covertly they have cast poison into their souls, still in
all that they have done or said they seem to be Protestants, but commend the
Bishops care in suppressing sects and schisms, and factious spirits, crying
out bitterly against the Pur^tant, and through them glance at the Protestant
Religion, urging the benefit of outward conformity, to the then new Cannons,
Innovations, and Popish superstitions, and how easy a thing it were by such
means to reco^cile the Church of Rome, to the Protestant Churches: And since
this Parliament began, they have been the poison of our Gentry, by the help of
Arminian and Popish Clergy, to seduce our Gentry to take arms to destroy
themselves, Jesuits and Priests have taintedthe gentry.
partly under pretense of order, and partly under pretense of vindicating the
Kings Rights, (which none were about to prejudice) and withal affirming, what
power and assistance the King had, so that if they showed not themselves in
this Cause for the King, His Majesty would take special notice of them, as
ill-affected toward his welfare: By these and the like subtilties, they have
seduced some well-meaning men.

These are the Plotters of all this mischief, the Incensors of His Majesty
against his Parliament, and people; the accusers of good men, and abusers of
truth, have caused them as Zedekiah did Michaiah, to be fed with bread of
affliction, 1. King. 22. 24. 26.
and water of affliction; yea these have breathed vennome into the bosom of
our selected Assemblies (our supposed just men) chosen by their Countries, and
trusted with our estates, and liberties; so that some of these are prefidious
to God and men, and joint instruments of our misery, revolters from law, and
justice, prophound to make slaughter, as the Prophet speaks, they themselves
are the shedders of innocent blood, that they might become Masters of their
estates and possessions.

In a word, these seducers, dreaming Prophets, that speak lies in prophecy,
Ier. 23. 32.
come in the name of God, yet God has not sent them; they prophecy for gain,
l^ke Balam, and err through wine and strong drink; these have seduced Esaias
28. 7.
all, and caused both King and people to err: Through these Pipes the Devil
conveyes the poison of Popery into the souls of men, drawing them that are
Corrupt Ministers are the Conduit pipo through which the Devil conveys poison
of Error into men's souls. 1. Tin^. 1. 19. 20.
unstable, to be actors of their own, and the Kingdoms ruin: some have under
pretense of duty to Kings, ushered men from their duty to God, having put away
faith and good conscience, like Hymeneus and Al^xander, for the reward of
fading honor, and brittle estate, as they themselves have found.

By great promises of preferment, the foreleaders of th^se traitorous Broods,
drew men to side with them in the preparation for the massacring war, that
should have followed upon their blowing up of the Parliament House by
gunpowder; by which they thought to destroy the Parliament, Religion, Laws,
Records, the King, and all of the blood Royal, and Protestant Lords, at one
blow: No Age, Nation, or People, yielding an example of the like cruelty, as
was then declared by our State, Lords spiriruall and temporal, who affirmed
and See the Book appointed for the Thanksgiving on Nov 5 but if this last
Impression be compared with the first, you shall find the Archbishop has minced
the wo^^s.
published to the world, that the Religion of Papists, is Rebellion, their
says faction, and their practice murdering of bodies and souls; yet these
Monsters of cruelty, are now assisted by our Princes, Nobles, and Gentry, to
effect by the sword, what they could not do by treason, only our Princes,
Nobles, and King Himself may, (it is possible) escape with their own lives
this way, which had been lost in that hellish plot; But let His Majesty beware,
and the rest that are not resolved to be Papists, for these bloody Jesuits,
Romes Priests, and hells devils, may, and do kill any Kings, that are
Protestants, (their Religion allows it) yea if they be Kings that do but
favou^ Protestants; why else did they murder Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth of France: they bite with their teeth and cry peace, but he that puts
not into their mouths, they prepare war Mica. 3. 5.
against him, they draw the Princes to evil as they in Juda, of which the
Prophet complains, Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves; They
covet fields, and take them by force; they oppress a man and his heritage.
Esaias. 1. 23. Mica. 2. 2.


But God sees all, and he is judge of the Earth, and of all Men; and that God
will enter into judgment with them that are Thieves, and companions of
Thieves; and will defend his truth, and his peoples right, against all
oppressors, Esaias, 3. 14.
for God is no respecter of persons, he will do it against tne Ancients of the
people, and Princes thereof; Hear ye, O Priests, and hearken, ye house of
Israel, for judgment is toward you, etc. Hosea 5. 1.


The matter and form of Great Britains misery, namely, that out of which it is,
and that by which it is and what it is, are; Oppressions, Ambitious desires,
Alteration of Religion, Destruction of Laws, Multitudes of Opinions, Sects,
Schisms, Jealousies, etc.

The Subject oppressed by Illegal Taxes, Loans, Mulcts, etc. The weaker The
matter and sorme of our misery.
trodden down, and spoiled by the mighty; Laws awed by greatness, made snares
to catch men, Wolves made Shepherds, to fleece the flock, and feed themselves;
Bishops by unconscionable Edict, bind the consciences of men, which Christ
has made free; The purity of Religion contemned, Errors and Heresies
maintained, Popery countenanced, and Idolatry set up, Synods deserted, Gal 5. 1.
and Parliaments annihilated; Godly men imprisoned, dismembered, banished, etc.
against the justice of Law, under an established; j^st Law, used by the
handlers of it, either as Law, or no Law; as the Asses ears (in the Fable)
either ears, or horns, as they would interpret them; at the best, the Laws were
but like Cobwebs, (as Plutarch once said) they catch Flies, but cannot hold
great Hornets; in short, Law was for the most part used (between a great rich
man and a poor) but for (if such a thing can be) a Legal Oppression, to take
away Rights and Inheritances, and to impose slavery upon sree Subjects.

Hence grew Distractions and Fears; and from Fear, Commotions and Tumults: The
unjust Oppressor was afraid of punishment, the Oppressed feared Guilt and
^ealousie.
greater cruelty, and more violence, yea an overture of Religion and Laws, (and
not without cause.)

Here Is the matter of Great Britains Civil War, and present Misery animated by
a third sort of discontented men, (like Sheba the son of Bichri) light,
irreligious, profane, broken-fortuned men, Sons of Belial, that blow up the 2.
Sam. 20. 1.
fire of Contetion, hating Religion, and fearing Law, to whom war is peace, and
peace ruin: These are most saf; in the midst of a seditious war, especially
when under pretense of Loyalty to the King, and love to the common good,
Desperate unth^^fis live by War and spoil.
they may draw many after them, to effect their own private ends, by raisurg,
and continuing Seditious war.

It was truly said by one of the Ancients, That that Man who is the causer of
such a Civil, seditious war, is not to be numbered among men, but banished from
the Society of men. And Nstor, a grave and wise Councellor, among the Grecians,
affirmed in open Synod, (upon a cause of discontent) that a mover to Civil war,
was a most cruel, wretched, and detestable man, not worthy to live.

Add unto these many bloody, treacherous, cruelties, murders, rapine, and all
violent insolences, spoiling of countries, burning of houses, towns, Corn,
outcryes of women, maidens, and children, abused by merciless, brutish
Miscreants: Three Kingdoms all divided, not divided one against another; but
every one divided within, and against it self: not as Ephraim against
Mannassah, one Tribe against another, but every Tribe, every City, every
Country against it self, to destroy it self, Father against the son, and The
misery of Britains division.
son against the father, Brother against Brother, Kinsman against Kinsman, deer
friends are become deadly enemies: The sons of one Mother, nearest in alliance,
the Professors of one Religion, and subjects under one King, by nature,
religion, and law, bound to defend one another, against all other enemies:
Th^se are enemies one to another, Traitors, destroyers, yea cruel butchers one
of another, and are joined with foreign enemies, and homebred bloody Papists,
Idolaters against themselves, the protestant Religion, the Laws of the
Kingdom, the estates, rights, and liberties of their Posterities: Oh Esaias. 1.
23. Rev. 2. 9. Zeph. 3. 3.
Misery of miseries sent from God to punish a sinful People! The Prophets cry
Peace and make War, the Nobles pretend Law, and destroy Law: oppress and rob
by violence: Those that say they be Protestants, destroy the Protestant
Religion: the makers up of the breaches, are the pullers down of the Hosea 4. 9.
walls to let in Popery and all Licentiousness: All sorts are joined with the
Spoylers, and do destroy as far as fraud or force can prevail, no Age, no Sex,
None freed from violenc^ of any degree, age, or sex.
Degree, or Dignity, can protect any from violence: Ireland wallowes in her own
blood: England has deeply imbruyed her hands in Phlebotemie, and still makes
progress in all Immanity: Scotland stands at the brinke of the same pit of
misery: The first in intention, though last in execution: the same seditious
seeds are sown there as in England or Ireland, although they have not grown up
so fast in that Land, yet (if God prevent not) they may at the second Spring,
sprought out, and prove as destructive, as else where: Ireland has almost bled
her last, England is waxen pale with bleeding, and Scotland trembles at the two
first parts of the bloody Tragedy, acting in England and Ireland, expecting the
next Scene upon their own Stage: And our watchmen that should give us warning
of our dangers, are the men that bring us into danger, our shepherds, that
should gather the dispersed flock together, they are the Scatterers of the
sheep, and devourers of the flocks: our teachers, from whom we should receive
direction and knowledge, are seducers and deceivers, they Mal. 2. 7. Iud. 11.
Ier: 5. 31.
run greedily after the way of Balaam for reward, the Prophets prophecy lies,
and the people love to have it so.

Yea these men have deceived our King, our Hope, our peace, Gods Deputy set
over us to be our Protector, styled The Defendor of the Faith, etc. yet Psalm.
82. 3. Indg: 10. 1. Esaias. 49. 22
does nothing in our defense, nor for the defense of the Faith; but is ofsended
with the Faithful: our Queen appointed by God to be a Nursing Mother, seeks to
take away the childrens bread: And the hopeful Issue, are trained up amongst
Swearers, Drunkards, Idolaters, and bloody wicked men: for these A pres^ge of
future misery.
things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the
Comsorter that should deliver my soul is far off, the Children are desolate,
because the Enemy prevailed. Lam 1. 16.


If our misery, were but the misery of War, it were not so much, if a war
against a Foreign Enemy, it were the lest of miseries, or but a war against
Papist onley, it were tolerable; for then a man might know his enemies, and
fly to a Protestant for help or shelter, or at least to bemoane one another:
The father might fly to the son, the son to the father, one brother to another,
one friend, and one neighbor to another; but our enemies are promiscuously
mingled with us, we know them not, till they betray us, they converse with us,
in nearest familiarity, and as David spoke of Achitophell in the person ^sa:
55. 1. 314
of Judas, so we may say of them, they take counsel with us, they eat and
drink a our table, etc. and we have trusted them with our nearest secrets, it
is with us as once with Jerusalem, among all her lovers, there was none
tocomfort her, all dealt treacherously with her: And as our Savior himself
foretold, that a man's foes should be of his own household, meaning (as I
conceive) Lam: 1. 2 Mica: 7, 6 M^^^ 11. 30
those that profess to be his Desciples, as well as of a domestic Family:
such as take upon them to preach Christ, that they shall be his greatest
enemies; as we have seen, and find at this day: in Bishops, Deans, and the
multitude of corrupt Clergy, and Minster-mungers, haters of hollinesse, hellish
Sophisters, pretend to preach Christ, while they by all their power set up
Antichrist, the Apostle has long before told us, that in these last times it
should be so, that some should depart from the Faith, and give heed to the
Doctrine of Devils, Be lovers of themselves, covetuous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, without natural affection, despisers of them that are good:
having a Form of 2 Timothy 2. 3 5. 4. etc.
godliness, but denying the power thereof. And thus of the matter and form of
Great Britains misery.

The final cause of it is two fold. First as it is from God the Author:
secondly, The final cause of great Britains misery, is, twofold:: first from
God.
as it is from men the instruments: As it is from God, it is also twofold, for
the good of his children, and to destroy his enemies: All the afflictions,
calamities, and miseries, that God brings upon the godly, are for their good:
All things work together for good, to them that love God, our light affliction
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and Rom 8. 29.
eternal weight of glory: First by afflictions, God makes them examine
themselves 1. Cor. 4. 17.
for sin, thus David did: and thus the Church did; search, and try, and turn 1.
Sam. 22. 1. Lam: 3. 40.
to the Lord: affliction prepares the heart for grace, and advances to glory.
Secondly it weaneth them from the world, makes them contemn the vanities of
the world, which before they liked. David says it was good for him Psalm: ^19.
Verse 67. 71.
that he is afflicted, before I was afflicted I went astray: 3. By it God
tries their ^aith, and patience, as he did Job; every grace is exercised,
which else lies dead in Job 2. 6. Heb 11. 17. Job. 34. 63
them, not known to themselves nor to others. 4ly. By it God corrects them for
sins past, and brings them unto better obedience, that they may live after the
will of God, not after their own lusts: In a word God afflicts the godly 1.
Cor. 11. 32. 1. Pet. ^. 7. 1. P^t. 4, 2.
for their Reformation, they are purged by it from their sins, as gold is
purified in the Furnance of Fire: when thy judgments are in the earth, the
Inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. The afflictions of the
godly are Esaias, 48. 10. P^^^ 12. 6. Pro: 17. 3. Es^y. ^^. ^.
not punishments, they are but shows of punishment; showing only what they
deserve, not inflicted as they deserve, their present affliction is their hell,
and it lasts at the longest but for term of life, afterward comes joy and
everlasting happiness, as the Apostle teaches: Henceforth is laid up a Crown
God afflicts his children in love, showing what they deserve, not afflicting
them as they deserve. 1. Tun. 4. 8.
of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give unto all
them that love his appearing.

Now for the ungodly and wicked, it is not so with them, for all afflictions to
them are real punishments: and (as Mr. Calvin observes) are but the earnest of
Gods wrath, and beginnings of their everlasting misery; hasten their ruin and
destruction: wicked men in all their afflictions, either run farther from God,
or seek to unlawful means for help, as Saul did, or seek unto God Gods
afflicts wicked men in anger. 1. Sam. 28. 7. 1. King. 21. 27. Hosea. 7, 14.
Esaias 1. 5 Deuteronomy. 6. 15. D^ut. 28. 65. 2. Sam. 17. 23. Math: 27. 3. Exodus: 14. 7.
with fained affections, and with hypocritical hearts, as Ahab did; but they
forsake not their sin, they howl upon their beds, but in hypocrisy, while the
judegement is upon them, for they still rebel against God: the Lord
complains of them thus, Why will ye be stricken any more, ye will revoult more
and more: And so they hasten destruction, till Gods anger be kindled, and he
destroy them from the face of the earth, yea themselves in their afflictions to
ease their bodies, send their souls (by their own impatient hands) presently
to hell: as Ahitophell and Judas, and Pharoh, who were more hardened by
afflictions, and grew more enraged against God, and Gods people, and so hastened
their own ruin.

Secondly, the final cause as it is from the Devil and his Jesuitical
Faction, The final cause of Britains misery as it is, from the Devil and men.
Job: 1. 11. Luke 22. 31. Pet. 5. 8. Job. 2. 2.
(the instruments) it is nothing but the utter subversion of our holy Religion,
and replantation of Popery, the overthrow of Laws and Liberties, and
introducing an Arbitrary Government: for Satan and wicked men hate the godly,
and seek by all means to destroy them. As for Satan he compasses the earth,
and walks continually too and fro in it, turning every stone to work
molestation and mischief to the faithful. And for wicked men, though their
chief Aim be that which I have spoken, yet they have also other particular
ends of their own; especially in this present destroying and seditious war: and
their ends are diverse, according to the diverse affections and inclinations; But
all in general dis-affect holiness naturally: and therefore all take part
against Wicked men hate holiness and holy men.
religion and laws, and desire their destruction that maintain or practice
either: and associate themselves with those that seek to overthrow them: this
is the first end, and only moving cause (in Jesuits, Papists, Bishops, and
others Popishly affected) of this war and misery: Observe first how they used
all hellish policy for diverse years before this Parliament began, to keep off
all Parliaments, Contempt of Parliaments.
and to bring them out of use: that so the laws might dye by a poisoning death,
and by degrees perish; And that our Religion might not outlive our Laws,
(which indeed it cannot probably) they had a poison to destroy it secretly; and
hypocritically under a fair pretense of Gods honor, to setle Conformity John
19. 7.
and Order in the Church, and by their policy and power, corrupted the Courts
of Judicature: Then by their own law (among themselves) punished, Fined,
Imprisoned, and Banished, all true sound Protestants, zealous for God, and for
the truth and power of Religion: Ministers and Laiety, calling them as Ahab did
Eliah, Troublers of Israel: And as Saul (through ignorance) (they through
malice) make havoc of the Church: accusing them by the Acts. 17. 19.
names of factious men, that raised new Doctrines, which they cast reproaches
Acts 28 22,
upon, and caused to be spoken against: thus they Suspended, Imprisoned,
Silenced, and Banished, our best Orthodox Divines, men conformable to the
esta^^^shed Persecution of (...) Ministers.
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England: not Annabaptists, Brownists,
Famalists, Donatists, etc. which if they had only done, we should not so
justly complain; but choice Protestants, men fearing God, walking orderly,
warranted by Gods word, and the Laws of the Kingdom, only refusing their new
popish Canons, and Oaths imposed contrary to Gods word, and our established
Laws, yet now these say, they fight for the Protestant Religion; (but, as
before, to take it from us) and therefore when former policies could not
prevail, they took arms to cut off Religion and Law at once, in destroying
this Parliament by force, and by the same force to make a Parliament The
destruction of this Pa^^ were the destruction of all. They that were the
Causers of the war in Ireland were cause of the war in England.
of their own choice, to repeal what Laws they please, and to set up Popery in
full power in all the three Kingdoms of Great Britain, and afterward to
suppress the Protestant Religion through all the Christian world: Nor let me
be mistaken, for I think not that the King intends all this, but this is the
intent and aim of the Jesuitical Plotters: (We see a proof of it in
Ireland;) They have persuaded the King to take arms against his Parliament, by
their unjust reports and false calumniations, as if the Parliament would
straighten the Kings prerogative, and deprive Him, or his Posterity of their
just Rights, and so they make it the Kings particular quarrel, till they have
made Him their Agent so far as lies in him; and then they will not spare to
destroy him, if he hinder the rest that they have resolved upon: God rebuke
them, and save his people: The Parliament, and with them all we Protestants may
in the presence of God with upright hearts, say to the King, as David said to
Saul in the like case: Wherefore 1. Sam. 24. 9.
hear thou men's words, saying, Behold the Parliament, or thy people the
Protestants seeks thy hurt: But we are all accused by corrupt Counselors to
our King, as the three Servants of God were to Nebuchadnezer by the heathen
^an: 3. 8. 12.
Caldeans, and for no cause, but as they refused to worship and Idol, so we for
refusing to adore Popish Ceremonies, and to give away our Birthrights and
Liberties: And as Daniel by the precedents and princes, because they hated him
for his goodness, and could find nothing against him to accuse him of, but
treacherously in the matter of his Religion: Therefore they devise a way
pleasing D^n: 6. 3, 4
to the King, and destructive (as they thought) to Daniel: in which all the
Precedents, Verse 5.
Princes, Governors, Counselors, and Captains, consulted together, and come
to the King, urging Him to establish a Royal and firm Decree, that Verse 7.
no man ask any Petition but of the King for thirty days, in which they
pretend honor to the King, and order in the Kingdom, and the King signed it
(for He looked not to their private bloody end:) Now they knew Daniel would be
constant in Prayer to his God, therefore they watch him: and found him praying,
Vers^ 1^.
so accuse him of the breach of the Kings Law, and regardlesse of the King:
Then the King see his error, and as the Text expresses, was displeased with
Himself that He had made such a Decree, and set his heart to save Daniel to
deliver him, but they urge his Acts (which they say cannot be changed:) The
King yields to them against nature, both in respect of conscience and
affection: (a weakness) but afterward he showed justice upon the unjust
Accusers. (...) 24.


Here Is the authority of Sacred word to confirm the story, and here is the
example of error, mercy, and justice, in a heathen King: who, as Joseph^^
relates ^xample of (...)
was by the Malignant Princes (haters of Daniel) urged to cast Daniel into the
Lions Den a second time, alleging (as is usual in such men) to b^inde the
Kings See Jos^pas in his book of an-tiquities. Chap. 11.
judgment, that the Lions were all gorged before, and therefore had not
destroyed Daniel: Whereupon the King commanded the Lions to be glutted with
meat, and then cast in those Malignants Princes, to try if the Lions would
touch them when they were gorged, who were presently devoured, etc.

Hence may arise several Inferences, which for brevity I pass; only this by
Inferences observeable.
way of instance; First, that wicked Counselors seek the destruction of good
men, more then the preservation of the common good: Here is a plain instance
Ester 3. 8, 9 1. Sa. 2^. 9. 10 Ier 20. 1. 2.
of the truth of it, as is seen in Hamans plot against Mordecai and his people;
we see it in Doeg against David, in Pashur the Priest against J^remy, and
others frequent in holy Scripture. Secondly, that wise and good Kings may be
intrapped by the snares of wicked Counsels, we have instance in this, King
Nebuchadnezzer; so in King Ahashuerus, to the destruction of his Queen, and her
people; in Ester. 3. 6 etc.
Solomon the wisest of Kings, by the counsels and insinuations of strange
wives; in his son Rehoboam, by the counsel of young men, etc. See it in King
James of happy memory (a second Solomon for wisdom) yet by the policy of
Gundamores infusing a Romish Spirit into some of His council, which we believe
he saw at last, but seeing, dyed, etc. And to the grief, and great misery of
His Majesty's Subjects, His Majesty is this day abused, and His Kingdoms
ruined, by the same Romish Faction.

Thirdly, here is instance of Gods protection to his people; When Kings
(through Gods mercy) for their errors, and the unjust malice of wicked
Counselors, Example of gods protect. 6
Gods people have present joy and comfort, both in the State, and in their own
conscience; al^o that the enemies of Gods people are cut off by the same
judgments that they intended to bring upon the godly; it was so with
Nebuchadnezzer, his Princes were e^ten by the Lions, but Daniel escaped; Haman
Ester 7. 10. Ester 9. 2. 3.
was hanged upon the Gall^w^ provided for Mordecai; Mordecai had his honors;
and all they that took Arms against the Jews, were slain by the Jews, and the
Jews escaped, etc.

Observe, that our case at this day, is the case of the three Children, of
Daniel, Mordecai, and the Jews, who may with good conscience say to our King,
God delivers his people and brings the wicked to destruction.
as Daniel did, We are innocent before God, and against the King have We done
no hurt: And may expect deliverance by God, and revenge by his hand upon those
that wrongfully seek our lives.

Secondly, some men are moved to it by Ambitious desires, they make honors A
second sort of enemies are men ambitious of honor and command.
and dignities their end; to obtain honor, they will use any dishonorable
ways, and use honor as dishonorably: These are men like Aesops dog, look at
the shadow, and neglect the substance; Virtue, which is the way to Honor, they
^^un; and Vice, which is the original of shame they follow, and climb to Honor
by the stairs of Vice, would be inobled for ignoble actions: These are
commonly very active men, in things they know will please Princes; without
respect to Virtue, or Justice, their end is Honor, not Duty: And when their
end is attained, they are yet unsatisfied, the more Honor, the greater their
Ambition, especially in the Honour-seeking-Clergie, that when they are at
highest, desire to soar higher, and endure no competitour; but if crossed in
their end they grow secretly discontented, full of venom, ^alignity and
hatred, against ^ersons, or causes, that hinder, grow desperate, and seek any
bloody revenge, and rather then lose their own private ends, care not to
destroy Kingdoms. If they go not forward, they will set all backward, and think it
some honor to be buried Wicked men to game their own ends, care not to destroy
whole Kingdom. ^.
in the ashes of a Kingdom; and therefore raise sedition, and civil war,
against their Prince, if he hinder, or against God himself, to make war against
his dearest mem^ers; and thus have some at this day done, and do, against
conscience, and knowledge, and still blow the fire of Contention, to continue
and increase Great Britains misery.

Thirdly, another sort of men make Profit and Command their end; they are
moved, and stirred up to Contention and War, out of Covetousness, especially A
third sort of enemies, are covetous men.
great men, when not contented with their own, will be owners of other men's
Estates, Possessions, Inheritances and Rights, Kings over their Subjects, Lords
over their Tenants, and men of place and authority over their inferiors, to
make themselves commanders, and ^ords over other men's Rights, usurping power
against Law, and distinguish not betwixt Law and will; hence arises murmuring,
impatience, and opposition, bleeding cruelties, and seditious mutinies, from a
spark to a flame; hence grew the discontent of the people of Israel, and the
reason why they asked a King that a King might do them Justice; and hence 1 Samuel 8. 3, 4, 5 1 King: 12. 16:
it was that they revoulted from their King, because he did not Iust^ce unto
them, and this has been one cause of our civil war, and is our present
misery; and was the cause of the first civil war in England, in the ninth year
of the reign of King John, which occasioned the great Charter, agreed upon,
between the King and the Subject, the beam of upright Sovereignty, and
subjection; but when covetousness See Daniel History:
gets into the one scale, the beam turns, and becomes unequal.

Fourthly, others are moved to it, by fear, safety to themselves is their
particular end; when by their actions and proiects, they have out of malice,
ambition, A fourth sort of enemies are Delinquents:
covetousness, or any other way, done violence to religion law, or the peace
of the State; and are by the law found faulty and convicted as Delinquents;
they rise in Rebellion against the Law, to escape punnishment, in hope by
destroying the law they shall prevent the Judgment of the Law; and hence they
disturb the peace, and quiet of the Kingdoms, rather then they will suffer the
just sentence of Justice, they will destroy most unjustly their just Laws,
Religion, and Kingdom: And of this sort there are of all degrees, Nobles,
Clergy, Gentlemen, Citizens, etc. These are the principal causers,
continuance, and aggravation of our bloody War, and the hinderers of peace;
they shun peace as the greatest plague: Thus Cataline (did, being guilty of
many crimes to save himself) conspired against his Country, and was assisted
by Lentulus Cethegus, and many notorious offenders, and vile persons, who also
stood in fear.

The fifth end is spoil and robbing; many deboyft men and of broken fortunes,
decayed in estates, seek to get estates to themselves, out of the ruin, and
destruction A fifth sort of Enemies, are men of broken fortunes:
of the Kingdom, by robbing, plundering, and pillaging honest men, and
therefore desire to break the Laws, that they may escape clearly unquestioned
withal their theevery, and other insolences.

Sixthly, some make liberty, and licentious looseness their end, they hate the
very name of Resormation, either in Laws, or Religion, and look upon them as
A sixth sort of Enemies, are licensious men
their enemies; and therefore desire the destruction of Parliaments; they
prefer licentious liberty, and voluptuous pleasures above all Parliaments,
Laws, or Religion: They look upon it as their God, preferring it above God,
and are worse then Fpicuras their master, who knew no other God, yet (as Seneca
says) even in the shop of pleasures, voluntarily abridged himself of that
content, but amongst us there are a sort of men, Gentlemen and others, who are
never satisfied in their Senea in E. pist: 18.
disordered courses, like those described in the book of Wisdom, Say they
shall be as if they had never been, and shall be forgotten in time, therefore
will I enjoy all pleasures, and not lose any part of their voluptuousness.
Wisd. 2. 1, 2. 7. etc.


Others there are, that are malicious enemies, to the Kingdoms just defense (or
Newters) out of an ignorance of God, and the just cause of God, as if all their
service and obedience to God, hung upon their obedience to the commands of A
seventh sort that are enemies to God and Religion. are Superstitious Ignorant
men. Math. 15. 6.
men, make men gods, and God nothing; making the commandments of God of no
effect, by the tradition and commandments of men.

Now because some of these sorts of men (especially the latter) are so well
instructed by the father of envy, and grand Seducer of men, that they, (as
himself did to our Savior) allege texts of Scripture to seduce men from
their obedience to God, to the obedience of men: I conceive it very necessary
to give a brief Answer to their main Objections.

They object from that place Rom: 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Power: for there is no power but of God etc. And that we are bound to
render to all that which is their due, Tribute, Custom, Honor, Fear, to whom
it is due:

Answer. All men are bound to yield obedience to the higher powers: that is
granted: but that the King is the highest in power, is denied God is the
highest in power, and there are no Powers but what is from God: Ioh. 19. 11.
is that Peter in another place commands honor to be given him: and wise
Solomon, joyneth God and the King together: Fear the Lord and the King: Showing
that there is a kind of holy dignity in the Office of a King: for which we must
fear, 1. Pet. 2. 17.
honor, and obey him: as also showing that there should be no difference
between Pro. 24. 21.
the Commands of a King, and the Commands of God: and therefore to be obeyed
for conscience sake, as Him that is sent of God for the punishment of evil
doers, and the praise of them that do well; and for this cause Kings are to
have Tribute, Customs, Fear, Honor, etc. Kings are principal men set up to
defend their Subjects, and Romans 12. 5.
preserve Kingdoms by administration of justice, (not by tyranny to destroy
men 1. Pet. 3. 14.
and Kingdoms:) So then, the commands of a King is not to be obeyed further
then their commands are agreeable to the commands of God: Plutarch relates a
passage of a woman that was injured, and came to King Philip for justice: But
he willing to put her off, she cried more, and with a loud voice, saying, hear,
and help, Oh King, or be no longer King: Kings are indeed Gods Ministers: as
Judges, Majors, Bailis^s, Constables, etc. are the Kings Ministers, they are to
be obeyed for the King, and the King for God: whose commands, they are to
command, execute, and see Bishop Andrew, in com. 5.
do^ if the King command any thing contrary to Gods command, we are not bound
to obey it, nay we are bound not to obey any such command, for then we shall
disobey God: therein we say (as Peter and John) we ought to obey God rather
than Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29.
man: God only has absolute power, and all other powers are from him. The
power and authority of a King cannot warrant my disobedience to God: No more
then a Major, or a Constable by his authority or command, can warrant me to act
No command of any King ca warant the left disobedience to God. Dan: 3. 16. and
6. 10. Ex. 1. 17. 20. 1. Sam. 14. 45 1. King 21. 3
Treason against a King: Else why did the three children and Daniel refuse to
obey the command of the King? And why did the Mid-wives refuse to obey Pharob
and God blessed them? And why did the people withstand the command of Saul
concerning Jonathan? And Naboth refuse to give his Vineyard to Ahab? So it is
clear that a Kings command is not to be obeyed, further then it is warranted by
Gods Word.

Objected: That Subjects are bound to pray for Kings: as 1. Tim. 2. 2. and to
defend their persons, life, and honor, with the hazard of their own bloods; as
the people would not suffer David to hazard his person against Absolm. 2. Sam.
18. 3. nor would David lay his hand upon the Lords anointed. 1. Sam. 16. 11.
Therefore subjects may not take arms against their King.

Answer. It is true, all subjects are bound to pray for their King, that under
His Government we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all goodlinesse and
honesty: and I do believe, that for the ommission of this duty, God oftentimes
punish^th a 1. Tim. 2: 2
people, by the evil Government of their King, and that most justly: It is a
doubtless a great sin in any subject not to pray for their King, if it be a
duty to pray for It is a duty to pray for the K. and a sin not to pray for him.
1. Sam; 12. 23 Ester 6. 2
all men; much more Kings: God forbid (says Samuel) that I should sin against
the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: Also it is the peoples duty to defend the
Person, State, Life, and Honor, of the King: So Mordecba revealed the Treason
of King Ahushueru's Ennuches: and the people but as duty bound them, fought for
David against 2. Sam: 18: 3:
Absolon: for they say thou art worth ten thousand of us: But it was not duty,
but wickedness in Doeg to slatter Saul, and to incense him against David, and
1. Sam: 22. 9:
against the priests of the Lord: and duty in Abimetech to defend David's
innocence against the wrath of Saul: but it was murder in Doeg (though at the
command of the King) to fall upon the Verse 14. Verse 18. David might not have
killed Saul.
Priests to slay them: and well done in other servants of Saul that refused to
execute that Command: David thought it utterly unlawful to kill Saul, either
in his Cave or in his Trenches., when he was in his hands, but that he was
bound to spare him as he did, it being by the Law of Arms barbarous cruelty to
kill an enemy treacherously: but much more for David to kill Saul: first
because he was a King, the Lords anointed, (as David himself says:) 2ly.
because David should have showed distrust in God, who had promised him the
Kingdom after Saul, (but not by such means to shorten the life of Saul:) Now
faith makes not have, but waits Gods time and means, yet forbids not to use
means of defense, when the person is unjustly assaulted: But we acknowledge it
is the duty of every subject to pray for their King: we also confess, it is
duty by all lawful means to preserve the life, honor, and state of the King:
But, if this be duty (as undoubtedly it is) to do it to this end, that God may
have glory, (for that is the Apostol call rule 1 Cor. 10: 31 2. Tun. 2: 2
in all things) and that we may live quiet, peaceable, and godly lives under
him: for the Apostle gives this reason, why we should pray for Kings:) Then we
are bound to use those means that conduce to that and: Therefore to appose
treacherous, dishonorable Counselors, who by their Subjects are bound to
oppose wicked and dishonorable Counselors.
counsels and actions hinder the Kings welfare, endanger his person and life,
prejudice his honor, or molest the quiet and peace of his people and kingdoms;
and especially such as seek the dishonor of God, and endeavor to take away
holiness, religion, and just rights: take away the wicked from the King, and
his throne shall be established: And this is all that the Parliament, and the
Kingdom do at this day, they stand in the just defense of the King, and all
that may conduce to his safety and welfare: all being by desperate men and armi
s assaulted. Objected Prove: 25. 5.
from that place Daniel 3. 16 from the example of the three children and
Daniel: that if the King command any thing which in conscience we may not
actually obey, yet we are bound to yield passive obedience, by submitting our
selves to the Kings mercy, but not make any resistance. Answer to this
objection (because it carries some truth in it) we must consider what kind of
government we live under: for there are diverse kinds and forms of government:
some Difference in the government (...) Kingdoms
people are bound to that which others are freed from, according to the
several customs, constitutions, and laws of kingdoms: some Kings are more
absolute in power of command some less^ So some subjects are (...) under their
Kings: some free subjects.

The Kings of those ancient Monarchies, Chaldea, Assyria, Media, Persia, Kings
of Chaldea and Assyria, etc.
etc. ruled over their people, as Lords over Slaves; had power over their
persons and goods, and had only nature for their Law, (yet lawful Kings)
which they usually violated to satisfy their wills.

The Kings of Israel and Judea were limited by the law of God: the Kings of
Israel. and Judea.
rule of justice, commanding them not to multiply houses to themselves: nor
cause the people to return to Egypt, etc. they were to judge the people
according to Gods Law, not their own wills: When he sits upon the Throne of
the Kingdom, he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a book, and it shall be
with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he Devt.
17. v. 17, 18, 19.
may learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep all the words of this Law, and
these Statutes to do them.

Now other Kings, and Kingdoms, differ from both these governments: as most
Kingdoms at this day differ one from another: Only, in this, all Kingdoms
have ever agreed: All have chosen and made their King. No King Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
All Kings elected by the people.
ever made himself a Kingdom, but the people made their King, therefore the
Kingdom is greater then the King. It is true, that Kings by force have usurped
Kingdoms. And the Jews after they became tributary to the Romans, had Kings
set over them, and their Customs, Laws, and Religion, changed; but that was
by unlawful force: but else all Kings were elected and chosen by the people,
some for life only, some for life and posterity for ever. The ancient Romans
chose their Kings, and Emperors; but afterward the Soldiers set up in the
Empire whom they would: as after, it fell out with those great Monarchies. But
the people of those Monarchies had no Joseph in martyrdom. of Maccab. 2 Mac. 7.
right to resist their Kings, but were bound by the Law of nature, to obey
them: either to do or suffer: Thus the three children and Daniel, submitted to
the Edict of Nebucbadnezzar, and so that grave Matron Solomona, with her seven
sons, yielded to the tyranny of Antiochus, as Josepbus relates it.

The Kings of Israel and Judea, had a kind of power over the persons and Kings
of Israel what power they had.
goods of the people, in necessary causes, but no further: although Samuel told
the people (to deter them from their desire of a King) that their King would
take their sons, and appoint them for himself, and for his Chariots, and to
be his horsemen, etc. and that he would take the tenth of 1 Samuel 8. v. 11. 15,
16.
their seed, and of their Vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his
servants: But (says he) you shall cry out in that day, because of the King
which ye have chosen: Now Samuel tells them this would be the manner of their
King, See verse. 11.
not that it was the justice of the King to do so; and therefore afterward
when their King was established, Samuel vindicateth his own justice, and
integrity to all the people, before the King: that he had not taken an Ox, or
1 Samuel 12. 3.
Ass, or any thing from any of them, nor defrauded, or oppressed any, or taken
any bribes, etc. yet in this the people were not to resist their King.
Therefore Naboth made no resistance against Abab, when he would take his
Vineyard from him: But right reason, the guide of all actions, and Gods Law,
the Kings rule, which he might not transgress, forbid Kings to oppress their
people: some think it cannot be justified in the ten Tribes, that they cast
off their King Rehoboam, for his oppression but sure I am, it was a just
punishment from God upon him; and may serve for a caveat to oppressing Kings:
and it was God that did it, who puts down one, and sets up another;
therefore when Rehoboam had prepared an army of an hundred and Psalm. 75. 7.
fourscore thousand chosen men, to reduce the kingdom again, God forbids
the people to fight: for this thing (says he) is from me. 1 King. 12. 2^. 24.
Several governments of several kingdoms.


Now other Kings are more limited by contracts, conditions, and Laws of the
Kingdoms: which conditions and Laws are maintained by a middle magistracy
between the King and his people, on the peoples behalf, as there was among
the Lacedaemonians, an Ep^ori, against the power of their King. The Athenians
had their Demarchy, against the Senate; and the Romans their Tribune, against
the Roman Consuls. And thus are Parliaments in England, and diverse other
kingdoms: Thus they were in France, but in France now lost by the same means,
and in the same manner, as they are losing at this day in Great Britain;
envied by oppressing spirits, and innovators: as Prrliaments are the only bar
against unlimited prerogative.
the only bar against unlimited Prerogative. But yet this is Englands
Privilege above other Nations, wherein both King and people are (or may be)
more happy then other kingdoms: and is our hereditory right, which by Gods
assistance we may still enjoy long, and long, to the glory of God, and the good
of unborne posteritics, against all opposition of hell and earth, to defend our
just Laws, and true Religion; except by our sins we so provoke God, that he
will eclipse his own glory, and give over a stupid people (like France) to
betray, and destroy their own happiness.

We know that Parliaments of England have ever been the peace, and
preservation of our Kings, maintainers of their honors, persons, and all just
Parliament are the p^eservation of Kings and people.
rights: The defenders of the people, and their just liberties: have ever
compelled due obedience to Kings, supported them in all necessities out of the
peoples estates, according to the necessity of the one, and the ability of the
other; besides the certain revenues confirmed upon the Crown: And are whilst
they are sitting (being called by the Kings authority) his great, and alone
known counsel, for the great affairs of the kingdom; and besides them we
know none, nor can acknowledge any other, being of Sovereign, and highest
power: The King only above them in person, and Prerogative, to call them
together, as the necessity of the kingdom requires: of which they are
conservers: for the kingdom is not wholly the Kings, but the people have See
Senec. in Clem. l. 1. c. 19.
a propriety. The King indeed is the head to defend and preserve the people: so
it is his to preserve the peace of it, but not to destroy it. The covenants,
and conditions, made between the Kings of England, and the people, at Kings
are bound to keep their covenants with their subjects. See Fren. Accad. c. 55.
of L^^o. See Dr. Will. in com. 5. and Bish. Andrews ^^de^n.
their Coronation, are (as it were) annexed to the Crown, and the King in
conscience bound to observe and keep for the peoples good, and Parliaments
bound in conscience, and justice, to defend, on the peoples behalf: as the
people are bound to obey the King for his authority, so the King is bound to
make good his covenants to the people; which he cannot, nor may violate without
dishonor to God, and manifest injury to his people, having taken oath to
perform and maintain the same: And those rights so reserved to the people,
they may, and ought (by the authority of Parliament) to defend; (being
assaulted) against all opposition.

I say the people are bound to defend their Laws, Religion, lives, estates,
and liberties, by the authority of Parliament (not that any private man or men
may make resistance) against the authority of a King: private men are bound to
obey, or suffer the penalty of the Law: although the Laws be corrupt and
wrested to injustice. Thus did many Worthies in this kingdom, Many Worthies of
this kingdom while they were but private men suffered all penalty of tke Law,
and against Law.
both under the government of King James, and our now Sovereign King Charles:
When oppressed by Loanes, Monopolics, Ship Money, Knighthoodmony, and abundance
of such unjust taxations: though they refused the taxes, being contrary to Law,
and destructive to Parliaments, yet they submitted to the censure of Law,
though the Law was then by a fuger, the Judges, and handlers of the Law
corrupted, pronouncing unjust sentences, upon which came sinings,
imprisonments, dismembring, banishment, etc. Yet for all this we did not, nor
might make any resistance; all we did, was but to make our humble complaints,
by petitions, and humble supplications to his Majesty; and especially our
prayers to God for redress, that we might be eased of our burdens under which
we groaned, and some perished, taking it as a just scourge from the hand of God
for our sins, to suffer our Kings to be ruled by a Malignant counsel, to
oppress and afflict their loyal people: it was one of the judgenents that God
threatened against Jerusalem, I will give Job 34. 30.
children to be their Princes and babes shall rule over them, the people shall
be Esa. 3. 4, 5. verse. 12.
oppressed every one by another, and women should have rule over them: and
again, I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath: an
oppressing, or ungodly King, is the wrath of God upon a Nation: otherwise Hos.
13. 11.
there should be (says reverend Calvine) no more said of a King, then of a
common robber, that violently takes away thy goods, and an adulterer, See
Calv. instit. l. 4. c 20. and Sect. 25.
that defiles thy bed, of a murderer that seeks to kill thee; but as he
bears the image of God, and is the hand of God to afflict, (though else worthy
of no honor) he must be had in estimation, and honored, and not to be
resisted by private men.

But God has appointed his times and means, when, and how such unnatural and
oppressing Kings shall be curbed, though he use them for a time God appoints
times and means to deliver his Church.
to afflict his people, he will raise up means to afflict them, and avenge
himself upon them for their injustice, and deliver his people from their
tyranny: it is in Gods power to make private men of public authority, and arm
them by his own authority to execute public justice, as he stirred up Moses
to deliver his people from the cruelty of Pharaoh, by strong hand, so Othniel,
Exodus 3. 7. Judge. 3 8, 9.
Calebs brother, to deliver the Israelites out of the hands of
Cusban-risbatbim: and by Deborah, and Barak, he delivered them out of the hands
of Jabin, King of Canaan: And he stirred up Gideon, for a deliverer of his
people; who Judge 46. 24.
by inspiration first brake down the Altars, cut down the Groves, and spoiled
all the idolatry of the idolaters, and then gathered a mighty army, and Judge
16. 27. Judge. 7. 37. and verse. 25.
God gave his enemies into his hands by a sinall army of three hundred men: and
so from time to time, when for their sins God had afflicted them, he stirred
them up deliverers armed by his own authority against Kings: the greatest in
power (says Calvin) subdued the lesser, and gave deliverance to his people.
And by such means, and in such cases, it is lawful to take up arms against
the tyranny of Kings.

Such deliverers God has stirred up unto us in England at this day: Who This
Parliament called by the special providence of God.
can deny but this Parliament was called by the special hand and providence of
God, assisted by the authority of the King, by order of his Writs, issued forth
into all counties to bring them together, his Majesty's good correspondency
with them in the beginning, till incensed by Malignant counsel, and
established by his Majesty's own act; and is now (as we have said before) of
Sovereign authority, (his Majesty having by his Regal act stamped upon them
his own image) his great Council, and supreme Court of justice, accounted so
by all Kings of this kingdom, confirmed by the oldest Laws, iterated from
generation to generation: What their authority is, how ancient, and of what
power, is described fully by the zealous and learned Author of that treatise
entitled the Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms: divine Calvin
says of Parliaments, that they ought to withstand the outraging
licentiousness of Kings; Nay (says he) I affirm, that if they wink at
Parliaments are bound to withstand the outrage of Kings. Calvin. in Instit. l
4. c. 20. Sect. 32.
Kings wilfully raging over, and treading down the poor commonalty, their
dissembling is not without breach of says, because they deceitfully betray the
liberty of the people, whereof they know themselves to be appointed protectors
by the ordinance of God.

Then I say, if Parliaments are protectors of the peoples liberties, much more
ought they to protect their Religion, and to defend it with the hazard of their
dearest bloods against all opposers. I remember a story of the Emperor
Trajanus, delivering a sword into the hands of one of the Governors of his
Empire, said unto him these words, Use this sword for me, as long as I do
justly, and against me if I do unjustly. Where the people are a free people,
(says learned Dr. Willet) and the Princes received with conditions, to
maintain See Dr. Will. in Exodus c. 20. quest. 24.
the ancient franchieses, liberties, and immunity of the Country; the State
may lawfully maintain their Liberties against all vexation and violence.

Besides, if a King, or any his ministers shall (under an established Law,
contrary to that Law) assault a private man to take away his life or goods
without the sentence of the Law: such a private man is not bound to submit his
life, but rather to preserve it, either by flight, or defend it by resistance;
a man is bound to defend the life of another, if unlawfully assaulted, much
more his own: every animal is by nature taught to defend it self, what A
private man may desend himself against unjust violence
nature allows to other creatures, it denies not to a man; besides, the Law of
the kingdom allows a man to defend himself against all unjust violence: And
Scripture yields us warrantable example in that kingly Prophet David, he
defended himself against Saul his King, although he would not lay his hand
upon Saul teacherously to kill him, yet he would take up arms to defend
himself: and himself says, that three ways he might see the death of Saul,
and be guiltless; either that he die a natural death, or that God smite 1 Samuel 26. 10.
him by some extraordinary stroke, or that he wilfully descend into the battle
and perish.

Now that David would have joined in battle with Saul, if Saul had assaulted
him, is clear; sor, when David had delivered the men of Keilab from the
Philistines, and possessed himself of the Town, it being a strong place, with
gates and bars: he heard that Saul would come thither against him. Then he
enquires two things of God: first, whether indeed Saul would come: secondly,
whether the men of Keilah would deliver him up into his hand; and the Lord
answered him that Saul would come, and the men of Keilah would deliver him up:
He asks not whither he 1 Samuel 23. v. 10 11, 12.
should fight with Saul, but resolved if the men of Keilah would stand
faithful to him, to abide the siege, and stand battle against Saul: But
because the Keilahites were treacherous, he departed, and went whither h^ could
for safety. So when Antiochus, by cruelty, oppressed the Jews; forcing them to
forsake their Religion, the Laws, and Customs of Josep. war. Jews, l. 1. c.
^. 1 Macc. 2. 24, 25. etc.
their Nation, Matthias, the son of Osmoneus, with his sons, took arms
against him, flew Bacchades, chief Captain of his Garrisons, and by force
opposed the cruelty and unjust commands of Antiochus.

The office of a King is the ordinance of God, and Kings are Gods anointed;
but we must consider there are anointed of God that are not Kings, all Gods
elect, (Saints on earth) are Gods anointed, as well the beggar as the King;
and these, whether King or beggar, are precious in Gods sight: God has
reproved anointed Kings, for these annoynteds sake: saying, touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: Kings Psalm. 105. 15. Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
are gods in the Throne, men in the grave; gods, as they are executioners of
Gods will, and worthy of all honor, reverence, and obedience: men, as they are
executioners of their own wills, and neglect Gods command: Kings are Kings in
two respects, in respect of God, who sets them up, and 1 Samuel 10. 24. 1 Samuel
11. 15.
in respect of men that chose them, and accept of them; and so every kingdom
is bound to obey their own King, not another.

Now God sets up Kings to be a terror to the evil, not to the good, to punish
ungodly men, and oppressors, not to cherish them, nor to oppress; Romans 13. 3.
1 Samuel 8. 5.
and the people choose and accept of Kings, to be their protectors, and to do
justice betwixt man and man. Now if a King fail of the duty of a King, I say
not that he is therefore no King, but still a King, and, Gods anointed: but if
he command things contrary to God, and contrary to the Laws of his kingdom,
he is not to be obeyed, but contrary, (if there be a Parliament) they, that is
the Parliament, may and ought in the kingdoms defense, to oppose any power,
(directly or indirectly) raised to the dishonor of God, and violation of the
Laws of the kingdom, or the rights and freedom of the subjects: yet so, as
they are bound to preserve (if possible) the person of the King: and this is
agreeable to right reason, and is the judgment of the learned of all times,
divine and humane.

Elizabeth, and King James, as also all the known Laws, just privileges of
Parliament, and the liberty of the Subject.

Whilst the Bishops and popish Lords remaened in the house they hindered all
proceedings, and as soon as they were out, they put the King upon a war.
who are separated from them, and have raised this war against them; we know
they came as unjustly to their elections, as they have since unfaithfully
discharged their trust, many of them obtained voices for their elections, by
letters, bribes, threats, flatteries, and violence, and had Papists votes,
which is contrary to Law: these only are the factious men, that for particular
selfe-ends endeavor to destroy our Religion, and to ruin the Kingdom:
Whereas the other (which is the Parliament) have, and do, hazard all that is
their own, yea their dare lives, for the public good; They that flatter
Kings seek worldly preferments, which these are willing to lose to discharge
good conscience: Saul had no better argument to discourage his servants from
holding with innocent 1 Samuel 22. 7.
David, then to tell them David had not fields and Vine-yards to give to every
one of them. But this Popish faction declared plainly that they sought the
ruin of the Parliament, else why did they accuse five members at once of
Treason, and persuade the King to demand them out Charging the five members, a
breach of all privileges of Parliament.
of the House; if those had been delivered, by the same right, they might next
day have accused as many more, and so as many as they pleased, (which we know
they intended) where then had been the privilege of Parliament? (a precedent
to Kings is no less then a Law) is this but a jealousy? Then they (by what
means I know not) persuaded the King to come in person to the House, with 400.
Cavaliers, desperate men, armed with weapons of war, to take them by force,
or to destroy them, had not God sent them away (as he did Eliah, when Ahab
sought his life.) I am sure this was no jealousy, when the Tower of London was
committed to Lord Cottington, afterward to Lunsford, and others, it was
jealousy enough; and when Captain Leg, and the Earl of Newcastle, were
authorized to keep Hull, (both known Papists) afterward when the King
withdrew himself by their counsels, to Windsor, and the Queen sent beyond Sea
with the kingdoms jewels, to traffic for men, money, and arms, I am sure
this proves more then jealousy.

When they drew the King (by their counsels) to York, when there was no cause
of fear, they deluded the people under the Kings name, and procured a strong
guard for his person, so they wrought means to make the King afraid of his
people, and the people afraid of their King: Seneca says, he that thinks a
King can be secure in the place where all are afraid of him, abuses himself:
Kings See Senec. in Cle'n. l. 1. c. 19.
(says he) need not sortifie unaccessable places, nor cut down sides of
Mountains, nor ensconce themselves with walls, and towers; clemency will secure
a King in the open fields, and that only is his impregnable fortress, etc.
Thus when they had procured their guard, pretended for defense, it proved
presently an army of offense to destroy the kingdom: And yet they would
persuade us there was nothing but needless jealousies; any rational man will
say it was now time that the Parliament should provide for the kingdoms
safety, (for they prepared no army till things were gone thus far against
them) Then the Kings Standard was set up at Notingham, war professed, which
before was by words, protestations, and attestations, under many of their false
hands denied. Now they fell to sack houses, besiege Castles, plunder, abuse,
and destroy those that favored not the popish faction: from Notingham they
marched to Shrewsbury, where with Papists and Heathen-Welsh, they made a mighty
army, which ever since has overspread the kingdom, destroying men and
beasts, just as their confederacy have done in Ireland, and yet these are all
but jealousies: But besides these, we had jealousies apparent enough (that this
would be the issue) by their preparations, for 20. years past, See the
Remenstrance of that Parliament Ann. Dom. 1628. lately printed. Genesis 47. 14.
all which showed their intent was to set up Popery, and to force, or weary out
Parliaments, forcing them like Issachar to couch between two burdens: And
these ten or eight last years, things have hasted to a period, as a stone to
its Center; at the beginning of this Parliament, we were almost brought to hold
our lives by Patent of them, as they held our Former proceedings clearly show
an intent of innovation. 2. Sam. 3. 27.
livelihoods by Patents of the King from us; and still we must believe their
fair words, and protestations, but not believe our eyes, nor their actions,
although we have proved their words and protestations, all false, and all their
actions as we feared and expected; their words have been, and are as deceitful
as the words of Joab to Abner, that they may smite us under the fifth rib,
without suspicion or resistance: We must believe, that those Irish Rebels, that
are in the army of Cavaliers, and those that are to come, mean to fight for the
Protestant Religion here, though they fight against it in Ireland. Truly it is
a wonder, (but that it is done by the hand of God for our punishment) that ever
a knowing people, after so many experiences of their persidious breach of
promises, and insulting treacheries, should be led as the people of England
are, to destroy themselves, and betray the Gospel of Christ: Was there ever any
thing more manifest, then their unfaithfulness? if we had no other example,
then the example of Ireland, what promises, what protestations, what mighty
shows of good was intended Promises broken, therefore. not to be be: leeved.
to them, and calling upon the Parliament for help, that all the kingdom
sounded with the noise of their zeal? but as provision was making ready they
hindered it, stayed the sending of help to them: and at last openly opposed
their assistance, made war upon us here, and secretly assisted the Rebels
with what they were able from England, or other kingdoms, that so the Rebels
might be quickly able to assist them here, Commission of Array is a direct
breach of liberty.
to butcher us, as they have done the Protestants there. And now we our selves
are forced and compelled most slavishly, by the Commission of Array, to break
our privileges and freedom, and fight against the Parliament, to make our
posterities slaves, as well as our selves; and yet we must believe we shall
enjoy our liberties and the freedom of free subjects. He that will believe
such impossibilities, and apparent untruths, and not believe that they mean,
as some of them have sworn (in my hearing) that they will not leave a
Protestant Roundhead alive in England, is more stupid then Harpast Seneca's
fool, who being stricken blind, would not Vid. Senec. E. pist. 50.
believe she could not see, but said the house was dark. Let no man imagine
that those who are traitors to God, will ever keep any promise with godly men.
We know a perjured Papist, (if by his forswearing he further the Catholic
cause) shall be a canonized Saint.



Petition of Right never observed.
things did formerly, notwithstanding the Petition of Right granted by the
King, and accepted by the people with great joy and thankfulness: Yet his
Majesty through that wicked counsel, has not observed it. What assurance or
hope can we have of the continuance of any of the rest, to enjoy them any
longer then this, seeing this is all the security we have for them? And this
which was one of the last enacted, is the first assaulted; for, if the King
may, or can break this, he may, or will deny us all the rest: if such a wicked
malignant counsel be still suffered.

Therefore we have good cause to believe that that counsel consented The
passing of the Bills of public benefit in this Parliament but a trap to catch
the people, to make themselves destroy the Parliament and all Laws together.
to the passing of such Statutes, only to insinuate into the peoples
affections to blind their eyes with a show of reformation, because they well
knew that the heavy burdens, and intolerable oppressions, that lay so newly
upon the back of the Subjects, had imbittered their hearts, and enraged the
spirits of the people; which the passing of those Acts, they thought, would
mitigate, that by such means they might seduce the people, and draw them (as
they have done) to join with them against the Parliament, that so they might
make them instruments to undo themselves, and to destroy all other Acts, and
the whole Laws: for by this way they have taken, they may (and mean to)
destroy all as well as this one, for all hangs upon this. He that sees not, or
that will not believe that this is their purpose, is desperately blind, and
maliciously wilful.

Nor do I charge the King in these things, although it be our greatest misery,
that his Majesty is thus misled, to his own Majesty's prejudice, and his
Subjects ruin: we know Kings themselves cannot err: but Kings see with other
men's Kings see, hear* speak, and act by other men, and are often abused in
counsels to the prejudice of their people. Dan. 6. 4. 14.
eyes, hear with other men's ears, speak with other men's tongues, and act by
other men's hands: All Kings are guided by counsel, Nebuchadnezzar was ruled by
his counsel, and intrapped by their subtilty, to sign a Decree against
Daniel, which he intended not. Ahashuerus was persuaded by the counsel of
wicked Haman, to sign a Decree against the people of the Jews, under a fair
pretense (as the wicked counselors to our King have done) and believed the
counsel to be very good: there was a show of profit (which Kings love) and a
show of conformity, and order, a thing very good, and desired by Esther 3. 8. 9.
all good men. Now the King Ahashuerus could not imagine that Haman would
betray the life of his Queen, who had done no harm to any, nor of Mordecai
who had saved the Kings life. King Rehoboam would not give an answer to his
peoples petition till he was advised by his counsel, and therein he did well;
But he did not well to reject the counsel of the old grave counselors, 1 King
12. 8.
and follow the counsel of young gallants, brought up with him in his youth:
Now we may think it was his affection to the persons of the Flatering counsel
seek their own advantage, not the Kings good.
men, that caused him to harken to their counsel; and it is flattery in such
men, to give such counsel as they know will best please Kings, because they
seek honor to themselves, not good to the King, or revenge upon them they
hate, though the hazard the Kings prejudice.

When Ahab had but a desire to Naboths Vineyard, and was denied, Jezabel
thought that desire warrant enough for her to use the Kings name and his Seal
too, and to send to all the Elders, Nobles, and Citizens in the City of Naboth,
and they all as ready to obey whatsoever was the desire and command 1 King. 21.
8.
of a Queen: because she (as the counselors that rule our Sovereign) puts a
very fair pretense upon her bloody design, as different from her intentions,
as God is from the Devil: the commands a religious fast to be proclaimed, and
the man that she meant to destroy, she pretends to honor: Set Naboth (says
Verse (...)
she) on high above all the people, and that all may pass under pretense of
justice, and Law: Naboth must be accused before all the people, and his
accusations Verse 13.
testified upon oath, and he must be accused of no small crime, no less then
treason, not only against the King, but blasphemy against God Naboth See Verse
1^.
did blaspheme God and the King: Gods name is ordinary abused, in such bloody
treacherous designs, that the show of holiness may cover the bloody designs,
and all the multitude are ready and forward not only to Verse 11.
believe, but to act such wicked commands. Thus we see Kings have been misled,
and wicked things have been committed under a show of good, and pretense of
Religion.

God has in great mercy discovered letters written to the great City of Letter
and Commission sent to London to act bloody slaughters.
London, the City of our Naboths, and Commissions under the great and Royal
Seal, to effect as bloody and cruel designs, as that of the Counselors of
Nebuchadnezzar against Daniel, or that of Haman against Mordecai, or of Jezabel
against Naboth, not only to have destroyed one Daniel, one Mordecai, one
Naboth, but many: yea, all our Daniels, all our Mordecai's, all our Naboths,
and grave faithful Counselors of the kingdom, and under the notion of
defense of the Protestant Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, and the
known Laws of the kingdom, none of which are in the least manner opposed,
but by them that protest to do all these bloody and barbarous cruelties, under
pretense of defending them; I know not what Princes, Counselors, or Captains
have consulted to plot this wicked design: what Hamans, what Jezabels. But I
know God has discovered it, and I dare pronounce from the mouth of God, who
ever they be, they shall not prosper: Plotters of ^^ca^herous and bloody
designs shall not prosper.
whether they have prevailed with the King to consent to it, or whether they
have done it without his consent, as they have done, and daily do, what his
Majesty never heard of; they have more eye upon his Majesty, then his Majesty
has upon his Seal, or what passes under it, in his name, especially in this
time of war, wherein all things are common, and men cannot keep their own
wives from the violent lust and rage of bloody Cavaliers. It is not long since
God by his wonderful providence discovered a dangerous and bloody design upon
the City of Bristoll, somewhat in nature like unto that Plot against Bristoll.
upon London, but much below it in cruelty, besides many other strange and
dangerous plots, by divine providence all prevented and blasted, but assuredly
when the time appointed by God is come, and the sins of those Popish and
Heathen Protestants (for they would be called Protestants) is full, as the
sins of the Amorites, for which God prolonged the time of making good his
promise to his servant Abraham, and to his seed; till when, they were to serve
under great affliction and bondage, as God promised Abraham; (and I am sure the
same promise belongs to all the Church of God that are true Protestants) See
Cen. 15. v. 13, 14. 16.
that he would judge that people under which his people should serve: and I
hope none doubt of the performance of that, but that it was made good upon the
Egyptians; nor will I doubt but it will be made good upon the Cavaliers, and
plotters of these cruelties; it was so with all those wicked plotters, and
Counselors of Kings, against Gods people, that we mentioned in the last page.
The Malignant Counselors of Nebuchadnezzar, were themselves devoured by those
Lions that they thought should have eaten Daniel: Dan. 6. 24.
Wicked Haman that procured the King to sign a Decree against Mordecai, and
Esther 7. 10.
the people of the Jews, was hanged upon the same Gallows that he had
prepared to hang Mordecai: King Rehoboam, that followed the rash counsel 1
King. 12. 16.
of greedy young men, lost the greatest part of his kingdom for ever: And
Jezabell for her bloody plots against Naboth (with Ahab who did nothing to 1
King. 22. 37. 2 King. 9. 33
hinder her) were both destroyed: all this you may see confirmed by the
witness of Sacred testimony. We know God is the same now, that he was in those
days, he changes not, he is no less just to avenge himself upon Mal. 3. 6.
Esa. 59 1. Heb. 1. 12.
wicked men; he is as merciful to save his people, he is as strong and able to
do it: And the same promises belong unto us as unto Abraham and his seed, we
have had as great experiences of his love and mercy, as ever the Jews Romans 9.
8. Gal. 4. 28. Romans 15. 4.
had (or any people since) by several and many deliverances from the
invasions, and home-hatcht treasons of the hellish Papists, God by his
providence has made all their conceptions, plots, and treasons, abortive to
this day, (only he has, and must scourge us by them, for our sins) besides
we have Fromer deliverances should strengthen our says in God.
had wonderful experience of Gods mercy, and his hand of providence with us in
these present miseries, which should strengthen our faith and courage. David
was encouraged by much lesser deliverance to encounter with Goliab (the terror
of men) for (says he) the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion,
and of the Bear, he will deliver me from the hand of this Philistim. And we 1 Samuel 17. 37.
may with assurance rest upon him for deliverance, when his time is come; if
Psalm. 94. 13. Prove. 11. 5. Heb. 3. 19. Psalm. 56. 12. 2 Chro. 32. 25. Jer. 5.
25. Psalm. 37. 5. 7. Romans 8. 25. Heb 6. 15. Acts 17. 2 Chro. 39. 36 Psalm. 7 3.
19. Esa 51. 22, 26.
our unbelief, and unthankfulnes hinder it not: The people of Israel could not
enter into the promised Land, because of their unbelief; and wrath was upon
Hezekiah, because he returned not thankfulness to God, according to the
mercies he received; for such sins will withold good things from us: But if
we will wait by faith, and patience till the appointed time come, though we
know not when it will be: for times and seasons of this kind are secret to God:
But if we were heartily prepared to seek God, and fitted for reformation, as
the people were in Hezekiahs time, the thing would be done suddenly, and we
should drink no more of the cup of Gods fury: but he would give it into the
hands of them that afflict us to drink: who say to our souls, Bow down that
we may go over, etc.

I know these things though they be sweet, and pleasant to them to whom they
are chiefly meant, will be accounted bitter to guilty men: what I write is
truth, and it is written to a good end; but to them who are in the gaul of
bitterness, sweet things are bitter: I am not invective against the person of
any man, if any thing I write make any man sorrowful to repentance, I have my
desire: and for my Sovereign Lord the King, I honor and reverence his person,
and authority: my soul mournes for him, and my prayer ever shall be to the God
of the spirits of all men, to open his eyes (for he is misled) and to give him
a heart like David, that he may be a nursing Father, and his Queen a nursing
Mother Esa. 44. 22.
to his people and kingdoms. Upon his head let his Crown flourish, that he
may live to reign over his three kingdoms, long, and long, to the glory of
God; and that the Scepter may not depart from his posterity, while the Sun and
Moon endure, but let shame be upon all his enemies. Psalm. 132. 18.


I charge not his Majesty as author of these evils, for it is all by a
malignant counsel, by which he has been misled, and is still swayed by
natural love The King not charged with these evils, but his wicked counselors.
and affection to some, who have craftily entangled him in the snares of their
craftiness: slattery is very like true friendship, and some slatterers, in
shows, can exceed a true friend, and such convey vice covertly in show of
virtue, and is often received by men of good affections: as judicious Seneca
speaks, when men affect the person, the counsel is very prevalent, because we
seldom doubt such men: it was the Devils policy first to deceive Eve, and
leave her to seduce Adam, which probably the Devil could not have done
himself. Solomon who was Gen 3. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 14. See Josep. in antiq. l. 8. c.
2. Ecclus. 25. 13
never, nor could be seduced by an enemy, was by his wives drawn to serve
their gods; to gratisie and express the love he bore to his wives, he grew to
honor their gods, as Josephus shows: give me (says the son of Sirach) any
plague but the plague of the heart, and any wickedness but the wickedness of
a woman.



Answer. This is a mere cavil, senseless and ridiculous, that the voluntary
absence of the Kings person, should frustrate the act (besides the Statute Law)
of the King, which is absolute without condition, except they will confess,
and say plainly, what we have before alleged; namely, that this Act, as all
these Acts of grace, so much boasted of, was passed only to deceive the
people, and therefore no Act, because no Act was meant: But this cannot annull
the Act; it is but like the plea that the Argians made when they had falsified
the truce with Cleomenes King of Macedon, which they made for seven days. And
the third night after, the Argians (when the Macedonians were secure) fell upon
them, and said the truce was but for the days, the nights were not mentioned
We know diverse such equivocations, and Jesuiticall cavils were transported from
Spain by Bristoll, and so brought to the Court to counterfeit truth, as the
Bristoll stone does the Diamond.

But now they have a new devise, to deceive the people by Proclamation, under
great show of justice, and tender care of the Subject; it is no better then the
Foxes Sermon when he means to devour, we must obey frothy Proclamations, and
disobey solid, and law full Orders of Parliament: we must count By Proclamaron
we are ^abid to obey any Vote of parliament, and the parliament, ^^disallowed
at Westminster as no parliament, but a Oxford, where it may beawed, it that he
accepted.
the Parliament, a Parliament or no Parliament, as the Proclamation shall
conclude; if it remove to Oxford, a Parliament; if it remain at Westminster,
no Parliament: at Oxford it may be forced, but at Westminster it will be free:
Therefore while it is at Westminster it is but a pretended Parliament, though
by the Kings own Act confirmed, during the pleasure of both Houses, and
necessity of the kingdom, yet now we must believe that they are traitors, and
raised an Army to take away the Kings life, and to murder the Queen: We must
believe their gloss, not the text, what they say, not what is true, wise men
may easily see the snare, and pass by.

We see our misery, and the causes of it; the cure follows: but before we
meddle with the cure, take notice of an error in men, seeking cure from things
that Error in the cure of misery.
cannot help, and that increases our misery; we have in all our afflictions
looked too much to the hand of men, as the causes, and so for cure; and we have
trusted to the arm of fiesh, to the creature, and to outward means, and
consider not that they are vain: all things under the Sun, says Solomon, are
vanity, and vanity of vanities: not able to keep themselves from misery, much
less can they help us, or cure our misery.

When God has (as formerly) afflicted us with pestelince, we have attributed
it to outward causes, corruptayre, ill diet, etc. and sought cure by medicines,
or fly from infected places to escape it. When God sent great droughts, or
extraordinary rain, which has smit the fruits of the earth, we have been
ready to ascribe it to the conjunctions of Planets, and to natural causes: and
from thence have expected remedy. When we have had rumors of any foreign
enemy, by invasion, we have trusted to our seas and shipping, and our great
preparations by Land. When we were afflicted by oppressions, taxations, and
crrruption in justice, we ascribe the cause to the discontinuance of
Parliaments, and seek to Parliaments for cure; thus we have looked to the arm
of flesh in all.

In our great and long afflictions under cruel taskmasters, and heavy
burdens, laid upon us; we cried undo the Parliament to ease and help us: but
we were not thankful to God, that miraculously gave us a Parliament, nor
sought unto God by prayer to bless our Parliament to us, and make our
Parliament a means to cure us; but we sought unto the Parliament earnestly by
We look upon Parliaments as gods, not as Gods means to deliver us.
Petitions from every part of the kingdom, as if they were our gods, and
because they cannot help us, as we desire, we murmr against God, and against
them, as the stubborn rebellious Israelites did against Moses and Aaron in the
Wilderness, because they enjoyed not presently what they looked for; they wish
they had died in Egypt, rather then to be brought into the Wilderness, to be a
prey to the enemies, etc. So we, because we have not present cure of our
misery, we wish we had no Parliament, we complain that our burdens are
greater, and our misery much more increased, and better with us when we were in
our former bondage: this was the Israelites sin, and is ours, for this sin,
their carcasses fell in the Wilderness for forty years, and they never see
the good land of promise. And for this sin many of us have fallen, and more
will surely fall (except we repent) and shall never see the day of our
deliverance, nor cure of our misery, because our hearts have not been prepared
2 Chronicles. 20. 33. 2 Chro. 12. 14.
to seek God. We have sought to our Parliament, and vanity was there, because
we would not see God in it: we have sought to our King, and vanity was there
too: we have sought to our Armies, trusted in the strength of our men, and
horse, and glorious preparations, as if that could cure all; and vanity is writ
in the face of all these things. We looked to Holland to befriend All the help
looked for from any creature is vanity Eccles. 1. 14.
us, and upon our Brethren the Scots to come to our help: And behold, vanity
is found in all our hopes. All creatures are vanity, we prove the words of the
Preacher true in all: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit. When God for
the sin of his people Israel, sent unexpected terrible thunder and lightning
amongst them, they cried to Samuel to pray for them: Samuel bids them not to
turn aside to 1 Samuel 12. 21.
follow after vain things, which (says he) cannot profit nor deliver, for
they are vain: all are like Jobs friends, miserable comforters, as a stasse of
reed, on which Job 16. 2. 2 King. 28. 21.
if a man lean, it will break, and pierce his hand: all these things will
fersake us, leave us in our misery: they shall wander every one to his quarter,
none shall Esa. 41. 15. Psalm. 60. 11. Psalm. 62. 9. Psalm. 31. 6.
save thee: vain is the help of man (faith holy David) and why? because men
of lov degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: Therefore says he,
I have hated them that trust in lying vanities, but I will trust in the Lord;
God is our refuge and our strength, a very present help in time of trouble.
The righteous Psalm. 40. 1. Psalm. 34. 17.
cry and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their trouble:
God will help the righteous when they cry unto him: He, and he only gives
ability to Parliaments, turns the hearts of Kings, prospers Armies, and
stirs up friends to help: God is the true helper, all else are but his
instruments.

Now we are come to the cure it self, God is he that cures all misery, Esa
41. 22. Why, and how God will cure his peoples misery when they cry unto him.
and he only can cure, and heal Great Britains misery: Look unto me and be
saved, all the ends of the earth, for I am God there is none else.

Now it is necessary that we inquire into two things: first, why God will cure
his people: secondly, how God will cure his people, when they cry unto him.

To the first I answer, no other reason can be given why God will cure his
people when they are in misery, but for his own name sake: it is certain
there is nothing in man that can merit the least good from God, for when the
best of Gods own people have done all the best they can, they fall short of
duty, and therefore are but unprofitable servants: now he Iuke 17. 10.
that is unprofitable, and comes short of that which is duty, cannot merit any
thing: God at the first chose himself a people, of his free love, out of the
corrupt lump of Adams posterity, and out of the idolatrous Nations, to be a
peculiar people to himself. There can be no reason given why he did it, but
because it was his good pleasure, he had a delight to love them: there was
nothing lovely in them, When I passed by thee, I saw Deuteronomy. 10. 15. Ezck. 16. 6.
8.
thee in thy blend polluted, and I said unto thee, Live: and I spread my skirt
over thee, etc. Behold it was the time of love. He says further: because I
loved Dcut. 4. 37.
thy fathers, therefore I chose their seed after them: the Lord has avouched
them to be his peculiar people, that they should keep his Commandments, not
because they did keep his Commandments; he did not choose them because they
were holy, but because they should be holy: nor does God save, or deliver them
for their righteousness, but for his own name sake: The Lord will not forsake
his people for his great name sake: (as Samuel tells 1 Samuel 12. 22.
the people) because (says he) it has pleased God to make you his people.
There is a covenant between God and his people which he made with Abraham his
servant, and it is an everlasting Covenant, in which he has bound himself, to
be the God of Abraham's seed, and that they shall be Genesis 17. 7. etc. Psalm. 50.
his people: therefore when they cry unto him he will hear, and will deliver
them, and heal their miseries, that they may glorify him.

The second Quere is, how God does cure his people, when they cry unto him. To
this I answer, God is unlimited, all power is in his hands, he can do it at
his pleasure; he that created all things, can create deliverance for his
people: But usually, God does cure his people by means

1. Inwardly 2. Outwardly.
First, inwardly, for God uses to humble his people by their afflictions, for
this cause God led his people forty years through the wilderness, to humble
Dcut. 8. 2. 16. Exodus 32. 9. 2. Chro. 32. 26.
them and to prove them; for they were a stiff-necked people: so God brought
wrath upon Hezekiah to humble him, and by this means he was delivered, and
healed of wrath: Manasseh, that extreme wicked King, 2 Chro. 33. 12.
by afflictions was humbled greatly before the God of his fathers, and was by
that means healed of misery: the reason is, because God dwells Esa 57. 15.
Psalm. 10. 17. Prove. 15. 33. 1 Samuel 2. 7 Job 2. 11.
with them that are of humble spirits, to revive them, and to raise them up. He
hears (says holy David) the desire of the humble; and wise experienced
Solomon tells us, humility goes before honor: The Lord first brings Law, and
then he lifts up; God saves the humble persons.

By humility God makes them sensible of the greatness of their sin, and Gods
displeasure for sin; and so they come to cry unto God, and complain of
themselves; Woe unto us that we have sinned: When Job by Lam 5. 16.
affliction was sensible of Gods displeasure for sin, he cried out, I have
sinned, what shall I do, O thou preserver of men? Why have thou set me as a
Job 7. 20.
mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self? Thus does the Church in
their misery: He has hedged me about, that I cannot get out, he has Lam. 3.
7.
made my chain heavy: and again, Wherefore does a living man complain: a
Verse 39. Lam. 1. 8. 9.
man is punished for his sins? Jerusalem has grievously offended, therefore
she is removed, and they that honored her, despised her, etc. God sends
afflictions upon his people to this end, that they may be humbled, and seek
him: in their affliction they will seek me early: and in their affliction
Hose. 25.
God will hide his face from them, till they be humbled. I will go to my Jam.
4. 6. Psalm. 51. 9.
place till they acknowledge their offenses, and seek my face: God first
humbles, and then he gives grace, he will teach the meek his way.

The humbled heart is cast down, despaires in it self, and therefore Men of
humble hearts seek unto God.
seeks to God, God gives that grace of faith to the humble; the humbled soul,
is a believing soul, it believes God to be able, and all-sufficient to
deliver, and to heal any misery, and so he is set aworke to seek 2 Samuel 24.
10.
God, and to pray earnestly for mercy and pardon of sins, and blot out mine
iniquities, etc. This brought the Leper to Christ, he believed Christ Psalm. 31.
9.
was able to cure his leprosy (though he doubted of his will) and humbly
seeks to him, and kneeling down, said; if thou will thou can make Mark 1.
40.
me clean. It set the Centurion to seek cure of Christ for his servant.
Matthew. 8. 8.
And the woman that had the Issue of blood twelve years, when she had spent
all she had upon the Physicians, and could get no lrelpe, she comes
confidently Matthew. 26. 34.
to Christ, and therefore was healed; thy faith has made thee whole. Thus the
woman of Canaan came to Christ, and cried, Lord have mercy upon me, Matthew. 15.
22.
etc. although Christ seemed to put her off, she still cried after him; when he
seems to count her as a Dog, and tells her he was not sent to give the
childrens bread unto Dogs, she cries after him for all this, and is contented
with all; she replies, Truth Lord, yet though I be indeed a Dog, Verse 27. 28.
give me the crummes that fall from the table: that is, but a Dogs portion,
but we know she had a child's reward.

Now from these preparations of the heart, by the work of God upon the heart,
arises (cordial sorrow for sin, and steadsast belief in God through
Christ) the two radical graces, Faith, and Repentance; which are conditions
upon which (or qualifications to which) God has The Covenant and promises are
to none but to them that believe and repent.
engaged himself by covenant both to pardon sin, and to deliver from
temporal misery. It is true, the ground and cause is only Gods free love, why
he engaged himself in a covenant to his people, that he might magnify his
mercy through Christ, in whom is our righteousness and our life; but the
covenant and promise extends no further then to Faith and Repentance. Such as
believe, and such as repent, only, Acts 4. 12.
have right to the promise, not all that seem to be Gods people: for there are
that call themselves Jews, and are not: many profess themselves Revel. 2. 9.
to be of the seed of Abrabam, but have no right to what God has promised:
the unbeleeving Jews boasted of the privilege of being Abraham's: John 8. 39.
44. Matthew. 3. 9.
sons, but they were the children of the Devil.

Now the covenant was not with the Jews as they were lineally the sons of
Abraham: but as they were of the faith of Abraham, nor to them alone, as they
were, are, or shall be of Abraham's faith; but unto all Nations, none excepted:
the Scripture (says the Apostle) foreseeing that God would justific the
Heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. That is, all of all Nations,
Gal. 3. 8. Romans 4. 12. Genesis 17. 22. Genesis 25. 23. Mal. 1. 3. 2 King. 22. 2.
that walk in the steps, and faith of Abraham: for they, and they only, are
of the seed of Abraham: Abraham had an Ismael, that had no part in the promise.
Isaak had an Esau that was excluded from the promise: and wicked Ammon had a
good Josiah to his son.

And as the promise was to all Nations, so the Gospel was appointed to all
Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15 Act, 20. 24
Nations, Go and teach all nations, baptizing, etc. the Gospel is called the
Gospel of the grace of God: because by the preaching of the Gospel, faith and
repentance is wrought, and we are begotten to be the sons of Abraham through
the 1 Cor. 4 15. Romans 10. 17. Maith. 16. 16 Act, 10. 34, 35
preaching of the Gospel: So then, he that believes, and is baptized (of every
Nation) shall be saved; He that fears God, and works righteousne, is
accepted of God; to believe and to be baptized, is to believe and repent: the
water of baptism is called the water of repentance. We are baptized unto
repentance, and this is that which John Baptist was sent to preach, and
therefore he baptized: faith and repentance Mark 1. 15. Maith. 3. 2. 11.
go together; wheresoever is true faith, there is repentance, and where both
are not, there neither; they are both together in nature, but faith is first in
order, because no man repents, except he believe mercy is to be had Jer. 31
19. Heb. 11. 6.
in God: He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him: faith and repentance are the badges
of Gods people, he ownes them by it, and without it no man can call God his
God; much less can any man expect deliverance or protection from God.

We have in our former discourse proved that there is no misery but what is
from God, for sin: we will also prove that there is no denunciation of wrath,
or misery threatened for sin, but it is with condition: If you believe not, ye
shall be condemned: if ye believe, ye shall not perish: if you repent not,
ye shall perish; if ye repent, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 18. Verse 15. Luke 13. 3.
Acts 2. 38. Romans 15. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Romans 4. 20.
ye shall have remission of sins: These, and these only have right in the
covenant with God, and may claim the promises of protection, and deliverance;
and these, without any presumption, may be confident: for God is true and
faithful in all his promises; and is most honored and best pleased, when we
believe with assured confidence, if we perform the condition on our part. God
has promised if we believe and repent, to pardon our sins, and to heal our
misery: if a wicked man will turn from all his sins, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not die; God Ezekiel. 18. 21.
Rev. 21 3.
himself will dwell with them, and wipe away all tears. Thus says the Lord,
speak to the City of Judah, if so be they will hearken, and every one turn
from his evil way, I will repent of the evil I purposed to bring, etc. Jer.
26. 2, 3.
again, If a Nation against whom I have denounced, turn from their snne, Ier.
18 8. Joel 2. 13. Joel 3 4. Zach. 1. 3. A ^ 3. 9.
I will repent of the evil, etc. Promises of this kind are very frequent
through the whole book of God, Repent and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out.

This is the only and alone cure, of Great Britaires misery, God has long
looked that we should by faith look unto him: and by repentance make our peace
with him: but we have deferred, and that has increased our misery! Ier. 25. 5.
2 King 17 13. Ier. 18. 11. Acts 17. 30.
God Commands us to believe, and to repent, it is his glory, and our own good:
and the omission of this duty makes us miserable; we have had many warnings
from God, the cloud of Gods wrath, has long hung over us, before the storm
came: he has sent his messengers rising early and sending them as he did to
his people Israel: because he had compassion on us, and on our dwelling place:
but we like Israel, have mocked his messengers (our ministers) and despised his
Word in them: we have mis-used his Prophets, 2 Chro. 36. 16.
and now his wrath is broke out upon us.

He has several times afflicted us, with easier Judgment, sometimes by
Former judgments have not wrought upon us therefore we might, and may expect
greater.
Pestilence, and sometimes by great droughts, and extraordinary raines, by
murraines and rotts, and diseases on our herds, and flocks, but we would not
lay any of these things to heart: he has bestowed great mercies, and given
great deliverances from the destroying plots, of the bloody Papists: but we
regarded it not, but have provoked him more, and cherished them that would have
destroyed us, mingled with them, learned their ways, and served their gods;
all mercies have been abused, all judgments have been slighted, all warnings
despised: and now God has increased our misery, as we have increased our
sins. Ezra 9. 6. Ier. 5. 6. Levit. 16. 18.


We know it has been Gods usual dealing with all Nations, especially with
his own people, when they increase their sins that he has increased their
misery, when lesser judgments would not humble them, he brought greater, till
they were destroyed: take a view Gods dealing with his people An example of
Gods dealing with his own chosen people the Jews. Levit. 26. 17.
Israel: see first what he threatened to Israel, and observe his justice in
inflicting all that he had threatened because they repented not: he threatened to
bring upon them diseases, sickness, terrors, etc. if yet they would not
hearken and repent, he threatens to punish them seven times more, break their
pride their power, make the heaven Iron, and the earth brass: if yet this
would not serve but that they would still walk contrary to God, he says he
would walk contrary to them; and bring seven times greater plagues upon them,
according to their sins: if that would not bring them to repentance, and
reformation, Verse 21.
he would bring the sword and avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, Verse 25.
send Pestilence, and deliver them into the hands of their enemies, make them
eat the flesh of their sons, and of their daughters: destroy all their false
worship, and my soul shall abhor you: he threatens to make their Cities
Verse 33.
waste, and bring their Sanctuaries to desolation: and scatter them among all
the heathen.

Now ask but the sad stories of Jerusalem, Iudeth, and all Israel: if all that
Lam. 1. 4. Psalm 137. Sec Iosep in war Jews l 2. cb. 13.
was threatened, came not upon them, to the uttermost, and all for their
unbeleese, and Impenitencie; witness the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah,
the mournful weeping Elegies, by the Rivers of Babylon, see Josephus sad
story of their misery, when by seditious war they robbed, and spoiled all
their Country, and took away their goods under color of justice, and they
that had not to satisfy their covetous desires were abused, and imprisoned:
and the wicked seditious malignants, within the City of Jerusalem, set fire of
the City, burnt and destroyed their Magazines, consumed men, and means to
support themselves against the enemy: fill their streets and the temple War
Jew 1. 6. c. 1. etc. 15.
with dead bodies, and no man reverencing the living, nor burying the dead: one
sort of the living was desperately wicked; the other driven to be wretchedly
careless, through despair.

Then extreme famine brake in upon them, that men and women, reeled like them
that are drunk: by extreme faintness, and were glad if they could War Jews
l. 7. c. 7. 8.
get the worst of excrements to eat, and accounted moldy hay, and the lether
of their targets, good food: yea women eat their own children: and were at
last destroyed by their enemies, their temple burnt with fire, and their Cities
defaced, and laid desolate to this day: and nothing left but a spectacle of
pity, and an example to all others, to take heed of Impenitencie, and
unbeleefe.

The threatenings denounced against them, do all belong to us; our sins at
this day are the same that theirs was, we have had as many warnings as ever All
the threatenings to the Jews, and the examples of Gods wrath upon them belong
to us. Luke 13. 3. Romans 11. 21.
they had; our mercies have been no less then theirs: and Gods hand has been
long streatcht out against us, by easier judgments from time to time: and may
we not assuredly expect to be destroyed as they are? think not that they were
greater sinners, I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish: if God have cast off his own people, will he spare us: they were the
natural branches, we (as the Apostle teaches) but the wild Olive grasted in;
What could God have done more for a people then he has done for us? what could
he have done to his vineyard, that he has not done for England? he has fenced
it about, planted it with the choycest Vine, built a tower in the midst of it,
Esaias 5. 2. 4.
and made a wine Press therein, etc. He has dressed, dug, and dugged it,
as he did the fig tree, and waited many years for fruit, that fruit of
repentance and reformation: but England, miserable England is yet fruitless!
What can England expect but that fearful and last sentence, Cut it down^?
Luke 13. 7. Esaias 9. 14.
God is now striking at the root, and will surely cut off branch, and root in
one day.

Consider it ye people, men and Brethren of England, Scotland, and Ireland: you
that are called by Gods Name, you that are Protestants: you that have Gods
people must repent and seek God, or the Kingdom must perish. Lam. 3. 29.
known the ways of God, have given your names to be Christ's, and are in
covenant with your God, repeut, turn from your evil ways, renew your
Covenant of God, prostrate your selves in all humility before God; throw your
faces in the dust: and cry mightily to God, who is merciful, and ready to
forgive your iniquities, transgressions, and sins; God yet has spared you an
opportunity, he yet stands at the door and knockes, our day is not yet ended,
our sun is not quite set, there is still a moments time in our hand, bless
Rev. 3. 20.
God for that mercy; and make present use of it; let not God depart from you,
Wrestle with him like Jacob, strive with him like Moses, and speedily repent
with Nenevie, Nenevie had forty days given her, we have had more than forty
years, and are not sure of one day more than this present day: yet there is
Iona. 3. ^.
hope in Israel; if we will repent, God is able to prevent: we have his own
promise, from his own mouth, in answer to the prayer of Solomon, if my
people, which are called by my Name, shall humble their selves and pray, and
seek my face, and turn from their evil ways, then will I hear in heaven,
and will forgive 2 Chro 7. 14.
their sin, and beale their land: here is the promise, and the condition: do
you but your parts, and God will assuredly perform his promise to the full,
and will establish your peace and truth, in despite of war and falsehood, in
whose hands or hearts soever they be cherished, God will purge the land from
Popery, and Annabaptisme, with all erroneous sects, and establish his Church in
doctrine and Discipline, according to his own heart: let me say to you as
Iehosaphat once said to the people of Judea, and Jerusalem, believe the Lord
you God, and believe his Word, and Prophets, and so shall 2 Chro. 20. 10.
you prosper. You ministers and people of the most high God, throw your selves
before the God of heaven, and make your supplications to him, as Hezekiah 2
King. 19. 14.
did, when Rabsheca blasphemed, cry to him as Eliah, did to show himself: let
our enemies curse, we will bless, let them blaspheme, we will pray, let 1
King. 18. 37.
them mumble Pater Noster, and Ave Maryes numbering their beads, whip
themselves, or cutand lance their flesh, as the Priests of Baal: God will show
verse 26. 28.
himself from heaven, and will destroy all our enemies, and deliver us, to the
glory of his praise: remember what Iehoshaphat did, when the children of Moab,
and the children of Ammon, and a great many other came against Judah: he set
himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast, and all Judea gathered 2
Chro. 20. 3. 4.
themselves togethered to ask helps of the Lord, and God fought for them.

Therefore gather your selves together all you that expect to have part in the
inheritance of glory: before the ficrcenesse of Gods wrath break forth, and
Zeph. 2. 2. 2 Chro. 36. 16.
there be no remedy: your sins provoke more than the sins of other: and
your prayers will prevail more than the prayers of other, and your neglect in
this duty, and at this time, in performance of the duties of humiliation will
open a floodgate, at which destruction will break in upon the Nation without
resistance. God has long cried to you, by his Ambassadors of peace: Now God
calls upon you, by an Army of destroyers, you must now bow, or you must be
broken, therefore hear the rod, and who has appointed it: let Mica. 6. 9.
Lam. 3. 40. Psalm. 4. 4.
in search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: let us commune
every one with his own heart, let us every one consider of his own particular
sin, your sins of omission, as well as your finnes of commission: for your
omnision of holy duties, and duties of charity, are as provoking as the great
abominations of the Kingdom: and till you repent and reform your selves, your
prayers, and fastings, and all that you can do, in outward performances, will
prevail nothing at all; if you retain but any one sin, it will be like one
leake in a ship, which will sink it as well as if there were many, except it
be stopped: examine your selves, Judge and condemn your selves, and you shall
1 Cor. 11. 31. Amos 4. 2.
not be condemned: Gods eye is most upon you: and you must save, (or you will
destroy) the Nation; be humbled for your neglect of Gods worship; your
formalitie in holy duties: your omission of mercy, self love, ambitious
thoughts, pride, covetousness, Sabboth-breaking: your failing in family
duties, in your several relations, as Masters to Servants, husbands to wife,
father to your children: wherein you have been wanting in duty either in
instructing as a Prophet, or Priest, which you are to be in your own house and
family, to instruct and teach: the sins of your family are your sins,
consider how God dealt with good Ely for this omission. The command of
sanctifying the Lords Day is to you, and you must answer for your Son, your
servant, and your stranger: their sin is your sin. Be humbled and repent,
for your profusnesse in expenses, and voluptuous pleasures; your costly, and
many dishes at your table: your rich and strange attire, feed the hungry, and
cloth the poor, let the souls of the poor, the fatherless, and the widow
Job 29. 11. Job 31. 20.
bless God for you; do as Job did, take heed of lying for gain, and reproach
not your brother by scandalls or slanders; let his name be precious to thee, as
thine own, and do as thou would be done unto: first humble thy self, for
thy own sins, and then be humbled for the sins of others; for we must Mat.
22. 39.
repent for other men's sins, for the Idolatry, Sabbath breaking, swearing,
lying, oppression, murders, whoredoms, and all the abominations of the
Kingdom; and for the lukewarmenesse of newtrall professors: David beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved: So stir up others to seek God, by Psalm. 119
158.
your example, call upon them and exhort them, as the shipmen did, when the
storm was one the Sea, and the ship likely to perish, that every one may call
upon God: Jonah was the most righteous man in the ship, yet it was Ionahs sin
that caused the storm, God has raised a mighty storm, in great Jonah 1. 4.
Britain, and except we do thus we must perish.

Consider the practice of Gods people in former time, and see the issue of it,
when the Church in Hesters time, was sold to be destroyed, by wicked Ester 4 16.
council, as we now are: Hester and Mordica, and all the Jews, they fasted
and prayed, and humbled themselves before the Lord, and had a glorius
deliverance: Nehemiah was sad in heart; and prayed unto God, and gained favor
Neh. 2. 4. 6. Ezra 8. 21.
to build the Temple, and to establish the worship of God, in despite of all
opposition: Ezra when he was in danger of the enemy, sought God by fasting and
prayer, and was preserved: notable is the example of Daniel, when the Church
was in captivity, he made prayers and supplications for the sins of the
people; and while he was yet praying God gave him answer, Dan. 9. 23.
and told him that at the beginning of his supplications, the command came
forth, and the thing was granted, only the time was deferred, to finish the
transgression: you know what a temporal blessing Nineveh obtained, by their
temporary repentance (though afterward they were destroyed) but true Iona. 3.
5. 10.
repentance never fails of certain deliverance and continued repentance has
a continued protection. Now as every one must examine himself of his sins,
so it is as necessary that every one examine his repentance, whether it be good
or not, for men are apt to be mistaken in the work of repentance, and think
that to be repentance which is not; and so while we expect deliverance, we
shall be overwhelmed with destruction: some think if they turn from some
reigning sin, they have repented; as when a profused prodigals becomes a
covetous worldling: some think that to abstain from the Acts of gross sin is
repentance, as the civil honest man, or him whose abilities either in Luke 11.
26. Ier. 3. 10.
nature or estate, cannot act with the will: some think if they confess their
sins with plausible expressions, or affectionate tears, that they have
repented; but this was the repentance of Saul, in case of persecuting of David,
and so in the case of Agag: others think dejectedness of spirit, and grief
of 1 Samuel 26. 21. 1 Samuel 15. 24. Gen 4 13. Mat. 27. 4.
heart, is repentance, but such was Cains and Judas repentance, other think
that to come before God in the Congregation, to spend a whole day in fasting
and joining in prayer, that they have done all the work of repenaance,
especially if they forbe are for a little time, to follow after their usual
(every days) Esaias 58. 5.
sin, but this is that which is rejected, as to hang down the head for a day
like a bul-rush; yea there is a compunction or sorrow of heart for sin, as it
brings judgment, yet not as it dishonours God, and this is but Hypocritical
repentance, such as that of Ahab: Judas went farther (and yet repented not) 1
King 21. 27. Mat. 27. 3.
for he was sorry and confessed his sin and made restitution, and yet his
repentance was not good.

Consider therefore, that true, found, and acceptable repentance, is a turning
to God, from all sin in action and will, totally, and for ever; with
resolution Esaias 31. 6. Jer. 25. 5. Ephesians. 4. 23.
by Gods grace never to return with consent, to commit sin again, it is in
a word a changing of the mind, when the will and actions are turned from sin,
and the occasions of sin, arising from the hatred of sin, and love to
righteousness; not moved by the fear of punishment, nor hope of reward
(although both necessarily follow) but love and obedience to God; where true
repentance is wrought, it will produce inward grief, for every dishonor to
God, whether in our selves or in others: This repentance is the Acts 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Tit. 3. 5. They that contemn and s^^ffe at the Preachers or
preaching are far from repentance. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
gift of God (not in a man's own power) and is usually wrought in the hearts of
men, by the preaching of the Word, and always by the inward working of Gods
Spirit, per^^^^ted by prayers, and intercessions through Jesus Christ.
Therefore they are far from repentance that cry out of too much Preaching,
and they farther that scoff at Preaching and holiness, etc. persecute holy
preachers, and offer dispight to the spirit of grace; God who has called is
holy, and requires that every one that is called be holy in all manner of
conversation, and every one that has this hope in him purifieth himself even
as he is pure, every repentant sinner endeavors reformation in himself, and
strives to the uttermost to perfection, he loves it in others where it is, and
will endeavor it where it is not, by admonitions and exhortations.

Now prayer is the chief means by which we obtain all blessings from Prayer
the means by which we obtain all blessings. 2 Cor 7 14. John. 6. 23. Ioh. 14.
13.
God, and therefore it goes jointly, with the condition of faith and
repentance, if my people humble themselves and pray, etc. whatsoever ye shall
ask the father in my Name, he will give it you: again whatsoever you shall
ask in my Name, I will give it: prayer is by God appointed (through the
intercession of Christ) to be the means to obtain all blessings temporal and
sperituall, and to keep back and remove all miseries. Now because evey sin
in a man is as a devil possessing him, and some sins as some devils that
cannot be cast out but by fasting and prayer, as our Savior teaches us. Mat.
17. 21.


Nor can fasting, joined with prayer, do it without faith, Christ tells his
Disciples they could not cast him out because of their unbeleefe, and hence it
Verse 20.
is that all the faithful have upon any extraordinary cause (either to obtain
great blessings, or removing great Judgments) joined fasting with prayer.
Judge. 20. 26. 2 Samuel 7 6. Nehem 1. 4. Joel. 1. 14. Dan. 10. 3. Joel 2. 16. What
a holy Fast is. Levit. 23. 28. Ezra. 10. 3. Levit. 23. 29. Acts 10. 2. verse
30. 1 Cor. 9. 27.
A holy religious Fast is a volentary abstinence from all food, and from all
delightful things, and bodily labor, or recreations, for one whole day at the
least; and it is to this end, that by the humbling of the body the soul may be
afflicted too, which is a chief duty in a day of Fast; For that soul that is
not afflected in that day shall be cut off from his people: the manner of
keeping such a day must be even as a Sabbath day; wholly spent in the duties of
Piety and Charity; pouring out our Souls by spiritual supplications and
prayers unto God: and the work of it is repentance, to break the heart for
sin, therefore it is called a day of atonement, or reconciliation; and surely
the prayers that are put up to God upon such a day, are prevalent with God,
able to open and shut the heavens: if the effectual prayers of one righteous
man avail much, the prayers of many will prevail more; great and miraculous
things have been James 5. 16.
effected, by the prayers of this kind: by prayer Jacob held God till he
blessed him, and Moses pacified great wrath; by fasting and prayer Gods people
Hos. 12. 4. Exodus 32. 11. 14. Nothing so hard and difficult but it may be
obtained by prayer and fasting. Acts 12. 5. 7. Levit. 10. 1. 2. Holy duties
unholily performed become very sinful. Esaias 1. 11.
have obtained mighty things, nothing so difficult or hard, but prayer can make
easy, it can make chains of Iron fall from Peter, and open Iron gates to give
him passage to come to the Brethren, that had by unceass^nt prayer begged him
of God, but the instances which we have before named shall suffice, but on the
contrary, when this duty of fasting and prayer, is contemned, or formally
observed, it has procured wrath from God, and increase of misery, it is like
the sin of Nadab and Abihu, when they offered strange fire before the Lord:
for thus I reason, that duty which in it self is most holy, and most
acceptible to God, being performed according to his Will; when done negligently
in a formal manner is most profane, and most displeasing to God, abominable
in his sight: to what purpose (says he) is the multitude of your sacrifices, I
delight not in them: bring no more vain oblations, your new Moons, your
Sabbaths, and the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with them, it is
eniquitie, even your solemn meetings, my soul hates them, they are a trouble
to me, I am weary verse 14.
to bear them: not that God is wearied with our many Fastings, or desires
less; for he is best pleased when we are most conversant in such duties, but
he hates formality and hypocrisy in them, and so they are a burden to him,
and he is weary of them, and they become eniquitie to us: Who has required
these verse 11.
things at your hands, yet there was nothing in matter but what God commanded,
and they were bound to do, it was the manner only that God misliked;
therefore says the Lord, When you fasted and mourned (...) did not at all fast
unto me, but to your selves: the same thing is reproved by our Savior Christ,
Zech. 7. 5.
God has denounced a curse to him that does the work of the Lord negligently.
The Jews when they had taken great pains in their formal Fasting, Mat 6. 16.
and afflicting themselves, they captitulate with God, Why have we fasted and
Ier. ^8. 10.
thou see it not, we have afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge:
God gives them the reason; Because (says he) in the day of your fast ye find
pleasure, and exact all your Labors: you fast for strife and debate, and smite
with the fist of wickedness: is it such a fast that I have chosen, will you
call this a fast, and an Esaias 58. 3.
acceptible day to the Lord? God accounts of such services (although for matter
they be the same that God requires) but as if we slew a man, or cut off a
verse 5.
dogs neck, or offer Swines blood, all which he abhors and has
expressly Esaias. 66. 3.
forbidden.

Therefore it highly concerns every man, to examine his own heart: how, Man
must examine their hearts in the duties of Fasting whether they do it to God
or for their own benefit. Ier. 14. 10.
and why he keep his days of fasting, whether it be in humility of soul,
humbly to seeks God by repentance, and reformation of sin; or formally only
to remove the evil of punishment that is present upon him? for then we fast to
our selves, not unto God: and so we may Fast and Pray, call and cry, but God
will not hear us, to do us any good, but will punish us more, for our
impenitencie. God told his own people that thus fasted, When ye Fast I will
not hear your cry: I will not accept of your offerings, and oblations: But I
will consume you by the sword, and by the Pestilexce. The Fast that God has
chosen is to repent, and to be humbled for our sins, and to make our Peace
and reconciliation with him: to cease from evil, and to do good: and exercise
the duties of mercy and charity, to renew our covenant, and seek him by
prayer: Thus God requires to be enquired of. And this the Parliament Esaias 58.
6. 7. Ezekiel. 36. 37. 2 Chronicles. 15. 15.
(like good Asa) in their late Covenant drive at, as the means to obtain
mercy, and to be healed of our misery; for God will be thus sought unto, even
for those things which he promises to give. God has showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what he requires of us, to do justly, to love mercy, and to
Mica. 6. 8.
walk humbly. To this end he commanded the terrors and threatenings of
Judgment for sin, to be read upon Fasting days unto all the people, to See
Ier. 39. ver. 2. 3. 6 7.
move them to Repentance, and to make humble supplications for mercy; if we
thus keep our fasting days, with vows and Covenants to God Almighty, we may
assuredly expect a blessing, and a healing of our misery, and our remiss,
careless, and formal observing of our Fast days, is a chief cause, that
has so long hindered our deliverance: Gods hand is not shortened that he Esaias
49. 1. 21
cannot save, nor his ear heavy that he cannot hear, but your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face
from you, that he will not hear; the Prophet tells us plainly; your
iniquities and your Ier. 5. 25.
sins have holden good things from you: thus much for the inward means of
cure.

Secondly, God cures his people of their oppression, and outward miseries: by
outward means, this has been usual in all times; that when the people We
must use outward means to be cured of our misery.
have humbled themselves, and cried to God in their misery: he ever had
compassion on them, for his own Name sake, and raised them up deliverers;
armed private man with public Authority, enabling them by place, courage, and
power to be deliverers of this people; to subdue their enemies and to afflict
their afflictors. Thus we know he stirred up Moses, Othniel, Ehud, Samgar,
Deborah and Barak Gideon, Iephtah, Samson, Z^rubbabel, Nehemiah, and the like,
God has for us at this day, by his own hand, (in compassion to his people) in
an unexpected way (almost miraculous) called a Parliament together in England;
established them with Sovereign power by the Laws of the Kingdom, and
stirred up the King by his own Act to confirm them, The Parliament a
Sovereign power of command which the people ought to obey. The Parliaments
faithfulness and courage. Esa 45. 22. Exodus 17. 2. Exodus 15. 24. Exodus 16. 13.
Number. 14. see the Chap. The people must trust in God and wait by fifth with
patience. Judge. 4. 3.
and Authorize their sitting during their own time, till by their Wisdoms
(with Gods blessing) they re-establish the perishing and long decaying
principalls of the Kingdoms Fabric; and God has put into the hearts of them
to be of faithfulness and courage for Gods glory, and the Kingdoms lasting
welfare, to hazard their lives and fortunes for defense of their Religion, and
the peoples rights and liberty, against the malice and opposition of the
mighty, at this day combined against God and his people; and by this Parliament
he will deliver Great Britain of their misery, if we look but upon them as
Gods Instruments, (nothing in themselves) or if we, like the Rebellious
Israelites, provoke not God to more wrath by our unbeleefe, and murmurring
against God and them, and will but wait by faith, with patience, while our
deliverance is working: or that we (as too many of us are) be not like some of
the Tribes of Israel, who proved traitors and cowards, in the work of their
deliverance: The Jews were under the oppression of Iabin, and Sisara, the
Captain of his Host twenty years, and the people cried unto the Lord for
their oppression was great and their oppressors strong, nine hundred Charriots
of Iron, and a multitude of men: Now God heard their cry, though it seems it
was more for the misery of their bondage; then for sorrow and sense of their
sins, but God had compassion of them, and stirred up Deborah and Barack to
deliver them; and of all the ten Tribes of Israel they took an Army of ten
thousand out of the Tribes of Nephtali and Zebulun, verse. 6.
against the strength, power, and multitude of Iabins Army, for their hearts
Judge. 5. 18. The base cowardlines of the people a great discouragement. verse
16.
God had made willing, and ready to hazard their lives to the death, in the
high places of the field: expecting all the rest of the Tribes would come in to
their assistance, because the enemy was strong and mighty: but they basely
therefore absented themselves, which caused great thoughts of heart; some few
out of other Tribes came, and the Princes of Issachar came and joined with
Barack; but Ruben disserted the cause altogether, he took no further care, but
for his own flocks, and therefore stays at his sheepefolds, to hear the
bleating of the sheep; let them fight that would, he would sleep in a whole
skin: Gilliad takes example by Ruben, and kept within his own borders beyond
Jordan, that was safety enough to him, let his brethren sink or swim; Gilliad
will not cross the water to help them: Dan gets a Shipboard, and there he
remains till his brethren fight for his safety upon the land: Ashur keeps
about the Sea shore, hoping well that he should partake of the liberty Neuters
in the quarrels of God.
as well as they that fought for it, (if they could prevail) but will not
stir a foot from his place to help them. But Meroz, a City adjoining,
considered the enemy was mighty, and he could not go to assist, but with
eminent danger, they thought many of them must loose their lives in the battle,
and besides, if they were not able to overcome, they should fare the worse for
their meddling; therefore Meroz resolves to sit still a Newter, he would neither
be with nor against, none shall know his mind, he can excuse himself well
enough to his brethren, if they prevail; if Iabin prevail, he will find the
more favor: but it seems the cowardly baseness of all these, discouraged the
work, insomuch that Barack doubted of his strength, and would not go Judge. 4.
8. Judge 5. 15.
against Sisera, except Deborah the Prophetess, would venture her self to go
with him, and this caused great thoughts of heart, among all the rest; and much
searchings what they were best to do: but God that needs no help of man,
holds up their courage, and did his own work, to the greater glory God needs
no help of man, yet he requires man's obedience.
of his power: for it is all one with God to save with few as with many, this
was Asas confidence, therefore when there came an Army against him of a
thousand thousand, he cried to God, Help us O Lord our God for we rest in
thee, and in thy Name we go against this multitude; the same Jonathan said to
2 Chro. 14. 11.
his Armor bearer, who believed it and was encouraged: and with his eyes 1 Samuel 14. 6. 15
presently see it made good, for they two alone put the whole Host of the
Philistimes to flight; and indeed God seldom delivers his servants by much
strength of men, but when great preparations have been made, he does the work
by a few, as he did by Gideons Army of three hundred, yet God takes God takes
notice who are forward in his cause and who not, and accordingly rewards them.
Judge. 5. 23. Number. 16. 3^. Meroz quite destroyed as Corah and his company. The
people are bound to assist the Parliament. Judge. 6. 35. Judge. 7. 5. 3. Judge. 7.
24. Judge. 20. 11. 18.
notice who is for him, and who not, and accordingly rewards them: therefore he
cursed Meroz with a bitter and irrevokeable curse* because they came not out to
the help: of the Lord, to show their willingness to fight the Lords battles
against the mighty, it seems their curse was much like that of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, when the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, with their
houses, and all that appertained to them, not leaving so much as one to tell
who hurt them; only their fearful example is left upon divine record for
terror to all Cowards and Newters in the cause of God: as commendations of
Zebulon and Nepthal^ for encouragement of his people to all ages; for hence
take notice, that when God stirs up a deliverer to a people, the people are
bound to assist them, and to obey their commands, in assembling themselves in
their just defense against their enemies; thus they did at Gideons command, in
greater number than needed, by above nine and twenty thousand: So when some of
the Tribes of Benjamin had committed horrible wickedness, and the rest of that
Tribe would not suffer them to be proceeded in justice against, all the other
Tribes gather together as one man before God, to battle against Benjamin, and
when the war was ended inquiry was made whether any were wanting, that
appeared not at the assembly; and it was found that the men of Iabish Gilead
were not there, therefore Judge 4. 8. 21.
they all agreed to send twelve thousand men to destroy them of Iabish Gilead.

Great Britain has been (for their sins against God) long afflicted under
great oppressions and cruelty, and at this day more then ever, we all cried
under the weight of our burdens long ago, (but not to God) yet God has
stirred up deliverers to us, and we (that is a great number) reject them,
English neuters neglect God, and the means of deliverance, and cherish them
they should destroy.
and have disserted God: therefore our misery is increased, and we justly given
up to sordid stupidity, selfe-afflictors, defenders of them that afflict and
destroy us: oppressing Monopolizers, Patentees, Papists, and seditious robbers,
neglecting God, and our deliverers appointed by him, opposing the means of
deliverance, as if we were ambitious, to leave our children and posterities in
established slavery; bondslaves to merciless men for ever. The sons of
Anack that hinder our felicity, and act our misery, which we ought to destroy,
we cherish and defend: O fearful condition! The emblem of ruin and procurter
of their own destruction, let Meroz and Iabish-Gilliad be their ensample, as in
action so in punishment; and as Seneca says, Let Histories tell their infamy,
and register them to be hated to posterities, ^^^ca in (...), lib. 1. cap.
(...).
as those who had better never been borne, then to be born for a public
misery. Most wretched, cruel, and detestable men, not worthy to live, and sure
it is that insolent cruelties, beget everlasting hatred, and therefore bring
continual and gauling terror in conscience, which hastens an evil death; and
therefore an ancient said well, that an old Tyrant is seldom seen, their
actions call for destruction, and it hastneth as their blasphe^^ie, murder,
rapine, treasons, etc. Char. wisd.
are increased to fill up the measure, of their iniquity, and then he that
clothed himself with cursing, cursing shall enter into his bowels like water,
and like Oyl^ I^. 109. 18.
into his bones, then the sword that the wicked have drawn to slay such as be
of upright conversation shall enter into their own heart, and their bow shall
be broken. Psalm. 37. 14 15. (...) woe things do hinder deliverance. ^^e these
places Eze 33. 11. Jer. 51. 13. Math. 23. 32. Genesis 15. 16.
Two things do hinder Britains deliverance, and a while continue our misery.
First, the want of Repentance in Gods people, the afflicted. Secondly, the
filling up the measure of iniquity of the wicked and impenitent, the
afflictors: if Gods people would hasten to perfect the one, as fast as the
Cavaliers hasten to fill up the other, Britains deliverance would be speedy.

Although no man can know the mind of God, and what he is about to do, nor
what change he will shortly make in the world: for his ways are hidden, and
his footestepts be not known, yet we can believe so much as he We cannot know
when God will deliver us, yet we know he will deliver us. Acts 1. 7.
reveals to us, either by his Word or by his Works of Providence; we cannot
know when he will destroy our enemies, whether within a month, or a year, or
a day, It is not for us to know the times or the seasons, which God has in his
own power, we know not how far their violence shall yet break in upon us,
to kill, burn, and destroy; nor can we tell how God will destroy our enemies,
when they are grown strong and we weak, (if God should suffer them so far)
whetherby fire, or halestones from heaven, whether by pestilence, John 10. 11.
Esaias 30. 30. 2 Samuel 24. 13. ^er. 21. 6. ^ Chron 32. 21 Exodus 8. 24. Josh 24.
12. God will surely deliver his people, it they will repent 2 Cor. 5. 7. Heb.
11. 27.
or to fall by their own sword, whether by the stroke of an Angel, or by a
swarm of fles; God only knows what he will do, and how he will do it, and
we know he only is able to do what he will, when he will, and how he will.

We also know that he will deliver his people and destroy his enemies, if we
forsake our sins, and cry unto him, because his Word has spoken it; and he
has already in part saved us from our enemies by the work of his providence
in defeating their machinations, and diseovering their hellish bloody plots,
and by says we believe and know that he will effect his own work, for we
live by faith and not by sight: Moses forsook Egypt, and was not afraid of
the wrath of a King, because by faith he saw him who is invisible: but God
has visibly showed himself in the work of our deliverance, as afterward he
did to Moses and his people in the wilderness: who but God Experiences of Gods
mercy and protection.
only saved the Parliament-mens lives, in that bloody assault by the
Cavaliers, when they stood with their pistalls ready cockt, and cried when is
the Word given, etc. Who revealed their intentions of bringing the Kings Army
from York, against the Parliament as so one as there was a pacification with
the Scots? Who moved his Majesty's heart, to establish this Parliament, and
these men now sitting, which now the Cavaliers would destroy? and who
infatuated Gods providence clearly seen for the means of Britains
deliverance.
their Councels that they did not then hinder that Act, as they have done
others since? Is not God seen in all these things, are not these clearer
passages of his providence? has not God preserved our Armies from utter
destruction, by very weak and small means? Did not God deseate their first
bloody design against Bristall, and probably would have showed his power to
deliver them from the last assault, if men had not been afraid, and through
distrust of his All-sufficiencie lost themselves. Did any besides God
dis-appoint that barbarous cruelty, and hellish treason against London? have
not thousands of those Innocents, designed to death by that Plot, seen some of
the Plotters and Actors hanged, like Hamon upon the Gallows he set up for
Mordica? is not all this the work of Gods Providence, with many others which
for brevitie Consider the treachery in Hull, in the Army, in Lincolre, and Gods
providence preventing. 2 Samuel 3. 27. 1 King 2. 5.
Iomit: Stand still fear not, etc. And for confirmation of my former
assertion, namely, that they aim at nothing but at our Lives, Laws, and
Religion: Observe, that these Plotters and Actors in this bloody Treason, were
the cortrivers of that Petition for Peace, any Peace, upon any conditions
served their turn; Peace was in their mouths but War was in their hearts,
for they intended no longer Peace then till they could take us by the heard and
sinite us under the fifth Rib.

True Peace is a blessing and, and to be desired, Civil War is a soar
judgment, and to be (if possible) avoided, therefore Peace is better than
War: but if War break in upon us, we must make resistance, and stand in
our just defense as the Jews did in Susham, and in all the Provinces of
Persia, when An innocent defensive war is ever lawful.
through the wicked council and cruelty of Hamon they were appointed to
slaughter; by their resistance they escaped, and besides that, they had no
other means to escape; it was the work of Gods Providence to give them
lawful right to use that meaues, and they thankefully and prosperously used
it, and flue of those men that would have slain them (as Josephus relates) in
one day, three score and fifteen thousand. This is our case, we are like them
by Iosep. in antiq. lib. 11. c. 6. We may by authority of Parliamentas lawfully
destroy our enemies that seek our lives as the Jews did.
wicked councillors sold to be destroyed, and our good God has by his
providence given us as just right lawfully to stand in our defense, and to make
war upon out enemies, until they yield their Arms as the Jews did. Those
that have misled our Sovereign King are no better Subjects to him then Haman
was to Ahashuerus, nor better friends to the people of God: neither can they
ever recompense the Kings loss.

Therefore we are bound to make war against such men; Gods enemies, the Kings
enemies, our enemies; injurious misleaders of the King against his The
Cavalicrs are Gods enemies, the kings enemies and enemies to all Gods people.
most Loyal and best Subjects: like that seed of malicious Amalack of which
Haman was, of the by-race of wicked and profane Esau, a hater of his brother,
and his posterity, implacable enemies to the people of God.

There is a destructive Peace as well as a destroying War, therefore a just
War is to be chosen, rather than an unjust Peace, and is warrantably just
from the Authority of Gods Word: there are four things necessary to make a
just watre. First that the cause be just. Secondly that the cause be weighty.
Four things necessary to make a just war.
Thirdly, that it be the last means left to maintain or defend that cause.
Fourthly, that the end be to Gods glory: but such is the defensive war of
Great Britain, the cause is Gods in defense of his truth, the Kings person,
and safety of his Kingdoms, his subjects lives, estates and freedom, against
that abominable Idolatry of Popery, and Papists, and it is the last means, or
refuge to keep all or any of these, weighty and precious rights. The world
knows how often all other means have been assailed, before the taking up of
Arms, and since by humble supplication, arguments of law, All means of peace
was used before the parliament took arms, and since, and all rejected.
arguments of danger: Petitions, Messages, Treaties, and what not? but all was
rejected: and these means were so long used, that it came near to a tempting
of God, and betraying his cause, and we are sure no war was ever under taken
more directly to Gods glory than this, as it is defensive by the Parliament;
nor can any war be more directly against God than the offensive war on the
contrary party: it being against his known and confessed truth, and our
undeniable birth rights, which we are in conscience bound to leave free to our
posterity, as our progenitors left them to us.

Our sinful peace has been the cause of this our punishing miserable war:
Sinful peace has caused a punishing war.
and I see no scruple of doubt, but that we may with confidence, believe, that
this so just a defensive war (by the blessing of God, for whose glory it is)
will in Gods time establish a true, blessed and happy peace.

I am no Prophet, nor do I assume to my self, to write any revelations, nor
do I rashly through passion vent my thoughts, but what I affirm is from a
serious search of Scriptures, and consideration of Gods usual dealing with
people and Nations, grounded upon confidence of Gods promise to his Church and
people, that repent and turn from their evil ways, which if we of Great
Britain do, the promise belongs to us; but we must freely and courageously
use the means put into our hands, every one in his place to do his part; some
fight, some pray, some feed and cloth the Armies, draw out our selves Every
one must use his talent and lay it out for God whose stewards all men are.
willingly to the uttermost for the cause of God, if we dye, we dye for Christ,
who dyed for us, if we spend our whole Patrimony, God is able to double it to
us again, if our childrens portions, God has promised to be a father to them:
we are Gods, all we have is Gods, he has but made us his Stewards, and it is
required that afterward be found faithful, herein is our faithfulness, to use
what he has trusted us with to his glory, to lay it out for him when he calls
for it, he now calls for our help, he can help himself without us, but he
now tries us; tryes our love, our faith, our obedience: this is to give unto
the Lord the glory due unto his Nam^, this is to bring an offering before him;
Psalm 96. 8.
withold not good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the power of
thine hand to do it, much less withold from God what he requires and Pro
^. 27.
needs. God has promised to give men for thee, and people for thy life, and
shall we withold from God his own: what we do for Gods Church and people
Esaias 43. 4. Psalm; 6. 2. Math. 25. 45. Math 12. 30.
we do for God, our good and our bounty extends not to God, but to his
Church and Saints upon the earth, our not helping them is to deny Christ: now
if we of Great Britain, will indeed reform our evil ways, earnestly seek
God, and diligently use the outward means, which God has by the work of his
providence put into our hands; I dare from the mouth of God affirm, that we
shall see a glorious deliverance, from our oppression, bondage, and misery; and
see a settled peace, both in Church and State: the Kingdom sreed from tyranny,
and the Church purged from the Superstitions of Popery, Anabaptisme, God will,
if we will, give us deliverance, and free the state from oppression, and the
Church from heresies. Maca. 41
Antinomianisme, Familists, and all other erroneous Sects, to the destruction
or conversion of our implacable enemies, as is promised to the Church, though
we seem as if we had no King, and our counsels perished and pangs has taken
us, as a woman: we are in pain and the child of reformation, sticks in the
birth: Now labor to bring forth O daughter of Zion, like a woman in danger of
life, for now thou may be delivered, and dwell safely, and be freed from the
yoke of Babylon, for the Lord will redeem thee from the hand of thine
enemies: Now also many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be
defiled and let her eye look upon Zion. they threaten much, and promise much
to themselves, like Rabshakeh, 2 Kings 19. 10. 11. 12. and scoff like
Sanballat, Nehem^^h 4. 2, 3. but they know not the thoughts of the Lord,
neither understand they his council, for he shall gather them together as the
sheaves into the floor: and then he will say arise and pursue as Barack
pursued the Charriots and Host of Sisera, Judges 4. 16. and as Dodo arose and
smote the Philistimes, until his hand was weary: 2 Samuel 23. 10. Arise and
thresh O daughter of Zion, for I will make thy horn Iron, and I will make thy
See this place in Mica. 4. 9, 10 11. 12, 13.
hoofes brass* and thou shall beat in pieces many people, and I will
consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the God of the
whole earth: To me belongs vengeance and recompense; their foot shall slide
in due time, for the day of their Calamity is at hand and the things that
shall come upon them make haste: the Lord shall judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants: when he sees that their power is gone, and there is
none shut up, or left: The Lord our Deuteronomy. 31. 35. 36 Deuteronomy. 7. 9.
God, he is God, the faithful God; that keeps Covenant and mercy with them
that love him: but if we will still retain our sins and break our Covenant
with God, he will forsake us; and then the Word of our Savior Christ shall be
made good upon us, as our fearful doom, Except ye Repent ye shall Luke 13. 3.
all likewise perish; or if we withdraw our selves from the help of the Lord,
either in our hands or hearts, it is a token of Gods greater wrath; and then
the righteous (though many) in the Land, shall but (like Noah, Daniel, and Job)
Ezekiel. 14. 20.
deliver their own souls by their righteousness.

We see God in great mercy discovering treasons against the Kingdom and our
lives, to win us to seek him. We see God in his displeasure against some of
our Armies for our sins, that they are not prosperous; and yet his mercy too,
for he suffers not his wrath to break out to the uttermost, because he is
Psalm. 78. 38.
full of compassion he destroyed them not, but would rather that we should
repent and live; Why will ye dye O house of Israel, if we will yet repent and
turn Ezekiel. 33. 11.
to God, he will surely save us, and destroy our enemies: Surely the wrath of
Psalm. 76. 10.
man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath thou will restrain: God
will have glory by the wrath of wicked men, and will restrain wrath against
his people.

Now for further encouragement to repent, and to use the outward means Six
motives to repentance.
of our cure, consider these motives: first to repentance and to stir us up
thereunto, let us seriously consider these six.

Ezekiel. 33. 11.
turn to him, he swears by himself that he has no pleasure to destroy us,
he shows it by his patience and preservation, else why has he so long and so
many ways delivered us from destruction, which our enemies had prepared, and
thought themselves sure of long ago, he has looked for a man to make up the
breach, and to stand in the gap for the land, that he might not destroy it,
Esaias 63 5. Ezekiel 22. 30.
but found none.

England that has been so long taught and instructed by God above all
Nations, therefore be encouraged to thrust in among them, and it will prevail
with God at the last, let every one make one, and the number will quickly be
made up, and so wrath will be removed from us.







Sixthly, consider the infallability of Gods promise, if we will confess our
6. Pro^ 28. 13. ^ John 1. 9: Deuteronomy. 7 9 ^ Sam. 12. 22. John 24. 20. ^ Chro. 28.
9.
sins and forsake them, we shall find mercy; God is a faithful God and
keeps Covenant and mercy with all them that love him, and turn unto him, and
he has said he will not forsake his people, although they have committed great
wickedness, if they again seek to him and repent, but if they continue in
their wickedness, and will not turn unto him, but forsake him, he will cast
them off for ever: if thou will seek him and turn from thy evil ways, he
will forgive thy sin, heal the land, and cure all thy misery. 2 Chronicles 7. 14
Ten motives for encouragement, to use the outward means of our deliverance in
assisting the armies.


Secondly, for encouragement, to use the outward means of deliverance, that
God has put into our hands.

Consider, first, that God usually works by means; in the use of means we
show our obedience, and carry our selves as men; and by our use of such means,
as God offers to us, GOD is glorified by us ^ and will glorify himself in
prospering such means, and in the end (after the exercise of our patience)
will give deliverence by that means, and it shall be seen to be his own
hand, working by and in the means; God requires that men be active, and does
not usually give deliverance without the industry of men, as we have showed by
the fore going examples of Barak, Gideon, Mordica, Nehemiah, etc.









Esther 4. 14.
God will dissert us, and it will be to us as Mordica said of Hester, If thou
at this time withdraw thy self, though God do give deliverance and
enlargement another way, yet thou and thy posterity may justly perish.

and that courage (says Seneca) Seen. of Clem. lib. 1. chapter 12.
that grows from extreme necessity is marvelous forcible, and who (says he)
would not hazard that life which he cannot count his own; especially if by
such a hazard he may secure himself, or his posterity after him, from cruel
tyranny*

Mat. 16. 25. Mark. 8. 35. Mat, 19. 29.
he that shall lose his life for Christ's sake and the Gospells sake, shall
find it; but he that will draw back to save his life shall lose his life;
again he has promised that if we lose Brothers, Sisters, Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, or any thing whatsoever for Christ's sake, he (or
his) shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal life: therefore
be courageous, this was that which encouraged the Jews wonderfully against the
Commission of Calus, saying, We are ready to dye, or to encounter any
misfortune, under hope that God will assist us, and for whose honor we fear
not to adventure any See Iosep. in antiq lib. 18. cap. 11.
danger, rather then to obey through ^owardlinesse, and incur perpetual
Ignomy, and Gods wrath in neglect of his Laws, so as to viol te our Country
Laws and our Religion, etc. Oxford, which they may sway to destroy our good
Laws, and take away our lives and all we have, also to hinder the settling of
Church Government, till they can compel Popery to be set up; and bring over
the Irish Rebels to assist them, which is now their great business in hand:
therefore if we either love God, our selves or our Posterities we must now
bestirre our selves and quit our selves like men.



I have been much larger in this discourse then I intended, when I first set
Pen to paper, and now want time, and phrase to abreviate it: therefore I send
it (as it is) among friends and foes, entreating the Reader to excuse all
errors or mistakes by haste, and accept the uprightness of my intentions.

I will conclude with a story I remember, mentioned by Plutarch, concerning
Marcus Otho, who was by the soldiers Elected Emperor of Rome, and opposed by
Vitilius Cecenna, where upon a Civil war began, and one battle fought for the
Empire, the Soldiers pressed Otho to go on, and continue the war, assuring
him of victory, offering him the last drop of their blood in the cause, Marcus
Otho replied, I account this day more happy to me then the day I was pronounced
Emperor, seeing your real affection unto me; and I must dow show it in not
sparing my life for the good of my Country; this war (says he) is not a
war against Haniball, nor Pyrrhus, but against the Romans themselves; and
whether I conquer or am conquered, I shall offend my Country, I would rather
sacrifice my life for the peace and unity thereof: which said; he fell upon his
own sword: this was his love to his Country. But God be praised there is no
such cause of a war in Great Britain, nor cause why there should be such an
end of it: we desire but our rights and are ready to defend and maintain the
Right, Crown, Life, and Honor, of the King, to the last drop of blood, yet we
cannot have peace; but his Majesty is pleased to hear wicked Counselors, and
give them leave to War against us his faithful Subjects, to destroy us, though
with the hazard of his own life and Kingdoms, which needlessely he has and
does expose to danger. The whole passages of the late Treaty show the
Parliaments desire of Peace, so it might be with security: there is nothing
the King desires but they Grant, except the delivering the K^yes and strength
of the Kingdom, and all our lives into the hands of them that thirst after our
blood. The maine thing of difference is, Whether the King by advise of
Parliament, shall appoint what persons shall be trusted; or whether the King
shall appoint (contrary to Parliaments advise) such persons as his Council
shall choose in these times of danger: now if this were not to betray the
Kingdom, our lives, and laws to the hands of destroyers, let the world judge;
(especially if we See the Treaty and Letters.
will but take notice who, and what persons, they have long since pitched upon
for the chief places, as is made known to us by the letters that have been
intercepted,) traitors to the State.

Now the Parliament is bound in Conscience to God and in Faith to the King and
Subject; to secure the Kingdom, the King, and Us, from Treason: therefore we
are bound in Conscience to God, in faith to the King and to the Parliament, to
assist the Parliament with our lives and estates, to the last drop of blood,
and the last penny we are worth, against all desperate enemies, evil
councillors, and destroying murderers and robbers. Seneca says, There is a
King among the Seneca in Cl^^. lib. 1 chap. 19.
Bees, and he has no sting, Nature has denied it to him, because he should
not be cruel to seek revenge, nor hazard his life, and therefore took away
his weapon, and disarmed his wrath; all Kings and Princes (says he) ought to
consider this excellent example, for it is the Custom of Nature to discover
her self in little things.

I might add other motives, but if we look upon the horrible cruelties of the
Rebels in Ireland, and consider the rise of that Rebellion, set forth in the
Parliaments late Declaration, that alone is motive enough, being in it self
more horrid, and in the consequence much more dangerous to us, than that act of
the Benjaminites in abusing the Levites Concubine, was to the other Tribes of
Israel. Judge. 19 25.
This being every ones case, which we are all bound to vindicate. Me thinks
that Declaration from the Parliament is sent through all Britain, like the
divided See the Declaration entitled the rise of the Grand Rebellion in
Ireland.
pieces of the Concubine, into all the Coasts of Israel, and I cannot but say
of it as they said of that, Consider it, (take notice and speak your mind,
Judges 19. 29. 30.) if we have not more reason, and juster cause then the
Israelites, to gather together as one man, from all parts of Britain, and
resolve never to return to our own houses, till those miscreants (those men
of Belial) be delivered up to the hand of justice; see the place Judge. 20. 8.
13. and withal consider that place Proverbes 25. 5. Take away the wicked from
before the King, and the throne shall be established in righteousness.

Now to close up all, let me give you some Reasons, of my confidence (if you
thus do) that God will prosper you, and give deliverance in his due time to
his Church, and to his people in this Kingdom, and for that take briefly
these grounds following.

First, it was the especial hand of God, and his Providence that brought this
7. Reasons or grounds of confidence that God will deliver his Church and people
in this Kingdom at this time, if we use the means before prescribed. John.
11. 10. 51.
Parliament to sit, (the King was the Instrument) and after to establish it for
some continuance of time, contrary to the expectation of all men, and opposite
to the long continued purposes and designs of Malignant counselors: whom God
as strangely infatuated at that time, as at another time in another case, he as
strangely inspired Caiphas to Prophecy that Christ should dye for the Nation.

Secondly, Gods wrath was never kindled against any people, or Kingdom, but
for sin, especially for the sins of Idolatry, Sabboth-breaking, and public
injustice: nor has his wrath continued to desolation, but for non-reformation:
But God has called this Parliament to purge sin, to overthrow Idolatry, to
suppress Sabboth-breakers, and to reform public injustice, arming them with
Sovereign Authority by his own power, and by the Authority of the King: to
which work they have wholly devoted themselves; and for that very cause, they
are at this time so strongly opposed by the powers of hell and earth. Therefore
God will maintain his own cause, and his servants working his work, and in
his own time will make their work prosperous in their hands, as he did to
Nehemiah. Nehe. 6. 15. 16.


Thirdly, God has afflicted Britain for these sins, and a multitude of
other transgressions, and does still continue to afflict us for our
impenitencie: but it is observable that he whips us because he would convert
us; and yet he preserves us from destruction, because he would not totally
destroy us: therefore has wonderfully discovered the Plots of the enemy, and
blasted their bloody designs, when they had prepared them (as they thought)
ready to destroy us; former mercies are engagements of future deliverance;
hence I conclude from the confidence of Manoahs wife (when an Angel had told
her she should bear a 1 Samuel 17. 37.
son, that should begin to deliver Israel, her husband seeing the Angel
assend Judge. 13. 22, 23
up in the flame, said, we shall surely dye, because we have scene God) if
(says she) the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have showed us these
things.

Fourthly, I find by all Stories Divine, and Humane, (that ever I read) that
before God destroyed a people or Kingdom, he has taken away his Prophets,
Judges, and righteous men, or they have been rarely found, or else he has
taken Esaias 57. 1. Exodus 32. 10. Ier. 7. 16. Ier. 14, 11.
off their affections, and spirits from prayer, for that people or Kingdom.

I confess this has in part been made good to England, some have been over
awed, their mouths stopped, some banished, others destroyed, and many forced
to fly to other Countries for shelter: Yea, the two Fountains of Religion and
holiness (as well as the Courts of justice) were exceedingly corrupted: all
which presaged a storm coming, and now it is come: But consider Gods Isay 1.
26.
Ministers are restored, increased, and many returned from their Exile,
righteous Judges are set up, and good men put in Authority. The affections of
the godly (and that of many thousands) are moved with zeal to God exceedingly,
and their hearts stirred up to earnest constant prayer, and unwearied labors:
have seen some gracious returns of their prayers, and fruit of their labors,
and wait Mica. 7. 9.
by faith with patience, till the Lord plead their cause, and execute Judgment
for them.

Besides, notwithstanding the corruption of the fountain, God has from thence
produced pure streams, planted fruitful vines in his Orchard. When were more
young, able, godly, Ministers in England then now? When were men stirred up
with zeal for God to lift up their voices like Trumpets, to tell Israel Esaias
58. 1. Act. 4. 36. 1 These. 5 14. Psalm. 147. 1. Esaias 8. 11. etc. Esaias 10. 14.
verse. 15. 16.
her transgressions, and Judah of her sins? When were more sons of
consolation, to comfort the feeble minded? But if God graft new siens, and
plant young Vines in his Vineyard, he is not about to destroy it, but rather to
gather his own together, that he may destroy the wicked by themselves.

Fifthly, no story of any age or people, can give a president, that ever God
destroyed an humbled praying people, (notwithstanding the irreligiousnesse of a
multitude of godless men, amongst which they live, whom God can cut off Mat.
13. 30.
some other way, or reserve to greater wrath) but if a considerable number of
repenting reformers have been found, God has for their sakes spared such a
people or Nation; therefore this Church and Nation: Only we must consider Tim
2. 19.
God looks for a greater number in Great Britain, than in any other Nation or
Kingdom; God would have spared Sodom for ten righteous sake, yet seven Luke
12. 48. Genesis 18. 32. 1 King. 19. 18.
thousand in Israel was too few, (although God took notice of them all) and
surely twice seven thousand cannot save England: but if those in England who
have given their Names to Christ, be found to be truly repenting, praying, and
reforming their evil ways, with resolution to perseveere; undoubtedly England
2 Chro. 7. 14. John. 17. 19.
shall be saved for their sakes. The example of Judea and Jerusalem in the time
of Josiah; nor the present condition of Germany are no objections of validity
against this truth, except we resolve to cherish our base lusts, seek our
private ends, love our selves; so as to neglect God and the means he has in
mercy freely 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. ult.
given us to save us: this is to forsake God, and then God will forsake us, and
cast us off for ever; and it shall be said of England, as once of Babel; we
would have Jer. 51. 9.
healed Babel, and she would not be healed, etc.

6ly, Although for these sins, now reigning in this Kingdom, namely Idolatry,
profanation of the Sabbath, oppression, etc. God has destroyed whole
Kingdoms, laid them mast, and given up his own people with the wicked into
his Ier. 24. 5.
enemies hands. Yet you must consider it was when generally or wholly, the
people were willing to yield to such sins as it was before and instantly
after Iosiahs time. Besides when those men so given into captivity, have been
sold, Dan 6. 6. verse 23. 24. Esth. 8. 7. Neh. 4. 8. etc. Nehe. 6. 15. 16 1
King. 18. 24.
to destruction and appointed to slaughter by their enemies, maliciously to
destroy the Church of God: God has for his own Names sake given them a
glorious deliverance, much more will he deliver at this time, being now
invocated on both sides, and called to be Judge of the truth, as in the time of
Eliah.

Yet I say not but England is punished for these sins, and may be brought
very low and into great straights because of unbeleefe, lukewarmenesse, and
impenitencie, before she see a full deliverance: which if it be so the fault is
our own. Hos. 13. 9.


Seventhly, it has been usual with God when admonitions have been rejected,
and easier chastisements slighted, to lay great and heavy Judgments upon
Deuteronomy. 28. 29.
his own people, and of long continuance; and in these Judgments to take away
many of his children, till his people return and earnestly seek God, and till
Hos. 5. 15. Ezekiel. 5. 13.
the time of his indignation be accomplished; great sins, and long continued
in, bring great and long Judgments, (except there be proportionable
humiliation to prevent it) but glorious deliverance to Gods people will come,
and wonderful Deuteronomy 7. 23.
destruction to their enemies will be seen to all the world: and assuredly
deliverance will come to Britain, if we wait by faith and patience, with
diligent use of the means, without murmuring at the miscarriages, and
accidents in things, failing of men or Armies, confided in: or be discouraged
at the seeming unprosperous success of our Armies, or the successful
enterprises Psalm. 73. 18. Psalm. 76. 10.
of the enemy; in all which God has a secret way of providence, and will make
to the manifestation of his glory. Nor let any man think that he shall be
delivered by another man's faith and repentance, or escape by other men's cost
and industry: for although enlargement come, and the Kingdom be delivered, yet
Esth. 4. 14.
the unbeleeving and mammonist may be cut off before or after. Consider what
became of that great Lord, on whose hand King Iehoram leaned, because he
believed not the Word of God. Besides at the great day of account, Christ may
say to such, ^ King. 7. 17.
I know you not, depart, etc. You that were not with me, were against me.
Therefore let every one conscionably do his own part and duty; and then
depend Mat. 25. 40. 41 Mat 12. 30.
upon God for a glorious and comfortable deliverance, which God grant for his
Names sake.

But there are four evils that exceedingly hinder the work of Britains
deliverance, which must be removed. Two concern private men, two concern the
Public Magistrate: the evils in private men are, first, neglect of
selfeexamination, every ones not judging and condemning his own sin.
Secondly, our forwardness and rashness to censure and condemn the faults,
miscarriages or neglects of others: Parliament, Armies, Commanders, etc. whom
we are bound to pray for, as they are the Instruments of God for our good. The
evils in the public Magistrate are, first, not clensing Gods Armies of
known Achans, who seek the wedge of Gold, and the Babilonish Garment: these
Josh 7. 11. 12.
hinder God from going out with our Armies; cause the mouths of ill affected
men to be opened against our just cause, and discourage many well affected
people, and is an occasion, Why our Armies turn the back upon the enemy:
secondly, the nourishing of flattering Zibas, and traitorous Iudasis; who take
pay of our money, are maintained in excess and riot at our costs (while the
common Soldiers want necessaries) yet like Judas betray our cause, and sell us
for gain. Let us pray, and our Parliament and Generals endeavor to have
these evils removed. And God will be seen to go out with our Armies, and
will undoubtedly work our work for us; save our King, and destroy his and our
enemies. Let all Glory be given to God.

FINIS.

