OF THE AL-SVFFICIENT EXTERNAL PROPOSER OF MATTERS OF, FAITH.

DIVIDED INTO TWO BOOKS.

IN THE FIRST.

Is proved, that the true Church of God, is the All-sufficient external Proposer
of matters of Faith.

IN THE SECOND.

Is showed the manifold vncertanities of Protestants concerning the scripture:
and how scripture is, or is not, an entire Rule of Faith.

By C. R. Doctor of Divinity.

1. Timothe. 4. The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth.
At PARIS, M. DC. LIII.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
1. NAtural reason (gentle Twoe ways to learn truth.
Reader) teaches us, that what we can not know by ourselves, we should learn
by authority of others: and according as their authority is undoubted, or
probable, toyeeld assured, or probable assent thereto; and the same reason
teaches us also, that as the Sea infra l. 2. c. 8. sect. 1.
clear sight of God in heaven, is supernatural to us, and far above the reach
of our reason, so is also* the right way thereto. Wherefore (as S. Dev^^l.
^redendi (...). 16. 8. 17.
Augustine rightly says) if God will have men come to him in heaven, he must
needs have instituted some authority on earth for to direct them assuredly in
the right way, because by reason we cannot find way to heaven, known by
authority.
out that way. Which authority must be infallible, because otherwise it could
not assuredly direct us: as also because it is to direct us by divine faith,
which is altogether infallible. And herein is Gods goodness to be admired, that
he would bring men to heaven rather by authority and faith, then by knowledge
and reason, because every one can believe, but not every one konw hard
matters. And in all that is hitherto said, Catholics and Protestants generally
agree: The controversy between them is, in whom God has settled this assured
authority, for to direct and guide us infallibly in our way to heaven.

2. For Catholics say, that as God, Authority settled in men
at the first set this authority in his Prophets and Apostles, so because they
were not to live with us for ever he continues it in his Church, which he has
made his spouse, the mother and mistres of the faithful, the pillar and ground
of truth, his mistical body, whereof Christ is head, and the Holy Ghost, the
Soul, who is to teach her all truth, and in whose heart is always Gods Word
believed, in her mouth his word preached, and in her hands, his word written.
But Protestants because they can show no Church before Luther, who taught in
substance the same way to heaven, which they do, (as I have otherwere Lib. 2.
de Authore Protest^ Ecclesia.
showed by their own plain and manifold confessions) are forced to deny, that
God has settled this infallible authority in his Church, for to direct us and
guide us infalliblie to heaven, and do grant her no more authority in matters
of faith, then wh^tat. Cont. 1. q. 5. c. 20. l. 1. d^ script. 144. l. 2. p.
254. ^71. l 3. p. 435.
mere humane, enen in the Laud sec. 16. n. 26. 61.
most fundamental points of al. Naie some of them say, she has whitat. Cont.
1. q. 3 c. 3. l. 1. de script. p. 153. l. 2. p. 235. Calvin Actor. 15 v. 28.
See infra l. 2. c. 10. sec. 2. and* l. 1. c. 2.. 8.
no authority at al in matters of faith. So they abase the authority, or
rather take away al authority in matters of faith, from their Mother and
Mistres in faith, from the spouse of Christ, from the pillar and ground of
truth, from her, whose head, Christ is, and whose soul, is the Holy Ghost,
who teaches her al truth. And this The root of al heresy.
is the true root of al heresies, not to believe, that the true Church of God,
the pillar ant ground of truth, whom the Holy Ghost teaches al truth, is an
infaillible guide appointed by God to direct us assuredly to heaven. For every
one would follow her, none would oppose her, whom they confess to be an
infallible Guide.

3. Protestants grant every one of the Prophets or Apostles, to have been
infallible in matters of faith, and yet cannot show so mainie, nor so plain
testimonies of Scripture for their infallibility, as we can show for the
infallibility of the Church But al infallibility in matter of faith, they will
put in the scripture (as usually al T^rtul. d^ pr^wr. c 15. Hilar l. ad
Constant. August. ep^s. 222. H^eron. in Galat. (...). Sed infr^ l. 2. c. 14.
and seq.
heretics did) because they will understand that as thy please and so indeed put
al infallibility in themselves, though nether scripture says, that itself is
infallible, nor was it written for above 2000. years before Moses, nor was it
in all places, or times, when and where infallible faith was, nor itself can
show the way to heaven to them that cannot read it, nor shows that, which
Protestants account the most fundamental point of faith, or al other points so
clearly, as it need no interpreter, See infra. l. 2. c. 4. see. 2.
as we shall hear Protestants themselves confess.

4. And can any reasonable man persuade himself, that God has settled al
infallible authority forto direct men assuredly to heaven in that, which he
conffessth, God never said, is infallible, nor it was in all times, or places,
where and when men were infallibly guided in their way to heaven; which cannot
by it self guide the greatest part of men: which teaches them not the most
necessaire point of al, nor al points so clearly, as it need not some
interpreter (and yet say they withal, God has not given us any infallible
interpreter) I add also, that who follow it for their only guide in matters of
faith, have no constancy, nor unity in faith, nor yet any -- hope of unity
Is such a See infra l. 1. c. 8. n. 6.
one, men's only assured guide to heaven?

5. We produce the express word of God, that his true Church is the pillar and
ground of truth, and that the holy Ghost teaches her al truth: let
Protestants produce the like express word of God, that the book, called
scripture, is the pillar and ground of truth, and that it teaches al truth.
You must (says Cont. Pra. ^eam. l. 11.
Tertullian,) prove as clearly, as I do. Bring a proof like to mine. And S.
Augustine: Read as plain words as these are, which we read to you. Do l. de
vnis. c. 6. 14.
not bring us your consequences, or inferences, of which we may ^ay with S.
Augustine. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost.
This is a humane argument, not divine authority. See i^fra l. 25. 3. s^c. 1.
Protestants use to say, that al things necessary to be believed, are expressly
in scripture and need no inference, and that faith relieth not on argument, but
on authority: let them keep this in this main controversy: legant, let them
read in Scripture (not themselves infer out of Scripture) that God has set al
infallible authority for matters of faith, in Scripture, and we will believe
them, as l. de vnitate c. 17.
S. Augustine said in the like case to the donatists, and laud Relat. sec. 33.
Chillirg. p. 3 33
Protestants say in the dislike, to us: or I will else say with the same S.
Augustine: I believe what God says, not de vnita. c. 11.
what vain heretics babble, or what fallible men infer.

6. Nay Protestants are so far from reading in Scripture, that in it is al
infallible authority for matters of faith, as themselves se^. infra l. 2. c.
5. sec. 2.
confess, that by Scripture al things absolut^ly, cannot be proved, which are
to be believed: That Scripture is not an absolutely perfect Rule of
controversies, that it cannot decide the question of Schism: that it is not
safe to judge al things by scripture alone: that it does not contein simply al
things, which are necessary to salvation: that it cannot assure us, that it
is: the word of God: That it needs an interpreter for some points of faith.
Which are to far from the nature of an all-sufficient infallible guide of men in
matters of faith, and so far from the nature of an all-sufficient rule in
matters of faith, as I think, no judicious Protestant can in his judgment join
them together. For it is plain contradiction, to be All-sufficient, and to be
deficient, in so main and so many points.

7. And not with standing, though Hou scripture is necessary, and a rule.
in Scripture be not that All-sufficient authority, which God has instituted
on earth for to direct men by right faith to heaven, nor it be the entire or
the necessary Rule, ^or the very being of infallible faith, yet it is
necessary to the better being of faith, and a sufficient Rule both for all
fundamental, or al simply necessary points of faith, and also for the most
points of Christian faith, and a mediate rule for all of them. And this being all that, for which Scripture was written, and which it ought to have, it is to be
accounted a perfect ^ule because every thing is perfect, when it has all that
it ought to have. And herein we grant more perfection to Scripture, then.
Protestants do, both because we teach, that it contains al, that we account
absolutely necessary or fundamental to says, Protestants say, it teaches not
that, which they account the most fundamental point of al, to wit, that it self
is the word of God: and also, because we say, that e^her immediat^ly or
mediatly; it teaches clearly al points of faith what soever, in that it
sends us to the true Church, which teaches clearly al points. But
Protestants say, that nether immediately, nor mediatly it teaches some clearly,
and sends us not to any infallible interpreter So that S. Augustine. l. 1.
cont. Creson c. 33.
we grant both more vniuer^alitie, and also more claritie to Scripure, then
Protestants do, though they would seem to ma^e more of scripture them we do:
but in truth make so little of the Scripture, as Chilling. (...). 2. 6. 32. v. 9.
some of them teach, that we are not bound under pain of damnation to believe
the divine authority of Sc^ipture Nay (say) that the Scripture is none of the
material objects of faith; that we have as great reason to believe there was a
King Henry VIII. as that which is said in S^ripture of Christ suffering See
infra l. 2. c. 8. sec. 2. and c. 15. n. 2
under Pontius Pilat, which is in effect to say, we have as great reason to
believe some men, as to believe God. For not al but some men, say, there was a
King Henry VIII. and both God, and (in a manner) al men say, thar Christ
suffered under Pontius Pilat.

INDEX. OF THE CHAPTERS OF the first Book.
I. IN which is enplicated the question, touching the i^fallibilitie of the
Church. II. In which are set down the rational grounds of what is said in this
treatise, concerning the Church. III. What conditions are necessary to the
All-sufficient external Proposer of points of faith? IV. That God can give to
men a divine infallibility, or veracitie in proposing matters of faith. V.
That the true Church of God is a sufficient and infallible Propos^r of al,
which she proposes as points of faih, proved by what she is said to be in
Scripture. VI. That the true Church of God is infallibilible in all she
proposes as* points of faith, proved by Gods promises to her, in Scripture.
VII. That the true Church of God is an infallible proposer of matters of faith,
proved by the holy Fathers. VIII. That the true Church of God is infallible in
matters of faith, proved by Reason. IX. Some of the protestants reasons against
the infallibility of the true Church of God in matters of faith, answered. X.
That the true Church of God is infallible in matters of faith, proved by
manifold coufessions of protestants. XI. That the true Church of God is (in
ordinary Course) a necessary Propeposer of al points of faith, proved by holy
Fathers. XII. That the true Church of God is a necessary Proposer of al points
of faith, proved by Reason. XIII. That the true Church of God is a necessary
proposer of al points of faith, proved by plain confessions of Protestants.
XIV. That Protestants grant the Churches authority to be diuin^. XV. That
Protestants grant it to be a supernatural cause of says. XVI. How a vicious
circle is avoided in proving the Church by the Scripture, and the scripture by
the Church. XVII. How we are to answer that question: How know yo^ the
Scripture to be the word of Good. XVIII. That the true Church of God does
clearly and universally propose al points of faith. XIX. Which is a sufficient
Proposal of the Church, for points of faith.
INDEX. Of the Chapters of the second Book.
I. PRocestants uncertain, which books be canonical Scripture. II. Protestants
uncertain, whither all that is in scripture, be plain and easy to be
understood, or no. III. Protestants uncertain whether al things necessary to
be believed, be actually in scripture, or no. IV. Protestants uncertain, whether
al things necessary to be believed, be clearly in scripture, or no. V.
Protestants uncertain, whether scripture be the only and entire Rule of faith,
or no. VI. Protestants uncertain whether scripture of itself do sufficiently
show it self to be the word of God, or no. VII. Protestants uncertain, whether
scripture be a true Judge of Controversies, or no. VIII. Protestants uncertain,
whether scripture be to be believed to be Gods word with infallible asseurance,
or no. IX. Protestants uncertain, whether translated scripture be Authentical,
or no. X. Protestants uncertain, whether scripture be to be believed to be the
word of God, only for the Churches testimony, or no. XI. Protestants
uncertain, whether scripture be the formal cause of their believing whatsoever
they believe, or no. XII. Protestants uncertain, whether they had the scripture
from Cat^oliks, or no. XIII. Protestants uncertain, whether Catholics make
great account of scripture, and prove their doctrine by it, or no. XIV. That
scripture, taken by it self without the at^estation of the Church, cannot
sufficiently propose to us any thing to be believed with divine faith. XV. That
scripture, though believed to be the word of God, does not sufficiently propose
al points of faith. XVI. That Scripture does not sufficienly propose any point
of faith to al men, capable of external proposal. XVII. That scripture has not
proposed points of faith in all times, when faith was. XVIII. That scripture
has not proposed points of faith in all places, where faith was. XIX. That
scripture does not clearly enough propose al points of faith. XX. That the
proposal of scripture, is not (in ordinary course) necessary to divine faith.
XXI. That the scripture conta ineth the sum of Christian faith. XXII. That the
scripture teaches plainly the sum of Christian faith. XXIII. That the
scripture is necessary to the better being of Christian faith. XXIV.
Protestants arguments, that the scripture contains al points of faith,
answered.
OF THE AL-SVFFICIENT EXTERNAL PROPOSER OF POINTS OF FAITH. FIRST BOOK.
THE STATE OF THE question concerning the Infalibilitie of the Church,
explicated. FIRST CHAPTER.
IN the former part of this work, which was of the distinction of fundamental
and not fundamental points of faith I showed, that there are no such
fundamental points of faith as Protestants imagine, to wit, such, as if they be
believed, suffice to have a saving belief, to be a true member of the Church,
and to be in the way of salvation; though other points of faith sufficiently
proposed, be not believed: nor any such not fundamental points of faith, as, if
they be sufficiently proposed, be not necessary and fundamental to a saving
faith, to a true member of the Church, why treated of the sufficient Proposer.
and to the way of salvation, but that a sufficient proposal of what points of
faith soever, does bind to believe them al, and every one of them under pain
of loss of saving faith, of being a true member of the Church, and of being in
the way of salvation: It remains, that we she^ who is this ^l-sufficient
Proposer of points of faith, and which is a sufficient Proposal of them. And
because (as we shall prove hereafter) the Church is this All-sufficient external
Proposer of points of faith, and that she cannot be such, unless she be
infallible in all points of faith, it is requisite before we proceed to
explicate, what we understand by the Church, what by her infallibility, what
by matters of faith, and what by, necessary to al and every one.

2. First therefore by the Church, what is meant by The Church.
we understand not any particular Church whatsoever, either of the city of
Rome, or of any particular Province, and much less any particular person what
soever, but only the whole universal or Catholic Church of Christ, and we only
^n quire, whether she be infallible in all points, vhich she teaches as points
of divine faith, not regarding for this present, whether also any particular
Church, or person be infallible, or no, because it will suffice to our purpose,
that the whole Church be so infallible; and also because the infallibility of
any particular Church or person may be disputed, salua fidei compage as S.
Augustine speaks.

3. The second point to be explicated, what by infallibiliti^.
is Infallibility, by which we mean not freedom both from al actual error,
and also from al possibility of error, as is in God, even by his nature: but
only freedom from al actual error in matters of faith, by Gods efficacious
assistance, Bellarm. l 6. degra^^s 4. Gr^tia effi cax adiunct^m. habet
infallibilitatem, non necessitatem.
abstracting, whether there be also freedom from al possibility of error, in
such matters, or no. And this is that kind of infallibility which we
attribute to Gods true Church, and which is both necessary and sufficient to
her for to be a fit external proposer of faith. Necessary, because if she were
not in some sort infallible in matters of faith, her proposal of such matters
would not be sufficient to engender infallible faith of them. And also
sufficient to be an external Proposer of such matters, subordinat to God, who
is the principal proposer of them. For as it implies contradiction, that
divine faith should believe any thing that is not true: so likewise it implies
contradiction, that she, who by Gods assistance is free from al actual errors
in matters of faith, should act^ally errin them* and therefore she is a
sufficient external ground and pillar to stand or rely upon And hence it
appears, See infra c. 9. n. 3.
how superfluous it were to prove, that the Church has no possibility to err,
either near, or remote, in matters of faith, seeing freedom from actual error in
them by Gods efficacious assistance, suffices to an external proposer of them.
And that the true Church of God has this kind of freedom from error in
matters of faith, is clear by Christ's promises, by the testimonies of the
Prophets and Apostles, by the attestation of the holy Fathers, by the light of
reason, and by the confessions (some times) of the learnedest Protestants, as
we shall show hereafter.

4. The third particle to be explicated, wha^ is mea^t by matters of faith.
is Matters of faith. By which we mean only such matters, as the Church
proposes to be believed with divine faith, not such, as she proposes to be
believed with humane faith, as are the lives of saints in the Breuiarie, their
miracles, Relics, and such like.

5. The fourth particle is necessary what by Necessary to salvation.
to salvation, In which particle Potter sec. 5. p. 16 19. 21. laud sec. 21. p.
140. ^60. and seqq.
Protestants commonly agree with Catholics in words, that the Church is
infallible, but indeed they desagree two ways. For first, they mean only such
points of faith as by reason of the matter, are whitaker cont. 2. q. 4. l. 2.
Calvin. 4. Institut. c. 8. potter sec. 5. p. 19. 23. laud. p. 355 357. 358.
absolutely necessary, as the passion and Resurrection of Christ, and such
like, and not also such, as are necessary to Salvation, by reason they are
clearly revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed to us. For Catholics hold,
that the Church is infaillible in matters of faith which are any way necessary
to Salvation, though only by reason of their clear revelation and sufficient
proposal. Because, if we believe not al things (little orgreat) clearly revealed
by God, and sufficiently proposed to us as from God, we do not believe God to
be faithful in all his words, which yet to believe is most necessary to
sal^ation. Secondely Potter sec 5. p. 2^. 89. laud p. ^^7 165. Calvin.
Admon^s. vlt. p. 3^2. marty^. la^. 4. c. 10.
Protestants differ from Catholics, in that they do not believe al points of
faith (even such as are necessary to be believed only by reason of their clear
revelation sufficienly proposed) to be necessary to the well being of faith,
even by reason of the matter which they conte^ne; when as indeed al points of
faith are necessary to the better being or perfection of faith, even by reason
of the matter which they contein. For as in natural things, God does not give
what is superfluous both to their being, and also to their well being, or
perfection: so nether does he in supernatural matters, as are points of faith.
Whererpon the Apostle. 1. Thessal. 3. desired to add somethings, which were
wanting to their faith and yet (doubtless) nothing was wanting to the very
being of their saving faith, but only to the well being or perfection thereof.
And Ephesians. 4. he says, that God gave Pastors to the consummation or perfection
of Saints. Wherefore, as far as the better being, or perfection of Christian
faith, or consummation of Saints reaches, so far also reaches the
infallibility of the Church. And when some Catholics say, that the Church is
infallible only in things necessary to salvation, as Canus l. 5. loco. 5.
Stapleton Controu. 4. q. 2. ad quartum argumentum; and Bellarmin l. 4. de
Pontifice c. 5. they do not mean, as some Potter sec. 5. p. 16. 17. 22. 29.
Protestants think, that she is infallible in things merely fundamental, which
are necessary to salvation by reason of the matter, or necessitate medij (as
the principal points of faith are necessary) but of things, which are any way
necessary to salvation, either by reason of their matter, and their revelation
also, or by reason of their revelation only, as other The Church infallible
only in things some way necessary.
points of faith are necessary: and also which are necessary either to the
very being, or to the berter being of salvation, by reason of their matter, as
al points of faith are necessary. For in all things, which are any way
necessary to salvation, and only in things which are some way necessary to
salvation God has given Infallibility to his Church. Because (as I said) as in
natural things he fails not in any thing, which is any way necessary to
their being, or better being, so nether does he fail or abound in supernatural
things, as is salvation.

6. The last particle to be explicated, whas meant by all and every one.
is, To al and every one. In which Protestants differ from Catholics, because
they attribute Infallibility to the Church, only in things Potter sec. 5. p.
19. 29.
absolutely necessary to al men's faluation, as Laud speaks Relat. p. 355. or
in things absolutely necessary in themselves, as he speaks ibid. ^p. 357. and
generally Protestants say, the Church is infallible b^t in, fundamental points,
by which they mean only such, as are necessary to every Christian; as Potter
says sect. 7. p. 74. not such, as are necessary only to some. But seeing
Christ has instituted his Church as a necessary mean to save al, and every
kind of men she must needs be as in fallible in matters, which are necessary
for the salvation only of some, as she is in matters which are necessary for
the salvation of al. For else he should fail in a necessaire means for the
salvation of some kind of men, which were impious to think, seeing he came to
save al kinds of men; and therefore he has made his Church infallible, as well
in matters of faith, which are necessary only to the salvation of some kinds
of men, as which are necessary to al kinds of men. And this is so evident, as
whitaker Controu. 2. q. 4. c. 2. confes^eth, that in things necessary to any,
The full sense of this question.
the Church erreth not. So that our meaning in this question of the
infallibility of the Church, is, that the Catholic or universal Church
(through Gods efficatious assistance) certainly or infallibly never erreth in
any point necessary to salvation, either for the matter and divine revelation
too, or only for divine revelation, sufficiently proposed; or necessary either
to the being, or well being of faith, either of al men, or of any kind of men.
So that in what point soever, which is any way necessary to salvation, either
of al, or of any men, the Church infallibly never erreth through Gods
efficatious assistance of her, which assistance Christ has most clearly
promised to her, as he has promised to her remission of al sins, and
Protestants might as well question her power for remission of some kinds of
sins, as question her infallibility in some points of faith.

SECOND CHAPTER. In which are laid down rational grounds of that, which we
shall say of the Infallibility of the Church in matters of faith.
1. THe first ground is, that only Only Gods word, can be believed with divine
faith. Quomodo credet, quem non aud^e runt Romans 10.
the word of God, or what is said of God, can be the material object, or that,
which is believed with divine faith. This is evident, because only that word,
which implies contradiction to be falls, can be the material object of divine
faith, which implies contradiction to believe aniething, that is nottrue: and
such only, is the word of God, and no word of man, or of any creature. And
hence il follows, tha^ Protestants cannot believe with divine says, either of
these propositions: The Bible, is the word of God: The present copies of the
Bible, are couformable to the original. For Chillinh. c. (...) p 90. la^d^
sect. 16. p 69. 70 (...). 117. Hoober l. 2.. (...). Beza in Romans 1. ^ee l. 2.
c. 15. n. 8. and c. 5. sest. 1.
they maintein, that the scripture is the sole, and adaequat object of divine
faith, and confessing (which is evident) that neither of the said propositions
is in scripture, nor is any written word of God they must needs also confess,
that they have no divine faith of the said propositions. Wherefore thus I argue
in form against them: Only the scripture or written word of God is the
material object of divine faith. The said propositions are no scripture, or
written word of God. Therefore they are no material object of divine faith.

2. The second ground is, that only Only Authority or veracitie, the form^l
cause of bel^ef.
Authority or veracitie, can be the formal object, or formal cause of any
belief whatsoever. This also is evident. For as the Apostle says Romans 10.
faith is of hearing, and S. Austin lib. de vtil. cred. c. 11. That we believe,
we ow^ to authority; that we Know, to reason. Which he has also lib. de vera
Religione c. 24. And it is confessed by Protestants For thus Whitaker l. 3. de
scriptuta p. 408. Faith surely relieth upon Authoritie-Authoritie is the
foundation of faith; And p. ibid. principium credende ab externa authoritate
pendet. 509. To believe, some Authority is necessary, nor can any thing be
believed, without Authority. And l. 1. p. 50. That thou say, our faith
relieth upon testmonies, not upon arguments, I grant Laud Relat. sec. 38. p.
345. We do not believe one article of faith by fallible authority of humane
deductions. And hereupon they define divine faith, to be an Assent to divine
revelations, upon the authority of the reuealer. And hence it follows, that
Protestants cannot believe either Melanctho^ in proedi^amento qualita^is.
^hillingw. c. 11. p. 35. Protest^nts can have no formal faith of their bibles
The Bible to be the word of God, or Their copies thereof, to be incorrupt, for
any light they conceive to be in them, or for the majesty or style of them,
or for the excellency of the matter, because none of these, is any formal
Authority, or veracitie, but they are qualities of the word of God, which
qualities may cause Knowledge or opinion (accordingly as they are certain, or
only probable signs of Gods word) but cannot cause formal faith. And that
Protestants have not formal faith of the scripture, they seem some times to
confess. For thus laud Relat. Protestant last resolution, is into arguments*
sect. 1^. p. 83. 84. 85. 101. He that beleues, ^esolues his last and full
assent, That the scripture is of divine authority, into internal arguments
found in the letter it self, Lo, Protestants last resolution, is not into
authority, but into arguments. And Pottersec. 5. p. 8. That the scripture is
of divine authority, the beleuer sees, ^y that glorious beam of divine light
Laudep. 8^. 114. 115. 118. 121. 123. 3^0.
which shines in scripture, and by many internal arguments found in the letter
it self Whitaker. lib. 1. de script. p. 15. We believe, for the truth of the
thing, which is taught, or for the divinity of the doctrine it self. So also
page 56. 88. Which is in effect to confess, that they do not formally believe,
but know, or (as Potter speaks) see, that the bible is of divine authority
because their assurance, that the bible is of divine authority, is not lastly
resolved into authority, but into arguments taken out of scripture, or into
the ligh^e, the divinity or truth of the doctrine in it; whereas faith, is not
lastly resolved into arguments, or truth, or light, but Fides est non
apparentium Heb. 11.
into authority, nor is discursiue, but is a simple assent (of things not
appearing) for authority.

3. The third ground is, that only divine Authority or veracitie, can be any
true formal object, or formal cause of divine faith. This likewise is evident:
For humane or fallible authority is not sufficient to cause divine and
infallible faith. Because the authority, for which we believe, must be (at
least) as sure, as our belief: like as the premises for which we know the
conclusion, must be as sure, as the conclusion. And no See infra 12. c. 8. s^c.
(...).
authority but divine, can be so sure, as divine faith is, which implies
contradiction to be false. And this Protestants confess. For thus Whitaker l.
3. de scriptura p. sic etiam p. 509.
415. Such as the doctrine and religion is, which we profess, heavenly and
divine, such also must the reason and authority of believing be. And p. 392.
Our faith must rely upon an external infallible means. And l. 1. p. 166. The
effect does not surpass the cause. Potter sect. 5. p. 40. divine faith must
have a divine foundation. And Chillingw. c. 2. n. 154. None can build an
infallible faith, upon motives, that are not infallible, as it were a great and
heavy burden, upon a foundation, that has not strength proportionable. And
the same says laud sec. 16. n. 5. sec 33 p. 248. Potter sec. 5. p. 7. Field
l. 4. of the Church c. 2. and others. And hence we infer, that the authority
or testimony of the church, in matters of faith, is divine, because (as we shall
See infr^. c. 15. n. 6.
prove, and Protestants sometimes confess) it is a true cause of divine faith.

4. The fourth ground is; that for the authority of Gods church to be divine,
it need not rely upon immediate revelation from God, but his special and
effectual assistance will suffice thereto. First, because it cannot be proved,
that immediate revelation is absolutely necessary. Secondly, it were
derogatorie to Gods omnipotency, as if he could not make any infallible, but
in one manner. Thirdly, because S. c. 1. v 3. f L^ude sec. 16. p. 91.
Luke professes, that what he wrote, was by hearsay of such as had conuersed
with Christ. Fourthly, because Protestants some times confess, that such, and so
great assistance of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, as is purposely given to
that effect, is enough to make the authority of any company of men, divine
and infallible.

5 The fist ground is; that an authority Authority truly ^^n ne* is a
sufficient external cause of divine faith.
divinely infallible may be a sufficient external formal cause of divine faith,
subordinat to Gods authority, which is the principal formal cause thereof.
This is certain. For what greater certainty, or infallibility can divine
faith require in its external and subordinat cause, then to be truly divine.
Because al divine authority, effectually assisted by God, to tell nothing, but
truth never lies, as divine faith, is never falls: and therefore is a
sufficient foundation (external and subordinat to Gods authority) on which
divine faith may rely.

6. The sixth ground is, that verity, Verities distinct from vera^itie or
authority.
is distinct from Authority and veracitie. For verity, is the material object
of faith, and that which faith believes: Authority, or veracitie is the formal
object, or that for which faith believes verity. Wherefore verity cannot be
believed for it self; both because it has not of it self the formal cause of
belief, which is Authority or veracitie, as also, because that verity which
faith believes, has not of it self any motive to procure assent, because it is
unseen and vnapparent in it self, and Formal Authority or veracit^e, is no^ in
words or writings.
only is apparent in Authority.

7. The seventh ground is, that though verity can be in words or writings, as
in signs thereof, yet Authority or ver^citie (which is the formal cause of
believing verity) cannot be in words or in writings taken by themselves For
Authority is in some Author, and veracitie in one that is verax, and every
Author or vera^, is some intellectual person who utters verity, and who, for
his authority, or veracitie, deserves, and causes belief of that The formal
cause of faith is the authority of the reuealer.
verity, which he utters. Besides, divine faith (as al dogrant) is belief of
some divine truth revealed, for the authority of the reuealer, or as
Chillingworth c. 1. p. 35. says, an assentto divine revelation, upon the
authority of the reuealer. And the same says laud sec. 38. p. 344. Potter
sect. 5. p. 3. and others. But a Reuealer, is a person intelligent. Therefore
the authority of some person intelligent, is the formal cause of faith: and
not any words or writings, which are rather the external revelation, then the
reuealer. And hence it is, that though in holy Scripture, there be divine
verity, and that which is to be believed with divine faith, yet if scripture be
taken alone by it self merely, as it is such words, or writings, it has no
formal authority or veracitie to cause its verity to be believed. For as such,
it is neither any intellectual person, nor has any intellectual person
adioned to it, for whose authority it should be believed. Wherefore well said
Stapleton Controu. 3. q. 1. ar. 2. credimus scripturam, non scripturae, because
scripture has in it self truth, which is believed, but not authority, for
which it is believed. And likewise well wrote Chillingw. c. 2. p. 69. That the
divinity of a writing, cannot Note this.
be known for it self alone, but by some extrinsecal authority, you need not
prove, for no wise man denies it. And ibid. p. 114. A written rule, must
always need something else, which either is evidently true, or evidently
credible, to give attestation to it. And laud sect. 16. p. 88. Scripture
cannot bear witness to it self, nor one part of it, to an other. The same says
Hooker. l. 2.. 4. And See infra. l. 1. c. 14.
Protestants generally confess, that the scripture cannot be believed of us,
without the attestation of the Church. The true cause whereof is, that
scripture of it self, has no authority, but all the authority for which it is
believed, is out of it self, to wit, in God who is author of it, and in his
Church, who is witness to it. And when grave authors attribute authoritee to the
scripture, either by authority, they mean verity, or they take not scripture
by it sels alone, but as it is the scripture of God. As in like manner they
say, the scripture sai^th this, teaches this, affirms this, speaks this,
meaning God, by scripture. But Gods authority alone does not (in ordinary
course) engender faith, and we seek that authority on earth, without which
Gods authority alone, will not (in ordinary course) engender divine faith of
the scripture, or of any thing else, which authority evidently and confessedly,
is not in the scripture it self.

8. The eight ground is, that to a Four things in a proposer
Proposer of points of faith properly so called, there be long four things. 1.
is, his person, 2. his Authority to propose such matters. 3. his proposal,
which is his words or writings. And 4 the truth proposed and signified by his
words or writings. For a Propo^er of matters of faith, is a Preacher, who
proposes or preaches either by word only (as most of the Apostles did,) or by
writings also, as S. Paul, and some other Apostles Netherwords nor writings are
proposers.
did. And as their words were no Proposers, but that, by which they proposed,
so nether were their writings any Proposers, but were that* by which they
proposed. And of all the four said things, only the twoe last are in the
scripture, and therefore it cannot be properly the Propos^r of faith, but only
the Proposal, if we consider the words: and the Proposed, if we consider the
truth which the words signify. But all the four, are in the Church of God. And
Protestants cannot deny, that she is a person, or persons; nor that her words
or writings, are her Proposals, or the truth signified by them, her truth
Proposed. Nether do they whereim, Protestants grant divine authority to the
Ch^r^h.
deny, that she has divine authority to propose matters of faith, as to teach
Gods word, and administer his Sacraments, given to her in the last of S.
Matthew: only they deny, that her authority to testify or persuade that,
which she teaches, is infallible, and sufficient (as an external and
subordinat cause) to engender divine belief of what she teaches. In which they
do not consequently why Protestants de not speak consequently.
proceed. For first, how can the authority of the Church be divine in
proposing Gods word it is Gods word which she preaches Persuasion is the end
of preaching.
is the end of her preaching, as is evident, and Whitaker confesses in these
words l. 2. de scriptura p. 281. Preaching, is instituted for persuation? Would
God give to his Church, divine authority for the means, and not for the end?
seeing The end more desired then (...) the means.
every rational desirer, desires more the end then the means? Thirdly,
Protestants grant, that God has given divine authority to the Pastors of his
Church, for to govern her. Whitaker l. 2. de scrip. p. 246. Ministers of the
Church, are i^strvments of the holy Ghost, endu^d with divine authority to
govern the Church, committed to them. And if Pastors have diuineauthoritie to
govern the Church have they not also divine authority to persuade her, that it
is Gods word, which they teach her? Is not divine authority, as necessary to
Pastors for to persuade the Church, as to govern it? and right belief, as
necessary to the Church, as good government? More over Chillingw* c. 2. p. 105.
Protestants generally confess, that the church of God, is infallible in
fundamental points, and so infallible, that it implies contradiction, that she
should err in them. And how can she be so infallible in them, and be not
infallible by Gods special and effectual assistance? can the church of her own
nature or power, be infallible in such high matters above nature and reason?
Nay it seems so absurd even to Protestants themselves, to deny the church of
God to have divine authority to testify Gods truth, as sometimes they deny
it, but restritctly, as Laud sec. 16. 19. and 10.
that it is not simpl^ divine, not absolutely divine, or that she is not Potter
sec. 5. p. ^5. I whitaker. Contr. 1. q. 3. c. 11.
absolutely infallible, and confess, that the judgment of the church, is in some
sort divine, and call it a slander, that they say, the judgment of the church
is mere humane. But in truth they make her authority in matters of faith, mere
humane, yea less, and none at al. For thus Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 5. c. 10. In
the church thou shall find nothing, but humane, and therefore uncertain l. 3.
de script. p. 395. The perpetual testimony of the church, as far as it is of
the Church, is but humane testimony p. 327. The testimony of the church, of
it self, is wholly and merely humane. And l. 1. p. 112. The authority of the
matters of the church, is of no moment p. 16. An Protestants deny all
authority of the Church, in matters of faith.
argument, taken from the bare testimony of the Cburch to confirm any point
of faith, is fond, unfit, and vnforcible to persuade. l. 3. p. 482. The
testimony of the church, unless it be strengthened by scripture, is not worth a
farthing, in matters of faith. And l. 2. p. 235. The Church has no authority
in matters of faith, but all is Gods alone. And ibid. In matters of faith and
engendring faith, the Church has no authority at all. And to this blasphemous
denial of the churches authority in matters of faith, See infra c. 16. n. 5.
Chillingworth adds, that no certain Church, universal, or particular, is
infallible even in fundamental points, but only, that there shall be always
some uncertain men, who shall hold all the fundamental points.

3. The ninth ground is, that as the Apostles may be considered as they were so
many honest men, and ^o, no doubt, their authority was but humane: or as
Apostles divinely assisted in matters of faith and so their authority was
divine, as Protestants confess, infra c. 4. so the church of God, may be
considered, as so many honest and virtuous men, and so, doubtless, her
authority is but humane, and fallible: or as she is the Church of God, the
pillar and ground of truth, guided by Christ her head, and effectually assisted
by the holy Ghost; and so we say her authority in matters of faith, is divine
and infallible, though not in that high degree, as the Apostles was. But
Protestans, when they say that the authority of the Church, is but humane in
matters of faith, consider her only, as she is such men: wherein they proceed,
as if speaking of a man, they should consider only his body, not thinking of
his head or Soul. For the true church The church is a mystical body, whereof
Christ is the head and the holy Ghost, the soul.
of Christ is a mystical body, whereof Christ is the head, and the holy
Ghost, the soul, and in matters of faith is guided by this head, and
effectually assisted by this soul, according to Christ's manifest and express
promise, as we shall see hereafter, and therefore in such matters, has divine
and infallible authority from hersaid head, and soul. And what marvel, that a
body, whereof Christ is head, and the holy Ghost, the soul, has truly
divine authority, that is, be truly and effectually assisted by its divine
head and soul, to propose nothing as of faith, but what is truth? And What i^
meant by divine authority of the Church.
to be thus truly and effectually divinely assisted, is all the divine
authority, which we attribute to the church, and is both sufficient and
necessary for the ends, for which God appointed her, as we shall see presently.

10. The tenth ground, are the ends, The end for which God gave divine
infallibility to his church.
for which God gave divine infallibility to his Church, and her Pastors;
which, if they be well considered, will clearly show, that he has given her and
them, divine infallibility in matters of faith. For he has made his church
the pillar and ground of divine truth 1. Timoth. 3. which she cannot be,
without divine infallibility in divine truth. And because he made her pillar
and ground, not of a part of divine truth, but simply, of divine truth, and
that fundamental points, are but a part of divine truth, and the least part
too, he made her divinely infallible, not only in fundamental points, but in
all points, which he would have be believed with divine faith. And this our
Savior expressed more fully, when he said to his Apostles, that he would send
them the holy Ghost for to teach them all Io^n 14.. 16 Matt. 16.
things, all truth Likewise, because Christ has made his church so firm and
strong, as the gates of hell cannot preuail against her, and that every sinful
error in any point of faith, is formal haeresie, and a * gate Greg. in psalm. 5.
p^ni^. Portae inferi, h^reses sunt.
of hell, destructive of the church as I showed part 1. l. 2. c. 6. therefore
he has given his church divine infallibility in all matters of faith, for to
resist any haeresie in what point of faith soever. And in like manner, because
God has made the Pastors Ends, for which God gave divine infallibility to the
Pastors.
of his church, the external cause, and his instrument and means of engendring
divine infallible faith, Romans 10. he has given them divine infallibility in
all matters of faith, because no inferior infallibility would suffice, as I
showed n. 3. And likewise, because he has made them his instruments and means
not to engender a part of faith (as fundamental points are (but all faith,
because the Apostle says not, how shall they believe fun^amental points, without
hearing a preacher, but simply, how shall shey believe? he has given them
divine authority, and infallibility for all points, which ^e are to believe.
And in like sort, because God has given Pastors, and Doctors not Ephesians. c. 4.
only for the fou^datio^ of the body of Christ, or for the making of Saints,
but also, for the edification or building of Christ's body, and c^nsummation or
perfection of Saints unto a perfect man; and that fundamental points cannot do
all this, but not fundamental points as they are true points of divine faith,
so they are necessary to the building of Christ's body, and Not fundamental
points are of the perfection of faith.
consummation of his Saints unto a perfect man, therefore he has given them
divine authority and infallibility, even in not fundamental points. And the
Apostle, though (no doubt) he had taught the Thessalonians al fundamental
points, yet he desired to add those things, which he said, were wanting to
their faith, which 1. Thessal. c. 3.
was, to consummat or perfect their faith. And as far, as the edification of
Christ's body, and consummation of faith, extends, so far extends the
Pastors divine infallibility, which is given to them for this end.

11. And hence rises the eleventh ground, which is, that seeing Calvin. 4.
Instit. c. (...). 3. c 2.. 1. etc. 8. Vvitaker. Contr. 2 q 4. c 2 ^otter. sess.
Ep. 22.
Protestants, forced by the euidencie of truth, do confess, that the Church
is infallible in necessary points of faith, if they would grant, that she is
infallible, as well in points necessary to any men, as in points necessary
to all men, and in points, as well necessary. by reason of the formal cause of
belief which is divine revelation sufficiently proposed, though they be not
necessary by reason of their matter, which is to be believed, though by reason
also of that, they be necessary to the better being of faith, or perfection
and consummation of Saints) and as well in points necessary to the well being,
or perfection of faith, as simply to the being thereof, they should not differ
from us, about what points the church is infallible. For we do not say, that
she is infallible in points, which are not necessary to any, nor necessary in
any sort to the being, or well being or Stap^et. Contr. 4. q. 2. not. 7. Ad
E^^lesiae inf^l ibilitatem in docendo, satis ^st, vt sit in fallibilis in
substantia fidet, and publico dogma te, and rebus ad salutem nocessarijs Et ad
4. argumentum: i^fa^libil^tas docentis Ecc^efiae, pont tur tantum in rebus ad
salutem necessaris. The like says Bellarm. l 4. de Pont. c. 5. Canus l. 5 c.
5. Patribus Synodi Spiritus (...). non est praesens in omnibus, sedinrebus
solum ad salutem necessarijs.
perfection of Christian faith (as many scholastical subtilties are) as
Stapleton professes Contr. 4. q. 2. notab. 7. For as in natural things, God
gives not superfluities, but only, what is necessary to the being or
perfection of them; so nether in supernatural matters: But as he is not
defective in natural things, for necessaries, either for their simply being, or
their perfection, so, much less is he defective in supernatural matters,
according as these are of more importance, then those, and more regarded of
him. And Protestants, by saying, that God has made his Church infallible only
in things necessary to all men, and necessary to her very being, make him
les liberal in supernatural matters, then in natural. Besides, See infra (...).
6. n. 1.
Chillingw: c. 2. p. 54. says, that the scripture can end all controversies
touching things necessary, and very profitable: And ib. p. 98. What one of
the Evangelists has more then an other, is only profitable, and not
necessary. And if God has given divine infallibility to the scripture and
Evangelists, not only for necessary points, but also for such as are
profitable, why should we think, that he has not given to his Church, the
like infallibility, not only for simply necessary points, but also for
profitable, as all are, which make to the edification of Christ's body, and
consummation of saints unto a perfect man, as all true points Morton ^om 1.
Apologa l. 2. c. 9 Quasi ^ere nou fit fidei dogma, quod piri^us S. omnibus
eredendum propinauis.
of faith do? For who can deny, that all true points of faith revealed
clearly by God, are of the integrity and perfection of faith, and are
profitable for us to believe, otherwise to what end were they so revealed? And
if God revealed them clearly, he would have them believed, and if believed, he
would appoint on earth some infallible authority to propose them, which not
being in the scripture, must needs be in the church. I ad also, How al point^
of faith are necessary.
that though al points of faith be not simply necessary, by reason of the
matter, which is to be believed, they al are simply necessary, by reason of the
formal cause, which is divine revelation sufficiently proposed, for that is
simply necessary to be believed in whatsoever it proposes. How the principal,
and the instrument, are ^one, and how different.


12. The twelft ground is, that as the principal agent, and the instrument, are
but one entire cause in Kind, to wit, efficient: but in order and degree, are
far different. Different causes, to wit, Principal, and Instrumental, so the
authority of God and of the Apostles in matters of faith, were one and the
same entire cause of divine faith, to wit, formal: but in order and degree
were twoe, and far different, for the one was principal, the other ministerial,
one increate, the other create, one absolutely necessary, the other, not
absolutely necessary, the one sufficient of it self to beget divine faith, the
other, not sufficient of it self. And this unity betwixt the authority of God
and of the Apostles, our Savior expressed, when he said Luke c. 10. Who
hears you, hears me, which could not be true, unless he and his Apostles
were in some sort one and the same speaker, as the king and his Ambassador
are. And this same Protestants sometimes confess. For thus Calvin. in Joan. 20.
v. 21. He bids the Apostles succeed into the same function, which he had of his
father, he imposes on them the same person, he gives them the same right, --
Christ communicates with his Apostles, the same authority, which he had of
his father. Whitaker. Cont. 2. q. 3. c. 5. The Apostles did consigne the Canon,
not as men, but as the person of God. And lib. 1. de script. p. 61. Because
Christ left earth, he gave his office to preachers. And pa. 71. I deny not,
that Pastors do in some sort bear the person of God. And the distinction also
between these twoe authorities, Christ expressed, when he said Joan. 16. The
holy Ghost shall bear witness of me, and ye also shall bear witness In which
words, he expresses two witnesses, ad twoe testimonies. And the same did the
Apostles, when they said Act. c. 15. It has seemed to the holy Ghost, and to
us, to lay no other burden upon you, but these; where, they express twoe
imposers of the same burden, the holy Ghost, and themselves, and twoe
authorities of imposing it, one of the holy Ghost, the other, of themselves.
For they could not impose that burden, without they had authority distinct
from the authority of the holy Ghost, though not separate from it. And the
same (for unity and distinction of the authority of the holy Ghost, and of
the Church) I say of the Church, that, the authority of God and of his Church,
is one and the same in kind The entire formal cause of faith, in ordinary
course see infra c. 11. n. 1.
of causing divine faith, but far different in credit and degree of causing it,
though (in ordinary course) never separated. For in ordinary course the
entire formal cause of divine faith, is Gods and his churches authority
togeither, or God speaking by his Church. And the Churches authority being one
entire cause of divine faith with Gods authority, her authority must needs be
in matters of faith, divine and infallible; for a fallible authority cannot be
one cause in kind of belief with an infallible authority but a quite
different kind of cause. And if these grounds be compared with the grounds of
Protestants, for which they limit the infallibility of Gods Church, to only
fundamental points, and to mere humane infallibility, they will appear yet
more firm and solid. For their grounds are not founded upon any ends of the
Church, expressed in scripture, as these are; but founded only upon their own
ends, which are only to delude the texts of Scripture, which attribute
infallibility to the Church in all points of faith, by saying, that they are
meant of fundamental points only: and partly, to defend themselves from the
authority of the Church, in points, wherein they oppose her, by saying, that
her authority in any points what soever, is but human, and fallible also, in
such points as they oppose her. See Chillingw c. 3. p. 146. 172. c. 2. p. 86
laud sect. 16. p 93. 91. 231.
Some say, that the Church is efficaciter, or efficaciously assisted by God in
fundamental points, and therefore is infallible in them; but is only merely The
Church, is assisted efficaciously in ^l points of faith.
sufficiently assisted, in not fundamental points, and therefore fallible in
them. But besides, that this distinction of Gods efficacious and sufficient
assistance, in this matter is new, and therefore justly suspected as naught, it
is also voluntary without sufficient ground, and therefore irrational. Besides,
it grants, that the Church is divinely infallible in fundamental points. For
to be divinely infallible, is no more, but to be divinely assisted
efficaciously; more over it makes the Churches authority even in fundamental
points, to be uncertain. For if she be fallible in not fundamental points of
faith clearly revealed, (for such al true points of faith are, and points but
obscurely and darkely revealed, are but matters of opinion) how shall we be
certain, that she is not fallible in fundame^tal points seeing not fundamental
points (if they be points of faith) are as clearly revealed, as the
fundamental, as S. Augustine says of the scripture, that if it lie in any
point, it may be suspected in all. It makes also the Churches infallibility
vnuseful to us, because none know, which are all the fundamental points
necessary to be actually believed of every one, which not. To omit, that there
are no vnfundamental points of faith in the Protestants sense, but al true
points of faith are fundamental to the very being of saving faith, and to be
believed actually, if they be sufficiently proposed, or virtually, though they
be not so proposed. And to omit also, that mere sufficient assistance, which is
never efficient, Sufficient never efficient, i^ vain.
were vain, because (as Philosophers say, that power is vain, which is never
reduced to act, and is such a power, as is no where else to be found and also,
that fully sufficient and not efficacious, implie contradiction. For though
fully sufficient assistance may be not efficient, for want of our cooperation
Not distinct from efficacious.
or co^curse, yet it is always efficacious, because efficacious, (as it is
distinct from efficient,) is no more, but what has full power, or virtue to
work, and such is that, which is sufficient. But whether there be any
difference betwixt sufficient and efficacious assistance or none, God has
really and effectually made his Church the pillar and ground of truth, and so
strong, that the gates of hell shall not preuail against her, and therefore he
has given her efficacious or effectual assistance in all points of faith, and
so has made her divinely infallible in all such points. For as Chillingw. c. 3.
p. 145. says well, The Apostles could not be the Churches foundations, without
freedom from error in all those things, which they delivered constantly, as
certain revealed truths. So I say, the Church could not be the pillar and
ground of truth, without freedom from error in all things, she delivers as
points of divine truth.

13. And out of these grounds, first we may clearly see, that the true Church
of God is divinely infallible in all points, which she proposes to be believed
with divine faith. Secondly, we may easily answer all the objections of
Protestants to the contrary. Thirdly, we may see, what little cause Laud had
sec. 16. p. 91. to make such a wonder, that Catholics should say, that the
present true Church of God, is divinely infallible in all matters of faith,
seeing by divinely infallible, they mean no more, then divinely assisted
efficaciously to propose nothing to be believed, but what is truth. But rather
we Just wonder, that the Church of Christ should not be divinely infallible.
may wonder, that rational Christians will deny her to be divinely infallible,
or (which is alone) divinely assisted efficaciously, whom they cannot deny to
be the mother of the faithful, the spouse of Christ, whose head is Christ, and
whose soul, is the holy Ghost, who teaches her al things, and al truth, who
is the pillar and ground of truth, and against whom, the very gates of hell
shall not preuail. Is not such a one divinely assisted efficaciously? And whom
themselves confess to be infallible in fundamental points. For can she be
humanely Whitaker cont. 1. q. 3. c. 11. and l. 3. descript. p. 19 laud Relat.
sect. 16. p. 65.
infallible in such high matters?

14. Some Protestants urge us much to tell, whether the authority or
infallibility of the Church in matters of faith, be merely divine, or no. To
whom I answer, that if by divine, they mean divine in it self, as having How
the test^monie of the Church is divine, and now not.
any divinity in it self: we say it is not divine merely, nor at al; for it
is a create authority, as was also the authority of the Prophets, and
Apostles; but if by divine, they mean divinely instituted, and divinely
assisted efficaciously not to err in matters of faith, it is me^rly divine, it
is infallible merely by Gods efficacious assistance, and not by any natural
knowledge, or industry of the Church: Though she must use humane industry, as
was used in the Council of the Apostles Act. 15.

Lastely, it is well to be noted, that when we say, we believe for Gods
authority or veracitie, we mean not thereby, that we believe, because God does
efficiently cause our belief, namely, by lightining our understanding, or
stirring up our will to believe, because Gods authority or veracitie is no
efficient cause of our belief, but only a formal cause thereof; and also,
because he is in like sort efficient cause of our hope, or Charity, as he is
of our belief, and yet he is not cause of them by his authority: but our
meaning is, that we believe not for any thing which God works in us; but for
his authority or veracitie, which is in himself. And therefore they say no^
Canu^ l 2. c. 4. Whitaker l. 1. descript. p. 23.
well, who say, we believe, because we are moved thereto by special instinct from
God, or that our faith is lastely resolved into such special internal instinct.
For such special instinct can not be any formal cause of our belief, but only
an efficient cause thereof, and faith is not lastly resolved into any efficient
cause but only into some formal; besides that instinct is peculiar to him in
whom it is, whereas the motive or reason of Catholic faith, is common to al who
have such faith: more over it is not evident credible by it self, that such
special instinct is from God, and faith is to be resolved into some cause,
which is evidently credible, as is the authority both of God, and of his
Church in matters of faith; and therefore the resolution of our belief into
either of them, is sufficient and rational. For as when a King sends an
Ambassador to tell us some thing, we believe with humane faith, what is told us,
for the authority of them both, as for one entire adioint cause of our belief,
yet differently* prinpally for the Kings authority, and secondarily, for the
authority of his faithful Ambassador: so what we believe with divine faith; we
believe for the authority both of God, and of his Church, as for one entire and
total cause of our belief, but principally, for the authority of God, See
infra c. 11 n. 1.
and secondarily, for the authority of his Church, but with this difference,
that the King nether gives, nor increases the fidelity of his Ambassador;
but God gives to his Church all the fidelity she has for matters of faith.
Wherefore al Christian faith is lastly resolved into Christ's outward speech to
his Church, and into her outward speaking to us, both which speakers and
speakings, are but one, in such sort as is Sup. n. 12.
before declared. And when the Apostle said Romans 10. Faith is of hearing he
meant not of hearing internally by inspiration, Vvitaker cont. 2. q. 4. c. 2
who hear the Church, hea^ Christ him ^elf.
but of hearing externally by preaching, and doubtless meant of a last
resolution of faith. For hearing Christ's lawful Preachers, we hear him, as
before we showed. And the resolution of divine faith into the Churches
authority, is both sufficient, because her authority in matters of faith, is
plainly divine, and is also agreeable to men's manner of getting faith, who (in
ordinary course (are to have their faith not from God immediately speaking to
them, but from the Church immediately speaking to them from God; and therefore
their faith is to be resolved immediately into the authority of the Church, and
mediatly into the authority of God. Wherefore well said Bellarmin. l. 6. de
Great. and lib. arb. c. 3. Catholics have infallible faith, because what they
believe, they believe because God said it, and that God said it, they believe
because the Church testifies it. For what we believe, Christ told it to his
Church, and she having ever continued til our time, tells it unto us. And
seeing Protestants grant that faith may be welresolued into the authority of
the Infra c. 4. (...). 8.
Apostles, or of the L. 2. c. 11. sect. 1.
scripture, or universal tradition, because though their t Infra c. 10. n. 3. 6.
7. 9.
authority be create, yet by Gods efficacious assistance, it is plainly divine
and infallible, they should not deny that faith may be also resolved into the
authority of the Church, because it is create authority, seeing Christ has
most clearly promised to assist his Church most efficaciously, and also that
the Apostle testifies Romans 10. That Faith has its being from hearing the
preaching of the Church. And every thing is rightly resolved into that, of
which it has its very being, especially seeing the voice of the Church, is the
voice of Christ, and that hearing her, we hear him.

THIRD CHAPTER. What conditions are necessary to the All-sufficient external
Proposer of points of faith appointed by God?
1. CATHOLICS and Protestants agree, that there Twoe kinds of Proposers of
faith.
are two kinds of Proposer of points of faith unto men: The one Internal, who
proposes them internally to our minds; The other external, who proposes them
externally to our senses. Secondly, they agree, that the Internal Proposer, is
the Holy Ghost, and the external, some instituted by him. Thirdly they agree,
that the Internal Proposer can by himself* alone sufficiently propose al points
of faith to us, and engender faith in us without concurse of the external
Proposer: Fourethly they agree, that (ordinaril^y) the Internal Proposer, never
proposes points of faith to our minds, nor engendereth faith in us, but with
the concurse and proposal of the external Proposer. Fifthly they agree, that the
External Proposer, can no way engender divine faith in us, without the concurse
of the internal. So that they agree in all points touching the Internal
Proposer, and also concerning the External Proposer, that there is such a one
instituted of God, that his concurse (ordinariely) is necessary, and that he
cannot engender faith, without concurse of the Internal Proposer: but they
disagree about the conditions necessary to such an external Proposer, and who
he is, but if we find out the conditions necessary to such a Proposer, we
shall easily find who he is.

2. The first condition necessary to a sufficient external Proposer of
Conditions necessary to the external Proposer.
points of faith, is, that he be some intellectual person, or Company of
Intellectual Persons. This is evident out of the very word it self. For a
Prop^ser signifies a person who proposes. And also, because to propose points
to be believed, is an act of understanding, and (as our Savior said to the
first Proposers instituted by himself) is to teach and preach, or (as the
Apostle also speaks) to preach: and to teach, or Math. vlt. Marc. vlt. Romans
10.
preach, are acts of understanding. Secondly, because (as we shall prove
hereafter the external Proposer is instituted by God, for to move men to believe
points of faith for his authority: and al authority (properly speaking) is in
some intellectual person. Whereupon when the Apostle said Romans 10. How shall
they believe without a Preacher, he added, that the Preacher must be lawfully
sent, which lawful sending gives him authority or credit, that he is worthy
to be believed in what he proposes. Thirdly, because unless we make, the proposer
to be some Person or persons, we confound Proposer with proposal, which are
things clearly distinct; and the Proposer is some person, his Proposal, is his
word or writing, so that a word or writing, is no Proposer, but only a
Proposal. If any object, that the Church is proposed in the Apostles Creed to
be believed, as well as other points of faith are, and being a thing proposed, it
cannot be the Proposer of al points of faith, I deny the consequence. For the
Church being a company of intellectual persons, it can propose it self to be
believed to be the true Church, as the Prophets and the Apostles proposed
themselves to be such, as well as any other thing which they preached. But a
dead writing cannot sufficiently propose it self, as Sup. c. 2. n. 5.
Chillingworth before confessed, and others L. 2. c. 6. sect. 2.
hereafter will confess of the scripture. And the reason hereof is, because a
writing has not of it self any formal authority. Besides, though the
Proposer and proposed may sometimes be the same thing yet the Proposer and
Proposal cannot, because the Proposal is that where with the Proposer proposes
what is to be believed, as the writings of the Prophets or Apostles, were their
Proposal of matters of faith, and therefore not Proposers.

3. The second condition necessary to a sufficient external Proposer of points
of faith, instituted by God, is that his authority be See infra (...). 5. n. 2.
divine, or divinely assisted (as the Apostles was) and infallible in Proposing
them. The reason is, because points of faith are supernatural and divine, and to
be believed, so assuredly, as we ought to See infra 62. 6. 8. sec. 1.
curse an Angel, if he said the contrary Galat. 1. And therefore no humane or
natural authority, but that which passes Angelical authority, and is
supernatural and divine, is apt or sufficient to cause such assurance of divine
matters. And this Vvitaker l. 1. descrip. p. 392. 415. Potter sect. 5. p 7. See
infra l. 5. n. 5. and l. 2. c. 11. n. 1.
Protestants grant. For because they think the scripture only has divine and
infallible authority, they make it alone the assured Proposer of points of
faith. Besides, by a sufficient Proposer, we mean such a one, as proposes
matters of faith so sufficiently, as matters of divine faith require, and whose
proposal is such, as it binds men to believe with divine faith what he
proposes, and such it could not be; unless his authority in proposing were
infallible, divine, or divinely assisted efficaciously.

4. The third condition, is sufficient claritie in his proposing points of
faith. The reason is, because if he donot clearly enough propose unto us the
points of faith, we cannot be assured, what he proposes, or what we are to
believe.

5. The fourth condition is, that his Proposal be necessary in ordinary
course, for us to have faith. The reason is, because if his Proposal were not
necessary to us for to have faith, he were not the ordinary External Proposer
instituted by God, without whose concurse, God will not (in ordinary course)
produce faith.

6. The fifth condition is, that he be universal for time, for place, for points
of faith, and for all kinds of men, capable of External Proposal The reason is,
because the external Proposer, without whose concurse, God will not (in ordinary
course) engender faith, must propose al points of faith, must be present in all
times, when God engendereth faith in all places where he engendereth faith; and
present to al kinds of men, capable of external Proposal in whom he
engendereth faith. And otherwise he were not the ordinary external Proposer,
without whose concurse, God, in ordinary course, will not engender faith. And
we enquire, who is this ordinary external Proposer of points of faith, because
only he, is necessary to be known Now of al these conditions only
Infallibility and claritie in some points, agree to scripture, as is evident,
by it self, and we shall prove more hereafter, and therefore it is not the
ordinary External Proposer necessary to be sought, and they al agree to the
true Church, as we shall prove evidently by Gods holy assistance. And we will
begin with her Infalibilitie in matters of faith (For that she is a company of
Intellectual persons, needs no proof, which we will prove by plain places of
Scripture, testimonies of Holy Fathers, reason grounded in Scripture, and open
Confessions of learned Protestants. Because the denial of the Churchs
Infallibility in matters of faith, is the formal cause of al Heresies, and
Infidelity, as her Infallibility or veracitie in matters of faith, is the
formal external cause of al divine faith. For she being (by testimony of the
Holy Scripture) appointed by God to be the pillar, ground and witness of divine
truth, must needs be the formal External cause of our belief of divine truth;
without which, God ordinarily will not engender faith, and consequently The rote
of al Heresy.
the denial of the Infallibility of this pillar, ground, and witness, must
needs be a formal cause of al heresy or Infidelity opposite to belief of
divine truth, and of Heretics uncertainty, what they are to believe firmly
and undoubtedly. For who leave the pillar ground, and testimony of truth, can
never be firmly settled. Whereas Catholics, relying firmly upon this pillar,
and standing fast upon this ground, settled by God, and testimony appointed by
him, are firm and constant in their faith, and justly give it for a sufficient
seco^darie reason of what they believe, because the pillar, ground, and
testimony of truth, is most justly given for such a sufficient reason of our
believing truth. Yet before we prove the Churches divine veracitie or
infallibility in matters of faith, we will prove, that God can give to men such
a divine veracitie or infallibility, because this is some step to prove, that
he has given it; at least it remoueth a great impediment of believing, that he
has given it; and besides, it makes the testimonies, wherewith we will
afterward prove, that he has given such Infallibility, to be more undoubted.

FOVRTH CHAPTER. That God can give to men a divine veracitie or Infallibility
in proposing matters of faith.
1. THERE be two kinds of divine Infallibility: the one Twoe kinds of divine
Infallib. litie.
increate and intrinsecally divine, which is in God himself, who is the prime
veracitie: the other create, and but extrinsecally divine, in that it is
divinely and efficaciously assisted by God, to teach nothing but truth; and
therefore but analogically called divine, as a wholesome medicin is termed
healthful. And in this sort was the authority of the Prophets, and Apostles,
divine; and is the authority or veracitie of the true Church of God, in
matters of faith. The former divine authority or veracitie, is the principal,
alone sufficient, and absolutely necessary cause of divine faith: the latter,
is but secondarie, not alone sufficient nor simply necessary cause of divine
faith: but only a sufficient external, subordinat cause, and necessary only
in ordinary course; yet both these authorities or veracities are so
Infallible, as it implies contradiction, that either of them should teach any
untruth. And as for the former, that need no proaf: and the like is manifest of
the latter. For it is plain contradiction, that one divinely ad effectually
assisted by God to teach truth, should teach untruth. And therefore this latter
kind of veracitie may be a sufficient external and subordinate cause of divine
and infallible faith, such as implies contradiction to be falls. For a divine
veracit^^^ or authority which implies contradiction to See infra c. 5. n. 7.
teach untruth, may be a sufficient external cause of such faith, as implies
contradiction to be falls, and may be justly given as such, for a sufficient
cause of our belief. And this is that kind of divine authority or veracitie,
which we say God can give to men, and which he has given to his Church in
matters of faith. Neuertheless we do not make the Infallibility of the Church
equal to the Infallibility of the Prophets and Apostles; for their
Infallibility was by immediate revelation from God, and sufficient to propose
even new points of faith, and in what small matter soever they proposed as from
God, and to be the fou^datio^ of the Church: but the Infallibility of the
present Church, is but by mediate revelation from God, nor for to propose any
new points of faith, but to conserve those which she has received from the
Prophets and Apostles, nor in any little matter soever, but only in points
necessary to the consummation of Saints and edification of the body of
Christ: yet in this, both those infallibilities agree, that they are both
divine in their kind by the special assistance of God, and in all things which
are necessary in any sort for the consummation of Saints, and edification of
the body of Christ, and right constitution of his Church.

2. Now evident it is, that God can not give to men his own essential
authority or veracitie because that implies contradiction, and were to make
them Gods: but that he can give them authority or Infallibility, analogically
termed divine, because it is divinely instituted and assisted efficaciously by
God, I prove by scripture. Fathers, Reason, and Confession of Protestants. By
scripture, Moses authority joined with Gods. Calvin. 4 Instit. c. 8.. 2.
Popu^^^^n Deum and n Moysem credid^^^e di^untur.
for Exodi 14. v. 30. it is said: They believed God, and Moses. Where Moses
is said to be believed by divine faith (because with the same faith with which
God was believed) which could not be; if he had not divine authorite. For who
has but humane authority or veracitie, cannot be believed with divine faith.
The like is Joan. 5. v. 47. If you believed Moses, perhaps you would believe me.
The Apostle also Galat. 5. v. 2. says, I Paul, say unto you; if you be
circumcised, Christ will nothing profit you where he alleges his Apostolical
authority, as sufficient cause of believing (not with humane but with divine
faith) that Christ will not profit those, that are circumcised. And his
Apostolical authority had not be in a suffice^it cause of divine faith unless
itself had bein divine; for humane authority can be a sufficient cause but of
humane belief. In like sort, S. Ihon says of himself c. 20. v. 21. This is
the Disciple, who bears testimony of these, and wrote these, and we know,
that his testimony is true. Where, doubtless, he means, that his testimony
is infallibly true. And c. 19. v. 35. he What God can give to particul^r men,
he can give to his Church.
proves, that blood and water issued out of Christ's side, by his own
testimony, which had been a weak proof of a matter of divine faith, if his
testimony or veracitie in testifing such matters, had not been divine. And c.
1. he says; S. Ihon Baptist was sent to give testimony of Christ, that
Almight believe by him. And if his testimony had been fallible, it had been too
weak a means to cause men to believe with infallible faith. And the Prophet
Isaie c. 53. v. 1. complains thus: who has believed our hearing? Where
(doubtless) he speaks not of humane, but of divine belief, and shows, that
men should have believed him with divine faith. And S. Ihon. c. 4. v. 39. Many
Samaritans of that city believed in him for the word of the woman bearing
testimony. Where (doubtless) he means of believing in Christ with divine
faith; and yet says, they believed for the word of a woman, bearing witness who
was sent of Christ to bear that witness. And though they afterward said: now we
believe, not for they speech, for we ourselves have heard and know that this is
truly the Savior of the world, they meant not to deny that her testimony was
any cause at al of their belief in Christ, but that they needed it not for to
believe in Christ, seeing they heard and knew him: and (as S. Augustine says
homil. 15. in Joan.) They believed more firmly for Christ's words. For Christ
did confirm, not infirm the woman's testimony Wherefore Morton Apol. tom. 2 l.
1. c. 37. cites and allows these words of Tolet upon this place: when they
said, now we do not believe for thy word, that is as if they said: before we
believed for thy word, but now we have a greater testimony of believing then
thine, we need not the less, where is the greater, insinuating, that they would
believe for the word of Christ which they heard, albeit they had not believed for
the Samaritan woman. And in like manner, though we do now believe in Christ for
the testimony of the Church, yet if we heard himself speak, as the Samaritans
did, we would believe in him al though we had not believed in him for the Church.

3. In like manner, the scripture testifies, that it is damnable sin and
Incredulity, not to believe men sent by God. Marc. vlt. v. 14. Going into the
world, preach the Ghospel to every Damnable, not to believe some men,
creature, who shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved, who shall not believe
(you) shall be condemned, Where it is plainly said to be damnable sin, not to
believe with divine faith men sent by God to preach to them. And how should it be
damnable sin not to believe them with divine faith, if they had not divine, but
only humane authority? Nay how could they believe men with divine faith, if
they had but humane authority, which is fallible: And 16. v. 14. He vpraided
their Incredulity and hardness of heart, that they believed not them, who had
seen him to have risen. Where (doubtless) Christ speaks not of humane, but of
divine belief, and says, it was incredulity, not to believe them with divine
faith. And what Incredulity or hardness of heart had it been, not to have
believed them with divine and Infallible faith, if they had had only humane and
fallible See infra c. 5. n 2. and supra c. 2. n. 3.
authority? Nay (as I said before) how could they believe them with divine and
Infallible faith, who had but humane and fallible authority or veracitie? And
it must well be noted, that he calls it incredulity and hardness of heart, not
to have believed them, that is, persons, for to avoid a cauil, that he only
condemned Incredulity of his Resurrection. For he plainly attributes
Incredulity to not belief of the persons, who testified his Resurrection. For
divine faith binds to believe both divine messengers, and their message for
their authority. And therefore it is incredulity and against divine faith, not
to believe either. And it could not have been incredulititie or want of divine
faith, not to believe them, unless they had had divine authority or veracitie to
testify his Resurrection. And if it be incredulity opposite to divine faith,
not to believe men sent by God to testify, surely it is divine credulity to
believe such, and if it be divine credulity to believe them, they must have
divine authority. For divine infallible credulity cannot be but for divine
infallible authority. The Apostle also 2. Thessal. 3. v. 13. says. If any
obey not our word, note him. And 1. Joan. 4. v. 6. who knows God, hears us
who is not of God, hears not us: In this we know the spirit of truth, and
spirit of error. Where (doubtless) he speaks of infallible knowledge of God, by
hearing him; and infallible knowledge could not have been by hearing him, if he
had not been infallible in teaching Gods truth. And these testimonies of
scripture do not only prove, that God can give to men divine and infallible
authority or veracitie, but also, that he has given it to some.

4. That the holy Fathers thought, that God can give divine or infallible
authority or veracitie to men, will be evident out of their testimonies, Infra
c. 7.
hereafter brought to prove, that he has given such to the Church. And Reason
conuinceth, that he can give such authority or veracitie to men, because it
implies not contradiction. For what contradiction can be pretended, that God
can (if he please) effectually assist some so, that they teach nothing in
matters of faith, but truth? as he efficaciously assisteth the elect, that they
cannot be led into error Math. 24. And his effectual assistance makes their
authority or veracitie to be so divine Infallible, as we desire, and is
sufficient to be an external ministerial, or subordinat cause of divine and
infallible faith. For it implies contradiction, that who is efficaciously
assisted by God to say but truth, should lie. And I take it to be so evident,
that God can give such authority or veracitie to his Church, or to men, as I
think scarce any Protestant will have the face ^o deny it. For this is not to
make men or the Church Primam veritatem; prime verity, as Whitaker fondly
argues l. 2. de scrip. p. 230. but only a secondarie verity, or veracitie
subordinat and depending upon Gods prime verity or veracitie. If God can give
to men endless eternity, and yet not make them Gods, why can he not also give
them infallible verity or veracitie, and yet not make them Gods, or Prime
verity? If he can make weakmen not to fall, why can he not make the Church not
to err in points of faith? If he can make, that the elect; who are the
principal part of the Church shall not be led into error Matthew. 24, why can he
not make the Church it self? 45. Nay so manifest it is, See infra c. 15. and
Call uin in Luc. 10. v. 16.
that God can give to men this kind of divine veracitie or infallibility, as
Protestants themselves sometimes confess, that he has given it to men. For
thus Whitaker l. 3. de scriptura p. 395. The testimony of the holy Divine
Ghost, is internal, of the Apostles, external, both in their kind^s, divine
Sufficient.
l. 2. p. 310. the authority alone of the Apostles, sufficed to cause faith.
l. 1. p. 46. The Apostles authority was so great, that you might safely believe
their preaching for it self. P. 49. though the Apostles were men, yet they were
so extraordinarily governed of the holy Ghost, R^lied on their testimony.
that most certain faith relied on their testimony. P. 51. The Apostles for
their fulness of the holy Ghost, by certain Marks deserved assured authority,
so as we believe them alone Controu 2 q. 3. c. 5. the Apostles did consigne the
canon, as most certain organs of the holy Ghost, endued with divine
authority. l. 1. de Scrip. c. 8. p. 86. it was safe to Divine.
believe Paul, but speaking. Laud Relat of the Controu. sec. 16. p. 81. If the
speech be of the prime Christian Church, the Apostles, disciples, and such as
had immediate revelation from heaven, no question, but the voice and tradition
of this Church, is divine, not Simply d^uine.
aliquo modo, in a sort, but simply P. 84. In the voice of the primitive and
Apostolical Church, there was simply divine authority. P. 85. we resolve only
into Resolve into Apostolical tradition.
prime tradition Apostolical, and scripture it self. P. 91. Every assistance
of Christ and the blessed Spirit, is not enough to make the authority of any
company of men, divine and infallible, but such and so great an assistance
only, as is purposely given to that effect. Such an assistance the Prophets
under the old testament, and the Apostles under the New had, P. 102. we have a
double divine Divine.
testimony, altogeither infallible to confirm to us, that scripture is the
word of God. The first, is the tradition of the Apostles themselves: The other,
the Scripture it self. And into these, we do and may safely resolve our faith.
Sec. Safely resolve into Tradition.
18. p. 123. The Prophets testimony, was divine. Sec. 33. p. 239. All the
places Divine.
either speak of the Church, including the Apostles, as al of them do, and then
al grant, the voice of the Church, is Gods voice, divine, and Infallible:
Potter sec. 5. p. 5. The prime Church, I call that, which included Christ, and
the Apostles, who had immediate revelation Simply divine.
from heaven: the voice and testimony of their Church, is simply divine and
Infallible. Ibid. p. 30. Their (general Councels) authority is immediately
derived and delegated from Christ. sec. 1. p. 25. The high priest in cases of
moment, had a certain priuiledg from error, if he consulted the divine oracle
by the judgment of Vrim, or by the breast plate of judgment, wherein were Vrim
and Thummim whereby he had an absolutely infallible direction. If any such
Absolutely infallible.
promise of God to assist the Pope, could be produced, his decisions might then
justly pass for oracles without examination. Behold the high Priest in cases of
moment, had a priuiledg from error, had an absolutely infallible direction, and
if the Pope had such, his decisions might pass for oracles. Humfrey ad Rat. 3.
Camp. p. 214. Rock of faith.
we confess, the Apostolik Church, to be the rock of our faith. Chillingworth
c. 2. paragrapho, 138. we say, that Infallibility continued in the Church
even togeither with the scripture, so long as Christ and his Apostles were
living. And parag. 155. As the Apostles persons whiles they were living, were
the only judges of controversies, so their writings, now they are dead, are the
only Rule to judge them by. Field. lib. 4. of the Greater then scripture
Church c 11. If the comparison be made between the Church, including the
Evangelists, we deny not, but the Church is of greater authority, antiquity
and excellency, then the scripture of the new testament. White in his way, p.
74. The Apostles teaching, was infallible. Behold, the authority, the
testimony, the voice, the tradition of the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
and of the Primitive Church, is altogeither infallible, is divine, not in a
sort, but simply, as Gods voice, is a sufficient cause of faith, is to be
believed for it self, for which alone, we may believe, into which we may resolve
our faith, the rock of faith, and the Apostles and Evangelists were of greater
authority and excellency, then the scripture of the new testament. And
nevertheless the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and Primitive Church, were
men. Wherefore, God not only, can, but has given to men, authority infallible,
simply divine, made their voice his voice, made it a sufficient cause of divine
faith, and such, as into it, we may resolve our faith.

6. To al these confessions of Protestants, that the authority and veracitie
of the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and Primitive Church, was divine and
infallible, I add, that generally Protestants confess, that the true Church of
God, of what time soever, is Infallible in fundamental points of faith, as I
showed part 1. l. 1. c. 7. And they must needs confess it, unless they will say,
the Church of the time since the Apostles, is perishable. For if it be errable
in fundamental points, it is perishable, because fundamental points are
essential points, and without which the Church cannot stand, no more then a
house can stand without a fundation, as is evident, and themselves confess. And
besides, if it should not hold al points necessary to Salvation (which can
never agree to the true Church of God) it should fail of the end, for which
God instituted it, which was to bring men to salvation. Now this Infallibility
of the Church in fundame^tal points, cannot be natural, as issuing from the
nature of the men who are the Church, as is manifest. Therefore it is
supernatural and divine, proceeding from Gods special assistance, and virtue of
Christ's promise, that she do not err in such points: And if Churches
Infallibility in fundamental points be supernatural, and divine, proceeding
from Gods special and effectual assistance to that purpose, it may justly be
given as a sufficient external cause, why we believe any fundamental point, as
that the scripture is the word of God. See Vvita^er l. 3. de script p. 4 28.
Wherefore either Protestants must deny this to be a fundamental point of their
faith (which yet some of them account so fundamental, as that upon it, their
belief of alother points depends) or they cannot deny; but that we may
believe with divine faith, that the scripture is the word of God, because the
present Church does testify so and that her authority is not only an
Introduction or inducement to believe the scripture to be the word of God, as
Whitaker l. 2. descrip. p. 234. Potter sec. 5. p. 8 Hooler l. 3.. 8. Laud
sec. 5. n. 25. Chilling. c. 3. p. 150.
they use to say, but a true and sufficient external cause thereof. For it
cannot be denied, but that infallible divine authority or veracitie can be (in
its order) a sufficient cause of infallible and divine faith. And if the
Churches infallibility in some points of faith be divine, voluntary and vain
it is to deny it to be such in all points of faith. For if she be fallible in
some points of faith, what assurance can we have, that she is divinely
infallible in others, as S. Augustine rightly said of the scripture. Besides,
her divine infallibility in only fundamental points, were to no purpose for
us, seeing we know not certainly, which are those fundamental points, which not.
Moreover, al points of faith sufficiently proposed, are equally to be believed
of us with divine faith, and therefore there must be divine authority in the
proposer for them al. I add also, that Protestants teach, that the word or
voice of a minister, absoluing a penitent, is infallible and Protestants make
ministers vo^^e, Gods voi^e.
equivalent to Gods voice, and as much to be believed, as if God spoke to him
from heaven, as is to be seen in the Apology of the Confess: of Auspurg. c. de
poenitentia, Perkins Cathol. reform. Cont. 3. c. 3. Fulk. of Priesthood. p.
168. And if one Ministers voice be such, much more the voice of the Church.

7. And out of these confessions of Protestants of the infallible and divine
authority of the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, we may see: First, how
fondly some Whitaker l. 1. descrip p. 24. ^26 l. 3. p. 419. and cont. 2. q. 4.
c. 1. Laud sect. 16. n. 6. Petter sec. 5. Ch^lling. c. 3. n. 50.
Protestants argue: The present Church is men: Therefore it is not infallible in
matters of faith. As if the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, had not been men.
Secondly, how untruly Laud says, sec. 16. p. 65. That special immediate
revelation is necessarily required to the very least degree of divine
authority. For besides that he affirms that without all proof, it is
manifestly refuted by their grant of infallibility of the present Church in
fundamental points, For if she be infallible in such high and divine points
she is such without immediate divine revelation. Besides, himself sec. tit, p.
51. grants, that such and so great assistance of Christ, and his Holy Ghost,
as is purpos^ly given to that effect, is enough to make the authority What
assistance suffieth to make ^uine inf^llibilitie.
of an^e company of men, divine and infallible. And if such, and so great
assistance will suffice to make infallible and divine authority, then special
immediate revelation is not needful for that purpose. And surely, it were
greatly to restrain the Omnipotency of God, that he cannot give the very
least degree of divine authority, but by special revelation, and that what so
ever special assistance of his without that, were not sufficient to that
purpose: Moreover, S. Luke c. 1. professes to have written his Ghospel by
hearsay Thirdly, we maiesee, how impiously wrote Whitaker controu. 2. q. 5. c.
11. The Apostles are not simply to be Protestants will examine the Apostles.
heard, but to be examined to the Rule of scripture. l. 1. de script. c. 10.
sec. 8. No man's testimony of God, and of his word, can be sufficient. And l.
3. c. 19. p. 500. I believe Moises, but not for Moises: The like he has ib. p.
402. 404. and other where often. Ibid. c. 8. p. 409. The Apostles give al
authority of judging to the Scriptures, take none to themselves. l. 2. p. 294.
Nether Paul's, nor the Apostles authority, was reason or Rule of believing. l.
1. c. 2. p. 41. Noman believed for Ihons testimony only. c. 7. p. 78. The
command to hear the Apostles, was not simple, for what soever they should say.
Simple obedience and belief, is due to Christ only. l. 3. c. 3. p. 383. Nones,
but Gods testimony of himself, is sufficient. And Laud Relat. sec. 16. p.
107. were the Apostles living, and should tell us, that they spoke and writ the
very Oracles of God: yet this were but their own testimony of themselves, and
so alone not able to enforce belief on others. For will they have the Apostles
to be examined, and their testimony insufficient, which they have granted to
be simply divine, the voice of God, altogeither infallible, to be believed for
it self, sufficient to cause faith, and into which we may resolve our faith.
For (as Whitaker himself says l. 1. de script. p. 45.) if it once appear,
that the voice of the Church, is the voice of God, it were impiety not to
believe, what she teaches. For it were to call in question Gods authority. And
l. 3. de scriptura p. 428. will you not be content with divine judgment, or will
you except against infallible judgment? Besides, the Church being built upon the
authority of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. and Apocal. 21. if that be
not sufficient, al Christian faith is built upon an insufficient foundation,
and so is fallible. But to this unchristian impiety are they by little and
little lead, by their denial of the Churches infallibility in all matters which
she proposes us of faith. For who compares the dignity of the Spouse of
Christ, with any singular Prophet or Apostle, or the love of Christ to his
Spouse, with his love to any singular Prophet or Apostle, or the scriptures
testimonies of his efficacious assistance to his Spouse for not erring in
faith, with the testimonies of his like assistance to any singular Prophet or
Apostle, will easily see, that the denial of the Churches infallibility, will
lead him to doubt or deny the Infallibility of any singular Prophet or
Apostle; and the denial of that, will lead to the denial of al infallible
certainty of Christian faith; to which it has already lead Chillingworth, as
is to be seen in him c. 2.. 24. and 154. and otherwhere often. And if it be
true, See infra l. 2. c. 8. sec. 2.
which his three Approuuers (the chiefest Doctors of Oxford) say, that he
teaches nothing contrary to the doctrine of their English Church, their
English Church has not infallible or divine faith. But of this we shall speak
more hereafter. Now let us prove out of Scripture, that the true Church of
Christ (which soever she is) is infallible in all points of faith. Finally,
Protestants teach, that a ministers word absoluing one, is as infallible, as
Gods word, as is to be seen in Apologia Confess Augustanae c. de Poenitentia,
Confess Bohem. c. 14 Calvin. 10 v. 16. Perkins in Reform. Catholic cont. 3. c.
3. and others.

FIFTH CHAPTER. That the true Church of God is a sufficient and infallible
Proposer of al which she proposes as points of faith, proved by what she is
said to be in Scripture.
1. TWO ways we may prove the Infallibility of the true Church of God in all
points which she proposes as of faith, out of Scripture, the one is by what
she, or her Pastors, are there said to be, the other, by what God in Scripture
has promised to her. The first way we will take in this Chapter, and the
second, in the next. In the Scripture, the true Church of God is said, first
to be the pillar and ground of truth: secondly, her preaching, is said to be a
cause of faith: Thirdly, her pastors are said to be witnesses of Gods truth:
Fourthly, their voice is said to be Christ's voice. Fifthly, they are said to
be put to keep the faithful constant in faith: out of al which we will
evidently prove her infallibility in all matters, which she proposes as of
faith.

2. The Apostle 1. Timot. 3. v. 15. says: which is the Church of the living
God, the Pillar and Ground of truth. Which words do not only prove the Church
to be infallible, but also, that she is an external formal cause of divine
truth, concerning us: or (which comes al to one) of our belief of it, because
on what our belief of divine truth, relieth, as on a pillar or ground, that is
some formal cause thereof, But her infallibility I prove out thence in form,
thus: what is the Pillar and Ground of divine and infallible truth, is divinely
infallible in such truth. The Church is such, therefore she is divinely
infallible in divine truth. The Minor is the Apostles, The Mayor is evident.
For a humane and fallible pillar or Ground, is not able to See ^uprae. 2. n. 3.
uphold divine and infallible truth, as is evident, and Chillingworth
confesses c. 2.. 154. in these words: None can build an infallible! faith upon
motives, that are not infallible, as it were a great and heavy burden upon a
foundation, that has not strength proportionable. And the same he has c. 1.
n. 7. And also Whitaker l. 1. de Script. p. 166. l. 3. p. 392. 415 Field l. 4.
de Eccles. c. 2. Laud sec. 33. p. 248. Potter sec 5. p. 7. And (as the same
Chillingworth says well c. 3.. 33.) The Apostles could not be the Churches
foundation, without freedom from error in all those things, which they delivered
constantly, as certain revealed truths: so I say, the Church could not be the
pillar and Ground of truth to the faithful, without fredom from error in all
things, which she constantly delivers, as certain revealed truths. Nether
can it be imagined, how the Scripture could by a clearer metaphor, have
affirmed the Infallibility of the Church in matters of faith, then by saying,
that she is the pillar and Ground of divine truth. For who can imagine, that God
would not make her infallible, whom he makes the Pillar and Ground of his
truth? Neuertheless, Protestants seek many ways to elude the clearness of
this text: some by distinguishing the word Church. Some, by distinguishing the
word Pillar: some by distinguishing the word Is, and some by distinguishing the
word truth. And Chillingworth c. 3.. 76. p. 176. will have Timothe, not the
Church, to be called the pillar and ground of truth. Which variety of shifts,
does sufficiently confute them.

3. Whitaker cont. 2. q. 2. c. 2. ^ulk in 1. Timot. 3. Field l. 4. de E^cle.
c. 4.
Some say, the Apostle speaks not of the universal Church, but only of the
particular Church of Ephesus, because he says S. Timothe conuersed in the
Church, which is the pillar of truth. But this shift, first is new, not found
in any ancient author. Secondly, is contrary to the Apostles word For he
uses the word, Church absolutely; and Protestants translate it, The Church,
which (as is clear, and Laud Re^ lat. p. 128. 141. Chil^ing. p. 263.
themselves confess) signifies the whole Church, and not a part of the
Church, as a particular Church is. Thirdly, it is contrary to his meaning. For
no particular Church is the pillar and Ground of truth, because every
particular Church is fallible. Fourthly, it is contrary to the Fathers. For S.
Hierom in c. 26. Job. says: The Church, which is the congregation of al
Saints, the pillar and ground of truth. Fifthly, it is against themselves. For
Whitaker contr. 2. q. 3. c. 2. denies that by the Church, 1. Timoth. 3. is
meant any particular Church, but will have it to be their invisible and
Catholic Church, and so does Iuel part. 1. Apolog. c. 9.. 1. and others.
Sixthly, the ground or pretense of their limitation of the Apostles words to the
particular Church of Ephesus, is not sufficient, both because the pronoune Thou.
(Which is their Ground) is not in the Greek text, which alone Protestants
account c See infra l. 2 c. 9. sect. 2.
authentical, as also because S. Timothe conuersed in the universal Church, as
every citizen conuerseth in the city, though he live not in every part
thereof. Iunius l. 3. de eccles c. 14. ^li^nsis Respons-ad Bellarm. c. 14.
Others therefore distinguish the word pillar, and say, that the Church is not
the pillar on which divine truth relieth, but such a pillar, as truth is put
upon to be read, as in old time, Edicts were put upon pillars to be read. This
shift also is new, not found in any ancient author, nor grounded in any word
of the text, nay plainly contrary to the meaning thereof. For the Church is
said to be such a pillar, as Ground is, and Ground is not to lay truth or
Edicts upon, but to uphold things. And so plain it is, that the Church is here
called a pillar of truth, because it vpholdeth it amongst men, as Calvin upon
this place says: Because in Contr. 3. q. 5. c. 2. Fundamentum sustinet e
dificium. Reinolds Confer. p. 557.
respect of men, she susteineth truth. Whitaker contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2. She is
like to a pillar in this, that as a pillar does sust^in the whole building, and
make it more firm, so the Church does sustein and uphold truth. And ibid. q.
1. c. 13. It belongs to a pillar, to sustein others in truth. Nether do these
men, who grant the Church to be such a pillar, as susteineth truth amongst men,
differ from Catholics about the Churches susteining truth amongst men, but
about the manner how she does sustein it, to wit whether by only preaching
truth, as they would, or by preaching, and by her authority also of
testifying, as Catholics teach. For a pillar and ground is to be relied on. But
to this purpose al is one, by what means she susteins infallible truth. For if
she sustein infallible truth by teaching it, she must be infallible in teaching
it. Beside, if truth be always tied to the Church* she is always infallible.

4. Others distinguish the word, d Moulins cont. Peron. c. 13. Chilling. c. 3.
p. 177. Vshe^^ Reionder. p. 25.
Is, and say, that the Apostles meaning is not, that the Church is the pillar
of truth, but only, that she ought to be, or it is the duty of the Church to
be the pillar of truth. This exposition is (as the former) new, and voluntary,
and therefore a plain shift to delude the text, and contrary to the Apostles
words, who says not, what is the duty of the Church, or what she ought to
be, but what she is. Nether could it be her duty to uphold truth, if she were
not made infallible. For it were impossible for her to perform it* Whitaker
contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2.
Others therefore distinguish the word Truth into necessary, and not
necessary, and grant, that the Church is the pillar and ground of al
necessary truth. But (as I have said, and must often say) albeit only the
principal articles of faith be necessary to divine faith, and salvation by
reason of the matter which is to be believed, yet al articles of faith are also
necessary, by reason of the formal cause for which they are to be believed,
which is divine revelation sufficiently proposed, and which is most necessary
to divine faith, and which is denied, if any article of faith be not believed.
I add also, that al articles of faith (even by reason of the matter which they
contain) are necessary to the better being of faith, and of the faithful or
(as the Apostle speaks) to the consummation of Saints. Seeing therefore, al
articles of faith, be two ways necessary, there is no reason to limit the
Apostles speech, to any certain articles, especially, when (as Morton says
in his Grand Imposture c. 2. sec. 6.) It is the law of allawes: Non Rule not to
distinguish. See Gerla^hius tom. 2. d^sput. 24.
distinguendum, vbi lex non distinguit. Which he repeateth ibid. c. 13. and
tom. 2. Apol. l. 2. c. 22. Moreover, seeing none knows precisely, which
points are fundamental or absolutely necessary to be actually believed of every
one, which not, it were to no purpose for us, that the Church were infallible
in fundamental points only, because we know not, which are all the fundamental
points: and notknowing which they are, we cannot know in which points of faith,
the Church is infallible, in which not; And then what good would her
Infallibility (which is given to her for our good) do to us? I add also, that
Protestants are not ^See part. 1. l. 1. c. 7.
constant, whether the Church be infalliblein fundame^tal points, or no. And
that if indeed the Church were infallible in fundamental points her authority
(as I said before) were in such points divine, and we might give her
authority, as a just secondarie cause of our believing them: and in them rely
on her authority, as upon a sure pillar or ground of faith, both which
Protestants The Churches preaching a ^^^se of faith.
deny.

5. Our second proof of the Infallibility of the Church in all points of faith,
shall be taken from that in scripture her preaching is said to be a cause and
that necessary (in or dinarie course) of divine and infallible faith. Romans 10.
v. 14. How shall they believe, whom they have not heard. And how shall they hear
with out a preacher? How shall they preach, unless they be sent. Therefore faith
is of hearing. In which words, the Churches preaching, is made a cause, and
that necessary (in ordinary course) of infallible faith, and faith is said
to be of hearing her preaching the word of God. Wherefore thus I argue in form:
The necessary cause (in ordinary course) of infallible faith, is infallible:
The Churches preaching is the necessary cause (in ordinary course) of
infallible faith. Therefore her preaching is infallible. The Mayor is evident,
because a humane and fallible cause, cannot produce a divine and infallible
effect. And See sup. n. 2.
(as Whitaker l. 1. de scrip. p. 166.) The effect does not surpass the cause.
And less can it be a necessary cause thereof, because what is fallible, cannot
be necessary: for what is fallible, may fail, and what is necessary to
faith, cannot fail. Besides, al grant, that the extraordinary cause of
infallible faith, by the preaching of the Apostles, and Prophets, was
infallible, as we showed in the fourth Chapter n. 5. and why not also the
ordinary cause by the preaching of the Church? seeing the end of both
preachings, is the same, to wit, infallible faith. For if ordinary fallible
a^thoritie in the Church, can cause infallible faith, what need had God to give
infallible authority to the Prophets and Apostles for that end? The minor, to
wit, that the Churches preaching is (in ordinary course) a necessary cause of
infallible faith, is plainly the Apostles meaning. For he asks, how shall they
believe without a preacher lawfully sent, and the Pastors of the Church are the
only preachers lawfully sent: And out of this necessary dependencie of faith
on lawful preaching, he infers: Therefore faith is of hearing to wit, of
hearing the preaching of some lawfully sent, which is to make lawful preaching,
a cause of faith. For if faith be of hearing lawful preaching, lawful preaching
is a cause of faith. Nether hinders it, that the word preached, is also a
cause of faith: for the word is the object to be believed, and lawful preaching,
is the cause of believing it. Otherwise why should lawful preaching be
necessary, and notanie kind of preaching, suffice. And so euide^tit is, that
these words of the Apostle make the Churches preaching a cause ormeans of faith
as Whitaker l. 1. de scrip. p. 41. being urged with them, answers thus: I
confess, preaching is the external means instituted by God, by which faith is
begotten in the Sea ib. p. 68. and 442.
minds of the Hearers. And p. 15. The Churches preaching, is but
instrume^tally cause of faith. And l. 3. p. 425. Faith, is the effect of the
testimony of the Church as of an instrument. And contr. 1. q. 3. c. 3. The
Church is not author of faith, but as an instrument and external means. And an
instrument is a true cause. And the same say others, as h C. 14.
we shall see hereafter. And I as kno more but the Church to be asecondarie or
instrumental cause (in respect of God) of divine faith. For doubtless she cannot
be the principal cause thereof, as nether were the Prophets or Apostles: I omit
that fond shift of fundamental and nor fundamental points, which may be here
used for to delude this text, because (beside that which has been already said
against it) the Apostle does not say: How shall they believe fundamental points,
but how shall they believe, that is, believe any point of faith at al, without a
preacher? And also, because out of the Churches divine infallibility in
fundamental points of faith, evidently follows her like infallibility in all
points of faith: Nether have I as yet read any Protestant, who would grant the
Church to be divinely infallible in some points of faith, and deny herto be so
infallible also in others points: see infra l. 2. c. 10. sec. 2. Pastors are
Gods witnesses.


6. The third proof of the Curches Infallibility in all points of faith, shall
be taken from that in scripture her Pastors are said to be by God appointed
witnesses for to be get divine and infallible faith. Acts. 1. v. 8. ye shall be
witnesses to me in Jerusalem, and in all Jury and Samaria, and to the utmost
of the land. The like is ibid. v. 48. and 22. c. 2. v. 32. c. 10. v. 39. c. 13.
v. 31 c. 22. v. 25. c. 26. v. 6 1. Corinthians. 15. v. 15. Joan 1. v. 8. c. 15. v.
26. c. 21. v. 21. and otherwhere. Out of which places I argue thus in form:
who are witnesses appointed by God to testify divine truth, and to beget divine
and infallible faith, (for the end of witnesses, is Calvin Actor. 20. v. 21.
Testificatio ad toilendam omnem dubitationem interponi^ur.
to beget belief of what they witness) are altogether infallible: The Pastors of
the Church are such; Therefore they are altogether infallible. The Mayor is
evident. For humane and fallible witnesses, are unfit to testify divine truth,
because such may prove falls, and are unable effectually to beget divine and
infalble faith. For the Supra n. 2. 5.
effect does not surpass the cause. And surely no wise man would assuredly
believe any thing for the testimony of one, of whose fidelity he were not
assured. For as in science, we cannot be assured of the conclusion, and not of
the Premises, for which we are assured of the conclusion; so in faith, we
cannot be infallibly assured of the thing witnessed, and not be infallible
assured of the witness. Whitaker l. 1. de scrip. p. 49. 50. Laud sect. 16. p.
65.
Some answer, that witnesses appointed immediately by God, as the Apostles were,
are altogether infallible, but not such, as are mediatly appointed by him, as
the Church is. But this is The sawne end requires like means. Ca^uin. 1. Cor.
1 15. v. 15. Redundat in maximum Dei opprobrium si ordinati a Deo, aetern^ eius
veritatis praecones, mendatijs illus^sse ^undo deprehendantur.
frivolous. For the diverse manner of Gods appointing witnesses, does not vary
the end, for which he appoints them, which being one and the same in the
Apostles and the Church (to wit) testifying of divine truth, and thereby causing
of divine faith, requires divine infallibility in both, and only proves the
manner of Gods giving infallibility to them, to be different, to wit,
extradinarie. The Minor, namely that the Pastors of the Church, are appointed
by God witnesses of divine truth for to beget by their testimony, divine
faith, concerning the Apostles, the aforesaid places manifestly avouch, and
Protestants generally confess, as we saw in the former N. 5.
Chapter: But they deny, that Pastors, successors of the Apostles, are so
appointed by God. But this is evidently proved, because the end for which the
testimony of the Apostles was instituted by God, to wit, to beget divine
faith, continues. And therefore their infallible authority of testifying,
continues. As because the end of the Apostles preaching, baptizing,
administrating Sacraments, and the like, continues; so their authority of
testifying Gods truth, does continue. ^ay it was more needful, that infallible
authority of testifying, should be in the Apostes successors, then in the
Apostles themselves; because the Apostles, besides their infallible authority
of testifying, had the gift of miracles, which much strengthened their said
authority, which gift rheir successors ordinarily have Office of Pastors, to
testify divine truth.
not, and therefore more need infallible authority of testifying, then the
Apostles needed. Beside, the authority of testifying divine truth, is an
ordinary office or duty of the Pastors of Gods Church, as Protestants here
confess, and al ordinary offices or duties remain in the Apostles successors
Moreover, Pastors who succed the Apostles, (as we shall prove in the next
argument) are put to consummat Saints, therefore also to testify Gods truth.
And so evident it is, that the Church and her Pastors, are witnesses of divine
faith, as Protestants often times confess it For thus the English confession
art. 20. The Church is a witness and The Church afaithful witness.
teacher of truth. And Rogers upon that article: Al of us do grant, that the
Church, as faithful witness, may, yea of necessity must, testify to the world,
what has been the doctrine of Gods people from time to time. Melancthon in
Locis, tit. de Eccles. I confess, the Church keeps the scripture as witness.
Sutclif l. 1. de Eccles. c. 1. p. 11. we doubt not, but the Church is a
faithful witness of the scripture. Beza 1. Tim. 3. v. 15. The Church is witness
and conseruer of truth amongst men. Field, of the Church l. 4. c 6. The
Churches office of teaching and witnessing the truth. Potter sec. 5. p. 9. To
the Church, we willingly attribute these two excellent uses: first, of witness,
testifying the authority and sense of scripture to us: Secondly, of Gods
instrument, by whose ministry in preaching and expounding the scriptures, the
Holy Ghost breeds a divine faith in us. Whitaker controu. 1. q. 3. c. 1. The
Churches testimony, must be received. Ibid. The Church delivers the rule of
faith, as witness. Controu. 2. q. 5. c. 18. The Church is an external witness and
interpreter of truth. l. 1. de scrip. p. 15. we may be forced by the authority
of the Church, to acknowledge the Scripture. Calvin. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 10.
Moulins Bu^le^ sec. 104.
P. 19. The Churches testimony must be received, and who receaueth it not, is
guilty of Sacriledg. Ibid. it is the office of the Church and Pastors, to
testify of the scriptures. P. 22. The Church has authority to testify those
things, which are of faith. P. 46. we cannot believe, but by the testimony of
the Church, as by the ordinary means. P. 49. I have told, what offices the
Church has touching scripture. First, it is to be witness and keeper of the
scripture. Ibid. Indeed the Church is witness of faith.

7. You see, how the euidencie of the Churches Infallibility in witnessing
Gods truth, forces Protestants to speak (at least) as Catholics do,
howsoever they think not so. For they say, she is a faithful witness; she has
authority to testify Gods truth: her authority can force men to acknowledge
the scripture: Her testimony must be received, and who receaueth it not, is
guilty of sacriledg. And has she of her humane nature, to be a faithful
witness of supernatural truths? has she of herself, authority to testify such
truths; can her humane authority forcemen, to acknowledge things above sense
and reason? Is it sacriledg, not to receive humane testimony? Pastors are to
consummate Saints.


8. The fourth argument, we will take from that the Scripture says, that God
has put Pastors in the Church for to consummate Saints, and to keep them
united and constant in divine faith, til we meet al in one. Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, others some Eua^ge lists and
others Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of Saints, for edification of
the body of Christ, until we meet in the unity of faith. -- That now we be
not Children and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Out of which place
I argue thus in form: whom God puts in the Church; as he put Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, for to consummate Saints, and to keep them united
and constant in divine infallible faith: to them he has given divine
infallibility in matters of faith: but so he put the Pastors and Doctors of
the Church: Therefore to them he has given divine infallibility in matters of
faith. The Mayor is evident, both because to the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, such infallibility was given, and therefore the like, to others,
whom God puts in the Church, for the same end he put them: as also, because
if they had not divine Infallibility, they were nether fit nor able to
consummate Saints, and keep them united and constant in divine infallible
faith: For humane veracitie, cannot make men divinely assured. Some Protestants
may say, that this proves, that Pastors of the Church have Infallibility in
fundamental points, but not in all points. But, beside what we have said before
of this distinction, and that it is here, both new and groundles, and therefore
a mere voluntary and irrational shift, it is clearly refuted. First, because
Pastors are said to be put for the same end, for which the Apostles Prophets,
and Evangelists were, to wit, to consummate saints, and to keep them united and
constant in all points of divine faith. And also, Pastors are said, to be put
in the Church in the same manner for that end, as the Apostles were. Secondly,
because Saints are not consummate, if they be suffered to err in any points of
faith. Thirdly, Laud sec. 16. p 65. 91. Se^ the Prefacen. 2.
Protestants will not grant divine Infallibility to Pastors, even in
fundamental points, and the Apostle speaks of divine infallibility, such as
the Prophets and Apostles had. And if Protestants would in deed grant divine
infallibility in fundame^tal points to Pastors, I think they would not stick
to grant them divine infallibility in other points of faith.

8. Wherefore Chillingworth c. 3. n. 79. and seq. seems to grant, that the
Pastors (whereof the Apostle speaks (had divine infallibility in all points of
faith, as the Apostles had, but denies, that he speaks of Chilling. turns
Pastors unto writings.
Pastors succeeding the Apostles, but only of such, as in the Apostles time,
had immediate revelation, and that they consummate Saints, and keep them united
and constant in faith for ever, by their writing. But this Exposition, or
limitation of the Apostles words to Pastors, only in the time of the Apostles,
First, is new, (for he cites no ancient auther for it) and therefore is justly
suspected: secondly, it has no ground in the Apostles words, and therefore is
ameere voluntary and irrational shift to delude the true sense of them.
Thirdly, because no Pastors of the Apostles time (distinct from Apostles and
Evangelists) wrote any thing. For S. Mark, and S. Luke were Evangelists, and
al other writers, were Apostles. And S. Paul speaks of Pastors, who were
different from both Apostles and Evangelists, nor says he, that the Pastors
writings were put in the Church to con^ummate Saints, but the Pastors
themselves were put for that end. and Chillingworth in effect will not, that
Pastors were put, but only their writings, because not those infallible
Pastors, but only their writings were to continue in the Church for ever.
Whereas the Apostle speaks not of writings, but of men, to wit, of infallible
Pastors, that were to continue for ever. Lastly, it is contrary to the common
sense of Protestants, who out of this place do gather, that there shall beal
ways Pastors in the Church, as Melancthon to. 1. Lutheri disp. de Politia
Eccles. fol. 442. Kemnitius 2. part Exam p. 192. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 3.. 2.
and upon this place, Whitaker Controu. 4. q. 1. c. 3. p. 634. and others And
besides now S^^ l. 2. (...) 6. sec. 2.
Protestants grant, that no Scripture is of it self (without the testimony of
the Pastors of the Church) sufficient to prove any point to be believed with
divine faith, much less, to consummate Saints, and keep them constant and
united in such faith. Wherefore S. Paul meant not of any writings of infallible
Pastors in the Apostles time, but of infallible Pastors themselves: And when I
say: the Pastors of the Church are infallible, I mean not, that every Pastor
is infallible farther then he agrees with the Church, no more, then when I say
The Church is infallible or perpetual, I mean, that every member of the
Church is such, because, The Pastors, signifies the body or company of them,
as Chilling. p. 263. Laudep. 128. 141.
The Church, signifies the whole body thereof. And these four arguments
hitherto brought, are a pr^ori, taken from the end, for which the scripture
says, the Church was instituted by God. For because he made the Church, the
pillar and ground of divine truth, he gave her, to that end, divine
Infallibility: Because he made the Churches preaching, the ordinary means of
begetting divine infallible faith, he gave her (to that end) divine
infallibility in matters of faith: because he made her Pastors witnesses of
divine truth, he gave them (for that end) divine infallibility in testifying
that truth. Because he put Pastors for to consummate Saints, and keep them
united and constant in divine faith, he gave them (for that end) divine
infallibility, in matters of faith, because both Church and Pastors without
divine infallibility had been unfit and unable to attain to those ends as is
evident by it self, and confessed by Protestants here above n. 2 and 5.

9. The fifth argument, shall be taken out of that our Savior said of the
Pastors of the Church: Luke 10. v. 16. who hears you, hears me, who
despises Pastors, one teacher with Christ.
you, despises me. Out of which words I argue thus in form, who are one
teacher with Christ, are infallible teachers of Christ's doctrine: The Pastors of
the Church, are one teacher with Christ: Therefore they are infallible teachers
of his doctrine. The Maioris evident. For Fallible, and infallible teachers, are
not one, but quite different kinds of teachers: the Minor also is manifest. For
if they were not one Teacher with Christ, it would not follow, that who hears
them, hears Christ. For different teachers may have different hearers. And I
note, that Christ said not, who hears your Vvitaker cont^. 2 q. 4. who hear
the Church hear Christ himself.
doctrine, hears my doctrine, but, who hears you, hears me. Thereby making,
not only his Pastors doctrine and his doctrine, one, but also making them and
him, one teacher of his doctrine, which is much more. For a private man's doctrine,
may be al one with Christ's doctrine, but be not one Teacher with Christ, because
he is not a Teacher appointed by Christ to speak for him, as Pastors are. Some
Protestants answer, Chilling. c. 3. n. 72.
that these words of Christ, are meant only of the Apostles, who were indeed
both infallible Teachers; and one Teacher with Christ, but not so their
Successors. But this limitation of Christ's meaning to the Apostles alone,
First, is new, because no ancient author is alleged for it. Secondly, it can
have no other ground in the text, but because the words were spoken only to the
Apostles, which is no reasonable ground. For so al power of preaching, and
ministering Sacraments, should have been proper to the Apostl^s. Thirdly, it is
contrary to the end of Christ's speech. For as Christ made the Apostles,
Teachers of his doctrine for the good of the Church, so he made them also one
with himself for the same end. Wherefore as he made Pastors, successors of his
Apostles, in being Teachers, for the good of the Church, so he made them,
successors of the Apostles, in being one Teacher with him for the good of the
Church: and therefore are such, as long as the Church continues. Fourthly, the
latter part of this speech of Christ, is meant of the successors of the
Apostles. For who despises them, despises Christ, as well as who despises the
Apostles. Therefore the former part who hears you, hears me, is also meant
of the successors of the Apostles. Fifthly, it is contrary to the Fathers. For
S. Cyprian, Epist. 69. says: Christ says to his Apostles, and thereby to al
Pastors who succeed the Apostles by successiue ordination, who hears you,
hears me. Lastly, it is contrary to diverse Protestants, who p Laud sec.
16. p. 25.
grant, that these words are meant both of the Apostles, and their Successors,
but (say p some of them) differently, to wit, absolutely, in the Apostles, and
conditionally, in their Successors, namely, so long, and so far as you speak my
words and not your own.

10. But this exposition is (as the former) new, and without any ground in the
text, and therefore an irrational elusion of Christ's words Secondly, it makes
Christ to equivocate, using the same words differently, without any expression
of his different usage. Thirdly, the latter part of Christ's speech, to wit, who
desp^seth you etc. is meant absolutely, as well of the Pastors, as of the
Apostles. For absolutely, who despises Christ's Pastors, despises him, as well,
as if they despised his Apostles, because they are his legates, as well as the
Apostles were. Fourthly, it is contrary to the end of Christ's speech, which
was to give both to the Apostles, and to their successors assurance to teach
his doctrine; and to People, to hear and believe them, because they were one
Teacher with himself. Which end were frustrat in the successors of his
Apostles, if his meaning were not absolute to them, as well as to the Apostles.
For what assurance should either the Pastors have in teaching, or people, in
hearing them, if Christ's words depend upon an uncertain condition? Assurance
requires an absolute promise: and seeing Christ meant to assure both the
Apostles, and their teaching, and people, in hearing them, he must needs mean
absolutely, both of Apostles, and their successors. Fifthly, it implies
contradiction, to be one Teacher with Christ, and not to be absolutely
infallible in teaching his doctrine. For how can he who is one Teacher with an
infallible Teacher, be not absolutely infallible? Besides, it is one thing to
teach infallible doctrine, and an other, to be infallible in teaching infallible
doctrine. And one thing is to hear Christ's doctrine, and to hear Christ. Private
men, may teach infallible doctrine, yet are not infallible in teaching it: and
who hears them, hears Christ's Whitaker l. 3. des^rip. p. 414. Spiritus per
os E^^lesiae loquitur so cont. 1. q 3. c. 11.
doctrine, but yet hears not Christ, because Christ has not appointed them to
speak for him, nor speaks by them. But whom Christ appoints to speak for
him, (as he does Pastors) they do both teach infallible doctrine, and are
infalible in teaching it, and who hears them, not only hears Christ's
doctrine, but also hears Christ himself, because he hears them, whom Christ
has ^pointed to speak for him, and by whom he speaks. And it implies
contradiction, that they should not be absolutely infallible, whom Christ
appoints speakers or teachers for him, and speaks by them, or. whom
hearing, we hear Christ Wherefore Thus I argue; Christ said absolutely, and
without any condition, as well of the successors of the Apostles, as of the
Apostles themselves; who hears you, hears me, Therefore absolutely, and
without any condition, both Apostles, and their successors are infallible. For
we cannot be deceived by Christ, by any way that we hear him. The antecedent
is evident by Christ's words, which are absolute and have no condition any more
for the Apostles Successors, then for the Apostles themselves. The consequence
also is evident: For who absolutely are such, as hearing them, we hear Christ,
are absolutely infallible. And this consequence those Protestants saw, who
denied these words to be at al meant of the Apostles Successors. For they saw,
that if Christ said absolutely of them, as well as of the Apostles, who hear
you, hear me, Laud p. 65. 91.
they must need be absolutely and not merely conditionally, infallible. Lastly,
Protestants do not grant, even conditional divine infallibility, but only
humane, to Pastors; and yet Christ here speaks of divine infallibility, for
such was the infallibility of the Apostles, and such must needs be theirs,
whom who hears, hears Christ. For who are such, as who hears them,
hears Christ are such as Christ speaks by and such as Christ speaks by,
are doubtless, infallible. For Christ cannot speak untruths by any whom
soever. L. 1. de scrip. p. 109.
And as Whitaker says: What is the Church speaking the word of God, but the
mouth and tongue of God?

11. And all the aforesaied places of Scripture, and arguments made, prove
indifferently, that the true Church of God, can no way err in points of faith,
either vincibly or inuincibly: others, peculiarly prove, that she cannot err
vincibly or sinfully in any point of faith. As where Scripture testifies,
that Hell gates Math. 19. O ^eae. 2. Romans 13. 1. Cor. 12. Michea 4. Luca^. 57.
Psalm. 2. 27. 32. Hebr. 32. Galat. 4.
shall not prevail against her, or calls her the Spouse of Christ, the body
of Christ, Christ's kingdom, Christ's Inheritance, Christ's Temple, our mother
which brings us forth to Christ, For sinful error in any point of faith, is
the sin of Heresy, which is a gate of Hell, and S. G^egor. in psalm. 5. Poeniten.
which destroieth both the unity, and substance of saving faith, and of the
true Church, as we have proved at large part 1. l. 2. c. 2. and seqq. and need
not here repeat. For having clearly proved already, that the true Church
cannot err at al in points of faith, we need not prove that she cannot err in
them vincibly or sinfully. Wherefore we will now prove out of Gods promises made
in the Scripture to the Church, that she cannot err in points of faith.

SIXTH CHAPTER. That the true Church of God is infallible in all points of faith,
proved by Gods promises to her.
1. JOAN. c. 14. v. 16. Christ says: I will request my father, and he will give
you an other Paraclet for to abide with you for ever. And v 26. The Paraclet,
The Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, shall teach you al
things, and suggest unto you al things, whatsoever I shall say unto you. And c.
16. c. 13. when the holy spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you al
truth. Behold a most large promise of Christ to the Church, that the Holy
Ghost shall be for ever with the Church, and shall both teach, and suggest her al
things, al things what soever Christ shall say, Al truth. Therefore she cannot
err in any thing, which Christ taught, or in any truth. And Whitaker cont. 1.
q. 3. c. 11. calls these, most clear and most certain testimonies. To this
Protestants make three answers* al opposite one to the other: The first
Whitaker ^ont. 2. q. 4. c. 2. Laud se^. 25. p. 165. P^tter se^. 5. p. 59.
Chilling. c. 3. 71.
and most common, is, that Christ promises not that the Holy Ghost shall teach
the Church al truth of faith, but only, al truth which is absolutely necessary
to al. This limitation of al truth of faith, to al truth absolutely necessary
to al: First is new, for no ancient Author is alleged for it. Secondly, it is
voluntary. For it has no ground in the text, but is voluntarily shaped
according to their opinion, That the Church cannot err in fundamental points,
but in other points she may: Thirdly, it is violent, for it is as to expound,
al truth, by not al truth. Fourthly, it is injurious to the Apostles, to whom
it was personally made, as if Christ had not here promised to teach them al
truth of faith whatsoever, but only fundamental. Fifthly, it is contrary to
the Fathers. For Phoebadus l. contra Arianos says: when Christ says, al
truth, surely he excludes none. Sixthly, al points of faith are absolutely
necessary to al, to be believed, at least virtually, and also actually, if they
be sufficiently proposetd, as we have clearly proved in the former D 2. c. 3. 1
lb. l. 2. c. 3.
part, and Protestants sometimes confess. And though there be but some points,
which are absolutely necessary to be believed actually of al, yet seeing (as
Protestants confess) none knows precisely, which they are, what good would it
do to Christians, to know, that the Church cannot err in them. Do not
Protestants confess, that al divine revelations without exception, are
necessary to be believed, when they are sufficiently proposed, as I showed
part 1. l. 1. c. 25. N'ay do not they confess, that al divine revelations are
fundamental to faith, when they are sufficiently proposed, as I showed ibid. l.
2. c. 25. How then can they think, that the Church can err in any point of
faith sufficiently proposed? Does not Chillingworth in his answer to the
preface n. 6. say; that we are bound See P^tter ^c. 7. p. 103.
by the love of God, and the love of truth, to be zealous on defense of truths,
that are any way profitable, though not simply necessary to Salvation? Our
Savior himself having assured us, that he that shall break one of his least
commandments, and shall so teach men, shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven. And will not Christ teach his Church al truths profitable to salvation,
or suffer her to teach contrary to any of his least commandments? Does not
Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 4. c. 2. say, that the Church erreth not in those
things, which are necessary to any? And are such things absolutely necessary
to al men? Does not Laud Relat. sec. 38. n. 25. say, that beside the
foundation common to al, there be things necessary to many particular men's
Salvation? and will Christ suffer the Church to err in things necessary to
many particular men's salvation? As he does, if he suffer her not to err but in
the foundation common to al. I omit here Laud his fond distinction sec. 16. n.
28 That Christ promised an infallible assistance to his Apostles, but only a
fitting assistance to their successors, for beside that it is a new and
groundles distinction, it is contrary to the end of Christ's promise. For no
assistance in matters of ^nfallible faith, is fitting, but that which is
infallible But out of the aforesaid sayings of Protestants, it is evident,
First, that some times they grant, and indeed must grant, that the Church is
infallible in more points, then are absolutely fundamental to al men. 2. that in
what points she is infallible, she is in them diuinitus, or divinely
infallible, because she is such, by Christ's foresaid promise, and the Holy
Ghosts special assistance. 3. That in saying, the Church is infallible only in
necessaries, they should not dissent from Catholics, if by necessaries, they
would mean necessaries to alsortes of men, and both for the being and better
being of faith, as no doubt the Apostle meant Ephesians. 4. by consummation of
Saints, and edification of the body of Christ. For Catholics do not think,
that that the Church is infallible in things altogether unnecessary, as many
scholastical subtiltiesare.

2. Their second answer is, that though the Holy Ghost teach the Laud sect.
25. n. 5. Chilling. c. 3.. 71.
Church al truth, any way necessary to Salvation; yet it follows not, that
she learneth al such truth, because God complains of some, that they had eyes,
and would not see, had ears and stopped them. This answer also is new, and not
grounded in any word of Christ, but voluntary and irrational, and injurious
to the Apostles, as if they had not learnt al truth, which the Holy Ghost
taught them, and also to the Holy Church, as if she would not learn all the
truth which the Holy Ghost teaches her, but were like to those reprobats, who
would not see, nor hear Gods voice, and blasphemous against Christ, (as if he
would not promise) and against the Holy Ghost, as if he would not more
effectually teach the Apostles and Church, then he does teach Reprobates. But
before, we have proved, that the Holy Ghost teaches the Church efficaciously.

3. Their third answer, is, that this Whitaker l. 1. de Script. p. 77. Laud.
sec. 16. p. 97. Chilling. c. 3.. 72. Moulins Bu^ler p. 51.
promise was made to the Apostles only, whom indeed the Holy Ghost taught al
truth of faith, and who also learnt it; but not to the Church; or Successors of
the Apostles. This answer is new, nor sufficiently grounded in the text, as
shall by and by appear, but contrary to Christ's express words of his Promise,
for ever; For the Apostles were not to abide here for ever Contrary to the end
of his Promise, which was for the good of the Church, and therefore was to
continue so long, as the Church continues For it was chiefly for the good of
the Church, that the Holy Ghost was to teach al truth. Contrary to the
Fathers, as we shall see in the next Chapter: And finally, contrary to
Protestants. For thus Laud sec. 16. p. 93. 96. It was made to the Apostles,
and their suecessors. sec. 25. p. 161. A large promise to the Church, of
knowing al points of truth. And sec. 33: p. 231* for necessary truth the
Apostles received this promise for themselves and the whole Church P. 232. The
Fathers refer their speech to the Church universal. And Potter sec. 5. p. 18.
That promise was made to the Apostles, in behoof of the Church, and is verified
in the universal Church. And ^tem Cont. 2. q. 1. c. 1. Laudesect. 16 p. 96.
Whitaker controu. 3. q. 6. c. 2. says, that those words. For ever, convince
it, as in truth they do, because, the Apostles were not to be here for ever.
Nevertheless Chillingworth c. 3.. 74. answers, that by for ever, here is not
meant eternally, but continually for the time of the Apostles lives, because for
ever is sometimes so taken in Scripture. But fondly, for in those places, the
Tertul. de ^estor. ^3.
matter shows that for ever signifies til death. But the like is not here,
for the reasons already given, and al words are to be understood properly,
unless the contrary be manifest, as the Tertul de Carne ^hri^. c. 13. 15. 24.
de restor. c. 18. Cont. Praxec 13. Augustine l. 3. d^ Doctrine. c 10. 11.
H^larius l. 1. 2. 4. 5. 7.
Fathers teach, and reason shows. For else, al understanding of words, should
become voluntary, as men would have it. And yet Chillingworth. 75. says I
presume I have showed sufficiently, that this (For ever) hinders not, but that
the promise may be appropriated to the Apostles, when he has out of a few
places, and those unlike; (as being of a quite different matter) wrested a word
from its proper and usual signification, to an improper and unusual, merely for
to defend his heresy. For the matter is quite different, because in the places
brought by Chillingworth, speech is of some particular persons, who nether in
themselves, nor in their successors, could continue eternally: and therefore,
for ever, in them, must needs be mant For their life, whereas the Apostles
continue in their successors eternally, and therefore For ever, spoken to them
them for the good of the Church, is to be understood eternally, as properly and
usually it signifies. But it is the common sophistical manner of arguing among
Protestaut writers, to argue from some few particular improper use of words, in
some matter, against the proper and usual sense of them, even in a different
and dislike matter, which is a very Sophistical kind of arguing, and well to
be noted. For by that, nothing can be assuredly proved out of scripture.
Besides, Christ here so promises the assistance of the Holy Ghost for ever, as
Math. 28. he promises his own assistance for ever, but that he promises Laud
sect. 16. p. 29.
eternally. For he says. Going, teach al nations, baptizing etc. And I am
with you al days til the end of the world: to wit, with you, teaching and
baptizing. Which shows Christ's assistance for ever with his Pastors in their
teaching. Chillingworths proofs, that this promise was made to the Apostles
alone, be cause in them some words pertein to them alone, prove no more, then
that the promise was in words made to them alone, but not meant to them alone.
As Christ's promise to S. Peter Math. 16. that the Church should be built on
him, and that he should have the keys of heaven, was made to him alone, yet
not meant to him alone, but to his successors also; and commandment was given
to him alone Joan. 21. to feed Christ's sheep, and yet not meant to him alone,
but to his successors also. Math. 18. that what the Apostles should Promises
are to be measured by, their end.
loose on earth, should be loosed in heaven, was made only to them, but meant
also to their successors: and the like is of many others such. And the reason
of al, is one and the same, because al these promises were made to the Apostles,
for the good of the Church, which was to continue after the Apostles. Thus we
have refuted the Protestants three answers to this promise of Christ, and
showed them to be mere shifts, Nay indeed they turn Christ's most bountiful
promise made unto his Church, to nothing* for to what purpose is it to teach
the Church al fundamental or absolutely necessary truths, and not tell her,
which are those truths? To what purpose were it to teach the Church
vneffectually, as Reprobates are taught: To what purpose were it, that the
Apostles alone were taught al truth, if the Church also were not taught it, who
is to teach us as they taught her.

4. An other promise of Infallibility in matters of faith, made to the Church,
is Isaiae. 59. v. 21. This is my Conuenant with the, says our lord: my spirit
which is in the, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy sred, and from the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says our Lord from hence forward, and for ever. Which words are not a
command as Moulins would have it, but a conuenant or promise, and that
absolute, not conditional, as Plessiae would, and do plainly promise to the
Church continual infallibility, and infallibility for ever, and in all the
words of God, which he has put in her mouth, and are so plain as Whitaker
contr. 2. q. 5. c. 19. said: This place does show, that true preaching of the
word, shall be in the Church perpetual. Yet l. 1. de Scrip. p. 133. he says,
this promise was not made to the teaching Church, but to the whole Church, that
is the elect. But first, this distinction of the teaching Church, and the elest
Church, has no ground in the text, and therefore is a voluntary and irrational
shift: Secondly, words put in thy mouth, show plainly, that it is made to the
teaching Church, and (as Whitaker before cited) show, that true preaching of
the word, shall be perpetual in the Church. Thirdly, if this promise be made to
the whole elect Church, it comprehends some part (at least) of the teaching
Church. For alwries some of the teaching Church, are Elect: and so there are
always some preachers of al points of faith in the Church. I omit their usual
shift of their distinction of Fundamental, and not fundamental points of faith,
both because there are no not fundamental points in their sense, that is, not
necessary to saving faith, true Church, and Salvation; but al are fundamental
to those ends, that is, necessary to be believed, at least virtually, and also
actually, if they be sufficiently proposed^: And also, because See part. 1 l. 1.
c. 7.
Protestants do not constantly defend, that the Church is infallible in
fundamental points, and See infra l. 2 c. 10. sect. 2.
generally they say, that she is not infallible in their most fundamental point
of al, to wit, that scripture is the word of God; and al of them deny her to
be divinely infallible in any point of faith what soever. And God in these
words, plainly testifies, that he will make her divinely infallible, because he
will put his word in her mouth and make, that it shall never depart from her,
which is to make her divinely infallible, as he made the Prophets; or
Evangelists: For I call that divinely infallible, which is infallible by Gods
divine assistance, and not by any natural insight of truth, and natural
fidelity, in telling it: And such divine infallibility God has promised to
his Church in the foresaid words of the Prophet, or that can not be promised by
any words, which men can speak or hear.

5. And now (Gentle Reader) I pray thee consider. First, how many places (to
omit others for brevity sake) I have brought for the divine infallibility of
the true Church of God in all matters of faith: secondly, how directly they
affirm the said infallibility, so as they need no inference of ours, though I
have reduced some of them to sillogistical form, because Beza in Colloq. mont.
p. 95. 96. 98. Hunnius de Condit. disput. thesi 18. Whitaker Pr^^. Controu.
Morton part. 2. Apol. l. 1. (...). 49. Fulco de Suc^es. p. 493. Chilling c. 3.
n. 43.
Protestants do require it. Thirdly, how clearly, that Protestants are forced
to invent so many, so new, so contrary one to the other, so voluntary, and
so violent expositions. Fourthly, how against so many, so direct, so plain
places of Scripture, which teach the infallibility of the Church in all points
of faith, Protestants cannot bring one place of Scripture, which directly, so
much as seems to teach, that she is fallible in points of faith, as may be
seen in Whitaker contro. 2. q 4. c. 3. and other Protestants, who write of this
matter, but al their arguments are either taken wholly from mere natural reason,
or at least partly from natural reason, which evidently shows, that they can
have no divine and infallible faith, that the Church is fallible in points of
faith, because the conclusion follows the weaker part: whereas Catholics have
express, and clear scripture for her infallibility, and consequently good
ground for divine faith of it. The most they can bring out of Scripture for
their purpose, are some examples, which are the same, which the Donatists
brought for the perishing of the Church, as may be seen in S. Augustine l. de
Vnitate c. 13. to which he there fully answers; and indeed do rather prove
the perishing of the Church, then her erring in faith, and therefore must be
answered as well of Protestants, as of Catholics. For (as Whitaker says
Contro. 2. q. 3. c. 1.) He is mad, that says the Church can Perish. And ibid.
c. 2. who denies that the Church is founded for ever, and to continue
perpetually, he is no Christian. Morton in his reply, for defense of his
apology p. 90. It is madness to say, that the whole visible Church can fail:
and Chillingworth c. 3.. 11. we believe the Catholic Church can not perish.
Though this he believe not infallible. For in answer to the preface. 18. he
says: the contrary doctrine, I do at no hand believe to be a damnable
heresy, And c. 5.. 41. Nether is it certain, that the doctrine of the Churches
failing, is re^ugnant to the Creed. Fifthly, consider how untruly wrote
Chillingworrh c. 2.. 28. of Catholics: you yourselues do not so much as
pretend to enforce to the belief hereof (Infallibility of the Church) by any
proofs infallible and conuincing, but only to induce us to it by such as are,
by your confession, only probable motives.. 35. your faith, even of the
foundation of your faith, your Churches authority, is built lastly and wholly
upon prudential motives. And. 70. The faith of Papists, relies alone upon their
Churches infallibility: That there is any Church infallible, and that theirs
is it, they pretend not to believe, but only upon prudential motives. Are so
many, so plain so direct places of Scripture, as Catholics bring for the
infallibility of the Church, only prudential motives? To say nothing of the
testimony of Fathers, conuincent reasons, and plain confession of Protestants,
which hereafter we shall bring for the same purpose.

6. To all the former proofs of the infallibility of the Church, taken out of
holy Scripture, I will add one taken from the Apostles Creed or Symbol, which
Calvin 2. Instit. c. 16.. 8. Whitaker l. 3. de script. c. 3 sect. 1.
Protestants say is an Epitome of the Scripture, ad contains al fundamental
points of faith. For in that we profess to believe, the holy Catholic Church.
And holy she cannot be, if she sinfully err in any point of faith, because
every sinful error in faith, is heresy, and every heresy, a sin, which
excludes out of heaven. Nor Catholic she could be, if she err sinfully, or not
sinfully, in any matter of faith, because Catholic includes orthodoxie, that
is, right belief, as is evident, because Catholic is opposite to heretik, as
also, because the Fathers affirm it, as L. 1. in Genesis and Epist. 48.
S. Austin, S. Cat^chesi ^8.
Cyril, S. Epist. 5.
Pation, and Optatus l. 1.
others. And namely S. L. de vni^ate.
Austin says, that though Christians were spread over the world, and yet did
not believe aright, they were not Catholics. Which sheueth, that Catholic, does
not include only diffusion, but also Orthodoxie. And if the Church be evermore
orthodox, she is evermore unerring in matters of faith, and we professing in
our Creed, that she is ever Catholic, profess that she i^ ever unerring in
matters of faith, which is to be, as infallible as we mean, and as Laud sec.
21.. 5. says well: If we will keep up our Creed, the whole militant Church must
be holy. And holy she cannot be, if she sinfully err any way against faith
which is the foundation of al holiness.

SEAVENT CHAPTER. That the true Church of God is a sufficient and infallible
Proposer ^f al points of faith, proved by the holy Fathers.
1. S. Ireney l. 3. c. 4. It is easy to receive the truth from the Church,
seeing the Apostles have most fully deposited, in her, as in a rich storehouse,
al things belonging to truth. Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 6. c. 12. p. 389. says:
we grant this. But indeed they are far from granting it as shall presently
appear. Chillingworth c. 2. n 148. answers, that though S. Ireney say: The
Apostles deposited al truth in the Church, yet he says not, that she shall
always keep al truth. For the Apostles deposited al truth in particular
persons and Churches, and yet these kept it not always. But S. Ireney not
only says, that the Apostles deposited al truth in the Church but as in a
rich storehouse, and that it is easy to receive Vincent. Ecclesia. sedula
and cauta d^positorum apud se dogmatum custos
it from her, which he nether said, nor could say of any particular persons,
or Churches. And for to be a rich store house of al truth, from which is easy
to receive it, is to be a sufficient and infallible keeper and Proposer of al
truth. And Whitaker c. citato p. 388. confesses, that S. Ireney did appeal
from scripture to Church, and to Apostolical tradition, and says, that
heretics, are to be refuted by tradition. Which is to confess, that S. Ireney
thouht the Churches tradition infallible, for else he had betrayed the Christi^n
cause in appealing from an infallible Proposer, to a fallible, and had taught,
that heretics were to be refuted by fallible means.

2. S. Athanasius epist. ad Epictetum, disputing against Arians, says, we
must answer only (which alone suffices) these things are not of the Church,
nor our Ancestors thought so. Behold the authority Contra Whitaker l. 2. de
script. p. 239.
alone of the Church, accounted sufficient to refure heretics; and if
sufficient, surely infallible.

3. S. Chrysostom in 2. Thessal. c. 2. It is a tradition (of the Church) ask no
more: which words are so plain for the sufficiency and infallibility of the
Churchestradition, as it made Whitaker c. cit. p. 391 to cry: It is au
inconsiderate speech, and unworthy Church infallible in universal traditions.
of so greata Father: and Chillingworth c. 3. n. 45. to confess, that the
Church is ^nfallible in her universal traditions, but not (says he) in all her
decrees, or definitions of controversy. But what word of God warranteth the
Churches Infallibility in her traditions, and not in her definitions of faith.
Besides Chillingworth c. 2. n. 25. and else where often, and Protestants
generally deny any tradition of the Church to be infallible, because nothing
is infallible wi^h them, but the written word of God, and tradition is not
written. I add also, that S. Chrysostom says not: it is an universal
tradition, but simply It is a tradition.

4. Basil l. de Spiritu sancto c. 27. What things are observed and preached of
us, we have received partly by written doctrine, partly by the Apostles
delivered to us in mystery, and both these have equal virtue to piety. Behold
traditions of the Apostles not written, and they of equal virtue to piety with
their written doctrine: and he adds, that the Ghospel without tradition of the
Church, would have no force, but be a small or bare letter. To Which Whitaker c.
cit* p. 390. says: If So Ke^^nitiu. part. 1.. 148.
Basil were alive, he would without doubt not acknowledge this sentence, which
deserves to be cast out, and condemned of al pious men. Which is plainly to
confess, that S. Basil thought the Churches tradition to be a sufficient
proposal of points of faith, and without it the Scripture would be to no
purpose.

5. Tertullian l. Praescrip. c. 16. teaches, that we ought not to dispute
against Heretics out of Scripture, but out of tradition. Whitaker c. cit. p.
392 answers, that he spoke of such heretics, as denied the Scripture, and
therefore (as Ireney did) appealed from Scripture to the Church. But first it is false* that Tertullian spoke only of such heretics, as denied Tertul. appealed
from scripture to the Church.
the Scripture: For he plainly speaks, of al such, as deny either the
scripture, or corrupted the true sense of it, as al heretics do. Secondly, I
ask when Tertullian appealed from Scripture to Church, did he appeal to some
sufficient and infallible proof of faith, or no? If he did, we have what we
desire, if not, he betrayed the Christian cause and taught us to leave the
only infallible means of refuting heretics, and to take a fallible.

6. S. Cyprian l. de Vnitate: The spouse of Christ cannot be made an
adulteress, and if she cannot be made an Adulteress, she is infallible in faith.

7. Hierom. l. contra Vigilantium, I reject al Doctrins contrary to the
Church, and with open mouth condemn them. And dialogo contra Lucifer: I could
dry up all the brooks of thy Propositions, with the only sun of the Church.

8. S. Austin l. de haeres: says of the Donatists: They dare rebaptize
Catholics, wherein they more showed themselves to be heretics, seeing the whole
Catholic Church has judged, that even in heretics, usual baptism is not to be
rejected: Behold Donatists accounted heretics, because they went against the
judgment of the whole Church. And in the end, says of al heresies reckoned
there by him; it is superfluous to ask, what the Church judges of them, when
it suffices to See Potter sect. 2. p. 33.
know, that she judges against them. Behold the judgment of the Church,
suffiseth to condemn heresies. Lib. de Vnitate c. 22. Thi^ is nether openly,
nor evidently read, either by you or by me, yet if there were any wiseman, of
whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should be consulted in this
question, we would make no doubt to do what he should say, least we might seem
to gain say not him, so much as Christ, by whose testimony he was commended:
Now Christ bears witness to his Church, Item. Whosoever refuses to follow the
practice of the Church, does refuse our Savior himself, who by his testimony,
recommendeth this Church. Behold, that to deny the Churches testimony to be
sufficient in matters of faith, is to deny Christ's testimony of her.
Chillingworth c. 1. n. 163 says, that S. Augustine, in saying, that some point
of faith, is nether openly, nor evidently read inscripture, contradicts
(forsooth) himself, because l. 2. de Doctr. Christ* c. 9. he says, In these
things, which are openly put in scripture, are al those found, which contain
faith and manner of life. But S. Austin there speaks of al things, which
contain faith, and manner of life Morton tom 2. Apost. l. 1. c 49. verum
respondes.
necessary simply to every one, or which are necessary (as he adds) to
have hope and charity; or (which comes alto one) he speaks of the Rule of
faith. Which (as he says l. 3. de Doctr. Christ. c. 2.) is received from the
plainer places of scripture. Beside which kind of points of faith, there are
others, which are nether openly, nor evidently read in Scripture, and such was
the baptism of heretics whereof he spoke lib. de unit. c. cit. But what is this
to S. Austins authority, that who contradicts the Church in a matter of
faith, contradicts Christ, and who follows her, follows Christ, because he
gives witness to her? Lib. 2. de Baptist. c. 4. Nether durst we say any such
thing (that baptism of Heretics is vailable) unless we were assured by the most
agreeing authority of the whole Church. Behold the authority of the Church
both sufficient and necessary for some point of faith. And ibid. c. 9. The
whole world was held by the strength of Custom (of the Church) and this alone
was opposed against those who brought in Novelty. And was not that sufficient,
which held the whole world, and which alone was opposed to erroneous Novelty?
Lib. 7. de Baptis c. 53. It is s^f^ for us to avouch with confidence of secure
voice, what in the Government of our Lord Jesus Christ, is confirmed with
consent of the universal Church. Lib. 2. contra Crescon. c. 32. I do not
receive what Cyprian thought of baptizing heretics and Schismatiks, because the
Church does not receive it. Lib. contra Epist. fund. c. Because.
5. which book, (of the acts) I must needs believe if I believe the Ghospel,
because both books, Catholic authority does Beca^s.
alike commend to me. Behold Catholic authority binds us to believe books of
Scripture, and is a cause why we believe them l. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 8. The
Books of Wisdom and Because.
Ecclesiasticus, are to be accounted prophetical, because they have been
admitted into authority. And l. 3. c. 2. let him consult the Rule of faith,
which he has received from the plaine^ places of scripture and from the
authority of the Church. Epist. 56. All the height of authority is settled in
that holy name (of Christ) and in his one Church for recreating and reformi^g
mankind. And calls the authority of Church most firm, sermon 14. de Verbis
Apostoli c. 21. This is a grounded thing: an erring Disputer is to be borne
with, in other questions not diligently disgested nor yet made firm by full
authority of the Church: There, Error is to be borne with, but it ought not to
go so far, that it endeavor to shake the foundation it self of the Church
Behold dispute in matters not determined by the Church, may be borne with all,
but not with matters determined by her full authority lib. 10. de Genesi ad
literam c. 23. The custom of our Mother the Church in baptizing Infants, is
noe way to be despised, not yet at al to be believed, unless it were an
Apostolical tradition. Laud sec. 15. p. 57. answers, that S. Austin means
not, that tradition is the cause of our believing the baptism of Infants, but
that it is the cause, that we sought and found it in scripture: But this is a
plain evasion. For S. Austin speaks not of our seeking the Baptism of
Infants in Scripture, nor of the cause of our finding it there; but of our
believing it, and plainly says that the cause of our believing it, is
tradition, and that without tradition, it were not at al to be believed.

9. And so undoubted a thing it was in the time of the Fathers, that the Church
of God is a sufficient and infallible Proposer of matters of faith, as even
Pelagius in S. Austin l. de gestis Pelagij c. 19. professed, I curse Ancient
heretics confessed the Church to be ^nfallible.
all that gain say or contradict the doctrins of the holy Catholic Church. And
Dioscorus in Council. Chalced. Act. 1. If Euthyches think contrary to the
doctrine of the Church, he is worthy not only of punishment, but even of fire.
But now (Gentle Reader) consider, first, how many (omitting Vi^cent. c. 1. 14
32.
many more for breuities sake) testimonies of holy fathers, have been brought
for the sufficiency and infallibility of the Church in matters of faith.
Secondly, how clear and evident, as some of them are confessed by Protestants
to be against them. Thirdly, how unlikely it is, that in this so main and
clear a matter, the Fathers should either contradict themselves, or be contrary
some to others. Fourthly, how Protestants expositions of those testimonies,
which they will not grant to be against them, are voluntary, not grounded in
the words of the Fathers nay violent and contrary to the usual sense of such
words, and therefore are mere shifts, invented for to delude Fathers authority.
And thus having proved, both by holy scripture and Fathers, that the true
Church of God is a sufficient and infallible Proposer of points of faith, let
us prove the same by reason. Only I will add, D. Rainolds confession of the
Fathers in his Preface S^^ his th^s. 5. p. 106.
to his conclusions: The Fathers, who deny the Church of Rome may err, gain
say us indeed, but they gain say the Ghospel too. -- Pardon me, o Cyprian! I
would believe thee gladly, but that believing thee, I should not believe the word
of God. -- All the testimonies of the Fathers (for the Roman Church) are of two
sorts, the one of them true, but clean beside the purpose: the other, to
purpose enough, but untrue. And in verse bidds: Auant al ye, who on the
Fathers saws depend. Thus plainly he confesses the Fathers to be against him,
touching the Infallibility of the Church. Out of which testimonies of Fathers
and confession of Protestants, evident it is, that it is an universal
tradition, that the true Church of God is infallible in all matters which she
professes as of faith. And therefore if (as hereafter Protestants say) they
admit universal traditions in all matters where it can be had; and that
universal tradition, is the key, the introduction to al divine truths, that
for it they believe the Scripture to be the word of God, and that it is as
infallible as the Scripture, they cannot deny the true Church of God to be
infallible in all matters which she proposes as of faith.

EIGHT CHAPTER. That the true Church of God is infallible in all points of
faith, proved by Reason.
1. THE Infallibility of the Church of God (which soever she is) in all points
of faith, is so evident, as it is not only testified by scripture and Fathers,
but also convinced by light of Reason. And therefore falsely said Chillingwort
c. 3.. 27. p. 141. For the Infallibility of the Church, no proof can be
pretended, but incorrupted places of Scripture: The first Reason we will take
from the definition or description of the true Church, given by scripture,
Fathers, and Protestants. For the Scripture Acts. 2. v. 42. describes the true
Church of Christ, to be a company of men, p^rseuering in the doctrine of the
Apostles, and communion of Sacraments. And doubtless, a Church perseuering in
them, is infallible. The Fathers (as Protestants Confess) are wont to
understand by a Moulins cont. Peron. l. 1. c. 2.
the Church, (which oftentimes they call Catholic the whole society of
Christians, orthodox and sound in faith, united together in Communion. But a
Church Orthodox and sound in faith, is infallible, so long as she remains
such: Protestants also (as we showed pars. 1. l. 2. c. 6.) put in the
definition of the true Church, that she profess the pure and entire word of
God, and they give, purity in doctrine, for an essential note of her. But a
Church of whose definition it is, and whose essential note, is to profess pure
and entire doctrine, is infallible in profession thereof. And what some may say,
that they mean only of purity of doctrine in fundamental points, is refuted c.
6. citato.

2. The second argument, may be taken from the ends, for which God instituted a
Church on earth. And to omit those ends, which we brought out of Scripture c.
5. as to be the pillar and ground of truth, to be the ordinary means of
begetting infallible faith, to be Gods witness of infallible faith, to
consummate and keep the faithful united and constant in infallible faith; an
other end is, that she is instituted as an infallible and Whitaker l. 3. de
script. (...) 392. Pott^r sect. 5. p. 7.
necessary means to bring men to salvation by faith, Hope, and Charity. And
Faith sisignifieth whole faith, not a part only, as fundamental articles are.
Therefore she is as infallible in teaching al points of faith, as in teaching al
points of hope or Charity. She is also instituted to be a mother to conceive
and bear Children to God by the infallible word of God: to be their Mistress
and Laud sect. 38. p. 345.
Guide in faith. That she is the mother of the faithful, The Apostle
testifies. Galat. 4. v. 26. and Calvin confesses 4. Instit. c. 1. 4. where he
says: Let us learn by the only title of Mother The Church, mother and
mist^es of the faithful.
how profitable, yea how necessary it is to know her, seeing there is no
entrance into life, unless she conceive us in her womb, unless she bear us,
nourish us with her duggs etc. Whitaker l. 1. de scriptura p. 87. I am a
disciple of the Church, I acknowledge the Church for my Mother. The Church truly
is mother of the faithful: And p. 72. The Church is truly mistress and Guide of
our faith. P. 128. we honor the Church as mother, Nurse, Tutress, Teacher, we
hear and respect her, as our perpetual Mistress. P. 153. None denies the
Church to be a Mistress of her own. -- We deny not, but a Mistreshipp was
given to the Church l. 2. p. 234. I confess the Church is to be heard as a
mistress, and her judgment also to be followed. But the sure means of
infallible faith instituted by God; The Mother of Christians in infallible
faith instituted by God, the Mistress or Guide of infallible faith instituted
by God, must needs be infallible, both because of Gods institution, and for the
infallibility of the end: For a fallible Mistress or guide, is as good as
none; for to learn infallible truth, or to attein to infallible security, or
(as Chillingworth says c. 6. 20.) A doubtful Guide is A fallible Guide naught
worth.
for men's direction, as good as none at al. And c. 1. n. 7. I grant, that this
means in the Church to decide controversies in faith and Religion, must be
endued with an universal infallibility, in whatsoever it propounds for a
divine truth. And to say (as Protestants do) that she is a sure guide but in
fundamental points, cannot stand with her fallibilitie in other points: For (as
S. Epist 8. and 9. Difference of Masters in faith, and science.
Austin says of the Scriptur) if it fail in any point, it becoms doubtful
in all: so say of the Church, If she can fail in some points of faith, she is
doubtful in all. And here must be well noted, the diffeence of Masters or
Mistresses in sciences, and in faith. For Masters or Mistresses of sciences,
do show their scholars the truth of things in the things themselves, and so
they are but shewers of the truths, which they teach, not perswaders of it; but
Masters or Mistresses of mattets to be believed, do not make their disciples
see the truths (which they teach) in themselves, but in their own authority,
and their authority is the formal cause of persuading them those truths:
Wherefore if Protestants would indeed grant the Church to be Mistress of
Christians in matters of faith, they must needs grant, that in her authority
they see the truths, which they believe, and for her authority are persuaded
of them: but indeed they do not distinguish between a Mistress in faith and in
science which is a gross oversight.

3. The third argument may be taken from that, if the Church be not infallible
in matters of faith, there is no external formal cause sufficient to beget
divine faith. For (as I See inf^a l. 244.
showed c. 2.) there is no formal cause of belief, but authority, nor any
formal authority, but in some Author, nor any Author, but some intellectual
person, or company of intellectual persons: and faith we cannot have (in
ordinary course) without some formal external cause sufficient to engender
infallible faith* f Whitaker l. 1. descript. p. 64. l. 3. p. 39^. See infra c.
17. n. 4.
And no person on earth can be pretended in which infallible authorities should
be if not the Church.

4. The fourth argument shall be this. The Churches authority in preaching or
proposing al Christ's doctrine is not natural or humane; but supernatural and
divine. Therefore it is infallible in doing that. The consequence is evident,
because divine authority is infallible. The antecedent I prove out of those
words of Christ to his Apostles: Teach al Nation^, baptizing them etc. teaching
Math. vlt.
them to keep all that I have commanded you. Where Christ gave no humane or
natural authority to his Apostles, but supernatural and divine. And what
authority of teaching or baptizing he gave to them, he means also to their
successors, else these should have no authority to preach or baptize; as also
because, that authority was given to the Apostles for the good of the Church,
and therefore was to endure as long as the Church endures: moreover, the
Churches authority to preach or propose al points of faith, is divine:
Therefore also her authority to testify and persuade that it is Gods word,
which she preaches, is divine. The Antecedent is proved already. The
consequence I prove, because persuasion, that it is Gods word, which the Church
teaches, is the end of her preaching it. And if God give her duine authority
for the means, doubtless he gives the like for the end, because the end is more
desired then the means, and the means desired but for the end. And if the
Churches authority in testifying or persuading what she preaches, be divine,
doubtless it is infallible in testifying it. For divine authority to persuade,
is infallible. Further more, the Churches authority can force us to believe the
scripture to be Gods word: Therefore her authority is divine and infallible.
The consequence is clear, because no authority can force us to believe divine
matters, but what is divine. The antecedent Protestants grant: For thus
Whitaker contr. 1. q. 3. c. 7. I answer, as often before, that we are forced by
the Churches authority to believe these books to be canonical. And can fallible
authority force?

5. The fifth argument for the Infallibility of the Church in matters of faith,
shall be taken from the great and manifold inconveniences, or absurdities, which
necessarily follow of the denial of it. As first that Christ has given us no
competent or fit Judge of controversies of faith For if the Church be fallible,
she is no competent or fit Judge of Infallible matters: and the scripture
cannot be a Judge, because a proper judge is an understanding person, and
judgment, an act of understanding. And this is so clear, as now See infra l. 2.
c. 7. sect. 2.
Protestants confess, that the scripture is no proper Judge: And want of a
competent Judge, would make co^trouersiesendles. And (as Hooker says in the
preface to his book. 6) of this we are right sure, that Nature, Scripture, and
Experience it self Scripture, nature, experience require a judge of
controversies so also Tailor in l^bertie of prophsing sect. 6. n. 1.
have al taught the world to seek for the ending of contentions, by submitting
it self unto some judicial or definitive sentence, whereunto nether part that
contendeth, may under any pretense or coler refuse to stand. Wherefore to
refuse a Judge who can pronounce such a definitive sentence in contentions
about matters of faith, is to resist Nature, Scripture, and Experience. An
other great inconueniencie, which denial of the Churches infalli ilitie
breeds, is, that it opens a way to heresies and schisms. For upon pretense
of the Churches erring in some matters of faith, a plain gap is opened to
depart from her profession of faith, as heretics do, or from her communion in
Sacraments, as Schismatiks do; And al sufficient means of either conser^^ng or
restoring unity in faith, and communion, quite taken away, First, because al
sufficient external authority (which is the secondarie formal object of faith)
is taken away. Secondly, because (as we shall prove hereafter and See infra l 2.
c. 5. sec. 2.
Protestants now confess) the Scripture nether teaches al points of faith, nor
al those which it teaches, does it teach so clearly, as is requisite to beget
infallible faith. Thirdly, Experience shows this in Protestants, who denying
the Church to be infallible, have nether unity in faith, or communion, nor yet
any hope of it; as i Cataubor Epist ad R. Iacobum. Calvin Antid Council. sess.
7. Land sect. 38. p. 360.
Confess Martyr in Hospin part. 2. Histor fol. 245. Whitaker contr. 2. q.
(...). c. 8. cout. 3 q 6. c. 2. and respons ad Rainoldum p. 8. Laud sec. 38.
n. 23. Potter sec. 2. p. 38. Chillingworth c. 2.. 85 and others. Nether will it
serve them to Laud sect 26. n 3. Chilling c. 2. p. 61.
say, that they have sufficient means of unity in fundamental points, because
the scrip^^^e teaches them plainly; and as for division in Not-fundamental
points, that destroieth not the substantial unity of faith, or of the Church.
First, because themselves confess the Scripture teaches not (...) See infra l.
2. c. 5. sent. 2.
al fundamental points; secondly, because they See part. 1. (...) 1 (...) 6.
confess they know not, which are fundamental points; Which Not fundamental
points. Thirdly, because division in any point of faith, sufficiently proposed,
or of communion, is a substantial division of true faith and Church, as I have
clearly proved part 1. l. 2. c. 5. And as Laud says sec. 32. p. 226. If
controversies arise in the Church, some end they must have* or they will tear al
in sunder.

6. An other great inconueniencie is, that by denying the Churches
infallibility, we take away al external infallible proof, that the Scripture
is the word of God; and therefore this question; How know you the Scripture to
be the word of God? much troubles Protestants, and (as Laud says sec. 16.
p. 65.) brit^geth some of them to infidelity. For (as he, confesses ibid. p.
66.) Scripture must be known to be Scripture, by a sufficient S^ripture must be
proud by, some word of God, and by some infal. authority.
infallible divine proof, and that such a proof, can be nothing but the word of
God. And p. 64. It seems to me very necessary, that we be able to prove the
books of Scripture to be the word of God, by some authority, that is absolutely
divine: and he proves it thus: For if they be warranted unto us by any
authority, less then divine, then al things contained in them, which have no
greater assurance, then the scripture in which they are read, are not objects
of divine belief, and that once granted, will enforce us to yield, that all the
articles of Christian belief, have no greater assurance, then humane or moral
faith or credulity can afford. Thus he, both confesses and proves, that the
Scriptures must be proved to be the word of God, by some infallible divine
proof, and that such a proof can be nothing, but a word of God, and by some
authority, that is absolutely divine. But where this word of God, by which the
scripture is to be proved, is, where this absolutely divine authority, is, out
of the Church, he cannot tell. For himself says sec. 16. cit. p. 70. There is
no place in Scripture, which tells us, that such books containing such and such
particulars, are the word of God. And p. 88. Scripture cannot bear witness to
it self, nor one part of it to an other* White also in his way p. 48. The
certainty of the scripture, is not written indeed with letters in any
particular place, or book of the scripture. So there is no written word of God,
that See inf^a l. (...). c. 6 sec 2.
avouches the Scripture to be the word of God; And unwritten word of God, they
admit none: Wherefore Laud flies to a divine light in See infra l. 2. c. 5
sec. 2.
scripture, which (says he) after the present Church has testified the
Scripture to be the word, clearly shows to us, that it is the word of God.
But beside, that this light is feigned (as we shall see more hereafter) light is
no word of God (which Laud requires to p^^ue the scripture by) but a
quali(...) of the word of God, nor is any formal object of belief, (which
authority or veracitie only is) but is object of science, or of vision. And
so this light is nether the material object of faith, nor sufficient proof of
the Scripture, because it is no word of God* nor any formal obiector cause of
faith, because it is no authority. Wherefore Chillingworth, finding no surer
motive to believe the Scripture, then the testimony of the Church, and yet not
granting that to be infallible, grants that consequence, which Laud would
avoid, See l. 2. (...). 8. sec. 2.
to wit, that al their assurance, that the Scripture is Gods word, and of al
things contained in it, is but humane and fallible, and so Protestants faith is
not divine or infallible, and may deceive them. An other main inconueniencie
is, that if the Catholic A fallible Church men^ force to professor in faith, or
to forsake her communion.
Church, could err in matters of faith, she might force us to profess her
error, (if she exacted ^t as a condition of her commun^^^, which were great sin
or so forsake her communion, which were to put our selves out of the state of
Salvation, because there is no salvation out of the Church as there Calvin. 4.
Inst. c. 1.. 4. Whitaker contr. 2. q. 5. c. 3.
was not out of the Arck of Noe, Whereby we see, that the Infallibility of the
Church, and Necessity of being in the Church, do mutually infer one the other.

7. To al these proofs out of Reason, I may add, that Reason forces
Protestants to confess, that the Church is infallible in fundamental points:
and if it were not to have some pretense to refuse the Churches judgment in
some points, it would force them to confess, that she is also infallible in
Not-fundamental points, and making fundamental or Not-fundamental, which they
please, they take pretense to admit or refuse the Churches iudgment-in which
points they please. And this is the true ground of their denial of the Churches
divine Infallibility in all points of faith, which to have discovered, is to
have refuted. I may add also, that for more then 2000. years, God Protestants
make she Church more infallible in the law of nature, then after.
gave infallibility to his Church, and that he never said, that he would take
it from her, and that the Church is not less infallible now then it was before
Moses, but rather founded (as the Apostles says) in better promises.

NINTH CHAPTER. Some of the Protestants arguments against the Infallibility of
the true Church of God, in matters of faith, ansvvered?
1. PRotestants heap up great store of Arguments (but no express testimony of
Scripture) against the Infallibility of the Church in matters of faith, that
so they may by number supply the weakness of them, and if not convince the
Reader, yet confound him; wherefore I will not relate them al, but the chiefest,
by answer to which, the Reader may see, how he may answer the rest. The first
argument is this: The Church may a Whitaker cont. 2. q. 4. 6. 2. 3. Chilling.
c. 5. n. 93.
err in matters of manners: therefore also in matters of faith. I answer, that
if they mean in the Antecedent, of the universal Church, I distinguish, of
damnably erring, or venially erring, and deny, that the whole Church can
damnably err in manners, because that would make her not holy, and so that
article of our Creed: I believe the holy Catholic Church, should be falls: and
(as Laud said sec. 25. 5.) The whole militant Church is holy, and so we
believe. Item. If we will keep up our Creed the whole militant Church must be
holy. Secondly I deny the consequence. For etror in manners destroieth only
a quality of the Church, which is holiness, and without which the substance of
the Church may be; but sinful error in faith destroieth her See part. 1. l. 2.
c. 6.
substance, and makes her no true Church of God, but a falls and heretical
Church; because sinful error in faith, is the sin of heresy. And also even
every sinless error in faith, destroieth the end for which the Church is
instituted, which is to be a sure and undoubted See sup. c. 2. n. 2. and c. 8
n. 2.
Guide in matters of faith, and to persuade them, which she could not, if she
erred in any point of faith: For (as S. Epist. 8. 9.
Austin says of the Scripture) if any error were found in any point of her
doctrine, her doctrine in other points would be unsure and suspected of error.
Besides, we might argue thus against Protestants: the Church may err
fundamentally in manners; Therefore also fundamentally in faith.

2. A second argument is that the Church may for some time be ignorant of some
points of faith; Therefore may also err. I distinguish the antecedent, of points
of faith, necessary necessitate medij, or Adesse fidei, and then I deny it.
For then she should not be a sufficient guide of faith; or of points not so
necessary, and then I distinguish also of sinful ignorance, and sinles
ignorance, I deny the Antecedent, for sinful ignorance is heresy; or
equivalent to it: ignorance not sinful, I grant the Antecedent; but deny the
consequence For error in faith (whether sinful, or sinles) includes untruth,
and so is contrary to the end of the Church, which (as said) is to be a sure
guide in matters of faith, and sure she cannot be, who proposes any thing as
of faith, which either is not of faith, or is contrary to faith, for that were
untruth. But simple ignorance of some point of faith not so necessary, is not
repugnant to a sufficient and sure guide in matters of faith, nor includes
any untruth. As it is not against the assurednes of Scripture, that it
teaches not all that is of faith, as it would be, if it taught any the least
error or untruth: For simple ignorance, or not teaching something, includes no
untruth, but mere vnknowledg, or not teaching that truth, but error includes
untruth, which cannot be in a sure Guide, as the true Church Some ignorance is
but against the pe^fection of the Church.
of God always is. Wherefore ignorance of some not so necessary truth, would
be against the perfection of the Church: but al error whatsoever, sinful or not
sinful, in any point whatsoever of faith, would destroy the end of the Church.

3. The third argument may be this: Whitaker cont. 2 q. 4. c. 3. Laud sec. 16
p. 65. Chilling. c. 3. n. 70.
every member of the Church may err in faith: Therefore the whole Church: I
deny the consequence both because God has not made every member of the
Church, the pillar and ground of truth, as he has made the Church; nor made
promise of infallible assistance to every member of the Church: and also,
because he has not instituted every member of the Church for an infallible and
sure Guide in matters of faith, as he has instituted the Church: And if this
note of the essence of the Church, which is to be a society in Christ's true
faith, and not only in some part of his faith; and the end of the Church,
which is to be a sure and undoubted Guide in matters of faith, be well observed,
we shall easily both defend the Churches infallibility, and also solue the
Protestants objections against it. A fourth argument may be taken out of that
which Chillingworth says c. 3.. 30. p. 144. The Churches dependence on the
Apostles So also Tailo. in l^bertie of prophe^ing sect. 6 n. 1.
rule, is voluntary, for it is in the power of the Church to deuiate from this
rule being but an aggregation of men, of which every one has free will. To
which I answer, first, that this would equally prove, that the Apostles were
not infallible, because they had free will, nor the Church infallible in
fundamental points* secondly, I answer, that by, the Churches Infallibility,
mean not any natural or absolute infallibility as in God but such as Christ
says Matt. c. 24. is in the Elect, who though of their nature may be led into
error, yet through Gods efficacious assistance, can not. And possibility of
erring by nature, and impossibility of erring by Gods efficacious assistance,
may stand together, as they did in the Apostles. For this impossibility or
necessity of not erring, is (as logitians speak) only consequentiae, non
consequentis. And necessity of Necessity of consequence, not of consequent.
consequence, does not repugne to liberty or freedom. For as of my seeing one
walk, it follows necessarily, that he walk, and yet he walks freely: so of
Gods efficacious assistance of the Church not to err, it necessarily follows,
that she err not, and nevertheless she freely erreth not. And the reason is,
because Gods efficacious assistance alters not m^n smanner of working (which
is to work freely) but only assuredly makes them to Gods assistance ca^^oth
assurednes not necessity.
work. And assurednes of the work, may well stand with free manner of working
it, because the work, and the manner of working it, are different things. It
suffices, that God, who is the principal worker, will have it done, and that
he, by his omnipotency, can effect it assuredly as well by a free secondarie
Agent, as by a necessary Agent; for who resists his will?

4. Wherefore now (Gentle Reader) compare our reasons for, the Infallibility of
the Church in matters of faith, with the Protestants Reasons to the contrary,
and our solutions of their arguments, with their solutions of ours, and thou
shall find a main difference. For one of our Reasons is taken a priori (as
Philosophers speak) from the definitions of the true Church given by Scripture,
Fathers, and Protestants themselves: whereas Protestants nether bring nor can
bring any Reason for the fallibilitie of the Church; out of her definition*
For what color of her fallibilitie can be drawn from that she is a Society in
Profession of the true faith of Christ, and communion of his Sacraments, but
rather for her Infallibility? An other of our arguments is also taken a
prior^, from the final cause or end of the Church, which is to be a sure Guide
to salvation by right faith in Christ: which end can afford no color of proof
of her fallibilitie. Our third Argument also is a Priori from the formal
external cause of divine faith, which must needs be infallible as faith is,
whereof it is cause; which formal external cause of infallible faith affoordeth
no color of fallibilitie. Our fourth argument is taken from Christ's gift. And
our fifth a Posteriori, from ^he many and great ill consequences, which
necessarily follow of the denial of the Churches Infallibility* whereas
Protestants can infer no inconneniencie at al, out of our auouching her
infallibility in points of faith. But their best reasons against the Churches
Infallibility, are taken from similitudes, which are indeed Dissimilitudes,
between error in manners, and error in faith, between ignorance of some point
of faith, and error in some point of faith: between every member of the Church
and the whole Church. And as for our solutions of their arguments, they are
satisfactorie and scientifical, because they are taken from the nature and the
end of the true Church, and show a plain difference betwixt those things, which
Protestants think to be like: Whereas Protestants can give no such satisfactorie
or scientifical answer to our Arguments, taken of the definition, or end of the
Churh, but do voluntarily gloss the definition and end of the Church as if her
essence were only a society in profession of some part of Christ's doctrine,
and Protestants destroy both the esse ce, and the end of the Church.
her end to be a sure Guide, only in some part thereof, to wit, in the
fundamental or principal part, which is indeed to make her a part of Christ's
Church, and truly not his Church, nor any sure guide at al? But now let us
prove the Churches Infallibility, out of Protestants confessions, for it is so
evident, as they are forced sometimes to confess it.

TENTH CHAPTER. That Protestants do many ways confess, that the true Church
of God, is Infallible in proposing matters of Faith.
1. IT is so evident, that the true Church of God is Infallible in proposing
matters of faith, as Protestants do many ways confess it, though it do
quite overthrow their cause, because themselves acknowledge that for many ages
she has opposed their doctrine, whose confessions I will endeavor to set down
in order. For first they plainly and absolutely grant, that the Church cannot
err in matters of faith Luther l. de seruo arbitrio to. 2. fol. 438. Thus has
our Creed: I believe Not in the least article.
the holy Catholic Church, that it is impos^ible for her to err in the least
article. Respons ad Syluestrum tom. 1. fol. 177. I shall be an heretik, if I
hold it not, after the Catholic Church has determined it. Ibid. The universal
Church cannot err, as the Cardinal of Cocciustom. (...). p. 140.
Cambray proves most learnedly. Libro de december Praeceptis: The Church cannot
err, it is governed by the holy Ghost In Resolutionibus: Do we not see, how
watchful Christ is in his Church, that he suffers not them to err. Tom. 7.
German. fol. 562. The Church nether ought, nor can lie, no not in the least Not
in the least matter.
matter, seeing God is the mouth of the Church, and God cannot lie, so nether
the Church can. And lib. de potestate Bellarm. l. 3. de Verbo D^^ c. 5.
Papae. We are not certain of any private man, that he has revelation from
the father, but the Church it i^, of whom we may not doubt. Melancthon Respons.
ad Clerum Coloniensem to. 2. p. 113. Let the earth swallow me, and al Etna over
whelme me, before I fight with the Church of God. We sphalus in Hospin part 2.
Histor. Sacram. fol. 237. ^h Church Not in doctrine.
of God can not err in doctrine. Thus Luther and Lutherans.

2. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 1.. 3. we are Se^ al^o c. 8.. 12.
sure, that we shall always have truth whiles we are in the lapos the Church.
lib. de scandalis p* 102. I willingly add, that the sense of the Church is so
joined with the true doctrine of the law and Gosp^l, that she is rightly judged
a faithful teacher and Interpreter of it, And in Antidoto Council sess. 4. None
of us, but submitts his writings to the judgment of the Church. Sadeel ad
Repetit Turiani loco 30. p. 643. If the Church be the ground of truth, as Paul
avouches: if faith be the fundation of the Church, as Ambrose affirms it
follows, that whersoeuer the true Church is, there true faith is. Moulins l.
1. contra Peron. c. 1. It is true, that who is assured, that he is in the true
Church, is assured, that he has true faith and doctrine.

3. Cranmer in Fox Acts p. 1709. I am ready in all things to follow the
judgment of the most sacred word of God, and of the holy Catholic Church.
Latimer Ibid. p. 1603. I confess, there is a Catholic Church, to the
determination of which, I will stand. Philpot. ibid. p. 1637. I do not think
the Catholic Church can err in doctrine. P. 1640. If they can prove themselves
to be the Catholic Church, I will never be against their doctrine, but revoke al,
that I have said. Ridley ibid. p. 1597. I acknowledge an unspotted Church, in
the which no man can err. Whitaker controu. See Whitaker ^ont. 1. q. 5. c. 3.
q. 3. c. 5. cont. 2. q. 4. c. 2. l 2. cont B^^. sect. 1.
2. q. 5. c. 18. It cannot hold any heretical doctrine, and yet be a Church.
Ibid. Truth makes the Church, and the Church teaches where is truth, and
which is truth C. 19. which place (1. Timoth. 3.) shows, that truth abides
always in the Church, nor can be separated from her: other companies may err,
but it is proper, and a Note of this company, that it can not err, as they
confess. Ibid. this place (Isaiae 53.) shows, that true preaching of the
word, shall be perpetual in the Church. And controu. 4. q. 4. c. 2. The Church
is the Mistress of faith and manners, to her al must submit. And l. 3. de
Scriptura p. 453. They slander us, that we make the judgment of the Church
merely humane. P. 412. Tradition was once of the same authority, as Scripture
is now. White in his way p. 79. No man denies, but that it is a good way not
to be deceived in an obscure question, to ask and follow the Judgment of the
Church, so it be the true Church. P 80. The Church is to us a witness and
vpholder of the faith, and always preserves it, which we deny not. P. 67.
These words be tolerable: The doctrine, teaching, and belief, of the true Church
Infallible rule.
is the infallible Rule in all points to be followed. In his defense p. 318. we
would fr^ely grant this conclusion, if his meaning we^e no more, but that the
doctrine and faith of the universal Church, is the Rule of faith. See him also
p. 339. ^ulk in Joan. 14. Nota 5. The true Church of Christ never falls into
Aposta^ie, heresy, or to nothing. Therefore it is an impudent slander, we say
so. Field in Appendice part. 1. p. 69. Nether D. Humfrey, nor we condemn the
Universal Madness to condemn the Church.
Church, but think it very madness so to do. Laud sec. 20. p. 142. A very
dangerous thing it is, to cry out in general terms. The whole Catholic
Church can err. sec. 18. p. 139. We hold, that the Church never falls into
heresy. That the whole visible Church never falls into heresy, we most
willingly grant. sec. 16. p. 113. First comes in the tradition of the Church,
the present Tradition of the Church, is not heretical.
Church, so it is no heretical or schismatical belief. sec. 36. p. 344. we do
rely upon the infallible authority of the word of God, and the whole Catholic
Church. Ibid. p. 346. It Is true, that after a General Council is ended, and
admitted by the whole Church, is then infallible. Moulins in Arnolds flights c.
8. It is false, that we say simply. The Church can err. Andrews Respons ad 1.
Epist. Molinei. Arrius his name is justly in the Catalogue of Heretics, because
he opposed the consent of the Universal Church. Chillingworth c. 2.. 124. p.
100. That the living Judge in the Jewish Church, had an infallible direction,
is that which the Doctor (Potter) attributes to the Jews. Potter, sec. 2. p.
25. The high Priest had an absolutely infallible direction, If any See
Chilling. c 2 p. 106.
such promise from God to assist the Pope could be produced, his decisions
might then justly pass for oracles without examination. Ibid. p. 34. The
Catholic Church is the faithful keeper of al scripture and divine verities. And
ibid. p. 55. Whosoever ^ther wilfully opposes any Catholic verity, manteined
by this Church (of Saints) or the Catholic visible Church, as do heretics,
their Heretics, who oppose the visible Church.
condition is damnable. Chillingworth in his preface n. 16. The doctrine of the
Trinity, is supported by those pillars of the faith, which alone are fit and
able to support it, I mean Scripture, and consent of the ancient Doctors.
Behold the consent of ancient Doctors, a pillar of faith, and able to support
even the doctrine of the Trinity. And n. 28. what is held necessary by the
Catholic Church of this age, I do verily believe Church of this age.
and embrace c. 1. n. 7. I grant, that Christ founded a visible Church stored
with all helps necessary to salvation, particularly, with sufficient means to
beget and mantein faith, to conserve unity, and compose schisms, to discover
and condemn heretics, and to determine controversies in religion, which were
necessary to be determined. And if Universal tradition, as inf^l^ble as
Scripture.
sufficient to these ends, infallible to these ends, as he there grants. c.
3. n. 45, we willingly grant the Church to be as infallible in he^ universal
traditions, as the scripture is. n. 46. Make it appear, that it is tradition,
and we will seek no farther. c. 2. n. 155. Universal tradition is the rule to
judge al controversies by. Field l. 1. c. 13. Heretics are they, who obstinatly
persist in error, contrary And rule to judge al controuersi^s by.
to the Churches faith l. 4. c. 2. That the whole Church, as it comprehends
only al those beleuers, that are and have been since the Apostles times hold
err in any thing contained within the compass of re^cled truth, is impossible:
seeing error, which is an aberration declining or swaruing from the truth once
delivered, necessarily implies a kind of particularitie, and novelty. Ibid.
yea in Present Church erreth not in things not absolutely necessary.
things, that are not absolutely necessary to be known and believed expressly,
and distinctly, we constantly believe, that this (present) Church, can never err
or doubt pertinaciously. Item. That the visible Church never falls into
heresy, we most willingly grant. c. 5. All the Pastors of the Church since the
Apostles, can not err. And (as we showed part. 1. l. 2. c. 3 and l. 1. of the
Author of Protestant religion c. 1.) they commonly profess to exclude al
heretik^ out of the Church.

4. If any answer, that these Protestants mean only, that the Church is
infallible in fundamental points, but not in proposing al points of faith, I
reply, First, that Luthe^ says the Church can not err in the least article,
not in the least matters. That Wesphalus, she cannot err in doctrine, that Field
says she cannot ^rr in things not absolutely necessary* Secondly, that others
say absolutely: The Church cannot err, and it is sophistical, to interpret
absolute words In part or, In some sort. Nether hinders it, that in other
places they say the Church can err, because it is usual for heresiks to
contradict themselves, and to confess truth when they are pressed thereunto, and
at other times, to deny it. Thirdly, that if the Church be infallible in
fundamental points, she must be also in all points sufficiently revealed to her,
because al such are fundamental to her. And also, that there are no
Not-fundamental points in their sense, that is such as if they be sufficiently
proposed, may be not believed, without loss of saving faith, true Church, and
salvation, but al are to be believed actually, if they be sufficiently proposed,
and to be virtually believed, though not so proposed. And therefore if the true
Church be infallible in fundamental points, she is infallible in all points of
faith, or in all parts of Gods word, sufficiently revealed to her. But it must
be well noted, how plainly Protestants confess, that the Church can not err in
the least article, in the least matter, cannot err in doctrine, not in things
not absolutely necessary, in all points, that they are sure of truth, who are in
the Church, that the Church cannot fall into here^ie: that it is heresy, and to
be an heritik, obstinatly to oppose the Churches faith. Which if they would
constantly hold, al controversies were ended, in finding the Church.

5. Secondly, Protestants put pure, sincere, incorrupt, and entire profession
of Christ's doctrine, in their definition of the true visible Church, as is
showed part 1. l. 2. c. 6. And it implies contradiction, that there should be
any error. where there is pure, sincere, incorrupt and entire profession of
Christ's doctrine. If any answer, that they mean only: Pure sincere, incorrupt,
and entire, profession of Christ's fundamental doctrine, I reply (as before) to
the former shift, and also that this were to condemn their definition of the
true Church, of defect and obscurity; in not expressing such a necessary
particle, as without which, the definition were falls, and would not agree to
the thing defined. For Purity, unless, In fundamentals; be added, will not agree
to a true Church erring in Not fundamentals. I add also, that as yet, never
durst any Protestant define the true Church, to be a company, professing the
fundamental part of Christ's doctrine, because the name of any part of his
doctrine, would show, that it is not his true Church absolutely, but in part
only, and simply not his Church. Like to this, is that they give Pure
preaching of Gods word, for an essential Note of the Church, yea for the only
essential Note thereof, as says Whitaker contro. 2. q. 5. c. 17. Morton l. 2.
Apolog. c. 4. and others. And Luther in ^. 2. Isaiae. Beza de nobis Eccles.
how can, Pure preaching, be any Note, if there may be error in all secondarie
points of faith? If therefore River tract. 1. sec. 45. Daneus^ont. 4. p. 141.
Chilling. c. 4. p. 221.
they will mantein their essential definition, and their essential Note of the
true Church, they cannot say, she can err in any points of faith.

6. Thirdly, they sometimes grant that the Church is infallible in her
universal traditions, and namely, Universal tradition as infallible as
scripture and so a word of God.
that the scripture is the word of God. Chillingworth c. 3. n. 45. you were to
prove the Church infallible, not in her traditions, which we willingly grant
(if they be as universal, as the tradition of the undoubted books of scripture,
is) to be as infallible, as the Scripture is. For nether does, being written,
make the word of God more infallible, Protestants in Col^oq. Ratisb. s^ss. 1.
and 11.
nor being unwritten, make it the less infallible. Brentius in Prolegomenis
contra Sotum p. 249. we speak not of that tradition, by which the Scripture,
and what is contained in it, has been delivered to us. For we affirm this
tradition to be certain and undoubted. And Morton l. 1. Apolog. c. 32. and to.
2. l. 1. c. 5. calls this. The Lady and as it were Goddess of al traditions.
Robert Baronius tract. de Eccles. c. 21. n. 1. The Fathers knew no other
infallible Rule of faith, beside the Scripture and perpetual tradition of the
Church. Dauenant de Iudice c. 5. we grant, Tradition before Moses, was
sufficient.
that before Moises, the word of God not written and propagated to posterity
by continual tradition, was a sufficient Rule of faith. Whitaker contr. 1. q.
3. c. 5. I deny not, that the Churches Trad^tion. conuin^ent.
tradition is a conuincent argument, which books are Canonical, which not. And
if conuincent, infallible. Behold, the Churches tradition of the Scripture, is
certain, undoubted, the Lady, and as it were Goddess* of traditions, and her
perpetual or universal tradition, as infallible, as the Scripture, an
infallible rule of faith. And what makes it so, but Gods assistance?

7. Fourthly they grant, that the testimony or tradition of the Church,
Testimony of the Church proves the scripture.
is an infallible proof of the Scripture. Whitaker l. 2. de Scriptura c. 4.
sec. 4. p. 227. I say, the testimony of the Church, suffices to convince and
refute those, who think amiss of Scripture, or deny the articles of Christian
faith. Ibid. p 270. Thy meaning was, that the judgment of the Church, was a
most strong argument, in the kind of external cause, and my meaning was
altogether the same l. 1. c. 1. sec. 9. p. 19. The true Churches testimony of
the Scripture, must be taken, and who takes it not, shall be guilty of
sacriledg. Contr. 1. q. 3. c. 7. we are forced by the Churches authority, to
believe these books to be divine. And c. 9. p. 325. Al those Fathers do they
prove any other thing, then that Scripture is to be received, because it was
always received of the Because.
Church: and some books to be rejected, because the Churchal ways rejected
them? This we most willingly grant. And ibid. p. 326. we conf^ss with Ireney,
that the authority of the Church, is a firm and compendious Demonstration of
Canonical doctrine. And l. 5. contra Dureum, sec. 19. I think, there could not
be brought a stronger argument against the schismatical Donatists, then from
the authority of the Church. And l. 1. sec. 30. we confess the Churches
approbation is necessary, and we admit no books, but which have certain and
perpetual testimony of the true Church -- you see therefore, how much we give
to the Churches t^stimonie, in which we think is strenght enough, to confirm
Strenght enough in the church testimony.
the Canon of Scripture, and refute al Adversaries. Kemnitius 1. part Exam*
tit. de Scriptura: All this dispute (whether S. James Epistle be Canonical)
depends on the assu^ed, firm and agreing testimonies of the Church. Hooker
l. 2.. 4. Nether could we ever come to any pause whereon to rest our assurance
this way, so that unless beside Scripture, there were something, which Something
beside Scripture, can assure us.
might assure us, that we do well, we could not think, we do well, in being
assured, that the Scripture is a sacred and holy rule of well doing. And this
thing, which can assure us, as a pause to rest on, that scripture is a sacred
rule, he says l. 3.. 8. is the Church, where he adds: scripture teaches
us, that saving faith, the which God has discovered unto the worldby
Revelation, and it presumes us taught (by the Church) that it self is divine
and sacred. Item. If ^nfidels or Atheists chance at any time to call it in
question, this gives us occasion, to ^ift, what reason there is, whereby the
testimony of the Church concerning scripture, and our own persuasion, which
Scripture it self confirmed, may be proved a truth Testimony of the Church,
infal^ible.
infallible. Behold the Church can assure us, as a pause to rest our assurance
on, that the Scripture is Gods word, she teaches us, that it is divine, and
that her testimony of the Scripture, is infallible. And is not this, to have
one ^illable to this purpose, that, That whereon, we must rest our assurance
that the Scripture is Gods word, is the Church, as Chillingworth avouches c.
2.. 30. Does the Church assure us, as a pause to rest our assurance on, does
she teach us, that the Scrippture is Gods word, is her testimony of the
Scripture, infallible, and may we not rest our assurance hereof on the Church?
or is this no more, but to be a key or inducement, as Laud would have it sec
16. 25. 8. Spalatensis l. 7. de Republ. c. 1. n. 9. does not only say, that
the Churches testimony of the Scripture, is sufficient to believe it to be The
Chur^h^^ (...) stim. only me^ns.
Gods word, but also adds, that it is the only motive or mean to believe it
to be such. To enquire (which book is Canonical) the Church has that alone,
singular, and only Rule, that the Universal Church ask herself, and what she
in actual exercise holds, seek and plainly know. And l. contra Suarem c. 1.
n. 34. I show, that nether Councels, nor Popes, nor Fathers, nor Church can
otherwise define, which books be canonical, which not, but by the only
testimony of the whole Church* Chillingworth c. 2 n. 27. The question whether
such or such a book, be canonical Scripture, cannot be decided affirmatively,
but only by the testimonies of ancient Churches. n. 32. by the Churches But by
the Church.
consent, we are assured, what Scriptures be canonical -- of this controversy,
we make judge, the consent and testimony of the ancient and primitive Church*
Which he repeateth n. 35. 42 And n. 114 It is upon the authority of universal
tradition, that we would have them believe scripture. In his preface n. 28.
Whatsoever is held necessary by the Catholic Church of this age, I verily
believe. Finally, they commonly grant (as we shall see l 2. c. 4 sec. 2.) that
the Scripture needs an Interpreter, even for some necessary points of faith.
And I hope, they will not say, that a needful Interpreter for matters of
infallible faith, is fallible in interpreting them: or that the Church of God,
is not this infallible Interpreter, rather then any A needful interpreter of
infallible faith, is infallible.
other. I add also, that Whitaker contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2. grants, that the
Church erreth not in things, that are necessary to any men. And such are more
then absolutely necessary to every one. Laud also Relat. p. 356. The Fathers
of the primitive Church, did sufficiently propose to men the divine revelation,
and did by it beget and breed up faith. Behold, the testimony or authority of
the Church, suffices to convince, and demonstrate, that the Scripture is to be
received, because the Church receaueth it: that the Church can assure us that
the Scripture is the word of God; and that her testimony herein, is
infallible, is a Rule of faith, nay the only Rule or mean to know, which
books be Canonical. And why infallible in this, and not in other points? What
word of God affirms that, and denies this? Is it not plainly voluntary, to
grant her to be infallible in this, and not in other points of faith? Is it not
for to have some pretense, that Protestants are infallibly certain, that the
Scripture is the word of God, by testimony of the Church and that being had,
to neglect her See S. Austin Cont. Epist. fund^m (...). 5.
testimony in other points of faith? Is not this to make the infallibility of
the Church, to serve their turn, as far as they have need of it, and
otherwhere to leave it? For in the matter of the Scripture, and other such
points, as they think themselves bound to believe which are only (as they call
them) the fundamental points, they will have the Church to be infallible: but in
other points, which they think themselves not bound to believe, they will have
her to be fallible: so that just as far, as they think themselves bound to
believe, she is infallible, and farther, she is fallible.

9. Fifthly, they plainly insinuate, Protestants believe partly for the Church.
that they believe the scripture to be Gods word, partly for the testimony, and
authority of the Church. For thus their French Confession art. 4. We
acknowledge these books to be Canonical, not only for the common Protestants in
Col^oq Rot^^b^ess. 11 Fulk. 2. T^essal. 2.
consent of the Church, but also etc. Laud sec. 38. p. 330. I believe the
entire scripture, first by the trrdition of the Church. Whitaker Contr. 1. q.
3. c. 1. The sum of our opinion is, that the scripture is of it self worthy
to be believed not only because the Church has so commanded. Ibid. We reject
not the testimony of the Church, but deny, that we believe the scripture for
her commendation alone. And c. 5. We believe them to be canonical, not only for
the Churches testimony, and Authority, but for etc. The same he has l. 1. de
Scriptura p. 18. 52. Chillingworth c. 2.. 35. Protestants, by the Churches
consent are assured, what scriptures be canonical.. 155. scripture needs the
attestation Scripture needs tradition.
of universal tradition. Field l. 4. c. 20. The number, authors, and integrity
of canonical books, we receive by tradition. And truly who say, they believe
the Scripture not for the testimony of the Church only, do plainly insinuate,
that they believe it partly for her testimony. And as Chilling. says c. 2..
154. None can build an infallible faith upon motives, that are only lightly
credible, and no^ infallible, as it were a great and heavy burden, upon a
foundation, that has not strenght proportionable. For what is even a partial
formal cause of infallible belief, is infallible.

10. Sixthly, they teach, that we ought to follow the Church. King James in
Praefat. Antiuors: blames Vorstius because he would not admit the Church to be
Arbitrer of the errors, objected The Church is arbiter of controversy.
to him. Carleton l. de Eccles c. 1. what then, will some say? Do we see the
Church, in the Church? I indeed do so, and after holy scripture, will ask my
mother to show herself, and that the Church teach, where the Church is to be
sought. White in defense of his way c. 37. It is necessary to find and
follow the teaching of the Church. Whitaker l. 2. de Scrip. p. 234. I confess,
the Church is to be heard as a Mistress. Potter sec. 6. p. 66. It is very
meet, that the ignorant people should submit themselves to the direction of the
Church in many profound doctrins above their reach sec. 2. p. 28. The Church
Catholic or universal is confessed in some sense to be unerring: and he is
little better then a pagan, that despises her judgment. Ibid. p. 52 Particular
Churches ow to the Catholic, mother of al Christians, the duty of obedience.
Geneuas note Proverb. 1. Frustrate not thy Mothers instruction, that is the
teaching of the Church: Field in the Epist. Dedicatorie before his books of the
Church: seeing the Controversies of Religion in our time are grown in number, so
many and in Nature, so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer
strenght of understanding to examine them, what remains for men desirous of
satisfaction in things of such consequence but diligently to search out, which,
among all the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy
ones, that house hold of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living
God, which is the pillar and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her
communion, follow her directions, and Rest in the judgment of the Church.
rest in her judgment. Which words are so full and so plain for the sufficient,
and safe proposal of the Church in all controversies of faith, as Chilling. c.
2. n. 86. says. They slipped unadvisedly from him, and he strained to high.

11. But of al which has in this Chapter been related out of Protestants, it
evidently appears: first, how manifest a truth it is, that the Church of God,
is infallible in proposing matters of faith, seeing they have so plainly, and
manifoldly confessed it, partly directly, partly indirectly, though it do
quite overthrow their cause. Secondly, that if they would constantly stand to
their aforesaied confessions, there would be no more controversies betwixt us,
whether the true Church were the all-sufficient external proposer of al points
of faith, nor indeed about any other matter of faith. For Laud sect. 33. p.
249.
they confess in plain words, that the true Church, for more then a thousand
years, has taught contrary to their doctrine, and therefore openly except
against the Church, after the first four or five hundred years, and indeed
against the Church, of what time soever, calling that in her, ouersights, and
blemi^hes, which in the Church of latter times, they calerrors, superstitions,
impiety Idolatries. And thus having proved, that the true Church is infallible
in proposing points of faith, let us also prove, that she is a necessary
proposer of them, because this also is a necessary condition of the
All-sufficient Proposer of matters of faith.

ELEVENTH CHAPTER. That the true Church of God is (in ordinary course) a
necessary Proposer of al points of faith, proved by holy scripture.
1. THAT the true Church of Christ is (in ordinary course) a necessary
proposer of al points of faith, so as we cannot (in ordinary course) have
saving faith of any point, unless she propose it for divine truth, is evident
out of those former places of Scripture, whence we proved, that she is a
sufficient proposer of al points of faith. For they prove not only the
sufficiency, but also the necessity of her proposal. Romans 10. The Apostle,
giving the necessary ordinary external cause of divine faith, gives no other
then hearing lawful preaching of the word of God, saying: How shall they believe,
whom they have not heard? How shall they preach, unless they be sent? And then
infers: Therefore faith is of hearing. Wherefore he makes hearing of lawful
preaching the word of God, as necessary a cause (ordinarily speaking) of
believing, as mission is a necessary cause of lawful preaching. And lawful
preaching is not out of the true Church. And truly said Stapleton contr. 4. q.
3. art. 2. The complete formal Complete formal cause of faith. L. 2. de Sa^ram.
c 25. omnium dogmatum firmitas, pendetab authoritate praesentis Ecclesiae.
Epiphan in Ancorato Hieron. cont. Lucifer. Cyril Catech. 17.
cause of our faith (ordinarily speaking) is God revealing by the Church: and
Bellarmin l 3. de Verbo Dei, c. 10. The secondarie foundation of faith, is the
testimony of the Church: But the formal cause, and secondarie foundation, is
(doubtless) necessary to faith in ordinary course: which is all the necessity,
we speak of. And this must those fathers mean, who did read in the Greed: I
believe in the holy Church, for to believe in one, is to make his authority a
formal cause of belief: and also waldensis, who tom. 1. l. 2. c. 21. says,
that the testimony Io. de Ragusio de com. sub vtraque spec^e: Ecclesiam non
errare, and simpl^^^ter primum in doctrina fides.
of the Catholic Church, is the object of Christian faith: to wit, the formal
external, object, for the material object, is al revealed truth. And falsely
says Whitaker, l. 1. de Scrip. p. 175. Faith is not of hearing the voice or
authority of the Church, but of Gods word. For the Apostle says plainly,
that faith is of hearing, and hearing, of lawful preaching of Gods word.
Wherefore he must no more exclude lawful preaching, from a cause of faith, then
we exclude the word of God. For the word of God, is that which faith believes,
and lawful preaching, is the external formal cause, wherefore we believe it. And
Whitaker himself loco cit. is forced to confess, that the voice of the Church,
is an instrumental cause of faith. And if an instrumental cause, surely a
necessary cause, in ordinary course, and faith is of its instrumental cause,
and consequently, of the voice of the Church. Ibid. p. 11^. he says: hearing,
is the mother of faith. Item p. 121. The Church by the preaching of the Gospel,
begets us to Christ. And p. 118. The Church, is the mother of beleuers, and
how mother of beleuers, if not necessary? Is not a mother, necessary? And p.
69. I most willingly grant, that the external judgment of the Church, is a help
and means to engender, nourish, and confirm faith, instituted of God, and
necessary for us. And if necessary for us, we can have no faith without it.
controu. 2. q. 5. c. 19. By preaching of the Gospel, we come to faith, and
never without. The Church is the school of the faithful, and makes faithful,
by preaching of the word, as by a necessary, and ordinary means. If any
object, that then deaf men could not have faith: I answer, First, that deaf men
can nether read Scripture, because without hearing they cannot know, what
letters signify. Secondly, that deaf men have not any ordinary means of
faith. For (as S. Austin says l. 3. contra Iulianum c. 4.) The defect of
deafnes, hinders faith it self, witness the Apostle, faith is of hea^ing.
Porter sec. p 104. Some are inui^^^bly disab^ed from faith.
Wherefore if God will have such to believe actually, he provides them, of some
extraordinary mean. And this proof I confirm out of the Confession of
Bohemia, and diverse Protestants, who (as we shall see hereafter) out of this
place do prove, that preaching and ministry b C. 14.
of the word, are necessary to engender faith.

2. Secondly I prove* that the true Church is a necessary proposer of al
points of faith, out of her forsaied propriety, that she is the pillar and
ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3. For the pillar and ground of truth, is necessary
to uphold truth. The true Church is the pillar and ground of Truth, Therefore
she is necessary to uphold truth. The Mayor seems evident by it self. For
how can the pillar and ground of a thing, be not necessary to uphold, that
whereof it is the pillar and ground? The Minor is the Apostles words. And
Calvin upon this place says, the Church in respect of men, does sustein
truth. And Whitaker controu. 2. q. 5. c. 19. The Church does sustein, preach,
and propose truth to others l. 1. de scrip. p. 112. The Church does sustein
divine truth, that it fall not wholly among men. But what susteineth a thing, is
necessary to it.

3. Thirdly I prove The same, out of her office to be witness to Gods truth. For
witnesses are necessary for to believe that which they are appointed to
testify. The Church, or the Pastors of the Church, are appointed by God to be
witnesses of his truth. Therefore they are necessary. The Minor is proved
before And the Mayor is evident. For unless witnesses were necessary to assure
us of the truth, whereof they are witnesses, there were no need to a point them.
For what need is there to appoint such, as are needles? and such witnesses are
needles, without whom weca^be assured of the truth.

4. Fourthly I prove, the necessities of the Churches proposing matters of
faith, out of the ends, for which Protestants (as we saw c. 8. n. 2.) confess
the Church was instituted by God, to wit, to be Mother, Mistres, and guide of
Christians in matters of faith. For doubtless what is such, is necessary. But
now let us prove the same by the holy Fathers.

TWELFT CHAPTER. That the true Church of God, is a necessary proposer of al
points of faith, proved by holy Fathers.
1. S. Cyprian l. de vnitate: It is the Church, by whose trauail we are borne,
with whose milk we are nourished, with whose spirit, we are animated. But such
a one, is a necessary proposer of faith. S. Ireney l. 3. c. 4. What if dispute
had been of some small matter, should we not have recurred to the most ancient
Churches, and received from them, what is certain of this present question?
Which made Whitaker cont. 1. q. 3. c 9. to grant, that the authority of the
Church, is a firm compendious Demonstration of Canonical scripture. But Ireney
says more, that it is a necessary demonstration. Tertull. praescrip. c. 21.
What the Apostles preached, what Christ revealed to them, here I will prescribe,
that it ought not to be proved otherwise, then by the same Churches, which the
Apostles erected: For Which words Whitaker l. citato grants, that Tertullian
made this prescription, that the doctrine of the Apostles, was not to be proved
any other way, then by the Churches which they founded. And if by no other
way, then the Churches testimony is necessary.

2. S. Augustine contra Epist Fundam. c. 5. I must needs believe this book (of
the Acts) if I believe the Gospel, seeing the Catholic authority does commend to
me both books alike. Which Present Church.
authority made Whitaker contr. 1. q. 3. c. 7. to say: we may be forced by the
authority of the Church, to believe these books to be Canonical. And if forced
to believe by authority of the Church then the authority of the Church is a
most effectual and sufficient cause of infallible belief. And in the same place
S. Austin: I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic
Church did move me: which clearly testifies the necessity of the Churches
proposal, and made Whitaker q. cit. c. 8. to grant, that it is true, we should
not believe the Gospel, unless the Catholic Church did propose it. But S Austin
says more: If the Catholic Churches authority did not move me. And it is far
more, for Catholic authority to move us to believe, then for the Church only
to propose. Men of no authority, may propose; but authority, which moves to
believe the Gospel, and with out which we cannot believe the Gospel, must needs
be necessary and infallible authority. For belief of the Gospel is
infallible, and such must be the authority, that so moves us to it, as
without which we cannot believe. Commonly Protestants answer, that S. Austin
spoke these words of himself, as he was an heretik. But this cannot be because
as he was an heretik, he did not believe the authority it self of the Catholic
Church, and therefore as such he could not be moved to believe the Scripture for
her authority. For how could he be moved to believe the Scripture for that,
which it self he did not believe? Secondly, because he says not: non
credidissem: (as Morton tom. Apol. l. 1 c. 37 falsely cites him (but non
crederem, which words properly are to be understood of him, as he was minded at
that present And al August. de Doctrina l. 3 c. 10. 11. Tertul de ^arn^ Christi
c. 13 15.
words are to be understood according to their propriety, if the contrary be
not manifest. For otherwise we should be uncertain, how to understand men. And
it is not manifest, that S. Austin did not use those his words according to
their propriety. Wherefore Morton loco cit. grants, that S. Austin makes the
Church, the means, by which a Catholic believes, and the reason without which
not, which suffices for my present purpose, to show the necessity of the
Churches proposal for the means by which, and reason without which not, are
necessary. Thirdly, because afterward S. Austin adds: The authority of
Catholics being weakened, I can no more believe the Gospel, which he spoke
plainly of himself, as he was then a Catholic, and show, that his belief of the
Gospel, even both then, and for the time after, depended on the authority of
the Church I add also, that though S. Austin had said the foresaied word of
himself, only as he was an heretik, yet it would thence follow, that the
proposal and authority of the Church is (at least) necessary to begin belief
of the Gospel, howsoever it be not necessary for to continue it. And it cannot
be said, that is is necessary so, only as an inducement or disposition to
such belief, because (as S. L. de vtil. cred. c. 11.
Austin says) That we know, we owe to reason, that we believe, to authority.
So that, as Reason, is the formal cause of our knowledge, so is Authority the
formal cause of our belief: and such cause of our belief of the Gospel, is the
authority of the Catholic Church, such, not principal but subordinate to Gods
authority. Chillingworth c. 2.. 54 p. 54. p. 73. and. 97. p. 88. says, That
S. Austin by Catholic Church, meanerh the Church of al ages, including Christ
and the Apostles. But nether proves he that, nor can tell, how S. Austin could
be infallibly certain of the testimony of the Church of Christ, and the
Apostles time, but by the testimony of the Church of his time. Which if it
were not infallible, he could not be infallibly certain of the testimony of
the Church of Christ, and the Apostles time. Beside, S. Austin shows, that he
means of the authority of the present Church, in saying: The Catholic
authority does commend to me both books alike. And l. 1. contra Crescon. c.
33. The truth of Scripture is held, when we do, what now seems to the whole
Church. Which is plainly meant of the present Church. The same S. Austin (as is
before cited) says, l. 10. de Genesis ad literam c. 23. That baptism of Infants
were not to be believed, unless it were an Apostolical tradition. And l. 2. de
baptismo c. 4. that he durst not defend the baptism given by heretics, unless
he were assured by the authority of the Church. Therefore he thought the
authority of the Church necessary to believe those points of faith. Vincentius
l. 1. c. 2. Here possibly one may demand, when the rule of Scripture is
perfect, and in it self more then enough sufficient unto al things, what need
is there to join unto it the authority of the Churches sense? And he
answers; this is, because al men do not take it in one sense, therefore it is
necessary, that the line of interpretation be directed according to the rule
of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. Behold the sense of the Church,
necessary to understand the Scripture rightly. And the same Vincent. 16. c.
41. It is necessary, that the understanding of the holy Scripture be directed
according to the only rule of the Churches sense. And if the understanding of
the Scripture must be directed according to the sense of the Church, doubtless
the sense of the Church is necessary.

THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. That the true Church of God, is a necessary proposer of
al points of faith, proved by reason grounded in Scripture.
1. FIrst: What is Gods ordinary means of teaching faith, is (in ordinary
course) necessary to have faith. Gods ordinary means of teaching faith, is by
the Church: therefore his means of teaching by the Church, is (in ordinary
course) necessary. The Mayor seems evident by it self; and the Minor is
proved by those places Romans 10. Faithis of hearing lawful preaching. Ephesians. 4.
God has put Pastors for consummation of Saints. 1. Tim. 5. The Church is the
pillar, and ground of truth: and so evident, as Whitaker l. 1. de Scrip. p. 73.
says: That the ordinary manner, by which God teaches, is by the Church, I
willingly grant.

2. Secondly, because nether Scripture, nor reading of Scripture, is a
necessary cause of engendring faith, in ordinary course. Therefore the
preaching of the Church is such a means. For there is (doubtless) some ordinary
means instituted by God, which in ordinary course is necessary, and if not
Scripture, nor reading of Scripture, surely the Church and her preaching. For
no other can be reasonably imagined. The Antecedent I prove, because (as I said
before) for many ages before Moses, there was no Scripture at al, nor for
some years after Christ, was there any Scripture of the new Testament, and in
S. Ireneys time, no Scripture, amongst some Barbarians, and yet there wanted
not then, some necessary means of getting faith. For there were faithful men
in all those times, and places.

3. Thirdly, Preachers or Pastors are necessary to the Church in ordinary
course. Therefore preaching also is necessary. The consequent is evident. For
why should preachers be necessary, if preaching (for which preachers are) be
not? The Antecedent is clear, both out of many places in Scripture, and out
of the definition of the Church, where Ministers of the word and of Sacraments
are put, as an essential part of the Church, where nether Scripture, nor
reading of it, is put as any part thereof; and also, out of the confessions
of Protestants, as we shall see in the next Chapter. If any say, that before
Scripture was written, Gods ordinary means, and necessary for us, was
preaching, but after Scripture was written, the reading of it, is the
necessary ordinary means of faith: First I answer: he voluntarily says,
that God has changed his necessary ordinary means of causing faith.
Secondly, Scripture never can be the universal necessary means of causing
faith, because it cannot be such to blind men, or to such as cannot read, nay
nor to any that understand it not in the original toungs, according to the
opinion of Protestants. Besides, See l. 2 c. 2. sect. 2.
it is absurd to say, that after Scripture, God had altered his ordinary
necessary means of engendring faith. For why should he alter it? What proof is
there that he did alter it? Where is his word that says it?

4. Fourthly, sowing is necessary in ordinary course that the seed do grow,
but preaching is compared in Scripture to sowing. Therefore it is necessary in
ordinatie course, that Gods seed or word do grow in men's hearts.

FOVERTEENTH CHAPTER That the true Church of God is a necessary proposer of
points of faith, proved by plain confession of Protestants.
1. THat the Church is so necessary a proposer of points, as without her
proposal, in ordinary course, we can have no divine faith, is so manifest, as
Protestants sometimes do plainly confess it. For thus Luther tom. 1. fol. 54.
The ministration of the word by a priest, is necessary to faith. Tom. 2. l.
contra Church conceived by voc^l word.
Catharin. fol. 140. The Church is conceived, framed, nourished generated,
conserved, by the vocal word. Tom. 5. in c. 1. Zachariae fol. 516. Albeit God
can teach men the Gospel without preaching, yet he will not do it. And ibid.
praefat. in Catechesim fol. 645. There are some this day, even of the Gentry,
who dare say, they have no need of Pastors or preachers, but that books
suffice, out of which, any man may learn the same things by himself without
any teaching. And in colloquio marpurgi in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 77. Lutherans
and Sacramentaria^s agreed, That the holy Ghost, ordinarily speaking, gives,
faith to none unless the vocal word go before, Kemnitius 2. part Exam. tit. de
Sacram. ord. p. 391. God, upon his certain Decree, has determined to dispense
those things, which belong to our salvation, not infusing into men's minds
inward peculiar revelations, without any means, but by the external ministry
of the word. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 1.. 4. The knowledge of the (visible See him
1. In^^^t. c. 7. 3. l. 4. c. 1.. 5. and in Actor. c. 16. v. 17.
Church) is profitable, yea necessary to us, seeing there is no other entrance
unto life, unless she conceive us in her womb, bear us, and f^ed us with her
duggs. And ibid.. 5. Howbeit Gods power is not tied to external means, yet he
has tied us to the ordinary means of teaching. -- Either pride or emulation,
or sloth drives many to persuade themselves, that by private reading and
studying, they can profit enough. In 1. Tim. 3 The office of ministering
doctrine, which God has put in his Church, is the only instrument of truth
Only Instrumental. Preaching is before faith.
that it perish not out of the memory of men. The ministry of the word,
being taken away, Gods truth will fall. Ibid. Paul simply means, that because
faith is by hearing, there will be no faith, without preaching. Beza, epist. 20.
I^ it clear that faith is of hearing, and therefore it follows, that preaching
must go before faith. Fayus in enchiridio disput. 66. The necessity of
Ecclesiastical ministry, appears by that, that without it, we cannot have
knowledge and understanding, either of the word of God, or of his ^il revealed to
us in it. Whitaker l. 3. de Scriptura p. 413. We alconf^ss, the testimony of
the Church to be most necessary, by which men, by Christ's apointment, may be
brought to believe. P. 499. we affirm, the ministry of the Church to be very
necessary l. 1. de Script. p. simply we cannot believe without the ministry
of the Church. P. 39. we believe not, I confess, unless the Church by preaching
teach us. P. 106. The ministry being taken away, nether faith, nor charity,
nor obedience, nor any other virtue will remain safe. See him p. 46. 106. 108.
111. l. 3. p. 369. I confess, that the ministry of the Church, is most
necessary for to believe the Scriptures l. 3. p. 478. I affirm, determine,
hold, that there is no entrance to salvation, without the ministry of the
word. Ibid. By ministry of Pastors, we assent to the Scriptures, nor is it to
behoped, that without this ministry, we can have faith. And p. 477. It is
true, that without the ministry, there is no entrance to salvation, and that
this ministry, is not, but in Pastors. Contro. 2. q. 3. c. 11. p. 332. By the
preaching of Pastors, the gates of heaven are in a sort opened, so that
without the ministry of the word, no entrance to salvation can be for an^^.
Ibid. q. 5. c. 19. p. 550. Without preaching of the Gospel we never come to
salvation. Fulk of succession p. 30. Salvation of people, can never be procured
without preaching. And p. 163. No Christian will deny, but that preaching is
necessary for building of the Church. Latimer in his sermons fol. 38. Take
away preaching, and you take away faith. And fol. 99. The office of preaching,
is the only ordinary means, by which God has decreed, that we be saved.
Cartwright in Hooker l. 5. p. 230. No salvation to be looked for, where no
preaching is. Item. Reading, cannot begin the work of salvation, it cannot
breed and cause faith without sermons. And the Puritans in whitgifts Answer to
the admonition p. 53. Reading is not feeding. Field in his Appendix part. 2 p.
21. The tradition of the Church is a necessary means, whereby the books of
Scripture may be made known. -- The Churches proposiug of things, is a
necessary condition, without which ordinarily men can not believe. Potter sec.
5. p. 5. We do not deprive the Church of that prerogative and office, which
Christ has given it. Faith comes by hearing the word of God, and the
ministry of the Church, is necessary in ordinary course, for the begetting
of faith. P. 9. The Church, ordinary propounder of faith.
God has appointed an outward ordinary means to present and propound divine
verities to our faith, and this ordinary means, we grant is the Church. Is not
this to grant in plain terms, that the Church is the ordinary proposer of
faith appointed by God? P. 10. The Church is one cause, to wit, inductiue or
preparatiue, without which men ordinarily do not believe, P. 6. The testimony
of the present Church, is the first external motive of our faith, it is the key
or door that lets men into the knowledge of divine mysteries. Laud sec. 16. p.
73. No man may expect inward private revelation, without the external means of
the Church, unless perhaps the case of necessity be excepted. Hooker l. 3.. 8.
we al know, that the first outward motive, leading men to esteem of the
Scripture, is the authority of Gods Church. Chillingworth. c. 1. p. 63.
Whether such or such a book be canonical Scripture, affirmatively cannot be
decided, but by the testimony of the ancient Churches. P. 52. we take the
Scripture upon universal tradition. P. 66. Of this controversies (which books
be canonical) we make the Church the Judge, The consent and testimony of the
ancient and primitive Church. P. 72. It is superfluous for you to prove out of
S. Athanasius, and S. Austin, that we must receive the sacred Canon upon the
credit of Gods Church, understanding by Church, the credit of Tradition. P. 96.
It is upon the authority of universal tradition, that we would have them
believe the Scripture. c. 3.. 38. p. 150. The Church is a necessary
introduction to faith. Couel. art. 4. Doubtless, it is a tolerable opinion in
the Church of Rome that the Scriptures are holy, and divine in themselves, but
so esteemed by us, for the authority of the Church. See Whites defense p. 251.
254.

3. Nether do they only confess this, but also confess, that the Scripture
teaches it. The confession of* Auspurg. c. de potestate Ecclesiastica. Eternal
justice, the holy Spirit, life everlasting, can not be had, but by the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, as Paul says. The confession of
Bohemia art. 10. They grant, that none can have true faith, unless he hear the
word of God, according to that of Paul, Faith is of hearing. And again: how
shall they believe in him, whom they have not heard? And the Protestants in
their Conferencie in Maspurg in Hospin part 2. Historiae Sacram* fol. 77.
agreed: that the holy Ghost (speaking of the ordinary way) gives Vocal word
of God.
faith to none, unless a sermon or vocal word go before: but he works faith
by, and with the vocal word, where, and in whom he pleases. Romans 10. Calvin
4. Instit. c. 1.. 5. God inspireth faith, but by the Organ of his Gospel, as
Paul admonishes, that faith is of hearing. Ibid. We must hold, what we have
cited out of Paul that the Church is not builded otherwise, then by external
preaching. In 1. Cor. 3. v 6. Note in this place, that preaching of the word,
is necessary nothing can hinder, but God can infuse faith whiles we sleep, if
he will, without help of man, but he has decreed otherwise, to wit, that faith
is of hearing, The same he has Hebr. 4. 1. Tim. 3. and Ephesians. 4. Beza in
colloquio Montisbel. p. 407. The ordinary means, by which faith is ordinary
cause.
infused, is by hearing the word of God. Romans 10. wherefore these two causes are
always joined, to wit, the Holy Ghost, and hearing of the word of God. Bucer
in Romans 10. The Apostle knew, that God can call al men, without the ministry
of men, yet he simply wrote, how shall they believe in him, of whom they have
heard nothing? Hyperius upon the same place: This it is: That al believe and
invoke God, it is necessary, that they first hear the Gospel, and be
taught. Daneus l. de visibili Ecclesia p. 1069. Paul says, Faith is of
hearing, not of private reading. Whitaker l. 1. de Scriptura p. 29. What thou
obiectest of the Apostle: how shall they believe him, whom they have not hear,
does demonstrate, that preaching is necessary to ^aue right faith of God. P.
39. I am not ignorant, how necessary the ministry of the Church is both to
begett, and confirm faith, and if you urge, I can grant, that what is believed,
is believed by the ministry of the Church. For God has set that order in his
Church, that faith be of hearing, and hearing of the word of God. The like he
has p. 41. 100. l. 3. p. 396. Contro. 1. q. 2. c. 15. Faith (as the Apostle
witnesses Romans 10.) is of hearing. And q. 6. c. 15. out of which place (Romans
10) it is evident, that faith is conceived by hearing. And in his last sermon.
p. 694. It is certain, that in those of years, faith is of hearing, as the
Apostle teaches. White in his way. 27. p. 116. It will be easily granted, that
the ministry of the Church, is the ordinary means, whereby we learn the faith
of Christ, and that no man of himself can attain to the knowledge thereof, but as
the Church teaches him. Except in some extraordinary cases, the preaching
thereof is required, is a necessary condition, as the text of S. Paul (Romans
10.) speaks See Potter sec. 5. p. 9. and Dent in his plain way p. 250.

4. Out of which confessions of Protestants, it is manifest, 1. that the
Churches proposal is necessary Whitaker l. (...). de Scrip. p. 18. 49.
Chilling. c. 2. n. 21.
the Church by the Scripture, as commonly Protestants use to teach. Let them
therefore tell me, what Church preached Protestant doctrine to Luther and to the
first Protestants; of hearing of what lawful preacher, he had his Protestant
faith? By what Churches ministry, he learnt the Protestant sense of
Scriptures? or say, that he had not his faith of hearing, but of divine
inspiration, which themselves condemn in Suencfeldius, Anabaptists, and
Enthusiasts, as is to be seen in Melancthon, Respons ad articulos Bauaricos
fol. 172. Schusselburg to. 10. catal haeret. p. 30. Kemnitius 2. part Exam.
tit. de Sacram. ord p. 391. Whitaker contro. 1. q. 3. c. 11. and l. 1. de
Script. c. 3. p. 44. and l. 2. c. 10. sec. 4. Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 3. and
8. to which I ad, that Beza in colloquio Montisbelg. p. 407. says, of
extraordinary means, by which faith is infused, we have no testimony in
Scripture. Wherefore they can have no faith, that Luther had his faith by any
extraordinary means, or otherwise then Suencfeldius, Anabaptists, and
Enthusiasts pretend, that they had theirs. And hence also appears, that
Protestants nether take the right way, which God has appointed, and the
Scripture plainly declares, for to learn true faith, and divine truth by,
Protestants take no^ the right way to get right faith.
nor will learn them of those, whom God has appointed to teach and show them.
For the only way, which God (in ordinary course) has appointed, and the
Scripture declares, to learn true faith by, is by hearing Romans 10. and the
persons, whom they are to hear, are lawfully sent Preachers ibidem, the
Successors of those, of whom Christ said: Who hears ye, hears me. Luke
10. and whom he has put in his Church, for consummation of Saints Ephesians. 4.
and whom he has made the pillar and ground of truth. 1. Timoth. 3. But
Protestants seek truth by their reading, or by their discoursing or inference:
and not of Pastors, or of the pillar or ground of truth, and therefore no
meruel, if they never find truth, whiles they will not seek it, how and where
it is to be found. For where should truth be sought or found, but at the pillar
and ground of truth; And who seek it not there, are never like to find divine
faith, but at most, humane belief. And Chillingworih therefore often times L 36.
37. 62. 73. 112. 117.
professes, that Protestants have only humane and moral certainty, such as
they have of profane stories, no infallible or certainly unerring belief: and
that they have as great reason to believe there was a Heurie eight, as that
Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilat. To such profane credulity or
rather incredulity, are they fallen, who seek not truth at the pillar and
ground of truth, which is the Church Whitaker l. 1. descrip. p. p. 8. 43.
Chil^ng. c. 2. n. 12.
but profess, that they will first seek, truth, and then the Church: which is as
much, as if they said, they will seek first the end, and afterward the only
means to come to it. But now let us prove that Protestants do some times grant
that the authority of the Church is even divine, or divinely infallible.

FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. That Protestants do diverse ways confess, that the
authority of the Church in matters ^f faith, is divine or divinely infallible.
1. IN the former Tenth Chapter we showed, that Protestants do often times
confess, that the Church is infallible, at lest in fundamental points of faith,
now we will show, that some, times they confess, that she is also divinely
infallible, that is, infallible by Gods divine efficacious assistance. And
indeed it cannot be conceived, how she can be infallible in any kind of
supernatural and divine matters, and not be divinely infallible in them, that
is, infallible by Gods divine efficacious assistance, For by herself, or her
natural power, she cannot so much as know them, much less be infallible in them.

2. Calvin in Luc. 10. The testimony of our Salvation, given by men sent of
God, is no less then if he spoke from heaven. The same says confessio
Bohemica c. 14. Apologia Confess Augustanae c. de Poenitentia. perkins in
Reformed Catholic cont. 3. c* 3. and others. Whitaker l. 3 de Script. p. 4^6.
when the Church gives testimony to the Scriptures, surely this testimony is
divine, because God is the author Testimony of the Church divine.
of this testimony. Behold the testimony of the Church is divine and that
because God is Author of it. Nether can he, by the testimony of the Church,
mean the truth testified by her: because that were to equivocate, and also to
grant no more her testimony to be divine, then is the testimony of any
private man, of the Scriptures. Wherefore by the Churches testimony, he must
needs mean, The Churches testification of the Scriptures, or her act of
testifying them, to be divine, and so is no private man's testification, divine,
though he testify the same, which the Church testifies. And contr. 1. q. 3.
c. 11. Stapleton says; the judgment Judgment of the Church divine.
of the Church is divine; be it so, let the judgment of the Church be divine --
We enquire not now, whether the judgment of the Church be divine in it self,
but how we know that it is divine. Which supposes, that the Judgment of the
Church is divine, for we cannot know, that it is divine, if it be not such
indeed. And ibid. we confess, that the judgment of the Chuch is in some sort
divine, not simply, but in some part, when the testimony of the Church
conspireth with the testimony of the holy Ghost, then we confess, it is
divine. Where, by Judgment, he cannot mean, the truth judged by the Church, but
her act of judging both for what we said of testimony of the Church, as also,
because he says, her judgment is not simply divine, whereas Gods truth judged
by the Church, is simply divine, and not only in part. And the same Whitaker
l. 2. de Script. c. 7. p. 246. Ministers of the Church, are instruments of the
holy Ghost, and endued with divine Ministers endued with divine authority.
authority to govern the Church committed to them. Where, is plainly granted
to Ministers, divine authority to govern the Church, and if to govern, why not
also divine authority to testify that to be divine truth, which they teach?
Is it not as necessary to the Church, to be rightly taught, as to be rightly
governed? And if as necessary, why not divine authority granted as well for
the one, as for the other? And Authority of s^ripture equal to Christ.
contro. 1. q. 3. c. 11. p. 328. The authority of the Scripture, is no less
then the authority of Christ himself. And yet the Scripture is a create thing,
as well as the Church is. Powel l. de Adiaphoris p. 7. Such indifferent things
as by the Church have been lawfully and orderly instituted, are so far humane,
as they are also divine therefore have more then humane authority, yea plainly
divine. And if things instituted by the Things instituted by the Church
plainly divine.
Church, have plainly divine authority, surely she has divine authority to
institute them. For humane authority can institute nothing, which is plainly
divine. Nether do I think, that any judicious Protestant will deny, that the
Authority of the Church to preach Gods word and administer his Sacraments, is
truly divine, because our Savior Matthew the last, says: Al power in heaven
and earth is given to me, wherefore going, teach al nations, baptizing them etc.
And what need had he to say, Al power in heaven and earth was given to him, for
to give mere humane power to his Apostles; and also, what humane power could be
fit or sufficient to teach and administer divine word, and Sacraments? And if
Christ gave to his Apostles true divine authority to preach his word and
administer his Sacraments, he gave them also true divine authority to
testify, that it was his word and Sacraments, which they administered; because
the end of their preaching, was to persuade men, that it was his word and
Sacraments, which they administered; and God giving divine authority to the
means, must needs give the like authority to the end, because he more desires
the end, then the means, and therefore will not give less authority to obtain
the end, then he does to obtain the means.

3. Secondly, Protestants say many things of the Churches authority, which
must needs argue it to be divine. For Whitaker l. 1. de Script. p. 11. and 19.
says, It is sacriledg not to receive the Churches testimony of the Sacriledg
not to receive the Churches testimony.
Scriptures Tailor l. of liberty of prophesying sec. 9. n. 2. The authority
of the Church, is divine in its original, for it deriues immediately from
Christ. Potter sec. 1. p. 10. The good Spirit of truth and love ever assists
and mantaines that great body (the Catholic Church) Sec. 5. p. 20. The whole
Church cannot so err, as to be destroyed. For then our lords Promise of her
stable edification, should be of no value. P. 21. Nor has the Church universal
the like assurance from Christ, that she shall not err in unnecessary
additions, as she Assurance from Christ.
has for her not erring in taking away from the faith, what is fundamental and
necessary. It is comfort enough for the Church, that the lord in mercy will
secure her from al capital dangers. P. 22. That the Church shall never be robbed
of any truth, necessary to the being of the Church, the promses of Christ
assure us. P. 30. Their (General councels) authority is immediately derived and
derived and delegated from Christ. Laud in his Relation sec. 21. p. 170. That
the whole Church cannot err in doctrins absolutely fundamental, seems to be
clear by the promise of Christ, Matthew 16. The gates of hell etc. Ibid. This
power By Christ's ^romise.
(of not erring) is in it, partly by this promise of Christ. Sec. 16. p. 61.
The universal Church delivers those supernatural (fundamental) truths, by
promises of assistance. Sec. 33. p. 231. For this necessary truth, the
Apostles received the promise for themselves, and the whole Catholic Church.
Sec* 38. p. 355. The Catholic Church of Christ Infallible assistance promised.
in things absolutely necessary only, had infallible assistance promised. And
Chillingworth c. 5. p. 277. That there shall be, by divine providence, preserved
God has promised absolutely.
in the world, to the worlds end, a company of Christians who hold al things
precisely and indispensably necessary to salvation, and nothing ineuitably
destructive of it, this the Doctor affirms, that God has promised
absolutely. And is her authority not divine, which not to. receive, is
sacriledg? Is not she divinely infallible, who is infallible by Christ's
absolute promise, and the Spirit of truth his efficacious assistance? What mean
we by Divinely infallible, but infallible in this sort? Does not Laud sec. 16.
p. 91. say, That so great assistance of Christ and the B. spirit, as is
purposely given to that effect, that the authority of any company be divine
and infallible enough. And do not the forsaid Protestants confess, that such
assistance of Christ and of the B. Spirit, is purposely given to the Church in
fundamental points of faith; How then can they deny, that her authority in
such points is divine, and she divinely infallible in them?

4. Thirdly, Protestants are sometimes ashamed to say, the Authority or
testimony of the true Church is mere humane: and do but restrictly say, that
it is divine. Whitaker contro. 1. q. 3. c. 11. p. 331. It is a slander that we
make the Judgment of the Church, mere humane, which surely is false. Laud in
his Relat. sec. 16. n. 19. The tradition of the present Not more humane.
Church, is not absolutely divine. And n. 21. The voice of the Church, is not
simply divine. Sec. 10. n. 11. The Churches authority is not simply divine.
Sec. 19. n. 1. The testimony of the present Church, is not simply divine.
Potter Sec. 5. p. 15. That the Church is infallible, we do not absolutely
deny, we only deny, the Church to be absolutely infallible. Which is tacitly
to confess, that the authority or testimony of the Church, is truly divine
in some degree. For what is not merely humane, and only denied to be simply
divine, is in some degree truly divine. And what authority is in any degree
truly divine by Gods special assistance, implies contradiction, to deceive.
But why do Protestants use these ambiguous and equiuocal terms, not simply,
not absolutely, which they condemn in others, and do not speak out, and
Whitaker l. 3. p. 419. Laud Relat sec. 33. p. 247
tell plainly, whether authority of the Church in matters of faith be truly
divine by Gods efficacious assistance, or no. For if it be truly divine in any
degree by Gods efficacious assistance, that suffices to us, because it implies
contradiction, that such divine authority, should deceive or be deceived. And
as Chillingworth c. 3.. 33. p. 175. says: The Apostles, could not be the
Churches fundation, without freedom from error in all those things, which they
delivered constantly, as certain revealed truths, For if once we suppose, they
may have erred in some things of this nature, it will be utterly indiscernable,
what they have erred in, and what they have not. And in like manner I say of
the Church: That she could not be the pillar and ground of divine truth,
without freedom from error in all things which she delivers as divine truths.

4. Fourthly, they grant, that the The Rule of faith.
tradition and doctrine of the Church, is the rule of faith, and of judging
controversies by. White in defense of his way c. 3. p. 339. I grant, that the
doctrine of the Pastors of the true Church such as succeed the Apostles, is the
rule and means of faith. And c. 37. p. 356. That the Churches doctrine is the
rule, I deny not. Chillingworth l. 2. n. 155. Universal tradition, is the rule
to judge al controversies by. And c. 3. p. 148. We believe canonical books, upon
universal tradition. But the doctrine or tradition of the Church, could not be
the rule of divine and infallible faith, or of judging controversies in such
faith, if it were not also divine and infallible* For a rule, must be as divine
and infallible, as that is which is ruled by it. And as Chillingworth says.
c. 3. p. 148. cit. An authority subject to error, can be no firm or solid
foundation of my belief in any thing. Nor likewise, no firm or solid Rule.

6. Fifthly, they grant, that the voice, Cause of divine faith.
authority, or testimony of the Church is a true cause of divine faith
Whitaker l. 1. de Scriptura p. 118. The Church is Mother of beleuers. P. 121.
The Church, by preaching the Gospel, begot us to Christ. P. 175. I deny not,
that the voice of the Church, is an instrumental cause of believing. l. 3. c.
441. I exclude not the testimony of the Church from a cause of believing, if by
cause, you mean an instrument. P. 442. Thou tellest, what kind of instrument,
the Church is, to wit, not dumb or dead, but in which is its proper motion and
virtue. And who denies this, or knows not the necessity or virtue of this
instrument? Ibid. p. 425. The Church is Mistress of faith: Item. faith is the
effect of the Churches testimony. And contr. 2. q. 5. c. 19. The Church makes
faithful, by preaching of the word. And l. 1. de Scrip. p. 145. out of both
testimonies (Spirit and Church) faith is in some sort inflamed and burns.
Contr. 1. q. 3. c. 3. God reuealeth truth by the Church c. 11. We confess, God
speaks by the God speaks by the Church.
Church. And generally al Protestants confess, that the Church is: the Mother
of the faithful, and a mother; is a true cause of her Children. And if the
Church be the mother of the faithful, do beget the faithful, if her voice, her
testimony, be an instrumental cause of divine faith, if she have a proper
virtue in producing faith, if divine faith be the effect of her testimony, and
by her preaching, she make faithful, Surely, If the effect be divine, the cause
is divine.
she has a divine power or virtue. For as Whitaker confesses l. 1. de
Scriptura p. 166. The effect surpasses not the cause: and l. 3. 415. Such as
the doctrine and religion is, which we profess^ such also must the cause and
authority of believing be. So also Potter sec. 5. p. 7. Field of the Church l.
4. c. 2 Chillingworth c. 2. n 154. c. 3. n. 33. But the effect of the Church,
is truly divine, to wit, divine faith. Therefore also her testimony and is
truly divine. And indeed, how can we divinely and infallibly believe, for a
humane and fallible testimony? How can divine faith, be the effect of a humane
testimony?

SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. That Protestants do diverse ways grant, that the
Authority or Testimony of the Church is a formal cause of divine faith.
1. THis follows, first out of that they granted, the authority of the
Church in matters of S^p. c. 15. n. 2.
faith, to be divine. For doubtless, if it be divine, it may be some formal
cause of divine faith. Nay, they think (as is before showed) that if it be
divine, it may be the vltimate formal cause of divine faith. But otherwise they
grant it also. For first they confess, that the cause, why they believe the
Scripture, is, the authority of the Church. Whitaker l. 2. de Scriptura p.
320. I grant indeed, that the Ratio credend^ est prop^er quam credimus
Whitaker l. 3. de Scrip. p 442. 459.
Scripture is to be received, because (...) is received of the Church. P. 312.
Al Christians are moved by the authority of the Church to believe the Gospel.
Cont. 1. q. 3. c. 9. Al these Fathers, what other thing do they prove, then
that the Gospel is to be received, because it has always been received of the
Church: and some books to be rejected, because the Church always Because.
rejected them. This we most willingly grant. Ibid. sec. 5. p. 322. we believe
them For.
to be canonical, not for the only testimony or authority of the By.
Church, to believe these books to be canonical. And ibid. c. 1. This way seems
For.
tolerable, that Scripture is divine in it self, but not acknowledged for such,
but for the testimony of the Church. Laud Relat. sec. 15. p. 57. It Is not
denied, that this (baptism of Infants) is an Apostolical Therefore.
tradition, and therefore to be believed. Chillingworth c. 2. p. 73. we must
receive the sacred canons, upon Upon.
the credit of Gods Church. Ibid. we will Because.
say with Athanasius, That only fowr Gospels are to be received, because the
Canons of the holy Catholic Church (understand of al ages since the perfection
of the Canons) have so determined. Ibid. p. 62. We believe the Scripture upon
Upon.
the credibilitie of universal tradition. And c. 3. p. 140. We have sufficient
certainty From.
of Scripture, from universal tradition. And what can those causal particles,
Because, By, For, Upon, From, Therefore, in this matter signify, but a formal
cause of belief?

2. Hooker l. 2.. 4. There is some pause, whereon to rest our assurance (of
Pause to rest assurance or.
the Scripture) beside the Scripture, and some other thing, which may assure
us. And this pause whereon to rest our assurance, and which can assure us of the
Scripture, he says l. 5. 8. is the authority of the Church. And what is
that, which is a pause whereon we rest the assurance of our belief, but some
formal cause of our belief? Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 119. The credit of the
Scripture to be divine, Main ground.
has three main grounds. The first, is the tradition of the Church. And is not
that which is a main ground of belief, some formal cause of belief? And sec.
38. p. 344. we rely upon the infallible authority of the word of God, and
Rely upon.
the whole Catholic Church. And is not that, some formal cause of belief, upon
which we rely, as we do upon the word of God? Couel art. 4. p. Doubtless, it
is a tolerable opinion in the Church of Rome, that the Scriptures are holy and
divine in themselves, but so esteemed of us, for the authority of the Church.
And is not that For.
for which we esteem the Scriptures to be divine, some formal cause of our
esteem of them? The like has Whitaker contr. 1. q. 3. c. 1. who also l. 1. de
Script. p. 23. says; That the question, between him and D. Stapleton was,
whether we are to believe For.
the Scripture to be divine, only for the testimony of the Church, or rather
for the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost, The same he says contr. 1. q.
3. c. 1. Wherein he plainly supposes, that we are to believe the Scripture to be
divine, for the authority of the Church and only denies, that we are to
believe so, for it alone. Which al Catholics also deny. And contr. 1. q. 3. c.
3. says: Many believed Christ for the testimony of Ihon. And c. 5. p. 322.
we believe them to be canonical, not only for the authority of the Church.
Then partly for her authority. Ibid. It follows not, that we know not By.
which books be Canonical by any other testimony, then of the Church. And c.
8. Austin indeed says: he was held in the Church for testimony of Catholics,
and consent of Nations. But (as himself says l. 1. de Script. p. 39.) To
believe for the Church, and for the Churches For shows the reason of belief.
authority, shows the cause and reason of belief. The same he says p. 46.
And Chillingworth c. 2. p. 68. To say, we receive the books of the new So does
Because.
testament commonly received, because they are so, were indeed to make (Commonly
received) a rule or reason to know the Canon by. And indeed (as I said before)
what other kind of cause of belief, can these particles, Because, or For,
signify but some formal cause of belief? And the same Chillingworth c. 3. p.
152. It follows not, that because the Churches authority is warrant enough,
for us to believe some Vvarrant enough for to believe.
doctrine, touching which, the Scripture is silent, therefore it is warrant
enough, to believe these, to which the Scripture seems repugnant. Now the
doctrins which S. Austin received upon the Churches authority, were of the
first sort. Which is plainly to confess, that S. Austin received some doctrins
upon the Churches authority, and that the Churches authority is warrant
enough to believe doctrins, of which the Scripture is silent. But authority,
which is warrant enough to believe, is a formal cause of belief. Laud also sec.
16. p. 102. The key, that lets men into the Scriptures, even to this The key.
knowledge of them, That they are the word of God, is the tradition of the
Church. And p. 107. The testimony of the Church is a subseruient cause to lead
to knowledge of the author (of Scriptures) And what is the key of belief, but a
formal cause of belief: or what subseruient cause of belief, can testimony be,
but a formal cause? Hooker also l. 2.. 7. grants, that the authority of the
Church, is the key, which opens the door into The door.
the knowledge of Scripture. And Po^ter sec. 5. p. 6. The testimony of the
present Church, is the key or door, which lets men into the knowledge of divine
mysteries. And what is the key or door, in matters of belief, but some formal
cause of believing them? For (as I said before) what cause of belief, can
testimony or authority be, but formal? Wherefore if not in words, in effect
and deed, they grant the testimony or authority of the Church, to be a formal
cause of faith. Ad in vain they deny the name, when they grant the thing. For
August. 9. de ciuit c. vel l. 2. contr. Crescon. c. 2. l. 2. ad Bonif. c. 5.
Calvin 2. Instit. c. 2. 7. l. 4. c. 3.
truth consists not in words, but in things.

3. Secondly, they often times grant, that we believe By the Church, by the
testimony of the Church, and By the preaching of the Church. Whitaker l. 1. de
Script. p. 39. We believe by the Church, by the preaching of the Church. Ibid.
p. 46. That we cannot believe but by the testimony of the Church, is no
question between us. Contr. 2. q. 3. c. 3. p. 317. Many believe these
Scriptures by the Church. Which he repeateth p. 316. and 320. where headdeth:
God reuealeth by the Church, as by aministerial means. But in matter of belief,
To By testimony, and for testimony, is al one cause.
believe by or for authority by or for testimony, is al one kind of cause,
because Authority or testimony, can be no other kind of cause of belief, but
formal; nor belief, can have any other formal cause, but Authority or
Testimony. Wherefore the Scripture often times says, men believed by Ihon
Baptist, by the Apostles, by the Prophets, meaning for their testimony or
authority. And so we say, we believe by witnesses, or for their testimony.
Because, when the word B^ is said of Authority or Testimony, in respect of
belief, it can signify no other cause then For, does in the same matter, to
wit, formal. Wherefore seeing the causal particle By, does signify, that
Authority or Testimony is some kind of cause of belief, it must needs
signify the same kind of cause, which For, in that matter, does signify (as
it is al one to say, we know the conclusion by the premises, and for the
premises) but yet with this difference, that By, more signifies a subordinat
cause of belief, then For, does, and therefore it is oftener said in the
Scripture, men believed by the Apostles, or by the Prophets, then for them,
Though in other matters, By, may signify a different kind of cause, then,
For, does. And that By, and For, in matter of belief, signify the same cause
of belief, Whitaker tacitly grants, in that he often times denies, that we
believe by the Church or by the testimony of the Church, and says l. 1. de
Script. p. 7. What then Protestant^ den^e, we believe by, the testimony of the
Church.
Stapleton? Do not thou say, that we are certain by the Church, that this or
that Scripture is divine. This thou say, is that which properly is in
question. Did I say, think, put, or ascribe to thee or thine, any other thing,
when I sought the true state of the question? Behold, how plainly he
confesses, that the true state of the question between him and Catholics, is
whether we believe the Scripture to be divine by the testimony of the Church:
though in other places he would put a great L. 1. de script p 39. 46.
difference between believing by the testimony, and for the testimony of the
Church. And ibid. in Margin: To believe by the testimony of the Church, is the
plain heresy of Papists.

4. Thirdly, Protestants grant the Church of God is appointed by him, to be
witness of his divine truth, as I showed before c. 5. n. 6. But a witness, is by
his authority and testimony, a formal cause of believing what he witnesses,
and the only end of a witness, is to cause belief. And this confesses Calvin
in Acts c. 20. v. 21. saying: Testimony, is interposed to take away al doubt,
that is, to believe firmly. And out of that which has been showed in this
Chapter, it is evident that (if not in words) indeed and effect, Protestants
do grant, that the authority or testimony of the Church, is a formal cause
of divine faith: and (as I said before) to grant the thing, and deny the word
or name, is but folly: For what do we mean, when we say, the Church is a
formal subordinat cause of faith, then what they have said and granted? Thus
have we proved, that even by the confession of Protestants, the Church of God,
is infallible, at lest in fundamental points of faith, and also divinely
infallible by Christ's absolute promise, and the holy Ghosts assistance, and
also, that her authoritiein matters of faith is a formal cause of faith, though
subordinat to Gods authority, with which (in ordinary course) it makes one
total or entire formal cause of faith.

SEAVENTENTH CHAPTER. How a vicious circle is avoided, in proving the
Scripture by the Church, and the Church, by the Scripture.
1. PRotestants greatly object to Catholics, that they Laud sect. 16. p. 64.
116. Ch^ling c. 2. n. 118. c. 3. n. 27. Field. l. 4. c. 7 Morton 10. 1. Apol.
l. 1. c. 55
make a vicious circle, because they prove the Church by the Scripture, and
likewise the Scripture, by the Church. Whereas themselves use the same proof,
and have the same difficulty, and auoidles apparently (as we shall make
manifest) a vicious circle. For (as is evident by their confessions relate din
the fourteenth Chapter) commonly they teach, that the testimony of the Church
is necessary to believe the Scripture to be the word of God, and that it cannot
be known to be such, by its own light alone: and yet they prove the Church to
be the true Church, only by the scripture. Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 38. and
102. thinks to See in^^a l. 2. c. 6. se^. 2.
avoid a vicious circle, thus: That though they do mutually, yet they do not
equally confirm the authority, either of other. For the Scripture does
infallibly confirm the authority of the tradition of the Church, but
tradition does but morally and probably confirm the authority of the
Scripture. But first, it is false, that the Church does but probably confirm
the authority of the Scripture. For (as we have showed before) the Churches
testimony is a sufficient external and ministerial means to beget divine
faith: and the holy Fathers also proved sufficiently the divine verity of
Scripture (against such as denied any part of it) by the authority of the
Church: and it were to expose the credit of Scripture to the laughter of
Infidels, to say, that it cannot be proved otherwise, then probably, and that
al Christian faith of what is in scripture, relieth upon only probable proof,
that the scripture Seesup. c. 8. n. 13.
is the word of God. Besides, it is evidently falls, and no way proved, that
after the Church has probably proved; that the Scripture is the word of God,
the Scripture it self shows a clear light, that it is the the word of God.
For that the Scripture has such a clear light, either before the Churches
testimony, or after, is merely feigned without al proof; and if it had, it
would not cause faith in us, that it is the word of God (because faith is of
things not appearing) but science or knowledge. Moreover, seeing Laud and
Protestants generally confess, that the Church is infallible in fundamental
points, they cannot consequently say, that she is not infallible in this point,
That the Scripture is the word of God because they account this, the Hooker l.
1.. 14. Laudesest. 11. p. 43. sect. 16. p. 59. 65. 110. See infral. 2. 6. 11.
sect. 1.
fundation of al other points whatsoever. And what is infallible, affords an
infallible, and more then a moral and probable proof. Besides, this circle were
vicious, because the proof were not equal on either side. For on the Scriptures
side, it were infallible, and on the Churches side, but fallible. And we ask
for an infallible proof of Scripture, as well as of the Church, because we must
be infallibly assured of both: and to give us a fallible proof of the Scripture
by the Church, were to delude us. Finally I ask, if the Scripture, do
infallibly confirm the tradition of the Church (as Laud says) how does the
tradition of the Church only probably confirm the authority of the
Scripture? can not that, which is infallibly, proved or confirmed, make an
infallible proof of some other thing.

2. But Catholics far more clearly avoid al vicious circles: (For every
circular proof, is not vicious, but that only, whereby our knowledge is no way
bettered: For the effect may be proved a priori, or propter quid, by the cause,
and the cause, a posteriori, or quia, by the effect) and say, that our divine
faith of the Church, nether first rises, nor depends of the certain of the
Scripture, but only is confirmed by the Scripture; but that the certainty of
the Scripture, both first rises, and still depends (for us) on the authority
of the Church. For the true Church of God (whosoever she is) was believed more
then two thousand years before there was any Scripture, and she has
sufficient authority to testify of herself. This we prove by all the ways, by
which we proved, that she is a sufficient proposer of al points of faith. For
if of al, even of herself, that she is the true Church. For this is a point
(and a principal one) of faith. Besides, the foresaid proofs not only prove,
that she is a sufficient proposer of points of faith, but also, that she is
such of herself, or of her own authority given to her by God. For if of her
preaching, faith rises, if she be the pillar and ground of truth, if she be a
witness appointed by God, if her voice be one with the voice of Christ, her
authority is divine, and she is, even for herself, to be believed, as the
Apostles were to be believed for Sup. c. 4 ^ 5.
themselves. The Fathers also, who by her authority proved the Scriptures
against such heretics, as denied them, and (as they thought) sufficiently and
infallibly, surely did think, that she was to be believed for her own
authority. For by Scripture, they could not prove her, against such as denied
Scripture. Reason also confirms the same. For if a Disciple of Christ be to
be believed for himself, why not the Spouse of Christ, one mistical person with
him, whose head he is and whose soul, is the holy Ghost? And if S. Paul could
say I Paul say unto you: If you be circumcised, Galat. 5.
Christ will not profit you. Why not the Church? Whitaker l 1. de Script. p. 86.
says: who have such a Spirit, as Paul had, may by some judgment, testify
their Spirit. And contr. 1. q. 3. c. 3. Paul does aproue his epistles with his
own name and judgment The old and new Testament do confirm and sign one the
other. In other causes, this mutual confirmation is naught worth. But in this,
it is much worth, because none is so fit a witness of God and of his word, as God
himself in his word. And why may we not say the same of the Church, and
Scripture, which he says of the old and new Testament? because none is so fit
a witness of God, and of his Church, and of his word, as God, in his Church, and
in his word. If S. John could say of himself: we know, that his testimony is
true; why may not the Spouse C. 21.
of Christ who is one mistical person with him, and whose head, he is, to whom
he promised the assistance of the Holy Ghost to teach her al truth, and the
Holy Ghost is her soul, say the like? Protestants also, who (being enforced
by Scripture) confess, that concerning men, the Church susteineth truth, must
needs Supra c. 5. n. 3.
confess, that she is to be believed of men, for herself. For doubtless the
susteiner of truth, is to be believed for himself. Besides Chillingworth c. 2. n.
25. 1^9. and 154. grants, that Universal tradition, credible of itself. See
sup. c. 10. n. 37. c. 15. ^. 5.
Universal tradition, is credible of it self, and therefore fit to be rested on.
So that something beside Scripture, is credible of itself. And Laud Relat.
sec. 19. p. 124. says: A man may be assured by Ecclesiastical and humane
proof. And p. 125. Certain it is, that by humane authority, consent, and
proof, a man may be assured infallibly, that the Scripture is the word of God.
The same has Potter sec. 5. p. 7. who adds ibid. p. 6. That the testimony
of the present Church, is the highest humane authority. And is not the highest
humane authority, and that which can assure us infallibly, credible of it
self. As in matters known by reason, some are intelligible by them selves: so
in matters of belief, some are credible by themselves, else there would be an
endless process in such matters. Beside, some are witnesses without al
exception, and if any be such, surely the true Church of God, and witnesses
without al exception, are credible for them selves. But here we must beware of
being deceived, because as Protestants grant to the Church no other authority,
then humane, so they can grant her to be believed for herself, with no other
kind of faith, then humane. Whereas, as the Apostles had two kinds of
authorities, the one humane, as they were honest and virtuous men, the other
divine, as they were specially assisted by the holy Ghost: so the true Church
of God has the same two kinds of authorities: humane, as it is so ancient, so
great, so learned, so virtuous a company of men; and divine, as it is
specially assisted by the holy Ghost in all matters of faith And so she is to
be believed for her self, both with humane and divine faith, as the Apostles
were to be believed: and the humane authority, is no doubt, a great disposition
to the belief of the divine authority. And surely, since we must needs grant
that either the true Church of God is credible with divine faith, that she is
the true Church of God, for her self, or that these Copies which we have
written by fallible men, are credible for themselves, that they are the word of
God and conformable to their originals, no man of judgment can think, but that
rather the Church of God is so credible for herself, then such copies, as we
have, written by fallible men. For beside al other proofs, these Copies nether
do, nor can testify of themselves, that they are the word of God, or agreeable
to the original writings of the Prophets or Apostles as the true Church of God,
both can and does testify of herself, that she is the true Church of God, and
the same with that which was instituted by Christ.

3. Hence it is evident, that Catholics, proving to themselves the Church, by
the Scripture, and the Scripture, by the Church, commit no vicious Circle: For
they first prove the Church, by her own divine authority, and likewise the
Scripture, by the same authority and they do but confirm the authority of
the Church, by the Scripture. And to heretics, who deny the true Church, but
admit the Scripture (as did the Donatists) they prove the Church by the
Scripture and to other Heretics, who deny Scriptures (as did the Manichees)
they prove the Scripture by the Church. And therefore, in proving the Church,
and the Scripture, one by the other, commit no vicious Circle either in their
proof to themselves, or to Heretics. For to themselves, they prove the
Scripture to be the word of God, by authority of the Church, as by the
external and secondarie formal motive of faith; and confirm their belief of
the Church by the Scripture, as by a material object of faith, which is the
word of God. So that two ways they avoid a vicious Circle: first, because they
first believe the Church for her own authority, as for a secondarie and
subordinat authority to Gods authority, and do but confirm their belief of
the Church by the Scripture. So that belief of the Scripture to be Gods word,
depends necessarily (in ordinary course) of the Churches authority, but
belief of the Church, to be the Church of God, does not necessarily depend upon
the testimony of the Scripture, but only is confirmed thereby Secondly, because
they prove the Church by the Scripture, otherwise then they prove the Scripture
by the Church. For they prove the Scripture, by the authority of the Church,
as by a witness, and as by the external formal motive of faith, secondarie and
subordinate to Gods authority: as the Primitive Christians, proved the
Scripture by the authority of the Apostles; and they prove the Church by the
Scripture, as by a material object of faith which is Gods word, and not as by a
witness but as by a testimony of a witness. And to prove things by Gods word,
and by authority instituted by God, are different kinds of proofs, and show,
that there is no vicious Circle. If any say, that we prove the Church by the
authority of Gods word: I answer, that authority properly, is of some person,
and truth and verity, is in his word: so we prove the Church, by the truth of
Scripture; but the Scripture; we prove by the authority of the Church. And as
for our proof also of the Church by Scripture, and of the Scripture by the
Church, to Heretics, we commit no vicious circle, because we proceed so with
different heretics. For to such heretics, as admit Scripture, but deny the
Church, we prove the Church by Scripture: and to such as admit the Church, but
deny Scripture, we prove Scripture by the Church.

4. And hence also appears, how falsely said Chillingworth c. 2. n. 35. That
our Churches authority is built, lastly, and wholly, upon prudentia^ motives.
Which he repeateth again n. 70. For her authoritieis built lastly upon Gods
institution, which we know by her infallible testimony, and confirm it by
Scripture. Falsely also he said c. 3. n. 27. For the infallibility Universal
tradition, is Gods vocal word.
of the Church, no proof can be pretended for it, but incorrupted places of
Scripture. For the Churches infallibility is built principally upon Gods
authority, and secondarily upon her own, which is instituted by God, as the
Apostles infallibility, was built secondarily upon their own authority.
Prudential motives, are but rational motives, or dispositions to faith; they
are nether the principal nor subordinat formal cause of divine faith. For
divine Authority is the formal motive of faith, prudential motives, make
knowledge or opinion, not faith, and at most* can make the Churches authority
to be evidently credible, but cannot make it to be credited or believed with
divine faith.

EIGHTENTH CHAPTER. How we are to answer that question Wherefore or how we
believe or know the Church to be Infallible.
1. OVT of that which has been hitherto said, is clearly answered that
question: How or Wherefore we believe or know the true Church of God to be
absolutely infallible in all which she teaches, as matter of faith. Laud sec.
16. p. 60. says: The tradition of the Church taken alone cannot be a
sufficient proof to believe by divine faith, that Scripture is the word of God.
For that which is a full and sufficient proof, is able of it self, to settle the
soul of man, which Tradition is not alone able to do. For it may be further
asked, why we should believe the Churches Tradition? And if it be answered,
Because the Church is infallibly governed by the holy Ghost, it may be
demanded: How that may appear; And if th^^ be demanded, either you must say you
have it by special Revelation, or else you must attempt to prove it by
Scripture. And the very offer to prove it by Scripture, is a sufficient
ackno^ledgment, that the Scripture is a higher proof, then the Churches
tradition, which in your own ground, is or may be questionable, til you come
thither. Besides it is an inviolable ground of reason, that the Principles of
any conclusion. Thus he, whose words I have related at large that I might not
seem to dissemble the difficulty.

2. First therefore we must note, that Belief and Knowledge are different. For
Belief, is a simple assent for the authority of the speaker. Knowledge (if it
be not of such things as are evident of themselves, as that the whole is
greater then a part, and such like) is discursiue, inferring one thing out of
an other. Therefore these are different questions: Wherefore we know the Church
to be infallible in all matters of faith: and, Wherefore we believe her to be so
infallible: And we will answer to both questions differently and distinctly. To
the question: Wherefore we believe the Chrch to be infallible: I answer that if
you demand the material Gods vocal word the material object of faith.
object of my belief thereof, it is Gods vocal word, uttered to me by the
Church. For (as is showed before out of the Apostle) Faith is of hearing, and,
Hearing, is by the vocal word of God uttered by the Church. And for this vocal
word of God as his testimony, the Church was believed to be infallible, before
there was any Scripture; and of the aforesaied Barbarians, who had no
Scripture; and could be so believed, though al Scripture should perish. And this
Luther, and other Protestants before cited do confess, when they say: The
Church is conceived, bred by the vocal word of God. Supra c. 14. ^. 1. and 3.


3. And if you ask the formal object, for whose authority we believe the Church
to be thus infallible? I answer; For the authority of God, principally, and
for the authority of the Church, (which is the pillar and ground of faith,)
subordinatly. As we believe what the Ambassador says, principally, for the
King, who sent him, and subordinatly for the authority of the Ambassador
himself, as appointed by the king. And as before any Scripture was written,
Prophets were believed, not for any Scripture, but principally for the
authority of God, who sent them, and secondarily, for their own Prophetical
authority, instituted by God. Wherefore we need not (as Laud thinks) prove
the Church to be infallible, either by special revelation, or by Scripture, as
Chillingworth, says c. 3. p. 141. Because beside the private word of God (which
is by special revelation) and his publik written word, Publik vocal word of God
Videsup. c. 14. n. 1.
which is Scripture, there is also his publik vocal word, which he utters and
speaks by the mouth of the Church, as well as there is his written word, which
he wrote by Whitaker l 3. descript. p. 414. Spiritus per as Ecclesia loquitur ^ic
etiam cont. 1. q. 3. c. 11. and cont. 2. q. 4. c. 2. Qu^ ecclesiam audiunt
Christum ipsum audiunt.
the hands of his prophets and Evangelists. And Gods word (by whom soever it
is, either spoke nor written) is of equal authority, and his vocal word,
equally to be believed, as his written. Wherefore we have no need to prove the
Church to be infallible by the Scripture (as there was no need, nor
possibility by it, to prove that, or any other point of faith, before any
Scripture, was written) unless it be against such heretics, as believe the
Scripture, but believe not the Church. But Catholics do only confirm their
faith (which before they had of the infallibility of the Church by Gods vocal
Gods vocal word, confirmed by his. written.
word uttered by the Church) by his written word of the Scripture. As we use to
be confirmed in the belief of a thing, which a man does not only say by word of
mouth, but also by writing.

4. And moreover it is not always necessary (as laud thinks) that the mean
of knowing, be more known, then the thing known by it: as when they mutually
make each other known, as Relatiues and the Cause and proper Effect do. For in
these, a Circle is not vicious. As from a Father, we prove a son, and from a
son, a Father, From Rational, Risible, and from Risible, Rational; from the
suns rising, the Day; and from the Day, the suns rising. And (as Whitaker
says contr. 1. q. 3. c. 3. of the old and new Testament) Somethings mutually
prove each other.
The old and new Testament do mutually confirm one the other. In other
matters, this mutual confirmation would not avail, but in this it avails
much. For none is so fit a witness of God and of his word, as God in his word.
And contro. 2. q. 5. c. 18. As the cause does bring forth and show the effect;
so the effect in like manner does illustrat the cause. Ibid. c. 9. Relatiues
are not before or after one the other. And lib. 3. contra Dureum sec. 3. does
this seem ridiculous to the, to seek the word out of the word? White in his
Defense p. 301. It is no more a Circle in us, to prove our Spirit by the
Scripture, and again to be assured of the Scripture, by the Spirit, then it is
in discourse to go too and and fro, between causes and effects. The like he
has in his way p. 117. Field in his Appendice part. 2. p. 16. That the cause
may be proved by the effect, and the effect by the cause: and that such a kind
of argumentation, is not a circulation, but a demonstratiue regress: that two
causes may becauses either of other, we make no question. Calvin 1. Instit. c.
9.. 3. God has joined together the certainty of his word and Spirit, with a
mutual knot. The samesay I of Gods vocal word, uttered by the Church, and his
written word, signed by the Evangelists, that they mutually confirm each
other: yet with this difference, that the true Church gives sufficient
testimony to her self, sufficient (I say) to believe her with divine faith, to
be the true Church of God, because her authority in matters of faith, is
divine, as the Apostles was, and therefore needs not the testimony of the
Scripture to be believed to be such: (as Christ gave sufficient testimony to
himself Joan. 5. S. Ihon Baptist to himself. If particular men were credible of
themselves, why not the whole Church of God.
Math. 3. S. Ihon Evangelist to himself. Joan. 21. and S. Paul to himself
Galat. 1. 2. Cor. 4. and so does the pillar and ground of truth, to her self.)
But the Scripture gives not sufficient testimony of it self to be infallibly
believed to be Gods word, but needs authority of some infallible Author, or
Person; because Scripture is only the material object, which is to be believed,
and authority is the formal object or cause of belief, without which there can
be no true or formal belief, but only science or opinion. For as S. Austin
says: That we believe, we owe to authority. And Whitaker l. 3. de Script. p.
408. Faith relieth upon authority. Authority is the foundation of faith. Yet
Scripture being believed to be Gods word, is a sufficient testimony to confirm
the belief already had of the Church, and also to produce such belief in those,
who believe not the Church. And thus much for answer to that question: How we
believe the Church to be infallible? For we first believe the Church God speaks
by, the mouth of the Church Whitaker l. 3 de Scrip 414. so also Contr. 1 q. 3.
c. 11. see c. 4. n. 4. and c. 14. n. 1.
to be infallible, for Gods vocal word uttered by the Church: And we are
confirmed in that belief, for Gods written word in the Scripture. And to
Catholics, we give Gods vocal word, as the first subordinat cause of that our
belief; but to such, as believe the Scripture, and not the Church, we give only
Gods written word. And therefore no marvel, if to Protestants, who admit not the
authority of Gods Church, or his vocal word, we prove the infallibility of
the Church, only by Scripture; whereas if they did equally admit, as well Gods
vocal word, as his written word, or his true Church, as his Scripture, we
might, without any vicious Circle at al, mutually prove Gods vocal word by his
written word, and his written, by his vocal, and his Church by his Scripture,
and his Scripture by his Church, because Gods testimony is sufficient for proof
of whatsoever, and by what means soever it be uttered, to wit, by speech, by
writing, or howsoever else. Wherefore this is no vicious Circle: God says by
his Church, that God speaks by his Church, Whitaker supra.
such Scripture is his word. Therefore it is so. God says by his Scripture,
that such are his Church: Therefore they are so.

5. And as for answer to the question: How know you the true Church to be
infallible in all matters of faith? I say, that beside the reasons, grounded in
Scripture, given before, we may give a natural reason thereof. For (as S. Austin
says rightly (If God have L. de v^il. cred. c. 16.
providence of mankind, he has on earth settled some authority, on which we
relying, may mount to him. And this authority must not be blind or deceiptful
in matters of salvation (as al matters of faith are) as al fallible authority
is, and therefore is infallible in all such matters: And (as the same S. Austin
says of the Scripture, that if the lest lie be found in it, the authority of
all the rest fails: so if in the authority, which God has settled on earth
for matters of Salvation, there were found any error, we could not securely
rely upon it. And the same reason teaches us, that if God would setle this
infallible authority on earth in any, he would setle it in his Church who is
his beloved Spouse, and Mother of the Faithful, whom he has appointed to
conceive them by the divine seed of his word to bear, nourish, and guide them
in their way to salvation. For who can be imagined to be more fit to be
infallible in matters of Salvation, then the spouse of God, the mother, Nurse,
and Guide of the Faithful? Would God apoint to mankind a blind or deceiptful
guide to salvation? surely no, if he effectually meant to save mankind.
Nether, will it suffice to grant, (as Protestants do) that the Church is
infallible in fundamental points: first, because there are no fundamental points
(...) their sense, that is, such as suffice to salvation, though others
sufficiently proposed, be not believed. Secondly, because if (as S. Austin said
of the Scripture) she lie in some points of faith, we cannot be sure she does
not in others. Wherefore well said Chillingworth c. 3. n. 36. An authority
subject to error, can be no stable or firm foundation of my belief in any
thing. Thirdly, because Protestants cannot tell, which precisely are such
fundamental points, as they imagine, and therefore cannot be certain, in which
points the Church erreth not. Fourthly, because they say the Church is fallible
even in their most fundamental point of al, which is, That Scripture is the
word of God, and sometimes also, in other fundamental points, as is showed
part 1. l. 1. c. 7. Fifthly, Chillingworth denies, that there is any one
certain Church, universal or particular, which is infallible, even in
fundamental points, but only, that there are always some uncertain men, who
hold all the fundamental points and therefore denies, that any certain Church
is an infallible Guide even in fundamentals: and says c. 2 n 139. p. 105. you
must know, there is a wide difference between infallible in No certain Church
infa^lible even ^^fundamental points.
fundamentals, and being an Infallible guide even in fundamentals, and we
utterly deny the Church to be the latter. For to say so, were to oblidge
ourselves to find some certain society of men, of whom we might be certain,
that they nether do, nor, can err in fundamentals nor in declaring, what is
fundamental, what not fundamental, and consequently, to make any Church an
infallible Guide in fundamentals, would be to make it infallible in all things
which Note this.
she proposes, and requires to believed Which he often times repeateth c. 3.
as n. 39. 55. 58. and 60. where he adds: that it is falsely supposed, that
they grant, that in some certain points No certain Church to be obeyed under
pain ^f damnation.
(fundamental) some certain Church is infallibly assisted, and under pain of
damnation to be obeyed. So that no certain Church (universal or particular) is
either an infallible Guide, or to be believed, or obeyed under pain of damnation
even in fundamental points. Beside The Church, and Some Church, are different.
For The Church signifies the whole true Church, as himself confesses c. 5. n.
26. p. 263. or, The only true Church, as Laud says sec. 20 p. 128 and Some
Church signieth some indeterminate partilar Church. Therefore The Church, cannot
be said to be infallible in fundamentals, if only Some Church be so. For Some
Church is not The Church.

6. Nether can this necessary authority settled by God for mankind, be said
to be in Scripture, because Scripture was nether in all times, (for there was
none before Moises) nor in all places; (for in S. Ireneyes time, there were
many good Christians, See infr^ c. 20.
who had no Scripture) nor can serve immediately by it self for all kinds of men.
For scripture can not immediately by it self, teach those, who are blind, or
cannot read, as mo^st men cannot. And to teach of guide them by the reading of
men, who are fallible, were no infallible guidance. Besides, Protestants
confess, that Scripture is hard to be understood, and needs Interpreters,
even in matters of faith, in which See infral. 2 c. 4. sec. 2. and c. 2. sec. 2
matters it cannot be a sufficient guide. For (as Chillingworth c. 1. n. 6.
says of a Rule) Both these Properties are required to be a perfect rule, both
to be so complete, as to need no addition, and to be so evident, as to need no
Interpretation; so I say of a Guide or authority to direct, if it be not
evident, it is no sufficient guide or authority, because without euidencie, it
cannot serve for sure direction. Moreover, Scripture cannot but improperly be
called a guide, (but as a Rule may be called a Guide,) or a Judge. For properly
a Guide or Judge, is a living person, who may direct by Rule. But of this we
shall speak more hereafter.

7. And out of al which has been said in this Chapter, appears, how
wrongfully Laud said, first, that we must know the Church to be infallible
either by special reuealation, or by Scripture. For there is a third way, to
wit, by Gods vocal word uttered by the Church it self, as when the Apostles
lived, we might have known them to be infallible, by their own testimony,
which was Gods vocal word. Secondly, he falsely says, that to prove the Church
by the Scripture, is a sufficient acknowledgment; that the Scripture is of a
higher proof. For Christ and the Apostles proved their doctrine out of the old
testament, and yet the old testament was not a higher proof then their doctrine.
And in like sort the Fathers proved Scripture by the Church* and (as I said
before) Relatiues, and such as mutually and equally make each other known, are
of equal proof, each to other. Thirdly, how wrongly he said, that it is an
inviolable ground of reason, that the principles of any conclusion must be of
more credit, then the conclusion it self. For this is not true in Relatiues,
and such others, as are equally known and equally infer one the other. And that
principle is true only in such Consequents, as are not as well known, as the
Antecedents, but known only for the Antecedents, as most consequents are, as
may appear out of that Maxim, of which that principle depends, to wit:
Propter quod vnumquodque tale, and illud magis. Which is plainly meant of that,
which is the sole cause of the knowlegd of an other. But Scripture is nether
the sole cause, nor yet the first cause of our assurance of the true Church*
but the first cause, is principally Gods authority, and secondarily the
Churches divine authority instituted by him (as it was in his Apostles) and
also Gods vocal testimony or word uttered by his Church; and Gods written
testimony signed in Scripture by his divine Scribes, is but a confirmation of
our assurance of his true Church. And God may well confirm by writing, what he
has spoken; and yet be equally credited by what he speaks, as by what he
writes; because his veracitie is infinite, and equally infallible in both. And
hitherto we have sufficiently proved, that Gods true Church (which soever she
is) wants not either Infallibility or necessity required to be the
sufficient external Proposer of faith appointed by God; it rests, that we
show, that she wants, nether sufficient Claritie, nor universality,
requisite to be that external Proposer, and to show, which proposal of hers, is
sufficient and requisite for to cause faith.

NINETENTH CHAPTER That the true Church of God does clearly and universally
propose al points of faith.
1. IN the third Chapter we showed, that four conditions are necessary to the
al* sufficient external Proposer of al points of faith, to wit, Infallibility,
Necessity, Claritie, and Universality: and hitherto we have proved, that the
true Church of God has the two first conditions It remains that we also
show, that she has also the two latter, to wit, Claritie in clearly proposing,
what is to be believed, and Universality, in proposing it to al, who are
capable of external proposal, and in all times, and places, where faith is to be
proposed.

2 And for Claritie, it is evident, that the Church of God clearly enough
proposes to her Children, and to others, what they are to believe, and if any
doubt arise of her meaning, she calls General Councels, and expresses it
more clearly, as was seen in the Council of Nice, ad others. And as for
Universality of time and place, it is evident, that it agrees to Gods true
Church, because she has been in all times, and is dispersed all the world over,
whersoeuer faith is preached. And the like is of her proposing al points of
faith.

3. And finally, that in the true Church, is lawful sending to preach points of
faith, is undoubted. And so have we proved, that the true Church of God (which
soever she is) has all the conditions requisite to the al or absolute sufficient
external proposer of al points of divine faith, which God will have men to
believe, and consequently, is that al* sufficient external proposer of faith,
which we ought to seek.

TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Which is a sufficient proposal of the Church, for points of
faith.
1. A sufficient proposal of the Church for points of faith, is when she
clearly declares a matter to be of faith: or when she condemns the
contrary, as heresy, and excludes out of her communion al obstinat or
pertinacious mainteiners of it. See D. Stapleton l. 1. de Principijs c. 11. But
only Excommunication does not convince, that the Church accounts it Heresy,
because she may excommunicate even for holding doctrines that are temerarious or
scandalous.

THE SECOND BOOK. OF THE EXTERNAL PROPOSER OF POINTS OF FAITH.
THE PREFACE.
1. ALBEIT Scripture cannot be properly called a Proposer of points of faith,
because a Proposer, properly is an intellectual person, as the word it self
evidently shows, and much less can it be the Proposer appointed by God as
necessary (in ordinary course) to engender divine faith, because such a
Proposer is a Preacher lawfully sent of God, by hearing of whom, divine faith
is engendered, as is evident by the Apostle Romans 10. and Scripture nether is a
Preacher, nor is (in ordinary course) necessary to engender divine faith, as
we shall clearly prove hereafter; neuertheless because the letter of Scripture is
a Proposal of points of faith, though we cannot properly enquire, whither
Scripture propose al points of faith, because that is the part of a Proposer,
yet we may well enquire, whether in Scripture, or by Scripture, al points of
faith, which are any ways necessary te be believed of any kind of men, be
sufficiently proposed, as Protestants commonly affirm, and Catholics ever
deny. So that whether the letter of Scripture be a Proposal of points of faith,
or a Proposer of them, we may enquire, whether by Scripture al such necessary
points be sufficiently proposed or no. Yet before we enquire this, we will show
the uncertainty of Protestants touching al things belonging to Scripture, that
even thereby it may clearly appear, that howsoever they say, that the Scripture
is the Judge, the entire Rule, or All-sufficient Proposer of al matter of faith,
they can, indeed think nothing less.

FIRST CHAPTER. Whether S. James Epistle be Canonical Scripture and Gods
word, or no?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
CALVIN in praefat. in epistolam ^acobi. I do willingly without controversy
embrace it (Epistle of S. James) because I find no sufficient cause to reject
it.

Whitaker ad Rationem 1. Campiani. We receive it and number it among the
Canonical books. For whatsoever Luther or any other thought of it, yet our
Churches do willingly embrace it. Contro. 1. q. 1. c. 16. our Church receaueth
al, and only those books of the New testament, which the Council of Trent
received. If Luther, and others who follow Luther, otherwise thought, or wrote
of some books of the New testament, as the Epistles of James and Jude let them
answer for themselves.

Nether need we cite any more, because both the French, English, and Holland
Confessions, account S. James Epistle, Canonical.

SECOND SECTION. Protestants sometimes deny.
LVther in c. 22. Genes. to. 6. fol. 282. James concludes il. It Luther said,
S. James d^ated.
follows not as James doateth: Therefore the fruits do justify. Let therefore
our adversaries be packing with their James And praefat. in Epistol. Iacobi: I
do not think this was written of any Apostle, for this cause. For it is
directly against S. Paul, and al other Scripture, it attributes Justification
to works.

Melancthon de sacris Concionibus to. 2. fol. 23. If it cannot be mitigated
with some exposition, as that of James, you see etc. such simply are not to be
received.

Magdeburgians Cent. 1. c. 4. The Epist. of James does not a little stray S.
James ascribes justification to works.
from the Apostolical doctrine, whiles it adscribeth justification to works, and
not to faith alone. And Cent. 2. c. 4. The Epistle of James adscribeth justice
to works, against S. Paul, and al other Scriptures.

Pomeranus, the first Protestant Pastor of Wittenberg, in c. 4. Epist. S. James
erreth.
ad Romans By this place thou may epsy the error of the Epistle of James, in
I^^erreth ridiculously.
which thou see a wicked argument, beside that he ridiculously infers, he
cites Scripture against Scripture which the Spirit cannot suffer. Wherefore it
cannot be numbered among the books which preach justice.

Confessio Heluetica c. 15. The same he (S. James) said not contradicting the
Apostle, otherwise he were to be rejected. Which they would never say if they
were assured that it were Gods word: For I suppose, they would not reject Gods
word in any ca^e.

Musculus in locis Tit. de Iustificatione: they object to us the places of
James. But whosoever he was though ^e taught differently from Paul, he could
not prejudice truth. And he adds: Imperti^ently.
That he impertinently brings in the example of Abraham, that he abuses the
word, Faith, and sets down a sentence different from Apostolical doctrine.
And Tit. de Scripturis plainly a^uocheth that he holds it not for Authentical.

Hence it is evident, that Protestants agree not about their Canon or Rule of
their faith. For Lutherans reject S. James Epistle as also diverse others, which
Caluinists account part of the Rule of their faith, and part of Gods word.
Evident also, that Caluinists must judge their brothers Lutherans to have a
most desperate cause. For (as Whitaker writes Respon. ad Rat. 1. Campiani) who
cannot defend their religion unless they lay violent hands upon the Scripture,
and break the sacred authority of divine books, they must needs have a
naughty and desperate cause. But so do al Protestants who deny S. James
Epist. Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 1. Al corruption of Gods word, deserves
Gods thunderbolt. And the same Whitaker l. 2. de Script. p. 218. It is most of
al necessary, that the Sic etiam cont 1. q. 3. c. 3. A certain Canon, most
necessary.
certain Canon of Scriptures be undoubted among Christians. But so it is among
Protestants. For they are not agreed about the certain Canon of Scriptures. And
yet as Laud says sec. 38. n. 8. What scripture is Canonical, is a great
point of faith. Sec. 3. n. 12. If she (the Church) at this day reckons vpmore
books within the Canon then heretofore she did, then she is changed in a main
point of faith, the Canon of scripture. And Hooker l. 1.. 14. Of things
necessary, the very chiefest, is to know, what books we are bound to esteem
holy. See infra c. 15. n. 7.

SECOND CHAPTER. Whether al things that are in Scripture, be plain and easy
to be understood, or no?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
LVther de seruo arbitrio to. 2. fol. 426. It is published by the wicked
Sophisters, that some things in Scripture are hard, and that al are not open.
Ibid. fol. 440. I say of all the No part of Scripture, obscure.
Scripture: I will not have any part of it to be said obscure. In psalm. 37.
to. 3. fol. 10. If any of their (Papists) number appeal and say, we need the
exposition of Fathers the Scriptures are obscure, Thou shall answer that this
is false. No book in all the world is more clearly written, then the Scripture,
which if it be compared with all other books, is like to the sun before al other
light. Whereupon said Tailor in his Epistle dedicat: of his liberty of
Prophesing p. 47. so confident Luther sometimes was, as he said, he could
expound al Scripture.

Gerlachius to. 1. Disp. 1. p. 9. We say, all the Scripture is so clear, as it
Al scripture clear.
needs no interpretation at al.

Zanchius de Scriptura to. 8. col. 408. How can the Scripture be called obscure
in any part of it? Et col. 409. If the Scripture be not obscure in any
part, as we showed before, much less in In every part.
those things, which are necessary to Salvation.

Whitaker contro. 1. q. 4. p. 341. All the Scripture, The whole Scripture, is
plain and clear.

Plessie of the Church c. 5. p. 152. The word of God is perfect, and easy to
be understood of those that desire their salvation, as well of it self, as
compared with it self c. 4. p. 111. S. Peter says not, that there is any
obscurity in the Epistles of S. Paul.

Brentius in his Prolegomenies contra Sotum, They babble, that the scripture is
obscure, and therefore needs interpretation.

Sutclif in his Challenge c. 3. p. 94. Papists slander the scriptures, as if
they were dark, and hard to be understood. And thus they write, when they
exhort al men, weemen, and Children, to read the Scripture, or say, that they
know every parcel of the Scripture to be Gods words by the matter contained
therein. For how can they know every part of the Scripture to be Gods word by
the matter, unless they know the matter of every part thereof?

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
LVther praefat. in psalmos: It is Impudency to brag of understanding al
Scripture.
most impudent rashness to say, one understands any book of scripture in all
points.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 4. c. 1. We never said, that al things in scripture
are easy plain, nothing obscure, nothing hard to be understood: but we openly
confess, that many places of scripture are obscure and hard. Ibid. Luther was
far from that madness, to say, that nothing in the scriptures is hard, and that
it need no interpretation. C. 3. p. 340. When the^ prove, that there is great
difficulty to understand scripture, they dispute not against us. Et c. 4. p.
345. Nether did we ever say or think, that al things in scripture be open. Lib.
1. de Script. p. 56. What man on earth can thou find, who understands all the Mysteries of scriptures, who is ignorant of nothing, who can declare al?
See him p. 102. and 149.

Potter sec 5. p. 19. How many obscure texts of scriptures, which she (the
Church) understands not? Moulins of the Judge of Controversies c. 17. p. 281.
Whosoever should vaunt of the understanding al scripture, should vaunt of^
perfection, to which the Angels are not comen, as I think. Chillingworth c. 3..
25. some texts of scripture are so obscure and ambiguous, that to say, this and
this is the certain sense of them, were high presumption. Morton tom. High
presumption.
1. Apologiae l. 1. c. 19. denies, that this is the Controversy betwixt
Catholics and Protestants: Whether scripture be of it self so plain, as it
needs no interpreter.

Plessie of the Church c. 4 p. 113. yea, but yet are not there some places (in
Scripture) plainly known to be hard? Who can deny that.

Field l. 4. Eccles. c. 15. There is no question, but there are manifold
difficulties in the scripture.

Fulk against Heskins p. 7. who is so mad to deny, but that there are diverse
places both in the old and new testament, which be obscure and hard to be
understood, not only of the ignorant, but even of the best learned: Idem p. 12.

And if it be impudency, and madness, for any to say, He understands the
Scripture in all points, how can Protestants say, they know the Scripture to be
the word of God by the matter thereof (as diverse Protestants do say, who
affirm that all the Scripture is infallibly known to be the word of God, not by
the authority, or testimony of the Church of God, but by the matter thereof.

THIRD CHAPTER. Whether al points necessary to be belued, be actually or
expressly in scripture or no.
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
THe confession of Scotland c. 18. In which (Canonical books) we affirm, al
things to be Sufficiently expressed.
believed for man's salvation, are sufficiently expressed.

Luther in Postilla in ferias S. Stephani: Nothing is to be affirmed, but what
is expressed in scripture.

Melancthon and Brentius in Hospin. part 2 Histor. Sacram. fol. 107. Of
Zuinglius his doctrine, we cannot be certain, seeing of it, we have no clear and
express word of God.

Smidelin l. contra Hosium p. 169. Faith is not faith, but an uncertain
opinion, which does not rely upon some express testimony of scripture.

Wigandus apud Schusselburg to. 7. Catal. Heret. p. 681. Only those dogmes are
to be auoched and taught Whose very words, or equivalent are in Scripture.
in the Church, whose very words, or equivalent, are in Scripture.

Protestants in Conference at Ratisbone sess. 10. p. 310. There cannot by the
Churches testimony any new or peculiar dogme be devised, which afterward may
be added to the other dogmes expressed in Scripture.

Calvin in Gratulat. ad Praecentorem p. 337. Nothing is to be believed, which is
not expressed in Scripture. Contra Heshusium p. 844. where is the express word
of God, the touchstone?

Moulins l. contra Peron. c. 45. We receive no doctrine as necessary to
salvation, unless it be in Scripture, either in express terms or equivalent.
Epist. Either in express terms or equivalent.
3. ad Episcopum Wintoniensem p. 183. The Principle, by which our religion
mainteineth it self against Papistrie is: which are of divine law, are
sufficiently and evidently contained in Scripture. And D Andrews answering,
admits this Principle: For those things, which belong to faith and manner of
life. Whitaker contr. 1. q. 6. c. 6. we say, Al things necessary, either to
faith or life, are plainly and Abundantly expressed.
abundantly expressed in Scripture. See him l. 3. de script. c. 12. p. 419.

Laud Relat. sec. 33. p. 268. If the Popes decision be infallible, legant: Let
them read it to us out of the holy Scripture, and we believe it.

Morton in his Appeal. l. 1. c. 2. sec. 15. In all doctrins of faith, we are to
adheare precisely to the written word, as unto the sufficient and infallible
rule of faith. Tom. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 46. The holy Scripture is to be held for
the only rule of faith. The absolute rule of faith, the total rule of the
Church. And c. 49* A most exact rule.

Tailor of Liberty of Prophesing sec. 9. n. 4. In scripture, all that is
necessary, is plain.

King James in his speech to the Parliament An. 1603. My faith is grounded upon
the Scriptures, and the express word of God.

Fulk in Acts c. 15. Al things necessary to salvation, are expressed in the
holy Scripture.

Perkins contr. 16. c. 2. we say, that al things, which belong to faith, and
good life, and are necessary to salvation, are clearly expressed in Scripture.

Chillingworth in the praeface n. Clearly expressed.
21. Moderate Protestants will damn no man, without express and certain warrant
from Gods word. See ib. n. 10. 30. 37. Item. p. 18.

Author Praefationis in to. 5. Iesuiticae doctrinae impressae Rupellae 1596.
calls it a detestable lie, That Scripture contains not all the mysteries
Explicitly.
of religion, explicitly.

Vorstius Respons. ad Sladum: what is necessary to be believed, is contained
word for word in Scripture. Who will see more Protestants, that there is no
necessary point of faith, which is not expressly in Scripture, may read
Kemnitius 2. part Exam. tit. de Sacram. ibid. tit. de Missa 3. part tit. de
Inuocat. Sanctor. l. de duabus naturis c. 30. apud Hospin in concordia discordi
c. 47. Gerlachius to. 2. disput 24. Heshusius apud Hospin l. cit. c. 46. and l
de reali praesentia contra Caluinum, Scusselburg to. 8. Catalog. p. 64. and
520, Heidelbergenses in Colloquio Mulbrunen si act 11. Sadeel praefat. Respons.
ad art. abiurat p. 403. Tract. de sacrificio c. 3. King James in Basilicon
Doron. part. 1. Morton 1. part. Apol. l. 2. c. 9. Lobechius disp. 23.

And what they mean by Express terms, Couel. art. 2. p. 20. declares thus: we
call that expressliteral mention What Protestants means by Express.
which is set down in plain terms, and not inferred by way of consequence. And
the same is evident by the words of Hunnius, Whitaker, Fulk, and King James,
which we shall presently city. So that nothing is express in Scripture, if it
needs our inference: and nothing matter of faith, which needs our inference
out of Scripture, if either al points of faith be express in Scripture, as the
aforesaid Protestants teach; or we believe not any one article of faith, by
fallible authority of humane deductions, as Laud says Relat. sec. 38. p.
345. or (as Whitaker says l. 1. de script. p. 50.) That thou say, our
faith relieth upon testimonies, not arguments I grant.

And generally al Protestants, when they refuse to believe any point, or urge
us to prove out of Scripture, what they refuse to believe not, require and exact
express words of Scripture, as is to be seen in their writings about sacrifice,
Transubstantion, Invocation of Saints, and the like; In so much as Morton 1.
part Apol. l. 2. c. 9. alleges these words of Bellarmin, for to show the
consent of Protestant: They al teach, that al things necessary to salvation,
are expressly contained inscriptures: And Morton adds: What Protestants think,
and how much they consent, thou have showed. But when themselves are to prove
any thing controuerted, out of Scripture, they sing an other song as shall by
and by appear.

Besides, many Protestants argue, that such a thing is not, because it is not
express in Scripture. So Beza in Confess. c. 5. sec. 5. Heshusius l. de reali
praesentia. Iacobus Andreae contra Hosium p. 169. Kemnitius 2. part Exam. p.
229. Gerlachius to. 2. disput. 24. Chilling. Praeface n. 10. and others, which
plainly shows, That sometimes they require to a point of faith, that, it be
expressly in Scripture.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
PRotestants in the Conference at Ratisbon. sess. 3. p. 95. This Rule shall
stand against all the Gates of Hell: Nothing is to be admitted as a dogme or
article of religion, but what is expressed in scripture, or may be drawn from
thence in good Consequence. Sess. 11. p. 356. Not only those things are extant
in scripture, which are there in express words, but also those, which may be
thence deduced by good Consequence. Sess. 13. p. 386. I finally conclude, that
Good consequence suffices.
nothing is to be believed, in worship, articles and dogmes, which is not either
expressly contained in scripture, or may in good consequence be drawn from it.

Wirtenbergenses Respon. 1. ad Patriarcham Constantinop. We embrace al those
things, which may be proved out of scripture in good Consequence.

Confession of England art. 6. The holy scripture contains al things
necessary to salvation: so that what is not read in it, nor can be proved out
of it, is not to be required of any to be believed as an article of faith, or
as necessary to salvation.

Pareusl. 1. de Iustificat. c, 16. That we must vaunt of the express word of
God, and recall al our dog^nes to this one Express word of God, not always
required.
head, is an express lie.

King James Respon. ad Cardinal. Peron. p. 401. We have set down, that only
those things are to be thought necessary to salvation, which either are
expressly contained in the word of God, or have been drawn from it by necessary
consequence. And p. 392. The King calls those simply necessary, which either
the word of God expressly commands to be believed or done: or which the ancient
Church has inferred out of the word of God by necessary consequence.

Iuel in his Defense of the Apology c. 9. p. 54. we say not, that al Not al
points plainly expressed.
cases of doubt, are by manifest and open words plainly expressedin the
Scriptures: for so there should need no exposition. But we say, there is no
cause in Religion, so dark and doubtful, but it may be necessarily proved or
reproved by (our) collection and conference of the Scriptures.

Cartwrightin Whitgifts Defense p. 82. Many things are both commanded and
forbidden, of the which there is no express mention in the word, which Many
commanded things not expressed.
are as necessary to be followed, or avoided as those, whereof express mention
is made. Which (says Whitgift) I take to derogate much from the perfection of
the Scripture, to be mere Papistical.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 9. Whatsoever is inferred or gathered out of
Scripture, though hardly, al such, the ancient Fathers most truly said was
written. And Controu. 4. q. 4. c. 1. It is al one to be expressly in Scripture,
Alone, to be expressed and inf^rred
and to be evidently inferred out of Scripture.

Fulk in answer to Clarks overthrow p. 659. We are willing to acknowledge and
admit (necessary Collection) to be of as great authority, as Of as great
authori^^e.
the express word of the Scripture In Reioinder to Bristow. p. 97. Bristow
slandereth me, to affirm, that in all matters, only evident scripture, must be
brought, and heard, which I never affirmed. P. 88. I mean by only Scripture,
whatsoever is taught by plain As good.
words, or may be gathered by necessary conclusion, which is as good as
express words. So also 2. Thessal. 2. not. 19. and de Success. p. 74.

White in Defense of his way p. 288. No Protestant affirms al things to be
written expressly.

Laud in his Relation sec. 38. p. 332. It is enough to ground belief upon
necessary consequence out of Scripture, as well as upon express text. As well.


Potter sec. 5. p. 3. That this (divine) Revelation, for all necessary points,
is sufficiently and clearly made in the Scriptures, either in express terms, or
by manifest deductions, is the constant doctrine of Antiquity, even til the
latter times.

Chillingworth in his Preface n. 28. I believe al things evidently contained in
them (Scriptures) al things evidently, or even probably deducible from them.

Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 41. Even probably inferred.
Those things which are derived from Scripture, by necessary consequence, are
to be held for written traditions. See ib. l. 5. c. 9.

Chamier l. 13. de fide c. 10. n 12. It is not the word, of God only, which is
expressed in scriptures, or preached in the Church, but also what necessarily
follows out of it.

Gomarus apud Costerum in Apologia p. 75. There is no question between us,
whether al things which are to be believed, are express in holy Scripture. The
like say Beza Respons. ad Acta Colloq. Montisbel. part. 2. p. 46. Morton to. 2.
Apol. l. 1. c. 41. 52. 53. l. 5. c. 9. Field l. 4. c. 20. Pareus l. 1. de
Iustificat. c 16. Riuet Contr. tract. 1. sec. 18. Moulins de fugis Arnoldi c.
1. and generally al Protestants, when they themselves are put to prove any
point out of Scripture, as is to be seen of the Caluinists in Colloq.
Frankendalensi art. 12. fol. 549. 552. Particularly here I note What Fulk
says, that their Inferences out of Scripture, are as Good, and of as great
authority, are as Gods express words: Laud, That what is grounded upon their
Consequences, is as well, as As well.
upon express text: Which is to equalize their Inferences to Gods express
words. And White loco cit. Are they not as well conclusions of Scripture, which
are deduced (By Protestants) by true discourse, as which are expressed
verbatim? Perkins of the Creed col. 737. We must know, that a lawful
consequence drawn out of Scripture is as well the word of God, as that, which is
expressed Al well.
in words. Whitaker: It is al one, to be expressly, and to be inferred. They
condemn us for saying, that Alone.
Gods word tradid, is equal to his Written. Potter sec. 1. p. 14. To the word
of God, she (Romans Church) adds and equals her own traditions: Laud Relat.
sec. 16. p. 91. Equaling the tradition of the present Church to the written
word of Gods, Frets upon the very foundation it self, by iustling with it. And
they will have their Consequences and Inferences, as good as Gods express word.
When we say, that the Churches traditions are equal to Gods word, we mean
nothing, but that one word of God, is equal to an other. For we profess, that
both of them came immediately from God, one by tradition, the other, by writing.
But when they say, that their inferences are equal to Gods word, they must
needs Protestants make fallible men's Inferences, Gods word.
mean, that fallible men's Inference and that out of one humane principle too,
is equal to Gods word. For they cannot deny, but their Inferences are fallible
men's Inferences, because they are not made by God, but by fallible men only.
Perkins also in his Reformed Catholic Controu. 3. c. 3. and Calvin in Lucae 10.
v. 16. make the Ministers word equivalent Confessio B^^em. c. 14. Apologia
Confess. August. c. de Poenitentia.
to Gods promise, and a sufficient ground of faith. And Peter Martyr praefat.
l. de Euchar professes, that the Base, strength and foundation of his opinion
of the Eucharist, Make humane principles ground of their faith.
is, That it is proper to the Deity, to be every where and to the humane
nature, to be in a certain place. So the basis and ground of their faith
concerning the Eucharist, is partly their humane principle. For express
Scripture they can pretend none.

FOVRTH CHAPTER. Whether al necessary points of faith be evidently or clearly
contained in Scripture.
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
ONe thing it is to be contained actually in Scripture, an other to be
contained clearly. For something may be contained actually, and yet obscurely,
and therefore we make these distinct Chapters.

Protestants in Colloq. Ratisbon. p. 20. We acknowledge, that by Gods Plainly
and clearly.
goodness, whatsoever are necessary to salvation, are plainly enough and
clearly put before our eyes, in both, especially in the New Testament.

Calvin contra Versipellem p. 358. I stoutly affirm, that Heretics are
ouercomen by open Scriptures. l. de scandalis Clear.
p. 101. We receive nothing, but what is proved with clear and sound
testimonies of Scripture.

Beza l. Quaestionum and Resp. vol. 1. Theol. p. 673. The dogmes of true
religion, are plainly enough and clearly Plainly and clearly.
explaned in holy writ In Confess. c. 4. sec. 25. The Apostles and Evangelists
have so written those things, which they have written, as the dullest and most
ignorant of al men may thence perceive (unless themselves do hinder) whatsoever
suffices for their Salvation.

Zanchius l. 1. Epistolarum p. 16. Whatsoever is necessary to salvation, all that is plainly contained in holy writ. And p. 98. The places of holy
Scripture from whence the dogmes of Christian Need no clearer expression.
religion are taken, are so clear and open, as they need no more diligent or
clearer expression.

Academia Nemausiensis Resp. ad Iesuitas Tournonios Rupellae 1584. p. 531.
Hence it follows, that al matters of faith are plainly and clearly contained
in that written word, that is, in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Moulins in his Buckler sec. 94. Al difficulties being set aside, that which in
Scripture remains clear, and needs no interpretation, is sufficient to
salvation. Needs no interpretation.
In his answer to Card. Peron. l. 1. c. 1. The articles, in which the substance
of religion consists, are proposed Need no interpretation.
in scripture in so clear terms, as they need no Interpretation. So also de
Iudice Contro. c. 17.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 1. c. 1. we say, that al dogmes of faith are clearly
delivered in scripture.

Whitgift in Defense etc. p. 573. what is this else, but together with the
Papists, to condemn the scriptures of Plainly, and clearly expressed.
obscurity, as though al things necessary to salvation, were not plainly and
clearly expressed in them: p. 367. we are well assured, that Christ in his word
has fully and plainly comprehended al things requisite to faith and good life.
Fully.
Fulk Answer to the Preface of the Rhemes testament: so many parts of
scriptures, as are able to instruct us to salvation are so plain and easy,
Understood of every reader or hearer.
as they may be understood ofeuerie one that reads or hears them.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 4. c. 1. These are ouraxiomes: First, that scriptures
are so plain, as they may be read of the people, and of the unlearned with some
fruit and profit. Secondly, that al things necessary to salvation, are
proposed in scripture in plain words. Ibid. Inplain words.
c. 4. Hence it follows, that al things necessary to salvation, are manifest
in scripture, which is the ground of our Defense: which he often repeateth.
Manifest.
And q. 5. c. 7. We may gather the true As certainly as if God spoke to us.
sense out of scripture, no less certainly, then if god himself spoke to us.

Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 2. c. 19. That is the question: whether al those
things. which are necessary to salvation, be so plain (in Scripture) as the
Faithful, Wen to the mostignorant.
even the most ignorant, may be reading of them, be instructed to piety, and
Heretics, even the most learned, sufficiently ref^ted by them. And to. 1. l. 2.
c. 9. He calls it pure and plain Protestant doctrine; That the principal
points of faith necessary to the salvation of al, are clearly contained in
scripture. See his Appeal. l. 2. c. 7. sec. 9. Evidently.


Chillingworth in the preface n. 30. 33. 37. Al things necessary to salvation,
are evidently contained in scripture. And n. 37. he says: That is the base
and adequat foundation of his answer, and that al Protestants unanimously
profess and mantain it. c. 2. n. 157. p. 115. In a word, al things necessary
to believed, are evidently contained in scripture, and what is not there
evidently contained, can not be necessary to be believed. Ibid. n. 11. p. 58.
The scripture, in things necessary, we pretend, is plain. P. 83. n. 84. If you
speak of plain places (and in such al Need no Interpreter.
necessary things are contained) we are sufficiently certain of the meaning of
them, nether need they any interpteter. p. 59. n. 12. Thoses places, which
contein things necessary, and wherein error were dangerous, need no infallible
Interpreter, because they are plain. C. 6. p. 375. we want no unity, nor means
to procure it, in things necassarie: Plain places of scripture, and such as
need no interpretation, are our means to obtein it. c. 3. n. 52. p. 159.
Protestants agree, that the scripture evidently contains al things necessary
to salvation.

Plessie of the Church c. 4. p. 108. Evidently.
He who has mercifully vouch safed to save his people, and who only may be
called a true Father, would make his covenant with them in as plain terms and
express clauses, as could be devised. Ibid. There is nothing more clear, or As
plain and express, as could be devised.
more plain, then the doctrine of salvation.

White in his Way p. 31. The scriptures plainly determine al points of faith As
plainly as any can.
p. 32. He can name no one necessary article of our says, but the word
teaches it as plainly, as himself can. P. 39. The scripture, by its own light,
persuades as, and in alcases, doubts, questions, and coutrouersies, clearly
testifies with us, or against us. And in his Defense c. 31. p. 294. The
question is, whether the written scripture conteines in express words or sense,
the whole and entire doctrine of faith and good life.

Vshers Reioinder p. 114. scriptures are sufficient for the final determination
of al questions of faith. Tailor in his liberty of Prophesing sec. 3. n. 1. All the articles of faith are clearly and plainly set down in scripture. sec. 5. n.
2. scripture in its plain Expression, is an abundant rule of faith and manners.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
PRotestants in Colloq. Ratisbon in Respons. ad testimonia Patrum p. 470. None
of us ever dreamed, that the scripture is so clear, and easy, as any man may
straight, as it were at the first sight, and without help of teachers,
understand it.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 4. c. 1. when Bellarmin makes this to be the state of
the question: whether the scripture be of it self so plain, as without
interpretation, Needs Interpretation for matters of faith.
it suffices of it self to end, and determine al controversies of faith, he
fights without an adversary: For in this matter; he has not us Adversaries.
-- They say, but falsely, that we think, that al things in scriptures are plain,
and that they suffice without ^^edeth Interpretation For controversies.
Interpretation, to end al controversies. C. 2. God would have the holy
Mysteries of his word to be imparted to pure and holy men, not to be cast
before hoggs and dogs. C. 3. when they prove, that there is great difficulty
to understand the Scriptures, they dispute not against us. l. 2. de Scrip. c.
4. sec. 4. p. 229. The Eunuch, without Phillip, nether believed nor understood,
what was sufficient For matter of salvation.
to salvation.

Laud Relat. sec. 39. n. 9. Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church,
General Council, judge.
and a lawful and free General Council determining according to these, is Judge
of Controversies.

Dauenantius de Iudice c. 15. We defend not, (which the Papists impose upon us)
the doctrine of faith contained in Scripture to be so plain and perspicuous,
Needs an Interpreter for doctrine of faith.
that it need not at all the help of an Interpreter or Doctor. And need not this
needful Interpreter, to be infallible in interpreting? And who is such, if not
the Church?

FIFTH CHAPTER. Whether Scripture be the sole and entire Rule of al Christian
belief, or no?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
PRotestants in Colloq. Ratisbon. Thesi 1. p. 19. We undoubtedly acknowledge the
word of God contained in the writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles, to be the sole, certain, and infallible rule, square and measure of
doctrine, worship, and Christian Sole Rule.
faith.

The Confession of Basil art. 1. Canonical Scripture alone, contains
perfectly Perfectly.
al pie tie, al manner of life.

Confessio Belgica art. 7. We believe this holy Scripture to contein most
perfectly all the will of God, and that in it are abundantly taught al those
things whatsoever be necessary to be believed of Abundantly
men for to obtein salvation.

Calvin ad art. 20. Paris p. 2 9. We determine, that right faith is grounded in
the Scriptures only. In Confess. p. Only.
107. Our salvation relieth on Scriptures only. We embrace it for the only
rule of faith. In Refutat. Catalani p. 383. We believe and with a loud voice do
evermore cry, that the Gospel is the only rule, by which al must be reformed.
Onelierule.


Daneus Contro. 7. p. 1350. The only foundation of Christian faith; is the
word of God, and that alone written.

Hospinian part 2. Histor. Sacram. fol. 23. The Magistrate of Zurich
commanded, that hereafter they propound no other thing to their Churches but
the pure mere word of God, contained Mere written word.
in the words of the Prophets and Apostles.

K. James Resp. ad Card. Peron. p. 397. The king judges, that before a^
things, alagr^e of this Rule: That points of faith, and whatsoever deserves
necessarily Alone.
to be believed, be taken out of Scripture alone.

Laud Relat.. 17. p. 117. The Scripture Only.
only is the foundation of faith. Potter sec. 6. p. 65. Scripture the only
foundaiion and rule of faith. Pareus Collegio Theol. 3. d. 2. scripture in this
time is no les necessary to the salvation of the Church, then meat for the
life Scripture as necessary, as meal for life.
of man. And Collegio 9. d. 4. scripture now is necessary, not only to the
well being of the Church, but even to her being.

Whitaker l. 1. de Scrip. c. 11. sec. 1. scripture is the only sufficient
means to believe. So Contro. 1. q. 3. c. 10. q. 6. c. 9. p. 376. and c. 14. p.
399. Contro. The only sufficient means.
2. q. 5. c. 6. 9.

Chillingworth c. 2. n. 3. scriptures, be the sole Judge of Controversies, that
is, the sole rule for man to judge them Sole Rule.
by: And he inscribeth that Chapter thus: scripture, the only rule, whereby to
judge of Controversies. Where. 32. he says: I cannot know any doctrine to be a
divine and supernatural truth, or a part of Christianity, but only because the
scripture says so. And where says the Scripture, that it self is the word of
God? Who will see more Protestants, may read Zuinglius in Hospin. part. 2.
Histor. fol. 23. Bernenses ibid. fol. 52. Beza Apol. contra Sanitem p. 289. and
in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 10. Whitaker l. 1 de Script. p. 146. l. 3. p. 483. l.
9. contra Dureum sec. 64. Morton to. 2. Apologiae l. 1. c. 45. 46. 47. 49. and
l. 5. c. 12. he says: Matters of faith must rely only on the light of the
letters of faith.

Martyr in Disput. Oxon p. 143. and Pareus Colleg. Theol. 3. disp. 2. affirm,
that Scripture is the only Only external infallible means.
external infallible means to get faith, and as necessary to the salvation of
the Church, as meat to life, as also Pareus before said and Whitaker also.

White in his Defense p. 69. The whole rule of the Churches judgment, Whole
Rule
is only scripture, only scripture, only scripture, and nothing but
scripture.

SECOND SECTION. Protestants sometimes deny it.
PRotestants do diverse ways deny Scripture to be the sole or entire rule of
faith. First in formal terms. For thus Chillinhworth c. 2. n. 8. p. 55. when
Protestants affirm against Papists, that the scripture is a perfect rule of
faith, their meaning is not, that by scripture al things absolutely may be
proved, which are to be believed For it can never be proved by scripture to Not
al things absolutely.
a Gainsayer, that there is a God, or that the Book, called the scripture, is
the word of God. Ibid. n. 155. p. 114. scripture is not a Judge of
Controversies, but a Rule to judge them by, and that not an absolutely perfect
Rule, but as perfect, Not an absolutey perfect Rule.
as a written Rule can be, which must always need something else, which is
either evidently true, oreuidently credible to give attestation to it. See also
n. 156.

Field l, 4. de Eccles. c. 15. we do not so make the scripture the Rule of our
faith, but that other things in their kind are Rules likewise, in such sort,
as it is not safe without respect had unto Not safe, by Sctipture al^ne.
them, to judge of things by Scripture alone.

Hooker l. 1. 14. Albeit scripture do profess to contein in it al things,
which are necessary to salvation: yet the meaning cannot be simply of al
things Not simply al things necessary.
which are necessary.

Secondly they confess, that Scripture is no sufficient Rule to believe that it
self is the word of God, or who are Schismatiks. Hooker l. 2.. 4. It is not the
word of God, which Scripture can not assure us, that it i^ the word of God.
does or possibly can assure us, that it is the word of God. By what then are
you infallibly assured? Is it by the word of man?

Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 70. There is no place in scripture, which tells us,
that such books, containing such and particulars, No place in Sc^iptu^e.
are the Canon and infallible will and word of God. And p. 69. That scripture
should be fully and sufficiently known as by divine and infallible testimony,
lumine proprio, by resplendencie of that light, which it has in it self only,
and by the witness that it can so give to it self, I could never yet see cause
to allow. P. 80. The light, which is in Scripture itself, is not bright enough,
it cannot bear sufficient witness to itself. P. 88. Where he (Hooker) speaks so
Can not bear witness to it self.
sensibly, that Scripture cannot bear witness to it self, nor one part of it
to an other: that is grounded upon nature, which admits no created thing to be
witness to it self, and is acknowledged by our Savior. Sec. 25. n. 6. The Judge,
shall be the Scripture, and the Primitive Church. Primitive Church judge


Chillingworth c. 2. n. 11. p. 52. Scripture, we say, is the rule to judge
controversies by, yet not al simply, but all the controversies of Christians, of
those, that are already agreed upon this first Not al controversies by
Scripture.
principle: That the Scripture is the word of God. n. 27. When Scripture is
affirmed to be the rule, by which al controversies of religion are to be
decided, those are to be excepted out of this generality, which concern the
Scripture it self Ibid. Your Negative Conclusion, That these questions Not
controversies ^b^ut Scripture it self.
touching Scripture are not decidable by Scripture, you needed not have cited
any reason to prove it, it is evident by itself. Which he often repeateth, as
n. 29. 46. 52. 156. And n. 27. The question, whether scuh or such a book be
Only by the Church.
Canonical scripture, affirmatively cannot be decided, but only by the
testimony of the ancient Churches. And n. 35. you demand, whether that by the
Churches Assured by the Church
consent, they are assured, what scriptures are Canonical: I answer, yes, they
are so. And whereas you infer from Church judge of the Scripture.
hence, This is to make the Church Judge, I have told you already, that of this
controversy, we make the Church Judge.

Field l. 4 de Eccles c. 7. To him, that doubts of both (old andnew
Testament) we must not alleadg the authority of either of these, but some other
thing.

Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 5. c. 14. It is that, which we would have: That
Scripture is to be accounted Judge of those, who believe the scripture. Which is
plainly to confess, that it is not Judge of al. And Ibid. c. 10. We account not
scripture the only, but the supreme Interpreter. Not only Scripture.
And c. 57. Protestants do not so make the scripture the supreme Judge of
Controversies, as therefore they refuse the judgment of Councels. And l. 3. de
Missa c. 3. The Judgment of sense, in Sense a ground of Protest faith.
sensible objects, is a notable ground of faith.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 5. c. 6. He leeseth his labor, who out of scripture
disputes against those, that deny the scripture. Against such, we must
dispute out of the testimony of the Church, or use other arguments l. 1. de
Script. p. 92. The Creed of the Apostles, is the rule of faith. Creed is the
rule.


Plessie of the Church c. 3. The question (with the Donatists) was more for
matter of fact, then of right, as who had first failed in Charity, offended
the Schism not decided by Scripture.
Communion, opened the gate to schism? which could not well be decided by the
holy scripture.

White in his way p. 48. The certainty of the scripture, is not written
Certainty of Scripture is not written.
indeed with letters, in any particular place or book thereof.

Thirdly they grant, that Scripture needs interpretation, for to decide
Scripture needs interpretation.
some controversies of faith, as before c. 4. sec. 2. we cited out of Whitaker
and others. To Whom I ad, that Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 5. c. 9. says: Not so,
as we have the scripture the only but the chief Interpreter, that is, that in
expounding scriptures we follow the judgment of Pastors, but weighed by the
most clear Conference of scriptures. And Laud Relat. sec. 25. p. 157. Either
they (Protestants and Papists) must be judged by the scripture, they must either
both repair to the exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit to that, or
both call and submit to a General Council lawfully called. Ibid. p. 166. The
Judge, shall be the scripture and the Primitive Church. And sec. Scripture not
only judge.
39. p. 386. The scripture interpreted by the primitive Church, and a lawful
and free general Council, determining according to these, is Judge of
Controversies. Sec. 16. p. 104. When the Fathers say, we are to rely upon
scripture only they are never to be understood with exclusion of tradition in
what case soever it may be had, because it is deep, and may be drawn into
different senses, and so Tradition not excluded.
mistaken, if any man will presume upon his own strenght, and singly, without
the Church.

Fourthly, al Protestants, partly Scripture neeaeth some additions.
in words, partly in fact do confess, that the Scripture needs the addition
of some humane principles, for to prove both their special justification (In
which they assume this Principle, I believe) and also most, or altheir points of
faith, which are opposite to ours. As for to prove that the Eucharist is not
substantially the body of Christ, because the Scripture says, it is a
Commemoration of him, They need to ad this humane Principle: No Commemoration
can be substantially the thing which is commemorated: or to prove, that Christ
is not really in the Eucharist, because the Scripture says, He is in heaven,
they need to ad this humane principle: No body can (by the power of God) be in
two places at once. And so of the like.

And if the Scripture need the attestation of the Church, need the
Interpretation of the Church, need humane Principles, it is evident, that it is
not the sole and entire Rule of faith. For a sole and entire Rule, needs
nether addition nor Interpretation S. Basil lib. contra Eunomium: ^^hat
requisite to a Rule.
A Rule admits no addition. For what wants something, needs addition,
but what are imperfect, can never be rightly called rules or squares.
Theophilact in Philipens. 3. A Canon or Rule suffers nether addition nor
suhstraction. Protestants in Colloq. Ratisbon. sess. 1. p. 36. In matters of
faith, religion, and worship, that only is to be accounted and used for a
Rule, which admits nether addition, nor subtraction. Whitaker Contro. 1 q.
4. c. 4. The scripture is called a Rule a square, a scope exposed to the eyes
of al, therefore it must need be easy and open. And ibid. q. 5. c. 7. Every
rule must be certain and known. Ibid. q 6. c. 16. Unless the scripture be the
entire and perfect rule, it will be no rule at al. Ibid. If it be a rule, then
perfect and ad^^quate. And Chillingworth c. 2. n. 6. p. 54. I conclude, that
both these properties are requisite to a perfect Rule, both to be so complete,
as it need no addition, and to be so evident, as to need no interpretation.

White in his Way p. 15. The nature of a Rule, is to be perfect. Laud sec. 26.
n. 4. A Rule, must be certain and known.

And I conclude, that Scripture is no entire Rule of faith, because in diverse
matters of faith and religion, (according to Protestants plain confession) it
needs both addition and interpretation. Howsoever therefore, Protestants in
words avouch the Scripture to be the only and entire Protestants denieindeeds
what they affirm in words.
rule of Christian faith, indeed they deny it, because they do and must deny
it to be such, as an entire Rule must be. But perhaps their meaning is, that
when Catholics are to prove, then Scripture is the only Rule of faith; but
when they are to prove, it may need their expositions, or their humane
principles, which is as much as to say, sometimes it is a rule, sometimes not,
or to Catholics it must be an entire Rule, but not to Protestants; so that what
they will, and when they will, is their Rule of faith. And no marvel if their
Rule be as variable as their faith is.

SIXTH CHAPTER. Whether Scripture of it self do sufficiently show or prove it
self to be the word of God?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
Calvin 1. Institut. c. 6.. 2. whereas they ask, How shall ^e be persuaded, that
(the Scriptures) came from God, unless we fly to the decree of the Church, it is
as if one should ask, How shall we learn to discern light from darkness, white
from black, sweet from Scripture, as lear as light
bitter. For the Scripture of itself gives no obscurer feeling of its truth,
than white and black things, of their color, sweet and bitter, of their taste.
And Joan. 10. v. 4. By the spirit of discretion, the Elect do discern Gods
truth from men's lies.

Iuel. Defens. Apol. c. 9. p. 404. When Harding asked: How know you, that the
scriptures be scriptures? How know you, that the Gospel of Thomas, Bartholmew,
and Nicodemus, are no scriptures? Answers: A man might well demand the like
question of M. Harding: How know you, that the sun, As the sun.
is the sun? or how know you, that the moon is the moon?

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 3. c. 1. The sum of our opinion is, that scripture is
(...) that is of it self has al its authority and credit. And l. 1. de Scrip.
c. 9. p. 18. (...) is, which not only of it self is true, but which needs no
proof or demonstration Needs no p^oof.
to confirm it: See him ibid. p. 27. 93. 95. 102. 106. 65. 40. and contro. 1.
q. 6. c. 9.

White in his way, p. 27. The doctrine contained in the scripture, is a light,
and so abides, into what language soever it be translated, and therefore the
children of light know it and discern it: For God directs them by his holy
spirit, who opens their hearts that they know his voice from al others, and
that the light of his truth may shine upon them. Which light is of this nature,
that it gives testimony to it self and receaueth authority from no other.
And in his way p. 48. The virtue and power which shows it self in every line
and In every line.
leaf of the bible, proclaims it to be the word of God The scripture by its
own light shows it self to be the word of God. In his Defense p. 285. The
scriptures have in them a light, and an authority of their own, sufficient to
prove themselves to be the word of God, and to give infallible assurance to al
men of the true sense. p. 15. I deny, that the Canonical books cannot be
proved to be by themselves, secluding Church, authority, and tradition. P.
282. The authority and teaching of the Church, is not always nor simply
necessary to show al men the light of the scripture, or so much, as to point
to it: For either by immediate light of Gods spirit, or by the light of nature,
it may be known to be Gods word. And p. 277. he says, that assurance of By
light of nature.
the true sense of the Scripture is very By only ^eading.
ordinarily had, without al motion of the Church whatsoever, by only reading.
See him c. 20. p. 169.

Field Appendice part 2. p. 14. It Evident by itself.
is evident in it self, that God speaks in the scripture, and reuealeth those
things, which we believe: which is that, which we say. Bell in his Downfall of
Popery art. 7. p. 135. The scriptures Canonical, are discerned from not
Canonical, even of themselves, like as light is discerned from darkness,

Protestants in Colloq. Ratisbon. Thesi 1. p. 19. Credit is to be given to the
scripture for it self and sess. 10 p. 314. The authority of the Gospel of
Matthew, is gathered out of the scripture it self. Chillingworth c. 4.. 53. The
doctrine it self, is very fit and worthy to be thought to come from God.

SECOND SECTION. Protestants sometimes deny it.
HOoker, Couel, Laud, White, Chillingworth, and others related in the former
Chapter sec. 2. who deny that Scripture can be sufciently known by it
selfdenie, that it sufficiently shows, or proves it self: And the said Laud
Relat. sec. 16. p. 8^. We do not say, that there is such a light in Scripture,
as that every man upon the first sight, must yield to it. Ibid. p. 70. No
created thing alone, can give No created thing can give witness to it self.
witness to it self, and make it evident, nor one part testify for an other
and satisfy, where Reason will but offer to contest. sec. 38. n. 6. We believe
Scripture to No particular text for proof of Scripture.
be Scripture, and by divine and in fallible faith too, and yet we can show no
particular text for it.

Field in Appendice part. 2. p. 21. Tradition of the Church, necessary.
The tradition of the Church, is a necessary means, whereby the books of
Scripture may be delivered unto us, and made known.

Potter sec. 5. p. 8. That Scripture is of divine authority, the Beleuer sees
by Found, by help of the Church.
that glorious beam of divine light, which shines in the Scripture, though
found by the help, and direction of the Church without, and of grace, within.

Chillingworth c. 2.. 46. p. 69. That the Divinity of a writing cannot No
wiseman says.
be known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecal authority, you need not
prove, for no wise man denies it. Ibid.. 3. p. 53. The controversy, wherein the
Not but by natural reason.
Scripture is the subject of the question, cannot be determined but by natural
reason. 8. p. 55. It can never be proved by Scripture to a gainsayer, that the
book called Scripture is the word of God. So also. 27. p. 63.. 29. p. 64. sec.
52. p. 72. Ibid.. 155. p. 114. A written A written rule needs some thing else.
rule, must always need something else, which is either evidently true, or
evidently credible to give attestation to it.

And the same mean al other Protestants cited before l. 1. c. 14. who say; That
the attestation of the Church is necessary for to know the Scripture to be the
word of God, and that the Church, is as it were, the key or door to enter into
the knowledge of the Scripture. For how should the Churches attestatio^ be
necessary to know the Scripture to be the word of God, if it can be known to
be such, by itself?

SEVENTH CHAPTER. Whether Scripture be the true Judge of Controversies of
faith?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
WHitaker Contr. 1. q. 5. c. 7. The second argument, where with the Jesuit
proves that Scripture cannot be Judge and Interpreter of Scripture, is this,
because in every well ordered common wealth, the Judge and law are different,
wherefore seeing scripture is the law, it can be no way Judge. And he answers:
The Scripture, judge, Interpreter, andrule.
divine law is the judgment, the Judge, the Interpreter, and the rule. And c.
8. The Chief Judge of Controversies, must have these three. First, that we
certainly know, that his sentence is true, and that we ought to submit to it.
Secondly, that there is no appealing from his sentence. Thirdly, that he be not
partial. And al these has the scripture, and the Holy Ghost speaking in
scripture. Contro. Supreme judge.
2. q. 5. c. 5. In all Controversies, we appeal to the scripture, as to the
supreme Judge. l. 2. contra Dureum sec. 41. Austin would have the scripture to
be witness: I make it Judge. l. 3. de Scriptura p. 409. I will have the scripture
alone, and the Holy Ghost speaking in scripture, the Judge of al doctrines.

Zuinglius in Disp. 1. to. 2. fol. 625. No judge, but Scripture.
I will admit no other Judge beside the Scriptures.

Confessio Heluetica c. 2. We suffer no other Judge in matter of faith, but God
himself, pronouncing by the Scriptures, what is true, what falls.

Dauenant de Iudice Controuersiarum c. 2. p. 65. We must need admit the
Scripture for Judge, and also for Rule of Judging.

Laud sec. 26. p. 194. To settle Controversies in the Church, there is a
visible Judge and Infallible, but not living And that is the Scripture* And
sec. 25. p. 157. he says: The Scripture is the Judge. Item sec. 39. p. 386.

Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 5. c. 1. Scripture is the Supreme and infallible judge
of the Church, to the learned, in obscure matters, and to the unlearned, in
clear. And c. 13. Then you acknowledge it (Scripture) to be the publik judge.
God keep youin this mind. Ibid. The Fathers in all difficulties against
Heretics, appealed to the scripture, as to the supreme judge. See him l. 2. c.
1. and his Appeal. l. 3. c. 15. sec. 5.

White in his way p. 14. The scripture only is the judge and Rule of faith.
See Melancthon in locis c. de Ecclesia.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
PRotestants in Colloq. Ratisbon sess. 1. p. 38. It is one thing, to show the
Judge, an other, to show Judge and Rule, different.
the Rule. So the Rule is not Judge.

Chillingworth c. 2.. 3. p. 53. scriptures, being the sole Judge of
Controversies, that is, the sole Rule, for man to Judge them by. For we mean
nothing else.. 11. p. 57. To speak properly (as Not properly a Judge.
men should speak, when they write of Controversies in religion) the scripture
is not a Judge of Controversies, but a Rule only, and the only Rule for
Christians to judge them by. Ibid.. 10. We deny not, but a Judge and a law
might well stand together, but we deny, that No judge appointed by God.
there is any such Judge of Gods apointment.. 12. Which conclusion (that
though the Scripture may be a Rule it cannot be a Judge) I have already
granted.. 23. There is not any publikly authorized Judge to determine
Controversies in religion, nor any necessity, there should be any. The same
he has. 85. And. 104. speaking Scripture cannot be a Judge.
truly and properly, The scripture is not a Judge, nor cannot be, hut only a
sufficient Rule for those to Judge by, who believe it to be the word of God..
155. This assertion, That scripture alone is Judge of al Controversies in
faith, if it be taken properly, is nether a fundamental, nor an vnfundamental
point of faith, nor no point of faith at al, but a plain falsehood. It is not a
Judge of Controversies, but a Rule to judge them by.

Potter sec. 2. p. 32. The Scripture is Judge, or rather Rule of Controversies.
Whitaker Contro 1. q. 1. c. 2. The Scripture is the same in the Church, which
the law is in the common wealth. Moulins de Iudice Contro. c. 13. If our
adversaries think not, that the title of Judge ought to be given to the
Scripture, at least they should not deny it title of Rule, and this is that
which we require, namely that our faith be ruled by only Gods word. But nether
would this content them, unless Gods word be expounded, as they would have it,
which were to make themselves the rule of judging.

EIGHTH CHAPTER. Whether Scripture be to believed to be Gods word, with
divine and infallible assurance.
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 72. suppose it aggreed upon, that there must be a
divine faith, cui subesse non potest Scripture must be known with divine faith.
falsum, under which can rest no possible error, That the books of scripture
are the written word of God. Ibid. p. 66. This is agreed on by me, that
scripture must be known to be scripture, by a sufficient infallible divine pro
of. See him p. 64. and p. 75. After a man once believe, his faith grows
stronger, then either his reason or his knowledge. p. 86. Belief is firmer, then
any knowledge can be, because it rests upon divine authority, which cannot
deceive. See ibid. p. 105. and p. 114. 115. Likewise sec. 33. p. 227. Moral
certainty, is not Moral certainty, not sufficient.
strong enough in points of faith. See him sec. 19. p. 125. sec. 16. cit. p.
74. Reason without grace, cannot see the way to heaven, nor believe this book,
Reason, not sufficient.
in which God has written the way.

Potter sec. 5. p. 2. Faith is said to be divine and supernatural. First, in
regard of the Author or efficient cause of the habit, and act of divine infused
faith which is the special grace of God. Secondly, in regard of the object, as
things believed, which are above the reach of mere nature or reason Thirdly, in
regard of the formal reason or principal ground on which faith chiefly relyeth,
and into which it is finally resolved, which is divine Revelation, or
authority of God. If it fail in any of these, it is no divine or
supernatural faith. P. 7. The assent of divine faith, is absolutely divine,
which Faith, is absolutely divine.
requires an object and motive so infallibly true, as that it nether has, nor
can possibly admit any mixture of error or falsehood. p. 10. supernatural faith
must be absolutely undoubted and certain, Sec. 6. p. 59. The assent of faith, is
more certain (if it be possible) then that of sense, or science, or
demonstration, because it rests on divine authority, which cannot possibly
deceive. Sec. 5. cit. p. 40. divine faith, must have a divine foundation that
can not deceive.

Calvin 1. Instit. c. 7.. 5. Lightened by his virtue, we believe, not by our own
or other men's judgment, that the scripture is from God, but above humane
judgment, we resolve most assuredly, even as if we saw God there, that it came
from Gods own mouth by the ministry of men. See him ibid.. 4. and c. 6.. 2.
And both he 3. Instit. c. 2.. 6. 7. 16. in Cathechismo c. de fide Beza, in
Confess. c. 4. sec. 5. Luther in psalm. 14. to. 3. define faith to be Faith most
certain and infallible.
A most certain assurance, and Fulk in Romans 8. Nota 9. to be an Infallible
assurance.

White in his Way p. 2. Faith must be infallible, or certain, that is, free
from error, and such, as cannot deceau^ us. P. 10. Our faith must be withful
assurance and persuasion.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes they deny.
CHillingworth c. 1.. 8. p. 36. Of this hypothesis: That all the articles of our
faith were revealed by God, we cannot ordinarily have any rational and
acquired certainty, more then moral. But moral certainty.
C. 2.. 3. p. 53 The controversy, wherein the scripture it self is the subject
of the question cannot be determined but by natural reason. Ibid.. 32. p. 65.
Natural reason built on principles common to Reason, last resolution of
Protest. faith.
al men, is the last resolution, into which the Churches authority, is but the
first inducement. Item. 24. p. 62. I know no other natural and rational means,
to be assured hereof (of the incorruption of Scripture) then I have of any
other books incorrupted. For though I have a greater degree of rational and
humane Humane assurance.
assurance of that, then this, in regard of diverse considerations, which make
it more credible, That the Scripture has been preserved from any material
alteration: yet my assurance of both, is of the same Moral assurance.
kind and condition, both moral assurances, and nether physical, or
mathematical. Scripture, no materia object of faith
Ibid.. 32. p. 65. The Scripture is none of the material objects of our faith,
but only the means of conueying them unto us. 35. p. 66. Of this controversy
(which books be Canonical) wemake the Church the Judge, but not the present
Church, but the consent and testimony of the ancient and primitive Church;
which though it be but a highly probable inducement, and no demonstratiue
enforcement, yet, me thinks you should not deny, but it may be a sufficient
Probability, a sufficient ground of Protest faith.
ground of faith. Ibid.. 152. p. 112. The priuiledg, of not being in
possibility of erring, we challeng not. Ibid. 154. you content not yourselues
with a moral certainty of things you believe. p. 113. Moral certainty,
sufficient.
Me thinks you should require only a moral and modest assent to them (points
of faith) and not a divine, as you call it, and infallible faith. Ibid. 159. p.
116. God requires of us under pain of damnation only to believe the verities
therein (Scripture) contained, and not the divine authority of the books,
wherein Not divine authority of Scripture.
they are contained. -- We have (I believe) as great reason to believe there was
such a man as Henry the Eight, King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered
under Pontius Pilat. C 6.. 3. p. 325. That there is required of us a As great
reason for belief of K. Hen. as of Christ.
knowledge of them (points of faith) and an adherence to them, as certain, as
that of sense or science, that such a certainty is required of us under pain
of damnation, this I have demonstrated to be a great error, and of dangerous
and pernicious consequence.. 5. p. 327. Men may talk their pleasure of an
absolute and most infallible certainty; but did they generally believe, that
obedience to Christ, were the only way to present and eternal felicity, but
as much, as Caesar's Commentaries, or the history of Salust, I believe, the
lives of most men, Papists and Protestants, would be better then they are. --
And therefore it follows from your own reason, that faith, which is not a most
certain and infallible knowledge, may be true and saving faith. C. 7.. 7. p.
389. In requiring, that this faith should be divine and Dangerous, that faith
must be infallible.
infallible, you cast your Credents into infinite perplexity. Erasmus on the 2.
and 27. of Matthew: There is no fear, that all the authority of the Scripture
should fall, if any error were found in it. Luther called the Scripture: The
books of Heretics.

Protestants in Colloq, Ratisbon. sess. 11. say, that we must distinguish
between the faith, wherewith we believe points necessary to salvation and
historical faith, wherewith we believe the Scripture to be the word of God. And
historical faith, is not divine faith, unless they will make many kinds of
divine faith. And they add, that there is not equal reason of believing, that
scripture is Gods word, and that Christ is Incarnate. And Whitaker l. 1. de
Script. p. 88. who have no other faith but historical, do no more believe
Christ then the Devils. Moulins in his Bucler sec. 4. p. 13. Properly speaking,
articles Scripture, no doctrine of Christian religion.
of faith, are doctrins of Christian religion and in this sense, the Canon of
Canonical books, is no article of faith. So that the Canon of Scripture is no
doctrine of Christian religion.

White in his Defense c. 30. p. 282. scripture, either by the immediate light
Scripture, known by ^ight of nature.
of Gods spirit, or by the light of nature, may be known to be Gods word. And
if by the light of nature, without divine faith. Hooker l. 3.. 8. we know by
reason, that the scripture is the word of God. By reason.


Whitaker aforsaid l. 1. de Script. p. 25. The most divine character of the
scripture, does most plainly tell al, that either have received the Holy Ghost,
or are imbued with mean understanding. By mean understanding.
that it came from God. And if mean understanding suffice, without the Holy
Ghost, there need no divine faith to believe it. And ibid. p. 122. Who has
reason, and will use it, may thereby most easily discern these divine books from
men's books. P. 150. Scriptures By only reading.
may be known by only reading. And in praefat. ad Staplet. The Scripture
gives so clear a testimony of its diuini^ tie, that who read it with a small
attention and judgment, cannot be ignorant, that it is divine. And p. 77. unless
he be doltish. l. 2. p. 235. Scriptures may be acknowledged and held without
the testimony of the Spirit.

NINTH CHAPTER. Whether translated Scripture be authentical?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
WHite in his Way to the Church p. 12. I say, the Scripture translated into
English, Translated Scripture, rule of faith.
is the Rule of faith, whereupon I relying have not a humane, but a divine
authority. And p. 27. The doctrine contained in the Scripture, is a light, and
so abides, into what language soever it be translated, and therefore the
children of light know it, and discern it. Ibid. So the unlearned man is
secured, not upon the Churches credit and authority; but by the ministry,
which teaches him, he is directed to the light itself. And this Ministry we
have, and use for our Translations; but they, that obey it, know the
Translation, and so proportionably The matter of Scripture shows it self.
al articles of faith to be infallible, because the matter thereof appears to
them; as a candle in a lantern, showing it self in its own light. And in his
table before his book: The Scriptures translated into English, are the Rule of
faith. And in his Defense of his Way c. 28. p. 266. Though it be granted, that
the Ministry of men, and rules of art and knowledge of tongues, be al subject
to error, yet does it not follow, that by them we cannot obtein infallible
assurance of our translations. Chillingworth c. 2.. 32. we believe the
Scripture, not finally Matter of Scripture, known by it self.
and for itself, but for the matter contained in it. And so al Protestants
should say, seeing when they exhort the common people to the reading of their
translated Bibles, they bear them in hand, that it is the word of God: and that
their translation of the word of God is authentical, and worthy to be believed
for it self. Besides, they did the people believe what they teach them, because it
is in their Bibles, and so make their Bibles, the rule and ground of their
peoples faith. And no other infallible rule of faith, their common people can
pretend to have. Moreover, if they make the matter or true sense of Scripture,
the rule of faith, as commonly they do, they cannot deny, but Scripture truly
translated, has the same matter, which the original has.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
WHitaker Contro. 1. q. 2. c. 7. We make no edition (of Scripture) authentical,
but the Hebrew, in the old, and the Greek, in the New Testament. Translations,
if No translation, authentical.
they agree, we allow them, if they differ, we reject them. Ibid. c. 8. We do
do not say, that we must stand to our translations, as authentical of
themselves, but we appeal to the fountains only, as truly authentical. C. 9.
Authentical Scripture must come imediatly from the Holy Ghost. C. 10. only
authentical, is Canonical. Et ibid. q. 5. c. 9. The ignorance of the original
toungs, Hebrew and Greek, has caused many errors. And thus al Protestants
should say, because they deny the Vulgar latin, to be authentical, because it is
a Translation. For (as Whitaker c. 8. cit. says) An Interpreter translateth
authentical Scripture, but makes not his Translation authentical Scripture.
See Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 14. p. 71.

White in his Way p. 23. The conclusion Translation not a Rule.
(That the English translation is not the Rule) may be granted. P. 1^. Al
translations be to be tried by the original Hebrew and Greek. And a Rule is not
to be ruled it self.

Morton in Whites Defense c. 28. p. 259. What English Protestant ever No
infallible.
affirmed, that our Translations were infallible, or took them for the Rule?

Tailor in his liberty of prophesing sec. 4. n. 7. Is there any man, that
has translated perfectly, or expounded Nor authentik.
infallibly? No translation challenges such a praerogatiue, as to be
authentik, but the vulgar latin.

Pareus Colleg. Theol. 2. D. 1. We say, that only the Hebrew edition of the
old testament, and the Greek of the New, is authentical. Sic etiam Collegio 1.
D. 14.

Moulins of the Judge of Contro. part. 2. c. 6. p. 378. Common sense tells,
that translations are not to be received, but as far as they are agreeable to
the originals.

TENTH CHAPTER. Whether the Scripture be to be believed to be the word of God,
only for the testimony of the Church.
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
SPalatensis l. 7. de Repub. c. 1. n. 9. To enquire (which books are Canonical)
The Church has that alone, singular, and only rule, that the Universal Church
ask herself, and what she in actual exercise holds, seek and plainly know.
And l. contra Suarem c. 1. n. 34. I show, that nether Councels, nor Popes, nor
Fathers, nor Church, can otherwise define, which books be Canonical, which not,
but by the only testimony of the whole Church.

Chillingworth c. 2. n. 7. The question, Only by the Church.
whether such or such a book be Canonical Scripture, cannot be decided
affirmatively, but only by the testimony of the ancient Church. The like he
has n. 35. 42. And ibid. n. 1^4. It is upon the authority of universal
tradition, that we would have them believe the Scripture. See him supra c. 8.
sect. 2. And c. 1. n. 7. I grant, that Christ has founded a visible Church,
stored with all help necessary to salvation, particularly with sufficient
means to beget and conserve faith, to mantein unity, and compose schisms, to
discover and condemn heresies, and to determine al controversies in religion,
which were necessary to be determined. -- I grant, that this means to decide
controversies in faith and religion, must be endued with an universal
infallibility, in whatsoever it propounds for a divine truth. C. 2. n. 3. It
is superfluous for you to prove out of S. Athanasius, and S. Austin, that we
must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of Gods Church, understanding by
Church, the credit of tradition. -- We will say with Athanasius, that only four
Gospels are to be received, because the Canons of the holy and Catholic Church,
(understand of al ages since the perfection of the Canon) have so determined.

Whitaker l. 1. de script. p. 46. We cannot believe, but by the testimony of
the Church, as by the ordinary means.

SECOND SECTION. Protestants sometimes deny it.
Laud, in his Relation. sec. 16. n. 1. p. 60 The tradition of the Church,
taken and considered alone, is Tradition of the Church not sufficient
so far from being the only, that it can not be a sufficient proof to believe
by divine faith that Scripture is the word of God. n. 19. p. 80. The Tradition
of the present Church, is too weak, because it is not absolutely divine. Ibid. 25
p. 88. If Scripture has an other proof, nay many other Scripture can approve
^t self.
proofs to usher it and lead it in, then no question it can prove and approve
it self.

Potter sec. 5. p. 6. The testimony of present Church, though it be not the
last resolution of our faith, yet it is the first external motive to it. It is
the key or door, which lets men into the knowledge of divine mysteries. -- But
the faith of a Christian finds not in all Not ^nie sure ground.
this any sure ground, whereon finally to rest or setle itself, til it arise to
greater assurance then the present Church alone can give. The same must al
Protestants say, who either teach, that the testimony of the Church is
fallible, or that the Scripture has a sufficient light to show it self to be
Gods word.

Humfrey ad Rat. 3. Campiani p. 210. We say, that an argument taken from the
authority of the Church simply, Churches authority, little worth.
in our Academic, is little worth, effects nothing. p. 212. No firm firm
and irrefragable argument can be taken from the Church militant. -- Brefly, no
argument firm and solid, is taken from ani^ Church, unless it be the Apostolik.

Whitaker Controu. 1. q. 3. c. 3. Scripture, known without the Church.
Without the Churches judgment, it may be known to be Christ's voice, and true
Scripture. Cont. 2. q. 5. c. 18. It is most falls, that we cannot believe this to
be true Scripture, but by the testimony of the Church. l. 2. de Script. p.
280. who is led with the proper testimony of the Church, does follow but
humane testimony. And ibid. says, it is mere humane. l. 1. p. 112. The voice
of the masters of the Church, may be publik, but Pastors authority of no
moment.
their authority is but private, that is, of no moment. l. 1. de Scriptura p.
16. An argument, which is taken from the bare testimony of the Church, for to
confirm the Scriptures, or any parcel thereof, I say, is vnualid, vneffectual,
unfit to persuade l. 2. p. 235. ^he Church has Has no authority in matters
of faith.
no authority in matters of faith. l. 3. p. 345. The judgment of the Church,
considered by itself, is mere humane. Calvin in Act. 15. v. 28. Fond Papists
think there is some authority in the Church.

ELEVENTH CHAPTER. Whether Scripture be the formal cause of Protestants
believing whatsoever they belleue as of faith?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
1. WHitaker l. 1. de Scriptura c. 5. sec. vlt. p. 58. Whatsoever we believe,
Whatsoever they believe is for Scripture.
we believe for the scripture, which is the external cause of faith. -- I
mantein, that in kind of external cause, we believe not for the testimony of
the Church, but for the authority and testimony of the scripture it self,
which alone, in the ministry of the Church, is the external principal cause
of faith. For faith rises not of the testimony it self of the Church, but
only of the authority and divinity of the scripture And p. Only for
Scripture.
69. Not for the authority of the Church, by which we are taught, but for the
authority of the scripture it self, we acknowledge the scripture. P. 76. Faith,
is of scriptures heard. P. 108. Faith, is begotten not of testimony of the
Church, but only out of scripture. P. 122. The The ^^elie sufficient means.
scripture is the most strong, the most effectual, I ad also now, the only
sufficient means to believe. P. 130. Our faith relieth upon the scriptures alone
P. 165. scriptures are the foundations of our faith. P. 167. The scripture is
the beginning of believing. The same he has p. 168. P. 173. The formal cause of
our Scripture, the formal cause of belief.
faith, is not the voice of the Church, but Gods word revealed in the
scriptures.

Potter sec. 5 p. 8. The principal motive, and last object of belief, is the
divine last object.
authority of the scripture it self. P. 10. The chief principle ground, on
which faith rests, and for which it firmly The ground of faith.
assents unto those truths, which the Church propounds, is the divine
revelation made in scripture sec. 7. p. 95. The creed conteines only the
material The formal object.
object of faith: The scripture is further, the formal object of faith, or the
motive and ground, whereupon faith is grounded, being both the obiect^m quod, in
respect of things therein revealed, and obiectum Obiectum quod, and qu^.
quo, in respect of that divine verity and authority, which reueals them.

Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 84. Tradition of the present Church, is the first
moral motive to believe; but the belief it self, That the scripture is the word
of God, rests upon the scripture. P. 89. Do Faith resolved into Scripture.
you grant, as you ought to do, that we resolve our faith into scripture, as
the ground, and we will never deny, that Tradition is the key, that letts us
in. Sec. 18. p. 123. The Prophets testimony was divine, into which, namely
their writings, the Jews did resolve their faith. Hooker l. 2.. 7. Scripture
is The ground of al belief.
the ground of al belief.

Chillingworth c. 3.. 32. p. 149. I can not know any doctrine to be a divine
and supernatural truth, but because the scripture says so. And where says it,
that it is the word of God? Uttermost formal cause of faith.


Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 37. Papists are forced against their will to
grant, that the uttermost formal cause of Catholic faith, does not consist in
the authority of the Church, but in scripture. Ib. The divine authority of
the scripture, by virtue of the holy Ghost, does imprint in the minds of the
hearers, the last formal Last formal cause.
cause of faith. And l 5. c. 11. scripture, is to the faith^ul the supreme
Judge even concerning us, in which our consciences do last rest. In his
Appeal. l. Last rest and resolution.
3. c 15. sec. 5. In the doctrine of scripture men's consciences may take their
last rest, and resolution

White in his Table before his way: The last resolution of our faith, is into
the authority of the scripture. And yet they cannot deny, but the authority
of the Scripture is create. For they were written by men. And so* the formal
cause, the uttermost formal cause, the last formal cause, the last rest, Create
authority the uttermost formal cause of Protest. faith.
the last resolution of their faith, is create authority, and not Prima
veritas it self, as they pretend, and condemn Catholics for only saying, that
the create authority of the true formal cause, but say not (as Protestants say
of Scripture) the uttermost the last formal cause, the last resolution of our
faith. Besides, Protestants make Protestants inferences out of humane
Principles, the last resolution of their faith
their own Inferences partly out of some humane principle, to be equal and
equivalent unto express Scripture or word of God, as is showed before c. 3 sec.
2. and so make their own Inferences, (and those partly out of humane
Principles) the formal cause, the uttermost, the last formal cause, that, into
which their faith is last resolved, and withal teach, that L. 1. c. 18* n. 1.
the Inference cannot be more certain, then the Principle, out of which it is
inferred. How then can their faith have more certainty, then humane, as
Chillingworth confessed c. 8. sec. 2.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
CHillingworth c. 2. n. 159. p. 116. For other reasons I conceive this doctrine
(that Scripture is the rule of faith) Not fundamental, because if a man should
believe Christian religion, Scripture, no f^ndamental doctrine.
wholly and entirely, and live according to it, such a man though he should not
know, or not believe the Scripture to be a rule of faith; no nor to be the word
of God, my opinion is he may be saved -- so that the books of Scripture are not
so much the objects of our faith, as the instruments of conueying it to our
understanding, and not so much of the being of Christian doctrine, as requisite
to the welbeing of it. Ireneus tells us of some barbarous nations, that believed
the doctrine of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the word of God.
For they never heard of it, and faith comes of hearing -- God requiring of us
under pain of damnation, only Not damnab^e, not to be^eue the Scripture.
to believe the verities therein contained, and not the divine authority of the
books wherein they are contained. Ibid. n. 32. p. 65. Which (Scripture) we
believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter contained in it. -- We
Scripture, not last ob^^st of faith.
are to believe it, not as the last object of out faith, but as the means of it.
Ibid. Natural reason, built on principles common Natural ^eason last ^e^olu^^.
(...) of ^rotest. faith.
to al men, is the last resolution (of our faith of the Scripture) into which
the Churches authority is but the first inducement. n. 115. p. 96. By you, as
well as by Protestants, al is finally resolved into reason. Baro in his Apology
pro disput. de obiecto fidei p. 48. Laics believe the doctrine which is proposed
to them to be believed, to be in the Protest. believe Scripture but with (...)ne
faith.
Scripture, only with humane faith. Behold first (That Scripture is the rule
of faith) is no fundamental doctrine. Secondly, one may be saved, though the
believe not the Scripture to be the word of God. Thirdly, books of Scripture are
not so much objects of our faith, as instruments thereof. Fourthly, are not so
much of the being of Christian faith, as of the well being of it. Fifthly, God
requires not under pain of damnation, to believe the divine authority of
Scripture. Sixthly, we believe not the Scripture finally and for it self.
Seauently, It is not the last object of faith. Eighthly, natural reason is the
last resolution of Protestants faith of the Scripture. Ninthly Laics believe
their doctrine to be in the Scripture, but with humane faith. And can that,
which is such, be the formal cause, the chief principle, or ground of faith,
and into which divine faith is resolved?

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 7. I grant, that Ireney says, some had Faith
had without Scripture.
faith, and no Scripture -- some Barbarians for a time had no Scripture -- For
some time doctrine may be kept entire, without writing -- Scripture, not simply
necessary.
Hence he concludes, That scriptures are not simply necessary. Right, And the
same generally al Protestants confess. And Contro. 2. q. 5. c. 18. p. 548.
Many may be good Christians, who never read scripture. Ibid. q 3. c. 3. p.
320. It may be that there be many Christians, who know not the Canon of
Scripture, nor ever saw any books. But if Scripture were the formal cause and
ground of faith, faith could never be in any men, nor in any time, without
Scripture, and Scripture would be simply necessary to faith. For the formal
cause of faith is always necessary to faith, and simply necessary to it,
because it is the cause or motive for which we believe. And faith. in ordinary
course, cannot be but for the external formal cause of it: or thus: The formal
cause of believing must be known, or be believed of al men, and in all times But
Scripture is not so; Therefore it is not the formal cause of faith, and much
less the last and uttermost formal cause of faith.

Zuinglius in Exegesi to. 2. fol. 347. We do not think, that faith can
Zuinglius had his faith not out of Scripture.
be gathered out of words (of Scripture) but that words which are proposed, are
understood by faith, the Mistress. Ibid. How I pray you should we gather faith
of word, seeing we must not come to interpret Scripture, but being strengthened
with faith. And ibid. Respons ad sermonem Lutheri fol. 372. Faith cannot be
discussed or learned by words, but God is the teacher of it, and after we have
known it of him, then we may see the same also in words.

Oecolampadius in Hospin. part 2. historiae Sacram. fol. 70. I my self Nor
Oe^ola^padius.
come not to Scripture, but first armed with faith. Behold two principal
Patriarcks of the Sacramentarians, got not their faith by Scripture, but by
Enthusiasmes, and if they got it not by Scripture, surely Scripture was not the
formal cause, not the principal motive, not the only sufficient means, not the
ground or last resolution of their faith. What was then the ground, or into
what did these men resolve their faith, but into some special private
revelation, of which thus Whitaker l. 1. de Scrip. p. 91. It is schismatical,
fanatical, furious to boast of, or catch revelations now beside the Scripture.
See Laud sec. 16. p. 71 72. 73. 74*

TWELFH CHAPTER. Whether Protestants had the Scriptures from Catholics or no?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
LVther in c. 1. Galat. to. 5. fol. 293. We had indeed the scripture,
Protestants had the Scripture from Papists.
and the sacraments from the Papists. In 16. Joan. to. 4. German. fol. 227. We
are forced to grant, that we received the holy scipture, Baptism, sacraments,
and office of preaching, from them (Papists) otherwise what should we have
known of al these things?

Whitaker Contro. 2. q. 5. c. 14. Papists have the scripture, Baptism,
Catechism, the articles of faith, the ten Commandments, the Lords prayer and
these things came from them to us.

Dove of Recusancie p. 13. We hold the Creed of the Apostles, of Athanasius,
of Nice, of Ephesus, of Constantinople, which the Papists also do hold, and
the same bible, which we received from them.

Scusselburg to. 8. Catal. Heret. p. 439. We deny not, that Luther says that
in Popery is al Christian good, and from thence came to us.

Spalatensis lib. contra Suarem c. 1. n. 34. Albeit England had the scripture,
the Creeds, and Catholic Councels first from the Church of Rome, yet etc. See
Alsted l. de notis Ecclesiae c. 21. p. 231.

James Andrews l. contra Hosium p. 3^6. We deny not, that we received the
scriptures from you (Papists) Thus they, and others also: but by what honest
way or means, they had the Scripture from us, none of them tells, nor can
tell. And therefore they cannot clear themselves from plain theft, or Sacriledg.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
CHillingworth c. 2. n. 2. p. 52. Not from Papists.
Nether is that true, which you pretend, That we possess the Scripture from
you, or take it upon the integrity of your custody. But from whom else, then
Catholics, they possess the Scripture, nether he tells, nor any Protestant
can tell. Nay himself c. 6.. 73. says, we confess with him (Luther) that in
the Papac^e are many good things, which have come from them to us.

Sutlif in his answer to the Catholics Supplication c. 7 n. 13. we received not
the scriptures, nor our service orrites from them (Papists.)

Fulk in his Refutation of Rastel. p. 802. we know, from whom we have received
the Gospel, not from the Papists.

THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. Whether Catholics make great account of Scripture, and
prove their doctrine out of it, or no?
FIRST SECTION. Protestants sometimes affirm.
HOspinian part 1. Histor. Sacram. l. 3. p. 216. Thou hear, (Reader) that
the book of the Gospel is had in great reverence of Papists, How greatly
Catholics honor Scripture.
and much honored of them; Thou hear, the Reading of the Gospel to be
rehearsed religiously in their Temples: Thou hear, that they incense it with
Frankincense, and other odors, yea every word of it, every letter or tittle
to be accounted most holy; Thou hear, that the Hearers rise up, and stand
at the reading of it. Finally thou hear, other ceremonies to be used at this
reading of the Gospel.

Luther in Math. 5. apud Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 5. c. 16. The Pope, and The
Pope relieth on Scripture.
sect masters, and we, who rely on the scriptures, do in one sort boast of
the Gospel and word of God. And apud Scoppium in Ecclesiastico c. 10. The
Papists, as well as we, do boast of God, and his word, and both alike cite
scriptures, and of this we agree, and of Justification, they bring al most in
numerable places of scripture.

Calvin in Luc. 22. v. 28. The Papists Papists stick fast to Scripture.
are foolishly superstitious, whiles they stick fast to the words (of
Scripture) 4. Instit. c 17.. 20. The good Masters, that they may seem
literate, forbid to depart any whit from the letter. And he calls Catholics,
Catchers of sillabes, froward, and stubborn exacters of the letter, foolish and
ridiculous masters of the letter.

Potter sec. 5. p. 13. They (Papists) ^retend Scripture in every controversy.
pretend scripture in each controversy against us.

White in his Way p. 32. and 19. cites these words out of Sanders l. of the
Rock of the Church, which was Most plain Scripture.
printed 80 years since: We have most plain scripture in all points for the
Catholic faith. And himself adds: In all controversies, the Papists with whom
we deal, cry, Plain, evident, manifest scripture. P. 49. he cites Bellarmin
l. 1. de Verbo Dei c. 2. saying: other means may deceive me, but nothing is
more known, nothing more certain, then the scriptures, that it were the
greatest madness in the world, not to believe them. P. 64. some of them say, the
scripture is the rule, and the principal Papists make Scripture a Rule.
rule too, yea; more, as Bellarmin and others. P. 15. Papists grant, that al
other authority is finally resolved into the authority of Scripture. P. 17.
We admit the Scripture on al hands, and all the question between us, is about
the Church. In his Defense p. 162. Our Adversaries (Papists) grant the last and
highest resolutions of our faith to be into the authority of the Scripture.
Which he repeateth p. 309. 310. 3^5.

Laud sec. 16. n. 24. The greatest vpholders of Tradition that ever were, made
the Scripture v^ry necessary in all ages of the Church. sec. 20 n. 3. p. 120.
The Roman Churches rece^^ues the scripture, as Rule of fait^. Iu^l Defense of A
Rule.
the Apology part. 1. p. 65. p. 129. You (Harding) say the scriptures are so
clear of your side. Luther in psalm. 22. tom. So clear on their side.
3. fol. 343. We cannot overcome the Papists bring a huge number of places of
scripture for works. Plessie in his preface to his book of the Church: When in
the time of our Fathers, men began to protest openly against the abuses, and
traditions of the Romish Church by the authority of Gods word, they that were
then accounted famous for learning in that Church, as Ecbius, Cocleus Prierias,
and others, labored al they could to defend the said abuses by the holy
scripture. Behold, how from the very beginning of Protestancie, Catholics
sought to defend their doctrine by Scripture. Morton also tom. 2. Apol l. 5. c.
21. relates this words of Roffensis against Luther: The words of the Gospel
make most plainly for us, al fight for us, more clearly then More clearly then
the sun.
the sun. And ibid. l. 1. c. 37 cites this Note of the Rhemist Testament Joan.
4. This woman, Mystically being the Church, it is here signified, that they
which at the first believe, because the Church teaches so, afterward be much
confirmed, finding it in the Scripture also. And ibid. Morton adds: ye see
then, that your last resolution is founded in the authority of the Scriptures.

Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 1. c. 1. Papists extol the scriptures, and we higly
Papists extol the Scripture.
esteem them, and there is no controversy, that we ought to search the
scriptures, but how we should search them. Kemnice in Epist. dedicat. 1. partis
Exam. The Papists at this time, put all the strenght and Defense of their cause
in the matter of the scripture and Tradition. Thus Catholics esteem and speak
of holy Scripture, whereas far otherwise Luther postilla in Domin. 8. post
Trinitatem fol. 301. said The scripture is the book of Heretics. Christianus
Protestants say, Scripture is the book of Heretikr.
ad Portum l. contra Verronem tom. 5. Rupellae p. 31, Luther said most truly,
that scripture is the book of heretics. The same Luther postilla in Epiphaniam:
It is true, that Heretics are made by occasion of scripture. Daile in his
Apology, c. 5. Papists reverence the Gospels, and Epistles of the Apostles as
divine books.

SECOND SECTION. Sometimes deny it.
Apology of the Church of England part 4. c. 18. d. 1. These men (Papists)
alwaie abhor and fly the word of God, even as the thief flies the gallows,
Ibid. These men bid the holy scripture away, as dum and fruitles. Item. They
burn the scriptures and call them the books of Heretics. The like has Whitaker
ad Rat. 5. and 6. Campiani, And Contro. 1. q. 6. c. vlt. Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 6.
And l. 2. de Scrip. c. 6 sec. 3. And Morton tom. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 47. Martyr
in 1. Cor. 15. Papists leave no place, either to God, or scripture.

Calvin in Gal. 1. v. 8. The Papists do furiously vex the pure and simple
doctrine of the Gospel. In Joan. 4. v. 20. The Papists give no place to Prophets
or Apostles. Act. 17. v. 2. Papists think nothing can be certainly gathered out
of scripture. Contra Anabapt. p. 412. The Papists say, that the holy
scriptures Vide Calvin in ^oan. 6. v. 60. c. 8. v. 12. 39. c. 17. v. 20.
are to be let go. Luther in l. de Consilijs: The Pope burieth the holy
scripture in dirt and dust.

Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 33. Cardinal Hosius was not ashamed to say
impiously: See his Appeal. l. 5. c. 28. s^c. 2. Tom 2. Apol. l. 5 c. 13. Potter
sect. 5. p. 3.
It had been better, if (Scripture) had not been written. Yet ibid. confesses:
This I have read of Hosius, but not in Hosius. But he is ashamed to tell, where
he read it, to wit, in Iuels Apology of the Church of England, part 4 where
Iuels best excuse of a manifest lie, is, that some of his lying brethren had
told that lewd lie before him. Read Cope Dial. 6. c. 19. of this faceles lie of
Iuel, And Hardings answer to the Apology, Hosius de Verbo Dei, Bellarm.
Praefat in tom. 2.

White in his Way p. 18. They know and confess, the most and greatest points of
their religion, even well nigh al, wherein they dissent from us, have no
foundation on the scripture. And in his Epistle Dedicatorie; Al their spe^ch is
of the Church, no mention of the scriptures, nor God their Father, but their
Mother the Church. And in his Defense p. 61. accuses Catholics of Enmity,
rebellion, and contempt of scriptures. Ibid. p. 346. The words of the scripture
itself, the Replier and his Accomplices despise and revile. But it is well, that
both himself, and his fellows do give him the lie herein, as we saw in the
former section.

Vshers Reionder p. 1. Papists fly from the Scripture, even as the dog flies
from the whip, wherewith he is beaten, they speak evil of it.

But now having showed the manifold, and main uncertainties and contradictions
of Protestants, touching Scripture, let any judicious Reader judge, whether
Protestants can rationally say or think, that the Scripture is the only Judge,
or only Rule, or only sufficient Proposer of points of faith, appointed by
God for to direct and guide us assuredly, and infallibly in matters of assured,
and infallible faith: but now let us set down Catholics certain and constant
doctrine concerning the same. Only let us remember luthers word upon the fifth
psalm. No Heretics were ouercomen by force or craft, but by mutual dissension:
nether does Christ fight otherwise with them then by sending amongst them* the
spirit of giddines and dissension.

FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER. That Scripture, taken by it self alone, without
attestation of the Church, that it is the letter or word of God, cannot
sufficiently propose to men any thing to be believed with divine and
infallible faith.
1. THat Scripture, taken by it self alone without attestation of the Church,
that it is the letter or word of God, does not sufficiently propose to us, or
(to speak more properly) that in Scripture, or by Scripture alone, is not
sufficiently proposed to us, any thing to be believed with divine and
infallible faith, is evident, because all the Scriptures sufficient proposal Sup
c. 1^. sect. 1
depends on this, that it self is the word of God. And Sup. c. 5. sect. 1.
it self says not any where, that it is the word of God, and if it did any
where say it, that saying would require an other word of God to say the same of
it, and so forward without end. And this is so clear, as Hooker l. 2.. 4. Laud
Relat. sec. 16. p. 70. and 88. Potter sec. 5. and Chillingworth c. 2. do both
grant it, and prove it, and likewise al other Sup. c. 6. sect. 2.
Protestants, who grant, that the light of the Scripture is not so great, that
without the Church show it to us, we can see it. And indeed al Protestants
should grant the same, who confess (as we related l. 1. c. 14.) that the
preaching of the Church, is necessary to engender divine faith. For if that be
necessary (as we have proved l. 1. c. 11. 12. 13. 14.) we cannot believe the
Scripture to be the word of God before the Church preach it to us.

2. But it is against those Protestants who (as we related supra c. 6. sec. 1.)
avouch, that Scripture in it self has such and so much divine light, as by it
self alone, it can be infallibly known to be the word of God. But beside, that
this great light is denied by most of their fellows, as is showed c. 6. cit.
sec. 2. and feigned without al sufficient ground (as shall hereafter appear) it
may be clearly refuted. For as Laud loco cit. p. 7. says well If this inward
light were so clear, how could there have been any variety among the ancient
Beleuers, touching the authority of S. James, and S. Iudes epistle, and the
Apocalypse? For certainly the light which is in the Scripture, was the same
then, which is now. And I add: How could the Lutherans not see this light in S.
James Epistle, as well as the Caluinists? Nether can it be pretended, that this
is, because the Holy Ghost does not sufficiently lighten their eyes, because
this light may be seen even by natural reason, as Whitaker, Hooker, White and
other taught supra c. 8. sec. 2.

3. Besides, this light (great or less) is not fit or apt to the end for which
it was feigned. For it was feigned to defend, that belief, That Scripture is
the word of God depends not on the testimony of the Church, but proceeds
of the Scripture it self. And clear light cannot cause belief Light causes not
faith, but sight or vision.
(which is of things not appearing, Hebrews 11.) but only causes certain
knowledge or vision. And not light, but only authority, is the formal object
of faith. For (as the Apostle says: Faith is of hearing, not of sight. And S.
Austin l. devtilitate Credendi c. 11.) That we believe, we owe to authority. So
that light, wants both the material object of faith, which is Things not
appearing, Haebrae. 11. and also the formal object, which is Authority. And
therefore Whitaker l. 2. de Script. p. 227. 319. 235. l. 1. p. 77. 116. 122.
often times grants, that though certain knowledge, (That the Scripture is the
word of God) may be had without the testimony of the Church, yet denies, that
divine faith thereof can be had without the Churches preaching, because the
Apostle says plainly, How shall they believe without a Preacher? And, Faith is
of hearing. And Potter sec. 5. p. 8. That Scripture is of divine authority,
the Beleuer sees by that glorious beam of divine light, which shines in
Scripture, and by many internal arguments found in the letter it self. So this
light breeds sight, not faith. Beside, How do Beleuers How do Beleuers se^.
see? If therefore the Scripture can sufficiently propose nothing to be believed
with divine faith, til it self be believed with divine faith to be the word of
God (as is certain) the natural, knowledge or vision, which one may have, that
the Scripture is the word of God without the Churches testimony, serves not
to the end, for which it was devised. Besides, I hope, they will not say, that
their divine faith, That all that is in Scripture, is true, is resolved into
natural Sup c. 8 se. 1.
knowledge, That the Scripture is the word of God, as Chillingworth seems to
say c. 2. p. 53. 72. For so the ground and foundation of divine and infallible
faith, should be natural, humane, and fallible knowledge. Moreover, this
internal light, is no word of God, but (at most) a quality of the word of God:
and nothing can be the material object of divine faith and believed, but what is
the word of God, or said of God; Wherefore either they must show, where God has
said, that Scripture is the word of God; or they can never believe it with
divine faith; or they must say, that they can believe that with diuinefaith,
which God has never said, which is most absurd. And into this absurdity, al
Protestants must fall, who say, they believe with divine faith, that the
Scripture is the word of God, and yet deny, that there is any unwritten word
of God, which says, That the Scripture is the word of God. d Sup. c. 5. sect.
2.
For doubtless, there is no such written word, as themselves confess.

4. Moreover, this light (great or less) is either in the letter or words of the
Scripture, or in the sense thereof. Some Protestants seem to say, that it is in
the letter or words. For thus Whitaker l. 1. de Scrip. p. 25 We believe the
Scriptures, for the most divine character. P. 88. That they Scripture known by
the words.
are the Scriptures, is known by the style and phrase. P. 104. The Scripture
does show a certain kind of divinity in the very words, phrase, and in all
the form of the speech. And p. 113. That it came from God, is evident by the
inscription, the hand, the seal, the things and all the letter^. And Contro. 1.
q. 6 c. 9. As if by the very inscription to the Romans, it were not evident,
that it is Paul's. And Laud sec. 16 p. 83. He that beleues, resolves his last
and full assent, That the Scripture is of divine authority, into internal
arguments found in the letter it self. But beside that this internal light in
the words of Scripture, is merely feigned, it is clearly refuted, because, so al
men should see it, who can read the Scripture. And also, because the words of
Scripture are such, as men first invented, and have no divine light in them.
Likewise, if the light were only in the original letters of Scripture, as
Hebrew, and Greek, no translated Scripture should have this light, and so none
should know the Scripture to be Gods word, but who know Hebrew and Greek.
Moreover, both Fathers teach; and Protestants S. Hierom. Galat 1 Vvh^t^ker l 2
cont. Dur. sec. 1.
confess, that Scripture consists in the sense, not in the letter. or words
of Scripture. As Wotton in Whites Defense c. 28. p. 259. denies the words to
be the Rule of faith. And White ibid. affirms; the matter contained in the
words, so to be. Nay Whitaker himself l. 3. de Scrip. c. 4. p. 39^. says,
Nether do I put most certain divinity in the written letter. And surely
writing or letters give no divine authority to Gods word. For Gods word is of
the same authority, written and unwritten, as is evident, and Protestants
confess. How then can writing or letters give any true light or brightness to
Gods word? Finally, I add, that e Sup l 1. c. 10. n. 6.
faith cannot be resolved into arguments, because it is not discursiue, but
only into authority. For it is a simple assent to the saying* for the
authority of the saier. And only the word of God, or which God has said, can
be believed with divine faith. And no collection or inference of man out of the
character or letter of God, is Gods word, and therefore cannot be the object or
formal cause of divine faith. Nor is this feigned light in the sense of the
Scripture, because then by it, we could not believe every part of the Scipture
to be Gods word For (as Protestants before confessed) it Sup. c. 2. sect. 2.
were impudency and madness to say, that any know the true sense of every
part of Scripture, which is believed to be Gods word. S. Austin Epist. 119.
professed, that there is more in Scripture, which he knew not, then which he
knew. And Whitaker l. 2. de Script* p. 220. 235. says; The Eunuch, though he
understood not the Scriptures, yet he acknowledged them and certainly knew them
to be divine. And l. 1. p. 156. God has so framed his speech, that though
pious men do not always clearly see what he speaks, yet they clearly see by
the very speech, that it is God who speaks. What divine light of honesty,
have those words to Osee, Take a fornicarian, and make sons of fornication?
What divine light of humanity, have those words to Abraham: sacrifice thy
son? what divine light of truth have those words, that Balaams ass spoke to
him? And the like of many more? 5. Furthermore, the Deuisers of this
sufficient internal light of the Scripture, are not well resolved, whether not
withstanding this light, it need be proved infallibly, that Scripture is the
word of God. For Laud sec. 16. p. 64* says: It seems to m^ very necessary,
that we be able to prove the books of scripture to be the word of God, by some
authority, that is absolutely divine. And ibid. p. 66. Scripture must be proved
by some word of God.
This is agreed on by me, that scripture must be known to be scripture, by a
sufficient infallible divine proof, And that such proof can be nothing, but the
word of God, is agreed also by me. Thus he confesses, that notwithstanding
any light in the Scripture, it must be infalliby proved to be the word of God,
and that such proof can be none, but some word of God. Which if he would
constantly hold, he must needs grant, that there is some unwritten word of God,
by which the Scripture must be proved to be his word. Nevertheless himself soon
after p. 104. says, It is most But Protestants can not prove it so.
reasonable, that Theology should be allowed to have some principle, which she
proves not, but presupposes; and the chiefest, of these is, Tat the scriptures
are of divine authority. And the same he repeateth p. 110. Potter also sec. 5.
p. 26. Al Christians in the world confess the authority of scripture to be a
Principle indemonstrable, yet are we by them (Papists) perpetually urged to
prove that authority, and that by scripture. And Whitaker l 1. de Script. 106.
What Pastor ever laboreth to prove that it is God, who speaks in scriptures?
He by his right, requires, that this be granted to him. So that the chiefest
principle of Protestants Theology, and that on which depends their belief of
al they believe, cannot be infallibly proved, but must be praesupposed, and
freely granted: and consequently, they can believe nothing infallibly, as Laud
p. 64. cit. well inferred. For (as generally Protestants teach) we Sup. l. 1. c.
18. n. 1.
can have no greater certainty of the inference, then we have of the Principle
out of which we infer it. And hereupon Chillingworth (as before we showed c.
8. sec. 2.) consequently granted, that Protestants have but humane and moral
assurance of what they believe: And (as Laud says sec. 16. p. 59.) This
question; how do you know scripture to be scripture? drives some of them into
infidelity. Such fruits they see come of their denying the Churches
infallibility in all matters of faith.

6. Finally, this sufficient internal light of the Scripture (great or less)
has no sufficient ground. For the pretended ground thereof, is, that the
Scripture is called a light psalm. 118. To which I answer, First, That arguments
taken from Metaphors Arguments taken from me^aphors, are deceitful.
or similitudes, are most subject to deceit, because the true similitude may be
easily mistaken. Secondly, it is not said, that the scripture or Written word,
and much less, Al scripture, is a light, but simply: The word of God, which may
be well understood, either of the word preached. Gal. 1. Without which there is
no faith, Romans 10. or of the ingrafted word, which can save our souls. Iacobi
1. or of the word written in the hearts of the faithful. Hierem. 31. Thirdly I
say, that the word of God is called a light, not because it shows Why Gods
word called a light.
it self to be the word of God, as light shows it self to be light, but
because it shows the way to heaven. And therefore it is called a light to our
feet, which can not see but follow. And in this sort Job. 2. 29. says: He
was an eye to the blind, not that the blind could see him but follow his
directions. The like I say to that other place 2. Petri, c. 1. Where he
likeneth Prophetical speech to a lamp shining in a dark place. For nether
speaks he of al scripture, but only of Prophesies, nether likeneth he them
to a lamp, in that this is seen by it self, but either because Prophesies gave
but a darksome light of Christ, in respect of the Gospel, or because they
directed to Christ, as a lamp directs in a darksome room. In like sort, the
Apostles were called the light of the world. Math. 5. Not because the world
could see them to be Apostles of themselves, but because they gave to others the
light of faith and piety And thus much for this first proof, that Scripture
cannot sufficiently show it self to be the word of God, for want of the
material object of divine faith, which is Gods saying, that it is his word. For
God no where says in Scripture, that Scripture is his word, and what God
faieth divine faith cannot believe.

7. An other argument to the same purpose, may be taken from the Scriptures not
having in it self the formal object of faith, which is authority. For albeit
Scripture in it self contein most divine and infallible verity, yet taken by
it self, as it is such words, and such sense, it has not proper authority,
because Authority, is in an Author, and an Author is a Rational, or
intellectual Person, saying something, which for his authority or credit, we
believe. And Verity, which we believe, is in his speech, Authority or
Veracitie, for which we believe is in his person. Likewise we cannot believe, but
for some witness, who testifies that, which we are to believe: and a witness,
doubtless, is an intellectual person, distinct from his testimony, or that
which he witnesses. And Scripture is no intellectual person, but the
testimony of God, who is supreme witness of it. Wherefore it is no formal cause
of our belief, as a witness is, but only the material object, which is to be
believed. Besides, the Character or style of Scripture, or the doctrine or
majesty thereof, being not authority or veracitie, they cannot cause formal
faith, or belief, but (at most) opinion or knowledge. For (as we have often
repeated out of S. Austin) That we believe, we owe to Authority. Which is so
evident, as Whitaker l. 3 de Scriptura p. 408. says, Faith relieth upon
authority. Authority is the foundation of faith. And p. 509. To believe, some
Authority is necessary. Wherefore well wrote Stapleton Contro. 3. q. 1. art. 2.
The word of God it self (written or unwritten) is not of it self, and properly
a mean to believe, but is that which is believed: Is not the formal object of
faith, or any part thereof, but is the material object. For the word speaks
not but is heard by the voice of God, or of the Church speaking, and faith is
of hearing the word of God. And therefore properly Scripturam credimus, non
Scripturae. And in like manner, Potter sec. 7. p. 95. says: The Creed
conteines only the material object of faith, not the formal. And yet it
conteines the words and sense of Scripture. Wherefore the Scripture it self
contains not the formal object of faith, but only the material, which is
divine verity. And when grave Authors attribute authority to Scripture, either
they take authority for verity or credibilitie to be believed; or they speak
figuratively, attrib^ting by prosopopeia a person to the Scripture, as is
usual, when men speak of writings, to speak of them, as if they were the
writers. So we say, the Scripture speaks, says, teaches, and such like,
meaning, God by the Scripture does so. Or else they take not Scripture by it
self, but with the writer thereof. And so (no doubt) it has authority, not in
it self, but adioined to it, to wit, as it is the Scripture of God, or word of
God: But this authority is the increate authority of God himself, beside
which, we must have (in ordinary course) a create authority for to believe
with divine faith, and this create authority is not in the Scripture, but in
the Church, and much less is in the Scripture Prima v^ritas, as Whitaker says
l. 3. de Scriptura p. 485. and 509. For so it should not be a made or created
thing but God himself. And hence appears, that Protestants believing, what
they believe, merely because they find ^up. c. 11. ^ect. 1.
it in Scripture, and making Scripture their formal and uttermost cause of
their belief, have no formal faith, because they believe not for any formal
authority or veracitie, but for seeming verity of the things, which they
find in Scripture; which seeming verity, may cause opinion, but not true and
formal faith. But to admit, that the original hand writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, known to be theirs, had authority sufficient to beget divine faith,
how can mere copies of their writings, and those made by fallible men (as al
Bibles now extant are made by ordinary writers or Printers) have Copies of
authentical writings, are not authentical of themselves.
such authority, unless they be signed or testified by some authentical person,
that they are agreeable to the Originals? Are mere Copies of never so
authentical writings, made by private men, but not testified by any of
sufficient credit that they are agreeable to the originals, of sufficient credit
to beget humane undoubted belief in any court of Justice? And will we have mere
copies of the Prophets or Apostles writings made by fallible and ordinary men,
to be of themselves alone, of sufficient credit to beget divine faith? can not
undoubted humane faith be gotten by such mere copies not attested by any
authentical person; and can undoubted divine faith becaused by such? copies
made by fallible men cannot reasonably be accounted infallible unless they be
attested by some infallible person; and it is the attestation of the infallible
person, which makes them infallibly credible to us. Wherefore out of that which
I have hitherto said, I argue What is only the material object of faith, is
not the formal.
thus in form. What is only thematerial object of faith, or is only believed,
cannot be also the formal object of faith, and the reason of believing. That
which is the word of God (written or unwritten) is only the material object of
faith, and what is believed. Therefore it can not be also the formal object, and
reason of believing. The Mayor is evident. The Minor I prove, because the word of
God, taken by it self, has no formal authority* And only formal authority,
is the formal object of faith, and reason of believing. And here is the
difference betwixt the word of God, and the Prophets, Apostles, and Church of
God, that these have formal divine authority in themselves, and therefore are
not only material objects of faith, and believed to be Prophets, Apostles,
Difference between Scripture and Church.
and Church of God, but also are formal external reasons of believing what they
say themselves are, or what else they propose.

8. A third proof, that Scripture of it self cannot sufficiently propose it
self to be the word of God, is, because the authority of the true Church, is
the formal external cause, for which (in ordinary course) the Scripture is
believed with divine faith to be the word of God. This is evident out of those
places in Scripture, which we cited before l. 1. c. 11. and 12. which not only
prove the necessity of the Churches preaching the Scripture to be Gods word,
for to be believed as such, but also prove the very authority of the Church to
be necessary for to believe it. For faith is said to be of hearing of the word
of God lawfully preached: The Church is called the pillar and ground of truth:
she is accounted Gods witness, her voice, Christ's voice; her Pastors are
accounted Gods Legates, and appointed by God to keep men constant in faith. Al
which do show, not only that the Churches preaching is necessary to believe,
but that also her authority or testimony is necessary. And al authority or
testimony, is a formal cause of belief, because That we believe Chilling. c. 1.
n. 7.
we ow to authority. And Protestants define faith to be an assent to divine
Revelations, upon the authority of the Reuealer. And doubtless, a Reuealer is a
living and intellectual person, not a dead letter Whitaker also (as I before
cited) Authority is the foundation of faith. ^aith relieth upon authority.
Hereupon S. Austin l. contra Epist. Fundam. c. 4. and 5. professes, that
authority held him in the Catholic Church. That Christ by miracles, got
authority, and by Authority deserved belief. That religion can no way be
rightly gotten, but by authority. And otherwhere, De vtil cred. c. 17. Epist.
5. 6.
that in the Church is the height, the top, the castle of authority and that
her authority is most firm. And l. 2. contra Crescon. c. 32. I receive not
what Cyprian held of baptizing heretics, because the Church does not receive it.
l. 2. de Doctrine. Christiana c. 8. The books of wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, are
to be accounted Prophetical, because they have been admitted into authority. l.
contra Epist. Fund. c. 5. Which books (of the Acts) I must needs believe, if I
believe the Gospel because both Books, Catholics authority does alike commend
unto me. In which places he plainly makes the authority of the Catholic
Church, a sufficient external cause of his belief, or not belief.

9. Reason also shows the same. For if God would have us to believe his
mysteries, it is most likely he would apoint on earth some external
authority, subordinat to his supreme authority, for which we should believe
them: Whereupon S. Austin l. de vtilit. Credendi c. 16. said; If God have
Providence of mankind, we ought not to despair, but that he has appointed
some authority, on which we relying, as on a sure step, may mount to God. And
this authority he says, is the authority of the Church. But the authority,
on which we rely, is (doubtless) some formal cause of our belief. Protestants
also sometimes confess the same. For thus Chillingworth c. 2. Scripture believed
for the Churches authority.
p. 96. It is upon the authority of universal tradition that we would have
them believe Scripture. The same he has p. 69. Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 3. c. 7.
We are forced by the Churches Forced to believe.
authority, to believe these books to be Canonical. And if her authority can
force us to believe, it is a sufficient cause of belief. And l. 1. de Script. p.
15. We may be forced by the authority of the Church, to acknowledge the
Scripture. P. 72. The Church, is Mistres and Guide of our faith. P. 87. I am a
Disciple of the Church, I acknowledge her my Mother. P. 46. We cannot believe,
but by the testimony of the Church, as by the ordinary means. P. 62. We are
led to believe, first by the authority of the Church. P. 68. I most willingly
grant, the external judgment of the Church to be the help and means ordained by
God, and necessary for us to engender, nourish and confirm faith. And l. 2.
p. 234. The Authority of the Church, is a certain introduction to believe. P.
289. Catholic authority commending both books, Austin was necessarily induced
to believe both books. The same we must do. For what book soever such
authority shall commend to us, we must needs believe it. P. 320. I grant, the
Scripture is to be received, because it is received of the Church, Contr. 1. q.
3. c. 2. The Church is a witness of holy writ. C. 5. By tradition Tradition
conu^nceth.
and authority of the Church, it may be convinced, which books be Canonical.
C. 9. what other do al those Fathers prove, then that Scripture is to be
received, because it was always received of the Church? And does not, Because,
give a cause of belief? And Hooker, Laud, Potter cited l. 1. c. 14. grant,
that the testimony of the present Church, is the key or door that lets men
into the Scripture, Laud Relat. sec. 16. p. 102.
even to this knowledge of them, that they are the word of God. And Spalatensis
and Chillingworth c. 10. libri primi, add, that such a book cannot be known to
be Canonical Scripture, but by the testimony of the Church. But authority,
testimony, judgment, are formal causes of belief; And if Protestants do
think, that the authority S^p. l. 1. c. 14.
of the Church is no formal cause of faith, why should they teach, that the
Churches preaching, is necessary to faith, and that the preaching, teaching,
or proposing by private men, would not suffice? For private men may propose, all the Church proposes, only they cannot propose any thing with such authority.

10. And hence appears evidently that the true Church and her authority,
must always (in ordinary course) be believed before Scripture because her
authority is the formal external cause of the belief of the Scripture. And
also that falsely wrote Whitaker l. 2. de Scrip. p. 235. The Church has no
authority in matters of faith. Ibid. p. 228. The testimony of the Church is
no cause of faith And l. p. 122. The So Laud Relat. sec. 1. p. 117. Taude sec.
16. p. 106.
Scripture is now the only sufficient mea^s to believe. And Contr. 2. q. 5. c.
18. Faith does not depend upon the authority of the Church. And ibid. c. 20.
The Scripture is more manifest, then the Church. And Chillingworth c. 2. p. 57.
we say, every man is to choose his religion first, and then his Church. For
beside what we have proved, Whitaker himself has granted, That the authority
of the Church is an introduction to faith, That we are first led to believe by
her authority, and that her So laud sec. 16. p. 89. Hooker l. 2.. 7. Potter
sect. 5.
testimony is the ordinary and necessary means to engender faith, That her
authority causes faith: and therefore her authority must first of al be
believed, because it is an introduction, a first leader, a necessary means to
engender faith or (as others say) the key or door, to faith.

1^. And out of that, which has been said in this Chapter, is easily solued
that question: why is tradition Why Traditionerodible of it self, and not
Scripture.
of itself Credible, and not Scripture? I answer, That if we speak of tradition
materially, that is, of the doctrine, which we have by tradition, that is no
more credible of itself, then is the doctrine, which we have by the Scripture.
For example, the doctrine of seven Sacraments, which we have by tradition, is
no more credible of itself, then any other point of faith, which we have by
Scripture: But if we speak formally of Tradition, as it is an act of the
Church, that is of itself credible, because that includes the delivery of
doctrine by the lively or living voice of the Church. Which voice of the
Church, is evident to us, and her authority makes the doctrine, which she
delivers, credible. But the Scripture is delivered to us by dead letters, and
it is not evident to us, that the Prophets or Apostles were the Enditers of
those letters: and therefore it has not their authority adioined to it, as the
voice of the Church has her authority adioined to it: and so the Scripture,
not having the authority of the Authors thereof so annexed to it, as Tradition
has the authority of the Church, it can not be so credible of itself. Hence
also is answered that question, which Chillingworth in his Answer to the
Preface n. 25. p. Chillingwort the question answered.
18. and c. 3. p. 162. says, He desired to be resolved by many of our side,
but never could, to wit: why an implicit faith in Christ and in his word, should
not suffice, as well as implicit faith in our Church. Because it implies, that
(in ordinary course) there should be divine faith in Christ and in his word,
without faith in his Church. Christ and his word, include not all that is
necessary (in ordinary course) to divine faith, because faith is of hearing a
lawful Preacher Romans 10. But faith in his Church includes all that is (in
ordinary course) necessary to divine faith. For we can not believe in Christ's
Church, but we must believe in Christ's and in his word: Heretics say, they
believe in Christ and in his word, but that will not suffice them, because they
do not believe Vhosoeuer beloue in Christ Church believe in Christ, but not
contrariewise.
also in his Church: But whosoever believe in his Church, believe in him, but not
contrariwise, whosoever believe in Christ (so as Heretics do) believe also in
his Church, wherefore implicit faith in Christ's Church may suffice, because that
necessarily concludes faith in Christ: but al kinds of faith in Christ (as
that of Heretics) does not include faith in his Church.

12. As for the authority of Fathers, to prove, that the Scripture of it self
without the attestation of the Church, can propose nothing sufficiently to be
believed with divine faith, it may suffice, what before l. 1. c. 7. we cited out
of S. Basil, that Scripture, without tradition of the Church, would have no
force, but be like a bare letter: and out of S. Austin, that he could not
believe the Gospel, if the authority of the Church were weakened, And as for
Protestants confessions, it may also suffice, what we cited out of them l. 1.
c. 14. and here l. 2. c. 5. and 6. That the Church is a necessary
introduction, the key the door, which lets us into the knowledge of the
Scripture. And c. 5. That we cannot refel schismatiks, or Heretics, who deny
the Scripture, out of Scripture. For if the Church, be such evident itis, that
without the Church, the Scripture cannot be believed to be Gods word; and til it
be believed to be Gods word, it can not sufficiently propose any thing to us,
to be believed with divine faith.

FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. That Scripture (though believed to be Gods word) does not
sufficiently propose to men al points of faith.
1. THat Scripture (though believed to be Gods word) does not sufficiently
propose to us al points of faith, is evident. First, because, (as is proved in
the former Chapter) it does not at al propose to us this point of faith, That
it self is the wodr of God, which yet is a point of Confess. Angl. art. 6.
Gall. art 3 Belg. art 4.
faith necessary to be believed, yea in the Sup. c. 11. sec. 1.
Protestants opinion, the chiefest point of al, as on which depends their
belief of all the rest. If any object, that the Scripture, being believed to be
Gods word, it need not propose itself to be Gods word: I answer, that I speak
not, what the Scripture need not do, but what it does not. Calvin 1. Instit.
c. 7. and 8. where he endeauoreth to prove Scripture to be Gods word, brings
no word of God to prove it, but proves it out of the qualities of Scripture,
to wit, dignity, verity, conformity, antiquity and such like. And so does
Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 3 c. 3. and yet there confesses, c Item l. 1. de Sript
p 21.
that these arguments cannot persuade these books to be Canonical. And the same
says Calvin c. 7. cit. 4. And what cannot persuade, does not sufficiently
propose to make belief. For belief cannot be without persuasion. Besides these
arguments make not faith, but science.

2. Secondly, the Scripture itself says; There are some necessary
traditions, not written. 2. Thessalon. 2. v. 15. Hold the traditions, which you
have learnt, either by speech, or by our Epistle. Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c.
10. confesses, that Protestants answer diversely, whose answers, because himself
refuteth, we will for breuities sake omit. His answer is, that d So Pe^kins Cath
Refor. cont. 7. c. (...). (...) Barom. An. 53.
there were some necessary traditions not written, when this Epistle was
written. Let Whitaker show as plain testimony of Scripture, that al was
written after. You must prove as plainly out of Scripture, as we prove, as
Tertullian said to Praxeas c. 11. Secondly, because the Fathers, as S.
Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophilact, upon this place, S Basil, l de Spiritu
Sancto. c 29. S. Epiphanius haeresi 61. and S. Damascen. l. 4. de fide c. 17.
out of this place do prove, that even in their times, there were necessary
traditions not written.

3. Thirdly, because there are diverse points of faith, which nether are expressly
in Scripture, nor can be evidently and necessarily inferred out of it: But for
breuities sake, I will speak of one only, which is the perpetual virginity of
our Blessed Lady. For that is a point of faith, as is clear, Perpetual
Virginity of our B. Lady, a point of faith.
because both Iouinian, and Heluidius were condemned as Heretics for denying it,
as is evident out of S. Ambrose Epist. 7. S. Epiphanius haeresi 78. S. Hierom.
l. contra Heluidium, S. Austin haeresi 84. Gennadius l. de Ecclesiast. dogmat.
c. 68. And does any now know, what is a point of faith, or what is true
heresy, better then al these Fathers? Nay then all the Church of their time,
which condemned, partly tacitly, partly openly, the aforesaid Heretics? S.
Basil homil. de humana generatione Christi, says: The ears of those, who
love Christ, cannot suffer to here, that the Mother of God at any time left to
be a Virgin. S. Epiphanius loc. cit. calls it Blasphemous. And Confessed by
Protestants
diverse Protestants confess this to be a point of faith. For the Bohemian
confession professes to believe, art. 17. That our Lady was a Virgin before
and after her childbirth. Protestants in Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 10. p. 318. Who
denies it (her perpetual Virginity) is an Heretik Zuinglius sermon. de B.
Virgin Maria to. 1. fol. 350. I believe with firm and undoubted mind, the
pure, chaste, and unspotted Virgin, brought forth Christ, yet so, as without
any spot of Chastity, she remained a Chaste Virgin for ever. Luther l. de
votis, to. 2. fol. 272. If any deny Marie vas a Virgin, he is damned. Beza in
his confession of faith c. 3. sec. 3. professes, that she was a Virgin after
her Childbirth And why put he it into his confession of faith, if he believed it
not to be a point of faith? Whitaker also Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 9. dares not
deny it plainly: For being pressed with this argument, he says: It belongs
not to me to dispute of the perpetual Virginity of Marie. Field l. 3. of the
Church c. 30. If these were the opinions of ^ouinian: That Marie ceased to be a
Virgin, when she had born Christ and that al sins are equal: we condemn them,
and his error therein, as much, as the Romanists do. Nether can Protestants
deny it, if they will observe the definition of Heresy, which sometimes, they
give, to wit, Error against the doctrine of the Church. For Beza de puniendis
Haeret. p. 150. Moulins l. 1. cont. Peron. c. 7. Potter sect. 2. p. 55 See sup.
l. (...). 10.
that the perpetual Virginity of our B Lady, is the doctrine of the Church is
evident by the aforesaid Fathers, Greek, and Latin, in the East, West, and
South. Nether have they any reason to deny it, besides their own error, That
nothing is of faith, but what is expressly in Scripture, or may be evidently
deduced of it. Now, that this is nether expressed, nor evidently collected ou^
of Scripture, grants Perkins Cathol. Refut. Contro. 7. c. 1. I find not in
holy Scripture, that Marie remained always a Virgin, and died a Virgin. And
al Protestants must grant, because most of them deny it to be a point of faith:
as Beza Apologia altera contra Saintem p. 355. Academia Nemausiensis contra
Jesuit. Tornan p. 566. Field l 4. de Eccles. p. 240. Riuet Contro. tract. 1. 1.
sec. 20. Iunius Contro. 1. l. 4. c. 9 To this point of faith, I ad the question
of Schism, which (as Plessie cited supra c. 5. sec. 2. confessed) cannot be
decided by Scripture, because it is a matter of fact, of which the Scripture
speaks not. And yet schism is as necessary to be decided, as heresy,
because that is as well damnable, as this

4. As for the Fathers, they so plainly and directly say there are traditions
not written, as for breuities sake, I will omit their words, and relate the
confessions of Protestants Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. vlt. p. 415. I confess,
the Fathers speak much of traditions -- The Fathers were sometimes deceived --
we grant, that the Fathers defended traditions Ibid. c. 12. I grant, that
Ireneus appealed from Scripture to Apostolical traditions So Perkins.
-- it is clear, he was deceived with traditions. P. 389. Eusebius his
testimony (for traditions) is plain enough, but no way to be admitted. Ibid.
It is clear, that Basil was too much addicted to traditions. Ibid. Damascen was
too much given to traditions. P. 391. Chrysostomus saying (for tradition) is
Morton Appeal. p. 315
unadvised, and unworthy of so great a Father. -- I do not acknowledge this
his tradition. Ibid. Epiphanius was too much delighted with traditions -- He
allows indeed Apostolical Seultettom. 2. c. 19. 20.
traditions. P. 392. Let us not regard, what Cyprian, says (of tradition) P.
393. Al is not to be admitted, which Ambrose says (of traditions) Ibid. Either
Austin speaks of unnecessary traditions, or he contradicts himself. P.
394. Innocentius Primus erred in his traditions. Thus he Kemnitius 1. part
Exam. tit. de Traditionibus p. 140. Excellent men in the Church, besides
Scripture, gave too much to traditions. P. 141. The admiring of traditions not
written, drew many good and excellent men in the Church, from the wholesome rule
of faith. And that was done in the first and best times of the Church -- soon
after the Apostles, traditions beg an to be thrust upon the Church. This
opinion remained, and stuck in their successors, as in Clement. P. 142. Even
good men in the Church, were deceived by too great esteem of not-written
traditions. P. 143. Admiration of not-written traditions, deceived good and
great men in the Church -- Even in the best times of the Primitive Church
admiration of not-written traditions, could draw most excellent men from the
rule of faith. Reinolds thesi 1. Basil and Epiphanius, assaying al sorts of
helps against Heretics, will have certain things to be contained in traditions,
whereto, by the judgment of the Scripture itself, there must be no less credit
given, then to Scripture. Perkins in his problem c. de Tradit, some Fathers
inclining to heretics, did embrace traditions not-written. And he reakoneth S.
Justin, S. Ireney, Clement Alexandrin, Eusebius, Tertullian. And ibid. says:
The Fathers oftentimes speak contradictions about tradition.

5. Surely the Fathers testimonies for necessary traditions, must needs be
evident, which have forced these learned and earnest Protestants to confess,
that the Fathers avouch such kind of traditions, as they reject, whereas no one
learned Catholic ever granted, that the Fathers rejected such kind of
traditions, as they defend. Nether can Protestants produce one testimony of
any Father, which expressly or directly denies such traditions: But
Protestants infer it out of some Father speeches of the perfection of
Scripture, and of its containing al things necessary; which inference is
naught: For the perfection of Scripture and its containing al things
necessary, may well stand with traditions as we shall see hereafter.

6. Nay Protestants themselves are Protostants admit some traditions.
forced to admit some necessary tradition not written. Brentius in
Prolegomenis contra Sotum c. de traditionibus; We grant, that the tradition
wherewith the holy Scripture, and what is contained in it, is delivered unto us
by our Ancestors, is certain, firm, and undoubted: this tradition is
necessary to us, and in all manner to be embraced. Kemnitius part 1. exam.
tit. de Traditionibus p. 113 This tradition by which the books of the holy
Scripture are given into our hands, we reverently receive. -- The Fathers,
where they deliver this tradition of the books of Scripture, prove it by the
testimonies of the Primitive Church. Morton to. 1. Apol. l. 1. c. 32. after he
had rehearsed the aforsaid words of Brentius of the tradition of Scripture,
says: This Lady, and as it were Goddess of al traditions, Protestants
reverence, more then you (Papists) And to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 5. The true Canon
of Scriptures, we must honor and reverence, as the Queen, and plainly Goddess
of traditions. And l. 1. c 36. relates the foresaid words of Brentius and
allows them. Field of the Church l 4. c. 20. Though we reject the uncertain
and vain traditions of the Papists, yet we receive the number and names of the
Authors of books divine and Canonical, as delivered by tradition -- The number,
authors, and integrity of the parts of these books (of Scripture) we receive
as delivered by Integrity of Scripture believed by Tradition.
tradition. Bell in his Downfall art. 7. p 134. We receive this tradition (that
the Scripture is the word of God) p. 135. And so this tradition, is not
excepted, but virtually included in our affirmation. Moulins of Traditions c.
3. and 2^. we reject not al traditions, for Scripture itself is a tradition.
Carleton in Consensu de Scriptura c. 9. I will say freely what I think. I think
there are some Apostolical traditions ever conserved, and to be conserved iu
the Church. For Austin said not in vain: what the whole Church observes etc.
So he proved Baptism of Infants to be an Apostolical tradition, so also before
him, Origin. From Apostolical traditiou, we received the true Canon of
Scripture, and the true sense of the Canon. From hence the Church does
celebrate the Lords day. Canon and sense of it received by Tradition.
Aretius loco 33. calls (...), The Apostles Creed: what books are Canonical:
which is the true exposition of scripture. Item. Universal traditions
necessary to be observed, are the Apostles Creed, which books be Canonical,
which is the true exposition of the chiefest places of scripture. Laud Relat
sec. 16. p. 104. when the Fathers say, we are to rely upon scripture only,
they are never to Note this.
be understood with exclusion of Tradition, in what case soever it may be had,
not, but that the Scripture is abundantly sufficient, in, and to it self, for all things, but because it is deep, and may be drawn into different senses, and
so mistaken, if any man will presume upon his own strenght, and go single
without the Church. sec. 11. p. 44. Some traditions I deny not, true and
firm, and of great both authority and use in the Church, as being
Apostolical. And why is not the Churches tradition concerning Scripture, one of
these? Ibid. As for that tradition, That the books of holy Scripture, are
divine. I will handle that hereafter. And sec. 16. cit. p. 81. Against this
tradition, That the books of Scripture are the word of God, the Church of
England never excepted. Sess 15. p. 57. It is not denied, that this (baptism
of infants) is an apostolical tradition, and therefore (note) to be believed.
Protestants in Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 11. Our adversaries bring that tradition
(of Scripture) of which there is no Controversy at al among us. And sess. 1.
We grant, that Moses books are Moses, that this is a tradition by the
testimony of the Church, which could witness, that Moses books were put into
the Ark. Chillingworth c. 2.. 45. The Canon of Scripture, as we receive it, is
built upon universal tradition. The Canon is built upon universal Tradition.
Universal Tradition, rule of Controversies.
. 155. Universal tradition, is the Rule to judge al Controversies by.. 114. It
is upon the authority of universal tradition, that we would have them believe
Scripture. And though sometimes he teach, that this universal tradition is but
humane and fallible, and consequently Supra c. 2. sect. 2.
grant his faith of the Scripture, and all that is in it, is but humane and
fallible (as we have seen before) yet c. 3. n. 45. he avouches it to be as
infallible as the Scripture. For thus he writes; you were to prove the Church
infallible, not in her traditions, which we willingly grant (if they be as
universal as the tradition of the undoubted books of Scripture is) to Universal
tradition, as infallible a^ Scripture.
be as infallible as the Scripture is. Ibid.. 46. If you can of any thing make
it appear, that it is tradition, we will seek no farther Hooker also l. 3 8. If
Infidels or Atheists chance at any time to call it (Scripture) in question,
this gives us occasion to sift, what reason there is, whereby, the testimony
of the Church concerning scripture, and our own persuasion, which scripture
itself has confirmed, may be proved a truth infallible. Lo! the Churches
testimony, is a truth infallible. And we may rest our assurance upon a truth
infallible; and such is more, then an inducement to faith. Brentius also in the
words before cited, says the Churches tradition concerning Scripture is
certain, firm and undoubted. And Morton says, Protestants reverence it, as
it were the Goddess of traditions.

7. Moreover they grant, that it is a point of faith, That scripture, or the
Bible, is the word of God, and as such, it is put in their Confessions of
faith. Nay Hooker l. 1. 14. says: Of Anglica art. 6. Gallica art. 3. Belgica
art. 4.
things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what books we are bound to
esteem holy. l. 3.. 8. The main principle, whereupon our belief of al things
therein contained, is, that the scriptures Protestants main Principle.
are Oracles of God himself. Laud Relat. sec. 11.. 2. calls it, prime
principle of faith sec. 16.. 2. Great principle in Divinity.. 6. Great
principle of faith, the ground and proof of whatsoever is of faith. P. 104.
Chiefest principle. P. 110. Main principle of Divinity Chillingworth c. 2..
11. First principle. Whitaker l. 2. de Scriptura p. 218. It is most of al
necessary, that the certain Canon of scriptures be undoubted among Christians.
Vshers Reioinder p. 63 Of al things, this is most sure, and ought to be
believed, that the scripture is the word of God. But this most necessary, most
sure, this prime, this great, this main point of faith, is no written word of
God. For thus Laud sec. 16. p. 70. There is no place in scripture, which tells
us, that such books, containing such and such particulars, are the Canon and
infallible will and word of God. Hooker l, 1.. 14. Being persuaded by other
means, that these Scriptures are the Oracles of God, Note.
themselves do then teach us the rest. l. 4.. 4. It is not the word of God,
which does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well, to think it is in his
word. White in his Way p. 48. The certainty of the Scripture, is not written
indeed with letters in any particular place or book thereof. And I hope it is
not written with Ciphers. See more of their like Confessions supra c. 5. sec. 2.

8. And yet Hooker l. 5.. 21. says, We have no word of God, but the
Scripture. No word of God for their main Principle.
Whitaker Contro. 2. q. 5. c. 18. We acknowledge no other word, then written:
what doctrine soever is not written, that we say is bastard. Beza in Romans 1. v.
17. Christians acknowledge no other object of faith, but the written word of God
Perkins in his Reform. Cath. Contro. 20. c. 2. We acknowledge the only written
word of God. Wherefore either there is some point of faith, nay the chiefest
point of al, an unwritten word of God: or this point; That the scripture is the
word of God, is no point of faith with Protestants: Which Chillingworth c. 2.
4. seems plainly to teach, where he says: The controversies, wherein the
scripture it self is the subject of the question, cannot be determined but by
natural reason.. 32. The scripture is none of the material objects of our
faith. Scripture no material object of faith.
. 51. Tradition (by which Scripture is known) is a Principle, not in
Christianity, but in reason.. 159. God requires of us under pain of
damnation, only to believe the verities therein contained, not the divine
authority of the books wherein they are contained. And the same insinuate
Whitaker, Hooker, and White cited supra c. 8. sec. 2. Who say, that Scripture
may be known by reason and light of nature to be the word of God. So that the
most necessary, most sure, prime, great, main ground of Protestants faith, is
a principle of natural reason, and no object of divine faith, or which we are
bound to believe under pain of damnation. Surely I see not, how Protestants can
make agree these two main points of their doctrine: There is no word of God
unwritten, necessary to be believed and, That scripture is the word of God, is
a word of God unwritten, necessary to be believed. The first is the common
doctrine of al Protestants, who therefore deny, that there is any tradition,
that is word of God unwritten, necessary to be believed, and say, the Scripture
is the perfect and entire rule of faith, containing al, that is necessary to
be believed. The second also is their usual doctrine. For that with them it is a
word of God: That the Scripture is the word of God, is evident both because they
put the Canon of Scripture in their Confessions of faith, as a part of their
belief, and Sup n. 7.
also because Laud loco cit. calls it a prime principle of faith; And Usher;
That of al things, this ought to be believed. And seeing they say, their belief
of al other points depends on this, I suppose, they will not deny this to be
a point of faith, or Gods word, and say it is but a humane principle, or word
of man. That this point is not written is evident. For no where it can be
showed: and also because Laud, White and others cited supra c. 5. sec. 2
confess, that it is no where written in Scripture. And if it were any where
written, we could prove Scripture by itself, which Whitaker, Field, Hooker,
Couel, Chillingworth, and others cited c. 5. do deny. And that they account
this point necessary to be believed, I need not prove, because they account it
the most necessary of al, and on which depends whatsoever else they believe.

9. An other proof, that the Scripture does not sufficiently propose al points
of faith, may be taken from the Protestants confession, That they cannot deduce
most of their points of faith, in which they differ from us, out of Scripture
by any necessary Inference; but by adding to Scripture some humane principle
As they cannot infer out of that saying of Scripture: Do this in Commemoration
of me, that the Eucharist is not substantially the body of Christ, but by
adding this humane principle, A Commemoration cannot be substantially the thing
which is commemorated. And the like will appear in their proof of other their
points of faith, if they be brought into syllogistical form. And how can that
be said to propose See Vvhites. (...). 16 p. 138.
sufficiently al points of faith, which does but partly propose them and
needs the addition of another How can it be called the perfect rule of faith
which needs addition? seening we have showed before out of the Fathers, and
their own confession, that a Rule needs no addition. C. 5. sect. 2.
Nay how can they say, they believe those conclusions, as points to be
infallibly believed, which they being fallible men, do also infer partly out of
fallible and humane principles? seeing (as Laud says sec. 16.. 3.) This is
an inviolable See him sect. 19. p. 125.
ground of reason, That the principle of any conclusion, must be of more
credit, then the conclusion itself. And the same say Whitaker Contro. 2. q. 5.
c. 18. l. (...). de Script. p. 166. 392. 416. Potter sec. 5. p 14. 15 33. 40
Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 37. Chillingworth Fallible Principles can never
produce an infallible conclusion.
c. 2. p. 57. and others commonly. Thus have we proved, that Scripture does not
sufficiently propose al points of faith: now we will prove, that it does not
propose to al men.

SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. That Scripture does not sufficiently propose points of
faith to al men capable of external proposal.
1. THat Scripture does not sufficiently propose points of faith to al men, who
are capable of external proposal, is evident in the blind, and those who
cannot read. For the blind cannot so much as see the letters of the Scripture,
and those who cannot read, cannot see their signification, or what they
signify: Therefore Scripture of itself does propose nothing sufficiently unto
them. If any answer, that Scripture may be read to them, and so propose
sufficiently to them, I reply: First, that if Scripture cannot propose to them
but by some others reading of it, of itself alone it cannot propose, and so can
be no Rule of faith to them, because a Rule needs no help to direct. And yet
White in his Defense c. 24. p. 105. says; This Rule (of faith) is of such
nature, as it is able to direct al men, yea the simplest and vnlea^nedest
aline. Secondly, that according to Protestants, al men are fallible, and may
read wrong, either of purpose or of ignorance. And the Scriptures proposal were
not infallible, if it used a fallible help. Surely the blind or ignorant men,
can have no greater assurance, then moral, that the Reader reads true. For
what divine infallible assistance can he be thought to have in reading true?
And it were madness to say, he has divine assistance in reading true, and to
deny that the true Church of God has the like assistance in teaching true.

2. And (as D. Potter says sec. 5. p. 7.) The assent of divine faith is
absolutely divine, which requires an object and motive so infallibly true, as
that it nether has nor can possibly admit any mixture of error or falsehood.
And he should have said; it cannot possibly admit any mixture of fallibilitie.
And doubtless any particular man's reading, is fallible: How then can the blind
or ignorant men have faith, absolutely divine, whose motive is Gods word read by
a particular fallible man? If any answer, that Reading, to them is but a
condition of their believing, but the whole motive, is Gods word, which is
written: I reply, First, that their belief depends upon this condition, and
how can infallible faith depend upon a condition, which is fallible? Secondly,
that thus the word Read, and not, Written, must be the formal cause of their
belief: And so Scripture is not the formal cause of their faith: For Scripture
is only the word written. I ask therefore, what is the external formal cause of
the blind and ignorant men's belief of that which is in Scripture? For some
such external cause there must be, as Whitaker l. 1. de Scrip. c. 6. p. 64.
Potter and others grant; not the doctrine it self: For that is the material
object of their faith, and the thing, which is believed. Nor the writing of it,
or letters of the Scripture. For that they perceive or understand not: Nor the
Reading, For that is fallible.

3. If any say, that the doctrine is both the material and formal cause of
their belief, because it is credible for itself. I reply: First, that this
Credibilitie for itself, or internal light in the doctrine, is feigned and
refuted heretofore, in that we said before c. 14. of the Scripture. Secondly,
that assent to doctrine for itself, cannot be faith, because faith is an assent
for authority of some that proposes doctrine. Thirdly, that thus Scripture or
writing, is no formal cause of belief (as Protestants said before c. 11. sec.
1.) but merely doctrine is that cause, and that writing is but a conseruer, or
pointer to divine doctrine, but no cause at al of believing it. Let them then not
say, that Scripture is the principal external formal cause of their believing,
what they believe; but confess, that Scripture, or writing of divine doctrine,
serves them to no more, then Reading serves the blind or ignorant, who, as they
have the same faith, which the learned, so must they have the same external
formal cause of faith, which they have: but that all the formal cause of their
believing what they find in Scripture, is the internal light of the doctrine it
self, and that they have no external formal cause of their belief of it; and
that writing or reading of it, does but point to the verity or light of the
doctrine, as they say of the Churches testimony of the Scripture, that it does
but point at the word of God, which is to destroy al formal faith, which is an
assent for authority, and to become Enthusiasts and to make al Christian
doctrine ridiculous to Infidels, in telling them, that Christians have no
external formal cause, why they believe, either the Scripture to be written by
Gods inspiration, or that which is in it, to be Gods doctrine, beside the
Scripture or doctrine itself. And that, as the Church does but point to the
divinity of the Scripture, but is no formal cause of our believing it to be
divine: So the Scripture does but point at the divinity of the doctrine which
it contains, but is no formal cause of believing it to be divine doctrine.
Nether can they give a good reason, why they should say, that Gods writing
should be credible of be credible of itself to be Gods writing, and need only
the Churches pointing to it for to believe, that it is Gods writing; and that
Gods doctrine should not be credible of itself to be his doctrine, and need only
the Scriptures pointing to it, that it is his doctrine. For why should not Gods
doctrine be as credible of itself, to be his writing? And so al external formal
causing of belief is gone, and only pointing to the object of beleeif, is left.
And Protestants must not say: that they believe any thing, because it is in
Scripture, but only points to what they believe, as they say, they believe not
Scripture to be the word of God, because the Church testifies, that it is so,
but for it self, being pointed to by the Church. See Chillingworth supra c. 11.
sec. 2.

SEAVENTENTH CHAPTER. That the Scripture has not proposed points of faith in all times, when faith was had.
1. THat Scripture has not proposed points of faith in all times, when points
of faith were believed, is evident: For there was no Scripture til Moises, and
yet therewas true faith ever before since Adam. Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 7.
I grant, that there is no Scripture ancienter then Moises books, and that
religion remained pure all that time without Scripture. Ibid. c. 16 I grant,
that God from Adam to Moises, kept Religion kept by tradition more then 2000.
years.
doctrine delivered by living voice, that is traditions not written. Item c. 7.
cit. Some barbarous men for a time wanted Scripture: For a time doctrine may be
kept entire without writing. Item q. 3. c. 10. I grant there was a time when
the word was not written, and then was the Church. Kemnice 1. part Exam. tit.
de Scriptura p. 14. From the beginning of the world for 2450. years, heavenly
Moulins of Tradition c. 17.
doctrine, by divine voice revealed, was proposed, and from hand delivered,
without Scripture divinely inspired. And ibid. p. 41. It is clear, that the
Apostles for some first years delivered and spread Apostolik doctrine, without
any writing of theirs, by only lively voice.

2. Chillingworth c 2 n. 159. Ireneus tells us of some barbarous Nations, that
believed the doctrine of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the word
of God: For they never heard of it, and faith comes of hearing.

3. Dauenant de Iudice c. 5. We grant that before Moses, the word of God
Before Moses, Tradition was sufficient.
not written, and propagated to Posterity by continual tradition, was a
sufficient Rule of faith. Rainolds Conclus. 1. God revealed his will without
writing to Adam, and from Adams time, til Moises.

4. And was the Church of God, for 2400. years before Christ, infallible in all
points of faith, and is she not after Christ, infallible in the most
fundamental point of al concerning Scripture? was the tradition of the Church
for all that time, an infallible rule of faith, and it is not now? Is the Church
since Christ's Hebr. 7.
time, of worse condition, then it was then? or did men in that time,
ordinarily believe either without some external means or motive, (which is
Prophetical and miraculous) or did they believe infallibly for the tradition of
the Church at that time which was fallible? Whitaker l. 1. de Script. p. 64.
says: We ask which is that external cause, for which we must believe: For
there must Some external cause infallible.
be some external cause, seeing faith is not bred in us, nor produced of the
Holy Ghost, without external causes, unless miraculously, and is of hearing.
And l. 3. c. 10. p. 415. As the Doctrine and religion which we profess, is
heavenly and divine, such also must be the reason and authority of believing.
And ibid. c. 4. p. 392. Our faith must rely upon an external Chilling. c. 1.
n. 7. Laud sect. 33 p. 2. 8 Field l. 4. c. 7.
infallible means, and which is an external infallible means, causes faith.
Potter sec. 5. p. 7. The assent of divine faith is absolutely divine, which
requires an object and motive so infallibly true, as that it nether has, nor
can possibly admit any mixture of error or falsehood. And what external means
had men to believe ordinarily, before there was Scripture, but the Church? For
what external infallible cause, did they believe, but for the Church? or was the
belief of every man for those 2400. years, Prophetical or miraculous, without
any external infallible motive or cause? What motive so infallibly true, as
that it could not possibly admit any mixture of error or falsehood, had the
ordinary Beleuers, before there was any Scripture, beside the Church?

EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. That Scripture has not proposed points of faith in all
places, where faith was had.
1. THis is evident by the testimony of S. Ireney, who l. 3. c. 4. says,
that in his time, many Barbarous Nations believed in Christ, Augustine l. 1. de
Doctr. Christ. c. 39.
without letters or inck. which made Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 7. to
confess, that some Barbarous men for a time, wanted Scriptures, and that for a
Scripture not simply necessary.
time, doctrine may be conserved entire without writing, and that hence is
rightly concluded, that Scripture is not simply necessary. And l. 1. de
Script. c 14. sec. 4. p. 159. Those Barbarians, of whom Ireney speaks, who
had salvation written in their hearts, were indeed true Christians, though they
knew not Scripture: But (says he) they were not simply ignorant of the
Scripture, because they held the doctrine of the Scripture. But I reply, that
Scripture and doctrine of Scripture, are different, and relatiuely opposite.
Moreover, the doctrine of Scripture is no Proposer to believe, but the thing
proposed to be believed. And we speak of the Proposer of points of faith, not of
points of faith, or doctrine of faith proposed: Though therefore these Barbarians
believed the doctrine, which is in Scripture, yet they believed not it by means of
Scripture. We therefore ask, by what infallible external means, they believed it,
if not by the Church? For some infallible means they must have had to believe in
ordinary course, as Whitaker and Potter cited in the former Chapter confess,
and is evident: And howsoever the doctrine or sense of the Scripture, may be
said to be the Scripture, because it is the more principal part of Scripture;
yet in this question of the Proposer of points of faith, it ought not to be
meant by the word Scripture, because the doctrine of Scripture, is the points of
faith, and is that, which is to be sufficiently proposed and believed; and so it
is not the Proposer, but the Proposed. Wherefore Whitaker So also White in his
Way p. 2^. and in his Defensep. 259.
loco iam citato, and Contro. 1. q. 3. c. 10. equiuocateth: For when Catholics
argue, that the Church is ancienter then Scripture, because it was before any
Scripture; Or that Scripture is not necessary to faith, because diverse Nations
believed without Scripture, he answers, that the Church is not ancienter then
the word of God, None believed without knowledge of that doctrine, which is in
Scripture: For Scripture is Whitaker Contr. 2 q. 5. c. 19. Praedicatio, and
verbum ^c iptum, ratione differuns.
not the word of God, or doctrine of God, simply taken, but the word or doctrine
of God, written. Wherefore it is a Sophisme a Coniunctis ad diuisa, to speak of
Gods word simply, when he should speak of Gods word written: For Catholics
speak of the word or doctrine of God written, not simply taken; and confess,
that the word of God simply taken, is ancienter then the Church; and that none
can believe without this doctrine, because it is that, which is to be believed. And
they ask, what is the infallible external cause, for which this doctrine, or
word of God was believed of those Barbarians, seeing that could not be the letter
of God, or the Scripture, which they had not. Either therefore they believed the
word of God, and doctrine of Scripture, for no external infallible cause, and so
they believed miraculously and extraordinarily: or they believed it for the
infallible authority of the Church. When therefore Whitaker says, that
Scripture is the L. 1 de Scrip. c. 11. sec. 1. Contr. 1. q. 6. c. 9. 14. Calvin
1 Instit. c. 6.. 2. Vide supra c. 5. sec. 1.
only sufficient means to believe, either he means by Scripture, the letter of
Scripture, or the sense; if the letter, those Barbarians had not, nor blind
and ignorant men, have that means to believe: if the sense, that is not the
means to believe but the object to be believed; and we ask, what is the
infallible external means for to believe this sense. For (as Whitaker says l.
1. de Script. p. 151.) We seek some external means, for which we believe the
Scripture. And Contro 2. q. 4. c. 3. To interpret Scripture without means, is
Enthusiastical, Anabaptistical, and extraordinary; For the spirit now teaches
only by means, and such as the means are, such must needs be the Interpretation.

2. Protestants Confessions, that al things which are to be believed, are not in
Scripture, are related supra c. 5 sec. 2. to wit: That al things absolutely
cannot be proved by scripture; not al things simply; that it is not an
absolutely perfect Rule; not safe to judge by Scripture alone; that scripture
cannot assure us; cannot prove itself to be Gods word: That Schism cannot be
decided by scripture.

NINTEENTH CHAPTER. That Scripture does not clearly enough propose al points of
faith.
1. THat Scripture does not clearly enough propose al points of faith, is
evident: First, because (as we have already proved) it teaches not al points of
faith immediately, and much less so clearly, as is necessary to beget divine
faith of them al Secondly, because Scripture nowhere says, that it teaches al
points of faith so clearly And therefore Protestants can have no divine faith,
that it teaches al points so clearly, as is necessary to faith. Thirdly,
because the Scripture itself says, that in it are some hard and difficult
things 2. Petri 3. And Acts 8. When S. Phillip had asked the Eunuch, whether he
understood, what he read in Scripture, He answered; And how can I, unless somes
hew me? and the place which he read, was of the passion of Christ, which is a
most necessary point of faith. Whereupon Whitaker l. 2. de Scriptura p. 229.
says; The Eunuch, without Philip, nether believed, nor understood, what was
sufficient to salvation. And yet he was a pious man. And Luke. 24. Jesus
beginning from Moises, and all the Prophets, interpreted to them in all
Scriptures, which were of him. And what needed he to interpret the places of
Scripture, which were of him, if they had been of themselves clear enough to
beget faith? And yet the knowledge of Christ, is a point most necessary.
Fourthly, holy Fathers frequently say, that the Scripture is obscure, or hard
to be understood, whose testimonies I omit for breuities sake: And to say, they
mean not of any point of faith, as Protestants say, is mere voluntary.
Fifthly, if the Scripture were plain enough in all points of faith, there would
need no gift of Interpretation for points faith. For to what end need
Interpretation, where there is claritie enough to breed faith.

2. Finally, this is so evident, as Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 4. c. 1. says When
he (Bellarmin) makes this See sup. c. (...). sect. 2.
the state of the question, whether Scripture of itself be so clear, as without
Interpretation, it suffices of itself to end and decide al Controversies of
faith, he fights without an adversary: For in this he has not us for
Adversaries. And ibid. They say, but falsely, that we think that Scripture,
without interpretation, suffices to decide al Controversies. Behold,
Scripture of itself, and without Interpretation, suffices not to end al
Controversies of faith. Calvin also 4. Instit. c. 7.. 25. being urged, that the
words of the institution of the Eucharist, did plainly teach the real and
substantial presence of Christ, answers; As if you could cast the gift of
Interpretation out of the Church, which gives light to the word. So that the
Scripture does not clearly enough teach, what the Eucharist is, without the
light Interpretation: And yet it is a great point of faith And the same is
evident in the dissentions of Protestans about so many points of faith. For
they being (forsooth) holy men, would not gainsay clear Scripture. At least
true learned and holy men could hardly fall into any errors in faith, because
al points thereof were clearly set down in Scripture: And yet S. Hierom. l. 2.
contra Pelagium, and S. Austin l. 2. de Baptis. c. 1. 5. l. 3. c. 14. and De
dono perseuerantiae c. 21. say it is hard, even for the best learned, not to
fall into some such errors. And we see it in S. Cyprian and his Fellows, and in
others. 3. Protestants Confessions, that al points of faith are not clear
enough in Scripture, may be seen supra c. 2. sec. 2. and c. 4. sec. 2.

TWENTIETH CHAPTER. That the Scriptures proposal, is not necessary, in
ordinary course, to have divine faith.
1. THat the Scriptures proposal of points of faith, is not necessary in
ordinary course, to have divine faith, is evident First; because the Scripture
no where says it. Secondly, because the Scripture is not the external formal
cause of faith, as we have showed, that the authority of the Church is.
Thirdly, because divine faith was for more then Calvin 1. Instit. c. 6.. 2. See
supra c. 17. 18.
2000. years, before there was any Scripture. Fourthly, because even after
Scripture was, there was in S. L. 3. c. 7.
Irenes time, faith among some barbarous nations, where was no Scripture. And
this is so evident, that although Protestants must needs say the contrary,
because commonly they teach, (as we saw c. 11. sec. 1.) that Scripture is the
utmost formal cause of their faith (without which cause, undoubtedly, there can
be no formal faith) yet sometimes they confess it. Whitaker Contro. 1. q 6. c.
7. Hence he concludes, Therefore scriptures are not simply necessary: Rightly:
And it is clear out of which Protestants grant that there was divine faith in
the world for 2000. years before any Scripture was: and since Christ also,
where there was no Scripture: which conuinceth, that Scripture nether of its
nature, nor of Gods institution, is an absolutely necessary means (in ordinary
course) to have faith. For then the Barbarians, of whom L. 3. c. 4.
S. Ireney speaks, could not have had divine faith. And Chillingworth c. 2.
n. 159. says: scripture is not so much of the being of Christian doctrine, as
requisite to the well being of it. And Why Scripture is not the sufficient
Proposer.
out of al which we have hitherto said of Scripture, it is evident, that it is
not the Al -- sufficient Proposer, instituted by God for to believe with divine
faith. For first, it is no intellectual person, as doubtless a proper

ONE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. That the Scripture contains the sum of Christian
faith, and al things, that are necessary to be believed, of al kinds of men,
explicitly.
1. THat the Scripture contains the sum of Christian faith, and al things
necessary to be explicitly believed of al kinds of men, is manifest. First,
because it contains the mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation, and all the
Articles of the Apostles Creed. Secondly, because the Scripture professes this:
For Joan. 20. v. 51. it is said: These are written, that you may believe that
Jesus is Christ, the son of God, and that believing, you may have life in his
name. And S. Luke c. 1. It seemed good unto me, having diligently attained to
al things, from the beginning to write to thee in order (good Teophilus) that
thou may know the verity of those words, whereof thou have been instructed.
Where it seems, that both S. Ihon, and S. Luke profess, that they wrote in
their Gospel, the sum of Christian faith, and all that is absolutely necessary
to salvation: Romans 15. v. 4. Whatsoever are written, are written for our
learning, that by patience and comfort of scriptures, we may have hope. And if
we may have hope, why not faith?

2. And this, Fathers teach, as we shall see in the next Chapter. And this is
al, which some Protestants a Laud sect. 17. p. 117. Potter sect. 4. p. 96.
Morton to. 2. Apol. l. 1. c. 19 White Defense c 29. p. 270. Plessie de Eccles
c. 4. p. 85. Sum of religion.
desire, though in words they will seem to say more. Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6.
c. 6. We affirm, that the sum of our Religion, is written. Q. 4. c. 4. If he
confess, that the knowledge of Christ is manifest in Scripture, surely we desire
no more: For this is as much as we desire. Ibid. If by all the scripture, he
mean the sum of doctrine, necessary to every one for salvation, then we
Knowledge of Christ. Necessary to every one.
acknowledge the argument, and say, it is al clear. Again: If he confess, that
the scripture is like an open book for the mysteries of our Redemption, truly
we have not to demand any more: For thence will follow, that al things are
manifest in scripture, which are necessary to salvation, which is the ground
of our Defense. Morton to 1. Apol. l. 2. c. 9. after he had cited out of Coster
these words. We deny not, but that the chiefest points of faith necessary to
every ones salvation, are clearly enough set down in scripture, says: A pure
and right doctrine of Protestants. And in his Appeal. l. 2. c. 28. scriptures be
Al fundamental points.
the perfect treasury of al fundamental Principles of faith. Musculus in
locis, tit. de Nomine Dei p. 425. Al things could not be namely expressed in
scripture, which desire of Gods glory does require, it suffices, that the
sum of them Sum and general rules
and certain general rules should be inserted in scripture, to which we might
frame al our life. Humphrey ad Rat. 2dam Campiani p. 114. We know, that cases
or points of law, cannot be set down in laws, as Aristotle and Lawyers say
well: yet the sum of al religion Sum of religion.
and al heads of faith, are contained in those writings, out of which, al our
dogmes may be fully and abundantly drawn, as out of fountains. Calvin l. 2. de
lib. arbit. p. 151. Not al sermons were taken word for word, yet their Gospel
was faithfully drawn into a sum, which may fully suffice us.

3. Now that Catholics teach, that Stat. le^on l 13. de Principijs c. 6.
Bellar. l. 4. de Verbo Dei c. 11. Gordon Cont. 1. c. 21. 32.
the sum of Christian religion, and al things necessarily to be believed
explicitly, of al men, are contained in Scripture, Protestants themselves
confess: For thus Rainolds in the Preface to his Conclusions cites out of the
Preface of Gregory 13. in Biblia Regia: In these Books, See Vvhit^k Cont 2 q.
5. c. 20. Morton to. 2. Apol l. 1. c. 19. and in (...). p. 317. Ch^lling. c.
(...).. 80.
are explaned all the Mysteries of our religion. And ibid says. The Church of
Rome itself does acknowledge, that the whole doctrine, religion and faith which
leads the Faithful to salvation and life, by the true worship of God, is
contained in Gods word. Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. vlt. Bellarmin confesses
Whole doctrine of religion. Al dogmes simply necessary to al. White Way p
^3. and in Defense (...). 35. Potter sect. 4. p 95.
that al Dogmes simply necessary to al men, are had in the Scripture. Laud
Relat. sec. 11. n. 1. Bellarmin confesses, that al things simply necessary
for all men's salvation, are in the Creed, and the Decalogue. See him sec. 20. n.
3. See also Chillingworth c. 2. n. 144. c. 3. n. 80. Potter sec. 4. p. 95. sec.
5. p 4. 13.

4. Wherefore the true difference between us, is not, whether al things simply
necessary to be explicitly believed, or al, necessary to every one, be in
Scripture; but whether al things any way necessary, or necessary to any
men, be in Scripture: For they will have al points, that are of faith, to be
either actually contained in Scripture, or to be clearly inferred out of it, as
we showed supra c. 9. sec. 1. Nay Rainolds in his first Conclusion, defends,
that the Scripture teaches, whatsoever is behooful for salvation: which he
often repeateth; so that Whatsoever is behooful.
they will have not only al things necessary, but also al things behooful to
salvation, to be contained in Scripture. And nevertheless they confess, that it
does not teach, that itself is the word of God, which, with them, is the most
fundamental point of al. Whereas we confess, that it contains al, which we
acknowledge to be fundamental, that is by Gods institution absolutely necessary
to salvation: so that in effect we grant more to Scripture, then they do,
though they in words give more to it, then we.

5. I add also, that the Scripture, sufficiently teaches the far greater part
of points of faith: This I prove, because the Fathers heretofore, and other
Catholics since, have confuted al most all the heresies, that have risen, by
plain testimonies of Scripture: Hereupon Catholic writers (as we heard
Protestants Confess. c. 13. sec. 1.) say, they have plain Scripture in all
places for the Catholic faith, an in all Controversies, cry, Plain evident,
manifest Scripture. And hereupon also both Fathers and Catholics sometimes, by
the word Scripture, understand the whole word of God; because it contains the
far greater, and principaller part of the word of God. Catholics (says
Stapleton Act. 17. v. 2.) expressly teach, that the far greatest part, and in
general In general al doctrine of faith.
al doctrine of faith, may be, and must be gathered out of Scriptuie.

6. Moreover I add, that the Scripture teaches mediatly, every point of
faith, because it sends us to the Church, which teaches us al points of
faith. S. Austin l. 1. cont. Crescon. c. 33. Albeit of this matter, there be no
example brought out of holy Scriptures, yet even in this matter, the truth of
the same holic Scriptures is held, when we do, what Present Church.
now seems to the whole Church, which the authority of the same Scriptures
does commend: that seeing the holy scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears
to be deceived by the obscurity of this question, let him of it ask the same
Church, which the holy Scripture shows without al doubt. And the like he
says in other places. And Protestants in Colloq Ratisb. sess. 6. p. 144.
confess, That it seems a fair saying: By means of the infallible authority
of the Church, al matters of faith or manners, may be deduced out of scripture.
Hence appareth how untruly D. Potter sec. 5. p. 12. said of us: They teach,
that much of the object, or matter of faith, is not contained in Scripture any
way.

TWO AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. That the Scripture teaches plainly enough, the sum
of Christian faith, and al things absolutely necessary to be believed explicitly.
1. THat Scripture teaches plainly enough the sum of Christian faith, and al
things absolutely necessary to be believed explicitly, I prove because (as is
showed in the former Chapter) it teaches al such points; and that it teaches
them clearly enough, appears by that it teaches them in the plain and usual
sense of these words, which is to teach plainly enough, as can be by writing.
And this may be showed by Induction though all the Articles of the Apostles
Creed, which Catechimus Trident p. 13.
contains all the points, which are absolutely necessary to be believed
explicitly, and is called of the August. sermon. 194. de Temp. See more inf^a c.
24. Laud sec. 11. 11. Plessie de Eccles. c. 4. Leo Epist. ^om. 13. See him
(...) de unit. c. 1. 3. 5. 7. 10. 11. 16. 18. 20.
Fathers Regula fidei. And of ordination the Council of Trent sess. 23. c. 3.
says, that by the testimony of Scripture, it is manifest, that grace is
given by ord^nation. And sess. 13. c. 1. professes, that Christ gave his Body
to his Apostles in plain and express words, and in a most manifest sense: And
proves al most al its Decrees of faith, by manifest places of Scripture. The
same also teaches S. Austin l. 2. de peccatorum meritis c. vlt I believe, that
herein the authority of scriptures would be most clear, if man could not be
ignorant of it, without loss of promised salvation. And l. 2 de Doctrina
Christiana c. 9. In those things, which are plainly set down in scripture, are
found al which contein faith and manner of life: In which words, I note those:
If man, that is, if man could not be ignorant of it, without loss of Salvation!
which clearly show, that he speaks of things necessary to be actually
believed of al men: And in the second place he says not, which contein al
faith, but which is necessary to salvation, and which before he had called
Regula credendi. And l. 3. c. 2. he says: the Rule of faith is gathered out
of the plainer places of scripture. And the Rule of faith or Rule of belief,
contains not al faith, but all that is absolutely necessary to Salvation. For
a Rule is not to contein, but to regulate al. Regula dicta est, eo quod recte
ducit, nec aliquem trahit D. 3. apu^ Gratian.
aliorsum.

2. Nether is this contrary to that, which Fathers and Catholics say, that the
Scriptures are hard or obscure, First because to say, that the Scriptures are
easy for the sum of Christian faith, and points by Gods apointment absolutely
necessary to be believed explicitly of al, is not to say absolutely, that the
Scriptures are easy, but only that they are easy in some part, and that a
small one too. Secondly, because a way may be said dangerous, if in some part it
be so, though not in all parts: so the Scripture may be said hard and obscure,
if in some part it be such. Thirdly, because though the Scripture may be easy
to be understood, yet it may be hard to be infallibly sure, that we rightly
understand it, without the assurance of the Church.

THREE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. That the Scripture is necessary to the better
being of Christian faith.
1. THat Scripture is necessary to the better being of Christian faith, is
evident, both by what the Apostle says 2. Tim. 3. Al scripture divinely
inspired is profitable to teach, to reprove, to instruct etc. and also by what
has been said in the former Chapter, that it teaches al points fundamental,
or absolutely necessary to be believed explicitly of al, that it teaches the
most points of Christian faith in sending us to the Church, which teaches them
al. Besides, it helps to remember better what we are to believe; it describes
what is the true Church, and which are the Notes, and gives testimony to her;
And it is a main confirmation of the true Christian faith, and a great
confutation of heresies contrary to it, and the only arms proper to
Christians, which they have against most heretics. For they denying the
Infallibility of the Church, Councels, or Fathers, and rejecting al testimony
of miracles, leave the true Christian Church no proper arms to fight against
them, but the Scripture, which God has made to be of so great esteem among
Christians, as S. Austin says: None will refuse Scripture who will be accounted
in any sort a Christian. And otherwhere: No Christian will go against
scripture, no quiet man against the Church, no man in his wits against reason.
And Vincentius Lyrinensis c. 39. adds: we must either impugn older heresies
only with scripture, or avoid them being condemned by General Councels.
Moreover, it is not likely, that either the holy Writers; would have been so
careful to write, or the Church, to conserve the holy Scripture, if it had not
been thought to have been in some sort necessary to Christian faith. And what
great necessity soever some Protestants pretend, that there is of Scripture,
Whitaker confesses, that there is no absolute necessity of it, and that some
part of Scripture helps, though not to the being, yet to the better being of
faith. And Chillingworth, that it is not so much of the being of Christian
doctrine, as requisite to the well being of it, as we showed c. 11. sec. 2. which
is but in other terms to say, as we do, that it is but necessary to the
better being of Christian faith, and religion. So that indeed they make no
greater necessity of Scripture, then we do, whatsoever they pretend in words,
as we showed before, that they say, that the Scripture contains not so much,
as we say, nor is more clear then we say it is; yet because sometimes they
pretend the contrary, we will now answer to their objections.

FOUR AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Protestants arguments out of Scripture, that it
contains al points of faith ansvvered.
1. THeir chiefest place out of Scripture, that it contains al points of
faith is 2. Tim. 3. Al scripture divinely inspired, is profitable to teach, to
reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of God be perfect,
instructed to every good work: out of which they infer, that the Scripture
sufficiently teaches al points of faith. Catholics answer: First, that S. Paul
speaks only of the old Testament, is as evident, because, much of the New^,
was not then written, as also, because he says, that Timothy had known it from
his Childhood, and he had not known the New Testament from his Childhood. And
if Protestants will say, the Old testament sufficiently teaches al points of
faith, they make the New Testament needles, which none of them dare say, at
least it were not necessary. For how can the New testament be necessary, if
the old be sufficient? And I think, they will not say, the New Testament is not
necessary: And that S. Paul speaks of the New testament, Protestants nether
prove nor can prove: whereas we prove plainly, that he speaks only of the old
Testament.

2. Their second answer is, that the Apostle says not, that the Scripture is
sufficient, but only says profitable: And a thing may be profitable, which
is not sufficient: Their third is, that the Apostle says not, that the
Scripture is profitable to teach al things, to correct al things, to reprove al
things, to instruct in all things, but simply to teach, to correct, to reprove,
to instruct so that: by to every good work, he comprehends not every
particular good work, but al kinds of good works, as are teaching, correcting,
reproving, instructing. And so three ways they answer sufficiently to this
argument to which Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 14. says: no Papist ever
answered suffictently, or can answer.

3. The Protestants second place is Galat. 1 where is said: If any Euangelize
to you, be side what we have Euangelized let him be Anathema: Catholics answer,
that the Apostle by Beside, means so beside, as is contrary: First, because
both the Greek word (...), and the Latin Praeter, is usually so taken: And
Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 14. says I grant that (...), may well be
translated contra. Secondly, because else he should have accursed S. Ihon, who
after this wrote his Apocalypse, in which there are some things, which S. Paul
never told to the Galathians. Thirdly, because the Fathers, Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Austin, so plainly expound it, as Whitaker
loco cir. says: we need not answer them. And S. Chrysostom eypoundeth it of
such an addition to the Scripture, which ouerturneth either al, or any part of
the Gospel. And S. Austin tract. 98. in Joan proves it, because otherwise S.
Paul had accursed himself, who desired to come again to the Thessalonians, that
he might have add what was wanting to their faith. Fourthly, because the
Apostle there, speaks of a thing which was not only beside, but also
contrary to what he had preached, to wit the keeping of the law of Moises,
which he called an other Gospel. And of it and such like, he said justly, that
he deserved to be accursed, who should teach beside what he had preached to the
Galathians, to whom, being but rude, it is not like, he had, as then, preached
al points of faith whatsoever. I may ad also, that Traditions are not beside
the Scripture, because the Scripture teaches them mediatly, in sending us to
the Church, whom it testifies to teach al truth. In which sense, it may be S.
Austin l. 3. contra Petilian c. 6. said, that he were Anathema, who should
teach any thing which belongs to our faith and life, beside that which we
have received in the legal and Euangelical scripture, because all that belongs
to our faith or life, is mediatly in Scripture, though perhaps by beside, he
mean contrary, as he does tract. 98. cit, and l. 17. contra Faustum c. 3. and
l. 23. c. 7. For in the aforesaid place he speaks of flying schism
contravnitatem Christi, which is not only beside, but indeed contrarietoholie
Scripture. And Whitaker Contro. 1. q. 6. c. 14. even urging this place of the
Apostle, says: Traditions agreeable to scripture are to be received and who
receive them not, are condemned. -- These Fathers speak of Traditions agreeable
to scriptures. So that Traditions agreeable to Scripture, are not condemned here
by the Apostle: and approved by Fathers, and admitted by Protestants.

4. As for what they allege out of some Fathers, that Scripture contains al
things necessary, proves no more, then what we have said before, that it
contains the sum of Christian faith, al things that are necessary to be
explicitly believed of every one, and the greatest part of the rest, and
mediatly al points of faith whatsoever: but not that it contains immediately
al points whatsouer. For S. Hilaire l. 2. de Trinit. speaking of the form of
Baptism, says: what is it, that is not contained in that sacrament of man's
salvation? Hierom. praefat. in libros Paralipomenon. Al learning of scripture,
is contained in this book. S. Austin sermon. 194. and sermon. 130. The Creed
contains all the mysteries of our faith. Nor the Fathers only speak thus, but
even both Catholics and Protestants also: For Catechismus ad Parachos in
Praefat.. 12. says: the Apostles Creed contains al things; that are to be
believed: and our Lords prayer, all that is asked. The like says the Caluinist
French Catechism, Luther in c. 15. Genesis that Melchisedechs speech to
Abraham, contains all that can be said of Religion. Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20..
48. The Lords prayer contains al, that we are to ask of God: And in Math. 16.
v. 18. That Peter's Confession contains the whole sum of our salvation. Which
kind of speeches no man understands of every particular thing, that we are
to believe or ask of God. Besides, many Protestants do grant, that Scripture
does not contein every particular point of faith, no not their most
fundamental point of al, which is, that itself is the word of God. And Laud
cited l. 2. c. 5. sec. 2. says, that when the Fathers say; we are to rely
upon Scripture only, they are never to be understood with exclusion of
Tradition, in whatsoever it may be had, and that without the Churches help, we
may mistake the Scripture. And Field ibid. That they do not make the
Scripture, the rule of their faith, but that other things in their kind are
Rules likewise, in such sort, as it is not safe without respect had unto them,
to judge of things by the Scripture alone. And also White cited l. 1. c. 10.
That the Doctrine of the Church is an infallible Rule, and the Rule of faith And
Baro ibid. That Tradition is an infallible Rule. And Chillingworth ibid. That
universal Tradition, is as infallible as the Scripture. And out of this, is
also answered, that the Fathers call Scripture The Rule, or, A Rule of faith.
For they call also the Apostles Cred so: As Tertullian l. Praescrip. c. 13. S.
Austin sermon. de Symbolo, S. Ireney l. 1. c. 1. S. Epiphanius haeres. 31. and
others; And Protestants, as Kemnice in locis p. 10. Perkins in his reformed
Catholic at the end, and upon the Creed, in the beginning, and Plessie de
Eccles. c. 8. says; The Fathers call it ordinarily, the Rule of faith, Potter
sec. 7. p. 78. 89. And yet mean not, that it contains immediately al points of
faith whatsoever. Nay a Rule is not to contein al faith, but to regulate al.

5. Hence also may be answered, what Protestants object, that if the Scripture
contein not al points of faith whatsoever, it should be imperfect. For
imperfect is that only, which has not al, that it ought to have. And
Scripture has all the points of faith, which it ought to have, and therefore is
perfect. As the Creed contains all that it ought to have, and therefore is a
perfect Rule, though it contein not absolutely al points of faith whatsoever.
And yet Chillingworth cited above c. 5. grants, that Scripture is not
absolutely a perfect Rule. But seeing Scripture, and the Creed, have al, for
which they were made, both are to be accounted perfect Rules; and not to be
accounted imperfect, because they have not something for which they were not
made. It suffices, that they can sufficiently rule all that, for ruling of
which, they were made. And Protestants suppose (but never can prove) that either
the Creed was made, or the Scripture written, to rule immediately al points of
faith whatsoever. Nay some of them confess the contrary, as we showed before
c. 5. sec. 2. who must as well answer, what is brought to prove the Scripture to
contein immediately al points of faith whatsoever, or to be the immediate Rule of
al points of faith, as we.

Faults of Print to be Corrected.
Page 4. lin. 13. know. cor. known. ibid. lin. 24. wete. cor. were. P. 12. lin.
1. mate. cor. make. P. 42. lin. 16. sels. cor. self. P. 80. lin 17. ad. cor.
and. P. 94. lin. 14. as. cor. is. P. 101. lin. vlt. us. cor. as. P. 157. lin 2.
ir. cor. is. P. 189. lin. 9. after, sinles ignorance. ad. of sinful ignorance.
P. 217. lin. 18. lightly. cor. highly. P. 223. in margin Et. cor. Est. P. 259.
lin. 21. enough. cor. is enough. P. 260. lin. 6. is divine, cor. is not divine.
P. 330. lin. 19. believe not, dele not. P. 343. lin. 12. ad. be. P. 352. lin.
23. ad. such. P. 260. lin. 5. dele and. P. 481. lin. 3. add. of. P. 489. lin.
18. fof. cor. for. P. 502. lin. 11. add. cor. added.

