ENGLANDS PRESSVRES: OR, THE Peoples Complaint, Humbly Related, for Information
and for Satisfaction of the grounds and causes thereof, and communicated to the
Inhabitants of England, in the several Cities and Counties of the Kingdom.
Also, a short reprehension to Factious, Seditious Sinners, with a Christian
exhortation to Reformation, to Brotherly Unity and concord, and conscionable
performance of Covenant, by assurance of Gods blessing, a glorious deliverance,
with establishment of truth and Peace to the three Kingdoms.

By GEORGE SMITH. Gent.

Esaias 5. 7. He looked for judgment, and behold oppression; for righteousness,
and behold a cry.

Exodus 16. 7. In the morning then ye shall see the glory of the Lord, for he
hears your murmurings against the Lord: and what are we that ye murmur
against us?

Phil. 2. 14. Do all things without murmurings, and disputings.

1 Cor. 14. 33. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, in all
the Churches of the Saints.

Jer. 11. 3. Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant.

Imprimatur

John Downame.



Printed at London by E. P. for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at his
Shop next door to the Fountain in the Strand. 1645.

The Authors Apology to the READER.
RIght Honorable, Honorable, Right Worshipful, and others, etc. When I had
seriously considered what great things God Almighty has done for us, and for
our Nation, in giving us a Parliament when we were almost past hope. and which
is more, establishing that Parliament, (as it were) by infatuating the
Anti-Parliament Counsel; and against so strong opposition, to select so many
Noble, Wise, able men, not only grave Solons and Lycurguses, (good
Commonwealths men) but holy Religious men: Nehe. 13.
Nehemiahs and Ezra's, Ezra 103. ^. Ezra. 9. 1. Nehe. (...). 31.
Zealous Princes of the people, that have set themselves to separate from
Israel all the mixed multitudes, and according to the Law of God, reform the
evils in the Church and State; Ezra 10. 11.
To make confession to the Lord God of our fathers, and to do his pleasure; to
set up Jesus Christ and his Gospel, in holiness, and in paritie.

As also, Gods great mercy in delivering this Parliament from the many
secret, and dangerous. Plots of the Enemy: and not only so, but of late
giving them daily success and Victories against their Enemies. And when I
reflected in my thoughts upon our evil requital of God for all these mercies,
not making return 2 Chr^^. 3^. 25.
according to the benefit done unto us but suffering our hearts to be lifted
up, and every man to seek himself, still adding new sins to old
transgressions; I could not but unmannerly crowd in, abandoning all fear, or
flattery, to give information of danger, Joh. 5. 14.
lest a worse thing may befall us.

I have no selfe-end, nor private respect; God and my own heart knows it; my
aim is only Gods glory and the Kingdoms safety, both which I am bound in
conscience to endeavor.

First, I consider it is the end of my Creation.

Secondly, God has expressly commanded it, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

Thirdly, the State requires it by their solemn Covenant, which (...) not
violate.

Fourthly, the corruption of the times calls for it; It is a time of
Reformation, but sin is not reformed.

Fifthly, holy example begets encouragement, as in the time of righteous Neh.
5. 1.
Nehemiah, and holy Ezra, there was a great cry of the people, and of their
wives, against their brethren the Jews: which when Nehemiah heard of, he
rebuked them that were guilty, saying, verse. 8.
We after our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews, which were sold to
the heathen, and will you even sell your brethren? Or shall they be sold to us,
etc?

In all this I have but done my duty; sin is the accuser (not I) from which
my care shall be to cleanse my heart and hands: guilt is the defamer (I defame
no man) which I seek to prevent; but I considently believe, that if the cries
of the people shall come justified to the ears of our just Zerubbabe^s, or
Religious Nehemiahs, they will remove the cause. This is all my end, this is my
daily prayer, and this will be the Kingdoms happiness; to which I am

From my Lodging, Fleet Street London, this 31 of July, 1645. A poor
wel-wishing Servant, GEORGE SMITH.

Englands Pressures. OR, The peoples Complaint.
HAving by the providence of God Almighty, and in his presence, in obedience
to the Order and authority of both Houses of Parliament, The Introduction.
taken the Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of
Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and safety of
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, I have (since my first and
second taking thereof) seriously, and several times considered my particular
engagement thereby both to God and to men; and have therefore resolved to
discharge my conscience and duty, to the uttermost of my ability, in so great
and necessary a Work. And to that end, at this time, I am bold in all humility
to bring the general cries and complaints of the people to the ears of the
sage Senators, and Patriots of these times, the great Steers-men and Pilots to
the Commonweal of the three Kingdoms.

We use to say of Kings, that they hear by other men's ears, see by other men's
eyes, and act by other men's hands. The same (I conceive) may be said of great
men and grand Counsels: not that other men are wiser then they, to teach or to
instruct them in duty, but to inform them what men do and act, and leave the
rest to their wisdoms: For, in our proverb we use to say, The stander by sees
more then the Gamster; Poor men's information not to be despised.
so the wandering ear and eye hears and sees more then the fixed actor: Paul
had not known the wicked conspiracy of those Jews, who bound themselves by
an oath to kill him, if he had not received information by a Young Man Act. 23.
16
his Sisters son: 2 King. ^. 3* 4.
Naaman the Syrian had not known the Prophet Elisha, if he had not been told of
him by his servants, and they by a poor captive Maid; nor had verse. 13.
Naaman been cured of his Leprosy, if he had not hearkened to the voice of his
servants: my self, a free borne man; a subject to the King, and servant to the
great Council of the Kingdom, presume (though uncalled) to discharge my
conscience to God, and my duty to men; resolving (as Ester 4. 16.
Ester) If I perish I perish, I have already cast in my two mites into the
treasury, and have yet one handful of goats hair, which I freely bring to
the building of Gods Tabernacle: Pilot nor Steers-man I am none, but rather a
despised one sitting on the top of the mast. If thence I may discover and
prevent a danger, I have my end, acceptance is my reward; however, Eccle. 11. c.
I shall not withold to sow my seed in the morning and in the evening, but
know not which shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be alike good.

I know that all things in every course are guided by divine providence, God
by providence guides all things.
nor can any thing be altered by humane power or wisdom, Eccle. 3. 14.
whatsoeevr God does it shall be for ever; but I also know, that God has
appointed the time and means, when, and how every work shall be established;
and my endeavor shall not be wanting as a means, in my place and calling to
accomplish Gods Work; God had appointed the Amorites to be destroyed, yet he
had set a time, in which the measure of Genesis 15. 16.
their iniquity should be made full: he had appointed that Israel should serve
and be afflicted in Egypt, but the time was set how long; and when that time
was expired, Exodus 12. 14.
even the self same day they were delivered from their bondage: The means by
which they were delivered was also appointed, and so ordered by the Almighty,
and his ever-working providence, that their deliverance was so glorious, that
many Egyptians, and of other nations then in Egypt, seeing the great and
mighty works of God in Egypt, became Jews, and joined themselves with the
people of God; and a mixed multitude, says the text, Exodus 12. 38.
went up with them out of Egypt.

Now this mixed multitude did not join themselves with the Jews, Man of the
world join themselves with the godly for carnal respects.
in zeal to their Religion, nor in love to their God Jehovah; but for carnal
respects, they seeing the wonders that God had wrought in Egypt for his
peoples deliverance, joined themselves with the Jews, in hope of outward
safety and prosperity: therefore as soon as they came into the wilderness,
and were but a little proved by hard travel, through a barren desert, they
grew discontented with their condition, and fell to murmur against God, and
against Moses: The Numb. 11 4.
mixed multitude (says Moses) that were among the people fell a lusting; they
lusted after carnal contents, and despaired of Gods power and promise, saying,
who shall give us flesh to eat? As if they should have said, we shall dye, and
be destroyed, and neither God, nor this Moses, can provide for us, either
against hunger, or the enemy: Therefore they look back to Egypt, and say,
verse. 5.
We remember the fish we did eat in Egypt freely, the Cucumbers, the Melons,
the Leekes, Onions, Garlic, Evil examples corrupt many.
etc. Now by the example of this mixed multitude, these ingrate murmuters the
Israelites were stirred up to murmur too, and joined with this godless
multitude to mutiny against Moses, and so procured a curse upon themselves in
stead of a blessing.

Such mixed multitudes are joined with the people of God at this day, and for
the very same ends and do likewise cause murmuring and mutiny against God,
and against the Parliament, and holy Assembly; both which God has called
together, and established as he did Moses, and Aaron, for the deliverance of
his people from bondage.

But the railings of these mungrell mixed company are but as the railings of 2 Samuel 16. 6 7.
Shimei, or like the murmurings of Numb. 26. 2. 3.
Korah and his rebellious company; nor is their condition much unlike his,
Mark 5. 3. 4.
whose dwelling is said to be among the tombs: for they, like him, are
possessed with unclean spirits, nor can any man tame them, they speak proud
things, and Psalm. 12. 3.
will have no Lord to rule over them; to whom I say no more; Jud. 9.
b^t the Lord rebuke them. These are in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8. 2^.
they run in the way of Baalam for reward and shall perish in the gain saying
of Jud 11. (...)
Korah.

But besides these wicked men, The cries and complaints of all good m^n ought
to be heard in all ^ust causes.
sons of Belial, there are other complainers, more grievous, and more
considerable; and these have filled mine ears from all places and parts of the
Kingdom with cries against oppression, and hard task-mast^rs set over them,
whether it arises from the evil example of those sons of Belial* or from
their own lusts, or out of any sensible feeling of their own sense by unjust
oppression; or whether from all these, I will not dispute: But the complainings
are like, as in the daye^ of Ely; when his sons were wicked, and caused the
people to 1 Samuel 2. ^. 17.
abhor the offerings of the Lord, and as in the time when the sons of good
Samuel judged Israel, and were 2 Samuel 8. ^. ^.
given to Lucre, and took bribes to pervert judgment, and caused the people
to sin in asking for a King; but that sin in the people was pardoned.

The Complainers in our times are of all ranks, Two sorts of men that
complain.
callings, and degrees; I divide them all into two sorts: they are either
carnal men, such as were Israelites by name Romans 9. 8.
according to the flesh; or regenerate men, sons Luke 23. 5^.
according to promise, such as wait for the kingdom of God: For we know there
have ever been two sorts of men in the Church of God, good and bad; there were
true and false Israelites, there are regenerate and unregenerate; the examples
of all times prove it: In the first age, there was a Genesis 4.
Cain, as well as an Abel; In the next there was a Genesis 9.
Cham, as well as a Shem; and afterward there was an Genesis 22.
Ismael, as well as an Isaac; and an Esau, as well as a Jacob; there was also
a Saul, as well as a David; and among the Apostles, a Judas, as well as a Peter:
and in the Primitive times there was a 2 Timothy ^.
Demas, and an Alexander, etc. Sacred Scripture tells us, that Romans 9. 7.
the seed of Abraham are not all children; our Savior Christ compares the
Church to Mat. 13. 30. 47.
a net cast into the Sea, that gathers of every kind; and Mat. 13. 12.
to a Field, in which grows Corn and Tares; to a threshing floor, in which
is wheat and Chafe: There have been, there are, and there ever will be in the
Church Militant, good and bad; some Joh. 2: 19.
in the Church that are not of the Church: they are not all Romans ^. 6.
Israel, says the Apostle, that are of Israel.

Now these two sorts of men are of different affections, The different aims
and ends which men propound to themselves, cause differences.
and have different Aims, of what rank soever they be: for some are rich,
some poor; some Noble, some Ignoble; some command, some are commanded; some
Divines, some Laymen: yet both these two sorts of men look for some enjoyment
of the promise, only they mis-apply the promise of God: the carnal man
applies it to his carnal ends; the regenerate man to spiritual ends; the one
seeks happiness in this life, the other in the life to come; and drives at
Gods glory here, from whom he expects glory hereafter: you shall see an
example in Jacob and Esau; Esau, as a son, expected a blessing; but it was but
a temporal blessing, and this he earnestly sought, for Heb. 12, 17.
it cost him tears: It is evident he sought but this temporal blessing,
because he preferred his appetite to carnal things, above and before his
birthright, which was Sacred; and therefore is called Heb. 12. 16.
profane, for selling it; he counted the benefit of his birthright to extend
no further then to the things of this life: But Jacob waited for a future
happiness, and accounted the promise to himself, and to his posterity, in a
spiritual sense: And therefore, when he had obtained the blessing, he forsook
all present rights, left all the temporal substance of his fathers house to
his brother Esau, and willingly cast himself upon Gods providence, resting
upon the promise, that God would be his God.

Thus it too ofen falls out, The ground of emulations.
that in Families, and Kingdoms, from these two different affections, and
judgments, there arises differences and dissentions; and hence comes great
complaints, murmurings, and emulations among men, about the present disposing,
and event of things: and because they have different aims, they use different
means, to attain those ends; and many times indirect means are used by the
one, and by the other, to accomplish their desire. Thus it was in Jacobs family
(which was then the visible Church) Esau sells his birthright, Examples of
both sorts.
and all the privileges belonging to it, to satisfy his present appetite;
Jacob waited for the future, and expected the promise to be made good in due
time, for faith makes not haste; but by Rebeccahs counsel he was drawn to use
indirect means to get it, for which they both smarted; for it was the cause of
affliction to him, and to his mother Genesis 28. 5
Rebeccah, so much as banishment each from other, all the days of Rebeccahs
life; yet divine providence ordered every thing to the accomplishing of the
promise, as God ordered the envy of Genesis 45. 7
Joseph's brethren to their future good, and preservation of their families.

You shall see, that as soon as Hazael heard the Prophet say, that ^he should
be King over Syria; 2 King. 8. 13.
Hazael presently plots any wicked means to attain the Kingdom, and
therefore murdered the King his master, that he might presently enjoy it: so to
satifie the covetous desire of oppressing 1 King. 21 15.
Ahab, by Iesabels counsel he possessed Naboths Vineyard by blood, and did it
under pretense of holiness, and justice: because men live more by sense then
by faith, they rather seek carnal things then spiritual, and use any
indirect and wicked means to attain their end. Hence it comes that when God
is breaking down what he has built up, even this whole Land, and Kingdom;
that now at this time, Jer, 45. 5.
men seek great things for themselves, although they have no assurance to have
so much as their life for a prey.

When Gods oppressings judgments are upon a Land and people for their
oppression, To sin against Judgment is fearful.
then for men to be oppressors argues the very height of obduracie; It is no
other, but to Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
add drunkenness to thirst: surely, the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smoke against such men, and their names shall be blotted out from under
heaven; But truly this is an evil prediction, and is a sad complaint in these
times especially times of reformation, as we all pretend to God; these
complainers have cause to be pitied, and the complained have need to be
punished, or Gods hand will be stretched out still.

Nor do I say, All complainers are not to be hear^^ed to, nor all requests
granted.
that all complainers in this kind are to be cherirished; for there are too
many that complain and murmur without just cause; like the Iraelites, they
would have all the good that is promised, but would endure nothing for it,
either in their persons or purses to procure the good they desire: they will be
at no labor nor cost for Christ, but like the Luke 8. 37.
Gardarens will rather part with Christ, then their Swine; and like the
rebellious Israelites, cry out against God, against Number. 14. 2.
Moses and Aaron, and make themselves captains to go before them back into
Egypt, to a bondage under which they lately cried: because they find a little
difficulty in the way to the (...) Number. 13. 31. 32.
Canaan, or because they receive discouragement by some ^eleeving Spies that
tell them of the sons of Anak, Giants in the way, which cannot be overcome; and
will not believe Number. 14. 10.
Moses, Joshua, nor Caleb, princes of the people, that God Almighty is both
able and faithful to make good his promise to them; but most inexorable the
rebellious people cry out, Stone them with stones: what a fearful condition
is this? and yet such are some of our stubborn un-reforming English, in
several Counties of this Kingdom, who stand Neuters, will be for neither
side, Unworthy actions of Neuter Club-men.
and suffer their hearts to lust after Egypt, after Superstition and
Idolatry: unworthy men, stupid, insensible of Gods displeasure, or their own
misery. Oh that men would consider what is written by Moses of the Israelites,
what was the effect of such murmurings, and wilful disobedience! Number. 14. 12.
God smote them with Pestilence, and they were for ever dis-inherited, Heb. 12.
11.
God swear in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest.

God has done great things for us; he has by a mighty hand brought us out of
Egypt, from our heavy burdens, and from the Babyloinish Idolatry: we are
now in the wilderness, happiness and glory is before us; God only proves us
by some little hardship by the way, What the duty is of all inferior men.
to humble us, that he may exalt us: Let us be thankful to God, and let no
murmuring be heard amonst us against men whom God has made instruments for our
good: If all things be not so well managed by men, as they should be, pray to
God to amend it, and to remove evil or negligent men from all public
employment: First, search whether there be not some sin in thy self, which
thou cherishest, that is the cause of the thing for which thou complainest: and
cast it from thee: then, Humbly Importune the Parliament to redress the evils,
and put things right; Judges know not who is wronged, till the complaint come
before them; nor can they redress the evil, till proved by two or three
witnesses: If we thus do, we shall have no cause of any murmuring complaints;
for the Parliament will surely do justice: Romans 13. 4.
They are the Ministers of God to us, for our good, etc.

And know, God is now about to set up Jesus Christ on his throns, and to
establish the purity of Religion.
that God is now about a greater work for this Kingdom, and for the world of
elect at this time, then only the settling of our temporal freedoms; for
assuredly he will make Jesus Christ much more glorious to the world then ever
before; and his ordinances shall be set up in their purity, the truth of
Religion shall be established (not changed, as some simple Ignoramuses report)
The Parliament is not about to change any thing in Religion, only to purge out
the dregs of Antichristian doctrine, that Christ may be worshipped in purity,
according to the will of God revealed in holy Scripture, and practiced in the
best reformed Churches: Great wo^^es met with great oppositions.
The work is great, and difficult; and we know, great works have ever met
with great oppositions, and much difficulty; these are trying times; Heb. 11. 36
God proves us now, whether we will follow Christ or Antichrist; these are
fyrie trials, such as the Apostle Peter speaks of, which, he says, 1 Pet. 4. 12
is to try you: When he has tried me, Job 23. 10.
says Job, I shall come forth as gold: Jam. 1. 12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him:
If we will be blessed live must endure it, and endure it to the end; else there
is no promise of blessedness: he only Math. 10. 22.
that endures to the end shall be saved.

Now give me leave to advise, A Caveat to take heed lest we mistake Christ.
and beseech all men, of all ranks and degrees, to consider well, and to take
heed that none of us do now reject Christ as the Jews did: They looked for
the performance of the promise, that the Messiah should come: but because they
were stupid, and fancied that he should come only to restore their Joh. 6. 15.
temporal Kingdom; they failing of their expectation in that, rejected him
when he came to establish the Gospel; and for that sin were rejected by Christ,
as we know they yet are to this day.

It will be worth your consideration to consider, that because they so much
sought their own safety, and doted upon a temporal deliverance, Joh. 11. 50.
Joh. 18. 14.
God turned that very means which they used to secure themselves, to be their
utter ruin: God forbid it should be so with England, yet surely our case is
dangerous; for, Math. 12. 25.
a kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation.

That the Kingdom is divided, The dangerous Divisions that are in England.
I need not tell you; all men see and feel it; the bloody divisions between
the King and his Parliament have already almost brought it to desolation; but
there are yet more dangerous divisions then that: If we that are Protestants
were but against the Papists, as the Papists are against us, such a division
would make happy Union in the end: But we that are Protestants are divided
among our selves, in our judgments, or rather fancies; we run after shadows
and leave the substance, we use our liberty to a liberty to sin, to invent and
broach new errors, and spend our time to make Proselytes to our selves, and to
compass our own ends: some are Proud, some are Ignorant, some are Ambitious,
some are Covetous, some are Profane, some Treacherous, some Tyrannical
oppressors etc. all seek their own ends, but few seek Jesus Christ, nor the
good of others: we seek the Goods of others, and our own good by others ruin.
Surely this is cause of complaint, and (I conceive) is some ground of those
general complaints, that have from every Country come to mine ears.

Now I being bound in conscience, to the uttermost of my endeavors, to seek
the reformation of Religion, the peace and safety of the Kingdom; I shall with
sorrow of heart, and in all humble submission, present these 20 complaints of
the people, to the view and consideration of the Inhabitants of the Cities and
Counties of England, etc. (they are the peoples, not mine.)

Twenty several Complaints common among all sorts of the people related.
That the Government and Discipline of the Church is not settled, according to
the rule of Gods word, in uniformitie of worship, nor is there a restriction to
Sectaries and Schismatics, but they increase daily, and grow numerous in all
places of the Kingdom, to the grief of the godly and well-affected; Minister
preaching against Minister, and one Congregation separating from another; as if
Christ, the head of the Church, were divided; or as if there were more Christ's
then one: hereby the illiterate and unstable people are either seduced or
discouraged, not only to the disquiet of the Church of God, but to the
disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom; insomuch, that men rashly say, they
know not what Religion shall be set up, etc.



Chron. 15. 13. Ezra. 10. 5. 8.

Rehoboam, which put the people upon resolutions of setting up a third party.











Counties, when they go out upon any service, and no allowance is given to the
oppressed for injuries done, though complaint be made to the Committees, which
is a great burden, and causes distractions to the prejudice of the public.











opposed, hindered, and dis-heartened; notwithstanding it is known, that great
sums of Moneys are concealed, to the prejudice of the public, which by due
account might be brought out, to the great benefit of the Kingdom, and would
add much to the satisfaction of all the well affected. That just act and
example of the Parliament, in the impartial account given to the Kingdom
formerly, of all the Moneys received of the Kingdom, and expended for the
public, before this War actually began, was so acceptable to the people,
that they were encouraged with willing cheerfulness to put all their
substance into the Parliaments trust, for the maintenance of Laws, Religion,
and Privileges; but now with grief complain, that much of the public
Treasure is concealed by private men, and that inferior men, guilty of the
same crime, shall obstruct such an account, as the Ordinance of Parliament
requires to be made, and justice should exact: those that are the refusers to
give such account, speak guilty, though they say nothing.







prejudice of Parliament, and to the rejoicing of the malignant party; it is
my grief, but their complaint.

Diverse other complaints are made by the people, The Authors Impartia^^ie in
duty.
but these may comprehend all; all which I leave to the consideration of all
those whom they chiefly concern: My end is nothing but reconciliation, and
reformation; it is but duty, and I dare not omit it; if I be blamed, it is not
because I am guilty, but because I blame the guilty: If any such accuse me,
my integrity shall defend me; if not, I had rather suffer for duty, or perish
for loyalty, then to be made great by concealing evil, or doing any unworthie
act.

When Pompey was accused by the Romans for robbing the common treasure, he
cleared himself, by producing the author, and freely confessed how far he
was guilty; was himself acquitted of the crime, and was much honored by the
people. Solon (though he was importuned by the people, refused to take upon him
Sovereign authority, lest he should be suspected of tyranny; yet he at that
time commanded and ruled all, and afterward wrote these Verses: I neither
blush, nor yet repent my self,
that have preserved my native soil always,
And that therein (to hoard up trash and Pelf)
no Tyrants thought could once eclipse my praise.


Yet notwithstanding he reformed the State, and neither stooped for fear of
the great, nor flattered to win the multitude, but sweetened all to all sorts,
by the rules of reason, mixing sweet with every sour, and force with justice,
etc.

Now having humbly related these general complaints of the people,
Satisfaction to the complainers.
I desire (with submission to men of better judgment) to endeavor some
satisfaction (if possible) to all the complainers: not by giving answer to
their particular complaints, for that I cannot do; I may not either excuse nor
accuse: It belongs to public Justice to hear and to determine, (not to me;)
only by way of information, thus much I must say in vindication of the
Parliament, that in such a time of trouble and distraction, as is at this time
through all parts of the Kingdom, the Parliament being necessitated to use
many instruments, as servants to them, and to appoint many Committees, and
those Committees many agents under them, in every County: It has been the
care of the Parliament to appoint p^ous and just men in all places.
(of which there is a necessity) that all men so employed in the public
services, might be both pious, and just; It has been the care and diligence of
the Parliament, however it falls out, that some or many do prove otherwise,
for men cannot see into the hearts of men, (God only is the searcher of all
hearts) therefore it is possible yea probably true, that the Parliament may be,
and are deceived in some men, and by some men; a Mat. 7. 15.
Wolf clothed in a sheeps clothing; may be taking to be an innocent sheep,
and by such inward Ravening wolves, injustice may be done, oppression, and
unjust violence countenanced, and good men may be greatly injured, etc. It has
been so in former times, and cannot be wholly prevented in such times as
these, (as anon I shall show you) though much may be done to stop the violent
rage of such oppressors; oppressors are like Monsters with many heads; if one
be stricken off, another comes in his room: And the Parliament cannot foresee
it in the faces of men, before they be employed; no more then you the people and
Commoners of England could see the hearts and intentions of many of those
Knights and Burgesses, which you chose, and sent up to the Parliament; The
peoples negligence and irreligious choice in Knights and Burgesses, has been
the greatest cause of their misery and oppressions.
who have violated their trust, and perfidiously revolted from God, and from
their Country, to destroy both the Parliament, and the people: These have
been the strengthners of the hands of the Enemies, and are the chief cause of
all oppressions; the original of all the evils of which you complain: for
without their assistance, things had not come to this pass, the enemy had not
been able to do any thing; nor had the misery of the Kingdom grown to so
great a height, nor of so long continuance. These men whom you trusted, have
declared themselves open oppressors, and Enemies to the Kingdom. Now we know
what they are, and you see your own faults, which you must mend for the future;
nor is it unpossible, nor unlikely, but some remain yet undiscovered, and act
their parts, and your misery, in another Scene, under a contrary notion, who
knows (like Judas) how to betray with a kiss, and say, Hail Master: for our
enemies are not fools, they would not take all from amongst us, Secret Enemies
hurt most.
to give counsel against us at Oxford, but would leave some to betray, and
pervert counsel in other places: If any such are left in Parliament, they are
but there as Judas was among the Apostles: yet these do us the greatest
mischief, and most advantage the enemy, (nor is this any new thing, for it is
the policy of all States) especially in Counsels, and Armies.

This advantage David made of Hushai's staying with Absolon; Example.
2 Samuel 15. 3^.
If thou return to the City (says he) and say to Absolon, I will be thy
servant, etc. then may thou for me defeat the counsel of Achitophel: nor was
Hushai alone, for he had also verse. 36.
Zadok and Abiachar, to consult with: And these had Ahimaze, and Jonathan, to
carry information to David: this is ordinary in all States, and without
question lawful, in a just cause, as David's was, and were in the Parliament to
do the like; but the Enemy is as vigilant as we are careless, to prevent it
with us.

But that the Enemy has such Counselors, and such Intelligencers among us,
is clearly manifest by the acting of some designs, and retarding others: And
Aulicus may be in this evil occurrents a competent witness, who is not
ashamed publicly to confess, that they receive daily intelligence at Oxford
from Westminster, and London, and know what is done in their most secret
counsels: I am sure they have no 2 King. ^. 12.
Elisha with them, nor have they any Oracle to enquire of.

Nor is it easy (though this be known) to have all these evils presently
reformed, especially these oppressing evils complained of: For, while War is in
a Kingdom, injustice, oppression, violence, injury, cannot be kept out: That
very Sword which is drawn really to defend and to maintain Law, will in some
things, at some times break Law, In the time of a civil War, oppression and
violence (...) be prevented.
such are the evil effects of War; else War were not so great a judgment in a
Land: where War rages, there Ambition is awakened, there covetousnes
increases, there licenciousnes is set at liberty, and violence bears sway;
the yoke of obedience is cast off, the peasant would be a Peer; wicked men
get the upper hand, and good men are oppressed and abused; Justice is trodden
under foot, etc. order is thrust out, and confusion fills the Kingdom: it is
the complaint of Zion* the City that God loved: Lam. 5. 1^. 12.
Women were ravished in Zion, and Maids in the Cities of Juda, Princes were
hanged by the head, and the faces of the Elders were not honored, etc.
Infinite are the miseries and calamities of War, beyond my expression; they
are daily written in Characters of blood, and to whom shall we go for help?
of whom shall we complain? or where can we have redress in all these things?

If we complain, we must complain either against God, or against something
else: but to complain against God we cannot, for Psalm. 145. 17.
God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works: wicked Phara^h
acknowledges Exodus 9. 27.
to Moses, the Lord is righteous: Lam. 3. 33
God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: Ezra 9. 13.
and he punishes less then our iniquities deserve: And to complain against
men, is but like the Dog, to be angry at the stone that is thrown at him: For
we know, (or should know) that men are but Gods instruments, whether they do
us good or hurt: Shimei cursed David, but David knew it was because 2 Samuel ^.
(...).
God had bid Shimei curse: Israel was afflicted by Jabin, by Midian, by the
Philistims, etc. but it was because Judge. 3. 8. Judge. 3. 3. Judge. 6. 1. All
affliction is from God, and for sin.
the Lord had sold them into their hands: they were never afflicted by any
people, but God delivered them up to the enemy; nor were they ever afflicted
by any men, or means, in their own Land, but by the hand of God: and God
afflicts no man, nor suffers any man to be afflicted, but for sin; sin
only is our destroying enemy.

And surely, We have nothing to complain against, ^^t our sins.
we have nothing to complain against, but sin; if we complain of
wickedness in men, it is but to complain of other men's sins: if we
complain of their wicked actions, as they are hurtful to us, they are but
Gods ins^ruments, to punish us for our sins against God; G^d uses very
wicked men as his instruments to punish the sins of his people.
for God uses (and that u^ually) very wicked men to be his instruments, to
afflict his people; he punishes sin by sinful men; that is, when God will
punish or afflict a people, or a man, he lets wicked men loose, to act their
own w^ll in wickedness, to imprison, to oppress, to plunder, to burn
Houses, Towns, and to kill and destroy, etc. That men err in counsel, grow
at variance, are robbed, wounded, killed, or are betrayed by those they
trusted, or spoiled by those they should be preserved; it is all of God, and
from God.

It is true, Divisions among m^n* are just punishments of sin.
that divisions among men, in matters of judgment or practice, are occasions
of Commotions and Wars etc. yet the efficient cause is from God; for, when by
sin men are divided from God, God puts divisions among men: so long as Adam
stood reconciled to God, all the creatures were at peace with him; but when
Adam had sinned, the creatures were at variance with him, and among themselves:
while Solomon walked with God, God gave him peace with all men; but when Kin.
11. 9
Solomo^s heart was turned from God then God was angry with him; verse. 14. 23
and the Lord stirred up Hadad and Rezen to be adversaries to Solomon: you
know, that Ashur, and Assyrian, are called Esa. 10. 5.
the Rod of Gods anger; their malice, and their weapons, were but Gods
indignation; they held the staff, but God guided the hand: Esa. 45. 7.
I the Lord do all things; God stirred up the spirit of 1 Chro. 5. 26
Pull, and of Tilgath-Pilnesar, etc.

But for your fuller satisfaction, Whence the ground and cause of all division
is.
give me leave to expatiate my self a little in this thing, that I may fully
inform your judgments whence all divisions crosses, and afflictions come, and
how they may be reconciled; and in this, I shall impart nothing but truth to
you: for I mean not (nor is it my Genius) to use disguise, like the woman of 2 Samuel 14. ^.
Tek^ah, nor to speak by Tropes; Figures better set forth numbers then men, or
truths; nor can I tell you any thing by way of Prophecy, what shall be* or
when your misery shall end, as Elisha did of the Famine in 2 King, 9. 1.
Samaria; nor as the Prophet, that told the people, that to morrow the Lord
would deliver their enemies into their 1 Chronicles. 20. 15.
hands; for God Almighty does what he will, and when he will; Times and
Seasons are in his own Acts 1. 7.
hands, and not for mortals to know: but I will truly show you what God has
done, and what he does by his all-guiding providence every day; by which you
may see and know, who, and what it is that hurts you; and against that, you
have cause only to complain: Affliction (says holy Job 5. 6*
Job) does not spring from the dust; it is not from below, but from above. Let
men's malice be never so great, their ends never so mischievous and their
contrivance never so secret, God rules guides, and disposes all that they do:
l^^ men purpose what they will, Pro. 16. 33.
God disposes of their purposes, to his own end; who always uses wicked men
as instruments to work his own design, and usually disappointeth them of
their own aim, which chiefly they intended; for their end is quite contrary
to Gods end.

That God uses all the counsels and actions of men to his own purpose, All
counsels* are ordered by God.
you shall see; God complains, that the Ezekiel 11. 2 Examples.
Princes of Israel devised mischief, and gave wicked counsel: God
complains of the wickedness of their hearts; but you may see, God makes his
own use of it, and makes that to be a means to Verse ^.
bring the sword upon them, which was the thing they feared: again, you shall
see that Israel is threatened with the sword, That it shall abide on their
Cities and devour them, because of their own counsels; yet God says of
himself, Ier. 19. 7.
I will make void the counsels of Judah, and Jerusalem, and will cause them
to fall by the sword: God complains, that the Princes of Zoan are become
fools, and the Princes of Noph are deceived and they seduced others; but (the
Text says) the Esaias 19. 13, 14.
Lord mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of them: That Rehoboam forsook
the good counsel of the grave, ancient Counselor of his father, and followed
1 King. 12. 13.
the counsel of young men, to oppress, and tyrannize over his people; it was
not by chance: the young men showed the wickedness of their hearts, and
Rehoboams corruption was discovered by it; but God turned it to his own
purpose, as he had before threatened; for the sin of Solomon, ^ King. 11. 31.
to rend the Kingdom out of his hand, and give ten Tribes to Jeroboam:
therefore, whatsoever Rehoboam or his young counsel intended, God himself
says, 1 King. 12 24.
This thing is done of me, (or all this is from me.)

But to come more near to our present business, let us apply all this to our
selves, The application of things to ^hese present times.
and to these times of trouble, and misery, and consider from whom they are,
and why they are come upon us: First, consider they are not from evil
Counsels, from the Bishops, from the Queen, Papists, nor from Rome, nor the
Devil, but as they are ordered by God, The Devil is the chief instrument,
all ^icked men are his Agents.
for from him they are: It is true, the Devil has a chief hand, as an
instrument, but not as a cause; and all wicked men, Papists, and licentious,
covetous, cruel, oppressing men, are petty instruments under the Devil, but
all are ordered by God, though their aim, and end, is quite contrary to Gods:
they aim at destruction of Protestants, and Protestant Religion; God turns
their wicked aim to the preservation of both, and to the destruction of
themselves: their aim is, to make themselves Monarchs, and the people slaves;
God turns it to the rending of Kingdoms and power out of their hands, and to
establish the freedom of his people. Examples.
We know, that Labans end, in pursuing of Jacob, was for hurt to Jacob; but God
so ordered him, that it was for Genesis 3^.
Jacobs good: Esau had his end, in coming out against Jacob; but God orders
him to his own purpose. The Brethren of Joseph had their end in selling
Joseph; they hated him, and sought his destruction: but God turned it Genesis 37.
4. and Genesis 45. 5.
to the preservation of Joseph, and of all Israel. Haman had his end, in
setting up a Gallows; but God turned it to his own purpose, quite contrary
to Ester 7. 9.
Hamans end and intent.

Consider the evil Counselors of the King; God disappoynteth the ends of
wicked men.
Bishops, Jesuits, Papists, etc. they propounded their end; in all which, God
suffered them to go far, till they thought they could not be hindered; their
Plots were carried on by degrees, and gradations for at least twenty years,
visible to our sense; we saw it, and we felt it: but at the period of time,
when they thought to have effected all, and were as confident as Haman was of
his design against Mordecai, and against the Jews, then God put a turn to
all. Look back but to these five years past, and consider, and you shall see
Providence has wonderfully ordered things against their design, and for our
deliverance, beyond the counsel or power of men. Was it less then a wonder,
that God should so order things, that by their preparations into the North with
an Army, we should have a Parliament? It was contrary to their end: Was it
not miraculous, that God so infatuated their counsels, that they established
that Parliament, which now they cannot break, though many of them have lost
their lives in attempting it? When Pharaoh had let the people go out from
bondage, he repented, and pursued with an Army, to bring them back; but God
turned it to his destruction. We have seen what our enemies have done against
us, and what God has done for us; what God will do more at the Red Sea, we
know not.

Secondly, (...) Gods end i^ in afflicting his people, and what is the end
w^c^ed men propound to themselves.
Consider why these things are; I have already showed you, that all
differences, all afflictions and troubles, are for sin: but God, though he
use wicked men to b^ instruments to punish sinful men and Nations, has these
two ends why he does it; and that is, to destroy wicked men in their own
ways, and to humble his people, that they may be delivered by Gods mercy.
Wicked men hate the godly, because they are not so wicked, so profane, and
ungodly as they would have them; God afflicts the godly, because they are not
so good, so zealous, and so holy, as God commands: God chastises to humble
men, to bring them to repentance and reformation; and at this day does
therefore bring all these evils of punishment upon us, because we are an
idolatrous, superstitious, lukewarm people; profane, stiff-necked and
rebellious against God: That by these punishments and chastisements we may be
humbled, turn to God, forsake our evil ways, pray to him, and seek his face;
that he may do us good, destroy our enemies, establish our Religion, our
Laws, our Freedoms etc. and make us the happiest people under Heaven, to all
posterities.

If so (for this is a truth) then why do we complain? There is no cause ^hy
men should complain.
Lam. 3. 3^. ^0.
Wherefore shall a living man complain? shall a man complain for the
punishment of his sin: no, but Deuteronomy. 10. 1^.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: This God
looks for* this is all he requires of us, for all that he has done for us*
and for all that he will do for us, yet we murmur in all our afflictions, Esaias
9. 3.
And turn not to the Lord that smites us, neither do we seek the Lord of
hosts.

To this will be objected (for I have heard this objection often) we murmur not
against God, Objection.
nor for the punishment of our sins, nor against the common Enemy, against
whom we are willing to hazard our lives and fortunes in this just cause; nor
do we complain against the Parliament, for it is our life and safety: but we
complain of partiality, injustice, and oppression in particular men, from
whom we looked for justice, and by whom we hoped to be relieved from oppressors
hands: these selfe-seeking men make a prey of us, they devour our estates,
(which we freely give in this cause to God, and for our Country) to enrich
themselves: Amos ^. 6.
They sell the righteous for silver* and the poor for a pair of shoes; this
is our complaint, and our discouragement.

For fuller satisfaction, The deliverance out of Egypt was but a type of the
spiritual deliverance by Christ, from sin and Idolatry.
and information of our judgment, consider, (as I said before) God is working
a great and new work in the world, greater then that of the bringing of Israel
out of Egypt, whereof that was but a type or figure; that was temporal, this
is spiritual, and is far transcendent; Ier. 23. 7:
So as ye shall no more say, the Lord lives that brought up the children of
Israel out of Egypt, but the Lord lives which brought up, and led the seed of
the house of Israel out of the North, and from all Countries, etc. the greatest
works have ever met with the greatest opposition.

God is now about no less work then to set up Jesus Christ on his Throne, and
to pull down Antichrist from his Stage: Now as God has his instruments to
build, the Devil has his instruments to break down; and as God pulls down
the Stage of Antichrist (on which he acts his Idolatrous Scene) the Devil
endeavors to keep it up: and to that end, sends forth his Agents into the
world, 2 Chronicles. 18, 20. Ezekiel. 2^. 3. Rev. 16, 13.
unclean and evil spirits to seduce men, to make them his instruments, 1 Timothy
4. 1
who depart from the faith of Christ, and follow after doctrines of Devils;
set up Idols in their hearts, and forsake justice and humanity to embrace
devilish lusts: Now because God will cut Zach. 13. 8
off the name of Idols out of the Land, and cause those evils spirits to pass
out from among us; they are so much the more enraged, and bestirre themselves,
to hinder Gods work: as Iannes and Iambres 2 Timothy 3. 8
withstood Moses, so do these resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds.

Thus it is at this day; The Devils malice joined with the Antichristian brood.
the Devil and his Antichristian brood (as it were) losing their wonted
Jurisdiction, ready to be tumbled down into the place of correction, storm,
and stir up all their Agents, of all sorts, for they have agents for all
places; hence it comes, that our best societies are troubled: Agents of all
sorts.
they have Agents in the Church, and Agents in the Commonwealth; great Agents
for great Counsels, to hinder good designs; learned Agents for learned
Assemblyes, to trouble Religious Disputes; Military Agents for Militia
Consultations, to impoverish the Commonwealth; acting Agents in fighting
Armies, to betray Designs; Committee Agents, finely fitted, and inter-weaved
into Committees of all Counties, to breed dissension, and to tyrannize; besides
numbers of insinuating Agents to pervert, and these have potent Armies to
compel.

Now to every one of these (and to many more) the Devil propounds several
rewards, The Devil has many baits to deceive and catch men.
suitable to every ones natural disposition and inclination, as baits and
incitations to act their parts with diligence, which they make their maine end:
As for example, to the envious man he promises revenge, and he makes that his
end: to the proud man he promises applause and praise of men, and that is his
end: to the voluptuous Libertine he promises pleasure, that is his end: to the
base and servile he promises liberty, and that he makes his end: to the
ambitious he promises honor and high place, and that is his end: to the
covetous man (and he carries the great^s^ stroke) he promises profit and
riches, and that he seeks after as his chief end: and so for others; for the
Devil has a bait to suit with every ^ust: for me to take upon me to name
them all to you, were beyond my skill, as far as to number the motes in the
Sun, or to measure the wind: It may suffice for your information, and this
short Tract; to hint out the truth of things, to show you the ground and cause
of your complaint, Men's ^usts (...) hyp^cris^e.
which arises thus: Evil men thus induced, and drawn by the Devil and their
own lusts, disguised under the masque of Hypocrisy, in pretense of zeal to
God, and love to the Commonweal; crowd in among the multitude into the
public service, and fish in troubled waters, to accomplish their several
ends, especially the reward of gain, which they expect either from the enemy
for some acts of Treachery, in betraying us into their hands; or from the
Parliament, for some seeming fidelity and outside service, or to get it by
the spoil of others, as a thief that crowds into a house set on fire,
pretending to save that which he intends to steal: from these evils, as from
bitter fountains, do flow the great causes of all your complaints.

Nor does the Devil at one bring men to this height of wickedness, The Devil
makes men, wicked by degrees.
for he cannot force any man's will, but works upon his lusts and bribes with
promises, and so carries him on by gradations: as the cowardly Soldier is
hardened by degrees; at first coming into the field he trembles and shakes at
the report of every Musket, but after he has past through a battle or two,
and seen a Victory, he is hardened so, as to account the bullets whistlings
about his ears fine music, and dares encounter death at halfe-pike. We know
that Solomon at first took but one strange wife* then two, then more, at last
hundreds, or thousands: let the Devil but make one breach in the conscience,
he will come in like mighty waters, irresistible, till he overflow and drown
both conscience and reason; we say in our proverb, over shoes over boots, and
then, over-head and ears, and all. It is likely, that many of those men
justly complained of, intended not so much injustice and oppression (as since
they are guilty of.) When they first entered into the places of Collectors,
Receivers, Auditors, Committees, Colonels, Captains, etc. but the love of
money, (which the Apostle calls the 1 ^im 6, 10.
root of all evil) which while some coveted after, have carried them violently
unto all injustice: for (says Solomon) Eccles. 5. ^0.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied therewith* The oppressed may
complain of his loss* but the oppressor will never say he has enough; the
covetous man rusheth into temptations, and snares, and huttfull lusts, 1 Timothy
6. 9.
which drown him in destruction and perdition: the love of money made Numb. ^.
17.
Balaam go to curse the people of God; it made 1 Samuel 22 9.
Doeg flatter Saul, and accuse David; for a Kingdom Sam. 15
Absolon will seek his fathers life) and the hope of the Crown made Judge. ^.
2.
Abimelech embrew his hands in the blood of threescore and ten of his brethren:
and for money Math. 26. 16.
Judas will betray his master. What villainy is there in the world to be
committed that for the love of money some men will not readily act? The covetous
desire after gain depraves a man of reason, puts out the light of judgment
and understanding.

But most lamentable and dangerous of all is it, to see that the Devil should
by this bait induce men, that have taken upon them the profession of Religion,
to make shipwreck of faith and good conscience 1 Timothy 1. 20.
, like Hymeneus and Alexander and like 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas, to love this present world. As there is nothing in the world more
excellent then Religion, so no man is so honorable as he that is truly
Religious. But there is no evil, No man so vile as an hypocrite either to God
or men.
so evil and vile as Hypocrisy; nor no man so dishonorable, as he that takes
upon him the profession of Religion for by-ends, and for advantage sake; such
men are liars to the holy Ghost, they dishonor God above all sinners, they are
a stain to the purity of Religion, a grief to all the godly, a
stumbling-blocke to the weak, a hardening to ungodly men, and a rejoicing to
the evil angels: an hypocrite Job 1^. 16.
shall not see God; the sentence of wrath upon the worst of sinners, is but
Math. 24. ^1.
to have their portion with hypocrites: If any man draw back (says the
Apostle) Heb. 10. 38.
my soul shall have no pleasure in him: 1 John 2. 1^.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us: Math. 13. 2
The thornie ground becomes unfruitful, and why? because the decenfullnesse of
riches choke the seed of the word: our Savior says, it is a hard thing Math.
19. 20.
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of beav^n; but surely it is a harder
thing for a covetous rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Many
Patriarchs and holy men, were rich men; and diverse of them had their slips,
saylings, and sins, which in Scripture are recorded for our admonitions; but
(that I can find in all the Scripture) there is not one example of one holyman
that was an oppressor or a covetous man. Certainly the Devil cannot do so great
a mischief in the world as to procure a wicked worldling to take upon him to
be a profess^r of Religion; The Devil (...) greater mischief then to make a
wicked worldling to be a professor of Religion.
for (besides all other evils* he calls reproach upon God, and upon Religion
by his godless actions, more then all Devils or wicked men can do. God says
of 2 Samuel 12. 14.
David, for one sin committed by him, that he had given occasion to the
enemies of God to blaspheme: and the Apostle Paul says of such men, that Romans
2. 24
boasted of the Law, and yet by breaking of the law dishonored God; that the
name of God is blasphemed of the Gentiles through them.

Neither is any of all this without God, Gods hand is in all: Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and I have not done it? there is no evil
of punishment befalls any man, but it is from God; but all the evil of sin
is from the actor of it, and from the Devil, whose agents wicked men are: it
is true, that God uses wicked men to afflict his people, Wicked man act for
the Devil.
but they act for Satan and their wicked ends, in all the sin they commit;
only God makes use of them to afflict his people, for chastisements of sin
sometimes, and sometimes for trials of their faith: Zach. 13. ^
There is a refining fire through which a third part must pass; and in the end
God will destroy wicked men, for that in which they have afflicted his people,
They are simited by God.
and will blast all their designs, let them have never so great hopes for the
effecting of them; for Job ^. 14.
God will cut off the hope of wicked men, their trust shall be as a Spiders
Web: Gods will and purpose is unchangeable; Pro. 19. (...) Esaias (...).
There are many devices in man's heart (says Solomon) nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. Our Savior Christ tells Pilot, that
he Joh. 19. 11
could have no power, except it were given him from above: Nor did the Acts 4.
2^
Rulers of the people, Jews nor Gentiles, any thing (...) all that they did
against Christ, but what was appoyted by the determinate counsel of God.
Therefore there is no cause why any (man staring God) should be discouraged at
any thing that befalls them, to their persons or estates, Between (...) seed
of the bond woman and the seed of the free woman, there will ever be
contentions.
while they walk in the ways of godliness and honesty: for, where there is
a Jacob and an Esan there will be strivings, and while their seed remains upon
the earth there will be emulations and injuries; one will be for God, and
another for the world: and hence it is, if you observe, and consider well, that
there was never any Reformation in the world, by turning to God from sin and
Idolatry, but it met with great oppositions, and blood.

Consider, No reformation without blood.
the very Covenant with Abraham was signed with blood; the Israelites came not
out of Egypt, without blood; Idolatry was at no time ejected, in the times of
all the Judges of Israel, but by blood. Examples.
When Hezekiah had destroyed Idolatry, presently Senacherib sought to destroy
him and his people: when Asa made a Covenant to seek God and reformed his
Kingdom, Baasha King of Israel made war against him. The great reformation,
after the 70 years Captivity, was mightily opposed, from the first beginning
of it till it was wholly finished, and continually hindered by false
Accufations, by subtle Counsels, and pretended Treaties, and by open Violence.
The promulgation of the Gospel was opposed from the beginning, and continued
all the Primitive times, with bloody Perfecutions. The Reformation from the
darkness of Popery, in Luthers time, was opposed by bloody disturbance to
all Christian Churches. The Reformation that was begun by King Edward, was
opposed with fire and sword: and in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (of blessed
memory) it was opposed by continued Conspiracies, and open Hostility, with
effusion of much blood, especially in Ireland; and can it be expected, that it
should be now finished without blood?

If the beginning of this Reformation by King Edward and Queen Elizabeth cost
much blood, it must needs be expected, that the perfecting of that Reformation
now, The Antichristian br^^d have been many years plotting against us.
must cost much more blood; if we will but consider the Devils malice, the
potencie of our enemies, their long time in plotting against us, the
combination of all sorts of wicked men, united in One against Reformation,
Jesuits, Papists, Atheists, Libertines, etc. Hell and Earth have made a
Confederacy, and raised all their Powers, at home and from abroad, to binder
it, and to destroy us, by fained authority, and by the power of their Sword;
besides, the Devil has secret agents, like himself, tempters, that are
undiscoveted among us who infuse Poison, and hinder Antidotes: And thus God
will have it for a time, and then we shall call upon his Name, Zach. 13. 9.
and he will hear us, and will say, You are my people, and we shall say, the
Lord is our God; but we are not yet ready for such a Blessing.

Consider, that our long continuance in sins for many years, notwithstanding
many warnings, has provoked God to lay long afflictions upon us; The former
sins of this Kingdom, and our present impenttencie, cause our long afflictions.
and our present impenitencie, and continuance in personal sins, do still
increase Gods anger against us We^ make peace with our sins, and fall out one
with another; writ God be at peace with us, while we are divided one against
another; God is a God of Peace, 1 John 4. 16.
not of divisions* God is a God of Love, not of 1 Cor, 14. 33.
confusion: if we love not one another God will nor love us, nor can we be
Joh, 13 35 Joh. 14. 47.
the Disciples of Christ. Do we now seek to make our selves a Name on Earth,
and to get great Jer. 45. 5.
things to our selves, while God is plucking up, and breaking down what he
has planted, and built up? Is this to build God an House, and a Sanctuary of
Holiness? God now calls us to Esaias 22. 12. 13.
mourning, to weeping, and to girding with sackcloth, and shall we now be
proud, and ambitious, and covetous, and oppressors; and voluptuous? etc. God
forbid: this is the way and means, to be Esaias 9. 14.
cut off head and tail branch and rush, in one day.

When God by Moses commanded to build the Tabernacle, The builders of Gods
house have ever been of one mind.
the Exodus 3^. etc.
people were all willing hearted, of one mind, aimed at one end, all were
pleased with the fashion that Moses had prescribed; so, when ^ King. ^.
Solomon built the first Temple, and when Nehe^ 18
Nehemiah built the second Temple; but when the people would build a Babel,
they were divided, and they were scattered; Genesis ^1 4
Let us build, say they, lest we be scattered, etc. verse. 7. 8.
Let us go down (says Jehovah) that they may be scattered, etc. Gods
thoughts are not as our thoughts; when we seek safety in our selves God will
bring confusion. The Builders of Babel were confounded in their Language, and
so scattered* we are confounded in our ends, our devices, and fashions of the
Building; one thus another thus* a third after another fancy; all would be
pleased but none will be satisfied: she that contends 1 King. ^. 16.
to divide the Child, is no true Mother: if we seek to divide Christ, we are
not 1 Cor. 1. ^ 12.
members; if we be divided among our selves, Christ is not our Ephesians, ^. 15. 16.
Head.

Consider all ye, the inhabitants of England, Have we not all One Father, Joh.
^. (...).
God? Have we not One Mediator; 1 Timothy 2. 5
Christ? And is not Christ and the Father Joh. 8. (...)
One? Must there not be One Sheepfold and One Joh. 10. (...)
Shepherd? Has not Christ prayed, to the Father, that we may be One, as they
are One, Joh. (...) 2.
that the world might believe? And yet shall we divide our selves? We are not
our own, but Christ's; 1 Cor. 6. 20.
He has bought us with a price. And shall we thus Deuteronomy (...). 6.
requite the Lord?.

Besides, We should consider what great things God has done for us by this
Parliament?
Consider what God has done for us* we were sold to our enemies, to be
destroyed, but God has saved us; we were in extreme bondage, but God
delivered us: we cried for a Parliament, and God has given us a Parliament,
and not only a Parliament (as our enemies plotted and hoped) to destroy us,
but a delivering Parliament, a Religious Reforming Parliament; for (so indeed
it is) the bent and sense of this Parliament, is to set us free, and to reform
things amiss both in the Church and in the Commonwealth: God has given us a
Parliament miraculously, like Moses, to give us good Laws; and God has given
to them as to Moses, a holy Assembly, like an Maron, to help forward the work
of God. What could we have asked of God, that God has not given unto us? We
cried out against the increase and growth of Idolatry among us, and God has
taken it away: we cried out against Superstition, and a Popish Liturgy, and
God has freed us of all: we cried for freedom in the use of holy Ordinances,
and God gave it us.

Many other burdens and pressures, under which we lay, God has freed us
from, It is our own fault that we want any thing.
by this Parliament; if yet we lie under any pressure, it is our own faults,
because we are unthankful to God for all he has done, and remain still
impenitent, under such personal sins for which God was, and is still angry
with us: so that indeed, and in truth, we have nothing to complain of, but of
our sins, Jer. 5. 25.
which have withheld good things from us; and trouble the Parliament in the
progress of the work, of our full deliverance. We all desire peace, to enjoy
the blessings we have, and yet we contend and war one against another; but
we seek not for gracious hearts, to be humble, and thankful to God for what
he has done for us: but we, like Jesurum, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
wax fat, and kick. God has given us more then we could ask, and we grow
wanton; we loath the food of Angels, the Psalm. 78. 2^.
Manna that i^ given us from Heaven, and lightly esteem of (Christ) the Exodus
6. 14.
Rock of our Salvation.

With how much less would we have been contented within the space of seven
years past, then we now enjoy? (except the Wars, which our sins hold up)
and yet we are less contented now, then when we had not the twentieth part
of that we now enjoy; and might have yet more, if we would humbly ask it of
God, or accept it from God: but we will do neither, so ingrate and evil we
are. We complain of oppression, and yet we increase it, by our contention
and quarrels: we would have peace, but we increase strife: we would have the
worship of God settled, but we oppose God in the way and means that he has
appointed to settle it: we will not have Moses nor Aaron to be any Rule to us,
we say, they take too much upon them, Number. 16. 3.
and all the Lords people are holy, etc.

Nothing will content us, We seek to bring Gods word to our fancies, not to
have our judgments guided by Gods word.
but what we our selves (or rather our fancies) shall choose; we will wear^
no Coat but what is shaped by our selves, nor will we forsake any sin, but
what we our selves will call sin: every one will have his own way, to
worship God; and every one will have his own sin, to dishonor God; what is
this but confusion? shall we call this a building of God a house? when one
calls for a Stone, another brings him a Mattock; when another wants Mortar, a
Maule is put into his hand; one calls for Bricks, and an Axe is given to him;
one builds* and another beats down; but Jer. 8. 6.
no man repents of his wickedness, saying what have I done? We strive one to
go before another in places of honor, but we will neither go before, nor
follow after in the way of honorable humiliation: All sins do reign in
some men at this day and are increased.
where is one man among a thousand through all the Families of England, that is
a real truly reformed man? Is not the proud as proud as ever? witness gay
clothes, rich attire, strange fashions, patcht faces, curld hair, lofty
carriage, etc. Is the covetous man less covetous? does he not adore his bags
as much as ever? overreach in bargaining, spare more then is right, and every
way Jer. 15. 5.
seek great things for himself: Is not the ambitious man as greedy of honors
as ever he was? does he not seek honors and greatness by vicious ways? and
despise him that shall be said to be his equal? I would (...) God it were not
thus; Consider it, Is the oppressor less cruel? or is he not more violent in
oppressing then ever? do not oppressors every where, in every place, of all
degrees, Esaias 3. 15.
grind the faces of the poor without mercy, and beat the people to pieces? I
know it has been said by some* get their money, and let them starve or hang,
etc. I wish men could prove me a liar in this thing, and that there were no
such, oppressor: Is the voluptuous man less given to his appetite, and to all
sinful pleasures, or less profuse in unnecessarie vanities? What pleasure is
there that he forbeareth, that he is able to compass? wherein does he
restrain himself (except for want of money?) does he not seek after all
varieties, after every kickshaw, and toy, and the ver^e fullness of Sodom? In
like manner, does the drunkard drink fewer hea^ths? go more nights sober to
bed? does he swear fewer Oaths? or use less obscenitie then he was wont? Nor
is the lukewarm Formalist more zealous, but still the same that he ever was,
except such zeal as is by the Apostle condemned, Romans 10. 1.
that is not according to knowledge; or rather, are not men of knowledge, such
as have formerly been zealous for God in a right way, Rev. 2. 4.
Fallen from their first love? Are there not many such, that seek to bring in
new and strange doctrines into the Church? like the doctrine of Rev. 2. 14. 15.
Balaam, and the Nicholaitans, and are a stumbling block to Gods people; and
say of themselves; like some in the Prophet Esay's time, Esaias 65. 5
Come not near to me, for I am holier then thou.

It is true, every one will say sin abounds, and it is for sin that God
has laid all this upon us; but we look at other men's sins, Men look at the
sins of others, not at their own.
not our own: either spiritual pride or carnal security has blinded the
eyes of the most of all English people, so that few lay his own sin to
heart, or at least afflict his soul, because by his sin he has dishonored
God: but my Christian brethren, if we would have all clean, we must every one
sweep his own door, everic one must cleanse his own heart.

Then be exhorted, every one of all degrees, from the Prince to the Peasant;
Exhortation to repentance, and to reformation.
high and low, rich and poor, and If you love your lives, if you desire Gods
favor, and blessings to your selves; If you love your Families, if you love
your children, if you have any love to the Kingdom, or to the Church of God;
yea, if you love your own souls, or love Jesus Christ, that has bought you
by his own blood, Lam. 3. 40
Search and try your ways; 2 Cor. 13. 5.
examine your own sins, and turn with all your heart unto God: Resolve every
one for himself, and for his Family, as good Joshuah did; Josh. 24. 15.
Choose ye (says he) whom ye will serve, but as for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord: Except we thus do, and every one of us mend one, we may all
perish as the Israelites did; and God will fayse a people to himself out of
our dust: let no man look who shall begin, but rather every man strive who
shall be first, that he may be an example to others, and he shall have
greatest honor.

Besides, Exhortation to liberal contribution God loo^^^ (...).
let every man with all diligence help forward Gods work by liberal and large
contribution, according as God has made him able: the enemy; wicked men have
drawn their sword to star the righteous, P^a. 7. 1.
and have taken counsel together against the Lord Christ: Psalm. 2. 2.
Now God requires a help with hand and estate: Mero^ was cursed because they
helped not. Judge. (...)
He that is not now for Christ, must expect the same reward with them that are
against Christ: Math. ^2. ^0.
be not di^con^^ged at any miscarriages, it is God that does all: do thou what
God would have thee, and leave the issue to God: give freely, for that only is
acceptable: God delights in a cheer^f^ll give^, 2 Cor. 9. 7.
but God accepts no forced duty* obedience is more acceptable the^ Sa^rifice,
1 Samuel 15. 22.
Consider, that when those sons of Bel^al of the tribe of Ben^am^^, that
wrought villainy in Israel, were refused to be given up to the ustice of the
Law, the other tribes of Israel made war against Benjamin (and by Gods own
appointment, as you may fee in the story, Judge. 19. and Judge 20. etc.
all the tribe of Rev^^mine defended those wicked men and came ont to batted,
gave their brethren two great defeats: but at the third, they were wholly
destroyed. And you shall see that after the Tribes of Israel returned from the
battle, they made enquiry who of all the Tribes were not there to assist them,
and they found that none of Iabish, Giliad were there, and for that neglect
sent and destroyed them all. Judge. 20. 9, 10.
Also you shall see that for this very neglect in Nabal, Read the story.
refusing to rel^eve David (in the same case that ours is at this day) he was
by the hand of God struck with death, and God gave to David his Wife and all
his substance. Sam. 25. 3^, 3^.


And as every one must give freely, so let all those that are Collectors and
receivers of moneys, take heed that they deal truly and justly, He that
keeps any thing that is given, is a r^bber of God.
without fraud, and keep nothing back, for it is the Lords offering; will a
man rob God? yet ye have robbed me in offering, (...) the Lord: Mal. ^. 8.
but consider what follows? ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed
me, even this whole Nation. Verse ^.
Annanias and Saphirah were both stricken dead for keeping back but part of
that which themselves intended to give: Acts 5. 3.
and shall it not fair much worse with them that keep back that which others
give to God and the Kingdom. Let the covetous man also leave his covetousness
and become liberal, and give to them that want: Let the oppressor take heed
that he oppress not: especially oppress not the affl^cted in the gate, for
God will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.
Prove. 22. 23.
Oppression is a crying sin, and God will hear it. Iam. 5. 4.
Oppression (says the wise man) makes a wise man mad, Eccl. 7. 7.
it drives him violently to a damning sin, and then it torments the wound is
most intolerable, where the sense is most perfect, therefore let every wise
man abhor it. A wise man that will be an oppressor, destroys his wisdom and
himself: Nor let the ambitious man seek after honor, but strive to be humble,
seek God and his glory, and God will make him honorable. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Let all those that are soldiers be careful to follow the precept given them
by Jesus Christ. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages. Lu. 3. 14
In like manner let them that are seduced in judgment seek peace and unity, and
follow the exhortation of the Apostle: Speak all the same thing, that there
may be no division among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment 1 Cor. 1. 10.
And let all that are injured or oppressed, consider the necessity of the
times, and multiplicity of great businesses, and patiently bear all that God
lays upon them, and commit the revenge of every injury done by men to God
Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
who will not despise us: Only let the injured or oppressed complain in
righteousness, and justly to the Parliament, Those that are unjustly injured
may and ought to complain to the Parliament.
of those that unjustly injure them (and no doubt) the Parliament will right
them, for they are appointed by God to punish all injustice, and will assuredly
in due time, both chastise the oppressor, and relieve the oppressed: Therefore
murmur not, nor (as many do) repine that the Parliament does no more, and that
things go on so slowly, but rather admire (for so indeed we may all) that so
muth is done as is at this day, and that so great a progress is made to
Reformation, and bless God for it. Consider the mighty and many oppositions
they every day meet with, both open and secret.

Now in the last place, Exhortation to keep the Covenant, else we shall provoke
God to more and greater wrath.
let me entreat (or rather beseech) all you my Brethren, that have entered into
the League and Covenant in the presence of God, with your hands lift up to
heaven, that you will seriously look over your Covenant often, and consider to
what you have bound your selves, and take heed lest you neglect any duty
promised, or do any act contrary to the Covenant. For God, who is faithful in
all his Covenants, expects faithful performance from us: Examples.
God is as just as he is merciful, if he have not performance, he will take
the forfiture. Solomon by the breach of his Covenant with God, lost ten Tribes,
which God rent from his Kingdom. 1 Ki. 10. 1^.
Saul brake Covenant with the Gibeonites, and God sent a Famine in the Land for
that sin. 2 Samuel 21. 1.
Cursed (says the Lord) be the man that obeys not the voice of this
Covenant: Ier. 11. 3.
Those that swear falsely in making a Covenant do cause jvdgment to spring up
as Hem. lock in the surrows of the field. Hos. 10. 4.
God has threatened to send the sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant,
and to send pestilence and famine. Levit. 26. 25, 26.


Consider, we have entered into a brotherly Covenant with our neighboring
Kingdom of Scotland, and they with us, and we are now become Brethren; not
enemies, (as in times past) this is a great mercy from heaven: We have cause to
bless God for them, and they to bless God for us: And if we keep our
Covenant one with the other, God will bless both us and them to all
posterities: But if we remember not our brotherly Covenant, God will kindle a
fire among us, Amos 1.
and bring judgments upon us to devour us; therefore take heed of harkning to
(much less believing) any false calumnious reports, (raised by a self-seeking
faction) against our Brethren of that Kingdom; we know there is a Hereditary,
or inherent emulation between some Counties of England, and the Scottish
Nation, who are yet ignorant of the blessing by so happy a union: and we know
there are particular contentious men for self ends, are uncharitable in their
judgment and censures of them (our Brethren) and of their actions: They seek to
stir up strife; Let their sin lie upon their own heads, but let not us partake
with them in their sin, but as Christians admonish them and reprove them with
meekness. A wrathful man (says Solomon) stirs up strife. Pro. 15. 18.
And as coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire, so is a contentious man
to kindle strife. Prove. 26. 21.
That saying of Solomon is worth consideration: A froward man (says he) sows
strife and division: That is, he plotteth to make it grow to a crop; in seeming
to cast it away, he makes it increase seven times more and greater: And a
whisperer, says he, seperateth chief friends. It is a dangerous sin to break
a Covenant with a heathen man, much greater to break with a Brother; Read for
this purpose, Ier. 34. 18, 19, 20. verses. And I will give those men that have
broken my Covenant, and have not kept the words of the Covenant, which they had
made before me, when they cut the Calfe in twain, and passed between the parts
thereof: The Princes of Judah and the Princes of Jerusalem, the Euruches, and
the Priests, and all the people of the Land, which passed between the parts of
the Calfe: I will even give them into the hands of their enemies and into the
hands of them that seek their l^fe: and their dead bodies shall be for meat
unto the fowls of the heaven and to the beasts of the earth.

And to them that have not yet entered into Covenant, I say it is our duty to
do it: God and the Kingdom ^all upon you to do it, it is your danger that
you do it not, and may prove your ruin that you stand against it. Therefore
(as I love your souls) I exhort you to come in specility: that God requires
it of you; stead Deuteronomy. Chap. 26. verse 10. 11. 12, etc. I^ you with^^ly (...)
to join your selves with the s^ed of Jacob, shame shall cover you, and you are
in danger to be out off for ever; Read, Chadiah, 10, 11, 12, 13. verses.

Consider what I have said and the Lord give every m^n understanding in all
things, 2 Timothy 2.
And incline their hearts to walk humbly, and with perfect hearts before God,
not seeking their own ends, nor doing their own works: but that we may all
seek Gods glory, and do the work of God, as faithful servants to him,
submitting to his will against our own ^udgments, and deying our selves, that
we may give all to God, from whom we have all, and wait with patience Gods
time. If thus we do, let me perish if God destroy not all our enemies, and make
the deliverance of this Kingdom most glorious, and us of one mind and one
heart: That we the Brethren of both Kingdoms shall be one, as we have
Covenanted one with another. And as the Lord Jehovah has promised: I will give
them one heart and one way that they may fear me for ever, for the good of
them, and for their Childr^n after them: And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, etc. Which the Lord grant, for the Lord Christ his sake.
Ier. 32. 9* 10.


FINIS.

