A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OE THE Incomparably virtuous and truly pious
GENTLEWOMAN MRS. DOROTHY LITSTER.

By EDWARD SMITH.

The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. The Righteous has hope
in his Death. None considers that they are taken away from the evil to come.
Bl^ssed ar^ the dead that dye in the Lord. For they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. VIRTUS Post FUNERA vivit.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Will. Palmer at the Palm Tree in Fleet Street
over against St. Dunstan's Church, 1660.

Madam.
WHat I should have deemed presumption, flattery, or self-conceit to have
offered on my own accord, I reckon my duty to tender upon your request, being
fully assured, that where the quick eye of your Judgment shall find a fault,
the tender hand of your goodness will blot it out; and if you find many, you
have Charity enough to cover them all. I never yet thought any thing I could
do, either worthy the acceptance of such a person, or able to abide the test of
such a judicious hearer or reader, if you should mind to be critical, and
therefore should rather have run the hazard of being reputed rude and
unmannerly in denying to transcribe the notes you lately heard, than to be
convict of ignorance and weakness under my own hand. But being fully assured,
that out of a dear love to the memory of that precious Gentlewoman, your late
dear sister, who being dead, yet speaks to you in what was spoken at her
Funeral; and it may be also out of a desire to incourag me in the work of my
Ministry, you have condescended to signify your good liking of what was then
deliverd, I have taken upon me the confidence to give you the Sermon, as it is
my Notes, and not as it was then curtailed by the shortness of the time, and
sharpness of the weather, which I here humbly present to you, and which I
beseech you to look upon as a testimany of my thankful resentment of those many
obliging favors I have received from you. For to a service of this nature, no
consideration but that of Duty and Gratitude could ever have moved me. What I
spoke concerning the sweet and precious Mrs Litster, you have to a word almost
as it was then delivered, where yet I find my self in a straight, those who
knew her not, will condemn me of flattery and lavishnesse in my expressions,
those who knew her, will blame me as to low and scant, wronging both her and
the auditory, to which I can only say, God and my own conscience acquit me from
the first, my weakness and unfitness for a work so much above me, will beg,
if not from others, yet from you my pardon for the last; Madam, How much of the
comfort of my life, and of cheerfulness in the work of my Ministry I owe to
Mr. Hartop and yourselfe; I have a deeper sense, than I have either power or
opportunity at this time to express, only to what I have said, I add this, God
forbid I should sin against him in ceasing to pray and praise God for you and
yours, I humbly take leave and remain.

Madam. Your poor and unworthy, but many ways obliged servant. Edward Smith.
Hoby this 30. of December. 1659.
AS undue praises is a piece of flattery that suits only with base and slavish
spirits, who dare sacrifice their Consciences to satisfy some persons vain
glorious humor, endeavoring by the vermilion of their sale-oratory to paint
them at their death like Saints, who in their lifetime, were no better than
Devils. So on the other side to deny Commendations where true worth claims
them as due, is a superstitious niceness savouring either of ignorance to
descern it, or of malice, not to acknowledge it, or of injustice to render it.

And therefore I think he was not mistaken, to whom it seemed as real apoynt
of Religion to honor the virtues, as to reli^ve then cessito is. For I am sure
as this is commanded by the Apostle, James c. 1. v. 27. so the other is allowed
by Solomon, who spends, almost the 31th chapter of the Proverbs in the praise
of the virtuous women, and v. 30. says, A woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised. I think such and none but such, for according to Moral
philosophy praise is a moral Consesequent of virtuous actions. And as the wise
man warrants our Commendation of the virtuous, so the Knowledge that many here
present had of the virtues of this deceased Gentlewoman, will not only warrant,
but require it as a due satisfaction to their just expectation, that as we are
taught that we must die by this spectacle of mortality, so how to live and die
by setting before us, though but in some dark and shaddowy representations the
patte^n of her never dying virtues.

But I am given to understand that this is not regarded at any hands: Yet I
hope I may do my self that right, as to pay some small tribute of that respect,
and honor, which I do and shall owe to his precious Memory and you the service
of quickening your graces by reminding you of hers, which I doubt not will be
acceptable to some, and I hope none here so squeamishly affected as to be
offended at it.

And here I shall not mention her descent, her being such a Knights Daughter,
this we owe to fortune (if you^ allow the wo^d) that often favous fools, or
necessity, such a discourse would be here but a troublesome impertinency, which
it may be, if one were tied to speak of some great persons, must be the
principal argument for want of better. But though many of our degenerate
Nobility and Gentry think it honor and Dignity sufficient, that they be known
to be the Sons and Daughters of such Parents: such a Noble man's son, such a
Knights daughter, and Glory, worldly Nobility necessarily descending upon them,
need not endeavor to excel in any worthy or well-doing; yet, I am sure this
deceased Gentlewoman was otherwise minded, counting it a small thing that she
was such a Great man's Daughter, unless she was also Daughter to a Greater
Father, even to the Lord Almighty, 1 Cor. 9.

For where Virtue is wanting, Great men, as Sir W. Raleigh truly says, are but
like painted papers, whom ignorant persons worship in stead of Christ, our
Lady, or other Saints.

That therefore which will for ever endear her memory to us, is, her care to
enoble her birth by Grace; making honor, which usually, yea, naturally
descends to go up the Channel. For it was not so much honor to her that Sir
Mart. Litster was her Father, as it was to him that he had such a Daughter.

Such a Daughter, I say, whose tender years were seasoned with Grace, who, as
if she had foreseen how short her day was, like a good Houswife got up in the
morning of her life, and finished her work before the night of Death could
surprise her.

The time would fail me, should I speak of her rare natural Endowments, her
quick fancy, her piercing wit, her skill in the French Language, the
improvement she made of her liberal and religious education under the virtuous
and pious Lady, the Lady Denham.

Neither must I here call to mind, that (...) her sweet and gentle Disposition
(which very rarely accompanies such parts) whereby she tied the souls of all
that knew her, as well to love, as admire her; nor yet may I do more than
barely mention her courteous and modest deportment, her wise, witty and
pertinent Discourses, that rendered her so beloved and desired, while she lived,
and so lamented now dead. All this would but renew our sorrow be imminding us
of our loss.

That therefore which I Will speak to is, What is yet more consideraable, and
worthy both praise and imitation, such as may rather move our emulation of her
Piety, than afflict our memories with the sense of our loss: and what I shall
say concerning her life for the quickening of our dead and drowsy souls,
shall be such as wherein I am well assured, neither my own heart; nor any soul
living, shall be able to give me the lie.

She was constant, diligent, and Reverend in attending the public exercises of
Gods Worship. And there are those here present, who can witness, and I hope
will imitate her Christian course of private reading, prayer and meditation,
those morning and evening sacrifices.

Though she was not careless of her body, yet she spent not her time inter
pectinem and speculum; her greatest care was to trim up her soul, and whatever
else she minded, never forgot to put on those Ornaments of a meek and quiet
spirit, which in the sight of God and all good men is of great price.

She kept so strict a watch over her self, that she lived in the world
unspotted with the vanities of youth, which time, the generality look upon as
privileged from such serious entertainments of themselves, and severities of
Religion.

She remembered her Creator in the days of her youth, and He did not forget
her, but took her into his own Teaching, and learned her so effectually those
Great Lessons of self-denial and mortification, that, contrary to those silly
women mentioned by St. Paul; whereas for her time she might have been a
Learner, for her learning in divine things, she was fit to teach others the
ways of God: I am sure, I have thought so when I have been with her, and that
far greater abilities than I dare pretend to, might have conversed with her to
their very great Advantage; she kept such a mean between irreligion, and a
fantastical superstitious niceness, as that I have thought I never knew any so
becomingly Religious.

She was exactly careful of the Government of her inward man, to keep her
passions in subjection to her Reason and Religion: wherein she was so happy, as
those who best knew her can witness: she was of that even Temper, that she was
never known to exceed either in joy, or sorrow for any outward things; as if
she had converted not only the nobler Principles of the best Philosophy, but
also the Rules of the Gospel, and the best example of our blessed Savior in
succum and sanguinem.

She had such a rare mixture of parts, humility and goodness, as will scarcely
be found elsewhere in these years and degrees; that like the Kings Daughter she
was glorious within, and doubtless the Temple of the living God.

Her virtues were so admirably shining, that I may say as truly of her as a
learned man of a Lady in his Epistle Dedicatory; That Plato, if he had lived in
her time, might have found his timorous supposition brought into H. M.
absolute Act, and to the enravishment of his amazed soul, might have beheld
Virtue become visible to his outward sight.

I could be very well pleased to go on with this Discourse, and might spend the
whole time allotted me in it, and neither exceed the bounds of Truth, nor the
patience of those who have had the happiness of any intimate acquaintance and
Converses with her.

She had attained (which I had almost forgot) that high pitch of Christianity,
patiently to bear, and freely, and readily to forgive injuries.

And that she had such an excellent soul, that she was so good a Chris^ian, and
her heart such a Treasure of good things, he must be an arrant Sce^t^ck that
should doubt of it, who knew how able and ready she was to assist any sick
persons, whether kindred, servants o^ others, with her pr^yers, reading,
consulting, comforting, by speaking a word in season. And shall understand also
in what a heavenly state both sickness and Death found her, which we may guess
at by the pulse of her soul, which beat, as it proceeds lively to God; out of
the abundance of the heart, says the Scripture, The mouth speak^s, and a
corrupt fountain does not send forth sweet waters.

She had at the beginning of her sickness so many, so full and pertinent
Scriptures and other Ejaculations and heavenly expressions, as if she had never
acquainted her-tongue with any other Language, as if she had been (...) a
living Bible, so care^ull had she been of the Apostles exhortation, to let the
Word of God dwell richly in her; Doubtless, her h^ar^ had been long in ^i^ing
much good matter, which made her tongue like the Pen of a ready Writer.

She spoke so fully and clearly of heavenly things, and was so sensibly pleased
with them, even when she had almost left to be sensible of any thing e^se, that
one would have thou^ht her soul, not only in the suburbs, or at the gate of
Heaven, but already entered into the joy of her Lord, and taken into the bosom
of her Heavenly Father.

Oh! how was her heart e^flamed with love to God, and that love kept lively
with assurances of his love to her! I remember amongst other heavenly
expressions, I he^rd her say, I have loved God, and do love Him, and God loves
me: Oh how thy comforts refresh my soul!

And that this was no mere melancho^ick fancy, we need no other Argument than
her extreme (not to say Contentedness but) desire to dye. How loath was she to
think of living. I am now, says she, almost through my journey, it is a journey
I must go, and were I not better go through it now to God, than come back again
into the world?

But if any should say as Rebekah did, I fit be so, why was she then afflicted
in such a manner?

I answer, 1. That afflictions, though un^outh and extraordinary, are no more
an argument of Gods displeasure, than prosperity is of his love, otherwise. Job
or David, who, while they suff^red Go^s terrors were distracted, s^ou'd have
been wicked. Nero had been better than Saint Paul, who was b^ffe^ed with a
messenger of Satan, our Savior has given us a rule to interpret providence
by, Luck. 13. Think not that the ^alile ^s were ^r^^t^r ^^nners because they
s^ffered such things.

2. What if God willing to show his power and Sovereignty over his Creature,
that he is Dominus vitae necisque, might handle her in this manner; our Divines
hold that God may pro Dominio afflict an innocent person, not that I go about
to free her from sin, she she herself would be the first, if she knew it, that
would abhor me for it; yet that she was tainted with any course inconsistent
with the state of Grace, I think malice it self cannot charge her.

3. But I think this might be the maine reason; God saw her the fittest person
amongst us all to be made a monitor to us, to use our health and wits to those
ends for which they were given us, she being one, whose sufferings in this
nature could not prejudice her future Happiness as having beforehand secured
that by an early working out her salvation with fear and trembling.

We are now drawing to the end of her life, and this dicourse, and we shall see
that such was the goodness of God to her, that she died as well as lived an
excellent Christian, renouncing all her own righteousness, and expecting
salvation merely by Jesus Christ, yea, and that with much confidence and
assurance, as is clear, by the words she spoke about 2, or 3. hours before
her death, viz. I acknowledge the great goodness of my Savior Jesus Christ in
saving my soul eternally. Which said, she gave up her soul to God, And
doubtless both in a spiritual and literal sense is presented a chaste Virgin
to Christ, in whose tender arms and ravishing embraces we now leave her, with
this Congratulation (if you will indulge me that liberty) Enjoy thy Rest oh
virgin-blessed soul.

And grant good God, that we who survive may walk in her steps, that so when
Christ, who is our life shall appear, attended with her and thousands of other
Saints and Angels, we may together with her enter into those mansions of
eternal Blessing, which God has prepared for those that love and fear him.

And in the mean time, while we are in this vale of tears, may so live that we
may dye, Rejoicing in hope of the Glory of God, which is the Text I intend to
speak to for our instruction upon this sad and solemn occasion of our meeting,
which I the rather make choice of, because it suit so well with this Condition,
that sweet heavenly posture of soul I found her in, delighting in nothing but
prayer and praising God, speaking and contemplating of the joys above. In
which sweet and happy temper, setting aside the violent fitts of her disease,
she lived and died.

ROM 5. latter part of the second verse. And rejoice in Hope of the Glory of
God.
THese words are an amplification, or a further enumeration of the privileges
Believers have by Jesus Christ. Great and glorious advantages are held forth in
this and the former verses.

We are justified, being justified we have peace with God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, by whom also we are brought into such favor and acceptance with God,
and this state of favor so secured to us by Christ, that it begets in us, not
only hope of glory, but rejoicing in hope of the Glory of God.

(...), The word, says Beza, may well be explained in that in 2 Cor. 12. 10.
(...), that is, maximam voluptatem ex i^s percipimus, i. e. Non solum aequo
animo sumus and ab omni damnationis formidine liberi, imo de peccatorum
remissione per Christi sanguinem certiorati, and inde magna laetitia perfusi,
exultamus de haereditate coelesti, quae nos manet: Through Christ we have not
only freedom from Hell, but right to a glorious Inheritance, the Hope whereof
does so hugely please and delight us, that our Mouth is filled with laughter,
and our Tongue with singing, We rejoice in Hope of the glory of God.

We have in the words:

1. An Object, Glory. 2. The qualification of it, The Glory of God. 3. A double
act of the soul exercised about this Object, Hope, and Rejoicing.
Which several parts I shall handle, in speaking to this general Point of
Doctrine, which takes in the whole Text, viz.

Doctrine. That the future glory which Believers hope for, is ground of their
present rejoicing.

In speaking to this Point, I shall first show, that Believers hope for Glory.

Then, that they rejoice in hope of it.

And as I speak to them, shall gather several Doctrinal inferences by way of
Instruction and Consolation.

1. Concerning the hope of Believers, these Questions are briefly to be
answered:

Quest. 1. What hope is?

Answ. It is a certain expectation of those things that are promised us in
Christ, and yet exhibited. Sometimes in Scripture, Hope is put for the things
hoped for, but here I speak of the act or grace of Hope.

Quest. 2. How Hope differs from Faith, as respecting the promise of this Glory

Answ. Faith assents to the truth of the Promise. Hope exspects the performance
of it, or as Luther excellently distinguishes: Fides intuetur verbum rei, Spes
autem Rem verbi: the Object is the same, but the actings of the soul about the
Object are different. Faith looks upon the Truth of the Promise, that God will
give his Children eternal life; Hope waits when this shall be done, and the
Hebrew word for Hope, comes from (...) which signifies expectavit, a looking
for a thing with a st^etching out of the spirit or mind, and therefore it is
expressed in the Greek, by a word that signifies a stretching, or lifting up
the head to look for a thing, Romans 8 19. (...).

Faith is to Hope as a mother, Hope back again to Faith as a pious and dutiful
daughter: which like the young Stork nourishes and supports its Dam when she
grows weak and feeble; which pious affection the Greeks call (...). In this
lifetime we are, as one observes, beset with manifold Temptations: The work of
God seems oft-times contrary to his word, and things apparently fall out
otherwise than God has promised. That Faith is daunted and needs Hope to
support it. As for example, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
I Will deliver thee. According to this promise, a Christian calling upon God, and
finding no deliverance, begins to faint, then comes in Hope, and succors it
with that counsel, Heb. 2. 3. Though deliverance tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come, it will not tarry.

Quest. 3. Upon what is a Christians hope grounded?

Answ. 1. Its grounded on the Grace of God, 1 Pet. 1. 13. For so some read the
words: Be sober, and trust perfectly on the Grace that is brought to you by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. For the Grace of God is free and powerful, and
therefore affords ground for a Christians hope, notwithstanding all
discouragements or Temptations to distrust, that may arise either from the
sense of our own unworthiness, or weakness.

2. On the Redemption that is by Jesus Christ, as is clear, 1 Pet. 1. 21. The
Apostle speaking that we were redeemed by the blood of Christ, says, God
raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope may be in
God.

3. Upon the promises.

It is also nourished by prayer, patience, examples, and experience.

Quest. 4. But may not a Believers hope sometime fail, and may not a wicked man
have hope?

Answ. A godly man's Hope may be much weakened, the most active and vigorous
Faith and Hope may grow slack in its acting, the brightest day of a Christian
may be over-clouded, by reason of that fomes peccati which is in the Relics
of Concupiscence, and is the fountain and cause of new doubtings, yet the Sun
gets from under the clouds, Hope recovers its strength, and overcomes those
doubts, adeoque licet in praelio forte succumbat, in Bello tandem victrix e
vadit, Though it may be worsted in a skirmish, yet it gets the victory in the
battle.

And as for the hope of wicked men, as is their faith, such is their hope, as
the mother, such the daughter, their faith is a fancy, and their hope
presumption.

And the Hope of good and bad men differ:

1. In making out after the thing hoped for; a good man is careful in the
choice of means that he be not deceived: and diligent and patient in the use
of them, that he falls not short of what he hopes for, Lament. 3. 29, 30, 31.

But such is not a wicked man's hope, for either he wholly neglects the means,
or else uses them slightly.

2. They differ in their duration, shall I say troubles, nay, death it self
cannot kill a godly man's hopes, Job 13. 15. but the hope of the hypocrite shall
perish.

Thus much of the Act or Grace of Hope.

I come now to the Object of it, The Glory of God. And here I shall not
precisely handle it, in its own nature, but consider it under the notion of an
Object of Hope: and yet so it will hold forth to us, so much of the nature of
this glory, as may afford us much matter of instruction, which I shall briefly
raise as inferences as I go along.

The Object of Hope according to the Moralists, is, Bonum, futurum. Difficile,
possibile.

1. The Object of Hope is a good thing; we may then infer hence, that the Glory
of God is good truly, and every way good, which may call us off from all
immoderate desire and seeking after other things: why do we go to sinful
profits and pleasures, saying, will ye show us any good? Here Is that that is
good indeed, such a good, upon which a Christian pitching his hope is made
good, and the more he hopes, the better it will make him. He that has this
Hope purifies himself.

2. The Object of Hope is a good thing to come, it is absent, for a man does not
hope for what he has already. This then should teach us patience in our
expectation, Romans 8. 24, 25. If we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it. The Husbandman waits with patience, because he cannot
reap as soon as he sows.

3. The Object of Hope is a difficult thing, a thing that is hard to come by.

And then it instructs us, both about the means to the used, and the manner of
using them: He that hopes for any good thing, will use the means to obtain it,
so he that hopes for Glory, will use the means, yea, and with all his might
too. Things hard to be got, require our utmost pains and diligence.

This therefore may correct their mistake, or spur up their lazy spirits: who
say, they hope for Heaven, and hope to be saved, and yet are either wholly
careless of using the means, or else use them so carelessly and negligently, as
if it were no hard thing to obtain. Sure such would make Heaven cheap, even
unto vileness that would come thither without pains: I am sure we have not so
vile an esteem of earthly things. But remember the Object of Hope is Bonum,
arduum and difficile; for if it were easy and feasible at pleasure, it would
not be the object of Hope, but matter of our present possession. And therefore
there is a necessity of laying aside either our laziness, or hopes of Heaven.

But that this difficulty may not discourage.

4. The Object of Hope is a thing possible, no man can hope for that which is
impossible. Let this then encourage us to duty; for neither our hope, nor
labor shall be in vain in the Lord; nay, if we consider the grounds of Hope
before mentioned, it is not only possible, but certain, whereto agrees that of
Augustine, quoted by Zanchy, Tria considero in quibus spes mea tota consist it.
Charitatem adoptionis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis, and
therefore foolish thoughts, says he, murmur as much as you will, saying, who
art thou, or how great is that glory, or with what merits do thou hope for
Heaven? and I will confidently answer you, I know whom I have believed, and am
certain enough that my hope shall not be frustrated; Quia in charitate nimia
adoptavit me Deus, and quia verax est in promissione, and potens in
exhibitione. If we would yet further know what is this future, hard, possible
good thing that Believers hope, the Text says it is the glory of God.

The Glory of God is several ways taken in Scripture, but here it is taken for
heavenly happiness, for that life eternal which consists in a participation of
Gods glory, is begun in this life in the reparation of the glorious Image of
God by the grace of Regeneration, which is called Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And
perfected in heaven, which glorious inheritance is called The hope of
Christians, Hebrews 6. 18.

He that is Heir to a Kingdom, though as glorious as that of Solomon's, his
hopes are not to be compared to a Christians. For behold a greater, better, and
more glorious Inheritance than Solomon's is here, and therefore called glory in
the abstract, and glory of God; great or eminent glory, and it exceeds all
other glory.

1. In Splendour and Luster, 2. In real Worth and Satisfaction. 3. In
Suitableness and Proportion. 4. In Certainty and Duration. These I wave.
Thus briefly what is meant by the glory of God, I find four reasons why
heavenly happiness is called Glory.

1. Because of the glorious company that is in that high and holy place: The
place, the company, the employment, is all glorious.

2. Because the divine Glory, or Majestly of God is there most conspicuous and
manifest.

3. Because most glorious and divine gifts are there dispensed.

4. Because there our bodies and souls will be most glorious.

Now let us make some further application of what has been said.

Use I. Do Believers hope for glory, and is it such a glory they hope for, then
they are not men of such a forlorn condition as the world judges them to be.
They are richer and happier in their hopes than others that want these hopes in
their present possession. Its such a hope, Cui falsum subesse non potest.

Use II. See hence the reason of their courage and patience in bearing
Afflictions, undergoing troubles in the world: here is the reason they hope for
better, Gods promise and Christ's merits are the root of a Christians hope; and
Peace, Patience, Courage in evil times are the fruit of it.

And there is the reason why I should exhort and encourage to let patience have
its perfect work, and to go on through all opposition with an undaunted courage
in the ways of God, to keep your pace toward Heaven, be the weather fair or
foul; though the way be foul, the journey end will be fair. Be we then steadfast
and unmovable, always attending in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know
our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

And when we begin to faint, and grow weary under the burden of Afflictions, or
in the duties of Religion, let this hope of glory quicken us. Let Us call to
mind that of the Apostle, Romans 8. These light Afflictions, which are but for a
moment, are not to be compared to that eternal weight of glory: Oh let this joy
that is set before us, make us follow our Master, enduring the Cross. See 2 Cor.
4. 16, 17. This hope made the Martyrs embrace the flames, and kiss the stake,
Pericula non respicit Martyr sed Coronas.

Use III. Do Christians hope for the glory of God? then let us make use of this
to abate our esteem, and moderate our affections to the things of this life. If
we find our hearts ensnared and enamoured with the beauty and excellency of
outward things, there can be no better way to take off our inordinate
affection, than by pitching upon something thats' better; Let Us endeavor
therefore to gather clearer views of the beauty and glory of holiness and
happiness, and this will darken the glory of outward things, as the shining of
the Sun does the glimmering of the lesser Stars; that as we compare the glories
of this world with this glory of God, we shall say as the world did of Christ,
there is no comeliness or beauty in them, why we should desire them?

It may serve also to help us against temptations: He that has this hope also,
or the glory of God, would not sell his hopes for all the pomps and glittering
vanities of the world: such hope heightens our spirits to such a degree of
generousness and true magnanimity, that we shall reject with infinite disdain,
the highest offers of preferment and worldly honors, if they be made as baits
to tempt us from God, and hinder us of this glory which is the object of our
hope; a famous instance of this we have in Moses, and that other, Moses, the
noble Galeacius, Sanctus dum appetit aeternitatem, infrase habet omne quod
transit.

Use IV. Let this serve also to sweeten to us the bitter cup of death. Let us
be content that our bodies should for a while be turned into rottenness and
dust, for God will not always leave us in the grave, our flesh shall not always
see corruption; we do but lay down an evil body to take up a glorious one, for
it will change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body.

When Christ, who is our life shall appear, we shall also appear with him in
Glory. Certainly this consideration may raise us, not only above the fear of
death, but even to triumph over it in the words of the Apostle, O death where
is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory!

Use V. Let this also abate our sorrow for the dead, which use the Apostle Paul
makes for us to our hands. 1 These. 4. 13. For I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you sorrow not even as others
which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so
them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Should we trouble at
their advancement, or desire to detain them from their happiness (when God sees
them fit for it) to serve our conveniences?

Use. VI. Let us all labor to get this hope of glory, that so we may have an
Anchor sure and steadfast to keep our souls from splitting against the rocks of
presumption, or sinking in the sands of desperation, and bear up against the
winds and waves of persecution and temptation, which we are likely enough to
meet withal in this present evil world, and having obtained this hope of glory,
let us mind the Apostles exhortation. 1 These. 3. 11, 12. To walk worthy of God,
who has called us to his Kingdom and Glory. This will strengthen our hope for
hope is fed with the duties of obedience, and so at length we shall arise to
rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, which is the next act of the soul that is
exercised about this glorious object. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Believers rejoice in this hoped for Glory. Christians have their joy even then
when they seem to the world the most uncomfortable people in it, their hearts
are not always pen't up with sorrow and stuffed with grief. They do not, I
am sure, they need not always sigh and weep. They may sometime laugh and sing,
the word signifies such a joy as is not be contained, that will not be kept in,
but glories and makes us boast of God and the great things of Heaven.

There are several sorts of joy. But the joy here meant, is such as is wrought
in the soul by the spirit of God, evidencing to a Christian the pardon of his
sin, the acceptance of his person and service, and so confirming his hopes of
the glory of God. The greatness of these mercies apprehended is such as fills
the heart with gladness and the tongue with singing.

This rejoicing is faith triumphant, its not only a vital act of a Christian,
but a lively and rigorous act. Such as speaks the soul to be in a healthy and
sound constituition.

Reas. And surely well may Christians rejoice, if we consider the nature of the
object of their joy; it is, as you have already heard, the glory of God.
Concerning which if you should further ask what it is, I must needs say I
cannot tell, only I know its such as will pose the ablest parts, the richest
fancy of the most eloquent orator, so much as to shadow it forth, such is the
excellency of it, as words will but darken and eclips its glory, if we stay
upon them, the sun does not more benight the stars, than that glory will the
lust^e of a thousand suns: The truth is, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.

It does not appear how transcendently glorious we shall be. It cannot be fully
known, but by enjoying, which will be when we come to heaven. And therefore
when a christian is drawing near heaven, and would feign know, what the glory
of it is, Christ sends Death which bids him come and see: And when a Christian
that has had the clearest views and fullest discovery of its beauty and
sweetness to his soul shall come thither, he must say that he neither saw nor
tasted the one half, nay not the thousandth part of its glory.

As I did before, so I shall here also draw some short doctrinall conclusions
hence, whereby we may understand something more of the nature of this glory,
and consequently what good grounds a Christian has for his rejoicing in hopes
of it.

1. Do believers rejoice in hope of glory? Then this informs us, 1. of the
excellency of heavenly happiness, wise men do not rejoice at every petty and
trivial advantage: Its not enough that the object of joy be a good thing but it
must be excellently good, P. 119. 162. I rejoice in thy word as one that
finds great spoils. They are great things that are the matter of joy, such is
the glory of Heaven, it filis every chink and cranny of the soul that it finds
no emptiness or dissatisfaction, Psalm. 16. In thy presence is fulness of
joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

How then do such bewray their ignorance and unacquaintance with heaven, who
can rejoice in the things of this life, but as to heaven find no motion or
joyful inclination.

Nay, how do they shame themselves, who can rejoice in the satisfaction of
their lusts, glory in their beastly sensuality, and are mere changes to this
joy, these certainly either do not hope for heaven, or else they know not what
it is.

Do Believers rejoice? etc. then Heaven is their inheritance, they have
propriety in it: Christ has purchased it, and entitled them to it upon their
believing; men little rejoice in a thing that is excellent, if not their own:
men may like and commend the stately buildings pleasant Fields, Gardens and
Walks of another man's, but they do not rejoice in them, propriety gives great
advantage to affection, 2 Cor. 4. verse. ult. they did not faint at tribulation,
but could glory in all their sufferings: see the reason of this, chap. 5. 1.
For we know -- we have an House, a building of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens. Believers have the best estate, and best evidence for
it in the world. It Is purchased by Christ, the Deeds drawn and sealed by his
precious blood: yea, he has taken possession of it in his head, and therefore
now he rejoices in hope of a full enjoyment of it.

3. Infer hence the certainty of heavenly happiness. Estates here are
uncertain, but that such as we shall not only have and hold for present, but
possess and enjoy for ever, and therefore its called everlasting life, and an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that never fades away; certainly God
would never raise his people to rejoice in hopes of such a Happiness, which
should more sad them in the falling, than delight them in the enjoyment. Fear
of losing a thing does much abate our rejoicing in it but once hapy in heaven,
and never miserable.

All this, as it comends the happiness of heaven, and helps us to a view of
the Glory of God, so meethinks we should be taken as the Apostles were at our
Saviors transfiguration, and say, master, its good being there; and so should
move us to get into the number of Gods children, and put, us upon studying how
we may be meet to be partakers of this glorious inheritance with the Saints in
light.

This Text would also chide Christians for being sad; We rejoice in hope of the
glory of God. And in the Epistle to the Philippians, We rejoice in Christ
Jesus: certainly then they discover their ignorance and unacquaintance with the
true nature of Religion, who represent Religion as a thing that is made up of
nothing, but sorrow and terrors, and a kind of whining male-contentedness,
whereas its not only lawful for Christians to rejoice, but their duty, and
when they are themselves and in tune, they do so. It is the very Character of a
Christian to rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

They therefore mistake Christianity, who will neitheir be cheerful
themselves, nor like it in others, but please themselves to be in a mourning
and complaining condition, as if this was the natural frame and proper temper
of a Christian; When a Christian in this temper is off the hooks, quite out of
frame, and never less like himself.

Know this, that Christianity does not require this of her followers, to live
under constant agony: and horrors in a muttering complaining condition; No, it
requires them to rejoice in God, to make their boast of him all the day, and
having obtained peace with God, through Jesus Christ, and hopes of heaven to
rejoice in those hopes. No good comes of peevish sour malcontent and
dumpishness. It does no good to the person so affected, but dishonours God,
calls into question the satisfaction of our Savior, reproaches Religion,
disparages heaven, unfits the heart for duty. Does Christ, do you think,
delight to see his Spouse wringing her hands, and tearing her hair; It pleases
none but the Devil and his Instruments, who are enemies to God and his people.
Yet such is the infirmity and weakness of some weak Christians, that to be
querulous and peevish, to reject the tenders of mercy and love, as things too
good for them, they think the most proper and fittest state for them. I confess
to mourn when we have offended God, is ingenuous and becoming, but to refuse to
be comforted, when God calls upon us to rejoice, is Pride, Peevishness and
Sullenness, and which does both grieve and provoke God.

That sorrow that prepares for comfort, that empties the heart of sin, that so
there be no room to receive the greater measures of Grace, and take in the
larger draughts of consolation, is good; but that which arises from hard
thoughts of God, and tends to the nourishing those ungrounded and injurious
suspicions of Gods willingness to receive those burdened souls, that would have
ease from him, and so keep the soul off from God is no way agreeable to the
tenor of the Gospel, no way tending to the credit of Religion, contributes
nothing to the bettering of a Christians condition. I know nothing that is more
unbecoming or disadvantagious to any honest upright heart.

Many other uses might be made of this point; I shall conclude all in a few
words further. Do Christians rejoice in hope of Glory? Then take heed of such a
frame of heart, and such a course of life as will contradict such hopes, as
will lock up the heart from rejoicing: and stop the mouth from glorying in hope
of Heaven.

That I would say to you, you find Tit. 2. 11, 12. They who would look for this
blessed hope, must deny ungodliness, and worldly lust, and live righteously,
godly and soberly in this present world.

The Spirit of Holiness, and hopes Happiness must be joined together. Therefore
all profane persons that never mind God, that will not endure the troubles and
cross of holiness, may not look for the Crown of Happiness. Can those who are
strangers to the life of God, look for the Glory of God? Can those look for the
glory of heaven, whose conversation is in hell; be not deceived, profaneness
leads not to hope, but to despair; but you my Brethren, abhor that which is
evil, make conscience of living holily. Get more measures of Grace, that you
may have a good Hope through grace. and strong Consolation flowing thence, and
then rejoice in the Lord, and again, I say, rejoice. You that are sad and
mourning Christians, do not disjoyn your sorrow from your expectation of Glory;
as you look downward and mourn, so look upward and rejoice, while you are
sighing for sin, pant after your Savior; while you are in the Valley of sorrow
and suffering, look up to the mount of Joy and felicity, see the Crown of Glory
provided for you, know that when Christ appears, you shall appear with him in
glory, and rejoice in this hope of the glory of God.

FINIS.

