The Protestant INFORMER, OR Information to all Protestants: Showing the causes
and end, of this unjust war, Plotted by Romish Jesuits, and now managed by
English Papists, and their abbettors against this Parliament, and in this all
other Parliaments: Proving by forepast proceedings, present actions and persons
acting that: this war is no new quarrel, nor caused by the Militia But
divellish malice, against the true Protestant Religion, and Laws of this
Kingdom, to set up, and establish Popery, and has been fifteen, or sixteen
years last past, preparing. Also justifying this Parliaments proceedings, by
Nature, Law, and Religion, against the false Calumniations of all Malignants:
With an exhortation, to courage, liberality, patience, and Constancy, to the
hazard of life, and fortunes: in defense of Gods true worship; your own Rights,
Liberties, and this present Parliament; with confidence of a blessing, and
victory, like Caleb, and Joshua: For your GOD is with you. Published for
Information to the Ignorant. By Gregory Thims Gentl.

PSALM. 37. 14. The wicked have drawn out their swords, and bent their bow, to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

JUD. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly,
the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not forth to the help of the Lord,
to the help of the Lord against the Mighty.

GAL. 5. 15 But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

London Printed 1643.

The Protestant Informer.
WE all complain of our present misery, by the bloody distractions of the
kingdom, by this unnatural War: But few of us consider seriously of the
cause, whence these distractions come.

For information herein, take notice, that sin is the only cause of every
affliction, and of all punishments, whether to private men, or whole kingdoms.
We by our sins have provoked God Esaias 26. 9. Deuteronomy. 6. 15. Deuteronomy. 28. 63.
to anger, and God shows his anger, by his judgments upon us. King and
Subjects have sinned, and now King and Subjects are punished. God causes us to
punish one another; He does it either to reform us or to destroy us.

But God is the efficient cause of all. The cause of all causes: all other
causes are but Gods instruments. Now the isntrumental cause of our
distractions, is wicked men: God uses one sinner to punish another, as Isreal's
2 Chro. 12. 2. Esaias 10. 5. 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12
sins was punished by wicked Shishake, and by Idolatrous Asher: Whom God
calls the rod of his anger, and the staff in his hand: So God punished
David's sin, by wicked Absalom: and King Rehoboams 1 King. 14. 16.
sin, by his rebellious people: and the sin of the people by their King
Jeroboam.

Yet be informed, that though God do use wicked men for his instruments,
wicked men do wickedly even in the things which God uses them, to do his will
for they are naturally the Devils instruments, to execute his will, and their
own devilish malice: as we see in Job. That which God Job 1. 15.
does by wicked men is just, but that which wicked men do is unjust: for they
have no eye to the doing of Gods will, but to their own wicked ends, which is
always unjust and sinful: For example, It was just with God, to punish David's
bloud-guilt nesse and adultery, by Absoloms rebellion, and defiling of David's
concubines: But it was unjust and wicked in Absalom, to do it: It was just
with God to punish Rehoboam, by the revolt of his people, but unjust in them to
cast him off from being their King.

So it is just with God, to punish us at this day by these distractions, and
unnatural wars: and to suffer the King to be misled by a wicked counsel, to
afflict, and spoil his people: but it is unjust in that counsel: and error in
the King to be led by them to do such things.

For their aim is wicked and devilish, and are naturally the Devils
instruments, to make war against Christ: their end is to destroy the true
protestant Religion, to subvert our good Laws, and to establish popery: and
bring us and our posterities, our bodies and souls, into spiritual, and
slavish bondage for ever: and to root out protestant Religion from all places
in Christendom.

This is a certain truth: and will clearly appear to any rational man: That
will but take a view of their fore-past proceedings: Their present war, and the
persons contriving; and acting it.

First, take a view of their fore-past proceedings, and consider, (not to look
so far, as to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, or King James, both of blessed
memory) in whose times that Jesuiticall faction, were active in treasons; by
poison, stabbing, blowing up Parliaments, destroying postrities of Kings,
Nobles, and massacring whole kingdoms.

Only note their proceedings, in the passages of things, since the first of
his Majesty's Reign: at which time we may remember, the Duke of Buckingham was
the great Favorite: who (by confederacy which Jesuits and Priests: First in
Spain and after in France, when his Majesty married with the French Kings
Sister) gave great encouragement to the popish party in all places, and
furthered their designs in England by uncontrolled power; For through the
favor, and authority, the Duke (...) from the King, he ruled, and swayed, the
course of things in the Kingdom: and it was evident by those times, that the
Jesuits, swayed him: And by his greatness, brought many of their own
faction, into the greatest places of command: whom they desired, he put in;
and whom they disliked, he put out: that most at the Counsell-Table were their
such (...) such as (...) not oppose them.

And to make way for their design upon England, they set upon the protestants
in France, to weaken them, and to that end His Majesty's Ships were ^ent
against Rochell: which destroyed their shipping and blocked up the passage; and
when the Duke was questioned in Parliament, The answer was, the Ships were not
lent with intention to hurt Rochell; but in complement to the King of France.

Then a Fleet was prepared, the Duke himself ^ould go with it; pretending to
relieve Roc^ell: but when they came to the Isle of Ree, al our brave Soldiers
were betrayed to the Sword: Rochell robbed of their provision, and the
protestants Sold into their enemies hands.

What other Voiages were made (to Cadis and other places we remember too) and
observed then that their end was nothing but to weaken the kingdom, and
prepare to the ensuing treason, against our Religion, and Laws.

Then they began the work of England, by crying up Arminianisme defending those
tenants, patronizing their writings, printing, and publishing, those dangerous
books of Mountagues; which (before, King James had seen: disallowed,
condemned, and forbid to be printed) Mountague was made a Bishop, and Doctor
White also: for defending those books at a packt conference. All others were
presently preferred, that favored those tenants: as Conzens, Wrene, Corbet,
etc. Thus they sowed the seeds of popery, through the whole kingdom, which
showed they expected to have a crop of pure popery.

To bring this forward, the power, and professors of protestant Religion were
disgraced, and persecuted, I will only give you a view of some particulars; and
you may Judge of the whole, as the Geometrician did at the body of Hercules, by
his foot.

We can remember (it is so lately) that all our best Divines, and honest
Orthodoxe professors of Religion, of the Laity, were by Authority scoffed at,
and persecuted in the High Commission, and all other Courts of that nature; if
it were but for going from a dumb arminian Reader, out of his own parish, to
hear an Orthodoxe Preacher: All laborious, Orthodox Preachers were pecked at:
and by some foul mouths almost devoured: I am sure very many suffered under
the little Wren: for he peckt up all those precious plants out of his Diocese.

Then Lectures were put down in all places, and afternoone-Sermons forbidden
on the Lords day. Books were also published and commanded to be read in all
Churches, giving liberty to profane that Holy day, contrary to the express
command of God; and against the enacted law of the kingdom: all Ministers that
refused to read these books were suspended: thus good men were weeded out in
all countries, and all to displant religion, and plant popery.

The Arminian Priests and Court-Chaplains, cried out against the Sanctifying of
the Lords day: called Sunday, no Sabbath, and denied the morality of the fourth
commandment, etc.

And these men would not be called Preachers, nor Ministers (names that Saint
Paul gloried in) but called themselves Priests; the holy Table might no longer
be called table, but Altar: and the standing of it was (altered, and it made a
real Altar ascended to by steps, with bowing, cringing, and reverence to it;
Crucifixes set up, Basins and Tapers, were set upon it: nothing was wanting of
Popery, but the name popery and the Idol Sacrifice of the Mass.

Nor was that Idol altogether wanting; for it was daily in Summerset-house,
Saint Iames-house, and diverse other places; common to all that would go to it:
nor durst any man question those that went, though they were seen to go every
day.

Priest frequented Papists houses in all counties, and no man might question
them, if any by lawful authority did apprehend a Priest, they were checked for
it, and the Priest discharged, by special command from the Queen, or under
some Privy Counselors hands.

Court Chaplains and Bishops preached justification by works, free will, seven
Sacraments, and consubstantiation: (a fair way to transubstantiation) with a
number of other popish doctrines: and maintained, that there might easily be a
conjunction between the Papists and us: so it is plain that we must have gone
wholly to them: for they profess they will not come one jot to us.

The presses were allowed to Arminians, and the popish faction, to print any
popish tenants: but forbid to the good Protestants, none might preach against
their positions, much less print any thing for confutation of their errors or
heresies, upon pain of imprisonment, fining suspension pilloring, cutting off
ears, slitting noses, banishment, etc more cruelty, that has been inflicted
upon any Protestant, among the Turks: when these and more have been questioned
in Parliament, our Parliaments were broken, the evils increased.

Yea, Parliament men were disgraced and imprisoned; and because Parliaments
would not give the kingdom money, without redress of these and other evils:
they devised ways to rest by force, great sums of money out of the subjects
purse, by illegal and unsufferable taxations.

First by loan, and the refusers were imprisoned, or put to intolerable
charges by continual attendance at the Councell-Table: and many eminent
Gentlemen died, without mercy in the prisons: others p^^sent into remote
Counties. Then Soldiers were billeted in all Counties, and many Horses, which
their riders were sent for from beyond the Seas, to awe and subdue the
kingdom, and by strong hand to wrest from us our religion, and laws: but
divine providence, (by Feltons hand) cut off the actor of that design at that
time.

Here observe and clearly see, that this war is no new or sudden thing: nor
occasioned by the Militia, as they now pretend: but the same in effect that was
intended, fifteen or sixteen years ago: after this another Parliament was
called, voices were forced, and illegal means used; but when this would not
serve to their purpose, that Parliament as others was dissolved

Then came other taxes for non-knight-hood; who and what persons See the first
Remonstrance of both the Houses.
was brought within this taxation we all know, and the multitudes that were
imprisoned, and made to attend the Counsell-Table, we cannot forget.

After that came shipmoney, a boundless and endless tax; also taxes for
compositions for Cottages, for Forrest-lands, Timber, Woods, etc. Mighty
exactions upon customs, and Monopolies almost of all things of If this
Parliament had not taken away those Monopolies and taxe^ the kingdom had
suffered as much by this time in their estates, as they have by this wa^re,
(except the spoil by plundering) which is not the Parliaments fault.
necessary use: thereby inhaunsing the prizes, to the prejudice or the whole
kingdom, yea, to the utter ruin of diverse Trades and Corporations: So that
multitudes of Masters and Prentises cried out of the burdens which is now
forgotten by them: and no thankfulness is returned by them, either to God, or
the Parliament: Other cruel taxes were imposed upon buildings, together with
many other oppressions, all against law, and yet law could not help us; all
Courts of law and our Courts of justice were corrupted; Judges and great
Officers bought places deer, and sold their service in them deerer, to make
themselves gainers. Besides many Judges were displaced for doing Justice; or
for refusing to judge unjustly: the whole kingdom was oppressed, all were
wronged, and all left without remedy: Gunpowder, and other ammuniti^n was taken
from us, and we left destitute of necessary defense, Popery broke in upon us,
Parliaments were neglected, Prerogative was set up; and they began to promise
themselves a speedy accomplishment of all their designs: only they had some
fear that Sco^land might be some obstacle in their way (as indeed it prove)
God infatuating their counsels, to thrust upon the Scots their new Liturgy and
Popish Canons, before they had fully finished the work in England: (though
under a fair pretense of a glorious uniformity which our brethren of Scotland
did not so well fancy as we: nor did they give Land any great praise for the
present; but refused it: though it was manifest that it was no worse, then was
contrived A great providence of God.
at Rome, and from thence sent into England.

Then the little (great) Bishop (like a Pope) sent his commands by his Legates,
and Commissioners, that they should receive that Liturgy, but not obeyed: the
honest Scots were proclaimed rebels and traitors, and and an army raised to
compel them: his Majesty was incensed and persuaded (with his army) to advance
to Barwick: but by Gods providence there was a pacification, and his Majesty
returned home in pe^^e. Though quickly after he returned to that wicked
Counsel of Bishops and popish affected: (all promises bu^i^d in oblivion) was
persuaded ^o raise another Army: New Proclamations and Declatations were
printed, full of b^tternesse against the Scots: and a Parliament called to
raise moneys for that war; the Parliament refusing, was presently dissolved:
But the war notwithstanding went forward: then the Scots (as we all know)
entered Newcastle, standing upon their just defense.

Then this Parliament was called to debate of the war; which through Gods
goodness they again pacified, to the great content of both kingdoms; only
Bishops, Papists, and popish affected, stormed at the peace: especially, that
his Majesty had graciously signed the Bill (because of the many great affairs
in hand) that this Parliament should not be broken without the consent of both
Houses, and presently they plotted how to break it. First, they endeavored to
bring the Kings army from York against it, the Earl of Strafford having in
readiness 8000 Soldiers in Ireland, to be brought hither to assist that
work: and to subdue the kingdom, as was before intended, by the Duke of
Buckingham: but this plot being (by Gods mercy) discovered, Lictors axe took
off this actor, as Feltons knife the other: then they labored to hinder the
proceedings in Parliament by their votes, (as we are informed by the
Parliaments first Remonstrance) when votes could no longer hinder, they bread
division in both houses: and then between the King, and both Houses, caused
his Majesty to accuse some of both Houses of treason: but could never show
what the treason was, though desired by both Houses.

But indeed they thought to have put all in a present uproare, and so to have
broke the Parliament: Having during the time they were with the King in
Scotland, (as they hoped) made a party there: and by the Honor blinds the
eyes, and corrupts justice, as Solomon speaks of gifts.
honors which they had persuaded the King to bestow upon some of the Citizens,
they thought they had blinded the City too: and then having actually raised
that bloody rebellion in Ireland: intending the s^^e in England: they prevailed
with his Majesty, to come in hostile manner against his Parliament, to take
from thence by force those members, before accused: having in a scrowle diverse
others, they likewise intended to accuse; so to have broken the Parliament or
forced it to their own ends which Gods Providen^e and the Parliaments wisdom
prevented.

Then presently, they endeauored, to make themselves masters, and possessors,
of all the arms, and strong holds, of the kingdom; first they bought out Sir
William Belford out of his place in the tower: whom they knew to be uncorrupted
and no instrument for their treason: and put Colonel Lunsford in his place,
after him Sir John Byrone and Captain Leg to be governor of Hull; then the
Earl of New castle; Alluery fit men to betray a Kingdom.

These passages declare evidently their intention was to make war against the
Parliament, and Subjects: and hence it was that the Parliament desires to setle
the militia of the Kingdom in safe hands; and for this cause most Countyes
petitioned to have it so: So that the Militia was not the cause of their
war: but their preparation caused the militia.

They also made mutinies and tumults against the Citizens: First Lunsford began
in westminsterhall; then others of that faction in westminster: and after at
white hal gate, and the strand: cutting and slashing, unarmed and harmless
citizens: and then they persuade, the King from London, pretending danger to
his majesty's person by tumults when indeed there was no tumult, but what
themselves caused. But it is a paradox: if his majesty The letter that came
from L. D. to the King makes it c^eare, wishing the king to be take him to a
strong hold.
left London because of tumults: that they should endeavor (as they have done)
to make mutinyes and tumults in the city, to bring him thither again: But it
is manifest, that his majesty was not (indeed) afraid of any hurt by the city;
for then he would not hau^ gone through the city (with only one coach, and a
less attendance then ordinary) to guild hall: a lit^e before his goeing from
London: and it is clear there was no cause of fear, because his Majesty had no
affront: but Supplications and prayers from the people:

But we now See they had an other end in persuading his Majesty The answer to
the London Petition in part promises so much.
away: as well as in sending the Queen beyond the sea, as also, the Lord
Digby and others, to traffic for men, and arms, to assist their bloody
designs: then they might not be suffered to gather an army at Kingston,
windsor etc.

Then they persuade the King to York: where they also pretend danger (yet there
was no tumults but what they made in abuse to good protestants) and provide a
guard of armed men and trained bands: which as we have Seen) quickly grew to
an army of offense, first to Hull, and since to the whole Kingdom; and thus
you see what their preparation^ were.

Now let us consider and see what their war is: They could us they would make
no war against the Parliament: But they told us of the Kings rights and
prerogatives which they would maintain: and defend the protestant religion,
the privileges of parliament and the rights and libertyes of the Subject
against innovations, and arbitrary government.

But if that were the cause of their war, they would not fight against the
parliament; for all these the Parliament would have to be established for ever:
first for his majesty's just rights and prerogative, they offer to confirm to
him and his posterity: yea more, to make him the happiest of all his
progenitors.

And for the establishing the protestant religion, together with the
continuance of the just, and ancient privileges of Parliament; and the known
rights of the Subject; it is all that the Parliament destre of the King: that
which they from the beginning (and still) do humbly Suplicate his majesty
for, against all innovations and arbitrary government: therefore that can be no
cause of their war.

Besides, I think, no man needs information to assure him, that the cause why
Popery is broken so far in upon us: and foe much innovation, and arbitrary
government as of late years, has bin want of Parliaments, and would with
greater violence break in, if this Parliament were not.

Nor was it ever known, that any free elected Parliament, of 500, or, 600
Lords, and gentlemen, of Several countyes, and familyes, were the cause of any
innovation or arbitrary government: nor is it likely can be. But contrary have
ever been and at this day are the security of this kingdom against both: And
therefore it is that this war is made against this Parliament, to destroy it,
and with it all other and to bring in an arbitrary government etc. It is true
particular men, and private counsels may be corupted, to please Kings (in hope
of present honors, and great estates) to betray a kingdom; as private counsels
at this day. And particular men, lately fied from this parliament, to a^chiev
their private ends: care not to destroy the privileges of parliament: or to
take away all Parliaments (or which is worse) by the same army they break this,
to force a pact Parliament of their own choice: and soc make us slaves by act
of Parliament; let up popery, by the authority that threw it down: and kill us
with our own weapons. This is cle^^e as the light, yet men will not see it;
but are willingly held in the f^ols paradise, and suffer themselves to be
deluded, by proclamations, declarations, and protestations, which are but the
snares of the wicked, to catch simple men: al which though they have passed
under the kings nams, I hope his maiestic never saw nor heard of. Because they
have been all falsified: and their actions quite contrary to their promises,
and protestation^: like (...) who set their faces eastward, when hey mean to
now westward.

Therefore it will be the wisdom of every man, to make his eyes judge in this
cause rather ^hen his ears: actions best show the intentions: every tree ^s
known by his fruit.

At the entrance of Queen Mary to the Crown, great protestations was made to
maintain the protestant religion: but we see her actions, were destructive to
it.

The like protestutions we have heard concerning Ireland: and great calling on
the Parl. for assistance for that kingdom, but as often as preparations were
made, all assistance, and help was hindered, and the rebels were from hence
strengthened.

We have heard several proclamations, to put laws in execution against
Papists: but we see that the Parl. themselves were restrained, and might not
execute the known Laws upon them: though they by humble petitions sought it
and now we see them in best esteem and most trusted.

We have heard great promises, that there was no intention to make war
against the Parliament, and seen it testified under many Lords hands (now in
the Kings army) only a guard desired for the Kings Person, but we see a
miserable and bloody war, to destroy the Parliament.

We heard great protestations, that no papist should be admitted into the
Army, but we may see papists swarm in that Army (yea in the kings Court) like
wasps, about a honey pot: and in the north under the command of the Earl of
Newcastle, you may see eight thousand professed papists of one cluster.

We have heard heaven and earth called to witness, that their war was to defend
Protestant Religion: but it were strange to see so many papists fight for it;
but if it were so, why do they set up public mass in York and other places
where that Army is? and imprison Protestant Ministers, and a^l other that doc
but say they fight for the Protestant religion? We have heard protestations
that privileges of Parliament should be maintained, and the liberty of the
Subject, but if a Parliament may be broken by force, how can privileges and
liberties be preserved?

You will ^ay we have triennial Parliaments, I answer that is nothing, for the
king is no more bound to be present at any triennial Parliament, to confirm
any act (if it be called) then at this: besides the King is no more (...) to
call any trienniall Parliament, then he is bound to preserve this.

We have heard Proclamations prohibiting plundering by the Kings Army, and
molesting his good subjects, but we see the do plunder daily in all places,
except where they cannot overcome, or where nothing is to be had.

We have heard of an acceptance of an accommodation, and seen it published by
their own faction, but we see them the next day come furiously and
treacherously upon part of the Parliaments Army at Brai^ford; and barbarously
slew many men, more righteous then themselves, an act (...) themselves.

We have heard of a gracious acceptance of the City petition, and a readiness
to embrace propositions of peace, but we have seen some of the petitioners
excepted against, and accused of treason. He that has but (...) an eye, may
see their aim when they flatter, and animate the rudest of men, to rebel
against authority, and overthrow the government of the great City to make way
to overthrow the laws of the whole kingdom: ^^lfull fishers will fish in
troubled waters, and bankrupt Cavaleers can make best pillage in a divided
City, and this is their aim: without difference to friend or foe, the pillage
of one is as sweet as the other: propositions of peace have been sent as we
desired, and they expected, with an humble petition of both houses to the King
to remove the cause of the war, and accept of their propositions: what effect
it has wrought let the world judge, and the Parliament consider to whom the
answer is directed.

Yet thus much we may observe in it (which shows no forwardness to peace)
that no authority is ascribed (or allowed) to the Parliament, save only the
name, (both houses) and we may fear some design against them and us, if
there be a cessation of arms without dispanding the armies.

But the people of this kingdom ever have, and I hope ever will account
Parliaments the fittest and best expounders of Law, and Judges of offenders
either to acquit or condemn them; they never wrest the Laws for private ends,
as other expounders (or rather forgetters) of Law have lately done: when the
Subject (had less use of the Law, and less liberty) were imprisoned contrary
to Law, beyond the known power and rights of any Kings of England, their
habeas corpusses and all bail denied them.

Nor knew we by what Law to proceed against any papist, though the Laws were
known to us.

And by the discipline of our Church government, we could not well distinguish
between protestant religion and popery; the book of common prayer (though no
idol was idolized) which has in it good and holy things, may be, and was
abused contrary to the institution and meaning of the Parliament, first
instituting it. Things ceremonial were urged as substantial, what the
archbishop and his Romish pensioners pleased, and ye be no innovator, but for
the Parliament to desire any dimination (though of things offensive) is
innovation: whatso^ver makes for popery, may be added, but nothing popish taken
away.

For my p^rt, I protes before God, the searcher of al hearts, that I am no
Sectary, (so called) but a true pr^testant, according to that established
doctrine or Queen Elizabeth, and King I^m^s of blessed memory I disallow the
opinion of the Brownists, as I condemn the opinion, doctrine, and It is a
great disquiet and trouble to a state when men will go before the law, and not
follow the law in obedience.
practice of Papists, or Anabaptists, and never contemned or (wilfully)
neglected he common prayer in any assembly. Yet I am con^^dent (and I th^nk
upon good ground) that the common prayer has some nee^lesse things in it, and
some offensive, (as they may be in the worst sense interpreted, thus much for
information of the present war.

Lastly consider who, and what persons, are the contrivers, and actors in this
war: which are all of one of these six kinds,

First, Jesuits, and professed Bapists. Secondly, Bishops, and corrupt Clergy.
Thirdly, Lords, and Gentlemen, popishly affected. Fourthly, Delinquents, and
Pattentees. Fifthly, men of broken fortunes. Sixthly, Athiests, and extreme
deboyst men.
And these al^ agree in one final e^^ (viz.) to betray Protestant religion,
Luies, and the just Luierty of the subject.

But the three last s^rts, named, ^ave each a particular end to themselves.

The Delinquents aim, is, their ow^e present preservation, to rescue their
persons and estates from the justice of the Law, preferring themsel^es before
Religion Law, or Posterity.

Those of broken fortunes, aim at pillage, to make themselves great estates,
out of the ruins of the Kingdom, which they cannot do if law be not
destroyed.

The deboyst Athiests, seek to enjoy their licent^ous liberty, which they
prefer before Law, or Religion. They hate the very name of reformation in
others, yet these are the men, that tell us they fight for the Protestant
religion, privileges of Parliament, and the Subjects liberty. But we must
believe that they have learned that damnable art of equivocation, or mental
reservation of the Jesuits.

That when they p^otest to fight for the Protestant religion, privileges of
Parliament, and the Subjects liberty, their meaning is, that they fight for all
these, as ours: to take them from us as they do our estates, or as a chief
fights for a true man's purse, and this is these men's war.

Now if we examine why the Parliament and Kingdom have raised an army, and
consider their forepast proceedings, their present actions, and the persons
engaged in their war: we shall plainly see that they aim at nothing but Gods
glory, the safety of the Kings person and posterity, the defense of the true
Protestant religion, Parl. privileges, and the just Liberty of the Subject:
against those that (say they fight for them) and would take them from us: all
which, are at once assaulted by the several armies of the Cavaleers.

England and Scotland, His Majesty being then (by a malignant counsel) engaged
in a war against h^s good Subjects of Scotland, which that counsel could not
manage for him, not his Majesty desert with honor, they vindicated his
Majesty, stayed bloodshed, reconciled the nations, satisfied the wronged
Scots, paid the Kings army, disbursed great sums out of their own purses,
and engaged themselves for much more.











time, strength and estates, neglecting whatsoever was their own for the
common good.



You will say the King has acknowledged that fault, and i^ is no more to be
thought on. Answer, acknowledgement is nothing without repair, 1 Samuel 24. 16.
17 1 Samuel ^6. read the l^ves of King John. Hen. 3 Ed. 2. R^^h. 2. and consid^r.
but no repair is made. Saul confessed his fault in seeking David's life, and
confessed it with tears, ye^ Saul by the wicked counsel of the Ziphites
sought it again. And whilst his Majesty still retains such counselors, he
may still forget his promises. That which has been may be again.

Who is that man, for his own particular, that would be willing at the Kings
request, to cancel all his evidence for his lands and inheritance, and rest
only upon a bare word, to posterities? much less a Parl^ament to trust all
the righ^s and inheritance of a kingdom, upon the bare word of a King, when
guided by a malignant counsel, who seek the kingdoms ruin.

Ireland, to suppress that bloody rebellion so soon as it was discovered,
earnestly supplicating his Mai^sty to join with them, by passing a bill for a
speedy and sufficient expedition thither, which was graciously promised, why
not performed, let the world judge.

York) their messengers were beaten, Parliament men threatened, their houses
besieged, plundered, their friends abused and pillaged, before the Parliament
had any Army on foot, and after they had an army they never struck, before
they were stricken: such was their backwardness to war, else they might
easily have fetched all that masignant counsel from York, and prevented all
the mischief they have since made and done in the Kingdom; which if the
Parliament had foreseen, and prevented, men would not have believed what now
they see, but would have blamed the Parliaments forwardness more then now.

That the Parliament have no end to themselv^s in this war but only Gods
glory, and the public good, is manifest in their contempt of dishonorable
honors, and corrupt dignities: do but consider what some of them have lost,
and what other of them might have, if they were or would be corrupted. Some
have lost the favor of their King, and the highest places of honor and
profit, others might receive what favors honors, and dignity a King can give:
if they would betray Go^s truth, and the kingdoms trust: yea, those very men
that are for this cause hated, d^shonou^ed, and proclaimed traitors, and
Rebels, should not be denied what outward honors a King could bestow upon
them.

And shall we not honor such Champions for Christ, and such Patriarchs of
their country, and defend them while they defend us to the hazard of our
lives, and best fortunes with them, who willingly sacrifice themselves to
honorable deaths, rather then to preserve their lives by any di^honourable
act, to prodite their trust reposed by God and men, counting it as the Poet
said,

To be a sweet and noble gain, in Countries quarrel to be slain. To all the
former, add this, that (after their offers, petitions, and propositions,
formerly for peace, were all rejected) they, at the request and humble
petitions of many of Us, in the City of London, and ^ther counties; willingly
offered again, new propositions, more low then the former: accompanied with the
humble petition of both houses to be accepted, ^ manifest testimony of their
desires of Peace and unwillingness to war, if necessity constrained, not.

In the second place, consider their present actions, in the managing of this
their defensive war, having no other choice but two extremes either to Fight or
lose all, all being challenged, and at once assaulted, by men ^^ing armies.

Now we know that nature, has taught all creatures to defend their (...) but
nature, Law, and religion teach; and allow men to defend themselves from unjust
violence, the law of the kingdom allow a man to kill rather then be killed, and
religion restrained not that kingly prophet David, to take arms in defense of
his life against Saul his King, if David might defend himself against Saul,
th^n much more against Saul's evil counselors.

But it is objected, That David would not lay his hand upon Saul (the Lords
anointed,) when he had twice opportunity put into his hands. Answer. It is
true, David would not, nor might not, kill Saul, in a treacherous manner; But
if Saul would wilfully thrust himself into battle against innocent David, and
perish, David should have been guiltless, as appears, 1 Samuel 26. 9, 10.
David took Arms in his own defense; The Parliament and Kingdom in defense of
their Religion, and Hereditary rights; and not only so, But to defend the
Kings Person, and to rescue Him from the hands of cursed Dam-my, Ram-my
Cavaliers: Therefore scandalous are those mouths; that report, the Parliament
takes Arms against the King.

We have made choice of the men, and have trusted them with all our Rights; The
King has accepted of them, and acknowledged them His great Counsel; And they
according to their trust, defend our Rights, and His Person, and Posterity.

They freely venture their lives, and estates for us, and for our King, against
wicked Counselors, who seek His Majesty's ruin, as well as ours; Therefore we
are bound by conscience, Law, and Religion to defend them: Should we neglect
them, because they do His Majesty, and us right; or shall we dissert them,
because they will not betray us: Though Saul had sworn that Jonathan should
die, the people would 1 Samuel 14 39. Verse. 44. and 45.
rescue him, and said, Jonathan should not die; Much more would they have
rescued Saul against wicked Counselors, that sought his ruin? Our Parliament
is not only in danger, and with it, all that is ours; But the Person of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, by Jesuits and Popish Traitors; who if they
cannot poison His soul, will poison, stab, or destroy His body? We cannot think
they will deal better with Him, then they did by Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth of France, whom they slew; The one, because he would not suffer them to
sway the Scepter, The other, because he refused to break his Covenants with the
Protestant Princes. If these men should prevail in their War, These words are
by the Arch B: minced and altered as may appear by comparing the first Copy
with the late Edition.
and afterward be denied any thing, what they will further desire, for the
establishment of Popery, They will as treacherously end his days, whose
Religion alows it, and commends us meritorious, to kill any King, that is a
Protestant, or favourer of Protestants: Therefore we may in this see, how far
our Clergy is fallen toward Popery, who now defend them, and most confide in
them; who of late they declared to be Idolaters, Terming their Religion
Rebellion, Their Faith Facton, And their practice the murdering of bodies and
souls: God in mercy deliver His Majesty from their doctrines, and treasons.

Thirdly, Consider the Persons engaged in this defensive War, and it will
appear, That they are all His Majesty's best, and most faithful Subjects; True
Protestants; Yea, a Parliament; The Kings great (and known) Counsel; Able,
Honest, and Godly Men, Not corrupted by flattery; nor misled by the hopes of
fleeting honor, But like Nehemiah and Ezra, stout in the Cause of God, hold
the Sword in the one hand, whilst they build the decayed W^lls of Jerusalem,
with the other: Men that fear God, and honor the King. Not Papists,
Anabaptists, nor Atheists, as some falsely have called them; except any such
have disguised, and treacherously intruded themselves, to rob the Kingdom of
their Money, and betray their Army to the enemy; and would be a most acceptable
service, of any that could discover any such: If any Brownist All of upright
intentions will engage themselves for their just rights, against Arbitrary
Government, and the professed enemies of all Christendom, the Papists.
be accepted in the Army (which is not by me denied) they cannot be said to
have been incendiaries in the State; nor are they disconsonant from us in any
fundamentalls, only they differ in Ceremonies; nor are their many of broken
fortunes, nor deboyst Dam-mys; Though some such (too many) have intraded
themselves into the Army: (none engaged in the War, but) as Mercenaries; Such
as love the war for the pay, but pay nothing to the war; and as backward to
fight, as unwilling to be disbanded: These by their fearful Oaths dishonor
God, and cause the Land to mourn, and by deferring battle, and proferring
plunder; prejudice their just War, As Achon did in the Army of Gods people.
There was one Judas, amongst Christ's twelve Apostles, and one Achon in the Camp
of God: I pray God to purge such out of his, and Our Armies.

Now having informed you of the Kingdoms danger, and the Justness of the
Kingdoms defensive war; For the Parliaments Army is the Kingdoms, for God,
the King, and the Kingdom; The other is the Cavaliers Army, against God, the
King, in future, (though hid by present flatery;) and the Kingdom which they
would destroy (as we by woeful experience see) wherever they come, or can
prevail. Be therefore exhorted, to be courageous in this Cause, for God, the
King, and your Posterity: Wisemen forewarned, will be forearmed; If through our
credulity to deceivers, we suffer our selves to be destroyed; Or if we believe
our danger, and do nothing to prevent it, Our misery will be the greater; And
we most miserable under it. Consider what Mo^dica in such a case said to Ester,
and the same I say to thee: If thou help not at this time, according to thy
ability, place, and degree, Deliverance shall arise some other way, but thou
shall perish. Destructive war is now Est 4. 14.
in the Land, Such a war as is against God; Therefore sit not still, and say
with thy self, let others fight, give, pray, etc. and think to be safe thy
sell, like Gilead, Dan, and Ashe^, all reproved, But Zebulon and Judge 5
Nephtalie, are commended, who Jeoparded their lives in the fields against the
enemy: In the mean time Meroz, a people able to help, and near at hand; stood
Newters: But Meroz is therefore cursed, and that bitterly, because the
Inhabitants came not out to the help of the Lord, and his people. Therefore all
that are Gods people, or tha^ look to have part in Christ, will now come forth,
to the help of the Lord, against Baal: Halt not between two opinions; If thou
be a Protestant, defend thy Religion, against them that say, they are
Protestants, but are not: If thou be a Papist, why do thou desemble.
Profess to be what thou art, and be what thou professest: A professed Papist is
in a better condition, and more to be trusted, then a lukewarm Newter. There is
but one God, one Truth, and one Faith, in which men can b^ saved: The
Parliament profess that one God, Truth, and true Faith of Jesus Christ; and
that they, and all Gods Elect (except such as are yet ignorant) do defend: The
other Army say the like, (but it is to deceive us,) and say they take Arms to
defend that which none oppose, but themselves: They make protestation, and urge
it upon men by force, wherein they call God to witness, and so do we. But they
have now brought the controversy to a desired Issue; for surely, The Judge of
all the world will do right, and though he now afflict his people, and for a
time suspend sentence, it will not be always so. But he will show wonders in
the world, and declare to the eyes of men, who speaks the Truth, and who
desemble: A considerateman may see the Parliaments reality, and the others
dissimulation, by the mercies of the one, even to their professed enemies; and
the barbarous cruelty of the other; not only to us, but to their own friends,
spoiling, and plundering all, one as well as another, witness Banbury,
Brainford, Reading, Newbury, and all Towns and places where by force, or fraud,
they have entered; which the Parliament forces have not done, in any Town, or
place, where they have entered, with the hazard of their lives. Thus men
consider not, Nor compare their barbarous cruelty to our men, their prisoners,
whom they beat, wound, and starve; with the good usage their Cavaliers have,
which are the Parliaments prisoners, who are allowed good lodging, fire, food,
of all sorts, Bear, Wine, and what not; They want nothing, but honesty, and
liberty to act more mischief; but ours are denied all things, but honesty;
which they cannot take from them: All this God beholds, whose eyes run too and
fro, through the earth, beholding the good and bad; and will recompense all
according to their doings: God is the righteous Judge of all men, he is
unchangeable, his power is not weakened, his eye not shut, nor his ear heavy to
hear his justice, and his mercy is the same, as in former Ages; On him our eyes
wait, to see his judgments upon out enemies; and his deliverance to his
people. We know there 2 These. 12 7. Reve. 13.
is a mystery in the working of Antichrist; and he a Monster, having many
heads, and horns: But we are sure that Antichrist shall fall, and it is
probable that this is the time, and war, in which England shall cut off one
of those heads. This War, is his war, against Christ; And now Christ calls
all that are his, to stand for him: If now you deny your help, you deny Christ;
and therefore, give me leave to rememb^r you of Christ's words, (spoken in this
case to you) That if you deny him Matthew. 10. 33.
before men, he will deny you before his father: If you by Newtrality, think to
save your lives, you will endanger to lose your souls for ever. But if Matthew.
16. 25.
in this case, for Christ, and his Gospels sake, we loose our lives, we shall
surely save our souls, and procure a blessing to our posterities: Every man is
willing to enjoy the propriety of his Goods, and his Liberty, and Peace, etc.
But are unwilling to be at any pains, or cost to preserve, or procure it. But
contrary, many at this day are so extremely stupid, and grossly fordid, That
they take more pains, run into greater danger, and bestow more cost, to betray
their Rights, and Liberties, etc, Then is by the Parliament required of them,
for their present and future security: The twenty part is the most they
require, And that but lent? Your charge for your wives ^evers, and Taffaty
Gowas, and your own expense in Taverns, would quickly recover that charge.
What may we think of such men, But as men void of natural affection, much
more destitute, and empty of Religion, Love, or Charity; who disobey, or refuse
such an order, seeing by lending a twenty part, the other ninteen, may be
preserved: which else, without order, or parts, those Cavaliers will by force
take altogether, and by it, strengthen themselves to continue a war, to
destroy our Laws, and posterities: That which the Parliament requires of you,
and me, is but to defend you and me, etc. against their rage and rapine.

But you will say (and think you hit the nail on the head) that it is against
Law.

Answ. If it be not against Law, to defend thy self against violence, or to
preserve the Law it self from violation, Then it is not against Law to
contribute money as a means.

But a man in case of necessity, in his just defense, may kill; Although the
Law say he shall not kill; Much more a Parliament (who are providers,
maintainers, and best Judges of the Law) may by their Order lawfully; in case
of necessity, to defend the Law, cease the Subject at their descretion: The
whole Kingdom have trusted them with Religion, Laws, and Estates, which they
are to maintain and defend, at the Kingdoms charge.

If the sword, in opposition against the Law, will force, and destroy the
Ordinance of the Law, the sword by the equality of the Law, may defend the Law.

But you will say, You desire peace. Answ. So do all good men; cursed be the
man that desires it not; so that it be such a peace as has assurance of truth
joined with it: But to desire peace, or to accept a peace without truth, will
prove a cursed bondage, a remedy worse then the disease: Although War be a
great punishment, and the effects miserable, yet a just War is better then an
unjust peace; a just War will establish a true peace, but an unjust peace will
prove a more destructive War: our peace with Idolaters, has caused this War;
but to have a peace with their Idols too, will be our present ruin: Can we
expect any good and happy peace, so long as the whoredoms of Jezebel are so
many: when Israel chose new Gods, then War was in the 2 Kin. 19 22. Judge 5. 8.
Judge. 2. 12, 13, 14
gates: when Israel followed the gods of the Nations, and worshipped Baalim,
God brought upon them the sword of the Nations, and delivered them into the
hands of the spoylers that spoiled them.

But England has followed the Idols of the Papists, and worshipped Baalim;
therefore God has brought upon England the sword of the Papists, and may most
justly deliver us up into their hands to be spoiled and ruined.

Eighteen years ago, the Lord delivered them into our hands (as his, and our
enemies) to be destroyed for their Idolatry, or at least to be banished for
their Treason, but we spared and cherished them, to be as thorns in our sides,
and their gods to be a snare unto us: We have spared them as Benhadad was
spared by merciful (though wicked) Acbab; and 1 Kin. 20. 42. 1 Kin. 22 37.
as God punished Acbab and his people, by the hand of Benhadad and his people,
so is the King and the people of England punished at this day by the hands and
plots of bloody Jesuits and Papists:

Their design is great upon our King, upon us, and upon all his Majesty's
Kingdoms, God rebuke them, and deliver us: And that we may not fail of
deliverance (in due time) let us all, of all sorts, sexes, and conditions, seek
the Lord by hearty humiliation, and resolved Reformation; and in the first
place, with zeal and detestation, set our selves against that sin of Idolatry,
as Phineba^ did against Zimri and Cozbi, that Numb. 25 11.
so we may appease Gods anger; if we with all our hearts seek truth, it will
bring us to true peace with God and men.

We have sought to the Parliament for Peace; but they cannot give it us: We
have sought by humble Petition to the King for Peace; and that procured our
further prejudice: For while we sought for the peace of the whole Kingdom, we
received (from some of that malignant bloody Counsel) an Answer altogether
contrary to our expectation; and after it a Letter to the former effect: both
tending to stir up War (where yet by Gods mercy none is) in the great and
pupulous City (London) That because they cannot destroy us themselves, they
would set us to destroy one another (which God forbid.) We know that while we
hold the band of Unity, we are able (by Gods assistance) to defend our selves:
But if we be once divided, we lay our selves open to every adversary without
resistance, to be devoured. We will be warned by Jerusalems misery (that once
famous City of the world) by See losephus in War Ierus.
such sedition brought to be a heap of stones: And by the experiences of the
bloody cruelties, and merciless plundrings of all those Towns that have, or do
(by such division) give them entrance. Banbury had as much securing as King
could give them, and yet plundered; and the man (M. Vivors by name) who was the
chiefest agent to bring them in, was most plundered. But we will honor our
King, and hazard our lives and fortunes for His Person, Posterity, and
Parliament, to rescue them from the bloody hands of that malignant Counsel,
and Army of Cavaliers; and will assure His Majesty of safety and security in
this City, if His Majesty will be pleased to come to His Parliament, and to us
peaceably, as our King; and to the Parliament, as his great and faithful Many
Procters, Prebends, etc. and mercinary trades men, for profits and favor, care
neither for the welfare of King nor Kingdom. If we lose this Parliament, we
must expect to have greater, without all remedy. Exo. 7. 11 Exodus 14. 10, 11.
Icr. 5. 25.
Council, and besides them we know no other; though some who seek honor from
the King, rather then honor to the King, divide between his Majesty and them.

We cannot forget how much we all groaned under the burdens of oppressions late
laid upon us by the hard taskmasters that were set over us; and then we all
cried fot a Parliament to ease us: Our Bondage had some resemblance to that of
the people of Israel in Egypt (and so has our ingratitude) For whilst their
deliverance was working, their burdens grew greater, and then they murmured;
and so have some of us: They cried for deliverance, and God heard their cry; we
cried for a Parliament, and God graciously, yea miraculously gave us a
Parliament. But because malignant Counselors, as the Magicians of Egypt, have
hindered our present deliverance, we murmr against the Parliament, as they
against Moses and Aaron; God led them through the Wilderness to prove them, and
they said, They bad rather have died in Egypt, etc. Thus God proves us by some
opposition: and some say, It was better with us, when we endured our former
oppressions; but consider not that our sins have provoked God, and therefore he
suffers our King to be misled, for a great punishment to us; nor understand
that our impenitency hinders good things from us, and stop the Parliaments
proceedings. We are a foolish and sinful people, that love our sins, and lose
our Liberty; we prefer the twentieth part of our money, before our Religion, as
the Gadarens their swine before Christ: But let us not tempt God, as the
Israelites did; nor with the multitude of Atheistical Libertines, revile our
Moses and Aarons, much less give assistance to destroy them and our selves,
left we be found to fight against God. We know what became of those wicked men
that east an evil report upon the Land of Promise, and discouraged the people,
saying, Mighty men were in the Land, that could not be overcome: But thus some
do, by reproachful speeches, and spreading venomous Pamphlets, and lying
Fictions, to the dishonor of this chrice honorable Parliament, as if the
Parliament had brought these things to this pass, to make us die by the sword,
and our children to be a prey, etc. Thus the Israelites murmured, and were
destroyed by the Plague, before the Lord, Numb. 14. 37.
and all their Carcasses fell in the Wilderness, but their children, whom they
said should be a prey to their enemies (together with Caleb and Verse. 30. 31.
Joshuab, who spoke well of the Land) enjoyed the promised blessing, when all
else were cut off.

And we need not doubt (if once those Achans that are in our Armies Those Dam,
my sovearers, and theevish plunderers.
were cast out) but God will do the like for our Calebs and Joshuab's, and all
the rest of his people, that courageously oppose the wickedness and Idolatry
of these times, and unfainedly seek unto God by fasting and prayer, as Esther
did, in whose time the people of God were sold to be destroyed, under
A^asuerus, as we are at this day: they by the counsel of wicked Haman; we by
the wicked counsel of Jesuits, Papists, etc. They by the Kings misled
Authority against the Queen and her people; we by the King misled in his
Authority, by his Queen, and her people.

Abasuerus was guided by his Counsel (and so are all Kings) he looked wicked
Counselors, under pretense of good service to Kings, destroy Kings, and whole
Kingdoms. Esth. 7. 4. Esth. 3 6. Verse. 8.
upon the Counsel (in the pretense) as profitable, but considered not so far
as the end and intent of Haman, which was destructive: Surely there was no
thought in Abasuecus to destroy Esther nor her people; but Haman intended both;
he thought it not revenge to destroy part, but all the people of the Jews (as
they do this day in Ireland, and are about to do in England) He craftily
accuses them under a general Notion, and tells the King, There was a certain
People scattered and dispersed amongst his people, and their Laws diverse from
all people, neither keep they the Kings Laws, therefore not for the Kings
profit to suffer them: And to put the fairer gloss upon the obscured Treason,
he offers to give unto the Kings Treasure ten thousand Talents of Silver. Thus
are we (all that are true Protestants) accused to the King, under the name
Round heads, having Laws and opinions diverse from other people, nor keep the
Kings Laws, etc. when indeed, and in truth, we are the (...) observers and
keepers of the Kings Laws, and have no Laws diverse from any, but Idolaters, and
profane riotous persons, who therefore (as the Apostle Saint Peter says)
speak evil of us, because we refuse to 1 Pet. 4 4 By the name Roundhead, they
do not only mean Brownists and Anabaptists, but all that are godly men, and
good Protestants Esth 8. 11 The many pieces of Gods providence working for our
deliverance, should strengthen our faith in all future dangers.
partake with them: For this name Roundhead, is new sprung from hell; and all
those are so called, who refuse any of these particulars: (viz.) To drink
drunk, To whore, To swear God-dam-my, To scorn at purity, To take Arms (or
contribute) against the Parliament, To abuse, cut, or kill the Ministers of
Christ, and other his Members, or in a word, He that does not profess and do
all things that these cursed Cavaliers do, is a Roundhead: against these (by
the counsel of Jesuires and Papists) is past the Edict of destruction: by
which we had perished, had not the overruling, and ever-working providence of
God caused a contrary Decree (by a better Counsel) enabling us to stand in the
defense of our lives, as the Jews did in Shushan, and all the Provinces of the
King, which is a pledge unto us of our future deliverance: for where God gives
the means, he intends the end; and they that now refuse to use the means, are
guilty of their own blood, and of the Treason intended against the King and his
Kingdoms. God in mercy open the Kings eyes, that he may see the Treason and
bloody designs of those Counselors, and bring his Majesty again to consult
with his Parliament, his great and faithful Counsel, and besides which we
know (at this time) no other. We know wise Kings have been misled, as Solomon,
the wisest: holy Kings have erred, as David the holiest; the one by the
seducement of outlandish wives, the other by some remissness in his duty:
But God opened the eyes of Solomon, and showed David his fin. But Rehobo^^ was
misled by the counsel of his young Counselors, and repented not, therefore
was punished without repair: And Achab misled by the flatteries of 400 Court
false Prophets, was slain at Ramoth-Gilead, in a Bastell which they would have
him undertake, contrary to that good Prophet (though hated) Micaia.

Now my prayer is, and ever shall be, to the great and Almighty Jebovab, (King
of all King:) for my gracious Sovereign, King Charles: That God will show him
the error of all his Malignant Counselors, and as holy David, turn wholly to
God by repentance. That so he, his, and their Posterities, may, to Gods glory,
wear the Crowns of all his three Kingdoms, and defend the truly Christian and
Apostolic Faith, against Popery, and all Superstition, until the end of all
time: And receive the Crown of glory, for his, and their reward, when time
shall be no more: In the mean time, Let all true Protestants pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, And for the prosperity of her, and of her King, and People.

FINIS.

