A LETTER FROM NEWCASTLE OF The COMMISSIONERS their Message delivered to the
KING; and their Debates with the Scots Commissioners.

AND How the SCOTS have quit the City and Garrison of Durham; and the Garrisons
of Hartlepoole and Stockton, and Major General Skippon possessed thereof, on
Tuesday last, Jan. 26. 1646.

ALSO, A LETTER delivered from the Parliament of Scotland to the KING; in
Answer to His Majesty's two QVaeRES.

APpointed to be Printed and Published, according to Order of Parliament,

Feb. 1. 1646.


LONDON: Printed by J. COE, near Cripplegate, Anno Dom. 1647. Feb: 7th 1646

A LETTER FROM NEWCASTLE, OF The Commissioners, their Message delivered to the
King, and their debates with the Scots Commissioners, etc.
Honored SIR,
ON Saturday last, the 22. of Jan. Instant, the English Commissioners, the
Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Denbigh, Lord Mountague, Sir John Holland, Sir
Walter Earl, Sir James Harrington, Sir John Cook, Mr. Crew, and Major
General Brown, came from Durham, hither to Newcastle, with the Gentlemen
appointed to wait upon the King, Colonel Thomas Herbert, Mr. Maxvill, Mr.
Austley, Mr. James Harrington, Sir Fouke Grivel, Mr. Anthony Mildmay, and
Captain Middleton, Doctor Wilson the Physician, also, and diverse Gentlemen
more accompanying of them.

Some of the Scots Commissioners, with the Mayor, and the Governor, and other
Gentlemen met them, His Excellency General Leven, was then with the King: His
Majesty being then at Goffe, whither he never goes, nor any where else out of
the Town, but his Excellency waytes upon His Majesty, considering how strict a
charge is laid upon him, by both Kingdoms. There was a fair house in St.
John's parrish provided in the Commissioners quarters, where they are, a good
distance from the Court, The Earl of Stamford, Mr. Ashurst, stay with Major
General Skippon.

After that His Majesty came from Goffe, and the General had liberty, his
Excellency (with the Lord Lowdoune, Lord Belcarris, Lord Lothirn, Lord
Traquire, Lord Garthland, and others of the Commissioners, and Ministers of
Scotland, came that night to the Commissioners quarters to give them a visit,
Sir Arthur Forster, Sir William Carr, Colonel Welden, Lieutenant Colonel
Strangeny, Lieutenant Colonel Balbibueriwood, and Lieutenant Colonel Doglas,
were then Hostages with Major General Skippon at Northallerton.

The Scots Commissioners being come to the English, there were very free and
full expressions of love and affection, each to other, Mr. Stephen Marshall,
and Mr. Caroll, Ministers to the English Commissioners did lovingly salute each
other, and after some discourse, and many expressions of amity, it being
Saturday night, they parted, the Scots promising to be with them again on the
Monday following; And I must not forget to tell you, that the Mayor, and the
Inhabitants expressed as much affections to them as could be, and have been
exceeding ready and willing to accomodate them with any thing.

On the Lords day Jan. 34. Mr. Caryll, and Mr. Martial preached before the
English Commissioners very zealously, and divinely, Mr. Marshalls text was
Matthew 11. and the 12. verse, The words are thus. And from the days of John
the Baptist till now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force; out of which he made a very seasonable Sermon, and
Mr. Caryll was most excellent.

The King also heard 2. Sermons that day, one, by one of the Scots Ministers,
and the other by an Englishman, but His Majesty had as much dislike of the one,
as approbation of the other; yet both of them were excellent preparatives
against His Majesty's receiving the Message from the English Commissioners.

Some of the Commissioners of each Kingdom visited each other that evening:
but (in regard of the day) nothing was done in a public way, save only the
works of the day.

Yesterday Jan. 25. The Commissioners of both Kingdoms met, and had much
debate, consulting of the great affairs of the Kingdom, and particularly
concerning the business about which the English Commissioners came, (viz.) to
receive the King, and to bring His Majesty to Holmsby House, in
Northamptonshire; as also declaring what Instructions they had received from
the Parliament: so far as was needful to declare to the Scots Commissioners,
and concerning them therein, and advised with them in relation to the doing
therein accordingly. Some part of their debates were about those appointed to
go with the King to Holmsby House, and the English Commis: acquainted the Scots
who they were that the Houses had chosen, and that they were then with them,
only Mr. Maul, was then in those parts, (and as they had heard) with His Maj.
already. And the Scots Commis: acquainted them, that the Parliament of Scotland
had chosen the Lord Loudon, and the Lord Garthland to go with His Maj. as
Commis. from the Parliament of Scotland, to Holmsby. Some parts of which
debates the Scots concurred immediately with the English, and some things were
to be considered of; yet so that there is not the least obstruction, or
disagreement in any thing between them. All things being carried on with a
mutual joint advice, union, and affection; That day the King was acquainted
from the English Commissioners, that they were come, desiring His Maj. Audience
to what they had to declare to him from the Parliament; and His Majesty
appointed them to come on the morrow, and that they should have Audience, and
the Commissioners prepared all things in readiness accordingly.

This day the Commissioners went to the King, and have delivered their Message
according to their Instructions for receiving his Maj. and coming with him to
Holdenby house; as also concerning other things related, to what is contained
in the said instructions.

To morrow, or Thursday next at the furthest (it is believed) his Maj. will
give his answer: In the mean time, the Commissioners of both Kingdoms meet
daily to carry on the Work unanimously, and proceed in all things in love, and
brotherly affection.

It is conceived, that his Maj. will be delivered to the English Commissioners
on Thursday, Friday, or Satturday at furthest, The Scots Soldiery march
forwards a pase, all the ways are levelled for them to Barwicke. There are
Guns which they call the Hammiltons, are shipped, and much of their ammunition
and goods, wives, children, etc. are gone. The soldiers pass away daily, they
are all to march out on Saturday: most of them go very willingly; especially
those who are considerable, though indeed some of them are discontented, Genesis
Leven carries himself most excellently in the mannaging thereof.

The 100000. l. paid at Northallerton, is come safe to the Scottish Army,
though with a small Convoy part of the way, yet afterward there was strength
sufficient: you would not think how the bonny Scots laugh and fling up their
caps, at the sight of the moneys; to receive which, they have each of them a
singular good will.

The Country (indeed) is deeply taxed by some, and very great Sesments are laid
(which is no more then was expected.) But Genesis Leven has published a
Proclamation, upon the Commissioners complaint thereof, upon the receipt of
some Papers from the Gentlemen of the Country, to command, that no
advance-monies be taken, and has written to our Commissioners (there at
Newcastle) to assure them, that if any Officers or Soldiers offend them, that
they shall be punished, the grievances redressed, and the Country have
satisfaction. And moreover, that none shall take any Cattle, or any thing from
the Inhabitants, save what they pay for. Concerning which, his Excellency is
most full in his Proclamation, and promise to the Commissioners, professing by
all means to use all possible care for a fair and friendly parting;
concerning which, the Commissioners have received great satisfaction.

The Scots Commissioners writ to the Parliament of Scotland at Edenburg, about
the dispute they had with the King, concerning two Quaeres; concerning his Maj.
freedom, and going into Scotland in safety, with their Answer. In
consideration whereof, that Parl. have sent a Declaration, and some desires to
the Parl. of England, which you have fuller knowledge of at London, then we
here. And in answer thereto, the Parl. of Scotland have also sent a message to
Newcastle; to let his Maj. know that he cannot go to Scotland, and that they
have condescended to the Votes of the Parl of England, for his Maj. going to
Holmby house, and therefore have appointed the E. of Lowdon, and the L.
Garthland to go with his Maj. as Commissioners from them, And for his Maj.
freedom, that it is not so to be restrained by his Majesty's going thither
(though with a guard for the present) as that it shall be any diminution to his
Maj. in his Kingly Government, if he will take the Covenant, and pass the
Propositions of both Kingdoms for Peace, nor any prejudice to his Posterity.

Major General Skippons Headquarters is at Northallerton, expecting the Scots
surrendering of their Garrisons; with him are the Commissioners of the Army, the
Treasurers, Tellers, Hostages, etc.

The English Horse and Foot are all quartered from thence, about those parts,
all on the South side of Tees, who carry themselves so fair y toward the
Country, that the Inhabitants do highly applaud them.

And for the Scots, they make no great stop in their preparations to be gone,
and give very good satisfaction in all things, so far as yet we have had to do
with them. And it is the opinion both of the Commissioners of the Treasurers,
and of the Army, that all things will be fair to the last; and that it will be
as honest a parting now, as it was the last time they came into England.

The Scots are already surrendering the English Garrisons, as you may see by
this following List; resting

Newcastle Ian. 26. 1646. Your most humble servant, W. Sitrauk.
A List of the English Garrisons slighting, quit, and also those surrendered by
the Scots, to Major Genesis Skippon, and the English Commissioners, on Tuesday
Ian. 26.
1. The City and Garrison of Durham quit, Ian. 26. 2. The Garrison of
Hartlepool, quit and left. 3. The Garrison of Stockton also quit, and the
English Dragooners have taken possession thereof.


FINIS.

