A WARNING TO THE WORLD, BEING Sundry strange Prophesies Revealed to Nicholas
Smith, living at Tillington near Petworth in SUSSEX, Shoemaker.

As he was about 30 Years since in the House of one Vickers, living in the Stert
at Abbington in Berkeshire, spoken to him by a Man whom he affirms was his
Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; In the presence of the said Vickers (Master of
the Inn) one Katherine Smith, one Carpenter's wife, and a Maidservant of the
House, who all both saw the Vision, and heard all the words of this Prophecy.

1. Concerning the Restoration of the CREATVRES. 2. Concerning the Bible, and
all the Books in the world. 3. Concerning my own life and conversation, 4.
Concerning this particular Nation, and the whole World besides. 5. Concerning
things past, things present, and things to come.
Manifested by the Spirit of God to me Nicholas Smith on Matthias day last, In
Obedience to whose blessed Will and Pleasure I am now come up to London to
perform the Work I am commanded, and lie at the sign of the Flying-horse in
Thames Street near Dowgate; where I will (by the Grace of God) be ready to
attest the truth hereof with my Life.

N. Smith.

Wonderful PROPHECIES.
IN the latter end of the reign of King James, at Abbington in Barkeshire,
being in one Vickers his House in the Stert, I saw a Man that told me the
things that should happen unto this Kingdom; One remarkable thing was, One
Army should lie at Abbington, and another Army at Oxford, and That these two
should fight one against another; but God would judge them for their Brother
blood; He told me many remarkable things concerning my own Conversation which
have already come to pass, and many things that are yet to come, which is
admirable: many things are yet to come to pass concerning the whole world; He
told me, That all the Books in the whole World should be taken away from the
use of man, the Reason was showed me, some had Books, but they would have no
body but themselves to read in them, therefore they shall have none to read in;
some said they were Litterall, therefore they shall not have a Letter to see;
some say, They must be more spiritual, they shall have five Years time to
Exercise the Gifts of the Spirit; At that time the Creature shall be delivered
from the vain Conversation of men that are now subject unto vanity; Every one
must confess their sins one to another; Every Woman that bares Children, must
after that time confess the true Father of them; he must take them home, and
keep them whilst they are young, and they must work for him when he is old: at
that day, every one will be in perplexity, God judges every man according to
his works, all men shall be judged according unto him that earneth but 10d. a
day, if one earn 2s. 6d. a day, he must work three times so hard, else he will
be judged for a Thief; He appointed me to make Paper according to his
direction, and to present it to him whom they that love him not, call him their
King; and bid me tell him, That He shall cause the Scripture tobe Printed in that
paper; tell him, There are great abominations committed in the Land, some men
find fault with the pride of other men that ride in Coaches, yet pull them out,
and go into them themselves in the sight of the People, and the People find
fault with it; if he will not hear thee, carry it to thee Speaker tell him what
he shall do to it; if he neglect it, tell the Major and the Sheriff of it,
carry it to the Exchange, and give it to the Merchants freely, if they neglect
it, it will be ill for them all; get one to go with thee to set men at work,
make a Box, let him carry it, see that thou do not touch it, if there be a
Stone-wall before thee, if the wall remove, thou must go forward; advise them
in the Cities to carry their necessary Goods into the Country, God will not
have so many to live so near together, every man shall be restored to the
condition as Adam was after his fall, he was ashamed of his sins, humbled
himself before God; but men are fallen so far now, they sin in the presence of
God, saying, They will confess their sins to God, yet act it in his Presence,
and are proud of it; Ask them if they know God in their own bosom? ask them if
they know the Image wherein they were created? advise all men that they spoil
not Barley, for they must learn to drink water, they should do good to their
enemies, they should feed them, but they will not feed their Children for fear
their enemies should eat part of it; they had rather plant Thorns and Briers,
then to plant fruit trees; they should have repaired that which Satan defaced,
if they had planted fruit trees in the fields, they might have had the leaves
of them; thou shall see a Cart-load of Skins, being Records, Prophecy against
them, say they shall bear record no longer; Prophecy unto them on the right
hand, and on the left, Tell them, they should take heed, the place where they
sit shall burn like a furnace, they think they can easily get forth, but they
that are without side shall keep them in Chancery; there will be new money, at
that place beat out the stamp which was before; and if they ask thee why thou
did not beat out that which was before, tell them, He knows what it is to be
a King: Caesar must account for what he has taken more then what is his; The
Kings of the Earth make money, and buy such things as they lack, and when they
lack money, they send for it again; Tell them how they should agree with their
Adversaries that would make Peace with them Give them Peace offerings rather
then take any: Impose upon them the Gospel, as all men may understand it; show
them how they should subdue all their enemies under them, kill none of them, but
take oppertunity to do them good; you can send a Man a thousand miles, and he
finds him to whom you send; you find not the way to Jesus Christ: I have
sought Counsel and Instruction of the wise and Learned men of this Kingdom,
whom this Person that appeared to me may be, but they all refuse to give me
instruction; when all men neglected me, the Lord manifested himself unto me,
entering into me by the power of the Spirit, judging of me what I had don in the
flesh, manifesting himself to be my salvation, whom I saw at Abington: the
manner of the cumming of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus upon me, was by touching
lightly the hair of my head, so soaking down into my head, it made all my neck
and shoulders to rise; after two hours, it entered into my soul; whereupon I
being in great fear and trouble, cried unto my Lord and Savior, beseeching him
to interceed for me unto God my Father, and I heard a voice to my
understanding, saying, Thou do not pray; my Answer was Lord thou know I do
pray, he answered again, not with all thy heart; I entreated the Lord to search
my heart, and try it, feelingly it removed from the place where it was, to my
heart, bringing my prayers to remembrance, asking me, whether God would accept
of such prayers as I had prayed formerly, I was questioned of all the intents
and purposes of my heart, what I had done, and what I intended to do, asking
me, wherefore I did work? answering him, I told him to live; he said to me,
That I was not willing to die to live with Christ; I said, I waited the
pleasure of the Lord, I was adjudged for the Transgression of the whole Law of
God, and for opposition against the Government of my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; my understanding was opened, and I was showed what it was, and I was
showed his Government, and what it was. He told me, I should be first up in my
family, and last abed; I should see all things in good Order in the morning, I
should cause all my Family to come together, cause a Chapter to be read, and
pray with them, and for them, I should earn my own bread, and fetch my own
Water, I must give to every one rather then receive, I should use as much as I
could of the Talent which God gave me, but as little as I could of that which
is committed unto Satan; Gods Talent is a reasonable understanding soul, which
every one ought to improve to the glory of God, the good of himself and others;
that which is committed to Satan, is the earth and the glory thereof, I was
judged for enmity against God my heavenly Father, I acknowledged it was true, I
was asked then, How I thought to escape the damnation of hell? I said it was
that wound which we received in our first Parents, and it cost the precious
blood of my Lord and Savior: It was asked me, Whether I had no other hope? I
answered, No, There was no other Name under heaven whereby I may be saved: And
I said, I knew if my Lord and Savior was pleased to apply one plaster of his
precious blood with his own hand to this my wound, which was a pain upon the
midst of my belly: immeoiately upon my Faith and confidence the pain departed
from me; then I gave thanks to my Lord and Savior: he said, yet thou may sin
a sin and be damned: I entreated him tell me what it was; he showed me the
revelation where it is to be found: Take heed that ye are not ashamed to behold
the appearing of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, glory, honor, and worship
to his holy Name for ever.

Would you have me tell you what God has done for my soul: I wish that all
men did fear the Lord.

I have sought the Counsel of several Ministers this many years; I spoke of it
to Mr. Hilton Minister of Billinghurst in Sussex 14. years since, and diverse of
his neighbors: I asked seven Ministers at one time, what I might do to be
saved? they said it was a necessary question to be asked, but they said it was
not the business of the day, therefore they deferred it, but said it should be
answered; the time past one year, I desired to be satisfied of some instruction
of the Scripture by some learned men; and desiring them to tell me whom they
thought he might be that spoke to me at Abbington; I invited Doct. Chanel to my
house, and twelve Ministers besides to try my Faith whether it was rightly
grounded upon the word of God according unto his will; and I desired them to
tell me whom they thought it might be that told me all things remarkable that
had and should happen unto me; he said that there was no man able to tell me
such things; he said I was deluded: I told him how he should know whether I was
or not, for he bid me invite you to my house, but he said you would not come;
if you would come to morrow, then I shall think that I am deluded; when the
morrow was come, there came never a man which I invited. My Lord and Savior
told me 28. years before, there would a Minister send me word that he would
come to me upon a Tuesday, he said I should take heed, for he was the Devil;
he said make thy Will, set thy house in Order, make clean thy house, humble
thy self before God, fetch a burden of Straw, and lie naked in it all night:
so I caused Doctor Chanel to make my Will, I lay in the straw, a Minister came
to persuade me that I should grant him one thing before I know what it was,
that I should put no more trust in my Lord and Savior which I spoke with at
Abbington; then I remembered four men that was assigned unto me, which were
Ministers, I was appointed to go to them and command them to choose two a
piece, whom they pleased, to come to my house and judge me, and things which I
should make known unto them; I was appointed to choose a Witness in the morning
before they came, and tell him what they should say when they did come, and what
I was appointed to do, and say to them: I asked four questions in seven years;
the first was, How I should be born again? the second was, What I should do to
be saved? the third question was, The bones of the Paschal Lamb being not
broken, whether it signifies any thing in our days or not? The fourth, If a
man takes his Wife in the act of Adultery, whether he ought to put her away or
not? But they gave me no satisfactory answer; one was angry with me, because I
said that a man could not be born of the Water of Baptism, I thank the Lord
that he has satisfied me that all men that will enter into his governmen, must
be born up by his Word and by his Spirit: he that will be saved must be zealous
of the honor and glory of Jesus Christ which was crucified at Jerusalem: they
that will be his body must keep his instructions; they that will be his Spouse
should not join themselves unto an Harlot; ye that have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, sigh and groan within your selves, waiting for the
manifestation of the Sons of God, to wit, the redemption of our bodies, I
mean our deliverance from the power of Tyranny, which forces us to kill our
enemies, sometimes our friends for their will and plea^^^^ our Lord has showed
that we should do good unto our Enemies, and then we should do good unto our
friends. After the day of Restoration, the Horses, the Kine, and those
necessary Creatures will be subject unto none but unto those that are subject
unto Jesus Christ: and men shall be known to be Christians by the gifts of
God; the Creatures will be subject unto them, as it is said, The Creature shall
be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: Men of England,
subject your selves unto the Gospel and Government of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, as it is briefly made manifest in the four Evangelists; lest the
Creature be delivered from the use and comfort of this Nation, know the only
true God in your own bosom, know that the Spirit of the Lord is in you
accusing or excusing: whether your actions be good or evil, know Original
righteousness; For this is eternal life, that ye know the only true God in
your own bosoms, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. My Lord showed me that
it was very dangerous to dye in debt; we should agree with our Adversaries
while we are in the way: if any man trespass against us we should forgive him,
and do him some good: My Lord showed me the Angels were very rational, and
looked upon us as we look one upon another, and judge our love unto our God; As
we like the Workman-ship of his hands, they are offended because we like not
the form which he has made: We show God that we would have him make Horses
without tails, and some without ears; our own Toes all of a length, just strait
and square; some feet a little forked, our heads and kne s bigger; our arms as
big at the hands, as they are at the shoulders: the wood which God gives us to
build our houses we like it not of that color, but make it of some other,
still showing our dislike,

Lord have mercy upon us, The Whore of Babylon knows no more how to be borne
again then Nicodemus.

It was revealed unto me, That all Creatures should be delivered from the
bondage of their corruption, according to the 8 of the Romans into the glorious
Liberty of the Saints, I seeing no men in the Government of my Lord and
Savior, was afraid that the Creatures would be taken away utterly from the use
of Man I fell on my knees, and did beseech the Lord, if it might be for his
glory, and the eternal good of men, that it might be another year; for I did
hope that their would before that time be some that would be in the Government
of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

By me NICHOLAS SMITH.

FEllow Covenanters, stand fast to the word of God; The honest Lawyer must deny
the first Article of the Lawyers faith, or else they will prove transgressors
of the commandments, and traitors unto Jesus Christ.

The Lawyers faith, is, if any one come to him, and give him a fee; It is his
faithfulness to improve all the gifts that God has bestowed upon him to
justify him in his Cause, though it be evil and unjust; So he justifies the
wicked for a reward, and takes away the righteousness of the righteous from
him. Exodus 23. 6, 7, 8. Thou shall not rest the judgment of thy poor in his
Cause, keep thee far from a false matter, and the innocent and righteous slay
thou not, for I will not justify the wicked; And thou shall take no gift, for
the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. God has
sent you a light in a dark lanthorn; I honor God the Father in you, and I
thank you and the honorable Counselors, for engaging us to reform according
to the word of God: But as for this present war, be you sure that you are not
the cause of it, maintain the glory of God, take no hing from your enemies
that is good: I do not desire you to take away the Law, but I entreat you that
we may have it established so, that twelve men of the Neighborhood may have
full power to give unto every Plantiffe that which is justly his, doing as they
would be done by, as they would answer it before the judgment seat of Christ,
think not of your prosperity; suffer not the Defendant to remove it out of the
Court upon any case, but if the Defendant become plantiffe, let him remove it
to what Court he please; maintain that which is good, for that is the way to
glorify God.

I wish there was a law in this Commonwealth, that it might open Heaven and
shut Hell; that he that did confess his sins might be forgiven, and he that
hid them afflicted; teach your Children to pray unto you, for you are the image
of God: least when your back is turned, they say we have seen the image of that
evil one.

I wish that no man may be punished for the first fault, if he acknowledge it;
he that is burnt in the hand, you show God that you would have him burn his
soul.

Question, What is thy Name? Answer, Adam. Question, Who gave you this name?
Ans. God, in the day that he Created me. Quest. What did God do for thee in
that day? Answ. He made me a man capable, if that I did fall to rise again; he
gave me power by his wisdom over the work of his hands, he impowers me to go
when he bids me, and to come when he calls me: he made me ears to hear, and a
heart to believe, and a tongue to confess to his praise and glory, his laws
holy, righteous, just and good. Quest. Do thou keep the Commandments? Answ.
No. Quest. Why do thou not? Answ. Because I am smitten with a deadly wound of
a blind mind, and a heart drawn from God by the power of Satan's pollutions,
whereby he makes me to run from my God by the correction of my necessity, to
seek life by the comforts of the Creature, because I am alienated by wicked
works from my God, the tempter draws forth my affections by unbelief, holding
my face upon the Creature, and my back upon the Lord, but God is good unto me
still, and says, Return ye sons of men my salvation is near unto them that
fear me, he sent the Angel of his presence, who took the nature of Abraham
to show us the way how we should return; his exsample is that way in which our
heavenly Father will accept us, he have himself a ransom for his Enemies, he
set not his affection: upon the Creature, he lived long without the use of
them, he was satisfied in doing the will of God, he regarded not a habitation
upon the earth, he was willing to offer up his soul and body to the glory of
God our heavenly Father a ransom for his brethren. Quest. Has God given power
to man to believe this? Be not faithless, but believe where God has given
nothing, nothing he will require: set not thy affections on goodly buildings,
nor on a heap of money, nor on Ships at Sea, neither on a curious Coach to
carry thee on the way; settle not thy affections upon the Proprieties of the
earth, least when the earth burns thy affections be there, be of that Family
that Jesus Christ owns, give to all the public weal of his people, and he
says thou shall have treasures in Heaven, settle thine affections one things
above, where there is pleasure evermore at the right hand of God; set not thy
affections on the earth, believe and be baptized, so shall thou be made
manifest to Israel; resolve to die rather then to live in the pollution of
Satan, resolve to live unto God, thou know what is good, do it as thou
love eternal life which is hid in Christ in God.

We have a hedge, but the Stakes are as withs, when the wind turns the hedges
turns, so it shelters no man that goes by it; when the Restoration is for
five years, the stake shall stand under the drapping of the Church; they shall
not ware a black garment for ever, they shall ware a white garment when they
shall appear before God, they shall not eat an Apple but they shall save the seed
of it, or it were better they did: they shall for ever make there one parrel,
they shall not ware a Cloak but a Mantle, none shall bring it to him, but lay
it on the ground, because he shall stoop to take it up; every one of his
society shall bring to him his web, to see whether the thread be to little or
to big; he shall not have a Child in his Family, his wife shall be Nurse to all
his soiety; do you see that they do not pull down your House lest you die
desolate, set to every Pillar in Paul's a Pulpet, if it lacks so many, your
communicants must be Believers baptized.

FINIS.

