A COPY OF A LETTER FROM The Generals Excellency Sir Thomas Fair fax his
Quarrers; Concerning the A^mies not disbanding; the Votes of the Council o^
War, And the proceedings of the Committees o^ the Soldiers.

With the Answer to the Parliame^ts Message of sending f^r the Moneys ^ac^
again: And the proceedings of the Committee o^ Lord and Commons with the ARMY.

June 30 London Printed for R S^mpson, 1647.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
Worthy Sir,
I Am much sadded to view the present affairs of England. Have we not had
blood enough, yet I fear there are Horse leaches in England, that will never
be satisfied, till they see fresh broils (which God forbid) Have we oney
sheathed the sword to draw it again in a field of blood? Must we needs run all
madding to spill more, when every family (almost) is still uncured of the
former sores, in one relation, or other.

Oh that a wise man could be found to save this poor (nay all these three sad)
gasping Kingdoms.

But why should English people be still discontented under so many mercies.
Has not God subdued the common Enemy? why then are we not satisfied? Has not
God given us peace, why then should we go about new proyles? Has not God
delivered us from the pestilence, why should we go about to bring a plague
upon our selves? Has not the Lord kept us from the Famine why should we seek
to devour one another? Has not the Lord spared a remuant of Us, why should we
that are left (to praise God for his mercies) bring judgments upon our heads:
the Lord settle us in a firm and lasting peace.

For news thus: ON Tuesday May 25, 1647. his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
came hither to Bury from Saffoin walden to order and settle things, it being
the chief place where the grand Committee of the Soldiers met, which
meetings, as also other meetings of sub Committees, and others, in this kind)
his Excellency has endeavored to prevent, and field Marshal General Skippon,
and others have labored what they can to satisfy the soldiers of the good
affections of the ^arliament toward them.

Wdnesday May 26, his Excellency made inquirey into the state of things here,
and after what condition the soldiers were in, and finding them very high upon
terms and pleading to be much unchtisfied, his Excellency considered with some
of his chief officers, what course to take; for the composing of those
differances, and discontents, so much as possibly he could, and then advice had
with his Officers, his Excellency seriously considering the great weight of the
business resolved to call a Council of War of all his Officers in Commission
to consider what to do there.

Thursday May 27, his Excellency summoned his Officers to meet at Bury, at a
Council of War, and by this time the votes of the houses were come to the
Army, for their disbanding, at the several places of their several Regiments
of foot as is expressed in the said votes.

Friday May 28, diverse of the Officers came to the generals quarters, and that
night, they had notice that Commissioners were coming down from both houses of
Parliament, with moneys and Instructions for their disbanding, and that they
were about to go to Chelmsford, to disband the generals own Regiment there;
but they stayed not, declaring much dislike to be so disbanded; saying, that
they expected their Arrears to be paid; answer was made that care was taken to
secure their arrears.

Saturday May 29. the Council of War met and sat here at Burey very late
that day, and considred of all the proceedigns of the soldiers in general and
compared them with what they are commanded by both houses Parliament, and the
Council of war made several votes the Copies whereof are sent to both the
Speakers of the two houses of Lords and Commons in Parliament, with a letter
from the generals Excellency advertising of the state of the armies and
disbanding that some things therein mentioned may be taken into consideration,
before the disbanding.

For the Soldiers are generally against disbanding, thus pleading for
vindication, moneys, and other things expressed in their desires, God grant
that this great differance be composed in a settled, and sure Peace.

Monday 31, the Commissioners from the Paliament, viz. the E. of Warwick, and
the rest of the Commissioners came to Chelmsford, intending according to their
instructions, to disband the Genesis Regiment there, and so from thence to proceed
to disband Col. Hewsons, etc. But the Comis. found not only that Regiment, bue
the whole Army in a condition not to disband, the moneys was also brought by
Capt. Blackwell.

The Genesis Excellency has resolved to have a general Kandezvouz of his whole
Army, and to impart to them his mind, etc.

Yesterday being June the 1, F. M. Genesis Skippon received orders to return to
the Parliament and Capt. Blacswell received order to send back the moneys.

And this present wednsday June 2, F. M. Gener^l Skippon is gone to London
accordingly as Capt. Blackwell is sending of the moneys back again, the
so^ldiers none of them (let me say that for them) so much as offering to meddle
with any of it, but as they let it come, so they let it be carried quietly back
again.

The General will sudenly have a randezvouse and every chief Officers (as
take i) will have instructions for the moving of the Regiments to Conply with
the Parliament orders and disband.

God grant that these differences may be soon composed and that we may all
apply our selves to peace, and unity, and lay bitterness of spear aside so
prays,

Burey this 2 of June, 1647. Your most humble servant Roger Smart.

FINIS

