The defense of Humphery Smith, Anthony Melledge, and William Bayley, against
several false accusations cast upon them by John Bunkley, for which they yet
remain in Prison at Winchester.
Whereas Humphery Smith, was falsely accused of saying I curse, or for
cursing, whereby John Bulkley has most unreasonably cast and kept him (and
Anthony Melledge and Will. Bayley in a strait filthy prison above a year, and
whereas John Bulkley has also therein made lies, his refuge seeking to cover
his cruelty and injustice, by common continual reports, that Humphery Smith did
curse a maid at Poulner, and also that he made her destracted. Therefore is
this true testimony written in short, to clear the truth before the eyes of all
that can receive it in plainness,

From John Redes house at Poulner, the 28th. day of the 1 month 59.
HUmphrey Smith a prisoner at Winchester above a year, by reason of a false
witness, he came and had a meeting, as formerly he had among us at Poulner,
near Ringwood in Hamshire, to whom then some of us spoke of a maid not far off
that was distempered, and after some persuasions, he and Anthony Melledge was
free to go with us to visit her being distempered, who since is become sencible
and sober, and when we came, we were invited in by Steephen Jaye the man of the
house, who after falsely swore against Humphrey Smith, though then he offered
us his house to meet in, or liberty for any of us to be with the maid.

But there being a filthy thing then ruling in her, Hum: Smith denied it and
her words, but whereas he was falsely accused of cursing or saying I curse, and
that Rich: Harris should say Amen, was both false and never spoken by them, we
being then eye and ear witnesses, and what was spoke was not in secret, neither
did Ant: Melledge say Amen, nor any other of us to which our names are written:

Anne Read, Frances Bence, Mary Hobs, Elizabeth Everedge.

And the maids father Thomas Hinton came after to a sitting of them called
Justices at Ringwood, where was John Bulkley and John Hilsley, before whom he
offered to testify upon his oath that Hum. Smith never spoke them words, but
John Bunkley would not receive his testimony, the truth whereof is certified
under our hands, --

Richard Harris, Phil. Bence. Ann Read.

The testimony of Rich. Harris.
Whereas Humphrey Smith was accused for cursing, I bear my testimony with the
rest, that he was falsely accused,

Richard Harris.

The maid her self can give no testimony of it but underneath are some words
plainly written, as they came from her own mouth.

I was then distempered, and did not give ear to the words which were spoken,
and if I had, I had not been sencible, and I do not remember what was spoken,
for I was not then as I am now, nor as I was before, and I was distempered
before ever I heard of thy name, (meaning H. S. and she said) I believe
Bulkley's sending for me was to get what he could out of me, and to this, she
with her own hand writ her name, -- Mary Hinton.

By these last words of hers it may be understood how John Bunkley had sent for
her after H. S. was falsely accused, and that John Bulkley had commonly
reported that he had made her mad, but he never saw her face before that time,
he went to see her she being ^istempered.

The testimony of the maids Father.
WHen Hump. Smith was at Poulner, I desired him, and he and others of his
friends went to visit my daughter, and I went along with him, and was with him
there, and also came thence with him, and did not hear any curse pronounced,
nor hear him say I curse, the which he being accused of; I went to a sitting of
Justices at Ringwood, to testify upon oath, but John Bulkley would not receive
it, and after this Ste. Jaye had accused H. S. of cursing, he drew his knife to
kill himself, but he could not do it, but swore he would run his knife ^n my
daughter, and did beat her, that she spit much blood, and lay very sick after,
so that he went away into another County.

Tho. Hinton.

The testimony of Anthony Melledge
I being with H. S. to visit the distracted maid at Poulner, after which time
he was accused for cursing that maid, and that I should say Amen. The which I
testify is false, neither was William Bayley there

Anthony Melledge.

The testimony of Will. Bayley.
AT that time H. S. went to visit the distracted maid I was not there, but sick
at home 10. miles off: though John Bulkley has kept me a prisoner above a year
(from 3 small motherless children and way of livelihood) as for several
misdemeanors (done at that time and place) as was mentioned in the Mittimus.

THe Lord God of Heaven and Earth knows I am wronged by John Bulkley every
way, when I neither did nor spoke nor intended any evil toward any creature, I
was by his warrant brought before him, and then not suffered to speak for my
defense in truth, but falsely accused of cursing, as the Lord God knows, and
presently committed to prison, and also 2 of my dear brethren with me, who have
since suffered a most cruel and close inhumane imprisonment, above a year, and
my soul grieved to hear and see continual wickedness, besides all the
sufferings in my body, and grief to see my dear brethren lie sick upon the
ground by me sometimes wanting water or any thing to nourish their bodies, by
reason of close restraint and cruelty, and to add affliction to all this, and
much more, he also sought by all likelihood to take away the life of my body to
cover his own injustice, and therefore sent into my native county to Colonel
Burch, and endeavored very much to have more falfe witness against me; and
therefore as himself confessed to me he caused a man there to be bound over to
a Sessions as to testify against me, whereby he had thoughts to have got
testimony upon oath, that I had cheated some man of much money, and so been as
a thief, and so to take away my life, which was a horrible wicked thing, but in
that the Lord prevented him, though he commonly reported the thing to be true,
to make truth and me odious, and himself to be as a just man, in punishing such
a one: and he also commonly reported not only that I cursed the maid, but also
that I made her mad, but that it is all false, I am ready to testify unto
death, and for the clearing of the living truth of Jesus Christ, from them and
all other false reports which are many by him, my life is not dear unto me nor
my long imprisonment, though tedious, but do believe if it be many years more,
the Lord God of power who knows my innocence will keep me in faithfulness
with the rest, until his wickedness and envy does appear unto all sober people,
and the truth of God stand clear from all his false accusations, and deceitful
malicious enterprises, against the way of God and me his servant; for this I do
know, the Lord God is on my side, in whom alone is my trust, for whose namesake
I suffer bonds, patiently, knowing all these things to be false, this with
boldness I publish, and should willingly appear before the chief Rulers of the
nation to clear the truth of God from those false things under which John
Bulkley does cause it and me to suffer, who am called,

Humphery Smith.
Winchester close Prison the 5th. of the 2d. month 1659.

