AN HONORABLE AND WORTHY SPEECH: SPOKEN IN THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.

By Mr. SMITH of the Middle Temple, October 28. 1641.

Concerning the Regulating of the Kings Majesty's Prerogative, and the
Liberties of the Subjects.

With a Motion for the speedy Redress of all Greevances under which the Church
and State does lie.

decorative flourish

LONDON Printed by Barnard Al^, MDCXLI.

An Honorable SPEECH Spoken in the High Court of Parliament, October, 28. 1641.
by Mr. Smith of the Middle Temple.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THE last time we assembled, we sat like a College of Physicians, upon the
life and death of three great Patients; whose bleeding hearts lay prostrate
before us, were arrived at that critical minute, either to receive relief, or
eternal destruction. The 3 fortunate Nations were presented to us, in all
their distractions: and grown to such a superlative in their miseries, that
like Nursing Mothers bereaved of their tender Infants, they were careless of
what might happen to them, ^uia perdiderant libertates. These 3 Kingdoms whose
peace and amity filled the remaining world with envy and emulation, and were
like that happy Trinity of Faith, Hope, and Charity, in a perfect union: had
but now their swords edged to each others confusion. O scelus hominum! height
of impiety! KAI SV TEKNON! Said Caesar in the Senate, it was not his death that
grieved him, but that his Son should advance his hand to his slaughter. How
many Sons and Neroes had we, whose earnest indeav-ours were to rip up their
Mothers womb, and like Vipers eat through her bowels, and to lay desolate
their Fathers House! Quis talia fando,

Temperets a lachrimis? And yet all this had bin but a Prologue to our Tragedy;
had not God Almighty pleased to interpose his hand, and to have bin a pillar of
fire betwixt us and our Captivity, and to have wrought our Deliverance, by his
Great Instrument, the Parliament; whose constant Labor it has bin, for this
year past, to create a true understanding, and firm peace between the
Nations: which I hope is so accomplished, that it is not in the power of the
Devil, or all his works, ever to dissolve it. This, I say, was the work of
our last sitting. Give me leave Sir, I beseech you, to deliver what I conceive
convenient to be of this; To give God his due, to establish Rights between
King and People, and to compose things amongst our selves: that we may give God
his due, we must advance his worship, and compel Obedience to his Commands,
wherein he has been so much neglected. Honor and Riches have bin set up for
gods, in competition with him, Idolatry and Superstition have bin introduced,
even into his House, the Church, and He expulsed, his name has bin blasphemed,
and his day profaned, by the Authority of that unlawful Book of Sports; and
those who would not tremble thus to dishonor God, would not scruple to do it
to their Parents, or injure their Neighbors, either by murder of themselves,
or names; or by Adultery, David's great Crimes: they have not only robbed God of
his Honor, but men of their Estates, and of part of themselves, Members and
Ears have bin set to sale, even to the deforming of that Creature, whom God
had honored with his own Image, that they might color this their
wickedness, Perjury and false Testimony, have bin more frequent with them then
their prayers: and all this proceeded out of an inordinate desire of that which
was their Neighbors. And thus God in all his Commandments has bin abused. Can
we then wonder at his judgments, or think he could do less to right himself
upon such a Rebellious People then he has?

I beseech you Sir, let us do something to seal him in his Throne, and
worship all with one mind, and not that every one should go to God a way by
himself: this uncertainty staggers the unresolved soul, and leads it into
such a Labyrinth, that not knowing where to fix, for fear of Erring, sticks to
no way, so dies ere it performs that, for which it was made to live, uniformity
in his Worship, is that which pleases him; and if we will thus serve him, we
may expect protection from him.

The next thing that I conceive fit to be considered, is, to cause the Rights,
both of the King and People truly to be understood: and in this, to give that
Authority to the Prerogative which Legally it has, and to uphold the Subjects
Liberty from being minc't into Servitude.

That the King should have a Prerogative, is necessary for his Houour; it
differences him from His People: but if it swells too high, and makes an
Inundation upon his Subjects Liberty; it is no longer then to be styled by that
Name: The Privilege of the Subject, is likewise for his Majesty's high Honor.
King David gloried in the number of his People, and Queen Elizabeth delivered
in a Speech in Parliament, that the greatness of a Prince consisted in the
Riches of his Subjects, intimating that then they stood like lofty Cedars about
him, to defend him from the storms of the world, and there were ample
Demonstrations of that in that renowned Queens Reign: but what Encouragement
can they have, either to increase their Numbers; or Estates; unless they may
have Protection both for themselves, and Estates? Therefore the Privilege and
Greatness of the Subjects are relatively for the Honor of the Prince.

Prerogative and Liberty, are both necessary to this Kingdom: and like the
Sun and Moon, give a luster to this benighted Nation, so long as they walk
at their equal distances: but when one of them* shall venture into the others
Orb, like those Planets in conjunction, they then cause a deeper Eclipse. What
shall be the compass then, by which these two must steer? Why, nothing but
the same by which they are, The Law: which if it might run in the free
current of its purity, without being poisoned by the venomous spirits of
ill-affected Dispositions, would so fix the King to his Crown; that it would
make him stand like a Star in the Firmament, for the Neighbor-world to behold
and tremb^e at.

That they may be the better acted, I shall humbly desire, that after so many
times, that great Charter, the Light of the LAW, may be reviewed, the Liberty
of the Subject explained, and be once more confirmed: and pen^lties imposed on
the breakers, and let him dye unto the bargain, that dares attempt the Act.

The last thing, that falls into consideration, is, to set things right amongst
our selves, the Subjects of England, And in this, so to provide, that the
Maecenasses of the Times, may not, like great Jacks in a poole, devour their
Inferiors, and make Poverty a Pavement for themselves to trample on. This has
bin a burden we have long groaned under; for if a great one did but say the
word, it was sufficient to evict my right even from my own inheritance. They
had both Law and Justice so in a string; that they could command them with a
nod, And thus People have been disinherited of their common right: the Law
which is as due to them, as the Air they breath in.

On the other side, we must take care, that the Common People may not carve
themselves out Justice, by their Multitudes. Of this we have too frequent
experience, by their breaking down Enclosures, and by raising other tumults,
to as ill purposes. Which if they be not suddenly supp^est, to how desperate an
Issue, this may grow, I Will leave to your better judgments. My humb^e motion
therefore is, that an intimation may go forth, unto the Country, to wish
those that are injured to resort to Courts of Law. And if there they fail of
Justice, in Parliament they may be confident to receive ^t.


