GODS UNCHANGEABLENESS: OR GODS Continued Providence, in preserving, governing,
ordering and disposing of all Creatures, Men, Actions, Counsels and Things, as
at the beginning of the world, so to the end of the world, for ever, according
to the counsel of his own will.

FROM WHENCE Is gathered six necessary Inferences very applicable to the
Changes, Alterations and vicissitude of these our present times. WHEREIN Is
clearly demonstrated and proved, That OLIVER CROMWELL is by the Providence of
GOD, Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. to whom the People
owe obedience, as to him whom GOD has set over them.

Unto which is added, The Causes of Discontent, Repining and Murmurings of Men:
Also, Some serious Advertisements, and seasonable Admonitions to the
Discontented, and Reprehensions to all Impetuous, Arrogant Murmurers. Together
with Answers to some chief Objections made against the Lord Protector and his
present Government, endeavoring (if possible) satisfaction to all men.

Therefore written and published for public good, By GEORGE SMITH Gent.

JER. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not
in man that walks, to direct his steps.

PSALM. 75. 6, 7. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South. But God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up
another.

1 PET. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, Or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well, for so is the will of God, etc.

LONDON. Printed for Tho. Underhill at the Ancor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard,
and Lawrence Chapman next to the Fountain Tavern in the Strand. 1655.

TO ALL FREEBORN PEOPLE of England, that are lovers of Peace and Truth, Grace
be unto you and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, etc.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THere is not any Doctrine more useful to the life of man, or more necessary
to be known to the comfort of the Saints, then the Doctrine of Providence; for
not to know and believe, that God the Creator does by his secret and wise
providence govern all things, is injurious to God, and hurtful to our selves,
and as much as to deny the Sovereignty and high prerogative of the Lord Jehovah
over the worlds; which is indeed the exercise of his Kingly dominion, in
ordering the whole universe, which in the following Discourse I offer unto your
serious consideration: But because these times are pestered with many pestilent
opinions, and seditious practices, all truths cannot please all men, every man
believes or denies whatsoever may most advance their own particular judgments
and interests; so that I well know this discourse will be very unpleasant to
many of this age: Therefore (good Readers and my friends) let me beg your
patience, not only in the matter of my discourse, thwarting the desires and
self-designes of men, it being against the common stream of the now reigning
opinions; but in the manner also, in my applications to the present Changes and
alterations, designs and interests, so strongly strugled for by the most of
men; to all which this my discourse runs in flat opposition; the same thing
being flatly denied which I affirm and do defend. I think I am the first that
in this way and manner has published any thing in defense of the present
Government under his Highness the Lord Protector: I have not read nor seen any
thing written of this nature, but what has been to the contrary; by which I
received so little satisfaction, or am so far from being satisfied by what I
have read, that my spirit burned within me to make opposition thereunto, which
caused me to put my pen to paper on this subject. Give me also leave to give my
Judgment in the matter; I am one of the freeborn of the Nation, and claim my
vote as well as any other, having a proportionable right to all privileges,
and must proportionably share in any affliction that God shall please to
inflict upon the Nation; Therefore it concerns me to speak as well as to hear
others speak; if I speak not their sense, let me be born with, as I bear with
them that speak not my sense: if any my friends be offended at what I write, I
cannot help their passion, nor will I be angry at them: I know not any man's aim
nor end in what they do, so well as I know my own: I know my own; I know my aim
is public good, and my end Gods glory, nor do I seek to please men but to
please God, I seek not victory but verity; if God accept of my endeavor, I
have my end; if men reject it, or me for it; I pass not: yet I would so speak
and write, that I may not give any offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the
Gentile, nor to the Church of God: but if offense be taken without cause, why
therefore should I lose my liberty in which Christ has made me free? But
though I be free from all men (as the Apostle speaks) yet would I be servant
to all (in the sense the Apostle speaks) that I might gain the more to God:
There is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence; If ever there were a time
to speak for God, and the Cause of the Saints on earth, the despised ones, it
is now no time to be silent, but to contend earnestly for the truth, and for
the faith that was once delivered to the Saints: It was but once delivered, I
dare not say it shall be delivered a second time, to them that have had it once
delivered, if they lose it, whether it be to a Nation or to a man only.

We in England have had it delivered to us, We, beyond Capernaum, have been
exalted unto Heaven etc. the mysteries of the Gospel have been unfolded unto us
above all other Nations, and God has long owned us to be his people; the Word
has been operative, working in power, piercing even to the dividing of soul
and spirit, joints and marrow; a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of
the heart: It has been a converting Word, else whence had those rebellious
children their conversion boasted of, that cast off their Mother that bare
them, and brought them forth? an Antichristian Church brings not forth a
Christian brood: It is thus far true, that we have had much chaff mixed with
the pure wheat, many weeds have grown in this vineyard of Gods planting: Was
there ever wheat without chaff? Was there ever a garden without weeds? but
never so many as at this day: some have been always, and some will be to the
end of the world: there shall be, there must be tares among the good corn: the
evil one will cast tares where God casts good seed; and that evil one has been
busy in this age above all ages; the field of Gods Kingdom seems now to be
covered all over with tares, but God can gather in his good corn, and weed out
those tares, at the day of his harvest: he will manifest the blasphemers, and
reprove the horrid blasphemies, strange self-opinions, false christ's, false
apostles and teachers, seducers of men's souls, evil angels in shape of Angels
of light, that under the notion of truth broach damnable heresies, doctrines of
devils: All o^d herefles, abominated by the primitive Church, are all at this
day revived at once, and in disguised new dresses, come like wolves in sheeps
clothing: these are such as trouble the Church of God, which the Apostle in
his time wished to have been cut off, Gal. 5. 12. And it is the duty of the
Christian Magistrate to suppress them; he is as Christ's vicegerent and
Lieutenant on earth, not only to command observance of the first Table, but
also of the second: If he that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under
two or three witnesses; how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God. etc. and done
despite to the spirit of grace? Heb. 10. 28, 29. And the sword is not put into
the Magistrates hand in vain We read in Deuteronomy. 17. from verse. 2 to verse. 7. if
any had broken the covenant with God, and worshipped false gods, he was to be
stoned to death: yet I say not, that every heresy under the Gospel should be
punished by death: but I say, it is the duty of the supreme Magistrate, to
suppress all heresy and blasphemy by a Law: Nor do I say, that an erring
Conscience is to be punished by the Law of the Magistrate, if he keep his
erring opinion within his own walls; but if he seduce others, and thereby
stir up sedition, alienating men's judgments from due obedience, I say such a
one is liable to the wrath of the Civil Magistrate; and those Magistrates, that
tolerate or connive at such things, will be found to do the work of the Lord
negligently: those things I only hint at by the way, and leave to the
consideration of the judicious.

What I have said as to the matter of my following discourse, which is
Providence, ordering all things; it is the truth of God held forth in sacred
Scripture, from which I cannot retrograde: what I have said as to the matter
applicatory, I only give my judgment, and leave the even to that Providence
which governs all things. As to my vindication of the Lord Protector, whom
Providence has exalted, Providence will yet further order him, and all his
counsels and actions, after the counsel of Gods will: God has a great work for
him to do, and it shall be done, whether to be a nursing father to the Church
of Christ, and a skillful Esculapius, to heal the distempers of three sick and
wounded Nations, or whether for a contrary work, I cannot assert, God only
knows it, to whom all secrets belong: what is revealed belongs to us, and it
is our duty as we are men, to own the Powers that be; and as we are Christian
men to pray for them; therefore for him; that God will make him a glorious
instrument in his own hand for his glory and the peoples good. We hope well,
but prayer is better then our hopes, and is the means to accomplish our hope:
and God is always better to his praying people then their prayers: let us not
sin by withholding our prayers, which thing has sometimes caused blessings
to be turned into curses: Let us not limit the holy one of Israel, nor give
rules to Providence; nor let us spend our time in devising and plotting, nor as
the Athenians, make it our work to hear and to tell News; but pray and
endeavor for peace and truth; and believe, that God is a rewarder to them that
diligently seek him. There is yet balm in Gilead, a door of hope is opened to
us; The seed is yet in the barn; as yet the Vine and the Fig Tree, the
Pomegranate and the Olive tree, has not brought forth (says the Prophet,)
from this day I will bless you* Hag. 2. 19. It is God that prepares the seed
and the ground, and gives the increase by his blessing, Psalm. 65. 9, 10.
Therefore let us pray unto God for our Governors, for his Highness, and for
his Parliament; for as God does instruct the husbandman to discretion, to break
the clods of his ground, and to cast in his seed in the appointed place and
time, as the Prophet speaks; so does he instruct Princes, and teaches them
discretion to rule and govern as he pleases; for by him Princes reign and
rule; The husbandman waits for the fruit of the earth (says James) and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and the later rain; and shall
not we follow the footsteps of providence, and patiently wait Gods time and
means, for giving us the blessings promised? Let us cast off our own ways,
wills and designs, and be obedient to Providence, and see what the Lord our God
will do for us. Courteous Reader, read me with patience, not with any
prejudice: try all truths, oppose nothing that is truth; good counsel is not
to be slighted, nor seasonable reproof to be scorned, though it come from one
of whom you could say as Achab said of Michaiah, that you hate him, and that he
does not speak good concerning you but evil: I have written what God has
instructed me, do you read, and read all; then judge (as God shall put into
your heart) of him who is your servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, that desires
increase of grace to you and all the Israel of God.

George Smith.

The principal things touched upon in the following Discourse.
GOD the Creator does govern all things by his secret Providence. Page 1. The
want of the true knowledge of Providence, is cause of murmurings. p. 2, and 12.
Providence set forth by the Ladder that Jacob saw in his vision, and by the
Pillar of cloud that guided Israel in the wilderness. p. 2. Nothing comes to
pass by chance or devisings of men, or merely by nature, but by Providence.
ibid. Providence what it is? ibid. and p. 12. It is the eye of God. p. 3. It
orders all the actions of men. ibid. The days and life of man. p. 4. It
orders the dispositions of men. ib. It orders the wicked actions of wicked
men. ib. It orders the secrets of the heart, and the answer of the tongue. p.
5. It orders the least of things, which men falsely say come by chance or
fortune. ib. All creatures animate and inanimate wait on God, and obey and
execute his command. p. 6. Providence changes the order that nature has put
into things. ib. All the works of Providence are known and certain to God from
eternity. ib. But they are all contingent to men. p. 7. The times of Families
and Kingdoms are appointed by God, their rise and their period is certainly
set, and the means thereto conducing. p. 7, and 8. Why Jehu was punished like
Achab. p. 8. Admonition to those that God has made punishers of others sins.
ib. Providence orders all actions and things, to advance men and Nations as
pleases him, p. 9, 10. Providence ordered Oliver Cromwell to be Lord
Protector. p. 11. Every mercy and every judgment is from God, not from men, but
as instrumeuts in Gods hand. p. 11, 12. Inferences drawn from the Doctrine of
Providence. p. 13. All mercies to men or Nations are of Gods free grace and
love. ib. Particular mercies instanced. p. 14, 15. All Judgments are from God
as recompense for sin. p. 16. Particular sins instanced, and at ripeness in
England. ib. How Privileges of Parliament were lost. p. 17. A Memento of the
Covenant. ib. The wicked are taken in their own craftiness, and fall by their
own designs. p. 18. Observations of some Actions and Designs of King James, and
of the late King. p. 18, 19. Six pieces of Providence very observable to the
late King. p. 20. Considerable Providence to the long Parliament. p. 21. Six
considerable Quaeries propounded. p. 22. God has set a time when he will give
in mercies, and when he will instict Judgments. p. 22, 23. And upon whom. ib.
And how much it shall be. p. 24. But all those times and purposes in God, are
unknown to men. p. 24, 25. Men's boldness to foretell Gods times and purposes.
ib. Revelations and visions in these times, but vain fancies. p. 26. These are
trying and shaking times. p. 26, 27. God shakes Nations several ways. ib.
The word of God like fire shall consume all opposers. p. 28. The greatest
Reformation, has ever met with greatest opposition. ib. Three things have long
threatened Judgment to England. ib. Men not able to bring any enterprise to pass
by all their contrivings. p. 29. The Lord Protector set up by Providence, made
successful by Saints prayers. ib. Although God has set the time for every
purpose, which cannot be altered, yet men are to be diligent in the use of all
lawful means, p. 30, 31. How God is said to repent, or to be changed. p. 32.
No means must be used but lawful means. p. 33. We must not trust in means, nor
be too solicitous in the use of means without a particular Promise. ib. Nor to
use unwarrantable means to obtain lawful things. ib. Christ's Kingdom is
spiritual. 34 He accepts not the use of the sword in the Saints hand, to set up
his Kingdom. ib. Reasons why? p. 35. The pressings in men's spirits, not always
agreeable to the Spirit of God. p. 35, 36. The Spirit of God leads but to one
truth. ib. The right means to obtain Mercies, and to avoid Judgments. 36, 37.
What the Doctrine of Paul and Peter is, concerning the civil Magistrate. ib.
The civil Magistrate has authority to command the worship of God, and to
punish the contemners of it. p. 38. When God has manifested his will by the
work of Providence, we are to submit and not to murmur. p. 39. Murmurers
reproved. ib. The effects of murmuring. ib. The causes of men's murmurings. p.
40. Several sorts of murmurers noted. p. 41, 42. Order in discipline required
by Christ in his Church. ib. Men ascribers, are God prescribers. p. 43. The
murmuring of Corah was against the Offices of Magistracy and Ministry. p. 43,
44. Advice to the people. p. 44, 45. Men are building new Babels. ib. Kings,
nursing fathers to the Church under the Gospel. ib. Christ's enemies shall be
slain miraculously, by the sword that goes out of his mouth. p. 46. It was
Isreal's sin in asking a King before God gave him, And it is a sin in any
people to reject a King when God gives him. p. 47. Seditious persons like Sheba
the son of Bichri. ib. The bitterness of war, instanced in Abner and Joab.
ib. Five principal Objections made against the Lord Protestor, Answered. p.
48. The cause of our late war, what. p. 49. The Lord Protector vindicated, as
to former promises. p. 50. In his trust to the Parliament and Nation. ib. In
breach of Privileges of Parliament. p 51. That this is a free Parliament. ib.
Concerning the Militia. p. 52. Concerning his Negative voice. p. 53. Concerning
Religion. p. 54. Concerning making Laws, and raising of Money. p. 55. That he
is no favourer of Cavaliers, but as in justice he ought. ib.
Gods Unchangeableness, OR, Gods continued Providence in preserving, guiding,
ordering and disposing of all Creatures, Men, Actions, Counsels and Things, as
at the beginning of the world, so to the end of the world, for ever; According
to the counsel of his own Will.
THat there is a God that has created the world and all things, we all
acknowledge; the Heathen confess the same, but know not the true God in his
essence and being, God has hid himself from them, farther then what is
revealed to them by the works of creation, therefore they frame gods to
themselves according to their fancies, and so make many gods: We Christians do
acknowledge one God, and but one God, distinguished by three persons, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; And that there is three Persons or three Hypostases, and
but one God, is revealed to us by the Word of God, contained in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, where only this mystery of the Godhead
is to be known; therefore the wisest and most prudent of the Heathen cannot
know this, because they have not the sacred Scriptures made known to them; But
this we all prof^sse to know and to believe, therefore it we^e in vain and lost
labor to use Arguments to prove it.

But that this one God the God of Israel does govern, order, and dispose all
C^eatures, Actions, Things, Men and Counsels, according to the purpose of his
own will, is not so clearly acknowledged nor believed, but contrary, it is
denied by some though by name they are Christians, yet they go not in their
practice in this particular beyond the old Sect of Stoic Philosophers, who
though heathen acknowledge a Deity, yet leave the guidance and ordering of
things to nature, and so tie God to second causes; Therefore it will not be
unnecessary to prove, that there is a secret and special providence of God that
governs and orders all things; for indeed the want of the knowledge and
practice of this is the cause of great complainings, discontents, and
murmurings against God and against men; We look at instrumental causes but see
not the efficient cause, the cause of all causes: Jaco^ did not only look to
the foot of the ladder which he see in his vision, but he (...) at him who sat
at the top of the Ladder Genesis 28. 13.
; This Ladder does literally set forth Gods Providence governing all things;
The steps or gradations of the Ladder are the diverse means which God uses; The
Angels ascending and descending are the ministering spirits which God sends
forth to execute his will, as the Apostle tells us, they are all ministering
spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation: And
the Heb. 1. 14
Psalmist exhorting us to the praise of God says, Who is like the Lord our
God, that has his dwelling on high, and yet abaseth himself to behold the
things in the heaven and in the earth? Psa. 113. 5, 6. He so beholds all
things as to order all things, and all actions, not only Men and Angels, but
the unreasonable creatures, yea, inanimate things by a providence: As the
Israelites were led through the wilderness by a pillar of a cloud by day, and
by a pillar of fire by night, So all creatures are guided by providence: You
know that when the cloud was taken up from the Tabernacle, the Israelites
journeyed and went forward so long as the pillar went before them, but when the
^pillar staid they staid, in that place where the cloud abode there they
pitched their tents, as is said, Number. 9. 17. Again, when the cloud was taken up
whether by day or by night, they journeyed, and so long as it rested they
remained in their Tents; whether it was for a day or for days, for months, or
for years: Numb. 9. 22. Ex. 40. 36.
God is the same to us that he was to Israel, his providence is the same,
though altered in the dispensations, etc. God is eternal, and he is
unchangeable in all his ways, he made himself known in times past by his
wondrous works and special Revelations, but now he makes himself known by his
word as well as by his works. The visible things created which are but part of
the works of God, do set forth to the whole world his power and wisdom, Psa.
19. and as the Psalmist says, The Lord is known by the judgments which he
executes, Psa. 9. 16. But especially by his word he has made himself known to
his people, his word is contained in the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, there he has revealed himself in his Attributes, Names, Titles,
eternal essence and being; and by his word we come to know what his works are,
they are revealed in Scripture to be Decree, Creation and Providence; Decree
was the purpose of God before all time what should be in time, and till time
shall be no more; Creation was the making of the worlds and all things in them
of nothing, and that was in the beginning of time; Providence is the governing
and disposing of all things, by which God the Creator does exercise his Kingly
power for ever, according to the decree and secret counsel of God, effecting
every purpose, in the time, place, and by the means pre-ordained by God.

Now that there is such a ruling providence that orders all things, and every
thing in the world, is necessary to be known and believed by all; Therefore I
shall endeavor to prove it by Scripture and experience, and that nothing comes
to pass by chance or merely by nature, nor can be effected and done by any
devisings, contrivings, wisdom, or power of men, without the disposing of
providence: For if there be a God that made all things, it must needs be that
the same God governs all things and their Actions, according to his will: But
God made all things, that is confessed, why did God make the creature? not for
themselves, nor to leave them to act and do as they list* But God made all for
himself, for his own glory, Pr. 16. 4. Isa. 43. 21.
yea, he made the wicked for the day of wrath: It was indeed a glorious work to
make the worlds and all creatures, but it is a more glorious work to govern the
worlds and every creature by his most wise providence: This providence he
calls the eyes of his glory Isa. 3. 8.
, by it his glory is manifested in every thing, and this glory he will not give
unto any other Isa. 42. 8.
: Providence is the absolute Sovereign power of God over the creatures,
exercising his eternal Decrees and secret counsel, ordering things and actions
according to his good pleasure, after the counsel of his own will Ephesians. 1. 11
; Thus says the Lord (speaking of things done from the beginning of the world,
and things to be done) my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure
Isa. 46. 10 Psa. 33. 11
; Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord (says the Prophet) and read, not one of
these things shall fail, nor ssiall miss one of another Isa. 34. 16
: All things shall come to pass, and be so ordered and fitted unto another as
the sword to the Scabbard or knife to the sheath: I will speak the word, and
the word that I speak shall be done Ez. 12. 25
; The Lord of Hosts purposes, and who shall disanull it Isa. 14. 27
? he spoke and it was done (says the Psalmist) he commanded and it stood fast
Ps. 33. 9
.

There was a sore Famine in Samaria, and the Prophet tells them that the next
day there should be great plenty, but this seemed a thing impossible, and was
not believed, the Assyrians being then with a mighty Army besieging Samaria 2
Kings 6. 24.
: Now the Lord made the host of the Assyrians to hear a noise of horses aad
chariots, and of a mighty host, and for fear they all fled from their Tents,
and left their Tents and Camp, even as it was with all provisions, and fled for
their lives 2 Kin. ^2.
: Now there were four lepers that were in distress and ventured themselves to
go to the Camp of the Assyrians, where they found abundance of food and
treasure, and all the host was fled; these bring tidings to Samaria; And as the
Lord had said by his Prophet so it came to pass Ver. 16.
: Here was no contrivance, nor wisdom, nor power of men in all this, but the
work of providence; So you shall see that when two men go into the field to hew
wood, the head of the Axe sticth from the helve at unawares, and kills one of
these men Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
: This is the work of providence, and in such a case God himself says, I have
delivered such a man to the slayers hand Ex. 21. 13
: If God take care of a Sparrow, he much more takes care of a man, But a
Sparrow falls not to the ground without the providence of God, and a mani, of
more value then many Sparrows Mat. 10. 31.
: Two men travel on the way, the one is robbed of his purse, the other is
never assaulted, this is providence in the one and in the other.

You know Ahab would needs go up to Ramoth-Gilead, he was very confident of
victory, he takes much advice and counsel about it, strengthens himself by the
assistance of King Jehosapha^, and is encouraged by no less then four hundred
false Prophets; all say to him Go and prosper 1 King. 22. 6.
; Only Mic^iah the Prophet of the Lord tells him from the mouth of God, that he
should not return in peace; Ahab scorns the Prophets words, and imprisons him,
and goes on with confidence of his design; Now what crossed him in his design,
contrivements, and power, etc. the Text tells you, a certain man drew a bow at a
venture, and shot an arrow; He knew not Ahab, nor could any know him, for he
had disguised himself; Ahab wanted not for any contrivance, policy, counsel,
nor strength to preserve himself, yet maugre all policy, the arrow thus shot at
a venture finds out Ahab, and although Ahab was armed it is by providence
guided to the joints of his armor, where it enters, and hits Ahab so that he
died 1 King. 22. 34.
; Here providence executes the decree of God upon Ahab; You know the King of
Assyria sent a mighty and invincible Army against Hezechiah King of Judah,
confident of success: Hezechiah unable to make opposition by any equality of
strength, yet this invincible host is destroyed, not by any art, wisdom,
counsel, or strength of men, all was wanting; But an Angel of the Lord went
out and smote the Camp of the Assyrians in one nigh^ One hundred fourscore and
five thousand 2 King. 19. 35.
, This is also the work of Providence.

As the Actions of men so their days and life are ordered and appointed by
God, therefore says holy Job, the days of every man are appointed by God, and
all those days are ordered by providence, though men know them not, nor how
they are secretly ordered and every hour preserved till the appointed time be
come, for says Job, Thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass Job
14. 5
, therefore says he, I will wait till my change come Job 7. 1.
; So the Propher David, My times (says he) are in thy hands Ps. 31. 15
.

And as Providence orders the Actions and Lives of men, so it does reach to
the orderings of the disposition and natural affections of men, either to love
or hatred, to kindness, or to chur^ishnesse, what else changed the disposition
and affection of Esau, from bloody wrath to loving kindness, when he came out
against Jacob with hatred, and when he meets him he embraces him with
loving-kindenesse and brotherly affection Genesis 33. 4
; So you shall see Laban pursuing Jacob in great anger, and when he is on the
way his disposition and anger is changed Genesis 31. 29.
; You may see the Midianites that came out against Israel all in love one with
the other, and hatred against Israel, fall one upon another, and destroy one
another, providence orders that every one set his sword against his fellow
Iud. 7. 22
; The like you may see in the Army of the Philistims 1 Samuel ^4. 20.
.

Yea more, It is evident from sacred Scriptures, That all the wicked Actions of
wicked men are ordered by providence, God rules them, and orders them for the
accomplishment of his secret counsel, and by the ordering of those Actions God
has glory: I say, they are ordered by providence, not as wicked men intend or
act them, they intend and act out of a wicked principle, to a wicked end, but
God orders them otherwise, to effect something of his own decree, and turns it
to good in the doing his will; The action, and the sin in the action is their
own, but the ordering of the action is of God: All wicked actions of wicked
obdurated Pharaoh, providence ordered to the glory of God. St Paul has this
expression, For the Scripture says of Pharaoh, even for this cause have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared throughout all the earth, Ex. 9. 16.
Romans 9. 17. His cruelty in destroying all the male-children of the Hebrews;
Moses being cast into the River, the repulse that Pharaoh gave to Moses message
from God, his increase of the burdens and labors on the Hebrews, and his often
refusing to let the people go, etc. Providence ordered all these things to the
advancement of Gods glory: So it is said of Sihon King of Heshbon, that God
hardened his heart, and why? that Sihon King of Heshbon out of the bitterness
and envy of his own heart against Israel, should refuse to suffer them to pass
peaceably through his Country, to the end that Israel might have a just cause
to engage war with them and destroy them Deuteronomy. 2. 30.
.

Was there ever so great an Act of wickedness acted in the world, or invented,
as that horrid conspiracy of Herod, Pontius Pilate, Judas, the Gentiles, and
the people of the Jews against the Lord Christ? yet providence ordered all
this, and brought the greatest good out of that most horrid act; The Scripture
says plainly, that all this was no more but what was before-determined should
be done Act. 2. 23. and Act. 4. 27, 28.
: St John speaking of the unbelieving Jews from that place Isa. 6. 10. sairh,
God has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts Joh. 12. 40.
: and Esaias says, the Lord has powered upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and
has chosed their eyes, The Prophets, Rulers, and Seers has he covered Isa.
29. 10
; God is not only a bare permitter of evil actions in men, but he is a powerful
agent, ordering of those evil Actions by his wise and secret providence, to
serve to the purpose of his own will; the sin is their own but the guidance
of the Action is Gods, ordered to his own glory; Job tells us, that the deceiver
and the deceived are both his Ioh 12. 16.
, he orders both; If a Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the
Lord have deceived him Eze. 14. 9
, that is, such Prophets as Ahabs four hundred Prophets were, whom Satan could
not deceive till he was bid to go and prevail: All the actions of the devil are
ordered by providence, and there is not, nor cannot be any action of the devil
but what is extremely wicked: Remarkable is that place of St John, Rev. 17. 13.
speaking of that foul apostasy of Papacy, he says, They shall give their power
and strength to the beast, He says not they will give, but they shall give, as
a thing that God had pre-ordained to be, much more may be said, this I hope may
suffice to prove this Truth.

Yet furrhermore you shall see, that as God orders by his providence all Men,
and all Actions, of all sorts, their times, their dispositions, etc. so he
orders the very secrets of the heart, and the answer of the tongue; The
Wiseman tells us, The Kings heart is in the hand of God, be turns it as the
Rivers of waters whithersoever he will Pr. 21. 1.
: And the answer of the tongue is from the Lord Pr. 16. 1
, to this effect is that saying of Christ to his Disciples, take no thought
what you shall speak, for it shall be given to you what to speak at the same
hour Mat. 10. 1^.
: The man thar shall consult within himself, and debate in his own thoughts,
and come to a full resolurion what he will answer or speak to this or that
thing, so as that he thinks nothing shall alter him, yet that man when he comes
to put his resolves into action, shall speak or do as providence shall order
and direct, it may be quite contrary to what he resolved, something will come
in between the preparation and the action; Caiaphas the High Priest doubtless
spoke not those words of himself when he said, It was expedient that one man
should die for the people, but Providence ordered him to use those those words,
That as he was High Priest that year, he prophefied, that Christ should die for
the Nation Ioh. 11. 51.
: So the Wiseman tells us, Many seek the favor of the Ruler, but every man's
judgment is from the Lord; As we know men usually seek the favor of a Judge
before whom they have a matter to come, but they consider not that the verdict
shall be as providence shall order it.

Yea, Providence extends to the least and smallest of things as well as to
the greatest, for God works all things after the counsel of his own will,
even those things that men corruptly call Chance or Fortune; The very hairs of
a man's head they are numbered Mat. 10. 30.
, a Sparrow is one of the meanest of birds, yet a Sparrow falls not to the
ground but by Providence Mat. 10. 29.
; The grass, the corn, the Trees, the Plants, and the Flowers of the Field
grow and flourish by providence Mat. 6. 28, 30,
, yea, the lot that is cast or drawn as we say by chance, is ordered and
disposed by providence; Providence orders all and every thing.

And as God by Providence governs and orders all creatures and their Actions,
so all creatures readily obey his command, they are all at his call, at his
beck they come, and at his beck they go, whatsoever he commands that they do;
Every creature in their kind own him for their Creator and Preserver; The eyes
of all (says the Psalmist) wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in
due season Psalm 145. 15.
; God is the great master of the whole Universe, the great Family of the world,
he sets every one in their station, appoints every one their work, and pays
them all their wages; Thy judgments (says the Prophet) are a great deep, thou
preservest man and beast Psa. 36. 6.
; The young Lions seek their meat of God Psa. 104 21.
; and God prepares for the young Ravens their food Job 38. 41.
; The Creatures are the Hosts and Armies of God, at what time soever he is
pleased to muster them together; The contemptible grasshoppers if God please to
whistle them shall be a destroying Army Joel 2. 25
; Poor despised Flies shall come in swarms to plague a whole Nation if God
command them, yea, at Gods command, Frogs and Lice shall be irresistible
Armies; And who can stand before them? The Hail, the Ice, the Snow, the Fire,
the Water, the Winds, all and every thing are at his command; All things in
heaven, on the earth, in the Seas, and in hell, are at his beck; Angels, Men,
Beasts, Birds, Fishes, yea devils themselves are commanded by God, and are his
Instruments to punish, overturn, lay desolate, and destroy the mightiest
Monarchs, Kingdoms, or people as pleases him.

Yet further, That order that nature has set in the creatures or things, when
God pleases to command, shall be altered and changed in extraordinary manner;
The Red Sea must part in sunder and stand as a wall on this side and on that
side; The proud streams of the River Jordan shall be altered and turned back,
even in the time of her highest pride and overflowings Josh. 3. 16. Ps. 104. 3.
; The Sun which as the Bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and as a Giant
rejoices to run his race Ps. 19. 5.
must at Gods command, for execution of his Decree stand still upon Mount
Gibeon Josh. 10. 12, 13.
: Again when God pleases it shall neither stand still nor go forward, but it
must go backward ten degrees Isa. 38. 8.
; Let Jouah be cast into the Sea, if God command the waters shall not drown
Jon. 1. 15
; if Daniel must be cast into the Den of cruel, hungring, ravening Lions; they
shall not be able one of them against Gods command, to open a mouth to hurt him
Dan. 6. 22
, If the three Children must be cast into a double-heated, fiery Furnace, the
fire shall not burn, nor so much as scorch one hair of their head Dan. 3. 21,
22.
; When God will have Israel come out of Egypt in quiet, not so much as a dog in
all Egypt shall move his tongue at man or beast Ex. 11. 7.
; And when God commands the very dogs of Jezabels own house shall tear and
devour Jezabel 2 King. 9. 10, 36.
, all things act or forbear to act as God pleases to command them, they
readily execute all his pleasure.

Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world Act. 15. 17.
, that is, nothing is new unto God in all the works of providence; he knows all
and every thing from all eternity, what shall be for ever; There is no
contingency in the Decrees of God, they are certain and unchangeable, nothing
shall fail of all that he has purposed, but providence shall surely effect and
accomplish every work in its appointed time and season, and by the means
appointed, according to the pleasure of God, but unto men the works and Decrees
of God are unknown, they are contingent both in respect of Actions and Events:
And hence it comes to pass that great works and strange events that
providence brings to pass in the world are wondered at, because they are
strange to us, we never see such a thing, such a change, such an overturn, etc.
nor looked not for any such thing; As the Prophet speaks, When thou did
terrible things which we looked not for, when thou came down the mountains
flowed down me thy presence Isa. 64. 3
, that is, when God appears in the world, in acting any new and great work,
which we have not seen nor looked for, whether it be in the delivering of the
Church out of some great affliction, or bringing calamities upon his Church for
their sins; Or whether it be in visiting the Nations Inhabitants of the earth
for their long-born with iniquities, their abominable murders, cruelties, and
oppression, their contempt of God and persecution of his servants the
Ministers, etc. When God I say shall come, and unexpected by us, unlooked for,
overturn, overturn, throw down the mighty, lay waste and make desolate strong
Cities, fortified Nations, and the greatest Monarchies; Then the mountains
shall melt, or flow down as water at Gods presence, all obstructions shall be
cast out of the way, the great men and most crafty counselors, that stood like
mountains a little before, seeming impossible to be removed, these shall vanish
and come to nothing; Who art thou O great Mountain before Zerubbabel? thou
shall become a plain Zech. 4. 7.
; God will throw off Kings, and corrupt, irreligious, oppressing Parliaments,
let them make their mountains never so strong they shall be cast down: This is
the absolute Sovereignty of God, the exercise of his Kingly power, his
everlasting dominion: Who is (as the Apostle expresses) the blessed God and
only Potentate 1 Timothy 6. 15.
, He who has on his vesture and on his thigh a Name written, KING OF KINGS AND
LORD OF LORDS, Rev. 19. 16. He changes times and seasons, removes Kings and
sets up Kings, etc. He is a just and righteous God, and has no respect of
persons, keeps Covenant and promises to his people, will not fail, nor can be
hindered; He is infinite in power, and he is unchangeable in all his ways and
works; He is the King of Saints Rev. 15. 3
, He goes forth conquering and to conquer Rev. 6. 2.
all Kings and Nations that are his enemies, and shall break them with a rod of
Iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel Psa. 2. 9.
, for he is also King of Nations Ier. 10. 7
, And for the seed of Jacobs sake he will break in pieces the Shepherd and his
flock, the Captain and the Rulers Ier. 31. 23.
; Out of his mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the
Nations Rev. 19. 15.
, And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, for the Lord is high above
Nations, and his glory above the Heavens Ps. 113. 4
; To him the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the
balance, All Nations are before him as nothing, and are counted to him less
then nothing, and vanity Isa. 40. 15, 17.
; He has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and measured the
Heavens with a span, comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighed the mountains in scaics, and the hills in balances Isa. 40. 12.
: Such is the greatness of Gods power; The days of men, the years of
families, and the ages of Kingdoms are all by him numbered and determined, the
time of their beginning, the time that they shall continue, the times and means
of their increase, and of their diminution, and the instruments to accomplish
all Gods will in every particular; All is known and appointed by God, Da. 5. 26.
till which time they shall stand, and longer they cannot stand; Luke 19. 42,
43.
their period is certain, determinated by God who is unchangeable; But unto men
they are altogether unknown, therefore uncertain; Secret things belong unto
God, yet these secrets God will reveal to his Saints in the time appointed,
when the time of the accomplishment is come and not before, as we shall show
afterward in the proper place.

You know that Gideon was a good man, and God stirred him up to be a deliverer
of his people from the bondage of the Midianites, the people would have made
him their King, and his poster^ty to rule after him, which he refused; Yet
Gideon that he might leave a memorial of his acts and name, asked of the people
their earrings, and their chains of gold, which they had taken as their prey
from the conquered enemy, One thousand seven hundred shekels of gold, besides
other ornaments, etc. which they willingly gave him, of which he made an Ephod,
and put it in his City, And all Israel went a whoring after it, that is, they
superstitiously worshipped it, which thing became a snare to Gideon and to his
house Iud. 8. 27
; This was the means to bring a period to Gideons Family, for as soon as Gideon
was dead, Abimelech the Son of Gideon, which he had by his Concubine a
Shechemite, together with the men of Shechem, conspired against the Sons of
Gideon, which were threescore and ten, and slew them all save Jotham who
escaped; Thus God made Abimelech the instrument to punish the sin of Gideon,
and Abimelech was made King, and reigned 3. years; Here was ambition,
treachery, and murder in Abimelech, and in the men of Shechem, this puts a
period to the life of Abimelech, to the people of Shechem, and to Abimelechs
Kingdom, for the Text says, God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the
men of Shechem Iud. 9. 23
; So that Abimelech is the instrument to destroy the men of Schechem that
joined with him in his conspiracy and murder of his Brethren, and set him up
over them; And when he had done that, providence makes a silly woman the
Instrument to destroy Abimelech Judge. 9. 40, 53.
.

So you know Ahab sinned, he sold himself to do wickedly, and God by the
Prophet foretells the destruction of him, of his Family, and of his Kingdom 1
King. 21. 21.
; Providence brings Jehu to be the Instrument to accomplish this work, Iehu did
it to the full, and with great zeal, seeming to the Lord of Hosts, but Iehu's
heart was not upright before God 1 King. 10. 30, 31.
, Therefore the Prophet Hosea from the mouth of God denounces judgment
against the House of Iehu for the blood of Ahabs house Hos. 1. 4.
; Iehu did all that God had threatened against Ahabs house, and he did but what
was the will of God should be done, yet Iehu must be no less punished then he
had punished Ahab; Calvin gives a good reason of this, It was not (says he)
for any act done to Iezabel, or upon the children of Ahab, for in all that the
Lord himself testifies he did well 2 King. 10. 30.
, but because Iehu's hearr was not upright to God in that that he did, and
because Iehu did not depart from the sins of Ahab Verse. 31.
, Iehu sinning like Ahab must be punished like Ahab, and it was made good
accordingly at the time appointed 2 King. 15. 10. 12.
: The Apostle tells us that these things are written for our adusonition 1 Cor.
10. 11.
, etc.

This is an admonition to them of our time whom God has made Instruments to
punish the sins and oppressions of others, that they take heed that they be not
guilty of the sins and oppression that they have punished in others; It were
a happiness to this Nation if some were not as faulty as those that they have
punished; It is good that sin be punished, but it will prove very ill to the
punishers that walk in the practice of the same sins. It was well done of
Henry the eight in putting down the Popes Supremacy, and demolishing
Monasteries, Nunneries, Priories, etc. Let his end be what it will, or what it
was, or the cause of doing it; but it was very ill in Henry the 8. that he
continued in the practice of the same superstition and persecution of Gods
people: It was a good act to cut off Tyranny, but it is extreme evil that the
same hands should act high oppression; God will stir up other hands to cut off
them and their Families, he has already showed his anger, and will perfect it
to their ruin, if their repentance prevent it not, for God is unchangeable in
all his judgments and his dealings with men, wherein a man sins therein he
shall be punished, as it was with Adonibezek, if men notwithstanding all
warnings, admonitions, and examples, will go on in sin, it is a sign that their
period is nigh: Thus it was with the Sons of Ely, they were wicked, and they
were oppressive, they caused the Sacrifices of God to be abhorred 1 Samuel 2. 17.
, and they were admonished by good old Ely, but they would not hearken to his
voice, to be reformed, and why? because says the Text The Lord would slay them
1 Samuel 2. 24.
, and providence orders the Philistines to be instrumental to accomplish it;
This was also the occasion of casting off Flies Family for ever: By this we see
how providence orders things, Actions, and Instruments to overturn and cut off
Men and Families, yea, whole Kingdoms, as we see in the mighty of Chaldea, at
the period of time the handwriting upon the wall showed Belshazzar that God had
numbered his Kingdom and finished it Dan. 5. 26
, the set time was come, and the same night was Belshazzar slain, and the
Monarchy transferred to the Medes and Persians, when he little expected such a
change, as appears by his jol^ity, feasting, and drinking wine, with a
thousand of his Lords, and causing the vessels of silver and gold to be brought
to carouse in, which his Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple in
Jerusalem; God defers long, but when he smites he does it suddenly, when men
least look for it, and that irresistibly.

Now as providence orders things, Actions and Instruments, to cut off and to
destroy, as it pleases him, so providence orders things, Actions and
Instruments, secondary causes, to advance men, families, and kingdoms, when he
pleases; Of which I shall offer two or three Instances; We see when God for
the bringing his own purpose to pass in accomplishment of his Decree and
promise made to Abraham, and would to that end advance Joseph above his
brethren, that he might be the Instrument to preserve his Fathers house, which
was then the only visible Church on earth, Providence orders every thing to
concur: And herein observe these nine particular pieces of providence: 1.
Jacobs love to Joseph procures his brethrens hatred Genesis 37. 2, 3, 4. and v.
10. 11
. 2 His Brethrens hatred procure consultations and conspiracies against the
life of Joseph. 3. Providence suffers them not to agree in their counsels to
kill him, and so his life was preserved. 4. They sell him to the Midianitish
Merchants, these Merchants carry him into Egypt, and there they sell him to
Potiphar a chief Officer to King Pharaoh, where God blesses Joseph and
prospered all that he put his hand unto Genesis 39. 2, 3, 4.
. 5. Joseph is cast into prison by the false accusation of Potiphars wife: In
the prison he finds favor of the Keeper of the prison, and is trusted by him
Ver. 21.
. 6. Two of Pharaohs servants, his chief Butler and his chief Baker are by
Pharaoh cast into the same prison where Joseph was Genesis 4. 2, 3
, and are put under Joseph's charge. 6. This Butler and this Baker dream each of
them one dream in one and the same night; Joseph came to the knowledge of their
dreams, and shows them the interpretation of it. 7. This occasioneth Joseph's
skill and knowledge in the Interpretation of dreams to be known Genesis 41. 12.
8. Pharaoh also dreameth a dream which none could interpret, which occasioneth
Joseph to be sent for out of the prison, who tells unto Phara^h the
Interpretation of his dream; Upon which Joseph is made Ruler over Pharaohs
House, and over the whole Kingdom, next to Pharaoh himself Ver. 40.
9. God brings a famine on all the earth, except in Egypt, for there he had
given plenty; Therefore Jacob sends his Sons into Egypt to buy food Genesis 42. 2,
3.
there they bow to Joseph their brother and do homage to him, as was foretold
by his dream, and for which they so much the more hated him Genesis 37. 7, 9.
: Thus you see how providence ordered every thing to concur to effect Gods
purpose: And Joseph himself ^els his brethren as much, saying, It was not you
but God that sent me before to preserve you a postcrity on earth, and to save
your lives Genesis 45. 7
, etc. a means to accomplish what was promised long before Genesis 15. 13. Act. 7.
6.
.

The like instance we have in the advancement of H^ster and Mordecai: Very
observable in ten other particular pieces of providence: 1. That at so great
and public Feast as the King Ahashuerus made to his princes and people, it
should come into the Kings mind to send for his Queen Vastai, a thing unusual
at such meetings. 2. That the Queen should give so peremptory a denial: And
that the King for that one offense, should be so greatly incensed against his
Queen, whom he loved (and in whose beauty he gloried) as to call for advice to
revenge himself upon her Est. 1. 11
. 3. That the Princes, Nobles and wise men, should thereupon suddenly advise to
put away Vastai from being Queen. 4. That when the fairest of the Persian
Virgins were to be called to the King to choose him another Queen, that Ester
should be brought amongst them, who was of a strange Country and a Captive,
without any friend or means in Court to prefer her, nor was her kindred nor
family known, yet providence gives her favor in the eyes of Hegai the keeper
of the women Est. 2. 9.
, and of all that looked on her, and specially in the eyes of the King, so as
she was taken into the house Royal, and afterward became Queen in Vastai's
stead ve. 16, 17.
. 5. That Mord^cai a captive Jew should be in the hearing of the Treason
plotted by two of the Kings Servants to take away the Kings life, and that by
his discovery the Treason was prevented ver. 21.
. 6. That this discovery of Morde at should be recorded, and Mordecai named for
the discoverer. 7. That Haman the Agagite having gotten an irrevocable decree
to destroy Mordecai and all the Jews, the whole Church of God Esth. 3. 8, 13.
, yet swelling in rage against Mordecai, prepared a gallows of fifty cubits
high to hang Mordecai thereon Est. 5. 14.
. 8. That the same night before the intended execution of Mordecai, Sleep
should go from the King, which caused him to call for the Chronicles to be
brought and read before him, and that the act of Mordecais discovery and saving
the Kings life, should be then among thousand other things pitched upon, and
read to the King, which then occasioned the King to think of giving honor to
Mordecai, which he never thought of before Est. 6. 1, 2
. 9. That at that very instant Haman should come to the King with intention to
speak that Mordecai might be hanged on the Gallows prepared, of which he was
not only disappointed, but to his shame and grief was made the instrument to
honor Mord^cai, and being taken in his own snare was himself hanged on the
gallows he made to hang Mordecai Est. 7. 10
. 10. That Esther by her Intercession to the King in the behalf of her self and
her people, obtained her request, and they the people that were designed to
death became the destroyers of their enemies, so that the Church of God was not
only preserved from the cruelty of their enemies, but was greatly advanced to
their great joy, rejoicing, and thanksgiving, to the praise and glory of God;
All which is left to the memory of all ages upon sacred record; Such is the
power and wisdom of God so ordering every thing by his providence to his own
glory and his peoples good.

Take into your consideration the many providence for preservation to David*
whom God purposed to advance to the ^hrone of Israel: what straits and
difficulties he was often brought into by by designs of secret enemies,
treacheries, revolting of friends, and the malice of Saul and his flatterers,
daily pursuing his life, with a great and resolute army, all made frustrate by
providence, that the Decree of God prophesied by Jacob, might in him be
accomplished, That a Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his seet until Shiloh come Genesis 49. 10.
, which was spoken of David and in him fullfilled Isa. 11. 1.
, the particulars would be too long to instance them; it may be I shall touch
some of them in another place afterward, and leave the whole story to the
Reader to contemplate.

Something I might say of many particulars and clear providence, observable of
late days in ordering things, Actions, and Instruments, leading Oliver our
present Lord Protector to the place, office, and dignity in which he now
rules, with the Honorable High Court of Parliament, for whom I pray, and of
whom I intend to say something more in the proper place afterward, in the mean
time we have I hope said enough to prove that God and God alone pulls down
Kings and sets up Kings; That so we may acknowledge that every mercy and
every judgment is from God, ordered by him, and is not from men, whatsoever
their designs are, or whatsoever they intend or aim at as their end, for all
men good and bad are but Instruments in Gods hand, secondary causes, and can do
nothing but what God by Providence leads them to do, or permits to be done to
effect his own purpose and secret decre^, ordering all and every Action
thereunto.

It is true, that a merciful man does good, and a good man shows mercy, but a
good man's goodness is not his own, he has received it from God who is the
fountain of all good, nor can a good man distribute good to another but as he
is guided by God, he is but the Instrument in Gods hand, Every good and perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights Iam. 1. 17.
: A man may be able to do good to this or that man, yet he may sometimes want
will to do it, if he have a will it is from God, where, how, or to whom he
shall do that good; or if a good man have a will and intention to do good to
this or that man, his intentions may be crossed that he cannot do it, or if he
be not crossed in his intentions, yet the good he does may turn to the hur^ of
him that receives it, except God bless and prosper it, so that all good and
every mercy to any man, let the Instrument be what it will it is from God: God
gave Joseph favor with the Keeper of the prison Genesis 39, 21.
and God extended mercy to his people in the sight of the Kings of Persia Ezr.
9. 9.
, all is from God; Men are but Gods Instruments, therefore Jacob prays to God
that God would give his Sons favor with the men they had to do with Genesis 43. 14
.

And as it is in mercies, so it is in judgments and afflictions, all is from
God, men are his Instruments, secondary causes; It is true that wicked men
devise and imagine mischief continually, and plot against the righteous, to
afflict and to molest them, although the wickedness which they plot is their
own; And they think they have power to act accordingly, they never wanting will
to do it, yet they are crossed by providence in acting what they intend: And
often yea always (to the Elect of God) the evil they think to do turns to the
good of them against whom it is done; as the bufferings from Satan did to Paul,
it was advantage to him, for if wicked men could act answerable to their wills
and intentions, neither righteousness nor holiness should be amongst men* not
the man on earth that should practice either, but they are in Gods hand, his
Instruments, to do his pleasure, and no more, neither wicked men nor Sa^an
himself cannot do, as shall be showed afterward.

The want of due and serious consideration of this truth and submission to it,
causes much discontent and murmuring among men, for in our affl^ctions we are
ready to fly in the face of men, mere instruments, secondary causes, and as the
Prophet complains, We turn not to God that smites us, nor seek to the Lord of
hosts Isa. 9. 14.
; We are like the dog that bites the stone that is cast at him, but looks not
at the hand that cast it; We are sensible of the rod that whips us, but take no
notice of the hand that holds it; We complain of men and things, Accidents and
Causes, and it is likely not without cause, but God the cause of all causes
(except sin) we consider not, who says of himself, I the Lord do all things, I
create the light and make darkness, I make peace and create evil Isa. 45. 7.
: God mingleth a perverse spirit in the midst of counsel Isa. 19. 14
, he leads away Counselors spoiled, and makes Judges fools Job 12. 17
; God stirred up Hadad and Rezon to be adversaries to Solomon 1 King. 11. 14,
23.
, and they did much mischief in Israel all Solomon's days? Shall there be evil
in the City (says the Lord) and I the Lord have not done it Am. 3. 6.
? that is, evil of affliction, punishment, not the evil of sin, for that is the
procuring cause of all punishment, as we shall show in the proper place; All
that I now drive at, is but to prove, that all secondary causes, men or things,
can do nothing of themselves either to misery or to happiness; But that all
mercies and all judgments, are of God, from him, and by him, he disappointeth
the devises of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.

This I say is the Sovereignty of God the Creator over all things, governing
the world by his wise and secret providence; And it does above all things
declare the glory, omnipotency, and incomprehensible wisdom of God, working in
and by all things, after the counsel of his own will; That all things though
in motion and use, never so contrary one to another, and in their nature and
ends destructive one to another, yet all and every thing in most harmonious
union, work together in one consent to effect and accomplish whatever God has
in his secret counsel determined, yea, by the worst of Instruments, to do
glorious things, bringing good out of their evil, and work deliverance to his
Church by the, Enemies Actions, and destroy his Enemies by their own counsels,
causing the wisdom of the wise to perish, and to hide uuderstanding from the
prudent Isa. 29. 14.
, When he gives quietness who can make trouble? and when he hides his face
who can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation or against a man only
Job 34. 29.
.

Thus much shall serve for foundation or groundwork of our intended discourse,
from whence we may gather some inferences, and therein take a view of some late
and remarkable Providence in these our days, ordering Counsels Actions and
Things contrary to men's designs and endeavors, and working all things after
the counsel of his own will, pulling down and setting up whom he pleases for
the accomplishment of his own secret purpose, first one, and then others,
changing times and seasons, men and counsels, governments and things: From
whence I infer,

First, That all mercies are from God, and are given in to a Nation or people
of Gods free love, not of any desert, merit, or by any procurement of men.

Secondly, That all judgments and afflictions are from God only, and are the
just recompense for sin, procured by our selves, men or things afflicting,
being but secondary causes, instruments in Gods hand.

That the evil designs of men, their wicked counsels, aims and ends, are all
ordered by providence, and turned to their own ruin.

Fourthly, That God in his secret counsel has set a time when he will give in
mercies to a Nation, and when he will inflict judgments, and has also
appointed the means, and upon whom it shall be, what it shall be, and how much
it shall be, and that those times altogether unknown to men

Fifthly, Although God have set the time for the one and for the other, which
shall certainly be accomplished in its time, according to Gods good pleasure,
yet men are to be diligent in the use of all lawful means for the obtaining of
the one, and for the avoiding of the other.

Sixthly, That when God has effected and done his will in any thing visibly
made known to us by the work of his providence; We are not to murmr nor
repine though it be in any thing contrary to our expectation or desire, or
though it be to our great affliction, but to submit to it willingly, only by
prayer to seek unto God, and patiently wait his time and means for deliverance.

For the first, That all mercies are from God, and are given in to a people or
nation, of Gods free love, not of any desert, merit, or by any procurement of
men; This inference is very clear, and warranted by sacred Scriptures, whether
spiritual mercies or temporal mercies.

First, All spiritual mercies are of Gods free love, we neither deserve, nor
can by any means of our own procure the least spiritual mercy; We are all by
Adams fall alienated from God, and are become his enemies Col. 1. 21. Romans 5.
(...)
, We are born heirs of wrath Ephesians. 2. 3
, and there is nothing in us that can reconcile us to God, nor any way appease
his wrath against us, therefore whatever the mercy be that we enjoy it is of
Gods free-love; Any punishment less then hell fire is a mercy from God which
we cannot deserve: God indeed made man righteous and upright, but men have
sought out many inventions Ecc. 7. 29.
; Men can pervert their own ways, and make themselves miserable, but no way
help themselves out of misery; But God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. Joh. 3. 19. So loved, that is, he loved beyond what can be
expressed, He gave his only begotten Son, it was a free gift, free love, in the
full dimensions, unconceivable and incomprehensible, He sent his Son made of a
woman and made under the Law to redeem us, that we might receive the Adoption
of Sons Gal. 4. 4, 5.
, yea, Christ gave himself to redeem us from our iniquity Tit. 2. 14. Gal. 3.
13.
; We are not redeemed by corruptible things, but with the precious blood of
Christ 1 Pet. 1. (...)
, if all the Angels in heaven should give themselves to die for the sin of one
man, it could not redeem him; All Angels and Men joined together cannot procure
the expiation of one sin, therefore all is of Gods free love; but that God
should give his Son Jesus Christ into the world to take our nature, our flesh,
and for us to undergo reproach and shame, and sorrow of soul, and at the last
lay down his life for us, that we by his death might have life; This is a love
not to be expressed.

Secondly, All temporal mercies are of Gods free-love, No man has by right nor
desert the least claim to any good thing, but as it is the free-gift of God,
every mercy to a Nation, to a Family, or to a particular man is the free-gift
of God: It is Gods free love and mercy that the heavens are not made Iron and
the Earth brass, and that our fruitful Land is not turned into a barren
wilderness, that the fruits of the earth are not parched away by droughts, nor
destroyed by Inundations, nor an Enemy let in upon us to devour and consume all
our labors; It is Gods free mercy to man to give wine to cheer the heart, and
bread to strengthen him: And that he gives us rain from heaven and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, a mercy that we of Gods
free mercy enjoy at this day beyond imagination; And it is free mercy that God
does not suddenly smite us for our unthankfulness under such enjoyments, and
for the murmurings of men for such a blessing; It was Gods free-love to his
Church to put into the heart of Henry the 8. to cast off the Popes Supremacy,
let the cause or end be what it will; It was from God the earnest of future
deliverance from the bondage of spiritual Babylon: It was Gods free-love to
preserve Q. Elizabeth from the rage and bloody plots of an Antichristian brood,
that she might be instrumental to a Gospel-Reformation, carried on by her with
much piety, although not perfected: It was Gods free-love to this Nation to
scatter the Spanish Armado in 88. And to defeat the Papists bloody design in
their hellish plot of the Powder Treason in 1604. And it was free mercy from
God to withhold the destroying plague of pestilence from this City of London,
amidst the many great distractions wherewith he had afflicted us; this sinful
City which deserves nothing from God but wrath and judgments, yet God has
long spared it, when the plague has been sore in other countries, and in
diverse places of this Nation; It was doubtless free-mercy from God that God
gave us a Parliament in 1640. and the fault was in men that it was not for
happiness to posterity: It was free mercy from God that we were victorious
over the power of a late Royal Army, and that we were not given as a prey into
their hands, and it was no less free mercy to England, that we had victory
over he insulting people of the Netherlands; as also to order things by his
wise providence, to compose things so as new to settle a peace between the two
Commonwealths, which I pray may be lasting to Gods glory: It was the Lord that
was on our side when men rose up against us, else they would have swallowed us
up quick: The snare is broken and we are escaped.

And truly (whatsoever some men think) it was a great and free mercy from God
that our everlasting Parliament was dissolved, who had a price put in their
hand, but they neglected it though they sat full twelve years: Self-seeking,
covetousness, and private interest blasted the good fruit we expected; at the
first we made them demy-gods, but God has showed us they were but men: They
indeed took off an oppressor, but they gave life to oppression, and brought a
free people into hard bondage: The house of Israel was Gods Vineyard, and the
men of Judah his pleasant plants, Whence God looked for judgment but behold
oppression, for righteousness but behold a cry Isa. 5. 7.
; Religion and policy were with many but one and the same thing, We fasted for
strife and debate, and smote with the hand of wickedness, but did not loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens and let the oppressed go
free Isa. 58. 4, 6
: Providence dissolved that Parliament not yet that I know lamented by any: And
truly I conceive it was no less mercy from God that the succeeding Parliament
was dissolved too, Many members therein having a design to destroy our Laws and
Religion, to cut off the head of the two great Ordinances of God, Magistracy
and Ministry, at one blow, and so set open a floud-gate for loose licentious
liberty to break in upon us to our confusion, where then should we have found
the true liberty and privilege of the people so much talked of, while we were
under the oppression of an arbitrary power? blessed be that providence that
has prevented those designs, and freed us from that yoke, giving us comfort in
hopes of a settled peace and holy Reformation, with the restoring us again to
our Laws and true privileges, By that Illustrions and Noble Champion OLIVER
Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, ande. whom Providence has
made instrumental to hinder destruction to the Nation, and provide that our
Teachers are not driven into corners, as the Lord has promised they shall not
be Isa. 30. 20.
.

Let no man mistake me to think that I am an enemy to Parliaments, I am not God
knows it, but I am a lover and honourer of Parliaments, and shall ever, as my
own life, and the public safety, But I hate the sins of Parliaments,
covetousness, self-seeking, oppression, schisms, divisions, factions and
private interest, these God hates, and I cannot nor will love what God abhors
though I be hated for it: I do with much thankfulness acknowledge it as a free
mercy from God that we have this present Parliament, My Prayer is, that God
will make them blessings to lasting posterities; And surely it is free-love and
mercy from God in setting up that authority and single person which has called
this Parliament; And as great a mercy that Providence discovered that Plot and
murtherous design hatched in France and to be executed upon his Person in
England: The same mercy and free-love was extended to this Nation for his
Highness late escape from the danger of his presumptuous attempt in a
recreation not becoming his dignity, I pray it may be a monition to him not
again to go out of his place and rank: Providence having called him to the care
of the greatest affairs con^erning the Church of God in general, and the
welfare of the people of these three Nations, A heavy burden! and requires the
whole strength of body and mind; And above all these mercies we must not
forget to acknowledge it a mercy from God that we at this day do enjoy the
Ordinances of God, notwithstanding the mighty oppositions both on the left hand
and on the right hand, Superstition on one side and imprudent zeal on the
other, we have the word of Truth held out to us, and may enjoy every Ordinance
in its purity if we will, or if we were not wanton; for men may be as holy as
they will or can be, there is no restraint in that, nor persecution for it: I
wish we did not too much counive at gross apparent heresy and blasphemy, For
though the truth should be free heresy should have a bar, God blames the
Church of Pergamus and the Church of Thyatira, for suffering them them that
held the doctrine of Balaam: and for suffering her that called her self a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce Rev. 2. 14. 20
, etc. Dead flies (says Solomon) cause the Ointment of the Apothecary, to send
forth a stinking savor Ecc. 10. 1
, and corrupt doctrines suffered are dishonor to the Truth.

We come to the second Inference, and that is, That all Judgments and
Afflictions are from God only, and are the just recompense for sin, procured
by our selves, men or things afflicting, being but secondary causes,
instruments in Gods hand: This is very fully proved in the whole Book of God,
That all Judgments and Afflictions are from God; is sufficiently proved in our
foregoing discourse; And that they are the just recompense of sin is as
clear, for God never punished but for sin, and if there had been no sin there
should never have been any punishments, The Soul that sins shall die Ezekiel.
18. 12.
: The old world was destroyed by a deluge, and why? for Sin, God saw that the
wickedness of man was great upon the earth Genesis 6. 5.
etc. And for sin Sodom and Gomorrha was destroyed by fire from heaven: Nadah
and Abihu for their sin were devoured by fire, and that (for ought we know)
for a sin of Ignorance Lev. 10. 1, 2
: The wages of sin is death To. 6. 23.
; What else is war, pestilence and famine but the recompense of sin? and so
procured by by our selves: All afflictions on the body, in the mind, on the
estate, or in our respective relations are just recompense for our sins from
the hand of God Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
; There has been no alteration, no overturnings, judgments and misery but for
sin, and is all procured by our selves: We may say of England as Daniel said of
Israel when they were under the captivity of Chaldea, To us belongs confusion
of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the people
because of our transgressions Dan. 9. 8
: And as Ezra, That God has punished us less then our deservings Ezr. 9. 13
: And as Jeremy, It is of the Lords mercy we are not consumed Lam. 3. 22
: Our elder Sister is Samaria, and our younger Sister is Sodom, we have
justifiedour Sisters in all the abominations which we have done Eze. 16. 46, 51,
: What shall we say to the pride of England even in the day of her calamity? Oh
the pride of apparel, the pride of place, of gifts, of blessings received, yea
of graces and of our supposed or flattered humility! What shall we say to the
idleness and fullness of bread? the drunkenness, swearing, forswearing, and
the abominable blasphemies, that England is guilty of? And what shall we say of
the murders, adulteries, mighty oppressions, self-love, and wicked Sorcery that
is in England? the dishonouring of the Lords day, contempt of Gods worship and
general neglect of all duties of the first and second Table? what
lukewarmnesse is there in Religion? more then ever was in Laodicea, What hot
contentions about fancies and ceremonies, and coldness to the power of
holiness? What unthankfulness under the enjoyment of multitude of mercies?
What security and self-promising of happy condition? as if no evil could befall
them, like the men of Laish that dwelt carelessly, and there was no Magistrate
in the Land that might put them shame in any thing Jud. 18. 7
: Although our professed and common Enemy is vigilant, watching and seeking all
advantages against us, if God should (as they hope) give us into their hand,
were it not just with God? And were it not by our own procurements, may not God
say to us as to Israel, Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help
Hos. 13. 9
.

Give me leave ye people of England, my Brethren, to put you in remembrance of
one sin more; And it is not a little one of which I fear many thousands are
guilty more or less; You made a Solemn Covenant, with your hands lift up to
the most High God, in the time of your distress, for Reformation and defense
of Religion, as should be agreeable to the Word of God (not the established
Discipline in Scotland nor England, but) for the settling one Discipline in the
three Nations, and that is no less then the command of God, Ye shall have one
Ordinance both for the stranger and for him that is born in the Land Lev. 9. 14
; I fear we are so far short of performing what we covenanted in this
particular, that we (or very many) have purposely acted the quite contrary: We
covenanted against Popery and Prelacy, which is (God be blessed) in a great
measure cast off; But heresy, schism, blasphemy and profaneness are increased,
which we also covenanted to extirpate; We covenanted to preserve Privileges of
Parliament and liberty of the people, but where are they? if lost, who lost
them? the power of the Enemy could not take them from us; but lost they are, or
in great measure lost: I will not dispute whether a Parliament or an Army lost
them, or took them from us, for it was neither; It was self-seeking that lost
all, Now hopeful by providence to be again restored by his Highness, stirred
up by Providence (I hope with confidence) to be Englands deliverer: As to that
part of the Covenant that concerned the late King, And that which concerned the
Union of the three Nations, I conceive them to be less substantial and more
conditional; conditions and circumstances not well observed, makes the
forfeiture on that side; Providence I trust will put us into a better Union
then we intended or could then think of, God works all things after the
counsel of his own will; I charge no particular person, nor blame any more
then my self, I know my own heart is deceitful to my self, I cannot say so much
of any other man's.

All my aim and desire is, as to my self so to all others, to stir them up to
considerate remembrance, that we are yet under such a Covenant, and that I and
every one may examine whether we have done our duty or not, and what we find
to be wanting in us let us in the strength of the Almighty endeavor to make up
by humbling our souls before God whom we have offended; For the Covenant was
lawful or it was unlawful; if lawful, we have provoked the high God by our
sleighting of it; if unlawful, we have dishonored God in swearing before him
to that which he would not own; so there is great cause and good ground why we
should be deeply humbled in the presence of God: Every particular person
covenanted to reform himself, and to endeavor Reformation in others, and each
one to endeavor to go before another in example of real Reformation: if we
have done what we were able in this particular, we have done well: if not,
sin lies at our door, and judgment will surely enter into our houses; for
as God is true and just, he will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant Lev. 26.
25.
; Let no man great or small promise to himself safety, nor think it is fogotten
by God, though it be cast off by men; Joshua and the Princes of Israel made a
Covenant with the Gibeonites, with whom they might not make Covenants, but had
commission to slay them, yet Saul four hundred years after brake that Covenant,
And for the breach of that Covenant God brought a famine three years year after
year in the time of David, until execution was done upon Saul's house 2 Samuel 21.
1.
; God takes notice of all our doings, but especially of our keeping or breaking
of Covenants; Because God is as it were called from his place to come to
witness our sincerity and uprightness, the breach whereof God calls the
pollution of his Name Ier. 34. 16.
, and for it threatens Israel to destroy them by the sword of an enemy, See
verse. 17. 20.
and by the pestilence, And to remove them into all Kingdoms captives, which in
the time appointed was made good; Gods forbearance is no acquittance, though
men foolishly imagine it so. Because sentence is not speedily executed against
an evil work, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men is set in them to do evil
Ecc. 8. 11
: Though God suffers for a time, yet all that time Providence orders Actions
and Things, for safety to some, and for destruction to others, And this brings
us to the third Inference.

The third Inference is, That the evil designs of men, their wicked counsels,
their aims and ends are all ordered by providence, and turned contrary to their
designs to be their own ruin; This truth is obvious, it is proved by Scripture
and by common and daily experience. The Lord (says the Psalmist) is known by
his judgments which he executes, the wicked is snared by the work of his own
hand Ps. 6. 16.
: This is one of Gods Judgments upon wicked men and wicked counsels, they
shall be snared by their own works: He takes the wicked in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried ^eadlong Io^ 5. 13
, yea, his own counsel shall cast him down Io^ 18. 7.
: Thus Haman the Agagite was snared in his own wicked devises, and Ahitophels
own counsel became his ruin: You know how it fared with Rehoboam the Son of
Solomon, and with Jeroboam the Son of Nebat: Rehoboam forsook the counsel of
the old men that were counselors to his Father, and followed the counsel of
young men like himself; The people come unto him for ease of their heavy
burdens which Solomon his Father had laid upon them; He by his counsel gives
them a very rough Answer, and tells them his father chastised them with whips,
but he would chastise them with scorpions, He would add more to their
burdens, heavy oppression, and his finger should be thicker then his Fathers
loins 1 Kin. 12 10, 11.
, but God turned his own aim and all his counsel to his loss; Ten Tribes
revolted from him, and from his Family for ever, and made Jeroboam their King.

Jeroboam he fearing lest the people of Israel should return again to Rehoboam,
if they should go up to Jerusalem to offer Sacrifice, therefore to establish
himself in the Kingdom he took counsel, and made two Altars and two Calves of
gold, pretending it was too far a journey for the people to go up to Jerusalem,
1 King. 12. 28, 29.
and he set one in Bethel and the other in Dan, and he made of the lowest and
basest of the people, to be Priests in the high places: Now this wicked design
by which he thought to establish himself, became his ruin 1 Kin. 13 34. and 1
King. 14 10, 11.
: See the like by the experiences of our time; King James Father to our late
King, not thankful for Gods mercies to him, bringing him from a mean Kingdom to
a rich and plentiful Nation flowing with milk and honey, grew wanton, and like
Jeshurn^ kicked, he came to strong Cities, a fat Land, houses filled with
goods, Wells dug, Vineyards, Olive-yards, Fruits, etc as is expressed by
Nehemiah, Chapter 9. 25. but he like Israel rebelled against his God, and cast his
Law behind his back, and persecuted the Prophets and Ministers that testified
against him, exalting himself and prerogative to make his Son and Family like
Nimrod; What strange wickedness did he act in his private chamber? and openly
gave away the lawful wives of men to others, viz. the Lady Rich to the Lord
Mount-joy, the Countess of Essex to Carre, etc. Did he not design to bring the
people of this Nation under, by laying heavy burdens upon their shoulders? What
else was Loan-money, illegal Fines for Buildings, and his fooling of
Parliaments? endeavoring to make them useless and himself a great Monarch,
preparing for a greater work which his Son was to act; which design our late
King endeavored to exalt, and in pursuance thereof followed the footsteps of
his Father (not in personal sins, but) in public grievances: Like Rehoboam to
make one of his fingers heavier then his Fathers loins; And like Jeroboam to
set up Calves in Bethel, and in Dan, to ensnare the people, to advance
prerogative: Did not he endeavor by his Prelates, or his Prelates by him, to
bring in a compliance or near Union between England and Rome? and to effect
their design they endeavored to weaken the Nations of able religious men, and
of Arms, why else was Rochel betrayed under pretense of releeving it, and many
able and godly men slaughtered? Why else was that mock-voyage to Cadis? why
else were our honorable Parliaments disgraced? called only of necessity for
money sake, but not suffered to reform any evil, nor to put them to any shame
which were the Actors of abominable wickedness, but honorable members of
Parliamennt for such things were imprisoned, where many died, others were
banished their houses into remote Countries Prisoners and Exiles* etc.

And for the advance of prerogative, new ways were invented to get money
without Parliaments or Law; Loan-money, Knighthood-money, Ship Money,
Compositions for Cottages, Compositions for New Buildings, Moneys for Forest
Lands, Woods, Timber, etc. Monopolies upon all our necessary commodities, Taxes
upon Customs, and gunpowder engrossed and kept from the Subject, their Arms
seized, Companies of Soldiers were billeted in most Market Towns of the
Nation, and lest that should be too little to effect the Tyrannical design, the
Duke and his plotrers had provided to have 600 Flanders Horse brought into
England, with Swisser Riders; No man is so silly I think as to ask why all this
was done, for the reason is plain to every reasonable man.

Nor was this all, for all zealous and godly Ministers were weeded out of every
Town and Country; Bishop Wren can easily name you some scores if not hundreds
that he drove from their Livings and Habitations; besides them he procured to
be imprisoned and banished. Arminianism was advanced and they were made Bishops
that defended it; Lectures were put down, Afternoon Sermons on the Lords Day
were forbidden, Books were published to give way to profane the Lords Day by
sports and pastimes; these Books were commanded to be read in all Churches to
ingratiate the multitude, and such Ministers as refused to read these Books
were suspended, the morality of the Sabbath was denied, preached against,
Sunday called no Sabbath, the name Minister was changed to Priest, the Table to
an Altar, on which Basins and Tapers were set, there was very little wanting to
plain Popery but the name; Thus far the design was carried on smoothly.

Scotland only stood in the way as some rub that must be removed, and to that
end a Liturgy was sent down to them which they would not swallow; Therefore
they must be forced, an Army to that purpose was prepared; The Scots make
opposition, money grew wanting to manage that design to leavy more forces; A
Parliament was called to raise money, which refusing to give were quickly
dissolved: The Scots grew enraged, had encouragements, make invasion, which
caused another Parliament to be called, That Parliament would give no money
except they might be established to sit till they had reformed abuses and
things; They were established by an Act to sit until both Houses consented to
dissolve, and also two Acts of grace was passed, viz. to take away the
High Commission and Star Chamber; All this to please the people that they might
assist in their further design of war, as shortly after appeared, wherein
providence ordered their designs, counsels, aims, and ends to Gods glory and to
their own ruin.

Here take special notice of six several pieces of providence; 1. That the
great pressures, innovations, and the designs apparent of bringing on greater
oppression even to a perpetual slavery, caused great fears in the people, which
could not be secured but by an established Parliament. 2. That providence
infatuated the late King and his counsel in passing an Act of unlimited time
for establishment of that Parliament, which was the giving away of one chief
part of prerogative, by which he might else have dissolved that Parliament
after some years, and saved his head; Esau sold his birthright but he designed
to have the blessing, Providence had infatuated him that he considered not that
the blessing was annexed to the birthright: Our late King sold that part of his
exercised prerogative, with design to get it double, not only to be King still
but Tyrant too, How Providence has ordered those designs we know. Thirdly,
That after the signing of the Act aforesaid the Sovereign Authority was in the
Parliament, which the late King by a wicked Council and lying Clergy was
seduced to take Arms against, as Ahab was by his Council and 400. lying
Prophets, to go up to Ramoth-Gilead to his own ruin, and the ruin of his
Family. Fourthly, That his heart was hardened and the hearts of his Council,
and would not hearken to any offer of peace or reconciliation, though many
addresses were made to him from time to time by the whole house unanimously,
but his heart like Pharaohs was hard, and the time of his peace was hid from
him, until it was too late, when he desired it and might not have it. Fifthly,
That Providence should make use of the Earl of Essex to be the Instrument to
drive the late Kings wife from him, whose Wife the late Kings Father gave to
another man. Sixthly, That the late King by his refusal of all offers of
reconciliation, and his delays, entreaties, providence over-ordering all
things against his designs, became his irrecoverable ruin; of whom we may say
as Sir Walter Rawleigh says of Darius, He was infatuated in all his Counsels
and undertakings against Alexander, ever following the worst counsel, and
using the unsafest means to preserve himself, which shows plainly that God
had purposed his destruction and the loss of his Kingdoms; And that the
disappointing him and his Counsel in all their Designs, and overthrowing their
bloody and cruel Armies was the immediate work of providence for the
accomplishing of the secret purpose of God; If we continue not to imitate and
act the same sins of oppression and innovation, or the like, as Jehu did: If so
we do, Iehu's reward will be given, for our God is an unchangeable God; What he
has done to others before us, he will as surely do still, and for ever where
the like sins are acted; God sometimes gives a King in ^is anger, and takes him
away in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. They, whether King, Parliament, or people, that
reject the Word of the Lord, the Lord will reject them, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Thus God
did by Saul, and thus he did by Rehoboam; for in that the ten Tribes revolted,
God himself testifies and says, This thing is done by me, 1 Kin. 12. 24. Who
is he (says the Prephet in the name of the Church) that says it comes to
pass when God commands it not, Lam. 3. 37.

Many other observable providence have offered the due consideration of them
to us; which I may not pass by with silence among many that have attended our
late Parliaments both in their sitting and in their dissolution; I shall mind
you of these few, the first shall be this, That when things were not likely to
succeed according to the Parliaments design, or a great part in Parliament,
They devised to publish an Ordinance called the Self-denying Ordinance, thereby
calling all the members of both Houses from all offices and military affairs,
here was a specious pretense, but by them that made it it was not intended to
be observed; for who left any place of profit to serve the public? It is true,
so far as the present design reached it took and made a great and a good change
in the Army, but providence ordered that Ordinance and that change, pulling
down and setting up, to frustrate the future design of them that made it:
Providence by that Ordinance took off the Right Honorable his Excellency the
Earl of Essex from being General, when he had gone with courage and fidelity as
far in that work as his principles could carry him, providence made him
instrumental to lay the foundation of that work, Providence also by that
Ordinance and that change Ordered, That the Right Honorable and Noble Sir
Thomas Fairfax should be set up in his room, to raise the structure of that
work and building upon the fonndation Essex had laid, as fitter to effect Gods
further purpose, who built as far as his principle could carry him, when
providence had used Essex as far as God had purpose to use him in that work:
Providence also in Sir Thomas Fairfax his time put a perverse spirit amidst the
Members of Parliament, so as the contest was very great, grew into factions and
interests, some designing the life of him whom others designed to die, so as
the power of the Sword was called to end the controversy, and all to the
accomplishment of Gods will, his Excellency the Lord Fairfax having a far
larger Commission then ever the Parliament gave before, having in his hand
power, the use of the whole Militia, Castles, Forts, Towns, etc, Providence
ordered upon some scruple in his Excellency that he voluntarily and resolvedly
laid down his Commission, when earnestly solicited both by Parliament and by
the then L^eutenant General Cromwell to hold it up; And providence still
ordering things to effect the purpose of God, Ordered that the then Lieutenant
General should have the same Commission, or larger, without limit, to be
Captain General of all Forces by Sea and Land, Castles, Forts, etc.
consequently of all the whole Militia; This was providence, That he might lay
on the topstone of the structure and finish the work so far: And as
Providence had stirred him up as a valiant Champion, so next as a faithful
Patriot to his Country to dissolve a sit still Parliament, to whom God had
given all opportunities to do their Nation good, but they would not, nor could
give themselves to consider what was their duty to act for their private
Interests, some levelling the Earth for their own design, others building of
Castles in the Air for a Fifth Monarchy, an unsafe practice and very unsound
doctrine, unwarrantable to be maintained in blood, If these be not clear
providence what shall we call Providence? These things we have seen gradually
acted and ordered by a secret and wise providence, turning the design of the
Parliament in their Self-denying Ordinance, and the Powers and Commissi^ns
thereupon granted, to their dissolution, which they aimed should have been the
means to have perpetuated their sitting.

These things premised, I shall modesty offer six Queries to any impartial man
upright and unbyast in this case. First, Whether it was not of providence that
the Parliament gave to his Excellency the Lord Cromwell that unlimited power
for the safety of the Nation, as it was of providence that the Late King and
his Council past an Act of unlimited time for the Parliament to sit, to his own
ruin and casting off his posterity? 1. Whether his Excellency were not bound
in conscience for public safety, being a public person in trust, to make use
of the one, as well as the Parliament made use of the other; and by that
authority to dissolve an undoing Parliament, as well as to suppress a
destroying Enemy, both conducing to public safety? Thirdly, whether the
dissolving of that Parliament were any greater breach of privilege then the
taking out of one half of the members by force, of which he had before of late
a President in the time of the Lord Fairfax, and well approved of by the
dissolved Parliament. Fourthly, whether as Providence served our necessity by
the late Kings Act for the Parliaments sitting for a long time, It did not
(after several admonitions) as much serve our necessity, after their too long
fitting, to dissolve that Parliament by the power of their own Commission?
Fifthly, whether it were not evidently a providence, That the succeeding
Parliament (not appointed by his Excellency, but) chosen by the Soldiery, Many
of them promoting (except in giving away the public treasure) the like
destructive ways, to the taking away our Fundamental Laws, and bringing in (as
it were) another Gospel, pulling down and overthrowing all, but set up nothing
except a floudgate to confusion, should of themselves, that is, the major part,
to prevent those (almost executed) designs, dissolve that Parliament, and
resign their authority into his Excellencies hand? Sixthly, whether providence
did not wonderfully order things in that time of distraction, discontent, and
division among the people at home, and a bloody war abroad: That his
Excellency calling of a Council, seeking God by prayer and fasting, All his
Council and all other persons of quality whom it concerned to be acquainted
with the thing, should most harmoniously agree, and resolve to meet one way as
to the government of the three Nations; And with one consent publicly to
entitle him (then his Excellency) to be Lord Protector of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and of all the dominions and territories thereunto belonging? Let
me say again with the Prophet, Who is he that says it comes to pass when the
Lord commands it not? Lam. 3. 37. These things sufficiently prove the
Inference, That the evil designs of men are ordered by Providence to their own
prejudice.

The next and fourth Inference is, That God in his secret counsel has set a
time when he will give in mercies to a Nation, and when he will inflict
judgments, and has also appointed the means; And upon whom it shall be, what
it shall be, and how much it shall be; And these times are altogether unknown
unto men.

That this is a truth, that God has appointed a set time for mercies and for
judgments, the holy Ghost witnesses, Eccl. 3. 1. To every thing there is a
season, and a time to every purpose under heaven: If there be a time to every
purpose then nothing is contingent, if to every purpose then it must needs be
appointed by God, none but God knows all times and purposes, therefore none but
God can appoint times and seasons; This is one part of Gods Sovereignty, as he
is Governor of the world; Men sometimes may appoint times and never intend to
keep them, and they may sometimes appoint times to some purpose which they are
not able to perform, or sometimes they may appoint times, and their mind
changes, they are altered from what they intended; But God is just and
intends to do all that he says and appoints; And he is infinite, can do
whatsoever he will, nothing can disable him; And he is unchangeable, In him is
no shadow of change, whatever he has appointed shall surely be done in its
time: Is there not (says Job) au appointed time to man on the Earth? Job 7. 1.
as much as to say, there is an appointed time.

You know God promised to give Abraham a Son, of whose seed the Savior of the
world should come Genesis 17. 19.
: And God set a time when that mercy should be given, And at the set time Sarah
conceived and bare Isaac Genesis 21. 2
: so God promised to give unto Abraham's seed the whole Land of Canaan; and he
set the time when it should be made good, and that was from the time of the
promise four hundred and thirty years, which was made good to a day, for says
the Prophet Moses, at the cud of 430 years, Act. 7. 17
even the self same day all the hosts of the Lord went out of Egypt Exodus 12,
42.
; The Prophet Isaiah prophesying of the increase and glory of the Church,
says, The Lord shall hasten it in his time Is 60. 22
God had set the time when it should be, the Psalmist speaking of the time of
Gods showing mercy to Zion says, The set time to favor her is come Psa. 102.
13.
: Daniel spoke of the appointed time when the Saints should possess the
Kingdom Dan. 7. 22
: The very time was set for the coming of Christ in the flesh, When the
fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4.
etc. And there is a time set and certain when he shall come the second time in
glory Luke 13. 33.
, but these times are altogether unknown to men.

So for Judgments, God has appointed and set the time when he will inflict
them, whether on Nations, Families or persons: God himself witnesses this
Truth when he tells Abraham, The sins of the Amorites were not yet full Genesis 15.
16.
: the time and measure of their iniquities was set, Israel had sinned against
God a long season, in oppression, and in Sabbath-breaking, etc. but when the
time was come and the measure of their iniquity made up, that they came to
despise his word, and to misuse his Prophets; there was no remedy, then God
gives them into captivity 2 Chr. 36. 16, 21.
: Destruction was threatened to Palestine, and the time set Is. 14 31.
; So for Babylons Judgments, the time was set Ier. 51. 33
; The devils have a time set, and they know it is set, but know not when it
shall be Mat. 8. 29.
; Jehu had a set time for his Family to last, four generations, and it was
fulfilled 2 King. 10. 30. Hos. 1. 4.
at that time.

As there is a set time for mercies and for judgments known and appointed by
God, so he has appointed upon whom it shall be; He in his secret counsel
spares one and punishes another, as pleases him; He has set his mark upon
his as he did upon the house of the Israelites, that the destroying Angel might
pass over Ex. 12. 23
, the destroier shall not touch one that has the mark, Old, Young, Maids,
Children and Women, that are marked Eze. 9. 6.
; but those that have not Gods mark of protection, them he separates every one
to evil Deuteronomy. 29. 21.
; So he has appointed what it shall be, whether sword, famine, or pestilence,
or any other affliction, according to their sins; Thy men shall fall by the
sword, and thy mighty men in the war ^sa 3. 25
, this was a particular judgment threatened for the pride of the women; Again,
I will number to the sword, and ye shall bow down to the slaughter Is. 65. 12
, this was threatened for the hypocrisy of the people, and in more particular
it was against Assyria, They shall waste Assyria by the sword Mic. 7. 6.
; So in particular the Lord called for a famine 2 Kin. 8. 2.
, so the Lord by the Prophet says, I have sent among you the pestilence after
the manner of Egypt Amos 4. 10.
: this was a judgment among others for oppression and irreligious worship,
also the grasshopper and the palmerworm, to devour the fruit of the Land, He
will likewise send harmfull beasts to destroy, as is threatened to the people,
walking stubbornly against God Lev. 20. 22.
, he also threatens to smite them with Consump^ions, with burning Agues and
Fevers, with blindness and with astonishment and other particular plagues
Deuteronomy. 28. 25, etc.
, and all these are appointed by God, this for one and that for another, as
pleases him; This the Prophet Jeremy makes clear and says, Thus says the
Lord, Such as are for death to death, Such as are for the sword to the sword,
Suchas are for famine to the famine, and such as are for the captivity to the
captivity Ier. 15. 2. and Ier. 44. 11.
, as God has appointed to every one, so he commands to be done, and
providence effects all.

God has also appointed how much it shall be, how long every judgment and
affliction shall last, not oppressing men, Nimrods of the earth, nor Satan
himself can punish or afflict, till God will have them afflict, nor can
continue the affliction either to a Nation or to a man, a day longer then the
time God has set; You know David complained that the Plowers ploughed on his
back, they made long furrows, but how long? till the time appointed by God,
then the rigbteous Lord cuts the cords asunder Psa. 129. 3. 4
; It is a metaphor taken from the Plowman, he holds the Plow, the Horses draw
by cords or traces, and the Plow breaks and teareth the ground, but when the
cords are cut the horses may go, but the Plow stands still, it makes no more
surrows; there would be no end of afflicting if the devils and wicked men were
not limited; God says to them as to the proud waves, Thus far you shall go and
not a foot further; God tells Abraham that his seed must be afflicted, and be
strangers in a Land (or lands) that was not theirs; and God sets the time how
long it should be; four hundred years is the set time Genesis 15. 13.
, this time of affliction began presently after the birth of Isaac, and was
thirty years after the Promise made to Abraham beforementioned, which Moses
counting from the time of the first Promise, makes four hundred and thirty
years, Exodus 12. 41. The Captivity in Babylon was appointed, and the time set
how long it should be threescore and ten years Ie. 25. 12 2 Chro. 26. 21.
; Satan was limited in all his temptations and afflictions upon Job, he could
not go one jot further then Gods appointments Job 1. 12.
; The holy Ghost foretells the afflictions of the Church, but withal tells
them, the time is set how long and what it shall be; Satan shall cast some of
you into prison, how long? You shall have tribulation ten days Rev. 2. 10
, God had set the time, and when that time is out, neither devils nor men can
afflict any longer, Pharaoh may pursue Israel with a mighty Army to his own
destruction, but cannot hurt one of the people of Israel, when his Commission
is out Exo. 14. 8
; So long as God would have Israel to be afflicted, every taskmaster in Egypt
could make their lives miserable, but when the time appointed was expired,
Pharaoh with all his host cannot continue it one day, not so much as a dog in
all Egypt shall move his tongue at man nor beast Ex. 21. 7.
.

But although God have set times to all purposes, and all are known to him, yet
these are unknown to men; Israel although the time of their affliction and
servitude was foretold,knew not the time of their deliverance till it came, for
they knew not from what time to begin their account of the four hundred years:
so although Jeremy had foretold that Israel should be in captivity seventy
years, yet they knew not when those years were expired, because they were not
sure whether they took the beginning at the first captivity, which was in the
time of Iehojaki^; or in the second, which was in the time of Jeconiah; or in
the third, which was in the time of Zedekiah, when the Temple was burnt and
wholly broken down; It is true, Daniel says He understood by Books (that was
by Jeremies Prophecy) that God would accomplish seventy years in the desolation
of Jerusalem Da^. 9. 2.
, by which he knew the time was near, but though he was a Prophet of God, God
had not revealed to him that it was expired, nor could he ascertain the time;
Neither could Nehemiah nor Ezra till the very time was come; Nor could they say
or imagine by what means their deliverance should come: but God who only is
wise and faithful in all his promises, keeps his time, and by providence
orders the means to effect the thing promised, so it was in bringing back his
people from theit captivity, which what done when they looked not for it,
before they were aware; Hence it was that the Church in celebrating her praise
for that deliverance, says, When the Lord returned again the Captivity of
Zion, we were like them in a dream Ps. 126. 1
, the suddenness of their deliverance was amazement to them, as if they had
but dreamed it; The time of Christ's coming in the flesh was foretold by Daniel
and others of the Prophets; It was showed to Daniel by the seventy weeks Dan.
9. 24, 25.
, yet until the very time came none could tell or say that was the time; So the
time of Christ's second coming it is foretold, and signs given us of the time,
yet no man, no, nor the Angels in heaven can tell the time when it shall be:
not what day nor what age Mat. 24. 36.
: We are theref^r: commanded to watch, for says our Savior Christ, Ye know
not when he will come, neither does any man know who shall be smitten, and who
shall escape in the time of any calamity, though it be certainly known and
appointed by God; Christ tells his Disciples, It is not for you to know the
times and seasons which the Father has put in his own power Act. 1. 6.
; God has set the time for the fall of Babylon, and he has set the time for
the conversion of the Jews, but the time nor means we cannot know till the
accomplishment be: Hence I conceive Daniel is commanded to shut up the words,
and to seal the Book even to the end Da. 12. 3
, that is, shut or seal this Prophecy, for it is obscure, and long to the end,
before it shall be accomplished: It is the saying of Irenius, That every
Prophecy before it be accomplished is as a riddle, but being once accomplished
it is plainly understood; And though by faith we look upon all Prophecies to
come as that which is truth, and that there is a certainty in them as if we now
saw them fulfilled, yet at the time of their accomplishment they shall be much
more glorious, and it is true that as Knowledge increases, so men will be more
studious in them, and in observing the several providence of God working and
ordering secondary causes, as the means to accomplish them in the time
appointed, but it cannot be known unto us as is proved.

Then surely it must needs be unwarrantable boldness in any to take upon them
to tell what God will do, and when he will do it, and will prescribe the means
how it shall be done, as many do in these days, who spare not to affirm, that
Christ shall come to reign on the earth a thousand years, and the time when he
shall come, and by what means that fifth Monarch shall be set up, and what
Governors and Government shall be in the world till then, they will tell us
when the Jews shall be converted, and how; When Babylon shall fall, and by
whom, and what means; But these things are secrets of Gods counsel, as I have
showed, things which he keeps to himself in his own power, and till the time of
the accomplishment no man can know the certainty of them; To tell us of
Revelations, Visions, Dreams, and new Lights, is nothing, but even as much as
if they should say they dreamed, they were in a dream, for they are mere
fantasies; I can say of these men no other then the Prophet Jeremy says of the
false Prophets of his time, which prophesied lies, saying, I have dreamed, I
have dreamed Ier. 23. 25.
, God himself testifies of such Prophets, that He had not s^^t them yet they
ran, nor spoken to them yet they prophefied Ver. 21.
.

It is good, that good men should search into all Truths, it is their duty, and
compare Providence with Sc^ipture, to find out all truths: but good men (for
so I judge of many of them, though seduced by a false spirit) to be too
confident in things altogether doubtful is unwarrantable boldness, they should
consider that there are many lying spirits gone out into the world, therefore
Saint John exhorts, that we believe not every spirit 1 Ioh. 4. 1
, And we are foretold, that in these latter times some shall depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrins of devils 1 Timothy 5. 1
; And we know that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light 2 Cor.
11. 14.
; Christ himself has foretold us, that there shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, that if it were
possible they should deceive the very Elect Mat. 24. 24. vtr. 23.
, but he commands that we believe them not Rev. 20. 7
, and gives a memorandum with an Ecce, Behold, I have told you before; And we
know, that these are the times wherein the devil is let loose to deceive the
Nations^^ because we see the Nations are deceived, and he has great wrath
bec^^se he knows that he has but a short time Rev. 12. 12.
: The Apostle Peter writing to believers says, there were false Prophets among
the people, and tells them, there shall be False Teachers among them, who shall
privily bring in damnable heresies, and shall bring upon themselves swift
damnation 1 Pet. 2. 1
.

These are those times foretold, but we will not see it, we will not know them,
we presume to tell of times that shall be, but will not take notice of the
times that be; This is the time of great trial, and yet in these times men
will be most confident and secure, and take not notice that Satan has deceived
them, to be the fulfillers of the Prophecies of Christ, and of his Apostles, in
their heresies and seducements, etc. There is a time to every purpose, but
because men knowing it not, but misseth their time, their misery is great; They
are snared with an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon ihem, as fishes
that are taken in an evil net, and as birds that are caught in a snare E^c 9. 12
.

These times, the times of this generation are not only trying times, but they
are shaking times, God is now shaking the Nations and Kingdoms of the world,
according to that Prophecy of Haggai, It is a little while and I will shake the
heavens, and the earth, and the Sea, and the dry-land, and I will shake all
Nations Hag. 2. 6, 7.
: God may be said to shake the Nations several ways, He shakes by his voice
Ier. 25. 30. Psa. 68. 8.
, in thunder and lightning, as when the Law was given on Mount Sinai; And he
shakes by his fearful and terrible judgments upon his enemies, casting down
and overturning Monarchs and Kingdoms; And he shakes by the power of the
Gospel, as at Christ's Birth a new Star appeared, and led to him, and at his
death the earth shock, the graves opened, the Sun was darkened; And at the
preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, Men, Nations, and Kingdoms were
shaken, turned and changed upside down.

God has of late shaken this Nation (as many other) by the sword; He is still
shaking Nations, yea, all Nations by the sword of his indignation, rending,
tearing, scattering, and overturning this or that Nation, this or that power;
These are doubtless Gods refining times; Preparations for accomplishment of
the glorious things to be done for his Church, which are promised; The downfall
of Antichrist, Gog and Magog, and making the Enemies of Christ to become his
foo^stool. The calling of the scattered Jews, and bringing in the fullness of
the Gentiles, when it shall be said, who are that fly as a Cloud, and as the
Doves to their windows Isa 60. 8.
? And the gathering together of his people, that there shall be one Shepherd
and one flock Ioh. 10. 16.
, and that Satan shall be ^^oden under our feet Romans 16. 20.
, all which in the times appointed shall be assuredly made good; Not by the
shaking of the Nations by the sword, though God may use the Nations as
instrumentally to break one another in pieces, as a preparative thereunto, so
far as pleases him: But the accomplishment thereof must be by the shaking of
the Nations by the Word of God; which I conceive is meant by the Apostle, where
he says, yet once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also heaven Heb.
12. 26.
, signifying a spiritual shaking by the powerful preaching of the Gospel and
work of Gods Spirit, to bring gathering the Church into one, subduing our lusts
and carnality, mortifying sin, and making us a reformed people, conformable to
Christ, and that the Kingdom of Christ may be set up in our hearts, for which
we are taught to pray; He that sat upon a white horse Rev. 19. 11
and made war, and on his head had many Crowns, and clothed in a vesture dipped
in blood, His Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. the Armies that
followed him were in heaven, therefore spiritual, and the sword, with which he
smites the Nations, goes out of his mouth; This is no material sword, but it
is the word of God, the Sword of the Spirit: When he threatened the Church of
Pergamus for suffering false doctrines among them, he tells them he will come
and fight against them by the word of his mou^h Rev. 2. 16
: That word of the Gospel which the wicked would have sliegh^ed and called
foolishness, shall with wondrous power shake the Nations, dest^oy, and conquer
the world of the wicked, as is expressed in other Scriptures 2 Th. 2. 8
, which agrees with that of the Prophet, Not by might, nor by power, ^ut by my
Spirit says the Lord of Hosts Zec. 4. 6.
, but I will not go further in this point, because I would not too much
digress from the Inference to which I am speaking, I only hint at these things
by the way, to the end that men may be stirred to search dilgently after truth
as they would search for silver Pro. 2. 4.
, and bring every man's judgment to the touchstone as they do gold, that they
may not be deceived* by dreams or specious shows, and so depart from the truth
and lose their future happiness.

This is a time of shakings, God is now shaking the Nations, Gods judgments
are abroad in the earth, that the Inhabitants of the world may learn
righteousness Isa. 26. 9.
: The shakings of this Nation have been great, not only in temporals but in
spirituals, Thrones, Dignities, and Governments, have been shaken and shaken,
cast down, overturned and changed again and again, Religion adulterated,
annihilated, and made a matter of policy, the very foundation of that pillar
and ground of truth, has been stricken at, undermined, and sorely assaulted,
and is at this day, but we have a sure promise, that the gates of hell shall
never prevail against it Mat. 16. 18.
, and we have seen Gods provident care thereof, that they that have been the
heads of this assault have been broken in pieces and their ass^tiations, the
Word of God is as fire and it shall consume stubble; All the enemies of truth
shall be like straws, though numerous, which conspire against a burning coal,
and encompasse it by heaps to put it out, that when they think they have done
it, and have eclipsed the light for a little while, it shall kindle, burn, and
consume them all, these straws though mighty for a time shall come to nothing;
This is their time of attempts, and this is the time that God will purge his
Church, This is the time of Reformation, and of great judgments; For whenever
God has been doing any great work tending to Reformation, the devil and Satan,
that great old Enemy and subtle Serpent has always made the greatest
opposition, the greater the work is that God is doing the stronger the
oppositions will be, as we see in Rev. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. considered and compared:
That God is doing a great work in these days is manifest, clear as the light
of the Sun, But what God will do he only know, To us it is unknown, whether he
will at this time give in to England the mercies promised, or whether he will
yet afflict us with more and greater Judgments we know not: The former shall
be made good assuredly to his Church, the latter seems rather to be our present
portion, the effects of all the alterations and changes in our times, is hid
from our eyes, only it is Gods good pleasure, and he is doing a great work.

There are three things, evils, that have long threatened the great judgments
and changes which we of England have lately felt and seen in this Nation.

1. The increase and growth of all kind of sin, especially corruption in
Religion Judge. 5. 8
, and a general crying oppression, these do still remain as high as ever. y
Zep. 3. 1. Eze. 25. 7. Jer. 5. 1.


2. The appearance and increase of secondary causes thereunto conducing,
principally Jealousies, Divisions, Emulations, Hypocrisy, Sedition and
Treachery Judge 9. 23.
: These things are effects of Gods anger Is. 19. 14
, and forerunners of great changes, but these do increase in England.

3. The straits and necessities of the Church, when good men especially holy,
godly Ministers are scorned, contemned, and misused 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
, then God is exceeding angry, and brings wrath without remedy; For the
Churches necessity is Gods opportunity to deliver his Church and to avenge
himself of their enemies, and that is always by great changes: God has made
change after change in England, once, twice, thrice, and again, but the evils
are not changed, therefore more changes are threatened: The Prophet denonncing
Judgment against the King and Kingdom of Israel says thus, Thou profane
wicked Prince of Israel whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end,
thu^ says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem and take off the Crown, this shall
not be the man; Ex^lt him that is low, and abase him that is high, I will
overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more until he come, whose
right it is and I will give it him Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27.
; This Prophecy was concerning Zedekiah, and Isreal's carrying captive into
Babylon, and the government of Christ, to whom all Kingdoms and Nations are
given, and are his right, whom he is pleased to set up as vicegerent under him,
to rule in righteousness and judgment, shall be established, God will abase
him that is highest, and exalt him that is low, and will overturn, and overturn
again and again until he come, for his right it is to whom Jesus Christ shall
give it.

So it is evident that all turnings, overturnings and changes that have been in
this Nation, or whatsoever shall be are not by accident, nor by the subtle
contrivement of counsel or men, but as all is ordered by Providence to effect
Gods will, for man is not able of himself to bring any enterprise to pass, he
is not able (says Doctor Preston) to see all the wheels that tend to make up
an enterprise, nor if he were able to see them all, he is not able to turn
them, nor to fit every one so together as to make up an enterprise.

God by providence after several changes and several attempts of new
enterprises, which the attempters (though skilful to deceive and powerful to
compel) could not enterprise, has given us a Supreme Magistrate to judge the
people of these Nations; And by providence has entitled him OLIVER Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of the Dominions thereunto
belonging; This is the man whom God by his secret providence has made the
instrument of our deliverance, from the designs of an Antichristian brood, and
from the powers of Royal and Hierarchical enemies, and rescued our Laws and
Religion out of usurpers hands, therein comparable to Gideon; It is true he
accepted of what Gideon refused Iud. 8. 22
, but he coveted not what Gideon asked ver. 24.
, nor indented beforehand, as Iephthah did Iud. 11. 9
, He might have sat in Parliament at ease, and with profit as others did, but
providence ordered him to another work, And he freely and voluntarily exposed
himself to all hardships, to endure the parching Sun by day, and the nipping
frost by night, as a zealous Patriot of his Nation, his sleep departed from his
eyes, His bed the open field, and the Heavens his Curtains, He was not backward
to jeopard his life in the high places of the field for the safety of his
Country, not shifting to secure himself in the greatest danger, nor declined
any Engagement with the Enemy, let the disadvantages be what they could, (...)
three, four, or five to one of the Enemies party, yet not once that I can
remember was he put to the worst, or caused to fly from, or turn his back from
the Enemy, from the beginning of the war to the end thereof; He is of an
ancient Family, He has been well educated in Learning and in Religion (except
only some youthful tricks) has been a professor of holiness and practiser of
justice, the man of the Saints prayers, whom God prospered, and made
successeful in all his undertakings, and providence has kept in all dangers,
ordering all along by gradations to what he now is, as is observed in our third
Inference: Why God has done all this we cannot give any reason, but that it is
his secret will to effect his own purpose; But whether it shall be at this time
as an income of mercies, or increase of afflictions, I leave to the all-knowing
God who will manifest his pleasure in his own time; It may be a mercy from God
and so I esteem of it, but we may by our divisions turn it to a judgment; as
indeed our seditious practices do threaten: Sure I am (whatever may be) that
since providence laid this burden upon him, he has managed it with much
wisdom and justice, the fruits whereof we have had some taste, To the honor
of God I speak it, And do apprehend that his purposes tend thereunto; As also
to the honor, safety, and benefit of the Commonwealth, manifested by his
ordering affairs abroad, in making honorable peace, thereby stopping more and
greater effusion of blood, and exhausting of treasure; As also his Highnesses
care for proving Ministers, to eject those that are scandalous and unsound, in
which I yet hope his Highness and present Parliament will make better and
further progress, that known Heresies, apparent Blasphemies, and open
profaneness may be extirpate and ^ast out of these three Nations, which that
they may do shall be my constant prayer, And that as God has added to his
Highness increase of worldly hononr; he will also double and redouble to him
spiritual humility, wisdom, holiness, with all other graces; And let this be
the prayer of Zions Saints, that Peace and Truth may be established, Jesus
Christ set up in ou^ hearts, and sincerely worshipped in his own Ordinances,
that the purity of Ordinances may stand like the Ark of God, before which all
heresies, seducements, and doctrines of devils may fall like Dagon to the
earth; so that if it be possible Eugland may be the Beloved Nation, and the
praise of the whole Earth, for the which let us all pray and endeavor, and
this brings us to our fifth Inference.

The fifth Inference is, that although God have set a time for the giving in of
mercies, and for inflicting of Judgments, which shall certainly be
a^complished in their time, yet men are to be diligent in the use of all lawful
means for the enjoying of the one and the avoiding of the other: This was ever
the practice of holy men in all ages, the Prophet Daniel notwithstanding he was
well assured of the performance of Gods promise for the deliverance of his
people, after the set time of seventy years was expired, yet he prays with
his face toward Jerusalem Dan. 9. 10
, yea, when he knew the time was at hand, he yet prays for the accomplishment
of it, and confessed his own sins and the sins of the people Dan. 9. 3, 4. 5.
, nor did he think it sufficient to pray for a spurt, but he prayed from the
morning until the time of the evening Sacrifice Ve. 20, 21
: Thus Zion her self complains unto God and prays for deliverance Lam. 5.
21, 22.
, and Nehemiab when the time was come, mourned, fasted and prayed, and used all
lawful endeavors Neh. 1. 4.
, He looked sad in the presence of the King, sig^^^^ing the sorrow of his
heart, for the ruins of Jerusalem, and this was a^^^^ns by which he obtained
favor to make his R^quest to the King, yea, ^^^lest his tongue was speaking to
the King, his heart prayed to the God of h^aven Neh. 2. 3, 4
* and God gave him his desires, not only to build the Temple at Jerusalem, but
to have all materials necessary for the wo^k* The reason why all lawful means
must be used, is, Because whatsoever God in his secret counsel has determined
to be done* he has also determined and appointed the means how it shall be
done: As he has decreed the end, he also has decreed the means conducing to
that end; So it was in the things of rebu^lding the City and Temple: God had
determined it should be built again promised it by his Prophets: And he had
also determined and appointed that ^yrus should be the means or secondary cause
of it, Therefore he calls Cyrus his Shepherd He that shall perform all his
pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, ^by
foundation shall be laid Isa. 44. 28.
, and he shall let go my captives ^s. 45. 13. 13.
: And this was at the time appointed made good as you may see Ezr. 1. 1. and
herein Gods purpose and secondary causes work together: God works by such men
and endeavors as he has appointed, and such means men are to use.

You know God promised to Israel many blessings, both temporal and spiritual,
he promises the downfall of their enemies, and great increase of all things,
multiplicity of blessings in all outward comforts Eze. 36
, so he promises to them, and in them to us Christrans, all spiritual
blessings* freely given for his own Name sake, he promises to sprinkle clean
water on us, to cleanse us from all our filthiness and from our Idols; He will
give us a new heart and put his Spirit into us, and cause us to walk in his
Statutes ve. 25, 26
, signifying thereby the merits and blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us
from all iniquity, etc. yet says the Lord (notwi^hstanding he will surely give
all these blessings freely) I will be sought unto, I will be enquired of by the
house of Israel to do it for them Ezekiel. 36. 37.
, so you shall see God sends the Prophet to Hezekiah, to te^l him, he should
su^ely die of the disease, of which he was sick; Hezekiah notwithstanding makes
his addresses by prayer unto God unto God, to spare his life, and obtains his
desire, God adds fifteen years 2 Kiu. 20 1, 5, 6.
, prayer obtains the mercy desired, that is one means, yet there must be another
means added; Hezekiah must take a bunch of figs and apply to the mortal sore,
and he shall recover Is. 38. 21
, when God allows, nay, requires that we shall use all lawful means; for us
to neglect to use the means or obstinately reject the means, we are
self-enemies, and it is just with God to withhold the mercy we desire, or to
bring the judgments upon us, we would avoid; to neglect, slieght or contomn
any lawful means, is a tempting of God, that man that shall cast off all
means, and say he will rest upon providence, neither believes there is indeed
an overruling providence, nor can rest upon providence upon any Scripture
ground; He that will rest upon providence must follow the dictate and ways of
providence, else he deceives himself; The Physician in cases of any necessity*
is the means for health, the Surgeon is a means for cure of a fretting
wound, ulcer, or gangrene: The Lawyer to clear a questioned Title, or to plead
a doubtful cause before the Judge* he that shall in such or the like cases,
neglect or reject such means, providence offering it to him, shall be justly
condemned of folly by any wise man, so it is in all things between God and us,
to obtain mercies or to avoid judgments, we are to search out and to use all
lawful means.

But in the use of any means though never so lawful, we must take heed that we
trust not to the means, for that is sinful, and the way to deprive our selves
of what we do expect or most desire, and to involve our selves in these
troubles and miseries we would avoid and most fear: This was the si^ of that
good King Asa, in his disease, he sought not to the Lord but to the Physicians
2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
: We must be diligent in means, but trust in God as much as if we had no means
to use; You shall see that when Moses was to lead the people of Israel through
a vast and barren wilderness, God gave him a pillar of a cloud by day, and of
fire by night to go before them; and the Ark of the Lord went before to find
out a resting place Numb. 10. 33.
, for where the Ark rested they stayed, and as long as the Cloud rested upon
the Ark they rested in their Tents Numb. 9. 18.
; This was providence guiding the people to conven^ent places for water and
rest, yet Moses the Servant of God is very inquisitive with his Father in Law,
whom Providence had brought to him, and who was acquainted with the ways of
the wilderness and places where was Springs of water, to instruct him in the
way, and be a guide unto him Numb. 10. 31.
, he would not be wanting in the use of any lawful means: When the Prophet
Nathan, sent from God, tells David that his child should surely die; David
notwithstanding sets himself to the use of means to preserve the childs life 2 Samuel 12. 16.
, yet David did not therein oppose himself against Gods will, for David knew
that the use of lawful means was no way crossing of Gods purpose; He well knew
that Gods comminations are sometimes conditional and sometimes absolute, as
indeed they are, and so are the promises of mercies: Gods threatening of
judgment against Nineveh was conditional, Yet forty days and Ninevth shall be
destroyed, that is, if Nineveh do not repent; but Ni^eveh repented and was
spared Jon. 3. 10
; The Text says, God saw they turned from their evil ways, and repented of
the evil he said he would do to them; Not that God indeed repented or can
repent, or be changed: the word repent we find several times in Scripture, 1 Samuel 15. 35. The Lord repented that he made Saul King, and Genesis 6. 6. It
repented the Lord that he had made man, So in Joel 2. 13. God is slow to anger
and of great kindness; and repents of the evil, and in ver. 14. who knows
if he will repent and leave a blessing behind him?

These and other the like Scriptures are by some objected against the absolute
decrees and purpose of God, as if God did not absolutely determine what he
would do, but as if there were a contingency in God, and that he upon occasion
changes his decree and purpose; To this I answer, That the word repent or
repentings is but an expression which the holy Ghost uses after the manner of
the speech of men, whereby the pity and compassion of God is set forth unto us,
and how unwilling he is to punish his creatures, as in Lam. 3. 33. He does not
afflict willingly, that is, he delights not to punish, to afflict, or to
grieve the ^hildren of men, but as he is provoked by their sins which he
hates, and he hates nothing but sin, or for sin, but God is said to delight
in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. We are not to search into the secret decrees of God,
which is absolute nor which is conditional, but we know God is unchangeable in
all his purposes and varieth not, The strength of Israel (says the Prophet)
will not lie, nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent 1 Samuel 15.
29.
, Therefore repentance in God is nothing else but his unchangeable ordering and
disposing of changeable things: God is not changed in any thing but things
change and alter, Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world Act. 15. 18.
, and what he has purposed shall be done, nothing can alter it, as is showed
in our former discourse: God is immutable, he changes not, In him i^ no
variableness nor shadow of turning Jam. 1. 17
, But God is said to change when they whom God loves and takes care of are
changed, then God changes the course of things so as it is for their good: God
unchangeably forgiveth them that repent as he did Nineveh, and unchangeably
punishes them that go on in their wicked ways, as he did Saul: All
comminations of God are means to repentance and to reformation, and repentance
with reformation is the means to prevent the judgments threatened, except where
the Decree is absolute, as in the case of Esau, Heb. 12. 17. and with Cain or
Judas, etc. and in case of resisting the means and motions of repentance, as
the stiff-necked Israelites, Heb. 3. 11. to whom there is no place for
repentings; But this is the secret counsel of God, and belongs not to us to
search into farther then it is revealed in Scripture, and the Revealed will of
God is our rule, we are to look no further, but practice according to what it
holds forth to us, whether the threatening of judgments be absolute or
conditional, it is not for us to enquire into it, but we are to use all lawful
means to prevent it, as to obtain any mercy promised; For all comminations of
God are either for our repentance that we may prevent the evil, or to our
obduration that we may be without all excuse, therefore God says, At what
instant he shall speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up and to pull down, and to destroy it; If that Nation turn from their evil, I
will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them: and at what instant he shall
speak concerning a Nation or Kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it do evil
in his sight, he will repent of the good wherewith he said he would benefit
them Jer. 18, 7, 10
, God is pleased to give encouragement to all, and the Covenants which God has
made between himself and mankind are conditional: The Covenant with Adam was
upon exact obedience on man's part, Do this and live; The Covenant in Christ is
not of works but of grace, established upon better promises, as the Apostle
reaches Heb. 8. 6.
, given by the hand of a Mediator, ties us by the condition to believe and
repent: ^he first Covenant under the Law shows what we should do, but cannot;
The second Covenant under the Gospel teaches us how all is done for us, if we
believe and repent: The promises of the Law are to the exact workers and doers
of the Law To 10. 5.
: The promises of the Gospel are to him that works not, but believes in him
that justifies the ungodly Romans 4. 5.
etc. Now if we break the condition on our part, God is no way bound to us, for
if we believe not, we shall be condemned Joh. 3. 18.
, if we repent not we shall perish Luke 13. (...).
: Thus it was to the Nation of the Jews, wrath came on them to the utmost,
because of their Impenitency and Unbelief, how much more shall it be so to all
other Nations and so it is to England! Great blessings are promised, and
destroying udgements a^e threatened, But God will surely withhold our mercies,
will pluck up what he planted, and will hasten destroying judgments if we do
not believe and repent; Therefore it is Englands duty to be diligent in the use
of all lawful means, to obtain mercies and to avoid Judgments.

Here let me give caution in two things: 1. That we use no means but such as is
lawful, warrantable in Scripture: 2. That we must not be solicitous in the use
of any means for things for which we have not a promise: To use unlawful means
for the obtaining of lawful things, or to seek unlawful things by any means,
are both equally evil: As for instance, Sarah did well to endeavor and expect
the blessing to Jacob, because she had a promise; but Sarah did ill in using
unlawful means for a lawful thing: Jeroboam had no promise of the Kingdom, but
he had a leading providence which was equivalent, therefore he did not ill in
using means to obtain it: But it was his great sin in using unlawful means to
establish himself in his Kingdom: so Saul, in the time of his distress it was
lawful for him and duty to use means, and endeavor to avoid the danger
threatened, but it was his sin to use unlawful means, to go to the Witch of
Eudor 1 Samuel 28. 7.
, contrary to this you see when good Hezechiah was in distress he use^h such
means as is warrantable, first he en^eavoureth to preserve himself and kingdom
against a potent Enemy by agreement and pacification 2 King. 18. 14.
: what they could not do it, though warrantable, as appears of the saying of
Christ Luke 14. 32.
, Then he flies to the rock of strength, he opens the whole truth of his case
unto God, and trusts in him, and was thereby delivered 2 Kin. 19. 4. 15.
. We know David had an absolute promise of the Kingdom from God, and found
great opp^sition, Saul persecuted him to the death, yet David would not use
^n^awful means to obtain the promise, nor to preserve himself, he only uses
such wa^rantable means as providence offered to him, and trusts in God! It is
true, he eat of the Shewbread which was belonging only to the Priests, but
this is justified by the Lord Christ in case of necessity Mat. 12. 3, 4. Hos.
6. 5.
, Mercy is to be preferred before Sacrifice, so he fled to Achas king of Gath,
and he changed his b^haviaur and feigned himself mad q 1 Samuel 21. 13.
, this in case of necessity to save life is not unlawful, he did not distemble
with his tongue to say he was mad: it may be lawful for a man to dissemble in
his behavior or discretion, when it is unlawful to do it in words, Nor did he
do it as distrusting in God, as is apparent Psa. 34. 6. he trusted in God and
was delivered at that time when he changed his behavior, as is evident by the
Title of that Psalm: It is granted that in matters of Religion to change
behavior is sin, as to bow to an Idol, or to be hypocritical in shows of
Religion, a^ it is to be feared very many are at this day, and have been for
honor or profit, as Simon Magus did, Nor did he dissemble his behavior, to
the end he might murder as Cain did, and as Joah did, but David intended
damage to none, only his own safety: We have a kind of resemblance to this in
the Lord Christ, to try his Disciples, Luke 24. 28. The Text says, He made as
if he would have gone farther: And whereas it may be objected he lied ^o Ach^sh
when he said that he had been against the South of Judah, and against the South
of the Kenites 1 Samuel 27. 10.
, etc. He did not lie unto him, he spoke doubtfully to the Question asked, so
as Achaz might take it in a double sense, either that he had been against the
people of the South of Judah, and of the Kenites, or against the people of the
Philistims that dwelt in the adjacent Villages of the South of Judah, and so
indeed it was; So that David lied not, nor used any unlawful means to obtain
the promised Kingdom, nay, when opportunity was in his hand he would not hurt
Saul, though he then hunted after David's life as after a Partridge on the
mountains, declaring his trust in God and innocence toward Saul; When he had
him at all advantage in the Cave* and at another in his Trenches, David would
do no act to cross Gods providence though animated to it by his chief Friends.

Contrary to David's practice is the practice of men at this day who without any
warrant from Gods Word, contrary to humanity, plot and contrive means to betray
and subvert men and governments, that are not su^able to their own desires, and
contrary to clear providence, and that by abominable evil means; And also in a
sollicitous use of good means for the obtaining of things not promised, nor any
leading providence or probabilities to the things endeavored for, but will and
fancy, or the instigations of false deceiving spirits, what else are the many
and frequent fastings one contrary to another, and appeals to God in things
which tend to strife and debate, and to set up the Kingdom of Christ by blood,
who says, his Kingdom is not of this world, or if it were he needs not the
material sword to exalt him: for all power is given unto him both in heaven and
in earth Mat. 28. 18.
; He is King for ever in a sp^r^tual sense, but They that take the Sword shall
perish by the Sword Mat. 26. 52
, He can presently have more then ten thousand Angels to cut down all his
enemies at once if he please, and when he please Mat. 26. 53
; And he no where in all the Scripture commands nor exciteth any of the
Saints to carry on his cause in blood, nor to use endeavors by the sword to
set up a fifth Monarchy, neither to make war against Nations, to destroy Kings
as Kings the sword of Christ is the sword that goes out of his mouth, Rev. 19.
15. with this sword he will smite the Nations, and by this sword were the
rem^ant slain, Rev. 19. 21. God refused to accept of David's desire to build the
material^ Temple for Gods worship, because he had been a man of war, and had
sh^d much blood 1 Chro. 28. 3.
: And again, 1 King. 22. 8. Thou shall not build a house to my Name, because
tho^ have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight: The Temple was a Figure
of Christ, and was for external worship: If that which was but a Figure and
material might not be built with bloody hands, then doubtless the thing
typified which was the glory of Christ, the spiritual Temple and spiritual
worship of the New and Heavenly Jerusalem, shall not be built by the sword of
the Saints on earth, a strange and unwarrantable opinion, and a worse practice;
The holy Ghost is pleased to intimate to us that while the Temple was in
building there was not heard neither Axe nor Hammer, nor any too^ of Iron, all
the time of the building 1 King. 6. 8
; From whence I infer, The holy and spiritual worship of Christ, shall not be
set up by any Instruments of war, but as in the building of the Temple the
stones were hewed and the materials made ready before they were brought to the
building, and were hewed by the men of Tire and other Nations who did not
belong to the services of that Temple; So God will use the sword of the heathen
and wicked men of the world to prepare for the work of the spiritual Temple,
they shall be his drudges to do that bloody work, to hew the Nations and
Kingdoms as pleases him; they shall be his Instruments to cut down, dig up,
and hew one another, and cast down the mig^ty Mountains till they be made
Plains, they shall do it in wrath and revenge one to another, but God will
work by them after the counsel of his own will: And then as in the Reformation
in the d^ies of Hezechiah* God will prepare the hearts of his own people, and
the thing shall be done suddenly 2 Chro. 29. 36.
; they shall be a willing people in the day of his power, this it consonant to
holy Scriptures, and has been the manner of Gods doings, Not by might nor by
power, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts Zec. 4. 6.
.

Besides, David in his Reign was a Type of the Churches troubles and war, es
Solomon was a Type of the Churches peace and flourishing condition; Bus I find
not that David nor Solomon ever made an offensive war against any Nation, but
it was ever defensive, except by command from God, or a providence leading to
it, as in the case of the Ammonit^s, when they had abused David's Embastadors
and his friendly courtesy, and disgraced them that were his Messengers: And
the Assyrians who joined with them 2 Samuel 10
; but for them to attempt things for which they have neither command nor any
leading providence, but upon their own wills, fancies, or as some say by the
direction and guidance of the spirit, to these men, not I but the Lord Christ
says unto them as to James and John when they would have had him to command
fire to come down from heaven upon the Sama^itans: Ye know not what manner of
spirit of spirit ye are of Luke 9. 55.
; The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives but to save them; These men
have spirits of infirmies, croo^ed spirits, like that woman whom the Lord
Christ healed Luke 13. 11
, the Lord in mercy cure thew: We are commanded not to believe every spirit 1 John, 4. 1
in Rev. 16. 13. there were three unclean spirits went out of the Dragon and
out of the mouth of the Beast, and cut of the mouth of the false Prophet; What
were these spirits? these were the spirits of devils, working miracles, and
what else, they go to the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather
them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, ver. 14. The Spirit of God
says expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the says,
giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils 1 Timothy 4. 1
; Hence is that precept of the Apostle, to try the spirits whether they are of
God because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. I
know many good men are seduced and do seduce at this day, And it is grievous to
them and unsufferable to them to bear it to be told they are seduced, because
they have a zeal to God and to holiness; Surely so had Paul when he was in a
great error, and so was David full of holy and right zeal to God, yet his
spirit erred; his spirit was pressed to build God an house, so as he vowed to do
it, Psa. 132* 2. And he consulted with the Prophet Nathan about it, and Nathans
spirit closed with his spirit, and said, Go do all that is in thine heart, for
the Lord is with thee ^^2 Samuel 7. 3
: But the spirit of holy David and the Spirit of the Prophet Nathan, were both
contrary to Gods spirit in that work, for the word of the Lord to Nathan forbad
it afterward.

Give me le^ve I beseech you in the mercies of God to say unto you that are
Fifth Monarch men, as St James says to the whole Church and Sa^n^s, Do not
^rre my beloved Brethren Iam. 1. 16
, it is most true that violent ungrou^ded affections are violent temp^ations,
and will bring violent and certain affl^ctions upon men and Nations; Obedience
is better then Sacrifice, blind Sacrifices nor uncommanded service by God were
never accep^e^; Who has required this at your hand? Let us therefore walk
humbly wi^h God, ^eny our selves, our own spirits, our own righteousness, and
^et up the Lord Christ in our hearts, that he may spiritually rule over us and
in us by mortifying our corruptions, subduing our carnal reason and our
unbridled lusts; this is i^ the Lord Jehovah has promised, and this is it we
are taught to pray for, Thy Kingdom come; And for this as for all other mercies
thereon attending, let us be ever diligent in the use of all lawful means, in
behalf of our selves or Nation, and the whole Church of God, with submission to
Gods will; And truly he that will impartially and strictly examine his own
heart (and be sure it deceive him not) shall find that all his endeavors will
be too little, to bring his will to the will of God in every thing, but the
heart is deceitful above all thing, and desperately wicked, who can know it
Jer. 17. 9
? and from the deceit of our own hea^^s together Satan's instigations, we labor
to bring Gods will to our will, and hence arises great evils and distractions
even among Christians, at this day; All boast of the Spirit and yet walk
contrary to the spirit, for the Spirit is one and is not divided, the Spirit
leads into the way of one truth not many truths; give me leave to put the
question which Paul in the like case, Are ye not carnal 1 Cor. 3. 4
? yet these Corinth^aus to whom Paul speaks were believers, Sain^s in the
Apostles esteem, for he gives them the right hand of brotherhood, though in
this respect carnal in their divisions concerning spiritual things, and those
things if not prevented will bring sore judgments, and prevent the mercies by
us exp^cted and t^ the Church promised.

The lawful means to prevent the one and to possess the other, are of two
sorts, spiritual and civil, which for brevity I shall but name, for I intend
not p^olixity in this discou^se; The first and chief means is prayer, Pray
continually, Col. 4. 2.
, that is the rule given T^. 5. 14
, and pray earnestly Iam. 5. 17
, and fervently Ver. 16.
; But we must come to pray with humble hearts, else God will not hear our
prayers, He gives grace to the humble Jam 4 6
, bu^ he resists the proud; God hears the desire of the humble, and will
prepare their heart, and incline his heart to hear Ps. 10. 17
, he dwells with the humble and will revive the spirit of the humble and
contrite ones, Isa 57. 15. and we must pray for such things as are according to
Gods will, such things as are according to Gods will, such things as we have
p^omise for, not according to our own wills, You ask and receive not, and why?
because ye ask a^^sse Jam. 4. 3.
: This is the considence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will h^heareth us 1 John 5. 14.
, but if we ask according to our own will he will not hear him, that is, he
will not give him what he asks; And we must also ask in faith without
wavering, Jam. 1. 6. but how can we have faith in asking any thing for which we
have not a promise? for faith is grounded upon the promise; Abraham believed
the promise, Romans 4. 3. he staggered not at it, he was fully persuaded that
what God had promised he was able to perform, and would do it Romans 4. 20, 21
; And without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6
what is not of faith is sin, without faith God accepts no prayer Mat. 21. 22.
; and in the last place we must ask all that we pray for in the Name of Jesus
Christ, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it you Ioh.
16. 23.
; See Joh. 14. 13. And in extraordinary cases we must add spiritual ^^sting to
our prayer, for there is a kind of devil that goes not out but by prayer and
fasting Mat. 17. 21.
, humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, Jam.
4. 10. we must come with humbled hearts, willing, and desirous to bring our
wills to Gods will, but take beed of fasting and praying, and making appeals to
God, Heb. 12. 29.
to bring Gods will to your will, it is not safe to tempt God, For our God is a
consuming fire.

The next means is to get the love of God kindled in our hearts, let us get
burning zeal to the truth, and receive the truth in the love of it, contend for
verity not for victory; Advance the Gospel in the Ministry of it, love the
brotherhood, honor all men, fear God, and honor the Supreme Magistrate 1 Pet.
2. 17
, whether King or Lord Protector, this is Apostolical doctrine, Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God To. 13. 1.
; This is the Apostle Paul's doctrine, and this is the Apostle Peter's doctrine,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Losds sake 1 Pett. 2. 13.
, for so is the will of God Ver. 15.
; This is no new devised doctrine, nor is it in the least Antichristian, but
the doctrine of the Law and the doctrine of the Gospel, If there come any unto
you, and bring not this doctrine (that is, that denies this doctrine) receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed 2 Ioh. 10
) to deny this truth of the Gospel, and teach for Gospel another thing, is to
bring in another Gospel: But I am commanded by the Gospel, that though men or
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel then what the Apostles have
preached, not to believe it Gal. 1. 8.
; The Gospel establishes a standing Magistracy and a standing Ministry, by
them Liberty and Religion is maintained and preserved if well regulated.

Therefore it highly concerns Parliaments, of which by Gods mercy and love to
his people, we are not wholly deprived, nor by one for ever oppressed; It is
Gods mercy and his honor (the Lord Protector I mean) whom God has made
instrumental to call this Honorable Assembly in Parliament together, I say it
concerns them to consider whence we are fallen, and whether we are going, and
by their authority to put bars against licenticusnesse and loose liberty, and
to be a wall of protection unto the truth, that those Foxes may be taken that
spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapes Can. 2. 15
; Honorable Parliament, if my Scribbling Sheets ever come to your view, take
notice from them that God has by his good providence called you together to
make up the breach that finne has made (or rather God for sin) upon us; We
have been perfidious to God, and God has removed justice and equity from us;
You must be both Phinchas and Aaron; Phinchas to rise up with courage and zeal,
not only to do justice but to give life to the just Laws of the Nation, that
justice may be done by a Law against the transgressors of Gods Law Numb. 25. 7
, and Aaron to stand between the dead and the living, that Gods anger may be
appeased: Numb. 16. 48.
: You in behalf of the good people of these three Nations, are to settle by
Gods assistance these unsettled Nations, what is possible for the present, and
with all possible care to look to the future, the God Almighty be your strength
and your Counselor, in the great work under your hands, that you may be
instruments in (...) hand to establish a just and settled Magistracy and a holy
religious Ministry, That the glory of the Lord Jehovah may be advanced, and the
people of these Nations may again enjoy their Rights and Proprieties, our sins
cry to God for g^eate^ judgments, and the people cry under great pressures;
And God has called you that are the great men of these Nations to prove and to
try what you will do for him, Jer. 5. 5. You have known the way of the Lord and
the judgment of your God, turn you not aside as others have done; God seeks
now as he did in Jerusalem, to find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment and secketh the truth, that he may spare poor England, Jer. 5. 1. And
let not the poor of these Nations be forgotten by you, provide houses and stock
to set them to work in all Cities, Countries, and Towns, that there may not be
a beggar in our Israel Deu. 15. 4
; Debts ought to be paid, but Public Faith debts not paid is most
dishonorable to the Nation, I know as things have been managed it is no easy
thing to pay them; But to purge the University and Nurseries of Learning from
their open pollutions and vicious practices, and Schools of Learning to be
purged of vicious Schoolmasters, the poison of youth and the bane of age and
ages, is a work acceptable to God, a means to obtain blessings to posterities,
and it will cost no money to do it.

These and the like means diligently used, really prosecuted, freed from
selfinterest, vainglory, or hypocrisy, will assuredly multiply mercies on the
Nations, and prevent the judgments threatened, and cause England to be the
praise of the whole earth: I pray give me leave to say what the Lord by the
Prophet said in another case (concerning Tithes then due by a Law of God,
leviticall, only belonging to the Jews; now due by no such right, but they were
unjustly withheld) Therefore says the Lord, Prove me now therewith, if I will
not open to you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing Mal. 3. 10
etc. So I say, Use such means as before I have briefly mentioned, and prove
the Lord if he will not double and redouble all sorts of blessings on this
Commonwealth.

I bless God that there has been a beginning of a Reformation of some things
by his Highness more then in some years past by others, though much was
promised; And I bless God that put into his Highnesses heart and this present
Parliament to call for a general and public day of Humiliation, for emergent
causes named, which God will doubtless accept of, as of late he did by a
signet of his favor, when we by his Highness order sought God for Rain in our
great necessity; Although some who style themselves Saints not only refused to
join in our Petitions, but used unchristian speeches to Gods dishonor and
contempt of the duty: And truly it was sad to observe the general neglect of
our late Solemn Fast, that only Shops should be shut, and places for recreation
full (as I was informed) but Churches shut or empty, in respect of the numbers
of Inhabitants, many omitting the duty out of carnal respects, and many out of
will, because it was commanded, and because the end crossed their
self-interests; I do affirm that it is no less a duty in the Christian
Magistrate to command the duties and performance of duties for the true worship
of God, then it was duty to the Magistrate under the Law, but the Magistrate
under the Law did command such duties, as Asa, Jehosaphat, Jehojada, Hezckiah,
and others: We know that Asa did not only command Reformation of Gods worship,
bur annexed to his command a great punishment 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.
; And Ezra did the like Ezr. 7. 26
; And the Apostle Paul diminishes nothing of the Magistrates Authority under
the Gospel, nor is there any Scripture that offers the least doubt of that
their authority, but rather makes it greater, Heb. 10. 28. therefore I say that
the neglect or rather contempt of such duties, and the suffering of it
uncontrolled by the Magistrate, will in stead of a blessing bring a curse, as
is threatened by the Prophet, Jer 48. 10. but the due observance of the holy and
spiritual worship of God held forth by the Magistrate, and practiced by the
Minister and People, is the chief means to divert the judgments we fear and
procure the blessings we want.

I come now to the sixth and last Inference, and that is, That when God has
effected and done his will in any thing visibly made known to us by the work of
providenee, we are not to murmr nor repine, though it be in any thing
contrary to our expectation or desire, or though it be to our great affliction,
but to submit to it willingly, only by prayer to seek unto God, and patiently
wait his time and means for deliverance.

This has been the practice of the godly in all ages; 2 Samuel 12. 22, 23.
Thus holy David did, while his child was yet alive he used all lawful means
for the life of it: But when God had done his will, and the child was dead, he
left off to mourn, and murmured not, but patiently bear the affliction; Thus
did just and righteous Job, he feared his Sons might sin, and procure Gods
displeasure, he therefore used the right means to prevent it Io^ 3. 25 Job 1. 5.
, but when Providence had brought that to pass which he feared, and God had
visibly manifested his pleasure, Job was patient, he murmured not, neither
against providence nor instruments, but blessed the Name of the Lord Job 1. 11,
22.
: The Church under her great affliction murmured not, they acknowledged Gods
hand, and complained of their sins the cause of all Lam. 3. 37, 29.
, and waited patiently for their deliverance: It is good (says the Prophet)
that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord Lam.
3. 26.
; Surely (says Job) it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement,
I will not offend any more Job 6. 12
; And the Apostle exhorts, that we be followers of them that by faith and
patience inherit the promise Heb. 6. 12
: But to murmr against providence is wickedness, and the effects of
murmuring and discontents is very dangerous; Dangerous to a man's self, and
brings others into dangers too: You know what became of the murmuring
Israelites in the wilderness, from time to time, as is recorded in the Books
of Exodus and Numbers; Consider the case of murmuring Korah and all his
murmuring company, the earth opened and swallowed them up Number. 16. 32, 33.
; This was the immediate hand of God, not Moses nor Aaron, yet such was the
rebellious hearts of the people, that the next day they all fall to murmuring
against Moses and against Aaron, and accused them that they had killed tho
Lords people Number. 16. 41.
* And for this there died presently of them, fourteen thousand and seven
hundred by a sudden plague Ver. 49.
; You know that for this sin of murmuring all the people that came out of Egypt
from twenty years old and upward, were excluded from the promise, except Caleb
and Joshua Numb. 14. 29.
: Hence the Apostle exhorts us Christians, not to tempt God as they tempted
him, nor to murmr as they murmured and were destroyed; for says he, All
these things happened unto them for our examples 1 Cor. 10. 10, 11.
; God is the same to us that he was to them, only he has diverse dispensations
of his judgments; he is an unchangeable God for evert If we sin like them that
went before us, we shall be as greatly punished as they were, yea, greater;
Though God do not so usually strike men suddenly for sin as formerly, yet there
is greater wrath to come.

Let us a little consider the cause of men's murmuring, and see if it do not
arise from a carnal heart, a carnal man propounds ends to himself, as the
Merchants St James speaks of, that say they will go to such a City, or such a
Country, and buy, and sell, and get gain, but say not, if God will: so it is
with men that seek their own ends in any thing, they propound this or that, but
God is not in their thoughts, they say no^, if God will; but we will do this or
that thing, or would have this or that done, etc. It may be, nay, it is common
with these men, that they will have the Name of God in their mouths, but (as
the Psalmist speaks) God is not in all their thoughts; And therefore when their
wills and designs are crossed, they are angry, and repine against God and men;
Thus the people of Israel did in the wilderness, they met with cross
providence which they looked not for, and they could not bear it, but cry out
against Moses, saying, because there were no graves in Egypt; Have thou brought
us to die in the wilderness Exo. 14. 1^.
? and again, wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt to kill us in the
wilderness, our children and our cattle Ex. 17. 3. Exo. 16. 8.
.

Thus at this day we have seen many strange Providence such as we looked not
for, and men have had many and diverse designs, aims and ends, but meet with
cross Providence, which they cannot bear, nay, resolve they will not bear,
they complain and cry out against this and that thing, but specially they
murmr against God and own not his providence in governing the world;
Therefore they also murmr at the thing done, and against the Instruments
doing it, this is I say against God himself, for he alone orders every thing
and every Action, as is proved in the beginning of this ourdiscourse, which may
satisfy humble men; But says the wisest of men, The foolish man perverteth
his way, Pr. 19. 3.
and his heart fretteth against the Lord: This is a carnal heart, for a
spiritual man sees God in all and bears all things with patience, and waits by
prayer for guidance by providence, but never prays against a manifest
providence, except to be delivered from the evil that may in some cases be
feared, for providence lead the people of God into straights and afflictions
for sin, as well as it delivers them from afflictions when they are humbled,
and this the Church was well acquainted with; therefore say, It is good that a
man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord La. 3. 16
, then by the rule of contrary it must needs be evil to repine and murmr.

It is very observable that Moses mentions a mixed multitude that came with
Israel out of Egypt, Exo. 12. 38. these were of other Nations, probably
Servants, that kept their cattle, etc, And they seeing the mighty wonders that
God did for his people in Egypt joined with them, and would go out with them;
As the multitude that followed Christ for the loaves Joh. 9. 26.
, but being crossed in their expectation they grow discontent and murmr,
lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt Nu. 11. 4
, and bred a general discontent among the people, such a mixed multitude was
among the people of Israel after they were delivered from their seventy years
captivity, which good Nebemiah separated from Israel Neh. 13. 3
.

Such a mixed multitude are at this day in England, some of other Nations, some
of contrary Religions, Priests and Jesuits, and others that have by all subtle
ways insinuated themselves, and these have set the people into discontents and
murmurings, and are enemies to the advance of the Gospel, and to the building
of the spiritual Temple, no less then those adversaries of Judah and Benjamin
that would have insinuated themselves under pretense of helping to build the
Temple, saying, they sought the God of Israel as the Israelites did, and did
sacrifice to him Ezr. 4. 2.
, when indeed they were enemies, and endeavor to hinder their work; but
Zerubbabel and the chief of the Fathers cast them off, then they send to have
conference with Nehemiah to betray him, but he would not own their message Neh.
6. 2, 4.
, and the work in his hand prospered. But our Fathers of England have hearkened
to these our mixed multitude, and Gods work has been hindered, and themselves
lost their honor; The mixed multitude among us are grown numerous and
incorrigible, they do not only murmr but they (some of them) threaten, and
resolve not to be satisfied, for if one sort have what he desires another will
dislike it, and that which is accepted this year shall be cried down next year
(nay sometimes next day) for they that seek they know not what, cannot tell
when to be pleased at every thing that is done: some cry out against it, and
against the Instruments doing it, without regard to Providence or public
interest, and these cause murmurings among the people who would not murmr but
for them; These are those that have tasted of the heavenly mauna, but grew
wanton, lusting after other food, many of these came into our hosts because
they saw the great thing the Lord did for us, but they came not in with the
first, nor did they bear the brunt of the day, and being enticed by their own
lusts they murmr and grow impatient at every providence that crosses their
desires: They murmured against our first Parliament called Anno Dom: 1640. and
rejoiced when it was dissolved, endeavoring to carry on their designs by the
next Parliament, but providence crossed them, and they were dissolved too: And
Providence has ordered all actions, counsels and things, to set up another way
of government, which for private interest was cried down: Now Oliver by the
Providence of God is set up and made Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. the great and general murmuring is against him, He is a man of
honor and integrity, the instrument in Gods hand to do great and mighty things
for us, And as I have said before he is the man of the Saints prayers, and by
their prayers God has made him prosperous and successeful in all his
undertakings, we (yea many of the chief murmurers) have acknowledged it, and
owned him as our Joshua: What has he done to the prejudice of the people or
Nation, that we now murmr against him? why, he has by Gods providence
frustrate the designs and aims of the mixed multitude, therefore they all
murmr; The Antichristian and prelatical parties and all the Hierarchy are
angry and seek his life, the Levelling party and the men of the Fifth Monarchy
they are angry, and combine together by plotting against him, and as the
Prophet says of himself so I may say of his Highness, They watch for his
halting, saying, peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against
him, and take our revenge upon him Jer. 20. 10.
: Besides these there is another sort of this mixed multitude that murmr, and
they are pecuniaries, either oppressors or mercenaries: Because it is conceived
his Highness will look after the public treasuries, and manage the public
treasure to public advantage; These were afraid of a day of account in this
life that were not afraid of a judgment day in the life to come, therefore
they are angry; There is another sort that are ambitious to have the honor and
command that Providence has cast upon his Highness, therefore they are angry,
for ambitious men cannot endure any superior; Good men without holy
watchfulness may fall into the evil of ambition: We find that Aaron and his
Sister Miriam a Prophetess grew ambitious against Moses, they quarrel with
him about the Ethiopian woman which he had married, that is their pretense, but
then they plainly tell Moses that God had not only spoken by him but by them
also; You know how God took it at their hands, if good men sin God will not
spare them but more severely punish them: some other there be that murmr
against his Highness, as Ioab did against good David in the case of Abner,
because he made peace with him, and with the house of Saul 2 Samuel 3. 21, 24.
: Others murmr, because they conceive more honor, greater esteem, and better
reward is given to some then to themselves, like those that were hired into the
Vineyard Mat. 20. 11.
, you know what answer Christ gives to such; This kind of evil began to enter
into the hearts of the Disciples, but Christ taught them a better lesson Luke
9. 46, 47.
, of some of these sorts, are all the great murmurers of which the Apostle Jude
says plainly, these are they that walk after their lusts, and their mouth
speaks swelling words Jud. 16.
; These strive for masteries, they would all command but they cannot endure to
obey, and would persuade the people that all their oppressions, injustice, and
cruelty is righteousness, and that the justice distributed to every man
through one man, is oppression; Every man's ways are right in his own eyes Pro.
16. 2
, as the holy Ghost is pleased to express; And they would do as when there was
no King in Israel but every one did what was right in his own eyes Iud. 17. 6
, to adulterate Religion, abuse the Ministers of the Gospel, teach for
doctrines the precepts of men, commit adultery, blasphemy, and kill, or what
not, as in the time of vacancy of Judges in Israel, that there was no public
Magistrate in the Land to put them to shame in any thing Iud. 18. 7
: Was not England almost brought to this condition? And is it not the thing so
much labored for at this day? and that under the specious pretense of a
Reformation, such a Reformation as ascends out of the smoke that came out of
the pit Rev. 9. 2, 3
: blessed be our Jehovah that has thus far helped us against such designs,
that they have been prevented by his good providence; And let the Instrument be
blessed by Jehovah who has been used by his hand to disappoint their purposes,
of whom I hope and expect much better things then from those Reformers, or then
we have seen in our Age for due administration of justice and establishment of
Religion and Laws, that Religion may be advanced, held forth to the people by a
holy discipline, according to the Word of God, which is the will of Christ, not
the fancies of men, for God is a God of order and not of confusion, He is not
the Author of confusion but of peace in all the Churches of the Saints 1 Cor.
14. 33
; And it was the Apostles joy in beholding their order and steadfastness of
faith in Christ Col. 2. 5.
; And for this cause as himself says, he left Titus at Crete, that he should
set things in order that was wanting and ordain Elders in every City Tit. 1. 5.
; Order by a discipline of worship in the purity of Ordinances is the way to
that Reformation the Lord Jehovah looks for; and the establishment and due
execution of good and just Laws, that every man may enjoy his own propriety,
and that justice may be distributed to every man without favor or revenge
impartially, and that oppressors may be punished severely, according to their
offense; This is the thing God looks for at the hand and by the place to which
he has called the Lord Protector; And this I believe he intends and will do,
if murmurers will have but patience, If he do it not, he dissembleth with God,
and God will judge him, who only knows the secrets of all hearts; For Judgment
belongs unto God alone, he has not given that unto men, but he has commanded
us not to judge (but our selves;) Judge not that ye be not judged Mat. 7. 1
, for the Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are they that wait upon him Is.
30. 18
: The Prophet Malachy sharply reproves the Jews in a case like ours at this
day; Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, wherein have we
wearied him? when ye say, every one that does evil is good in the sight of the
Lord Mal. 2. 17
; that is, you make acclamations against God and blasphemous clamours, because
you have not forthwith what ye desire, and in their own way, as if he were a
favourer of evil doers, therefore ye cry out Where is the God of judgment? as
a violent affirmative that there was no such just God, thus murmurers weary
God, Shall not God search out this, for he knows the secrets of the heart Ps.
44. 21
.

Why then do we judge and condemn the man that has done us good and no harm?
and why do we murmr against God and repine at providence? The Lord in mercy
open the eyes of all his people, and bring their hearts suitable to himself,
that they may willingly submit their wills to the will of God: You know we had a
long time of peace and knew not the bitterness of war, and we had a happy
beginning of Reformation in the days of Q. Elizabeth, but in stead of going
forward we went backward, and fell into the hands of oppressors and persecutors
of Gospel Truths, which was the procurement of war, (a sore punishment) we
expected relief from men, but were more oppressed, they neither cared to ease
us, nor pitied out condition, our Religion grew to be mixed with multitudes of
new devices, and all old heresies (cried down by the primitive Church;) Under
these calamities we groaned and cried to God, yea, many of Gods people sought
him by prayer and fasting, private and public for deliverance, And that God
would give us Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning Isa.
1. 26
, that we might be called the righteous and faithful Nation, yet we will not
give God leave to do it for us, though we see Providence working it, we will
not be satisfied except God bring his will to our will, nay to our wills, except
God will give us the thing we ask in our own way, and by the means we our
selves prescribe and set down, we will not own it any other way; We ascribe too
much to our selves, therefore we prescribe unto God things, times, men and
means.

God by providence has given us again a free Parliament, freely chosen by the
people, or it is their own fault, if some of the Members that the people have
chosen be discontented, and are of any of those sorts of murmurers before
spoken of, so as they refuse to act for the good of the Commonwealth, it is
their fault, and I fear their sin, It is not his Highnesses fault, nor the
peoples, but it will be some grief to the refusers when they shall see the work
done without them, or that it should miscarry by their neglect, they knowing
that at this day the pillar and ground of truth is shaken; And the two great
and standing Ordinances of God strongly assaulted by many of that kind of
temper that Korah and his company was; That rose up against the office of Moses
and the office of Aaron, who would have no Magistrate but themselves, nor no
Ministry, but of themselves; The office of Magistracy was in Moses, the office
of the Ministry wa^ in Aaron; They are two distinct Offices, and not
promiscuously to be mixed, nor to be severed from a Christian Commonwealth,
Gods word is the rule to both, Moses and Aaron were Brethren, and of one Tribe,
signifying a propinquity in their Offices, they go together, and are defense
and instruction one to the other; Now against these Offices Korah and 250
Princes of the people, men of renown, rise up and say, Moses and Aaron,
wherefore lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord, you take
too much upon you seeing all the Congregation is holy, even every of them Nu.
16. 3.
; Moses in this case makes his appeal to God, the murmurers did the like (as
some among us too presumptuously have done) God decides the controversy
between them, and says, he will cause their murmurings to cease, God gave a
signal testimony on the side of Moses and Aaron, showing who was the man that
God did choose, by causing the rod of the Tribe of Levi to budd, blossom, and to
bear Almons in the Tabernacle of witness Number. 17. 6, 7, 8.
; We are not to expect such miraculous signs in our time, yet it cannot be
denied our enemies themselves being witness, but that God has done wonderful
things by his Highness for us and against our enemies, of which we have (and
may have a lasting) benefit; if we provoke not the Almighty by our murmurings,
and cause him to turn our blessings into a curse; Faith makes not haste, but
stays Gods time, and waits upon Providence; But it appears we live more by
sense then by faith; We trust God so far as we see reason for it, and no
farther; We say as the murmurers in the Wilderness did to Moses, Thou have not
brought us into a Land that flows with milk and honey, or given us
inheritance of fields and Vineyards; Will thou deceive us, and make thy self a
Prince over us, and put ont the eyes of his people Number. 16. 13, 14.
? Do thou think they do not see thy falsehood toward them? These murmurings
kept the people from the Land they looked for, and brought a curse upon them
which they looked not for, and thus it may befall us, if God be not more
merciful to us; Who is then the sinner, and who shall posterity have cause to
curse?

I beseech you My Brethren of England, be not impatient, take heed that you
fight not against God, murmr not at any Providence, believe that God rules
in the earth, and governs all things, and that all the turnings and
overturnings, and the changes which we have lately seen is of God; And all
these, yea, all things shall work together for good to them that love Gol To.
8. 28.
: Let us trust God who is faithful in all that he has said, and will make good
whatsoever he has promised, and that to us in our times, if we provoke him
not: Let us therefore be followers of them that by faith and patience inherit
the promise Heb. 6. 12
: Consider what our condition was before our last change, and whether men were
leading of us, if Providence had not disappointed their design; were we not
hasting into that (or worse) condition that Israel was in, at the beginning of
Asa's government? when they were without the true worship of God, Without a
Teaching Priest, and without a Law? and there was no peace to him that went out
or to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of
the Countries 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5.
? If it were so with us then let us imitate those good people, and do as they
then did, they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord their God, and sought
him, and he was found of him, 2 Chro. 15. 4. And at that time God stirred up
the heart of Asa, and he reformed all the evils, and they were delivered; God,
as I have said, by strange providence, evident to us, has stirred up his
Highness, and given him the honor to be Lord Protector of his people, who
knows what the Lord our God will do for us by him? Let us seek God for him,
and daily pray that God will give him wisdom as to Solomon, and courage as to
Phinehas, and zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and for the religion of his God, as
to good Asa, Hezechiah, and others, that God made instrnmentall for the glory
of his Name, and for the good of his people; Such I hope his Highness will be
to us, not only in these three Nations, but to the Church militant through the
whole world: take the Apostles rule and practice it, Put up your prayers,
supplications, intercessions and thanksgiving for all men, but especially for
all that are in authority, and why? that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and holiness 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2
; But if we will disobey such precepts as this, and provoke such Providence as
have led us thereunto, and be obstinate in our own ways and wills, as if we
would build new Babels to our own fancies, and say as those Builders said, Let
us make us a Name lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth Genesis
11. 4
; God will surely bring the evil upon us that we seek to prevent, and we shall
be scattered in our work: Have we not (some of us) begun to lay the foundation
of such a work? why else are we thus confounded that we cannot understand one
another? One calls for mortar, and another brings a mattock; one cries out for
brick and stone, another brings a hammer and an axe; One is building and
another is breaking down; One says Christ Jesus is setting up Kings and chief
Magistrates according to his own heart, to be his Vicegerents on earth, such as
shall own the Lord Christ, and acknowledge that they reign by him and for him,
according to that Prophecy of the Evangelicall Prophet, Isa. 49. 23. Kings
shall be thy Nursing Fathers and Queens shall be thy Nursing Mothers, they
shall bow down to thee with their face to the earth, and lick up the dust at
thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, etc. that is, as the Nurse
feeds the child, and defends it from harm, so Kings and Queens under the
Gospel shall tender the Church of Christ, to provide for it by providing holy
Ministers and honorable maintenance for them, that they may not serve Tables,
but wholly attend to the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and be a wall of
protection to keep them from harm, and that corrupt doctrines break not into
the Church, and they shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth, that
is, they shall acknowledge the Lord Christ to be their head, before whom they
shall cast down their Crowns, and acknowledge they are but his Vicegerents, by
him appointed to feed, cherish, and defend his faithful ones, and to reverence
the word of Christ, etc, according to that of the Psalmist, All Kings shall
fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him Ps. 72. 11
; Others say, that Christ is Staining the pride of all glory, and bringing into
contempt all the honorable of the earth, pulling down all Kings and kingly
powers, Isa. 23. 9. Others say, that Christ is only pulling down all wicked
Kings, Tyrants, and Persecutors, and will stain the pride of all humane glory,
such as Babylon and Tire, against whom the Prophet Isaiah in the 23. Chapter
beforementioned denounces judgment but not against all Kings, yet deny not
that the Lord Christ who is said to ride upon a white horse, going forth
conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. shall conquer all Kings and Kingdoms that
are his enemies, all shall stoop before him; Others say, Christ only shall
reign and shall be King of the Saints, and shall be set up in his glory and
Kingdom on earth by the Sword of his Saints, in blood, alluding to that in Rev.
19. 13. He was clothed in a ves^ure dipped in blood, And as in Psa. 58. 10. The
Saints shall wash their feet in the blood of the wicked, and in Psa. 68. 23.
That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, etc. The meaning of
these places is plain to be no more but the sudden destruction which the Lord
Jehovah should bring upon the wicked, such as are enemies to the Church, as in
the words going before in Psa. 58. 8, 9. As a Snail that melts they shall
pass away, and before the pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlwinde: He shall, who is that he? It is God Jehovah he shall do it,
not the Saints; the Lord Christ to whom all power and dominion is given, and
was given to him from the time of his Incarnation, as he himself witnesses,
Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to me, etc. he does not say, It shall be given
me, but in the present tense It is given unto me; Hence is that of Isa. 63. 3.
I have tr^d the wi^epresse alone, and of the people (our Saints) there was none
with me, for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, See
Rev 14. 20. and Rev. 19 17, 18. by which it is evident that the destruction of
Christ's Enemies shall not be by the sword in the hand of the Saints, but by
some miraculous way from heaven, like that expressed in Rev. 20. 9. Fire came
down from God out of heaven and devoured them; It is doubtless true that Satan
is let loose out of prison, and God uses him instrumentally to deceive the
Nations, we see it, and the Lord Jehovah does cause them by Satan's deceits to
destroy and consume one another, but the great destruction must come by some
great and miraculous way from the hand of God, and thus Christ is said to be
King of Nations, and he is King of Saints in a peculiar manner, he is the
protector and safe preserver of the Saints on earth, and he rules in them
spiritually, notwithstanding M. Spittlehouse be of an erring opinion, as he
expresses in a late Paper published in print: I shall esteem and strive to
imitate him in any virtue, but I must dissent from his errors: Of this I have
spoken in our fifth Inference, to which I refer the Reader for further
satisfaction; We that make Scripture our rule, say, and shall ever aver, that
the Kingdom of Christ is set up by prayer, and that is the power of the Spirit
of God within us, he shall rule in the hearts of the Saints, and by his Kingly
power shall and will subdue our lusts or fantasies and self-waies; mortify the
flesh and the affections thereof, that we may be fit Temples for him to dwell
in, that he alone may rule and reign there 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
; Others there be that will have none to rule over them but Caesar, Caesar must
be their King, they will neither have Christ, nor his vicegerent to be their
King, but they say stoutly as the unbeleeving Jews, Away with him, away with
him, we have no King but Caesar Joh. 19. 15.
; Such are the great Disciples of M. Evans, who has a notable Art to abuse
Texts of Scripture; Many other such Babel practices we have to work confusion
in a poor shattered Commonwealth, but God in his appointed time will prove our
buildings and what they are, whether we have built upon the sands or upon the
rock Mat. 7.
: I shall at this time omit to numerate men's selfwaies, and shall with the
Apostle Paul give this caution to all, he says of himself (according to the
grace of God which was given to him as a wise Master Builder) he had laid the
foundation, and another builds thereon, but let every man take heed how he
builds thereupon, for the fire shall try every man's building what it is, 1
Cor. 3. 10, 13. Let not any that profess to be Christians contend for victory
but seek verity, for strife and division are fleshly and carnal, as the Apostle
expresses in the Chapter last mentioned; The Lord Christ exhorts us to peace,
the Apostles all exhort to peace, love, and concord, and Saint Paul tells us, If
we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one of another Gal. 5. 15
; And the Lord Christ by a convincing Argument says, that If a Nation be
divided against it self it cannot stand Mar. 3. 24
, Consider how great things God has done for you 1 Samuel 12. 14.
, therefore serve the Lord with all your heart; But if you will murmr against
God; and do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King, these are the
words of Samuel to the people when they bad sinned in asking a King, not simply
in asking a King, but violently desiring it before Gods time came, that he
would give them a King, for David was from the beginning ordained to be their
King, although they had not asked a King, as is evident Genesis 49. 10. and Kings
are Gods Lieutenants on earth: It is no less sinful to refuse a King when God
gives him, then it was sinful to ask a King before Gods time was come, wherein
he would give them a King, Let not this be Englands sin, it will not be
unpunished, we have seen the work of Providence all along, in setting up our
Lord Protector, all the plottings and devices, and counsels of men, could never
have effected such a thing, in such a way, it is evident that God has done it,
we have seen the working of the wheels, and the living creatures by the wheels,
spoken of by the Prophet Ezechiel, in Chap. 1. 15, 16, 17. etc. and in Chap.
10. 13. etc. And a wheel in the middle of a wheel Ez. 1. 16.
, It is hard to kick against pricks, and it is a dangerous thing to provoke
providence.

I have seen a seditious Paper sent abroad by some that style themselves sober
Christians, entitled, Some Memento's to the Army; I hope they are as they style
themselves; But I am sure Christians have neither precept nor example of such
practice, to stir up rebellion: There was one Sheba the son of Bichri a very
seditious man, upon Scripture record, a Son of Belial, of whom it is said, He
blew a Trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, every man to his Tent O
Israel 2 Samuel 20 1.
* Bichri prepared as he intended for a new war against David; What his reward
was from the hand of a just God, you shall see 2 Samuel 20. 22. he lost his head
by the hands and consent of his associats; Scatter thou the people (says the
Psalmist) that delight in war Ps. 68. 30
; You may know that war is every where in Scripture threatened as one of Gods
sorest judgments, and peace is promised as a singular mercy to a Nation, it
was so to the Nation of the Jews, and is especially promised to the Church
under the Reign of Christ* Kingdom, when they shall beat their swords into plow
shares and their spears into pruning books Isa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3.
, there is a time of war and there is a time of peace Eccl. 3. 8.
; We had our time of war, and tasted of the bitterness of it, God now in great
mercy offers us our time of peace, if we will not accept of it but provoke
God by our murmuting we may fear the event.

Christians and Englishmen, I pray consider that saying of Ahner to Joab, Shall
the sword devour for ever? will it not be bitterness in the latter end x? You
know how it proved, bitter both to Abuer and to Joab; Discontents, Ambiand
false Interest procured the sword to eat the flesh of them by the just hand of
God; As Abuer had shed the blood of many in Israel in an evil cause, his blood
was shed by Joab wickedly 2 Samuel 3. 27.
, And Joab because beshed the blood of war in the time of peace 1 Ki. 1. 5.
, he was slain by the sword at the horns of the (...): 1 Ki. 2. 34
God has manifested his will to us by clear providence, Let us as men tha^
fea^ God and own his providence submit unto it, and not murmr nor repine, but
with patience wait to see what God will yet do for us; He has multitudes of
blessings to the obedient, and as many curses and scourges to the murmurers; If
it he (as the Psalmist says) a good and pleasant thing for brethren to dwell
together in unity Ps. 133. 1
; Then it must needs be an evil and unpleasant thing for Brethren to dwell
together in discord, dissension, strife and variance, all disunited and
disjointed in affections.

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give every one a good and right
understanding in all things; If that I have said being well weighed be not
found to be truth, believe it not, But if it be the truth, follow it, practice
it: or this that I say shall one day be a witness against him that reads and
slieghteth it, and give me leave to add this to the rest, and tell you, that
those that are contemners and murmurers against the government of a
Commonwealth in the Infancy of it; they are he greatest enemies to that
Commonwealth, not hurtful only to themselves but to the whole Nation, the evil
example of one murmurer draws more to the imitation of that sin, then the
persuasion and good counsel of many can divert, and so all or multitudes often
perish together; As we see in the men that were sent to spy out the Land of
Canaan, they murmured and brought an evil report of that good Land, which
caused all the people to weep and murmr and cry out against Moses, and Aaron
Nu. 14. 2
, for which their murmuring they were excluded from that good Land and promise;
And not only so, but they even those men that brought up the evil report, were
destroyed before the Lord by a plague Numb. 14. 27.
; Consider what God has done he will do still; For God is unchangeable, It is
one of his Attributes which he takes only to himself, I am the Lord, I change
not Mal. 3. 6.
; In him is no variableness neither shadow of change Iam. 1. 17
; Therefore it must of necessity follow from Gods unchangeablenesse, that
whatsoever he has done in former times he will do the same, for he is the
same; what judgments he has inflicted for any sin, or that he has threatened
to inflict he will still do the same; therefore the Apostle tells (even us
Christians) that whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
Learning To. 15. 4.
etc.

I confess (my Brerhren) when I took my pen in hand to write upon this subject
Discourse, I intended not above three sheets of paper, but the matter is
increased before me, and I could not express my self with more brevity, I
would yet for further satisfaction modestly give Answers to some Objections
made by some sorts of men against his Highness the Lord Protector, which I
will do in as few lines as I can possibly.

It is Objected,That the cause of our war which has cost so much blood and
treasure, was, To defend our Rights and Freedoms against the Tyranny of Kings,
to be governed under a Parliament as free People by just Laws, etc. But the
Lord Protector assumes to himself the Authority of a King by exercising a
greater Tyranny over the people then the King did, to give Laws, etc.

Religion might be defended and established, This will appear by several
Parliament Declarations, Protestations, and solemn Covenant; wherein the
Parliament do declare, protest, and covenant (as their own privilege, freedom
and liberty, etc.) to defend and preserve the Kings person, his just Rights and
Prerogatives, so far as it might stand with the preservation of Religion and
the peoples Rights; But the late King standing in strong opposition to the
Parliament and Liberty of the people, and his Rights and Prerogatives coming in
competition with or against the preservation of Religion and Privileges of
Parliament and the peoples Right; He defending and taking upon himself all the
evil Actions and wicked devices of his evil Council, miscarried (for so
providence had ordered it should be:) And the people (as providence led them)
submitted to a Parliament to govern them as a free People, they expected much
ease and great Reformation, but enjoyed --. Now I would ask the Objectors these
two short Questions. 1. If a Parliament should become more tyrannical then a
King, and lay heavy burdens upon them, reaching to their persons, lives, and
estates, by an unknown Law or arbitrary power, and suffer Innovations to come
in on every side, to the contempt of Religion and adulterating every truth,
turning Religion into every shape to metamorphise truth; whether in this case,
if such should be, the people might not as justly cry out and take up Arms
against such a Parliament as against a King? 2. If all these evils could be
found and sensibly felt by the people, whether it were justice to themselves,
acceptable to God, or benefit to their posterity, to cast off, and to abandon
for ever the authority and use of Parliaments? I think they would give their
negative, except such as would live without all order or command, which is to
be worse then devils; Nor is the office nor just power of a King to be for ever
rejected because there have been Tyrannical, oppressing, superstitious, or
idolatrous Kings, for the office of a King is the Ordinance of Jehovah, and
cannot be made null by man: To this office though not by the Name or Title of a
King, God by his providence has exalted the Lord Protector; And he that
resists his just Authority and Government resists the Ordinance of God: It is
evident he has not assumed to himself that authority: he that objects that, I
believe speaks against the dictates of his own conscience (except his
conscience be cauterized) and that he has exercised any Tyranny or oppression
over the people, it is false, and malicious calumniation, or that he will ever
do any such thing is but envies suspicion, therein measuring his Corn by their
own Bushel; He has been the instrument in Gods hand to withhold greater
oppressions from the people, and what at this day lies upon their shoulders,
were laid on by others, not by him, from which he is endeavoring to free us;
Let us not therefore whilst he is easing of us cry out against him, and say he
hurts us, like the dog that bites him that saves him from the tree; And for
Laws he has given none of himself, for he refers that to the Honorable
Parliament now sitting, and successors: That which he did by advice of his
Council in the regulating of the Chancery, and ejecting scandalous Ministers,
and bringing all treasuries into one, etc. were (I think) very acceptable
things and beneficial to the Nation, such as were long looked for from -- but
they came not.

Obj. I, but he has protested, engaged, and promised before God and men
against the government to be by one person, and that the government should be
by succeeding Parliaments, etc.

I answer, not contesting whether he made any such particular engagement and
promise or not: but grant he did, such a thing I hope the Objector will grant,
for it cannot be denied that in every promise or engagement there is some
condition, the condition not kept the promise or engagement is void; Whether it
were between man and man in private contract, or whether it were between a
public person of trust and a Nation, or to other persons of public
concernment, if in any thing of private contract, doubtless although the
promiser were a looser by it he is in strictness of conscience tied to perform
what he promised; But if to public concernment, the conditions failing in the
least, he is not bound to perform what he promised and intended, for that were
the highest breach of trust, possibly his Highness might by persuasion and
conditions promised, engage against the government by Kings, and to be governed
by Parliaments, believing (such or such conditions being performed) it might be
most for the Peoples Freedom and Liberty, but when he found the conditions
waved, and that the Freedom and Rights of the people was monopolized, and their
liberty turned into licentiousness, he might change his mind and purpose: A
good Father that promises to his child such or such an Inherinance, and
really intends to do it, yet if he be fully and experimentally convinced that
his child will abuse that donation, he revokes his promise, alters his
intention, and gives it to any other, and that justly: I am unwilling to speak
all the truth in this case, because I would not cast dirt, etc. But the
question is whether his Highness was not bound rather to wave such a promise to
preserve posterity, then to keep it to enslave a Nation, he being a chief and
principal man in trust? For as I said just now, in every promise there is some
condition, as when it was imposed by supreme authority on all the people of the
Nation to engage to be true and faithful to that government then without King
or House of Lords; The condition was implied that the people must have honest
and just protection under that government; And the end of all promises and
engagements ought to be to Gods glory and public good: Now if after such
promise or engagement made by his Highness, if either the condition or the end
did not concur or answer the intention (as we know it did not) his Highness
is absolutely freed from his promise or engagement, and no way tied unto such a
promise.

It is further objected, That he was the Commenwealths Servant, trusted by
Parliament to maintain the Privileges of Parliament, and was paid for what he
did: But for him to dissolve Parliaments, break their Privileges, and set up
himself to rule and govern as he please, is not just.

by his industry and faithfulness might be distributed to the people in all
justice, which was not done, but the contraty; Therefore I say he being
established the chief person in trust, was bound to discharge that trust in all
things for public good, especially providence leading him by gradations, step
by step, to what he did, which if he had neglected or shall hereafter neglect,
God will raise up some other, but if he had been unfaithful in this, then what
should he do (as Job speaks) when God shall arise up? and when God visits
what should be answer him? Nor did he break the privilege of Parliament though
he dissolved that Parliament, for the privileges of Parliament were broken
(but not by him) long before their dissolution, by whom and upon what design
the whole people of the Nation knew, and I willingly omit to repeat: If the
attempting to take out five Members was a breach (as surely it was) then the
taking out or driving away of more then half five hundred, was a greater breach
and as much as a whole dissolution, which privilege could not well be restored
without a dissolution; for if that Parliament (as was in design by some) had
been perpetuated; or if (as was by some others designed) there had been another
force upon the house, or (as they called it) another purge, where had been the
privileges of the people? What would have become of the fundamental Laws of
the Nation? and amongst how many heresies and corrupt new formed Religions must
we have searched to find truth? and who should have known his right or enjoyed
his propriety in any thing? Nor did his Highness set up himself, for God set
him up, who pulls down and sets up whom he pleases, providence leading him to
that he is, nor does he seek to rule and govern according to his own will, but
according to the fundamental Laws of the Nation, and agreeable to the will of
God, else he would have asked much more for himself and his posterity then he
has done, nor intending to rule by any arbitrary power, for then he would nor
have bounded himself by Laws and Articles, as you see he has in the Government
published by himself, etc. And taking care for the future by tri^nnial
Parliaments, and calling this present Parliament freely elected by the people
as a means to restore lost Privileges: In all which is no injustice but
faithfulness in the discharge of his trust, as a Servant to the Commonwealth
for public good.

Fourthly, The great Objection framed against his Highness, is, 1. That he
called this Parliament upon design, as he did other former things, for his own
ends, not for public benefit. 2. That it is not a free Parliament, not free in
the Elction, nor free when assembled to proceed as a free Parliament, restraint
was put upon them, many members sent away, because they would not engage to his
design, to confirm on him the supreme power of the Nation, give him the
Militia, negative to all Parliament Resolves, power to make Laws, and to raise
money, so that not only all the strength and treasure of the Nation should be
in his power, but Religion too, which is more then ever the King had, and the
things for which we engaged in a war against him as a Tyrant, etc.

clearly led him to, as is proved in our foregoing discourse. 2. That this is a
free Parliament, both in the Election and in the proceedings, is evident to
them that are not blinded by some prejudication; For the restrictions made in
respect of qualification in persons to be Elected and Electors, was so far from
infringing the peoples liberty, or being any bar to their freedom, that it
was indeed their greatest freedom and security of their safety, and was at this
time (considering out present condition) of absolute necessity; Many designs
being on foot to corrupt and ensnare counsels, the judgments of men being much
unsettled by subtle insinuations of seducers; Nor was there any restraint upon
Parliament proceedings when assembled, as is objected, but what tended to
public good, and the end why this Parliament was summoned, viz. to put things
that are out of order into order, by the Legal way of Parliament proceedings,
not to increase factions, nor to maintain parties and private Interests, but to
establish Religion, peace, and just Laws, the main basis and foundation to the
well-being of a Commonwealth, wherein the Parliament is free, And I hope by
their wisdom, through the assistance and direction of Jehovah, this Parliament
will be isntrumental in the laying of such a foundation, that God may own us
for his people, dwell in our Land, remove his afflicting hand from us, and
leave a blessing to posterity.

I say further, that this present Parliament was summoned by the Authority of
the Lord Protector, which authority is from God, to which providence has led
him all along, And we are commanded to be subject to the higher powers, not
some but all; Let every soul be subject, why? for there is no power but of God,
The Apostle tells you that the powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1.
By this power he summoned this Parliament, And before the summons he by the
advice of his counsel declared to all the people the condition that the
Commonwealth was in, and what was now necessary to be done for a happy
settlement, I need not repeat any particular thing declared, nor verbally
spoken by his Highness at the Parliaments first assembling, because it is
public to all, The people in all obedience to his Highness authority
according to his summons, made their respective Elections; The Knights and
Burgesses elected (or the most of them) accepted of their Elections, and
appeared at the day and place; Why any one should after all this oppose that
authority which called them, and the end why they came together, I will not
judge.

That his Highness sent any away, as is objected, I deny, They were at their
own liberty to sit in the house or to depart, it was at their free choice, That
which they were to subscribe was no other then was plainly held forth to all
men in the government as to one man, This was no bar to the free debates in
Parliament, for their debates to establish justice and righteousness, or
offering any thing that might conduce to the benefit of the Commonwealth, It is
only a bar against Oligarchy, the worst of governments ready to break in upon
us: It is true it does confirm his Highness Lord Protector, for his life and
no more, which if he did not for public benefit he might have asked it for his
posterity, and carried it by his power, if he had made himself his design, as
is objected; To that part of the Objection concerning the Militia, he was
trusted with it by the Parliament, and it was at his dispose, for the good of
the public, and so he ever used it with all faithfulness, and God by it made
him instrnmental to bring us out of Egypt (I may say) by great wonders; We are
still in the Wilderness scarce come so far as to Mount Nebo: And we have many
thousands among us that still look back unto Egypt, and we have the Children of
Anak, Giants and Cananites that stand in the way and hinder out entrance into
the possession of our Evangelicall happiness promised, These must be subdued
and kept under, therefore the Militia is still as useful in his hand as before,
to secure the people from those lusting murmurers, and to subdue the Cananites;
He claims not the Militia to himself, but desires it may be in Parliaments and
himself, Providence has put it into his hand, and he knows his own heart, that
he intends to use it no way but for the benefit of the Commonwealth by advice
of Parliament, But he cannot know any others heart, nor can he say of any other
that they would so use it, No, not for the people, if it were in their hands at
this time, for the people are of as many minds as men, if all might elect whom
they would to serve in Parliament, or all that would by designs get to be
elected should be Members, it is more then probable the Enemy might in short
time be Masters of the Militia, and by it not only give away our Freedoms so
much talked of, and the liberty of the people, but take away our lives also,
and which is more then all take from us the privilege of the Gospel, and what
else has been purchased with so much blood and treasure, and turn our pleasant
Eden into an Acheldama; The good people of this Nation with his Highness may
say at this time, as David once said, The Sons of Zervia he too hard for me,
which caused David to omit the doing that justice he willed to be done; And
truly my judgment tells me, if his Highness should for his time (whatever he
may for public good grant for future) part wholly with the Militia from his
hand, he should provoke providence and betray his trust to the Commonwealth
(which consists not of a few men that appropriate singularity to themselves for
private interests, but all the people) and give his life as a prey to his
enemies, and with himself the three Nations, which till some settlement be
established, depend upon his welfare; As also the interest that all true
Christian people in the world have in the welfare of this Nation; There must be
a trust somewhere, but every man may not be trusted, though every free born
subject have right in it; Nor can it be trusted in the hands of the multitude,
for they rule by voice, not by Law, nor to some of them, because others have
equal right: Nor can it be safe under the hand of a government Democratical
(the thing mightily aimed at by the opposites to his Highness, under specious
shows, to please and to deceive the people) which is, as experience tells us,
next cosen to the highest Tyranny; why then not rather in him? of whose trust
and fidelity the people of this Nation have good experience and great
deliverance, from a first and second thraldom, till he by Gods blessing with
his Parliaments advice can settle it in safety for the future.

And whereas it is objected, That he seeks a negative voice to the Parliaments
resolves, is a scandal, He asks it not but only in those things that
fundamentally concern the government, and that is (if men could see) for
public benefit, that neither Oligarchy nor Domocracy may start up to enthrall
and enslave the people, by governing them according to will and fancy, by
promises without known Laws, where then would be the freedom and liberty of the
people now so much talked of by the Objectors? These things he only excepts
against, in all other things whatsoever of Parliament Resolves being drawn into
Bills, and offered unto his Highness, if he consent not unto them within twenty
days, they are to pass into, and to become Laws, although he shall not give
his consent, as is expressed in Art. 24. And for his seeking to have power to
make Laws, and to raise money, it is mere calumniation, he seeks it not, nor
claims it not, but leaves it to the wisdom of Parliament, as appears in Art.
6. except (as is there excepted) for and in cases of safety and of necessity,
till the time that this presant Parliament were assembled, and that to be done
by him with the advice of his counsel, as in Art. 30. so then he seeks not the
strength nor treasure of the Nation to himself, nor to have it in his own
power, as is objected: And for Religion he seeks nor to have it in his power,
but leaves it also to the Parliament to debate, consult, and resolve, that he
by them and they by him might receive all light possible in so great a
business, for In the multitude of counsel there is safety; It is indeed a great
work, beyond the wisdom of man to appoint, without divine assistance and
spiritual wisdom; His Highness well knows the evil of the rigid prelatical
Persecution, in Tyrannizing over the consciences of men in that rigid
st^ictness; And he as well knows the evil of unbridled liberty, that it is
abused and made a Cloak of maliciousness, and as servants to corruption,
occasions to the flesh, and to licentiousness, blasphemies, heresies, and
doctrines of devils, the original of all discord, dissenti^ns, quarrels,
seditions, and confusion, which seldom ends, if tolerated, but with destruction
to the best and most flourishing Commonwealths: These are Rocks that will split
the Ship of the best fortified Commonwealth, therefore carefully to be avoided
by the best advice and skill of the most experienced Pilot, in which his
Highness does not refuse the counsel of this Parliament, nor does he refuse to
pass the Bill they shall agree on, except in his wisdom he see (as our chief
Pilot) something in it be dangerous to the well-being of the Nation, and give
them satisfaction therein, for he is more in this case then any one man in
Parliament, possibly a vote may be carried by one man, which in such a case he
may justly deny, because the utility, peace, and happiness of a Commonwealth
depends upon the right Discipline in Religion, and the justice of Execution of
just Laws, for regulating between two extremes; Religion in the power of it, in
all godliness, is a Law in it self, and needs no Law to command it, for
Religion is truly the very nursing Mother to all virtues, graces, peace, and
unity among men; And I must tell the Objector, that the late Kings have not
really endeavored this, but he or they had power to have done it, the neglect
was his ruin, and a chief cause of Englands misery.

Nor did we engage against this power or authority of the late King, but
against his misusing of that power, casting off those just Laws which by his
authority he should have observed and commanded to be executed for the good of
his people; He seeking to rule by his own will, by absolute power in himself,
to cast off all just Laws and adulterate Religion at his pleasure; this was the
Original of our war, and this is that which the Ancients in all times have
called Tyranny; But his Highness assumes not to himself so much Authority as
the late and former Kings claimed and exercised, That which he claims is such a
power as may enable him to establish Religion in its purity, and that he with
his Parliament might enact and give life to all just Laws, under which the
people may live in all peaceableness, and be governed in all sobriety and
godliness, with tranquillity and utility, for present and future, that the
people may dwell safely every man sitting under his own Vine and under his
Figree, as in the days of Solomon, 1 King. 4. 15.

Besides, we ought to consider, that for several years past we have traveled
in a wilderness in untroden and uneven ways, and are digressed much from the
right way of good discipline, almost in that condition as Israel was when
without a known Law, and without a teaching Priest, 2 Chr. 15. 3. And it is nor
possible that in an instant at the first step we should recover our lost way,
and at^ain to such a Reformation as all good people desire, but we must expect
as we have been led in crooked ways, and leaped over all bounds to lose our
selves, we must meet with some unevenness and cragged steps before there can be
an establishment in all truth and justice; The work is very great and the
greatest works are done with the greatest difficulty, because they ever meet
with the greatest opposition, it was so in Ezra's time, and it is so now; yet
let none that truly fear God be discouraged, for God is our God, If we seek him
he will be found of us, but if we forsake him not he will cast us off for ever.
1 Cor. 28. 9. ult. These are the words of David to Solomon, when he was to
build the material Temple, and in ver. 10. he tells him for his greater
encouragement God had chosen him to build it, and exhorts him to take heed and
be strong to do it; There is a spiritual Temple to be erected, of which that
was the Type, we know not by express words who God has chosen and appointed to
do it, But it shall be done at the time appointed, and by the man and means
appointed; What was promised concerning the Temple at Jerusalem in a spiritual
sense, belongs to us under the Gospel, as that promise which God made to
Joshua, Chapter 1. 5. belongs to all Christians, and is to them applied by the
Apostle Heb. 13. 5. for he has said he will never fail you nor forsake you:
God is now working by his providence for us, though we will not see it; But let
us take heed we do not provoke Providence whatever men object or pretend, let
us follow the footsteps of providence, not our own wills, and be careful not to
envy men that God will honor, but imitate them who through faith and patience
inherit the promise.

It is again objected by some, That his Highness is a favourer of them that are
known Cavaliers, so as they have equal privileges with them that have ventured
all for public good, etc.

Ans. Why then do others object against him for exempting all cavaliers, from
being elected or Electors of members to serve in Parliament; If an enemy shall
submit shall not he receive him into favor, and shall another eye be evil
because he is good? and because we have been in a War shall we never be
reconciled? God forbid. Besides the Parliament upon good and Christian
considerations has past an Act of Pardon to such Delinquents as had
compounded, or were not sequestered, if any compositions were not made or any
were unsequestred, it was not nor is his Highness fault; By this let any
judicious man, unbiast in the case, judge whether these Objections be not more
of envy or out of rashness then of truth or justice.

Other Objections I might answer, but these I have named are the chief, and
those that seem to carry the greatest weight in them; Therefore I shall omit to
say any more, having been already longer upon this Discourse then I intended.

POSTSCRIPT.
SOme small things have been mistaken by the Printer and by my self, not any
thing much* material that have observed that needs an Errata, what you find I
pray amend by you^ Pen, and let your Christian love and patience bear with the
rest, Farewell.

FINIS.

