THE THREE KINGDOMS HEALING-PLAISTER.

OR, The solemn Covenant of Reformation and Defense explained.

Wherein is showed the Authority, Antiquity, and Use of an Holy Covenant: the
occasions moving to it, and the ends in doing it, the necessity of it at this
time, for diverse Reasons herein expressed.

Also a full explanation of each Article of the Covenant, to the satisfaction
of all: showing the benefit that may redound by it, viz. Gods Protection and
Blessing to heal our miseries, and establish truth in Religion, Peace and
lasting Happiness to the three Kingdoms. Likewise showing the Danger of
Refusing it, and Gods curse upon us, if we enter into it deceitfully.

Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall
not be forgotten. Jer. 50. 5. But ye have departed out of the way, ye have
corrupted the Covenant, says the Lord: therefore also have I made you
contemptible and base before all the people. Mal. 2. 8, 9. And I will bring the
sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. Levit. 26. 25.
Thus says the Lord, cursed be the Man that obeys not the words of this
Covenant. Jer. 11. 3. Imprimatur, Ja. Cranford.

By G. S. Gent.

London, Printed for Francis Coals in the Old-Bailey. 1643.

THE THREE KINGDOMS HEALING-PLAISTER.
I Lately sent into the World a Treatise, Entitled Great Britains Misery,
with the causes and cure. Which I published not so much to show the misery:
(For that all men feel) as to show the causes of it, and the means to cure it.

And now, that the cure may be full, God by the work of his Providence has
commended one ingredient more: that nothing may be wanting, except we be
wanting to our selves: We all desire a healing: But behold, increase of misery:
and why? because we have not sought the right cure: We have believed lies,
forged lies to our selves* (^s Job speaks) we Outward means cannot heal
great Britain.
have sought to Physicians of no value: Job 13. 4. trusted to lying vanities,
that is, to outward things: Vain things that cannot profit nor deliver, 1 Samuel
12. 21. but we have not returned to him that smite^h us, neither ^ought the
Lord of hosts. Esaias. 9. 13. Therefore God has plagued us seven times more, as
is threatened: Levit. 26. 28. The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we
are not saved. Jer. 8. 20. Not because there is no balm in Gilead: nor because
there is not a Skillful Physician there: but because we have rejected (or
neglected) the true Plaster: we have not yet gone up to Gilead to use that
sovereign balm, no^ applied our selves to the healing Physician. Jer. 40. 11.
We are as sheep gone astray, and have not heard the voice of the Shepherd: Nor
returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: 1 P^t. 2. 25. God has
smitten us that he might bind us up: Hose. 6. 1. bu^ we have not returned to
him: We have been perfidious and broken his Govenant, which he has commanded
to perform, De^t. 4. 13. and have made covenants, and leagues, with Idolaters,
contrary to Gods command, Exodus 32. 12. therefore the Sword does dev* ure, and
our misery increases as is threatened Levit, 26. 25. I will avenge the quarrel
of my Covenant.

Now it God have a quarrel against us for the breach of his Covenant; As ^^e
breach of covenant is the cause of judgments, the renewing of covenant must ^e
the means to remove judgement^.
it concerns us to seek to God, and to entreat to renew our covenant with him
again: If we will confess our iniquities, and that our uncircumcised hearts
be humbled, God will remember his Covenant which he made with our fathers, and
will accept of us and heal our ^and: L^vi^. 26. 40. etc. By our sins we have
cast off God, and have cherished Idolatry, which we should have destroyed;
therefore God seems to cast us off, and give us into the hands of Idolaters:
When Israel ^h^se new gods, then was War in the gates: Judge. 5. 8. When they
forsook the Lord and worshipped Baal, and Ashtaroth, When we forsake God, God
forsakes us.
he delivered them into the hands of spoylers, that spoiled them, etc. Judge. 2.
13. 14. God has done thus by us, at this day for the sin of Idolatry; yet God
Almighty, who in the midst of judgment remembers mercy, notwithstanding our
rebellions, has at this day offered to enter again into Covenant with ^^: to
renew the covenant with us, which he made with our fathers, that we might be
reconciled to him; he as it were calls upon us from Heaven, to gather our
selves together, and to enter into covenant with him, that he may be our God
and our protector, to defend us, and to heal our misery.

Th^s God by Moses exhorted the Israelites (after their many Example of Gods
acceptance of renewing of Covenant^:
revolts) to renew their covenant with God, that ye may (says he) prosper in
all that ye do: Deuteronomy. 29. 1. 10. and the people stood all before the Lord,
the Captains, Elders, Officers, with their wives and little ones, to enter
into covenant with the Lord, and into his Oath, that he may establish thee to
day, for a people to himself, and that he may be unto th^e a God, as he has
said unto thee, and as he has Sworn to thy fathers, verse. 11. 12. 13.

Now this extended farther then to the people of Israel, to those that were not
then present, verse. 15. When God chose our father Abraham from out of the
Idolatrous families, he made a Covenant with him, and not with him alone; but
with his seed; it was an everlasting Covenant to his seed, whether Jews, or
Gentiles, all that are of his Faith, that walk in his steps, have right in
that Covenant: Romans 4. 12. 13.

Covenants are of two sorts, civil or religious; that which I call civil is
between man and man: When men bind themselves Two sorts of Covenants, one
civil and another religiou^.
by covenant or Oath before God, to perform promises, and fidelity one to
other; such was the covenant between Abraham, and Abimelech. Genesis 21. 27. and
between Isaac and Abimelech. Genesis 26. 28. so between Jacob and Laban. Genesis
31. 44. and between David and Jonathan. 1 Samuel 23. 18. these are Covenants
made before God, who is called to witness of the integrity, and uprightness
of heart, in the perform^nce of all promises sworn unto; and such a Covenant
is made between the Kings of England and the commons, to maintain their Laws
and Liberty, of which God is Judge, etc.

That which I call a religious Convenant, is a Divine and sacred A religious
covenant is a holy and sac^e^ ordinance of God under the Gospel, to be used as
well as under the Law.
Ordinance of God, made before God, or with God; it is an Ordinance as is
everlasting, as well under the Gospel as under the Law; God himself was the
author of it; It is as ancient as man, and of use as long as men endure, so
long as fidelity is to be cherished among men, and so long as men must be
conformable to Gods will (which is for ever) so long is there holy use of
covenanting.

Now this Covenant for Reformation and defense, by the especial The Covenant
now commanded contains both a civil and religious on^*
providence of God, appointed by the Sovereign authority of Parliament;
contains in it the condition of the Civil, and of the religious Covenant;
wherein we swear fidelity one to another, and to God, to reform our evil
ways and walk according to his word, in our lives, and practice. And such a
Covenant is part of Gods worship, yea, it is sometimes in the Scripture put for
the whole worship of God, Esa. 19. 18. To covenant and to swear is all one.
where men bind themselves by Covenant or oath (for it is all one to covenant,
as to swear) to seek God, and to endeavor to do his whole will; sometime
God is said to swear by himself, in G^n. 17. 8. it is said He made a Covenant
with Abraham to give him the Land of Canaan, and in Exodus 6. 8. it is said,
He swear to give to Abraham the Land of Canaan; and He swear to D^vid, Psalm.
8. 9. 3. and again, I have sworn by my self, says the Lord, Jer. 49. 13. As
God swears to bless the obedient; so he swears to destroy the disobedient;
It is said Heb. 4. 3. that he swore the rebellious Covenant Breaking
Israeli^e, should not enter into his rest. Gods covenant with us ingageth us to
covenant with God again.


By Covenants, or oaths, God binds and engages himself unto men, and engages
men to him again; God swear to David, and therefore David swear unto the Lord,
and to the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. 2. When God offers to Covenant with
us, and we refuse to covenant with him; He will swear by himself, that such
a person, such a family, such a Kingdom, shall become a desolation, Ier. 22.
5. If we refuse when God calls, God will refuse when we ask, and will mark
when our misery and calamity is upon us, Pro. 24. 26. At this time God offers
to God by his works of providence at this time, calls upon us to enter into
Covenant with him.
make a Covenant with us; And now he calls from heaven by his Judgments, and
by his mercies; the distractions, miseries, and calamities of the three
Kingdoms, cry to us to make our peace with God, who is offended for our
sins, when Israel was in capitvity and bondage seaventy years, for their
breach of Covenant with God; they were not established until they renewed
their Covenant with God, Therefore Ezra prayed and confessed the sins of the
people, with weeping and casting himself down before the house of God (the
place of covenant) and there assembled out of Israel a very great Congregation
of men and women, and children, for the people wept very sore, Ezra 10. 1. Now
Shechaniah, and Ezra consult together, and with confidence believe that
notwithstandig all their sins, there was hope in Israel concerning this
thing. Therefore they conclude to make a Covenant with God and Ezra made the
chief Priests, the Levites, and all Israel to swear, and they all swear,
verse 2. 3. 5. Nor was this a new thing to them: but that which Moses did by
Gods command, (as we have showed) and after him Joshua, as you may read Joshua
24. 25.

Now the examples of Gods people ought to be our rule, especially Examples of
Gods people ought to be our rule.
in those things that are commanded by God himself, but to covenant with God
has been the frequent practice of Gods people, commanded by God, and always
with promise and president of acceptance: When the Prophet Azariah (being
stirred up by the Spirit of God, to move Asa, Judah, and Benjamin to seek the
Lord by entering into a covenant) tells them, The Lord is with you while ye be
with him, and if ye seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him
he will forsake you. 2. 1 5. 2. Now to break Covenant with God, or to refuse
to make a Covenant with God, is all one, and is no other then to forsake God,
it is the Lords own expression. Deuteronomy. 31. 16. They will forsake me, and break
my Covenant which I have stricken with them: and what then? Then my anger shall
be kindled, and I will forsake them, that is, I will hide my face, take away my
divine presence of protection from them. verse. 17. See the example of this, 2
King. 17. 15. they rejected his Statutes, and brake his Covenant: What
follows? see verse. 18. Therefore the Lord was angry with Israel, and removed
them out of his sight, etc.

Now when a people have broken covenant with God, and caused The surest way to
find God, is to seek him by entering into covenant.
God to depart from them, the sure way to find God again, is to seek him by
renewing the covenant; else we quite cast him off, and then he will cast us off
for ever. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

In the time of King Asa, when by the sins and Idolatry of his fathers: Israel
had been a long season without the true God, and without a Examples.
teaching Priest, and without Law: So that there was no peace to him that went
out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants
of the Country: Yet in all this trouble when they turned to the Lord their God,
and sought him, he was found of them: But how did they seek him? see the place
2 Chronicles. 15. 12. They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul; and ( verse. 14) They
Swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, all Judah rejoiced at
the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart and sought him with their
whole desire, and he was found of them, and the Lord gave them rest round
about: verse. 15. So after the great distractions and bloody cruelties of
Athalia, that usurping Queen, Ieh^iada the Priest, established the Kingdom by
making a covenant with the Rulers and Captains, and by a covenant between the
Lord, and the King, and the people. 2 King. 11. 4 and 17. and all the people
brake down the Idols of Baal. In like manner Hezekiah confess^^n the
iniquities of his fathers, and of the people, and that for their sins the wrath
of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, they were delivered to wrath and
astonishment. 2 Chronicles. 29. 8. 9. For lo our fathers (says he) are fallen by
the Sword, and our sons and our daughters, and our wives, are in captivity for
this: here is their misery, and Hezekiahs confession: But what is the remedy?
see verse 10. Now (says the good King) It is in my heart to make a Covenant
with the Lord God of Israele Why a Covenant? That his fierce wrath may turn
away from us: So he sets upon the work, and puts the Service of the house of
the Lord in order, that is, Reformed Religion, and Hezekiah rejoiced and all
the people, that God had so prepared the people thus to seek God: For (says
the Text) the thing was done suddenly: verse. 35. 36. The like did I^s^^h when
he had heard the words of the Law read, and considered it, he rent his clothes
because of the wrath of God, for not doing according to that Law; therefore he
sends to the Prophetess Huldah to ask counsel, who denounced evil against
the Inhabitants, because they had forsaken God and served Idols: Then Josiah
gathered all Judah and Jerusalem, and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk
after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, etc. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31.

The occasions moving Gods people to enter into covenants, The just occasions
that have moved the people of God to enter into covenant.
have been either engagements by way of thankfulness to God for great mercies
and deliverances; or for reformation, by way of humiliation for sins
committed; to remove or prevent wrath, and sometimes both these together. Upon
the first occasion Joshuah drew the people to make a Covenant with God, Ioshuah
24. upon the second, Shechaniah and Ezra, caused all the people to enter into a
Covenant, Ezra 10. Upon both those occasions together, Asa made that solemn
Covenant with God; partly for the great deliverance from the great Army of the
Aethiopians. 2. Chron. 14. 12. and partly for reformation to prevent wrath, and
to appease Gods anger, 2 Chronicles. 15. 6. 7.

Now we of great Britain have all these occasions, at this day The same
occasions are now to move us.
to move us speedily, and heartily, to enter into Covenant with God; If we
look upon the mercies, preservations, and deliverances, which we have received
from God, they are innumerable, not only of former years, but now every day,
even in these times of our revolt, and of Gods indignation against us; He has
had respect to the Covenant which he made with our fathers as he had to Judah
in the time of Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21. 7. and spared us for his own names sake,
because his compassions fail not. If we look upon our sins by which he is
provoked, they are crying and hasten destruction to us, and to our posterities.
Our idolatry, strange wives, adultery, profanation of Gods name and day, are
prodigious, as if we had utterly cast off God from being* our God; And for
these sins Gods wrath is gone out against us, as if he would speedily make us
no Nation.

If we consider either of these apart, or look upon them both together, they
call upon us to seek the Lord, by convenanting Covenanting is a duty of
greatest necessity and of greatest profit.
for reformation, and thankesgiving for deliverance.

It is a duty absolutely necessary, and of greatest utility. Therefore not to
be refused nor deferred, except we will declare before God and men, that we
are hardened to destruction, and will not be healed.) It is absolutely necessary,
because it is an Ordinance of God commanded, for God commands nothing
unnecessary. It is also of greatest profit and benefit to Gods people, to
procure blessings and happy condition without compare; the examples in
Scripture that prove it so are obvious.

Now whatsoeve^ has been necessary and profitable to the people of God, is
the same to us now, for we have the same God, who is the same for ever, we are
bound by the same commands that his people were before, and stand in the same
n^ed of the use of such divine and holy Ordinances Whatsoever things were
written before, were written for our learning, that through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope, Romans 15. 4. and whatsoever is
written is for our practice. Therefore this is a duty to us as to the Jews.

Nay, I will not fear* to affirm, that as the case now stands with the people
and Kindomes of great Britain, it is of more necessity to us at this time,
then ever it was to the Nation of the Jews, and of greater utility, if rightly
done, and well performed. The necessity will appear by these reasons.

First, because our revolt has bin as great ^a ever the Jews was, to cause
Reasons why there is a necessity to enter into covenant at thisday*
God to hide his face from us, and to procure his fierce wrath against us.

Secondly, because the judgments that are present upon us, and that daily
threaten us, are not inferior to any judgment, or captivity, that ever the
Jews lay under.

Thirdly, because our enemles have more subt^^ely combined, confederated and
covenanted against us, then ever any brood of hell did against a people, and
sworn our destruction.

Fourthly, because the mystery of iniquity now works in it is full power, by
lying wonders, to delude, insinuate, and draw men from God to the Devil, from
the true Protestant Religion, to Popery, by protestations that they fight for
God, for Religion, for Laws, privileges of Parliament, and the liberty of the
subject; but they intend as the Israelites when they had forsaken God and their
Prophet Moses proclaimed and said, tomorrow Exo 32. 5^
is a feast to Jehovah, when they intended it to the worship of their new Gods,
their Idol Calves.

Fifthly, because of their ludifying Declarations, to steal away the hearts and
hands of the people by great promises of reward, and grateful acceptance of
their service, as at first they did to the people of Yorke-shire, to raise an
Army under pretense of a personal guard, with protestations that they intended
no war against the Parliament. The like Declaration is lately sent to the
people of Cornwall to be read in all Churches, and kept for their assurance of
future rewards to their posterity (not a flap with a Fox tail) but
chastisement with Scorpions, as such evil Counselors sometime King 1^
promised to the ten Tribes.

Sixthly, because there are many Judases traitors mingled among us through the
three Kingdoms, that profess to be our brothers, but prove our butchers, seem
friends, and under pretense of a kiss (or Hale Master) betray us, fight
against us, as it was once practiced by the Ephramites against Iepthtah, who
could not be discovered but by the word Shibboleth. (...) 12. (...)


Seventhly, because of the many Sects, Schisms and dangerous opinions of men
that live amongst us, which by these means may be discovered and ^oure
co^^deratio^s ^o move ^^en with ^oy and wil^ingnesse ^o enter unto this
^ovenant.
purged ou^, as those that dishonor God and disturb the peace of Gods people.
In all these respects this Covenant is of necessity to be entered into.

Now, because every one may speedily, willingly, and joyfully enter into this
Covenant, I would commend to all men these four considerations.

First, the matter of the covenant.
First, the matter of the Covenant. 2. The authority commending it. 3. The end.
4. The profit or benefit.

The first article paraphrased.
First, consider the matter of the Covenant is just and holy in every thing
therein contained, agreeable to the holy Scriptures expressly comm^nded,
necessarily employed by Texts both of Old and New Testament.

As first we covenant, in our places and callings to endeavor to preserve the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline,
and government against the common enemy (Papists) for none but Papists deny the
Church of Scotland to be Orthodoxall* therefore we are bound to endeavor to
preserve it, if the Apostles example be a rule to us, 1 Cor. 11. 28. besides
we are commanded to do to others, as we would that others should do to us*
Math. 7. 12. Now they jointly Covenant, and swear, to preserve the reformed
Religion of the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in doctrine, discipline, and
government so far as it is, for shall be agreeable to the word of God, and we
covenant but the very same for them, and although the two Kingdoms should not
in every particu^ar agree in government; that is no breach of Covenant. But
because conjunction, and uniformity in doctrine and discipline, is most
glorious, acceptable to God, and profitable to both Kingdoms. We Covenant to
them, as they to us, to endeavor to bring the Kingdoms to the nearest
Conjunction that may be, still with this proviso, according to the word of God:
and this is an Apostolical precept, Romans 12. 6. and Romans 15. 6.

Secondly, we Covenant to endeavor to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, 2. Article
paraphased.
Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and
Commissaries etc. depending upon the Hierarchy, no otherwise then they shall be
found contrary to sound Doctrine, which is also an Apostolical precept, be
ye followers of me* even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Now we know to our
woeful experience, that these have not been followers of Christ but for gain,
as those that followed Christ, because they ate of the ^oaves and were filled.
John 6. 26. and for their private ends would at this day betray Christ (whom
they pretend to serve) having like Alexander and Hymeneus put away good
Conscienc^, and made shipwreck of the Faith of Christ: and for their
Chancellors, Commissaries, and the rest, what are they but fretting
Caterpillars, in Church and State? Such as were never instituted by Christ, nor
the Apostles, nor thought of in the primitive times: as for superstirious
Heresies, Schisms, and profaneness, who, that would be counted an honest man,
but will say he is bound to extirpate? our heavenly Father never planted any
of these, and therefore if we will believe Jesus Christ, they must be rooted
up, Mat. 15. 13. The word Protestant The wor^ Protesta^^ calls upon us t^
protest against p^pery and false worship.
puts us in mind of ou^ duty to abhor all herefie, and false Worship, and
therefore a^ we are true Protestants, we are bound to protest, and to endeavor
to extirpate Popery.

Every Christian King, every Father, and Master in their Families, are bound to
bring their Subjects, Children, and Servants, to the obedience of the Faith of
Christ, and the true Worship of God: Kings are called nursing Fathers, Esaias 49.
23. Parents are commanded to teach their Children the Pear of the Lord, and
his true Worship, Deuteronomy. 4. 10. And the command of Sanctifying the Lords day is
given to the Father and Masters of Families: therefore they are not to suffer a
contrary Religion, or a profane person to live in their Houses: this was the
practice of David, and is the Duty of all Christian Kings therefore, not to
tolerate any contrary* Religion, as Idolaters in their Kingdoms, nor witches
in their Camps. Besides, it is Gods command that if any person shall inti^e to
Idolatry or any City set up Idolatrous worship, that person shall be killed, and
that City destroyed: Deuteronomy. 13. 9. 15. This (says reverend Willet is the
meaning of the Law in forbidding to sow the field with diverse seeds, or wear a
garment of linen and woollen, Levit. 19. 19. We may not plow with an Ox and
an Ass together, which Saint Paul expounds (when he says be not unequally
yoaked. 2 Cor. 6. 14. what Communion between light and darkness, what
fellowship between God and Contrar^ Religion must no^ lesustired in an^ kingdom
^^eli^l) contrary religions must not be suffered in one Kingdom, Abraham cast
out scoffing Ismael out of his family Genesis 21. 10. Jacob put away his strange
Gods. Genesis 35. 2. David put out the Idolatrous lebusites ou^ of Jerusalem. 2.
Sam. 5. 8. Asa put out his Mother Maacha from being Queen because of her
Idolatry, and brak^ down her Idol, 2 King. 23. y. Zerubhabel would not admit
the Idolatrous Som^r^^anes to join with the people of God in building the
Temple, much less would he accept of them in his Army: Ezra 4. 3. These are
commended in Scripture and blessed of God, leftupon divine record, for our
example and Imitation.

The third Article of the Covenant, is to endeavor with our estates ^. Article
paraphresed.
and lives, mutually to preserve the rights and privileges of Parliaments in
all the three Kingdoms. Now, we are bound in justice to leave our posterities
as free as our Fathers left us, what they gained for us with the loss of their
lives, let us preserve with the hazard of ours, to our posterity. Again, we
covenant to preserve the Kings Person and authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, nor let any make
scruple a^ this clause, or ^mitation, (to preserve the King an the preservation
of the true Religion) for we cannot, nor may not covenant further, except we
disobey God, or covenant* against God, God commands the King to preserve and
defend the true Religion, and us to defend the King, in defense of Religion,
not against Religion, Let every soul be subject to the highest power, Romans 12.
1. But God is the higest power, therefore we must be subject only to God, he
must be obeyed, the King for God, and in God, as his Vicegerent; if God command
obedience to his Deputy, much more does he require obedience to himself.

The fourth Article is to endeavor to discover Malignant evil instruments, ^.
Article paraphresed.
that hinder the Reformation of Religion, divide between the King and his
people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, by making Factions, and parties
amongst the people, contrary to this Covenant, such as are crafty Achitophels,
flattering Zi^a's, and treacherous Iudases, that they may be brought to trial
by the justice of the Law: No man, not void of common nature, but would gladly
enter into such a Covenant, it tending to the general good both of King and
people.

The fifth Article is to endeavor to maintain the peace between these 5.
Article paraphresed.
Kingdoms to our power, in our places and callings to all posterities, etc.
This none can deny but to be agreeable to Scripture, and commanded by nature,
conducing to the height of temporal felicity, how good* and how pleasant a
thing it is, for Brethren to d^ell together in Unity* Psalm. 133. 1. For there
the Lord commands a blessing. verse. 3.

And for the sixth Article, to endeavor to assist and defend all that enter
into this Covenant, in the pursuit thereof is but reason and duty, for that we
are all members of one body (the Church) whereof Christ is the head: and not
only so, but members united by this Covenant to withstand and oppose all the
opposition of hell* Pope, and papacy: Now if one member suffer all members
(should) suffer with it (or else relieve it) If one member be honored, all the
members should rejoice with it. 1 Cor. 12. 16. We being but one body, and we
members one of another. Romans 12. 5.

And that we should not be drawn off from this Union by any craft, persuasion,
threatening, or terror, it is also just and consonant to divine precept, for
else we maime the body, for there is an use of the meanest members, and none
can say I have not need of thee. 1 Cor. 12. 21. For the body is not one member,
but many, verse. 14. And to be Neuters is most base and cowardly, hated by men,
and accounted by God as enemies, Mat. 12. 30.

Lastly, because the general provoking sins of the Kingdoms, are made The su^
of all and every m^ duty, as ^ is a Christian, and the very covenan^ of God
himself*
full by each particular man's sins. We promise and profess before God and the
world, that we unfainedly desire to be sorry for our own sins, and to be
humbled for them, and for the sins of others, this is but duty. Ier. 13. 18.
and Ier. 9 1. Holy David did thus, I beheld the transgressors and was grieved.
Psalm 119. 158. and good reason: Because he that covers his sins shall not
prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy. Pro. 25.
13. Therefore we likewise promise to endeavor t^ forsake our sins, and to
amend our lives, and endeavor to reform others (that all may be mended by
every ones mending one) especially those that are under our power and charge,
it is a duty expressly commanded to all. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin to lie upon him. Now this which the
Prophet Moses calls rebuking, the Apostle Paul calls admonition, admonish
him as a Brother* 2 Thessa. 3, 15. ult.

But because we see Gods judgments abroad in the world for sin, and are sorely
at this day upon us, by the Sword of merciless men, by which God avengeth the
quarrel of his Covenant threatened, Levit. 26. 25. We humbly submit to his
will, and confess that God has punished us les^e then our iniquities deserve,
as the Church has done in the like case. Ezra 9. 13. And therefore renew our
Covenant with ou^ God, (which is in effect but the same we promised, at the
Sacrament of Baptism) and in his presence who is the searcher of all hearts,
swear to endeavor to perform all that he commands us, so far as God by his
holy Spirit shall enable us; for without him we can do nothing. Joh. 15. 5.
except he bless our endeavors and our proccedings with success, we must give
all the glory to God, both of his judgments and of his mercies, and now while
his judgments are abroad in the world, we the Inhabitants of the earth must
learn righteousness, as in Esaias 26. 9. thus much for the matter of the
Covenant.

Secondly, confider the authority commanding it: First it is Gods 2.
Consideration from the authorit^ that commands i^
command, Deuteronomy. ^9. 1. Secondly the Parliament, the highest Court of
Magistracy, of Sovereign authority, and the representative body of the
Kingdom; who have with the hazard of their own live^ (and all else that is
theirs courageously) stood for God, and the maintenance of our rights, and do
jointly swear with us never to forsake us, nor betray the trust we have
committed to them, as some have per^idiously done* whose Treachery is now
manifest; yea by the same authority and advice of the whole Kingdom of Scotland
approved, and entered into by the Assemblies of Divines in both Kingdoms,
Reverend, Learned, Orthodox, and godly men* Withal, consider the tender love
and good affections of these our Worthies commanding, in that they have not
laid such a penalty upon us (if in case any should through ignorance make
scruple) as was laid upon the people in Asas time, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. That
whosoever would not (by entering into Covenant) seek the Lord, should be put to
death whether great or small, man, or woman; because, as they desire, and as
our necessity requires, they beeleeve that every one that desires a blessing
from God; will thus seek him, and will freely and willingly enter into this
Covenant, for that is indeed acceptable to God, he is well pleased, and only
delights in such as yield him willing obedience, therefore we should be so
much the more stirred up in Zeal to the thing, with thankfulness to God, and
to our Worthies for such an opportunity.

Thirdly, consider the end why we are by those our Worthies commanded
Conside^ation from the and.
to enter into this Covenant: Their first end is for the glory of God, to seek
God, to set up and to maintain the true Protestant Religion; and therefore
have Entitled it, A Covenant for Reformation and defense. First of Religion,
Secondly to maintain the Person, Honor, and happiness of the King: Thirdly,
the Peace, and safety of the three Kingdoms: mark it, and you shall see all
tends to one, or all these three things to seek God with unanimous consent, to
extirpate Popery, Heresy, Schisms, and profaneness, set up good men in place
of authority, and that evil men may be put out, that so the Kingdoms may be
preserved, and the throne established in righteousness. Prove. 25. 5. and all
this every Soul is bound to endeavor: they that consent not to this are to be
esteemed perfidious, both to God and to the Kingdoms: worthy (according to the
edict of Asa) to be put to death, of what condition soever they be: God is now
about a great work in the world: and doubtless will reform his Churches,
gather his elect together, destroy that man of sin, and cut in God will save
and deliver his people and destroy the wicked utterly.
pieces those men that say of Christ, this man shall not reign over us: And
although Gods people, for a little space of time must drink of the cup of his
anger, and pass through the fiery trials, yet it is but for a moment, and
Gods anger will pass over. I say 26. 20. And then all his enemies shall drink
the ^ull wine-cup of his fury. Jer. 26. 15. and all the wicked of the earth
shall drink the dregs thereof* Psalm. 57. 8. I dare not take upon me to set the
time, for it is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the father has
put in his own hands. Act. 1. 7. But Scriptures compared with these late
times, assure me the time is ^igh, even at hand. And although God will in his
own time freely accomplish his own work, yet he will be sought unto by us:
Thus says the Lord, I will for all this be enquired of by the house of Israel.
Eze. 36. 37. And those that seek him not this way, for ought I know or can
say, shall be accounted as those on whom his fury shall* be powered.

Fourthly, consider the benefit that will redound to all, and every one 4.
Consideration from the benefits.
that willingly and joyfully enters into this covenant, (if with honest humbled
hearts, they desire to seek God) they shall surely find God, and so find him,
as that he will be their God, to protect, save, and bless them, as is
promised: If ye seek him he will be found of you etc. if we endeavor to
walk perfectly before him for the time to come he will be our God
all-sufficient, and will bless us exceedingly* Genesis 17. 1. ^. He will bless us
with truth and peace in all the three Kingdoms, so that we shall lie down and
none shall make us af^aid. Levit. 26. 6. He will chase our enemies, and they
shall fall before us by the Sword, verse. 7. We shall be blessed in the City,
blessed in the field, blessed in the fruit of the body* and in the fruit of the
ground, the increase of our kine, and the flocks of our sh^epe, blessed in our
basket* and in our store^, blessed shall we be when we come in, and blessed
shall we be when we go out. Deuteronomy. 28. 3. etc.

The manner of solemnizing this Covenant is double: First in outward The manner
of solemnisin^ this cov^nant, agreeab^ to* the c^stom of the Chur^ of God.
action, 2. in inward affection. The outward action is, first* reading of the
Law (or Covenant) unto all the people: 2 Chronicles. 34. 11. Secondly, the assent of
the people expressed in words, as Joshu. 28. 21. or signified by shout, as 2 Chronicles. 15. 14. or holding up hands, which we now do. 3. The binding testimony
or affi^ma^ion by setting to our seal, as Ezra 10. 1. or by subscribing names,
as now.

The inward affection is; first an holy prepartion, examining our particular
corruptions and sins: 2. confession of them before God 3. resolution against
them: 4 an earnest, hearty, and holy desire to seek God: to search what he
requires of us to do: 5. prayer to God for strength to perform what we
promise and resolve, according to his will: 6 constant practice and performance
in prayer, and holy endeavor to observe all that God commands all the days of
our lives.

To refuse to enter into Covenant when necessity and lawful authority A great
not to e^ter into covena^ but gre^ter not keep a^ perfor^ the cov^nant.
call unto it, is a great sin, but when we have entered into covenant, not to
obs^rve it, is a greater sin: It is a work of the Lord, and he is cursed that
does the Lords work: deceitfully: Ier. 48. 10. Better not to vow, then that
thou should vow and not pay it Eccl. 5 5. Consider how much God was
displeased with all Israel for that one sin of Saul's, in breaking their
Covenant with the Gibeonites, it was only Saul's act. Yet because the people
who were equally bound in the Covenant, endeavored not to hinder Saul in that
sin, as they did in the sin he would have committed against I^nathan. 1 Samuel
14. 45. Therefore all Israel was punished with a Famine, year after year,
three years together. 2 Samuel 21. 1. If God will avenge the breach of Covenant
with men, and the meanest of men, (for the Gi^^^ nites were but their slaves)
how much more will he avenge the breach of Covenant with himself? We have of
late entered into several Covenants, but former Covenants have been forgotten:
Men have broken them as Sampson did the new cords wherewith he was bound: Take
heed, be not deceived, God is not mocked. Gal. 6. 7. I dare pronounce from the
authority of Gods Word, that you who make nothing to break Covenant, shall be
your selves broken. The men* that break my Covenant which they had made before
me, when they cut the Calfe in twain and passed through the parts thereof: I
(the Lord) will give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of
them that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat, etc. But
what covenant ^r covenant br^^^rs.
men are these that brok* the Covenant? no meaner then the Princes of Judah and
the Princes of Jerusalem, the Priests, and all the people that passed through
the parts of the Calfe, Ier. 34. 18. 19. 20. Take heed ye Princes of England
and of Scotland, ye Priests, and perfidious people, that have now lift up your
hands and subscribed your names, if you break your Covenant you have heard
your doom: He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
children shall fail. J^b 17. 5. All that confederate, counsel, or covenant
against God, and break covenant with God, shall be broken in ^ll that ^ake
con^deracy ^ covenant against ^od or his church ^all p^^sh.
pieces: see E^^ 8* 9. They shall be like Egypt, and her confederates,
Aethi^opia, Libia, Lydia, and all the mingled people; and C^^b, and the men of
the Land that are in league, all shall fall together by the Sword: Ezekiel. 30. 5.
But it shall be well with them that seek God which fear before him, as it shall
not be well with the wicked, nor shall he prolong his days, which are but as a
shadow, because he fears not before God, Ecclesi^st. 8. 12. 13. Heaven and
Earth shall pass^ away, but this truth shall stand for ever, and shall be made
good in our days.

FINIS.

