THE Safe way TO GLORY, In several EXERCISES of General use.

By WILLIAM SMYTH M. Ar. R. of Cotton in Suff.

LONDON, Printed by Eva^ Tyler, for Ed. Dod, at the Sign of the Gunne, in Ivy
Lane 1656.

Christian Exercises.
I. GIving directions to an holy life, with other conditions of the Gospel. II.
Satisfying Doubts concerning Grace, and Gods acceptance of a sincere Christian.
III. Answering exceptions against this Church and Ministry, with rules to
discover false professions. IV. Forms of Prayer of General use. V. A Catechism
for children.
By W. SMYTH M. A. and R, of Cotton in Suff.

TO All those deservedly much Honored Persons, whom I serve in the Education
of their CHILDREN, AND To all my loving Parishioners of Cotton in Suff. whom I
serve in the GOSPEL, Are Humbly presented these ensuing Exercises:

By their unworthy, yet Faithful Servant, in all engagements of duty and
respect,

W. SMYTH.

A PREFACE Apologetical To the READER.
A Pretense to satisfy every Reader, were as ridiculous, as his attempt, who
studied to make a garment for the Moon, that might fit her in every
interchange: and as unlikely to succeed, as his enterprise, who with a dish of
one relish, would satisfy every Palate. I am so far from that imagination,
that I think it a design elegible, rather to displease some (whom I cannot
gain) by declaring the truth, then (for some politic ends) in silence to show
such a neutrality and indifferency of Spirit, as might indulge a vicious and
factious world. I desire solemnly in this case to apply St. Paul's Expression to
my self, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. I know I
shall displease most, its enough if I please the best, (Principibus placuisse
viris, etc.) and not dis-satisfy any mind, that is not vitiated with
profaneness, prejudice, or faction. I account the acceptance of one good man,
of weight enough to out-ballance the contempt of a thousand; and if I can
administer an argument of piety to one sober mind, it shall compensate the
scorn and displeasure of ten thousand. When it was objected to a Tragedian,
that Plato only was present, his answer was, (Et hic unus Plato plus est quam
Atheniensis populus,) and that one Plato is more then all the people of Athens
besides: such an estimation I have of every honest pious person, though of the
lowest order. Nevertheless, lest I should seem morose or Cynical, I will
endeavor to take off the exceptions of three sorts of Readers; to whom I
humbly tender this satisfaction: First, to my prudent Friendly-Reader. 2. To
the Learned-Reader. 3. To the piously-affected, yet differing in judgment.

First, my Friendly-Reader will presently question my prudence, in thus
adventuring my self on the public stage, in this sad scene of Church Affairs.
He tells me, there is danger in it; for though such truths be as clear and
necessary as the Sun, yet like the Sun I must make my way through a Zodiac of
inconveniences: here the privy and sidepinch of a detracting Cancer, there the
poisonous sting of a malicious Scorpio, every where the sharp arrows, the
bitter invectives of the worlds Sagittarii. For his satisfaction, let him turn
his eye on the foregoing leaf, and that intimates my design, and reasons for
it; which is to secure the beloved souls of my Parish, and the tender plants
of my family, from the invasion of common errors; which like an Epidemical
disease, propagate their infection every where, and do inevitably (without a
great deliverance from heaven) subject posterity, to great departures from the
faith of Christ. So my full answer will be: It is at all times the best
prudence to serve God, and in this case it is truer wisdom to be administering
to the salvation of souls, then to sell our duties to God, for the unsafe hope
of a worldly advantage. If any soul fayles for want of any help, that is in my
caepacity, it falls with its own infelicity, and my sin. The rule of the
School herein is without dispute, (Causa deficiens in necessariis, est
efficiens) he pulls down, that holds not up. And a Christian, who declines his
duty, for fear of suffering, has in a great measure betrayed his profession of
Christ. I cannot despair, but that many in the Nation; I can hope, that many
of my Parish, and I am almost assured, that many of my family and near
relations, may be preserved in the Faith, and directed (in their judgments at
least) to the right rules of holiness, by these poor exercises. Now suppose the
least; If God shall please among all these to bring in but one soul by them,
and that but to some improvement of his knowledge only: or if I wanted that,
yet if I have done a service acceptable to God, I am recompensed for the worst
evils my Prudent-Reader can object to me. But my ingenious friend puts me upon
another task: He fears I must pass under the just censure of doing an
impertinent and unnecessary thing; That I have dug a p^t by the river
((...)) when the streams of the former, and this present age, have run full
and luxuriant in exercises of this kind. To which I answer; that such
Catechismes, and institutions, as have ordinarily been dispersed among the
people, have seemed to me to have pursued too great an interest of private
opinion, in decisions of controverted and notional points of Divinity; but to
have been too loose and general in cases of conscionable walking with God and
man. They have also generally abetted the doctrines of transmarine Churches,
against the settled doctrine and discipline of their own Mother Church: secretly
undermining the credit of our own Apostolic determinations, rather then
serenely driving at the scope of strict and severe holiness. Hinc illae
lachrimae, Hence our woe. For the people (through such writings and other like
insinuations) having been corrupted with false principles, and trained up to
siding and interests, many of them (I accuse not all) knew little other use of
their zeal but in opposition; nor of conscience, but in scrupling indifferents.
And while they were puzzled with an obligation to look into the inextricable
mysteries of Gods decrees and Counsels, perplexed with the understanding of
un-edifying controversies, and cried upon to the duties of getting Christ, and
getting Faith, were in the interim, made strangers to the holy practices of
humility, meekness, charity, tender-heartednes, deep-christian-compassion,
justice, peaceablenesse, and the like Christian graces: as by woeful experience
it has been made too evident to us. Now such Abridgments of the doctrines of
piety, which have run in the Channel of our own settled doctrines, as they have
been few, so have they been either long, or above the capacities of those,
whose advantage I principally design. For being long, they have discouraged
many (though of good capacities) who willingly would have read them, which
might have been comprehended in some few hours, but were easily tempted to
decline those, which required the reading of many days: And this discouragement
became an insuperable difficulty to young persons, poor servants, laborers,
and many others, whose callings required continual attendance. And though some
of them were short, yet being pend above the reach of ordinary capacities, they
became altogether useless to such young and vulgar intellects. To avoid
therefore the inconveniences of both: I have truly trodden in the paths of this
Church, as to the first; and I have endeavored plainness and brevity, as to
the second. Now to contract my argument to the force of a satisfaction: There
being none of the former sort, (that I have seen) which are not (in some
measure) chargeable with those mentioned defects: nor any of the latter, which
have not been either prolix, or too sublime: I presume I may beg the kindness
to be believed, that I have done a thing both necessary and seasonable.

2. In the next place, let not the learned eye despise me, that I appear not
with the embroydery of large quotations, or Chemistry of School-distinctions,
or that I have not conjured the plain principles of Christ, into a circle of
sciences. Such dresses suits them that pretend to the chair, and aspire to be
inserted in the Catalogue of the Learned; or them, whose design is to court
great and generous minds, to the love of Christ and his Religion. My business
is of another nature; I come to treat the lowest of Christ's School; and such,
whom you may as soon nourish with stones, as edify with learned discourses,
with whom I labor to make Christ to be understood, not to show my self
understanding. And if after this tender of satisfaction to such Readers, I must
yet purchase their contempt: my compensation shall be, that I account it as
much more blessed, to enlighten one poor ignorant disciple of Christ, then to
please the learned of all ages; as to feed one hungry soul, has more charity
in it, then to feast all the Nobles in the world. This intimation then of my
design, I make my only plea against the such allegations of the learned Reader,
to whose ingenuity I appeal.

3. Lastly, as to my Reader, that differs from me in judgment; I beseech him
upon his christian charity to believe me, that I intend not controversy: but
have made it my chief business, (concurrent with the mayn drift and scope of
our Saviors Sermons, the Epistles of the Apostles, and indeed of the whole
Gospel it self) to encourage men in, and to direct men to holy lives, and just,
peaceable, and merciful conversations. And when I have been necessitated to
meet any doubtful and disputable doctrines, (as of irrespective and absolute,
or conditional decrees of election and reprobation; of universal, or particular
redemption, and such like, tho decision of which, have administered nothing but
endless disceptations to the learned, and terrors to the weak) I have not at
all dogmatized, but only used them, as they have served the interest of holy
living: Always giving this rule to my self, in those intricate controversies,
that they are then concluded and believed with most safety, and likelihood to
truth, as their determinations give the best reason and encouragement of living
well. In order to which, if I have unavoydably declared a difference from thy
judgment in any such point, have but so much christian civility, to believe my
former profession; and that the argument that led me to it, was not to differ
from thee, but (according to my persuasion) to advance the doctrines of piety
in thee, and all men: and thou can not but count me worthy of christian peace
from thee. I beg of thee not to censure me hastily, nor litigiously, least thou
overreach a disadvantage to piety it self; which has never suffered more,
then when the fiery combats, and unnecessary quarrels of Christians, and of
Churchmen especially, have run them into heats, and actions beneath gravity,
and against charity; and upon such occasions disgracing, and undervaluing each
other, have taught the people to scorn and contemn them all, and in the end
religion it self, with which they trifled in needless argumentations. For it
is sadly notorious, since one Clergy have bitterly inveighed against, and
heavily oppressed another, about differences in Government, and Service: (which
every thing might have reconciled but passion and self-interest) they have
purchased a slite and contempt, not only to them, to whom they designed it, but
to themselves also in the greatest portion, and to Ministry in general: and by
necessary consequence, they have shaken the very foundations of this once
renowned National profession: Which they may soon believe, when they behold so
universal a defection from it, and that their congregations are thin,
careless, and irregular: the Sacraments unfrequented, and other Ordinances
disregarded: their callings disputed; their persons hated, their demeans
tottering, and a progeny of illiterate men ready to possess their places; and
(which is most sadly to be lamented) Religion it self made an amazement and a
scruple. Let sad experience therefore, and pity to a poor languishing Church,
move us to lay aside all personal and passionate dissentions, and animosities,
which have produced such miserable effects, and draw our contentions to this
one period, that we strive together, who shall be most forward in the work of
the Lord. All the satisfaction then, that I tender to this kind of Readers is,
That they are obliged to think me charitable, and that whatsoever point I have
determined contrary to their persuasions, was, because I made it an argument of
more comfort and diligence in the profession of Christ. And I thank God I look
upon them, and aell men that differ from me, with no other eye, then as St.
Austin did his Manachees (Vivat homo, moriatur error) let their errors dye, but
let themselves be happy.

Having thus dis-ingaged my self from all these exceptions; It remains only to
show the use of these ensuing exercises: which will best appear, by discovering
the gradual progress of my intentions about them: as they became productive
one of another, by necessary inferences. For I first propounded to my self,
only the Catechism for the rules of life: but then I found, that through the
severity of Gospel-obedience many scruples might invade pious minds, concerning
Gods grace to help to perform them, and concerning his acceptance of their
infirm obedience to them, which occasioned the following treatise, concerning
satisfactions of doubts about the doctrines of Grace. After that I considered,
that many good minds, ready to engage in a religious life, were sadly perplexed
about the diversities of professions, (all strongly pretending to be for
Christ) and especially about the Ministry, decryed every where, as unlawful,
and Anttchristian: which (as it became necessary) occasioned the third part:
Satisfying doubts concerning the profession of this Church and Ministry. Then
finding that a principal part of holy life, consisted in uncessant exercise of
prayers to God: I thought it not enough, to invite men to the duty; but also to
direct them to the right performance of it: which produced the fourth part: A
Manual of Forms of Prayers. And lastly, considering of what consequence it is
to Religion, to have children rightly seasoned with pious principles: I
subjoyned for that end, A short Catechism to be taught to them. In all which,
if I may be instrumental to any persons obtaining the ends designed: if I may
bring any soul to a right christian life, by the first: to a judicious and
lively hope in Gods mercy, by the second: to the peace and communion of the
Church, by the third: to frequent addresses to the throne of grace, by the
fourth: and any little ones to be disciples of Christ, by the fifth: I shall
not repent my self of my adventure, nor want encouragement to subscribe my self,

A poor Workman

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Edw. Dod at the Gun in
Ivie-Lane.
AN entire Commentary upon the whole Old Testament in 4. Vol. in Fol. wherein
the diverse Translations and Expositions, literal and mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators both Ancient and Modern are propounded, examined, and
judged of, for the more full satisfaction of the studious Reader in all things,
which compleateth the Authors Comment on the whole Bible, a Work, the like to
which has never yet been published in English by any man, written by John
Mayer Doctor in Divinity.

The Expiation of a Sinner in a Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews: Fol.
by T. L. D. D. a learnded and Reverend Divine.

The Justification of a sinner being the main argument of S. Paul's Epistle to
the Galathians, Fol. Written by the Author of the Expiation of a sinner.

Thomae Lushingtonii Logica analytica de principiis, Regulis and usu Rationis
Rectae, 8o.

The Angell-Guardian proved by the light of Nature, beams of Scripture, and
consent of many Ancient and Modern Writers untainted with Popery, by Robert
Dingley Master of Arts, la^e Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford; 8o.

America, or an exact description of the West Indies, especially of those
Provinces under the dominion of Spain, in which not only the Nature and Climate
of the place, with the Commodities it affords, is fully described; but also
plain and full direct^ons given for the right ordering of the same, so as to
fit them for the use of the Inhabitant^, and also for transportation, the like
never yet published in English; faithfully related by N. N. Gent. in 8o.

Natures Paradox, or the Innocent Impostor, a pleasant Polonian History
translated out of French into English, by Major John Wright, 4o.

Poems, Songs, and Sonets, written by Richard Lovelace Esquire. 8o.

The Life and death of Mr. Carter, with other Tracts written by his son Mr.
John Carter Minister of Gods Word in the City of Norwich; 8o.

Directions for writing of true English by Richard Hodges, in 8o.

The Reign of King Charles faithfully and impartially delivered and disposed
into Annals by H. L. Esquire. Fol.

Judgment and Mercy, or the plague of Frogs Inflicted, removed: delivered in
nine Sermons, by that late Reverend, and Learned Divine, Mr. Josias Shute. 4o.

A CATECHISM Containing the CONDITIONS OF THE GOSPEL, AND DIRECTIONS to a HOLY
LIFE,

In all Parts of GOSPEL-OBEDIENCE.

The particulars contained in the several Exercises.
In the larger Catechism.
THe Conditions of the Gospel. 3 Of Faith. 4 Of Repentance. 11 Of Obedience. 18
Public worship. 20 Sacraments, Baptism. 21 Lords Supper. 23
Sins against public worship, 29 Private worship. 32 Sanctified affections. 33
Private prayer. 35 Private fasting. 38 Recreations. 40 Charity and Alms. 41
Duelling. 46 Christian justice. 48 Duties of Magistrates and Subjects 49
Ministers and People. 51 Duties of Family relations. 52 Justice in deal^ng. 54
Restitution. 55 Usury. 57 Christian sobriety. 58 of the mind. 59 of the tongue.
60 Chastity. 61 Temperance. 62 Drunkenness. 63
Satisfactions of doubts about the doctrine of Grace. 65.
ASsurance of grace, and means to it. 68 Whence rejection and reprobation. 71
About Gods decrees, 75 Comfort against infirmities. 77 What Christ has merited
for us. 79
Satisfactions about our Profession and Ministry. 90.
PRofession by new light of the Spirit examined. 92 Profession by Scripture
upon private interpretation examined. 103 Profession from a plea of outward
holiness examined. 110 The exceptions against the Ministry answered 114 The
Calling of our Ministry proved to be lawful. 125 The present sufferings no
argument against the truth of our Profession. 132
Forms of Prayers. 142*
FIrst Form for a child. 147 Second Form for a child of growth, and for
servants. 150 Third Form for an ordinary shorter exercise. 158 The largest form
for private exercise. 168 For the universal Church. 185 For the Churches in
these nations. 186 For the afflicted, 187 For Parents. 189 For children. 189
Before the Sacrament 191 In time of sickness. 193 For a sick neighbor. 196
For a woman with child. 197 Before a Journey. 198 At first entrance into the
Church. 199 An exercise for a great humiliation for sins. 200 A Form for the
Family offices, morning and evening. 211
The Lesser Catechism for Children. 229
THe Belief. 232 Ten Commandments. 234 Lords Prayer. 239
The Reader is humbly desired before he reads these exercises, with his pen to
put out, and interline, according to this direction, lest he loses the sense
of those places.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 3. read desertion. p. 13. l. 25. r. deliberate. p. 37. l. 9. r.
guide. p. 69. l. 21. put out (by) p. 78. l. 12. r. conscience. p. 95. l. 5. r.
profession. p. 96. l. 19. r. great. p. 98. l. 23. r. profession. p. 104. l. 14.
r. could. l. 15. r. envious ends. l. 25. r (it is) for (but) p. 106. l. 13. r.
J^gling. p. 108. l. 21. r. grave. p. 111. l. 3. r. smooth. l. 15. r. ruining*
p. 113. l. 1. r. appeal. l. 26. r. accidental. p. 122. l. 1. r. condemn. p.
123. l. 13. after (of) interline (our) p. 124. l. 3. r. Christian. p. 126. l.
6. r. seal. p. 128. l. 5. after (profession) interline (without a Ministry) p.
203. l. 8. r. duty. l. 22. r. amendment. p. 214. l. 8. r. godly. p. 173. l. 15.
after (merits of) interline (thee) p. 227. l. 21. after (day past) interline
(that)

THE CATECHISM For Direction of LIFE.
CAP. I.
QUESTION.

What is that most considerable thing thou can propound to thy desires, and
about which, thou should chiefly exercise thy self all the days of thy life?

ANSWER.

How I may obtain eternal life.

Quest. But forasmuch as no man can do any thing that may merit so great an
happiness, Whence do thou expect it to be obtained?

Ans. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
From no other cause, Tit. 3. 5.
but the free gift of God through his undeserved mercies in Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
2. 5. 8. 9.
for whose sake alone, I am accepted to justification, 2 Cor. 5. 18
and salvation. Romans 3. 24.


Quest. What ground have thou, that God will vouchsafe so great a mercy to
mankind?

Ans. John 10. 28.
His sure and infallible promises, made to them every where in the Gospel: 1
Ioh. 2. 25
and an honorable opinion of his goodness, Tit. 1. 2.
that as he has given them immortal souls, so he has not left them without a
means of being proportionably blessed; 1 These. 5. 9
nor made them for destruction; nor appointed them to wrath.

Quest. What assurance have thou that those promises do oblige to thy
particular interest in them?

Ans. Because they are general and conditional.

Quest. It is well said: For the promises being general, thou art secured, God
has not passed upon thee an irreversible decree, to an hopeless dissertion:
and being conditional, thou art encouraged to undertake the task Christ has
appointed, whatsoever it is. But name to me some Texts, that signify a proof
that they are general?

Ans. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Saint Paul says, God would have all men come to the knowledge of his truth
and be saved. S. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Peter says, that he would not that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance. And his oath confirms me in a belief, That he wills not,
Ez^. 18. 31.
nor delights in the death of a sinner.

Quest. Forasmuch then that all men shall not be saved, it follows
necessarily, that the promises are conditional, that is, that eternal life
shall certainly be given to all them (and none but them) that perform the
conditions. What therefore are they?

Ans. To believe, to repent, and to obey the Commandments of Christ.

Quest. How does it appear to thee, that eternal life is promised on those
conditions?

Ans. John 3. 15.
For the first, Saint John says, He that believes in him, shall not perish,
but have life everlasting. Luke 13. 3.
For the second, our Savior says, except we repent, we shall all likewise
perish* and St. John says, 1 John 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, God is just and faithful to forgive them. For the
third, Saint P^ul says, Heb. 5. 9.
that Christ became an Author of salvation to all them that obey him: and the
reason of the condemnation of the wicked shall be, 1 These. 2. 8.
that they obeyed not the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.
Quest. NOw conceiving thou considerest the necesary concernment of these
conditions to salvation, and that without or besides them, there be no other
declared conditions, by which to hope for mercy: It is requisite thou should
understand them fully, and apart: And first, what is faith?

Ans. Ioh. 5. 47.
It is a clear assent of the understanding to the whole word of God, and to
all things contained therein; especially to the whole doctrine of Christ; Acts
8. 37.
and in that, Io^. 8. 31.
to all the promises, to be relied upon, and the commands, to be obeyed.

Quest. God, as he is represented to us in his word, being the primary object
of Faith, What art thou to believe concerning God?

Ans. 1 Cor. 8. 4.
That there is one only God, Ephesians. 4. 6.
who is an infinite spiritual essence, Ioh. 4. 24.
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
and everlasting; who by the word of his power made, Rev. 1. 4.
and by his providence governs and disposes all things, Acts 4. 24. 14. 15.
both in heaven and earth.

Quest. In what further mystery is God propounded in the Scriptures to our
belief?

Ans. 1 John 5. ^.
That there be three distinct persons of, Mat. 3. 17.
and which are, the same One God, distinguished by the names of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, which are all coequal, coessential, and coeternal. Mat. 11. 27.
The first so called, as he is Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, by an eternal,
and therefore, Psalm. 2. 7*
unconceivable generation; The second person called God the Son, as so begotten
of the Father; Joh. 15. 26.
The third, God the Holy Ghost, Gal. 4. 6.
as proceeding from the Father and the Son.

Quest. God represented to us in Christ, as to the work of Redemption, being
chiefly in the Gospel, propounded to our faith: What do thou believe
concerning that?

Ans. That after the fall of Adam in Paradise, Romans 5. 12.
by which himself and his posterity fell into a state of death, from which they
could never have been recovered by any possible satisfaction of Gods justice,
Ephesians. 2. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
that was offended; Genesis 3. 15.
Christ being the promised seed, Col. 1. 14.
God sent in the fullness of time, and gave to be a Redeemer for them, that by
his sufferings he might satisfy his justice, Heb. 2. 9.
that all they which should accept such conditions as he has propounded, might
partake of that redemption; Col. 1. 21.
be delivered from death, reconciled to God, and live for ever.

Quest. In what manner did, or does Christ work that redemption?

Ans. By the exercise of his three offices, as a Prophet, a Priest, and a King.
The first he performed by preaching the Gospel, and therein the condition of
salvation. The second by offering up himself a sacrifice upon the Cross, and
now at the right hand of God by making intercession for us. And the last by his
dominion over, and government of his Church, subduing his enemies, and
protecting his Saints and servants.

Quest. There being a more particular faith required of Gospel-beleevers, such
as shall be imputed to them for righteousness, and accepted to a condition of
justification, Romans ^. 3.
as was the faith of Abraham: Iam. 2. 21.
What is that faith?

Ans. Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21.
A particular reliance upon the promises of Christ without wavering, with a
clear resignation of the heart to obey Christ in all his commands; which faith
being tried and approved by God to be sincere, by following acts of such
relyance and obedience, Heb. 11. 8.
as was Abraham's, its then accounted (through Gods free mercy in Christ) for
righteousness, and accepted as a condition of justification, Romans 3. 28
excluding the works of the law, Gal. 5. 4.
as circumcision and other legal performances, Phil. 3. 9.
but ^^cluding the good works of the Gospel to a holy life, Gal. 5. 6. Ia. 2.
^7. 20.
such as make and evidence believers to be truly faithful, Phil. 1. 11.
and their Faith to have been true and sincere. Col. 1. 10.


Quest. Iam. 2. 14.
Is not a particular confidence in thy self, and a present assurance that thou
art accepted in Christ to a justification, and infallible salvation, the very
Gospel-faith?

Ans. No, for as there is no promise, Romans 11. 20.
that God will grant any such assurance in this life by any direct act of
faith, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
nor any degree of persuasion, Heb. 4. 1.
otherwise then may be collected from the performance of the conditions: so it
necessarily follows, 1 Timothy 1. 18
that whatsoever degree of assurance we may have of our present safeestate
toward God, is but an effect of faith, and our holy walking with God, in all
the conditions. Now forasmuch as most of Gods servants are very defective, Iam.
3. 2.
when they come to proportion their particular estates by the strict rules of
Gospel-holinesse, though they may be in a very safe condition toward God, may
yet (through an humble sense of their own failings) more or less want such
applications of certitude. The assurances, Heb. 10. 22
which the Gospel mentions, signify the infallibility of the object, that is,
the promises to be infallibly certain upon such conditions, and not a necessity
of a perpetual application of them with such certitude as to the subject, our
selves: 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Though we must always be endeavoring to make those promises sure to us, by
our universal obedience to all Gospel-commands. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
But when such assurances are upon any other ground ordinarily pretended, they
may justly be suspected to be but vain presumptions, and unreasonable
confidenci^s.

Quest. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Faith being the gift of God, attainable by means appointed by him through our
endeavor and application: What are those means that conduce to the obtaining
and increasing of the same?

Ans. Romans 10. 14.
A diligent reading and hearing his word, constant prayer, frequent receiving
the blessed Sacrament, religious use of such times, in which the memory of the
things of faith are celebrated, and accompanying our selves with the faithful
disciples of Christ.

CHAP. III.
Quest. HAving thus passed over a direction, and an account of the first
condition of the Gospel, proceed (with Gods blesing) to the second before
mentioned. And what is Repentance?

Ans. It is a total turn, and change of the whole man, Romans 6. 2. 22.
from a state of sin, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and a departure from all iniquity. Gal. 5. 15.


Quest. Ephesians. 4. 22.
Are not the single acts of sense of sin, Col. 2. 11.
and confession of it, the sorrow for it, and present purpose against it, to be
accounted the very repentance of the Gospel?

Ans. No: they are blessed preparatives to, and necessary companions of
repentance, in which the penitent must be continually exercised. But that
especially, in which the life of Gospel-repentance consists, Romans 6. 12.
is the forsaking of sin, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
and throwing off the dominion of it.

Quest. Col. 3. 5.
But are not those exercises requisite for the obtaining of pard^n, and
acceptable services to God?

Ans. 1 John 1. 9.
Yes: as they conduce to that great turn and change of life, otherwise they are
upon the same account with God that his state is, who may be likened to a dog
returning to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 32.
and a sow to her wallowing in the mire.

Quest. If repentance consists in such a total forsaking of sin, it must
follow then that you make the state of repentance like the new birth in St.
John, 1 Ioh. 3. 6. 9.
that as he that is born of God, so he that is truly penitent, 2 Pet. 3. 14.
cannot any more commit sin. And are there no sins consistent with the state of
Repentance, and a new birth?

Ans. 1 John 18. ^0. 1. 3. 2.
Yes: Sins of invincible ignorance, frailty, infirmity, and the single acts
of greater sins by sudden surprise, Mar. 14. 71.
into which the true penitent may fall, Ioh. 8. 7.
and by the grace of God rise again. Gal. 6. 1.


Quest. John 8. 11.
May a man yield, and be-come indulgent to any sins under those notions, and
give the reins to a lust or temptation to any sin, upon such an account?

Ans. No; they may then become wilful and deliverate sins, Gal. 5. 24.
and dangerous to the state of repentance.

Quest. What is to be done upon the consideration of such sins, when we have
committed them, in order to repentance?

Ans. Mar. 14. ult.
A sudden recalling our selves to a serious sense of them, sorrow for them, and
holy purpose against them, using all holy and prudential means to prevent them.

Quest. What sins are destructive to the Gospel repentance, and cannot consist
with it, which he that is truly penitent, cannot commit without ceasing to be
so?

Ans. Romans 6. 13 16.
A falling into an habitual and customary course of sinning, with a wilful and
deliberate allowance of any known wickedness to live in it, and into such a
course of life, as may notify a total departure from God.

Quest. What may be said of his estate, Heb. 6. 1.
who having been once enlightened, and made a partaker of the Holy Ghost, shall
fall from his repentance to such a course of sinning, 1 These. 5. 19.
and by resisting Gods grace, 2 Pet. 3. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 19.
and quenching his spirit, shall depart to his former unregenerate estate?

Ans. His state is very sad and dangerous, seeing God may justly give him over
(by withdrawing his Grace) never to be renewed by another repentance, Heb. 6. 6.
or that there should remain for him no more sacrifice for sin; Heb. 10. 26.
27. 28.
whereby it may be better for that man never to have known the way of truth, 2
Pet. 2. 21 22.
then being once known, to fall from it: or that having once escaped the
pollutions of the world, to be again entangled therein and overcome. His latter
end is worse then the beginning.

Quest. It is true, the sentence of the Gospel is very severe in that case.
What therefore does this consideration obligemen to? 1 Cor. 10. 12.


Ans. A severe watchfulness over all their ways, Ephesians. 6. 12. 13, 14.
and in all temptations, Mat. 25. 28
lest they fall; a careful employing the talent of Grace, Phil. 2. 12.
lest it be taken away, and a diligent working out their salvation with fear
and trembling.

Quest* What may be said of them, who after an ungodly life, dye with the
single acts of sorrow for sin, acknowledgment of it, and a resolution of change?

Ans. Their repentance is very unsafe; Heb. 2. 9.
First, because the promises of mercy in the Gospel are very insecurely
applied, but upon the terms of a durable repentance, that shall arrive at great
performances of Gospelobedience, constant services of God, and a copious
fruitfulness in a course of holiness. And secondly, because the sincerity of
such a repentance, is very doubtful* there being no opportunity remaining for
the experience and trial of it, by bringing forth fruits to evidence it. Yet
this hope may p^ssesse a charitable mind, that if God sees such a late
repentance to be truly sincere, and such as (if there were time allowed) would
proceed to a real turn and change, it might (through Gods infinite mercy) be
accepted, and the Will and Resolution of the penitent, for the following acts
of holy living. But such a repentance as is made after presumptions of mercy in
an ungodly course, and many despites done unto the spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. ^9
administers little hopes of acceptance.

Quest. What considerations do best provoke an impenitent soul, (through Gods
grace) to a timely undertaking this state of repentance? Romans 2. 4.


Ans. Rev. 22. 17.
The ignoble use of Gods goodness that invites him to it, Mat. 11. 28.
of the blood of Christ that has purchased for him a capacity to be accepted
by it, and the continual despite that is done to the spirit of God, Rev. 3. 20.
that stands and knocks at the door of his heart for his return.

Quest. What other motives may be superadded to those?

Ans. That a state of sin is against the very dictate of right reason, and
contrary to all moral prudence: it is rewarded with shame, Romans 6. 21
unpeaceablenesse, and discontent in this life, a fearful judgment, Romans 6.
ult. and a miserable eternity in the life to come.

CHAP. IV.
Quest. 1 John* 5. 3.
THe third condition of Gospel-salvation (you said) was obedience to an holy
life, Rev. 14. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 19
and keeping the Commandments of God; Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 John 2. 6.
How does it appear that the Gospel does necessarily require such a condition?

Ans. Because (as our Savior says) none shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of his father, Mat. 7. 21*
which is in heaven: Romans 8. 1.
and St. Paul says, that a deliverance from condemnation shall only appertain
to them who live according to the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
and not according to the flesh: Gal. 5. 21.
in whose fruits, whosoever is exercised (whatsoever hopes of mercy may be
pretended) is sentenced not to inherit the Kingdom of heaven: and lastly, Heb.
12. 14.
because without holiness, no man shall see the Lord.

Quest. What comprehensive Text can you name, that most summarily contains the
doctrines and Commandments of the Gospel, as to such an holy obedience?

Ans. Where it is said, that the Gospel teaches us to live godly, Tit. 2. 12.
13.
righteously, and soberly, in this present world.

Quest. What obligation to holiness, do these three expressions signify?

Ans. All that is required of a soul in this condition: that is, to l^ve godly
to God, justly to our neighbor, and soberly to our selves.

Quest. Forasmuch then, that in them is contained the third great condition of
salvation: It concerns thee to be well informed, what they oblige thee to, And
first, what is it to live godly to God?

Ans. It binds me to perform to him all that holy worship and service, Man. 1.
10.
which he has required of me. Rev. 22. 9.


Quest. Joh. 4. 23.
Now because God has appointed both public and private worship for his
faithful servants to perform. To what duties do the public worship of God
oblige thee?

Ans. To worship him in all the public exercises of the Church, that is,
First, in the administration of the Sacraments. Secondly, in the hearing the
word preached; and thirdly, in adjoining my self to the public prayers of the
Congregation.

Quest. Conceiving thy readiness to entertain a clear understanding of thy duty
in all these parts of his service? First, what, and how many Sacraments has
Christ ordained to be observed?

Ans. Mat. 26. 26.
Two, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11* 23.
both instituted by himself to become outward and visible signs of inward and
spiritual grace, Mat. 28. 19
arguments of his love to us, and actions of our service and obedience to him.

Quest. What is Gospel-Baptisme?

Ans. Joh. 3. 5.
A dipping or sprinkling with water in the name of the Father, Ephesians. 5. 26.
Son, and Holy Ghost.

Quest. With what spiritual benefits does Christ bless the baptized?

Ans. Romans 6. 4.
With grace to die unto sin, Acts 2. 38.
and to be borne again to a life of righteousness, Tit 3. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
thereby to put on Christ, and to be received into the Covenant of Grace.

Quest. To what respective duties do the baptized stand obliged, by that
Sacrament?

Ans. Gal. 3. 27.
An engagement to give up themselves to the Kingdom of Christ, by faith and
holy living: with whom they then entered covenant to forsake whatsoever is
contrary to that his Kingdom, that is, the devil and all his works, the Pomps
and vanites of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Quest. Are not christian parents bound in duty to Christ to present their
infants to Baptism?

Ans. Acts 2. 38. 39.
Yes: for Parents must consider that the promises were not made to themselves
only, but to their children also; to which promises they having a right as
well as themselves, are not to be debarred from, nor deprived of the seal and
consignation of them, in that blessed Sacrament. Further (as to the right of
baptizing infants) as it is proved by many necessary deductions from, Mat. 28.
19
so (as to the matter of fact) it is collected by many probable instances in
Scripture: Col. 2. 11.
In either of which, Acts 16. 15 33.
if the scruples of an unbeleeving and quarrelling age have raised doubts and
questions, Acts 18 8. 1 Cor. 1. 16
the universal practice of the Churches of Christ in all ages and places, has
determined it: Romans 16. 17, 18, 19.
from which to depart in this or any other service of God, (that is grounded
especially upon such binding consequences of Scripture) gives a just reason for
any man to be charged with private presumption, and dangerous singularity.

Quest. What is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Ans. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
The receiving of bread and wine in remembrance of the death and passion of our
Savior; which bread and wine being blessed by the Minister, 1 Cor* 10. 16.
are the communion of the body and blood of Christ to the prepared receiver.

Quest. What spiritual benefit does God communicate to such a receiver?

Ans. The strengthening and refreshing his soul with all spiritual graces, 1
Cor. 10. 16.
and the participation of Christ in all the effects of his death and passion.

Quest. What preparation is required of them that come faithful receivers to
that Sacrament?

Ans. 1 Cor. 1^. 28.
To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life. To have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death: and be in charity
with all men.

Quest. What other consideration may be added in order to the service of God in
that Sacrament?

Ans. To make conscience of entertaining all possible opportunities to receive
the same, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
as my love to God will make it necessary, Acts 2. 42.
to serve him as often as I can* Omitting no present occasion, lest it be the
last that shall be offered to me: and to decline which, there can be no plea
allowable before God, either in respect of sins or enemies: unless I can think
it safe for me to dye (which I may the next moment) without repentance, or
charity.

Quest. But may not the sinful and scandalous conversation of some, that are
admitted to the same Sacrament with thee, give thee a just* cause to decline it?

Ans. Mat* 26. 23 27.
No, For had any detriment accrewed to the other Apostles by Judas his
receiving with them, Luke 22. ^1.
Christ (who knew his unpreparednesse by his desperate design against him,
Mat. 26. 2. 14, 15.
and other gross wickedness, John 12. 6.
and which was not likely to be unknown to the rest of the Apostles) would
certainly (for presidents sake) have debarred him the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
And Saint Paul, Verse 14.
who punctually treated his Corin^hians about the holy communion, and so fully
described, 1 Cor. 11. 21.
and sharply reproved those scandalous persons, 2 Cor. 12. 21.
who mixed themselves in the society of the faithful receivers, 1 Cor. 10. 45.
would not certainly have passed over so necessary a reproof to the Ministers
of Corinth, for admitting them, and to the faithful, for receiving with them,
had an unworthy receiver eat damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 29.
or sin, to any other besides himself.

Quest. Heb. 10. 25.
The second part of public worship being hearing of the Word preached: Act.
11. 26.
How may thou serve God acceptably in that? Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.


Ans. Luke 14. 35.
To hear the Sermon attentively as a religious exercise, Romans 10. 17.
and isntrumental to the work of Grace. To treasure up the promises to my
comfort, Luke 1. 5*.
the reproofs for my amendment, Iam. 1. 22.
and the directions for the rule of my life. Not taking offense at Religion in
general, Mat. 10. 40.
nor at that service in particular, by the weakness or infirmities of him that
ministers those holy things unto me.

Quest. The third part of public worship, being to adjoyn thy self to the
public prayers of the congregation. How may thou discharge thy duty to God
therein?

Ans. To oblige my self conscio^ably to be present at them, Acts 1. 14.
as at the hearing of the Sermon, Acts 2. 42.
or the performing any other holy duties: Acts 3. 1*
to come timely, and with a pious mind to honor God, and with a charitable
spirit, that the whole Church of Christ, and the present congregation, may
receive the benefit of my prayers.

Quest. What other directions may be propounded for the more pious performance
of thy duty to God in all the public worship?

Ans. Acts 20. 36.
That I be present with an humble and awful mind, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
a lowly and reverent comportment of my body, Ephesians. 3* 14.
such as may signify decency and order; always considering the infinite
majesty of that God, Heb. 12. 28.
with whom I have to do, in those holy actions.

Quest. But is not the pious regard of the circumstance of time, conducing to
the discharge of thy duty to God in the public worship?

Ans. Yes: I am bound in conscience to keep holy to the Lord his day in all
religious exercises, Acts 20. 7.
and not to profane it either with secular or sinful employments; Rev. 1. 10.
1 Cor. 16. 2.
to observe public fasts for such reasons, as Authority shall order them, and
all other days set apart for the service of God, propounding such religious
ends to my self, Romans 14* 6
for which they were first instituted and commanded.

Q. What sins are committed against the public worship of God (which thou
ought to beware of) besides the ordinary breaches of the duties you have
mentioned?

Ans. Many dangerous enterprises that tend necessarily to the impairing and
eradicating the same; Acts 12. 1. 2 Timothy 3 6
as first, all attempting by power, or seducement to hinder the peaceable
assembling of Gods servants together in those holy services. 1 Cor 3. 17.
Secondly, all defacing, despising, 1 Cor. 11. 22.
or (especially) destroying the public places of Gods worship: Exodus 20. 24.
the preservation of which, 1 Kings 9. 8, 9.
were always accounted great significations of Religion in a Nation. Luke 19.
46.
Thirdly, all acts that tend to the destruction of the public ministry; it
being essentially necessary to the execution of the offices of the public
worship, and without which, no national profession was ever yet preserved. Now
the acts, that will certainly ruin a public ministry, and by necessary
consequence, the public worship, are these. First, the disgracing, oppressing,
and ejecting their persons from their places, in any present period of time.
Secondly, the cutting off all possibility of having such a public Ministry for
the future, and that will be effected by these attempts. 1. By disallowing or
prohibiting all means of succession, Tit. 1. 5.
by which an outward designation to ministerial offices is to be continued,
and by which a Ministry has to this day been preserved. 2. By taking away all
means of education to the knowledge of the tongues, arts and sciences, by which
understandings are prepared (by labor and industry) to acquire gifts for
finding out the mysteries of Religion, and to be able to instruct, exhort and
convince, extraordin^ry gifts being ceased after the first planting of the
Church. Romans 2. 22.
Lastly, by laying hold upon and taking away the demeans, by which a present
Ministry is maintained, 1 Cor. 9. 7 etc.
and a future perpetuated: the most infallible and certain method of destroying
them.

In these two last lay the project of Julian, S. Aust. l. de civ. Dei 18 c. ^2.
(the subtillest enemy of the Church of Christ) when he attempted the overthrow
of Christian Religion: which acts of his were accounted most dangerous
persecutions of the Church. I oblige my self therefore not to do any act by my
self, nor to adhere to the act of any other that shall (in any of these things)
impair the public worship of my gracious God.

CHAP. V.
Quest. NOw because its not enough to a godly life to yield conformity to the
public worship, but thou art bound to enlarge thy obedience to the Gospel, by
thy private performances of holy services to God. What does the Gospel require
of thee respectively in order thereto?

Answ. Romans 6. 13
A giving up the exercises of all the parts and faculties of my soul and body
to the obedience of Christ; especially the affections of my heart, which being
rightly ordered by the law of the Gospel, will infallibly carry the whole man
to the service of God. 2. Constantly serving God with private prayers and
fasting. 3. Honoring him and obeying the Gospel by the use of my particular
talent, to the good of others.

Quest. Now because the offices of the whole man (as you said) are guided by
the disposition of the heart, and its affections: It is expedient you know what
those affections are, and their duties to God. What therefore are they?

Answ. These four especially, Love, Hope, Fear and Joy.

Quest. It is well ordered that thou have put love to God in the first place,
which is so necessarily and eminently requisite to a soul in a true
Gospel-state, that all other services without it are nothing, and under its
larger notion they are all comprehended. What is the command of Christ, and thy
duty, as to that affection?

Answ. Mat. 22. 37
To love God with all my heart, 1 John 2. 15.
Soul, mind, and strength, Luke 14. 26.
to love nothing that is unlawful, and so inconsistent with him: Mat. 10. 37
and to love all other things that are lawful in subordinatio^ to him.

Quest. How may I best serve. God with my affection of hope?

Answ. H^b. 16. 19* 13. 16.
Clearly to resign my self to a confidence in Gods promises: Romans 4 21.
living in them above all prosperous enjoyments, Heb. 11. 26.
and possessing my soul with patience in all dangers and adversities; Romans 8.
29. 30.
hoping that as God has foreordained and called me to them, he will also
justify me in them, and glorify me after them.

Quest. How may the Gospel be obeyed, and God served by the exercise of thy
affection of fear?

Answ. Heb. 4. 1.
When in all inward motions and outward temptations to sin, 1 P^t. 1. 17
I represent the divine presence to my thoughts before which I stand, Mat. 10.
28.
and against which I must offend, H^b. 4. 13.
if. I consent.

Quest. Lastly, when is the passion of joy made serviceable to God? Phil. 4. 4.


Answ. Romans 5. 2. 11.
When I rejoice in the Lord, and in all spiritual comforts; abandoning all
pleasure in sin, 1 Cor. 13. 6.
and removing a too much delight, Luke 10. 20
and over value of any present lawful enjoyment whatsoever.

Quest. Having thus done, thou have presented to God the best sacrifice thou
have, which is thy heart, and by that thy self; yet is not that enough, for in
the next place (as thou saidest) God must be served with private prayers. And
how has the Gospel obliged thee to that duty?

Answ. Mat. 7. 7.
By absolute and indispensable commands, Mat. 26. 41
and by most gracious promises of Gods acceptance of them, Joh. 14. 13.
and answering them unto me. Joh. 15. 7.


Quest. 1 Pet. 3. 12.
Its true, nor has he for any other service given clearer injunctions or
directions, hav^ng made a pattern of words himself, and intimated several
kinds of prayers for our Christian exerc^ses. And what are they?

Answ. These four as S* Paul enumerates them, 1 Timothy 2. 1
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks.

Quest. What holy offices do those four sorts direct thee to?

Answ. The first signifies the acknowledgement of my sins, and an humble suit
for the pardon of them. Acts 8. 22
The second petitioning for all spiritual and temporal supplies: Phil 4. 6.
especially for the assistancies of Gods grace, Jam. 1. 5.
and spirit. 1 These. 5. 25.
The third an interceding for Gods mercy and blessing upon all mankind, Jam. 5.
15.
the Church in general, all governors, relatives, enemies and persons
whatsoever. Col. 1. 12.
The last signifies an expressing my thankfulness to God for all his blessings
to my self and others. 1 These. 5. 18.


Quest. The Gospel being very severe and importunate in requiring the frequency
of this duty, Romans 12. 12.
even to uncessancy. How may thou best discharge thy duty to God, 1 These. 5.
17.
as to that obligation?

Answ. Psalm. 5. 3. 59. 16. 130. 6.
To bind my Conscience without any dispensation, to sanctify the Morning and
Evening of every day with that service: to choose other times of the day, Dan.
6. 10.
by the example of other holy men, Psa. 55. 18 119. 164.
as* Christian prudence, zeal and opportunity shall give me, and to intermix my
lawful employments, with frequent recourses to God in pious ejaculations.

Quest. What are the offenses against the calling upon Gods name in prayer, in
this holy worship?

Answ. Ps. 53. 4.
As all omissions of the duty and neglect of invocation upon God, are
chargeable as sins: Exodus 20. 7
so all taking his holy name in vain, Jam. 3. 10.
by useless and unsanctified interpositions of it in our vain discourses by
blasphemies and bold expressions of God; by cursings and imprecations, and by
all kinds of unnecessary and customary swearing, Mat. 5. 34.
not only by the names of God, Iam. 5. 12
but by any thing else, Mat. 5. 34.
are offenses against God, Jam. 5. 12.
and contrary to this Gospel-duty.

Quest. Together with private prayer you mentioned private fasting as a
christian duty, fitly ^onjoyned with prayer, the one being sanctified by the
other. And do thou suppose thou art obliged to perform such a serv^ce to God?

Ans. Mat. 6. 16.
Yes, by the care our Savior takes for the more religious performance of it,
Mar. 2. 20.
and other frequent expressions of the exercise of it, Luke 2. 37
by holy persons in the Gospel.

Quest. But being a duty which ever stands in relation, or becomes
instrumental, to some other holy office, and ought to be designed by religious
persons for various ends, as holy occasions will be administered. Which be the
chief ends and opportunities for the exercise of the duty of private fasting?

Ans. Mat. 17. 21
These three especially, First to excite a zeal and fervencie in prayer in
pursuit of some remarkable blessing. Acts 32 3
Secondly, to assist the soul in the work of repentance and humiliation for
sin. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
Thirdly to mortify the lust of nature, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
and to assist the spiritual part against the contentions of the flesh.

Quest. Now the times and repetitions of this service of private fasting, being
left to christian prudence and piety. How often ought a Christian to return to
this service?

Ans. The more frequently, the more acceptably to God: Therefore it is religion
to undertake it as often as the ends of the duty shall occur.

Quest. But besides this, may not a more punctual advice be given of general
concernment?

Ans. Yes; for^^much as the life of the best Christian is full of frailties and
defects, it is expedient that the return of this duty be certain and
determinate, and that some day or days in the week be set apart for a more
strict and severe examination of life and repentance, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
heightened with the holy exercise of fasting.

Quest. Whether after all these exercises, and severities of a christian life,
will recreations be allowed to be consistent with the holy yoke of Christ?

Ans. 1 The. 5. 22
Yes; if they be innocent and sinlesse, short and transient, not scandalous,
not expensive of time, Jam. 5. 5.
nor such as shall endanger a temptation to lose zeal in devotion, Luke 8. 14
or hinder the holy offices of serving God, in their chosen periods.

Quest. Having served God thus far, thou have made good progress in this
condition of the Gospel, yet still is there a further process to be made, Mat.
25. 20
and that is (as thou saydst) by serving God with the exercise of thy talent to
the good of others. And what is the command of the Gospel, and thy duty therein?

Ans. Col. 3. 14.
To be charitable, merciful, and affectionately studious, Col. 3. 12.
and active, Gal. 6. 10.
to advance the good of all men, in whatsoever capacity of help, God (by his
goodness) has put me.

Quest. An example of such a course of living, the conversation of our holy
Master has presented to us, in whose steps we must walk, if ever we expect to
be members of his Kingdom, here or hereafter. But because the actions of this
service of God, b^ as various as the necessities of men. What method will thou
take to guide thy conscience therein?

Ans. To help and assist them that want me, first as to my spiritual, Secondly,
as to my temporal capacity.

Quest. Instance in some partiticulars, that may direct thee to the
understanding of all the parts, of serving God by relieving others, as to thy
spiritual capacity?

Ans. 1 These. 5. 14.
To admonish some inconsiderate sinner, J^m. 5. ult.
and to endeavor to recover him from the error of his way: 1 Pet. 4. 10.
to go to some ignorant understanding, to instruct some doubtful spirit, 1 These
5. 11
to counsel and confirm some drooping afflicted, 1 Cor. 1. 3, 4
soul, to comfort, and many such like, which are called the spiritual Alms.

Qu^st. Blessed employments, and acceptable services to God. Yet the Commands
of Christ to serve God with thy temporal capacity, are more frequent and
forcible; and crowned with greater promises of reward. What are the actions of
that service?

Ans. Mat. 5. 42.
All supplies whatsoever to my brothers present necessity and want, and my
Saviors enumeration of some principal of them (in the description of the
accounts that must be given at the last day) will help me to the understanding
of all the other holy exercises of christian charity.

Quest. Mat. 25. 35
It is true, those acts of mercy have the honor to be mentioned by our Savior
as the rule of his sentence of absolution or condemnatiou to mankind. And what
are they?

Ans. Heb. ^3. 2.
To relieve the hungry and thirsty, to entertain the destitute stranger, to
clothe the naked, to visit and help poor prisoners, and sick persons, and all
other actions of mercy, and doing good, Jam. 1. ult.
that hold proportion with these.

Quest. O rich souls, that have laid down their present interests at the foot
of Christ, and made advantage of their earthly enjoyments, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
to prepare a foundation for the time to come. Now because there cannot be a
punctual designment, what proportion of every man's estate may be sufficient for
the discharge of this duty to Christ. What is the safest rule herein?

Ans. 1 Cor. 16. 2
That my alms be liberal, and plentifully distributed, 2 Cor. 8. ^. 2 Cor. 9.
6.
beyond the result of a consultation with flesh and blood, Ephesians. 4. 28.
or the examination of worldly prudence. Considering what vain expenses of
pride, revenge, and unnecessary luxuries, my carnal part would judge fit to be
allowed, Iam. 4. 3.
for the satisfaction of my lusts, and were now more nobly and religiously
expended in the service of God. Again considering what accidental losses, by
casualty, deceits of men, extraordinary charges, and many other
disimprovements, I have patiently borne, and otherwise provided for; which if I
had begun to choose to have served God with, I might easily have been tempted
to thoughts of utter undoing, had I so bestowed them.

Quest. What other considerations may be added to move thee to enlarge thy
heart and hand in this service, besides the bare injunction of it by Christ, as
a Gospel-duty?

Ans. Luke 6. 36.
That alms are acts of purest generosity, and most rational nobleness in
themselves, and have a blessing beyond other noble actions, that the very
disbursements are gains, Mat* 6. 20.
and the securing of an immutable estate, and real treasure. Phil. 4. 18.
That God is not only pleased to entertain them as acceptable sacrifices, Mat.
25. 40.
but as actually done unto himself: Mar. 10. 30.
And that he has engaged his promises for as certain an increase in this life,
Psalm. 41. 1.
as any temporal blessing can be hoped for at his hand, Prove. 11. 4.
and for an infallible reward in the life to come. Mat. 10. ult.


Quest. But are not thine enemies, and such as hate, injure, and offend thee,
excepted from such acts of thy mercy and charity, or how far is the command of
the Gospel in these cases, obliging as to them? Mat. 6. 14.


Ans. Ephesians. 4. ult.
To forgive them whatsoever they have done against me, from my very soul, even
as I would be forgiven at the hand of God. Mat 5. 39.
To choose to suffer ten thousand evils from them, Romans 12. 17.
then to return one evil to them. After the highest provocations from them,
Mat. 5. 44.
to bless them, pray for them, Romans 12. 20.
and to do good to them, in all my capacities.

Quest. Is not a justification of our right by duelling after injuries
received, consistent with this part of Christian holiness, and what is your
judgment therein?

Ans. Mat. 5. 40. 4^.
That duelling is directly against the doctrine of Christ, Luke 6. 27 28.
an unhappy custom grounded upon the mistake of true honor and valor, and
the duel i^ self, either voluntarily accepted, or offered, is a sin against
this duty of charity on either part, Mat. 26. 51
both in him that exposes his own, Iam. 4. ^, 2
and in him that se^keth another blood, John 1. 3. 15.
and the fall of either miserable.

Quest. But suppose he has injured thine honor, may thou not endeavor thy
reparation?

Answer. By any lawful means I may, where neither passion nor revenge has
interest: Mat. 5. 22.
and if I cannot otherwise obtain it, then it is an argument of the clearest
nobleness and magnanimity, to trust God with the defense of my honor, and to
forgive the offender.

Quest. Suppose thou have injured a person, and offered all just satisfaction
to him, and yet he pursues thy life upon refusal of a duel. What is in that
case safest to be done?

Answ. Mat. 5. 25.
To prevent it as much as possibly I can, Mat. 22. 39.
tenderly regarding his sin as much as mine own suffering, after which being
unavoidably assaulted, if in my pure defense he or I fall, my soul is safe as
to his, or mine own blood.

CHAP. VI.
Quest. THe rules of the first part of obeying the Gospel of Christ by all
immediate services to God being discovered; the Gospel (as you said) requires
further holiness of them that will live up to the institution of Christ, which
is to live justly to men. What is then the obligation of the Gospel, as to that
part of holy life?

Answ. Mat. 7, 12.
To do to all men as I would they should do unto me.

Quest. Now because this Doctrine of Christ obliges to a duty, which consists
of infinite particulars of diverse kinds. First mention how many sorts of
Justice a Christian is bond to observe?

Answ. Romans 13. 7.
These two; the first is called distributive justice, which respects the
allowance of all just duties from inferiors to Superiors, and back again from
Superiors to inferiors. The se^ond is commutative justice, which respects
honest proceedings in civil contracts and dealings.

Quest. The duties of the Gospel-distributive justice being further various,
according as men have public or private relations, First, what duties of
justice are required of Christians, as to their public relations?

Answ. Such as the people ought to perform to the civil Magistrate, and
Spiritual Pastor, and such as they ought to return to their people back again.

Quest. What duties are required of a Christian, by the Law of the Gospel, to
the Civil Magistrate?

Answ. Mat. 22. 21
To give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: Romans 13. 5
To yield obedience for Conscience sake: Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13 14.
To submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, and not to resist
their power upon peril of damnation. Romans 13. 2
By all which a Christian stands obliged, not to do, nor consent to any act,
that may impair the honor, safety, estate or power of them that God has set
over him in Government.

Quest. How may a Christian Magistrate live justly, as to his Subjects?

Answ. Romans 13. 4
By interesting his power in the maintenance of an holy Religion against all
its opponents: by a tender regard to their peace, and quiet enjoyment of their
proprieties: by taking care that Justice be impartially distributed, and that
their Subjects be securely protected, from enemies abroad, and from the
insolences of unquiet spirits at home.

Quest. What are the duties which justice requires to be paid to the spiritual
Pastors of the Church?

Answ. To obey them in their spiritual guidances, Heb. 14. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 16.
as having rule over us, justly to pay to them their allowed carnalls, 1 Cor.
9. 7. ad 14.
from whom we have received spiritualls, Gal. 6. 6.
and to have them in esteem for their work and office sake. Heb 7. 8. 1 Timothy 5.
17.


Quest. 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
What is in this holy justice required of them to their cures?

Answ. 1 Cor. 4. 2. 1 Cor. 9 16
Faithfully to feed the flock of Christ by life and Doctrine, and in all parts
of their offices to be ready to do, Col. 4. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 12
and administer every thing that may conduce to their salvation: Acts 20. 28
always expressing a greater care of their peoples souls, then of their own
advantages in their places.

Quest. Thus if thou live, thou have kept a good conscience, and obeyed
Christ, as to thy public relations. What are now the duties that concern
private relations, where further distribitive justice is required of Christ's
disciples?

Answ. Such concern the Family, that is, the reciprocal duties of Husband and
Wife, Parent and Child, Master and Servant.

Quest. How do the Servants of Christ fulfill the righteousness of the Gospel,
as to the first relation?

Answ. When the Husband expresses love, Ephesians 5: 25. 28.
respect, tenderness and sweet carriage to the wife, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
living with her, and providing for her: when the wife gives meek submission,
reverence, and tender love to him, Ephesians. 5. 22. 24.
and both together bearing with one another infirmities, Col 3. 18.
do live like good yoke-fellows in all religious exercises, Tit. 2. 5.
and employments of their callings. Gal. 6. 2


Quest. How do Christians perform Gods will in just living, as to the second
relation?

Ans. When children honor and obey their Parents, Ephesians. 6. 1. 2
supporting their decays, Col. 3. 20. 1 Timothy 5. 4
and protecting them in their helpless ages: when Parents govern them by the
rules of piety, Ephesians. 6. 4.
not discouraging, Col. 32 1. 1 Timothy 5. 8
nor provoking them by caustlesse anger, and providing for them honest
educations and callings, and means of livelihood.

Quest. How is the Gospel obeyed in the third relation?

Answ. Ephesians. 6 5, 6.
When Servants conscionably perform their offices and labors, Col. 3. 21. 23.
as in the sight of God, 1 Timothy 6. 1
preserving their Masters interests and honor: Ephesians. 6 9.
and when Masters endeavor to keep them in Gods fear, Col. 4 1. 1 Timothy ^. 2
using them mercifully in their labors, and restraints, respecting their
burdens, and rewarding their faithfulness and toyls.

Quest. O blessed State, where Religion and Christian justice guids all
interests: and happy family where Christ rules: But (you said) the Gospel also
requires commutative justice in all bargains, commerces and dealings
whatsoever; and what is that justice?

Answ. Not to make use of any man's weakness, 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9.
or necessity, to defraud or go beyond him in a negotiation: 2 Cor. 7. 2. 1
These. 4. 12.
not to advantage my self in any matter by another loss: not to encroach upon
the right, or possess the estate, goods or livelihood of another.

Quest. Its true; God is an avenger of all such: 1 These. 4. 6
But does this justice prohibit the lawful gain of them that live by commerce
and trading? Prove. 11. ^


Ans. 1 Cor. 9. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 20.
No; So they use no deceit in the commodity, nor exact beyond the ordinary gain
or rate allowed by the common consent of honest minds, 1 These. 4. ^
and that is proportionable to the engagement of their stock, pains and craft.

Quest. But suppose a man, (through want of Gods grace and the true knowledge
of his duty) have injured any person against this rule of Gospel justice; what
does then Religion oblige him to do?

Ans. Luke 19 9.
To restore to him whatsoever he has unjustly taken from him, Ezekiel. 33. 15.
making him satisfaction for whatsoever loss he has suffered by him, to the
utmost farthing; and if he be not able to do it, to desire it, and express his
willingness to do it, if he were in capacity.

Quest. What if the tumults and confusion of his affairs shall hinder him from
the designment of the particular persons whom he has wronged; and if (in what
he knows) the persons be dead, and no heirs in being, to whom he may restore:
What is then safe to be done?

Ans. Luke 19. 8.
To pay in his satisfaction to the great Chancery of heaven, by relieving the
poor, and other acts of mercy and charity. For the retaining of that unholy
possession, as it can never free his repentance to God from insyncerity, Prove.
20. 17
so it shall become a continual gravel to his contentment, Prove. 10. 2
and a moth to consume his lawful enjoyments, Job 27. 16. 17, 18.
to him and his posterity. Job. 20. 15.


Quest. Prove. 13. 11.
But is this justice of the Gospel to be observed in satisfaction, for noother
injuries but such as are incident to trade and commerce?

Ans. Yes; For if a man by himself, or any other, through his abetment,
consent, or connivence, have injured another honor, or detracted from his
credit or abilities, that lives and subsists by his reputation: or if any man
shall wound, lame, or maim another, or by any other such way disadvantage him,
he is bound in conscience, by the law of Christian justice, to give him
satisfaction to the proportion of the wrong; if the injured person remits it
not.

Quest. Is not interest or use for money lent, to be accounted an unjust gain?

Ans. No; there being a voluntary contract for it, upon consideration of
profit, or at least of convenience to the borrower: Ex. 22. 25.
and there being no law of Christ or Moses to inhibit any such contract for it,
Lev. 25. 35 etc.
any otherwise than to prevent the oppression of the poor, To which is
referred Deuteronomy. 23. 19
and an obligement to a free and charitable lending to them, Ps. 15. 5.
and to restrain the biting and serpentine usury of the rich. Prove. 28 8.
The command of Christ, Ezekiel. 18. 8
to lend, expecting nothing again, Neh. 5.
as it was spoken by our Savior only in pursuance of the Doctrine of mercy,
Luke 6. 34.
so it may be transgressed in requiring the principal, as well as the interest,
by unmercifully oppressing him that is unable to pay either. If therefore a
man's usury exceeds not the reasonable rate provided for by laws, as to the
rich, nor offends charity as to the poor, it is safe as to justice.

CHAP. VI.
Quest. HAving gone along with the commands of Christ, in the two former
branches of the third Condition, which consisted in living godly and justly;
its requisite thou shoulst now inquire into the third part of that holiness,
that concerns thy obedience to Christ, which is (as thou said) to live
soberly as to our selves. In what therefore consists that sobriety, which as a
Christian thou ought to observe?

Ans. First in the sober use of my mind, Secondly of my body.

Quest. How may thou obey Christ in the sober use of thy mind?

Ans. Romans 12. 6.
In these two respects, First not to mind high things, that is, 1 Cor. 4, 6, 7.
not anxiously to aspire to heights in temporalls above my sphere; Romans 11. 20.
nor to indulge lofty conceits of my own knowledge, nor sollicitous thoughts of
a great esteem for piety, Romans 12. 3
proudly lifting up my self above other humble and holy servants of God: 1 Cor.
15. 9.
but to evidence a quiet and meek spirit in all professions and actions. 1 Pet
3. 4.


Quest. What is the second respect in which consists the sobriety of thy mind?

Ans. 1 Cor. 10. 10.
Not to torture my mind with discontents in the state and condition God has
placed me, Phil. 4. 11. 12.
whatsoever it is: being humbly thankful for the portion of blessings he has
allowed me, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8.
and quie^ly sober and meek in all adversities, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
judging them best for me, 2 Samuel 16 10.
because the merciful providence of my God has ordered them unto me.

Quest. What sobriety does the Gospel oblige thee to observe, 1 Co^. 6. ult.
as to the use of thy body?

Ans. It respects first the sober use of my tongue, Secondly of my body as to
chastity, Thirdly, as to Temperance.

Quest. Great insobrieties being expressed in our discourses, and a world of
evil committed by the tongue: Jam. 3. 6.
What directions do thou take, as to thy* holy ^arriage toward God, in the
sober use thereof?

Ans. To avoid all discourses against piety, 1 Pet. ^. 10
and mixing Religion, or Scripture in any vain mer^iments, Ephesians. 4. 29. 1 Co.
15. 33.
andiall discourses against charity, as slandering, detracting, judging,
censuring, or whatso-ever tends to the lessening of another: Tit. 3. 2.
To avoid all boasting and glorying of our own worth and abilities, Mat. 7. 1.
or insulting over another man's infirmities, Ephesians. 4. 25.
to avoid all lying, diss^mbling, Ephesians. 5. 4.
foolish jesting, and superfluity of talking. 2 Cor. 10. 15.
All which are very inconsistent with the strict sobriety of a Christians
carriage, and conversation.

Quest. In the next place what is the command of the Gospel, for the sober use
of thy body, as to chastity?

Ans. 2 Cor. 6. 16 2 Cor. 10. 8.
Not to defile my body (which is the temple of the Holy Ghost) in the time of
my virginity, 1 These. 4. 5
with any impurity, and in my m^trimoniall estate to keep my bed undefiled,
Heb. 13. 4.
knowing, that Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Quest, But are only the very acts of uncleanness forbidden by the Gospel of
Christ?

Ans. Mat. 5 28. 1 Cor. 5 9 1 Cor. 7. 1 2 Pet. 2. 14
No; A l wanton looks also with lust are accounted Adultery, much more all
unchaste discourses, and immodest actions, Romans 13. 13.
all cham^ering, wantonness, and lasciviousness, are sins against this Gospel
holiness.

Qu^st. What sobriety does the Gospel oblige men to, as to temperance?

Answ. Such as concern the temperate use of eating and drinking.

Quest. What is thy duty and Christian temperance, as to eating?

Ans. Luke 6. 25.
To make conscience of all immoderate eating with desigue of pleasure, Luke 21.
34
or giving fuel to lusts: of all unreasonable choicenesse for varieties and
delicacies, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
to the su^fetting my body, and unfitting me for the holy exercises to God, and
the offices of my calling.

Quest. How is the holiness of the Gospel preserved, as to sobriety in
drinking?

Ans. Ephesians. 5. 18.
Not only not to be drunk with wine and strong liquours, Isa. 5. 11.
but also not to drink immoderately of them, more then is consistent with the
severity of a sober and Christian carriage; Amos 6. 6
much more not to pull another man's sin upon me, by tempting, or urging him to
drink.

Quest. What other seasonable advice may be given to prevent a compliance with
this intemperate age?

Ans. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
Besides that no drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5. 21.
drunkenness is a sin that is attended with a complication of evils and
infelicities, Isa. 28. 8.
every one of which were enough to make it as odious to men, as it is to God.

Quest. Now because we have (with this direction) arrived at the last period of
our discourse, name some of them, though you digress to a little disproportion
to the brevity of the method?

Ans. It is a sin, which as it certainly makes a man to be no good man, so it
makes him to be no man at all, and by its debauchery gives not a man the
honor to be so sensible as a beast. It fills the mad society with the shame of
every man's infirmity, it makes it a scene of apish gestures, brawls, murders,
oaths, cursings, and susts, It makes a man a fatal governor, a loathsome
husband, a shameful parent, a disobedient child, a careless servant, and an
untrusty friend. It turns a man's body to a deluge and marsh of humors, and an
hospital of diseases; it shortens his days, he dies, and his soul that he
drowned in his life, sinks into a lake of fire, Luke 16. 24
where one drop will not be allowed to alleviate his eternal thirst.

Thus thou have finished the third and last Condition of the Gospel, with the
whole course of a Christians life, in which he ought to walk, if ever he intend
to be accepted to salvation in Christ; the Lord give thee an heart to desire,
and power to perform it. Ephesians. 3. 20. 3^.
Now unto him that is able to do excee^ing abundantly, above all that we are
able to ask or think; according to the power that works in us, unto him be
glory in the church by Christ Jesus, ^hroughout all ages, world without end,
Amen.

Satisfactions About the DOCTRINE OF GRACE, In order to the clearing some
doubts, which may hinder the Purposes and Attempts of obeying the GOSPEL.

Satisfactions About the DOCTRINE OF Grace.
AFter these Directions to a strict and severe profession of Christian
holiness, some unhappy, (yet too commonly received) principles, have made it
necessary to adjoyn some other Considerations to remove many possible scruples,
which being collected from those principles, do naturally impede the cheerful
undertaking this attempt of holy living. Now these Considerations will be of
two sorts' First, such as concern the doctrine of Grace, Secondly, such as
concern an outward Profession in some visible Church.

Quest. As to the first, it is fit to enquire (lest thou be discouraged in the
beginning) whence thou may expect ability to perform these conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
being of thy self unable to think a good thought, Joh. 6. 65.
of, or for thy self?

Ans. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Only from the assistance of the Grace of God, who works in me to will and
to do of his free mercy, Phil. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
which grace is sufficient for me in all parts of holiness: so that though I
can do nothing of my self, yet I can do all things, through Christ that
strengthens me. Phil. 4. 13.


Quest. What assurance have thou, that God will vouchsafe to thee such
assistance of his Grace?

Answ. I have so much assurance of it, Romans 14. 15.
as that Christ die^ for me, which is as sure as I am a son of Adam (in Adam
all dye, Romans 5. 18 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
in Christ are all made alive) as sure as he that has given me Christ, 1 Timothy,
2. 6 2 Pet. 2. 1.
will together with him, give me all things besides, Romans 8. 32.
necessary to my salvation: as sure as I have an honorable belief, that that
God which gave me a condition for salvation, Rev. 2, 21.
will not deny me a sufficient power to perform it. Phil, 1. 6.


Quest. How do thou expect or believe, that God will be pleased to work this
Grace in thee?

Ans. Romans 8. 11
Ordinarily by making the internal office of the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 3. 5. r Cor.
6. 11 2 Cor. 5. 19 20.
the outward administrations of the Word and Sacraments, and oftentimes by
othersweet overtures of his visible providence, Romans 10. 14.
to be isntrumental to the working of it; Luke 7. 37 Luke 15. 17
though besides them I believe God exercises other ways, Luke 2^. 4^.
means and instruments known only to himself, as men's present needs and other
individual circumstances, are seen by his wisdom, to be fitting opportunities
of mercy. But in what manner, that is, in what proportions, or order, (whether
in this, or that degree, or whether this Grace or that has the priority) it is
distributed; or whether he gives it by irresistible impulsion, or by resistable
swasion, whether by a Physical or a moral impression, and many such like
unedifying curiosities, I altogether lay them aside, humbly conceiving the work
of Grace in the will of man, a mystery not to be unfolded, and a point (as to
such enquiries) indeterminable: so I account such Controversies about them, not
only very unnecessary and impertinent, but very occasional to the making of
parties and factions among the learned, and of creating troubles and
discouragements to the pious of all sorts, in their purposes and attempts of
living according to Gospel-conditions. I say, passing by such riddles of
dispute, it is a sufficient argument and ground to support and encourage my
soul in all religious enterprises, that I am ascertained (whatsoever the manner
or method of Gods working his grace in me be) that he will not be wanting to
afford me such a proportion of it as shall be sufficient to begin, Phil. 1. 6.
pursue, and finish the work of salvation in me.

Quest. Joh. 12. 40
But some Texts of Scripture seems to weaken this your assurance; Matthew. 13. 14.
as, that God will blind some men's eyes, and harden their hearts, that they
shall not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart. Romans 9. 18. V.
15.
And that whom he will, he hardens, and there be some on whom he will not
have mercy. What may be said of such like Texts, and inferences from Scripture,
that may administer comfort?

Ans. That such acts of Gods justice in taking away or denying grace, in
reprobating, and casting off, are only subsequent to the despising and
neglecting the foregoing offers of his grace, and visitations of mercy. This
truth is fully evidenced in many instances of Scripture. As first St. Romans 1.
24. 28.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans affirms, that it was, because when They
knew God, they worshipped him not as God, etc. Therefore he gave them up, etc.
And because they changed the truth of God into a lie, etc. Therefore he gave
them up to a reprobate mind, 2 These. 2. 10.
etc. In another place he writes, that the power of Antichrist shall become
effectual to the destruction of many, and that they should believe a lie etc.
But it is of such as before received not the love of the truth, 1 Pet. 2. 8.
that they might be saved. St. Peter tells us that they to whom Christ should
become a stumbling block, and a Rock of offense, are such, as were first
disobedient to him. And this way of God is most conspicuous in his dealing with
his people the Jews (to whom those places in the question, chiefly refer.)
For his severity upon them, Romans 11. 22
was only unto such that first fell from him. They had a day of mercy which
they despised, after which it was just with God to make it a time of hardening
and excluding them from mercy. Which when God shall so do, Romans 9. 20
what art thou, O man, that thou should question his justice, or reply
against him, V. 21.
who has power as a Potter over his clay, to make some vessels to honor, and
some to dishonor? when some accept, others reject and despise his grace.
Therefore Gods ways are ^^equal. That this truth may yet be fully signified,
Luke 8. 5, etc.
we argue that the stony and other unprofitable grounds, wanted not their seed:
the unfruitful tree had its husbandry, Luke 13. 7.
manuring, and long forbearance, before it was sentenced to be cut down: Luke
14. 17
The refusing guests at the great Supper had their invitation. To conclude,
Luke 19. 42
Jerusalem had a day of visitation, in which they neglected the things of their
peace, before the fearful sentence was past, that they should be hid from their
eyes. From all which it follows, that to want grace, to be hardened, to be a
vessel of dishonor, can be no arguments to suspect God will deny such grace
and sufficient spiritual assistancies, but rather motives to beware of the
abuse and neglect of grace when it is offered, lest we forfeit our peace by
neglecting the day of mercy.

Quest. But further, may I not fear to be shut out from grace, and all hopes of
salvation, by a fatal and irrevocable reprobation from eternity, the necessary
consequence of an irrespective decree for the salvation of some?

Ans. I know some places of Scripture have administered occasion of endless
dispute, wherein men have waded (as in the dark,) into an abyss of doubts of
unfathomed depth, and by their passionate disceptations even to
uncharitableness, (about that which (I am confident) is no further revealed,
then what may make it necessary to be acknowledged a mystery, and to put reason
to a trial, to submit to that which it could never comprehend by any enquiries)
have made conclusions about the point, which (in natura rei) will, have, and
must hinder, and put a bar against a lively undertaking the purposes of
strict Gospel-obediencence, and weaken the applications of Gods grace, in
pressing endeavors to work out salvation, by the performance of the conditions
of the holy Covenant. Therefore passing by the enumerations of the differing
opinions of the divines both of the Romish and Protestant faith, and laying
aside all examination of such secluse secrecies of God, and all unnecessary
disputes about them, I set up my rest in this one thing, that I am comfortably
confident, that whatsoever Gods election and predestination is, it does not
contradict his promises of mercy, nor his end of giving Christ unto the world,
both which (by the universal scope of the Gospel) are general and conditional.
And it is the doctrine of the Church of England in the end of the seventeenth
Article, that we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

Quest. Another scruple yet occurres, that if salvation through Christ shall be
given to them only that perform the conditions, when I consider the weakness of
my faith, the defects of my repentance, and my innumerable failings in every
part of the performancies of holy living, I find nothing but arguments of
discouragement, and little hopes of being accepted to salvation: How may I
satisfy my soul in such a discomfort?

Ans. Though (as it is evident) that the faith, repentance and holiness of
Gods best servants have ever been, and shall ever be defective and imperfect,
they being unable, through their corruptions, perfectly to perform those
Gospel-conditions; yet is God pleased to accept of their faithful and sincere
endeavor to fulfill them. For the state of Grace does not necessarily suppose
a soul exempt from all sin, 1 John 1. ult.
but from the reigning power, rule, and dominion of it: Romans 6. 12
and a safe condition toward God, is not to be accounted by a freedom from
all sinning, (who then could appear before God, and the reflections of his own
concience with comfort?) but is to be collected by observation, that the
spiritual part has the greatest predominancy in the thoughts, affections, Gal.
5. 24.
designs, and actions; and that the lusts and carnal part are less, and
every day lessening, by the power of the predominant grace. In which estate the
failings and defects being suddenly retracted, and the soul humbled for them,
1 Io. 2. 1.
are unquestionably pardoned through the blessed plea and advocation of Christ's
precious merits, Heb. 7. 25.
and his never ceasing intercession.

Quest. Now because you have mentioned such an hope of pardon by the merits of
Christ; I conceive it will tend much to thy satisfaction in the first attempt,
and in the whole course of obeying the Gospel, rightly to understand what
Christ has merited for thee, that thy soul may know what comforts to rejoice
in, for what mercies to bless God, and what duties stand on thy account to be
performed. What therefore has Christ as a Mediator and Redeemer merited for
thee?

Ans. Heb. 8. 6.
A new Covenant of Grace, Romans 5. 8.
whereby man being at present enmity with God, Mat. 18. 11
might be reconciled to him, and being in a lost estate, might be recovered and
redeemed to life and salvation. Now the whole work of Redemption may be
represented in these five effects of his death, and mediation.

Quest. What is the first?

Ans. Gal. 1. 14.
Christ has, by his universal passion, Romans 5. 9, 10.
especially by his death and price of his blood, Ioh. 1. 29.
satisfied and attoned the justice of God for the sins of the world, to become
effectual to the justification and salvation of as many, Ioh. 1. 12.
as shall by faith accept of him upon his own terms, Heb. 5. 9.
receive his grace, and sincerely perform the conditions of the Covenant.

Quest. What is the second?

Ans. Christ has merited, that those conditions should not be (like the laws
imposed upon the Jews) numerous, troublesome, full of business and attendance,
to shadowie rites and ceremonies: but should become a light burden, Mat. 11.
29, 30.
an easy and pleasant yoke; and that his Commandments should not be grievous,
1 Ioh. 5 3.
but should become approveable to right reason, and acts in themselves of the
greatest prudence, and most conducible to the peace and felicity of all
societies and persons.

Quest. Gal. 3. 13.
You see here a most blessed progress of mercy to mankind: first a dreadful
justice satisfied (which the sacrifice of worlds could never have done) by the
suffering of him that was both God and Man: then secondly, a condition
propounded in a law, which man could not but have given himself, had God
allowed him a capacity to have chosen one, whereby to have made himself
blessed, even in this life. What is the third?

Ans. That though the conditions be thus pleasant in their exercise,
approveable in their own nature, and so successful in their end; yet such is
naturally the infelicity of man, that his whole frame being corrupted, and
depraved, and having in all parts and faculties such a general ineptitude, and
averseness to his own principal good, and so proclive a disposition to all
evil to love and pursue it, that (I say) how excellent soever those conditions
be, yet he is altogether unable to perform them (by any power in himself) as to
accomplish an impossibility. Rev. 21. 6.
Therefore in the third place, Iam. 4 6.
Christ has merited that there should be given to man a new principle of life,
Heb 13. 21
that is, (by Gods grace) an ability to perform those conditions acceptably to
God, having the mercy to receive of his fullness Grace for Grace. Ioh. 1. 12.
To cure therefore the erringnesse of our nature, the Holy Spirit is sent a
Guide to direct into all truth. Ioh. 16. 13.
When the darkness of our depraved understanding impedes the work, it is then
a spirit of wisdom to enlighten. Ephesians. 1. 13.
When our infirmities render us unable for the duties of the Gospel, then it is
a Spirit of might, Ephesians. 3. 16.
to strengthen us with power in the inner man. When our natural averseness to
good, hinders our coming to Christ, the work of mercy is to draw us in unto
him. Ioh. 6. 44.
And that which sums up all the comforts of this kind in one, is this, that
these and all other spiritual assistances shall not be denied us in our wants,
when by prayer we seek for Grace to help in time of need; Heb. 4. 16.
especially when our addresses (in such cases) to God are made, by Him, Heb. 7.
25.
who cease not to make intercession for us.

Quest. Is there now after all this, a further necessity of another degree of
Christ's merits and mediation?

Ans. Yes: For though (as you even now said) the Commandments are not grievous,
and the spiritual assistance powerful, to enable the soul to perform them,
yet still (such is the corruption of nature, and the direct opposition of our
carnal part to Christ, Gal. 5. 17.
and his government) that no man can perform the conditions without innumerable
and intolerable imperfections (as was also even now intimated) Therefore in the
fourth place (see the exceeding riches of Grace, and persuancy of mercy) he
has merited, that though our obedience be defective, yet if it be sincere,
(upon our humiliation for those failings, 1 John 2. 1.
and endeavors, to withstand them in future) it should be accepted, the sins
pardoned, and the soul delivered from the hell, that was the due, Romans 6. ult.
and proper wages of every one of those sins.

Quest. Though the mercies you have already mentioned, reach unto the clouds,
and (by a just acknowledgement of their greatness) have out stripped wonder, and
silenced even hope it self: yet because you mentioned a fifth effect of the
merits and mediation of Christ; where is the the necessity, and blessedness of
that to be discovered?

Ans. That forasmuch as whatsoever degree of holiness, a soul (by Gods grace)
may arrive unto, and how acceptable soever the performancies of a sincere heart
may be to that God, Es. 42. 3.
who will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, upon terms
of mercy, yet cannot that soul by any such holiness or obedience, Luke 17. 10
deserve or merit the least of mercies, Romans 11. 6
for its future well-being. Woe to the holiest person that ever served Christ,
if he should have no more comfort to come, then what he himself has merited,
or could challenge in justice, Mat. 10. 22
at the hands of God. Romans 2. 7.
In the last last place therefore Christ has merited and mediated, Romans 1^. 22
that so many as shall truly persevere, in such faithful and sincere
performance of all the conditions, and continue their engagement to him, to
obey him in all his commands, unto their lives ends: shall not only be
delivered from hell and destruction, but shall also (O unsearchable treasures
of Grace, and stupendous love!) inherit a portion of the greatest felicity,
which is to see God as he is, 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
and to possess a mansion of immutable rest, Ioh. 14. 1.
of his own preparing, and that mansion to be a Kingdom, Mat. 18. 3.
and that a Kingdom of glory; Romans 2. 7.
and that glory of an exceeding weight: 2 Cor. 4. 17.
where every subject (having been here an heir, Romans 8. 17
and coheir with Christ) shall be a spiritual King, Rev. 1. 6.
his reign and honor immortal, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
and crown eternal.

By this discourse I find my self fully satisfied in all my scruples about the
particulars contained in the questions, and all my discouragements removed,
that might hinder the undertaking a life according to those strict rules of
holiness. And now as I cannot but glorify God, for a work of so infinite a
mercy in his servants, having made the promises, rules, and arguments, to be
religious, and consequently blessed; as evident as the light, and as certain as
a demonstration: so I cannot but justify him in the condemnation of the wicked;
That he should make the Gospel to become a millstone, to fall upon, and grind
them to powder, because they despised it; Mat, 10. 15
and that the case of Sodom and Gomorrah should be more tolerable at the day of
judgment, Mat. 11. 23
then theirs. Heb. 2. 3.
For how shall they escape that have neglected so great salvation? Let every
evil man therefore that despises the grace of God offered in Christ, and that
chooses rather to satisfy his vain lusts, then to give up his soul to his
dominion, (I say, let every such person) know, that there is no true peace for
him in this life, nothing but horror at his dying hour, a curse at the great
judgment, and after that an hell to all eternity. And all this justly, because
he despised so tender a love of a merciful God, so dear a suffering of a
gracious Jesus, so importunate swasions of the holy Spirit: and with all these,
rejected such sweet precepts, upon promises of infinite rewards.

Satisfactions OF DOUBTS About the Visible Profession OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
And its MINISTRY.

Satisfactions of Doubts about the visible Profession of the Church of England,
and its MINISTRY.
FOrasmuch as there be many outward differing professions of Christianity in
the world, and as many (if not more) in this nation, as in all the world
besides; so that many pious spirits may stand amazed, and doubtful, which way
to take, in such various and inconsistent tracts; and by that amazement are
discouraged to adjoyn themselves to any, and unconfident in that way they have
assumed: I have thought it necessary, thou should account some short
directions, (proportionable to the business in hand) that may best establish,
and quiet the revolutions and doubts of thy mind, the more cheerfully to
undertake a religious life, and to confirm thee in the profession in which
thou stand: What therefore are such directions?

Ans. First to beware of such a Profession, and Religion, that has no other
ground, but the pretense of the light and immediate gifts, and inspirations of
the Spirit, to guide men to, and in it. For such a profession must be very
unsafe and dangerous, for these reasons.

First, 1. Reas.
because there has been no succession of any such immediate light or
revelations, since the Apostles age: when they were necessary, that the whole
way of Christ's first planting his Church, might, in all circumstances, be
purely miraculous. Since which time, no Church of Christ in any place, or at
any time have made profession upon that ground, till the late Enthusiasts in
Germany, and England. For certainly, if that had been the ground of professing
Christ, that Church which is a City on a hill, and that Gospel which is the
Mountain of the Lord, would not have left us without all evidence and
president, in such a long space of time. But if they please to conclude the
whole Christian world in darkness, from the Apostles times to this period,
though they think it nothing to condemn so many ages, to uphold their own
phantasmes, yet I ask them how the promise to the Church was effected, when
Christ engaged to send the Spirit of truth, to guide them into all truth; if
fourteen or fifteen hundred years together, the whole Church so foully erred,
by a false, unlawful, and Antichristian profession? But because they lay claim
to such immediate gifts of the Spirit, (without the subministration of
learning, education in Sciences and Tongues, and such like preparations of the
understanding for spiritual knowledge) from the examples of the Apostles, I
further require of them, why they pretend to some of those miraculous gifts,
and not to all, as gifts of tongues, healing, and the like, which were the
significations and proofs, that the other gifts and themselves were of God.
When therefore their ordinary discourses, pretended raptures, prayings, and
preachings are delivered by them, and owned to be the inspirations of the
Spirit, which may proceed from other natural dexterities, and acquired helps,
and having no other miraculous gifts, as of tongues and healing, and the like;
as the Apostles had, to prove them to be so, their own assertions are very
fallible, and the profession dangerous and unsafe.

Secondly, 2. Reas.
such a professinn is unsafe, because upon that ground, the devil has the
most certain advantage of deceiving men indiscoverably, when they shall once be
persuaded to follow the voice and dictate of an indemonstrable spirit, in
themselves, or others. Whence is that seasonable inhibition of the Apostle; 1 John 4. 1.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God; for many
false Prophets are gone out into the world. From which Scripture I infer
these observations, to strengthen the argument against such a profession.
First, Believe not every spirit, because there be several sorts of spirits, all
false, but one: There is a lying spirit, 1 Chro. 18. 20.
and a perverse spirit, or the spirit of error, as the Septuagint renders it,
Es^y 19. 14.
A man's own spirit, (...).
which is his opinion and fancy, there is also the spirit of the world, which
is the common humor and bent of every present time. 1 Cor. 2. 11 V. 12.
These and many of this sort will be pretenders to guide, as the Spirit of God.
Therefore when I am tempted to believe any thing, upon the bare pretense of the
Spirit, in what great danger am I in, to be guided by a false spiitit, there
being many to one true Spirit of God? Secondly, But try the spirits, that is,
those false spirits shall be so likened to the true Spirit of God, in so grear
an assimulation, that they are not to be distinguished without trial and
examination. And this is no wonder, 2 Cor. 11., 13, 14.
when Satau himself can transform himself into an Angel of light, and his
deceitful agents to be like the true Apostles of Christ. Now as the difficulty
of discerning and consequently the danger of such a profession) of the true
Spirit from the false, arises from their similitude; so also much more in
respect of what reason I have to suspect my self, as unable to try and examine
them aright. First, because when I consider how easily my judgment is deceived
in things obvious to sense, as in civil differences, and outward affairs, how
much more fallible must that my judgment be, in discriminating secret and
invisible spirits, lying under the cunning artificies of devils and evil men,
who, by them, attempt to seduce weak souls? Secondly, when I consider how
easily I may be prejudicated, and if fo, how soon, and certainly deceived. When
a prejudgement has once passed upon the mind, in the worst cause that ever
was, how does every likelihood make an argument, every fallacious argument
grows into a demonstration, and every man's discourse of the same judgment,
shall have an indulgence and a belief: But every argument and advising person
to the contrary, shall be sufficiently answered with nothing, but a suspicion
and a contempt. Therefore when I am tempted to a religion or profession upon
the pretense of the Spirit, to what dangers do I expose my self? lest I should
not (through the want of, or a prejudicated judgment) distinguish the true
Spirit from the false, when they are both made as like, as light to light.
Thirdly, because many false Prophets, etc. which inferres, that false Prophets
when they come, (because their ^ofession is against the ground of all visible
evidences) must pretend a Spirit: It being the common artifice of seducers, to
muffle up the understandings of their followers, by alleging something that is
high and undiscernable: like some Astronomers, who betray their disciples to a
ditch or a cheat, by causing them to look up with wonder, to some imaginary
Scheme of nothing. So that still fuch a profession must needs be unsafe,
because it is forewarned and prophesied, that false Prophets when they come,
shall have this mark upon them, they shall pretend a Spirit.

Lastly, if the pretended ground of being directed by an immediate light of the
Spirit were true, (and consequently safe) there could be no profession more
regular and certain; the same Spirit will always dictate the same thing. But
we see that the pretenders to the Spirit, are divided into Legions of factions,
Anabaptists, Catabaptists, Antitrinitarians, Antiscripturists, Ranters,
Quakers, and many such of like sort; among which, not one Sect agrees with
another, nor two Congregations of the same Sect among themselves, nor scarcely
the members of the same Congregation one with another, and very seldom the
same member at any one time, with what he was himself a little before. And yet
all pretend the Spirit of God for their guide, from whence their several
opinions are as unlikely to proceed, as that the two Poles should center in one
point, or that contradictions might be reconciled. How then can thou be safe?
with what Sect will thou join profession? with what Congregation of that Sect?
with what part of that Congregation? and then in what opinions will thou join?
such as they maintained last year, or those they now hold, or such as they are
like to take up the next? Now to strengthen the argument, it is observed that
such divisions and subdivisions among those that fall from the Churches unity,
are significant marks of their falsity, and that they are not of the true
Spirit of God. Irenaeus reports of the Valentinians, Lib. 1. c. 5.
that when they were very numerous, scarce two or three agreed in the same
opinions. And S. Austin of the Donatists, Lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 6.
that in his time they were cut asunder, and divided into very many small
pieces and factions: and the same may be observed by almost all the ancient
remarkable heresies: And how much of this observation falls upon such as have
departed from us, I leave to the impartial Reader to judge.

Qu. But do you follow no directions of the Spirit in your profession?

Ans. Yes; in these four ways or respects. First, I follow the guidance of
the holy Scriptures, as they were given by inspiration of the holy Spirit. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Secondly, I follow the examples, pattern, 2 These. 3. 6
and Doctrines of the first Churches which were planted by the Apostles, and
Apostolic men of the first age, who were directed by the extraordinary gifts
of the Spirit, as of prophesying, tongues, and miraculous healing, as was then
expedient for the conviction of the world, that they were from God. Thirdly, I
follow that light of truth, which the universal Church of Christ have kept and
preserved, as to all times and places: which I believe to be the effect of
Christ's promise of sending his Spirit of truth, Ioh. 16. 13.
to guide into all truth. Fourthly, I follow the direction of the holy Spirit,
Ioh. 6. 45.
whereby I am taught of God, that is, instructed and enabled by his preventing
and assisting grace, to lead a holy life, 1 Cor. 2. 15
and to have my judgment spiritualized, that I may mind, desire, discern, and
design spiritual things. Now whatsoever new light is pretended inconsistent
with the holy Scriptures so interpreted, by the common judgment of the first
planters, and the Churches nearest them; or that shall destroy the All-truth of
the Spirit in fundamentals maintained and confirmed by universal profession: or
that consists not with godliness, and the Gospel-rules of a holy life, mercy,
charity, peaceablenesse, justice, and the like; I dare not embrace any new
light upon the grounds forementioned.

Quest. What is your second direction or caveat?

Ans. To beware of such a profession, that has no other ground then a plea
from Sripture, upon private interpretation: which ground (though it has not
produced such monstrous effects of error, as the former, yet has been more
dangerous, and destructive to the Churches peace and unity. Now the
unsafetinesse of such a profession in the first place appears, because the
most absurd heretics of the ancient Church, in bringing in their then novel
errors, (as plainly and undeniably appears by the practices and histories of
the Manichees, Arians, Sabellians, Pelagians, Donatists, and others) when they
would no otherwise accomplish their enviousnesse against the then present
Church, departed from its communion upon new principles of dangerous
consequence, and cried up Scripture for their cause. A testimony or two I may
instance in, Lib. de praes. adv. Herit c. 15. consule totum caput.
from the Ancients instead of many. Tertullian speaking of heretics, says,
That when they persuade of matters of faith, but out of the writings of faith,
they pretend the Scriptures, and by such boldness move many to them. To the
same purpose Athanasius. Orat cont. Arian.
Endure not those that persuade you to new things, contrary to the faith
received, although they anthorize them from the holy Scriptures. In the next
place, I shall further add as a reason to suspect the unsafetinesse of such a
profession, the fatal infelicities and irreconcilable differencies, that have
always befallen the Church, but especially in these last ages, upon the
presumption of private interpretation; whereby every man, as he has been
indulgent to his own opinion (which either education, prejudice, advantage or
ignorance, has inclined his spirit to) so has he decided and determined the
controversies of the Church, or made new ones, worse then the former. And I am
confident, were there a thousand cells, and so many of our private Interpreters
in them, obliged to pass their judgments to determine the controverted
doctrines, to make a confession of faith, to marshall a Church Government, to
form a service and worship of God from the Scriptures by their private
interpretations, and they all supposed to lay aside those few principles, which
they have continued from the received doctrines and practices of the Church,
and no singling of principles one to another; we should soon and certainly find
a progeny of a thousand several religions and professions. Now the main reason
is this; though the holy Scriptures be in themselves most perspicuous and
plain, as to the direction of life and manners, for which cause David calls
them, a light to his feet, and lanthorn to his paths; yet, as to the deep
mysteries of faith, and the determination of many considerable emergent
controversies of doctrine and government; God has pleased to deliver his
truths in so dark and abstruse a manner, that they that want humility to hear
the common judgment of the Churches of Christ, and their received
interpretations, may easily be delivered over by God, to find arguments enough
in Scripture, to captivate and satisfy a private and prejudicate spirit in any
error of religion, wresting the Scripture to their own destruction. 2 Pet. 3.
16.


Quest. In what manner do you hold the direction of the Scriptures, and their
interpretation, as to your profession?

Ans. First, I acknowledge the Blessed Scriptures to be the rule of faith, the
end and decision of all controversies; and where they are clear and evident, I
submit my soul to them, as to the final end of all my enqu^ries and doubts.

Secondly, in the things that God has pleased should be doubtfully delivered,
(which is occasioned, either from some difficulty in the Idiome, or from
seeming difference with other places, requiring curious distinctions; or when
the expressions are clad and darkened, with tropes and figures, which are
frequent in Scriptures; or Lastly, when the Scriptures are occasional, and a
due consideration of the time when, and the persons to whom they were spoken,
or written, is necessary to the understanding of them) I say in things so
doubtfully delivered, as to doctrine or government, I submit my private reason,
and opinion, to the grand interpretation, and common consent of the first
Churches, for these reasons.

First, because they were uninterested in our present controversies, and so
without danger of being biased by passion; and they ordinarily lying under
persecutions, were not likely to gratify an error, for any private or worldly
regards. Secondly, because they had most reason to know what were the practices
of the Apostles, and Apostolical men, most certain guides to follow, in
controverted and doubtful points of Government, and the circumstantial parts of
religion. Their footsteps, which had so lately planted the Churches of Christ,
could not be so soon worn out, but that they left discernable tracts, for their
immedate successors, to walk in. Thirdly, they knew better the occasions of the
Apostles writings, and other co-incident circumstances, of the then present
times; to which many passages of great concernment do refer, which a private
person laying aside Antiquity, would be far enough from discerning, and so
most likely to mistake the meaning of them, being ignorant of the scope and
drift of such holy expressions. For these reasons it is, that the learned
professors of this Church, have offered the trial of the established profession
by Scripture, so interpreted, against all its adversaries. And I will instance
only in that yet unanswered appeal of the Author against Fisher the Jesuit in
these words. Page 53.
That all the positive Articles of the Church of England, Sect. 15.
are grounded upon Scripture, we are contented to be judgby the joint and
constant belief of the Fathers which lived within four or five hundred years
after Christ, when the Church was at the best; and by the Councels held within
those times, and to submit to them in all those points of doctrine.

Quest. What is the third direction?

Ans. Not to embrace a reliligion, that is taken up contrary to a received
profession, upon the credit of the plausible behavior, and smoorh conversation
of the promoters and leaders of it. The unsafetinesse of such a profession may
be easily observed, and concluded. First, because it is observable, that when
our Savior gives a caveat concerning false Prophets, he foretells them not
distinguishable by their outward behavior: For though they shall be raveing
wolves inwardly, Mat. 7. 14.
that is, in their designs of turning the Church of Christ, yet shall they
cover their villainy with sheeps clothing, that is, so great a proportion of
framed sanctimony and formed piety, outward innocence and humility, or so much
of either, or all of them, as may advance a reputation of their new doctrines,
to a discontented or prejudicated people. This St. Paul calls the form of
godliness, to uphold the credit of such as forsaking public Assemblies, shall
creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3. 5
and lead captive silly women. And for such ends, 2 Cor. 1 11 14.
it is as easy a matter for false Apostles to transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, as for the devil himself to appear an Angel of light, as
St. Paul argues. And secondly, it is not only possible, for the greatest
enemies of Christ, in pursuance of their designs to put on such deceitful
habits of outward holiness, and therefore a new profession taken up upon that
ground, very unsafe: But it is also necessary (and therefore the more
dangerous) that such bringers in of new lights, and principles, must pretend to
more then ordinary sanctity, having no other just or semblable plea, to
persuade or attract men to their misguidances. Now, though many sad experiences
in these times may clearly evince this assertion, yet I appear to an universal
observation of the ancient enemies to truth in propagating their errors for a
confirmation of it. Among which I may instance in one or two. St. Austin
mentioning the artificies of the Manichees to deceive their followers, the main
was, Lib. de mo. Eccl. Cath. 1 Tom. 1.
That they carried before them an appearance of a pure life, and memorable
continence. The next is of St. Basil, who affirms of the Arrians, That for
their fictitious holiness, Epist. 82.
they got a general belief of their way. Now the great stratagem, in their
design of personating such degrees of holiness, zeal, and piety, is to take
advantage, to check the imperfections and imprudencies, into which the true
Pastors of the Church, by time, and peace, have been betrayed: and to raise a
repute to themselves, by their odium, and accidesital disgrace, which by such
arts, they have attempted to put upon them with the people. Therefore such a
profession, that is entertained only upon the argument of outward sanctity,
must needs be very unsafe, because the greatest enemies to Christian truth,
have, will, and must palliate their notable changes in religion, by such
pretenses.

Quest. But what can you say for the defense of your profession, that may
satisfy them that object against you, the corruptions of the lives of your
Ministers, and Professors?

Ans. First, (we know, and can prove) that no profession in it self, contains
doctrines of more universal submission to all the commands of Christ, nor
principles more obliging to unity, peace, or purity, to greater reverence, or
more solemn worship of God, to faithfuller subjection to authority, or purer
charity to man; then the received doctrines of the Church of England. Examine
but this poor shadow of its religion, in this preceding Catechism, and I
challenge any man to an objection, to show what impieties to God, injustice to
men, or unsobriety in our selves, in body, or mind, we allow.

That our Professors and Ministers have not universally lived up to the purity
of its doctrine, is as certainly true, as that all outward Professors of
Christ, and always have been a mixed company of good and bad, which the ^et in
the Gospel intimates, to which the Kingdom of God (that is, Mat. 13. 47.
the state of the Gospel) is likened: or, as that the very Apostles and first
followers of Christ were so; or, as that St. Paul in most, if not in all his
Epistles, especially to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11, 21.
and that in the very societies admitted to the Sacrament, clearly evinceth to
be so: or Lastly, as certainly true, as that all the Churches of Christ have
been so, in all ages and places. Now in this mixture, the numbers of
hypocritical and loose Professors, and their deviations from the holiness of
the Gospel, have been more or less, with respect to the times in which they
lived, as they were more or less courted with peace and prosperity, or
oppressed with adversities and persecutions. It often falling out, that the
true Churches of Christ have at some times made the less visible progress up
the stream of piety, as the stronger torrents, and winds of contrary
temptations, have borne them down, and opposed them. So that to take offense
and quarrel against a religion, or profession, upon the argument of the mixture
of the professors, when the doctrines be pure and holy, is most unjust and
unreasonable, and might be evineing against the best Churches of Christ that
ever were, or will be, to the end of the world. It is true, it is a great
felicity, and glory to a profession, when the numbers of Saints increase, and
are predominant, when Gods honor is more generally preferved, and his worship
maintained, godliness encouraged, and sin shamed, and strictly corrected: but,
if in a corrupt age, it becomes otherwise, so loug as the established
profession be holy in it self, there is no argument to forsake her communion,
and much less to pursue a destruction, to the religion it self. They should
rather continue in it, take off the offense from it, and make it better by
their exemplary living, then to make the offense worse, by departing from it,
or to take the task of an enemy, to ruin and overthrow it. Now the result is
this, the mixture of all the best Churches of Christ being charitably weighed,
and the circumstances of a long continued peace (which always contracts the
rust of corruption) and all other accidents of present temptations considered,
I am confident no one period of time, ever presented a Church, that ever
declared greater effects of piety, or produced a more numerous progeny of
better Christians, then the Church of England has done. And I challenge all
the adversaries of this afflicted Church, to evince my assertion, by any former
president, or present example. As to the loud clamor of corruptions, in the
lives of the Ministers of this Church, (by which they pretend to satisfy the
world about their unparalled and unchristian usages of them, and indulge
their own cruelties, by thinking they serve God while they devour them, as our
Savior prophesied) we are as willing to acknowledge and lament them, as they
can be to suggest them. But that I may clearly take off the offense that is
used as an argument against the profession of this Church, by the allegation of
such corruptions in the lives of its Ministers, I desire that these particulars
may be charitably and impartially considered.

First, 1.
That the religion of this Church does as little allow such corruptions, and
gives as strong an obligation to the contrary holiness, and is as capable of
entertaining all possible securities for any present reforming, or future
preventing such evils, as any Christian profession ever was, or any other can
be. And if the loose reins of officers, and the temptations of a corrupt and
prosperous age, have occasioned much more errors of life in Ministers, then
was suitable to so holy a calling, yet is not the lawfulness of their call to
be justly impeached, nor the religion and Church it self chargeable with such
corruptions.

Secondly, consider that in all the purest ages of Christian profession, the
Ministers did always evidence they had their honor in earthen vessels, that
is, were men of common imperfections, Act. 14. 15.
and subject to the same frailties which are coincident to other men. To prove
which, I need not exceed my design of brevity, by making historical narrations,
through the several times of the Church, of the common failings of the
Ministry in them. Account but the Apostles themselves, Ioh. 12. 6.
and you may observe Judas to have been a thief and a devil; Mat. 26. 74
St. Peter to have not only denied, but also to have forsworn our Savior;
St. Thomas grossly disbeleeved him, and they all once forsake him: who had
they lived in this age, would have been exposed to Articles enough, to have
ejected them from their Apostolical offices, called their standings in
question, and to have given arguments to a malicious adversary, to have
scrupled their profession. Now if the fountains were defective, how could the
streams of their successors be expected to be pure, and free from all
corruptions? And because our adversaries have exposed us to contempt for our
imperfections, of which though we justly accuse our selves, and from our souls
desire an universal amendment, yet we are willing to be tried by the state of
the Ministry in any time, that our cunningest enemy can name for general
defense, all circumstances considered.

Thirdly, consider what an easy thing it is to contemn, when men are resolved
to accuse, and what an hard thing it is to be innocent, when a man lays at the
foot of every froward, and unreasonable distaste, and humor.

This evidently appears by the usage of our Blessed Savior, who though he was
the only person that was purely innocent, yet there wanted not them, Joh. 9.
16.
to make him guilty of great and high misdemeanors; Mat. 11. 19
he was accused as, Joh. 8. 48.
and reputed a winebibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Joh. 10. 20.
a Beelzebub, and Prince of devils; Mat. 12. 24.
and when he came upon the Articles of his life, Mat. 26. 65.
he was found guilty by testimony of blasphemy, and many other things as Pilate
told him. Mat. 27. 13.
And certainly were the lives of Gods best servants (suppose a Ministry)
searched to the bottom of their times, and their single falls recorded, and
that by malicious accusers (studious to find defects, and resolved to quarrel)
and so presented in the multiplying glass of disaffection, to the view of the
people already prejudicated by an ill opinion, who could be accounted innocent?
or where would be found a Ministry or a person, which might not be called
corrupted? How much of this case is ours, let the consciencies of adversaries
attest.

Lastly, let our adversaries cool their fury, and consider what security they
have above other men, to have their own next succeeding Clergy exempted from
corruptions after their enjoyments of peace, and the heats of opposition be
digested, whether they can secure a privilege for them above all examples and
common, incidencies to error; or whether they would willingly have them suffer
such a condemnation, which an ill-affected enemy, disposed to accuse, would
fasten upon them. I think it not a noble or Christi-thing to search for men's
faults or frailties, otherwise I might upon a good ground affirm, the Ministry
of the newest stamp, and latest shift, guilty of as great failings in
themselves, and to have been the occasion of as great offenses in others,
(though of another nature) as those for which we suffer so many indignities and
uncivil usages. And I believe could the people see (and I wish they could) what
the new Ministry would do in some few years of peace and power; I say I
believe, they would think they had lost a Ministry.

Qnest. This discourse, though fully satisfying the scruples that may be
objected concerning the lives of Ministers, yet leaves another knot untyed,
which the enemies of our profession have cast upon the consciences of many
weak, though well-disposed spirits, and that is concerning the lawfulness of
their calling, as the Ministry of this Church now stands. In which I desire to
see your satisfaction.

Ans. As to that point, though I might acquiesce in the various Treatises, with
which many learned persons have enlightened the world, against all the
cxceptions of the adversaries to Ministry; yet for the satisfaction of every
present Reader, I will subjoyn these two arguments, in their defense.

The first is from the effect of Ministry; 1. Arg.
an argumentation, which our Savior intimates, ought to be used in this very
case, to discriminate true Ministry from false Prophets; Mat. 7. 20.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. And blessed St. Paul, that could have
brought Angels, and men, and the plea of an immediate sending from God, to the
proof of his high and miraculous separation, is pleased to argue for his
Apostleship, with his Corinthians, from the effect of the same among them. 1
Cor. 9. 2.
For (says he) the zeal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. Now whatsoever
effects, and fruits, are judged producible from the true Ministry of Christ,
to demonstrate them such, have been eminently brought forth by the Ministry of
this national Church. What grace was there ever eminent in any Christian
Church, that has not as apparently been demonstrable in this? what heavenly
members of Christ's Kingdom, have shined in every part of this nation, no way
inferior to the most renowned Saints of ancient times, but that the frequency
of professors, and (as it were) familiarity of piety, have eclipsed their own
excellencies? And without doubt weighing those extenuating expressions of
Christ's Kingdom, (as, Luke 12. 32.
the little Flock, few that find it, Mat. 7. 14.
and the like) we might with facility observe in this nation, plentiful
additions of souls to the Church, above any nation in the world, proportion of
places considered. Whence then these effects, and demonstrations of religion,
but from Gods pleasure to preserve a neverfailing succession of Ministry, who
disserninated in every part of the nation, have labored in Word and Doctrine
among us? for it canuot be supposed that this Church have received these grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles, or that a corrupt tree, that is, a false or
Antichristian Ministry, should bring forth such good fruit, Man. 7. 17.
as our Savior argues in this very case. And after all this, lest these
eminent graces, and blessed effects, should still be attributed to any other,
either immediate, or mediate, proceediug of God; I desire any of our
adversaries to show, that ever any nation was converted to, or continued in a
Christian profession, or that ever the Religion of a Nation has not verged to
a Period, with the fall of its Ministry, and then I may be induced to suspect,
this Church received such graces from some other instrument then the Ministry.
And for further confirmation, it is no hard matter to observe, how much the
interest of Religion, is concerned in this Ministeries preservation, by
considering, how piety, peace, charity, reverence to Gods worship, and the
whole frame of religion have declined, and the contrary evils of profaneness,
sacrilege, blasphemy, Atheism, oppression, violence, and injustice, have
generally improved by their fall. Now the force of the argument is this; There
being these effects of piety, and salvation, as unparalleled consequences of the
work of the Ministry of this National Church, and there being no other
ordinary means (the mehod of grace under the Gospel) from whence otherwise they
should proceed, we therefore cunclude them lawful instruments of Gods work, and
a blessed and truly Christian Ministry to this Church.

The fecond argument for brevity sake I make as general and comprehensive as I
can, 3. Arg.
and thus it is. If the Ministers of the Churches of Christ in all ages and
places through the whole succession of Christian Religion had the same
separation to their offices, that we of this Church of England have, then by
necessary consequence either the universal Ministry of Christ were always
Antichristian, (which would be next to blasphemy to assert) as well as we, or
we Christian and lawful, as well as they. Now let our enemies show, that in any
age of that great space of time, or in any place, where Christ's Name was ever
professed, that the received Ministry thereof were otherwise in substance
ordained; (whereby to raise any plea to their new, or rather, no call,) we will
acknowledge the lawfulness of our calling to be justly questioned. This
argument has its foundation upon a promise of Christ to his universal Church,
in the name of his Apostles. Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come, Ioh. 16.
13
he will guide you into all truth. Which promise had apparently, in a
considerable point, been unaccomplished, had the universal Church of Christ, so
many hundred years successively, erred by an Antichristian and unlawful
Ministry, and by consequence all the Christian world, all that great while had
been deprived of lawful ordinances, (the outward means of grace,) which depend
upon the lawful Mission of the Ministry: How shall they hear to a success of
belief, but by their preaching, Romans 10. 15.
who are lawfully sent?

Quest. These arguments are convincing, and now as it seems to me, a man may as
soon, and upon as good ground question a great part of his Christian Religion,
as the lawfulness of the Ministry of this Church, being inferred from those
premises, which conclude and prove one, as well as the other. I desire
therefore rather to venture my soul with all the Churches of Christ, and under
a Ministry that have been received as lawful by them, and of whom we have had
experience in this national Church, in excellent effects of all spiritual
blessings, then to embrace the judgment of a few, who study new things, such
as the Churches of Christ never knew before; and to submit to such a Ministry
as descend in no succession, and without any character, either extraordinary or
ordinary, to demonstrate their mission, and of which, in a short time, we have
had sad experiences, as appears by the divisions, blasphemies, fond opinions,
and great impieties, that have prospered under them.

There remains one scruple more. What can thou say to satisfy them, that
urge the present fall of this Church, and sufferings, and contempt of its
Ministry, as an argument against the truth of the profession, and Religion?

Ans. It is true, I cannot deny, there be a great many that follow the
disingenuous practice of that sort of people, of which the holy Psalmist
complains, Psalm. 69. 27
that love to persecute him whom God has smitten, and to talk how to vex him
whom he has wounded: Crying out against us like another untoward generation,
God has forsaken them, Psalm. 70. 11
persecute and take them, for there is none to deliver them. But it is a wonder
to me that persons pretending light in Religion, and an understanding in the
Scriptures, should make outward providence the guidance of their judgment, in
determining the justice or unjustice of Causes. Conclusions by events prove
nothing but the folly of a vulgar judgment, that is biased by them. When most
frequent it is, that the wicked prosper in their way, Ier. 12. 1. 2. 12.
and they are happy that deal very treacherously: yea; God plants them, till
they take root. God suffers ofttimes evil men to flourish like a green
bay tree in worldly successes; Psalm. 3. 7.
when he permits them to blast the honor and safety of the just. If prosperous
providence gives the sentence of justice, The Turk that sets up his trophies in
the most renowned parts of Christendom already, and if he should pour in his
forces to the overthrow of all the Christian nations that remain, could never
want an argument to justify his usurpations, and Tyrannies. Nor does the
Churches unsuccesseful attempts for its preservation, disprove its truth and
being: But rather (if it were lawful, or indeed possible, to determine from
exterior providence) the frequent tragedies of its continual snfferings,
might induce us to a belief, that Truth and persecution have gone hand in hand.
Hence the worthy observers of the Churches instability in worldly safety, have
found out a reason of its happiness, from its miseries. The Church has
increased with persecutions, and is crowned with martyrdomes, Epist 62. ad*
Theoph.
says St. Hierome. Then it conquers when it is oppressed, and obtaines, when
forsaken, says St. Hilary: Lib. 1. de Trin.
For if its truth should have depended upon worldly successes, and prosperity,
what advantages should its enemies have had, and with what poor comforts should
its members have been supported, when it lay so long under the bloody
persecutions of the Roman Emperors, Nero, Domitian, Trajan, etc? Now if any
just cause that is oppressed, if any part of Christ's Church that is afflicted,
may plead no disadvantage to them, by Gods permitting them to be outwardly
miserable, much more the Ministry; whose, of all just causes, and who of all
parties in the Church have been ever exposed to the saddest providence, as to
the worlds eye. We shall find therefore, as if the cross had been the Label of
the Apostles Commission, Our Savior tells them when he sends them forth, it
should be as sheep in the midst of Wolves. Mat. 10. 16
From whom, what entertainment they were likely to receive, he expresses more
fully in a sollowing passage, V. 22.
They should be hated of all men for his Names sake. And as if they had
received with their commissions a commonpasse of trouble, they must be
persecuted from one City to another. V. 23.
All which, as they were infallibly to become true in our Saviors prediction,
so were they as evidently accomplished in the following tragedies of the
Churches miseries; when the Apostles were set forth as men appointed to death,
when they were made a theater, (...).
a common spectacle, a people shown forth for mockery and misery, 1 Cor. 4. 9.
to Angels and to men. For they hungered and thirsted, and were naked, and
buffeted, and had no certain dwelling place. Afterward followed the violent
deaths of all the Apostles, under the hands of their Persecutors, St. John
ouely excepted; and of the first renownned Fathers os the Church, Ignatius,
Polycarp, Irenaeus, Justin, etc. which paid their lives to the prevailing
enemies of the Gospel of Christ; all which to relate, would rather require some
large Martyrolygy, then a digression in a small Tractate. But were all these
forsaken of God, because they had not prosperity, and present successes? What
providence should then have been followed, the prosperous, or the adverse? If
their scorns, troubles, and oppressions under the hands of their prosperous
enemies, had disproved the truth of their calling, or cause, the very Gospel it
self might as justly, upon the same argument, have been called in question. By
all which it appears, that the charge against this Church for its adversities
and miseries is most unjust, especially by them, who have themselves been
instrumental to them. It is a hard case first to be made miserable, and
forlorn, and then to be quarreled with, and disputed against, for being so.
But I leave this to their own consciences, and timely repentance; only I desire
to mind them of a notable prediction by learned Hooker, of them and of the
ruins of this Church by them, even at a determinate period of time, which is
directly this present age. Which, becauso it fell from so grave and deliberate
a pen, Lib. 5.
I will set down in his own words. number. 79.
By these or the like suggestions (meaning our adversaries endeavors to
overthrow the Ministry in their maintenance and otherwise) received with all
joy, and with like sedulity practiced in certain parts of the Christiag world,
they have brought to pass, that as David does say of a man, so it is in hazard
to be verified concerning the whole Religion and Service of God. The time
thereof may peradventure fall out to be threescore and ten years, or, if
strength do serve, unto fourscore, what follows is likely to be small joy for
them, whatsoever they be that behold it.

By these considerations I find all my scruples answered, and doubts satisfied,
that I can with all clearness of judgment assert the truth of the visible
Church of England. Now I desire to recline my soul in her bosom, and most
cheerfully undertake and exercise the whole course of those forementioned Rules
of Christian living in its profession, as the safest in the world.

FORMS OF PRAYER For private PERSONS AND FAMILIES.

To the READER.
WHosoever thou art, I beseech thee; but if thy soul stands upon my account to
God, (I mean, if thou be one of my care and charge) then I earnestly beg of
thee; that when thou read and ownest these plaein directions for Devotion,
thou obligest thy self upon as strong purposes to follow them, or at least the
duties intended by them, as the interest of saving a soul requires: That thou
take care by making it a part of thy duty to Christ, to season thy children, as
with the first elements of religious knowledge, so with suitable practices of
prayer, as soon as they shall be capable of these little forms. And that thou
thy self accont no business so necessary, which should betray thee to forget to
sanctify (at least) the morning and evening of every day, in thy privacy and
family, with prayers and praises: considering that the hours spent in this, or
other religious exercises, will be of more concernment and eomfort to thee at
thy dying hour, then all the pleasures, profits, and present advantages
whatsoever, thou can obtain, by the engagement of the rest of thy time.

I desire thee, that before thou enterest upon these exercises, or in the midst
of them, (where I have directed thee) thou read part of holy David's Psalms,
by certain periods, that thou may imitate David's spirit in thy addresses to
God. And do not read them as an history merely to affect thy understanding, but
as acts of service, with affection, reverence, and piety; befitting such
communions with God, as most of the Psalms perport. Do thou also before thou
departest from serving God in any of these offices, read some part of she holy
Scriptures, in such order, as thy prudence shall direct thee; and digest the
same by meditation, to particular application to thy self, that thou may
live in the strength of it, in all thy actions to God and man.

I have divided (as thou shall observe) the prayers into several parts,
according to the most considerable periods of the duty. First, because they
will be the more fit, and methodical, to be taught to children, servants, and
such as cannot read. Secondly, that after the end of any one part of the
devotion the supplicant may stay and collect his spirit to a frame, fit for the
next: considering (as to instance) that confession and thanksgiving, and so the
rest do require different carriages of the Spirit* Thirdly, because the pious
soul may more fitly stay in any part, and pour out it self to God, as
spiritual necessity will be administered, and yet not break the order of the
devotion. Lastly, because such a partition, will alleviate the weariness that
is apt to be contracted, by one long continued form.

Now having rigged this little ship of devotion, The Lord give thee an heart to
venture thy soul in its bottom, and grant thee a prosperous gale of his Spirit
to drive thee forward to the port of rest, which is desired, designed, and
sincerely endeavored, by

Thine in all the offices

THE First Form.
Thy child having been baptized, and thereby made a member of Christ; as soon
as thou perceivest the eye of its reason to open, direct it to that Kingdom of
Christ, to which its name was given up by Baptism. Begin to instruct it in the
lesser Catechism, and as it makes progress in it, morning and evening let it
use such little services to God, as this.

A Morning PRAYER for a Child.
Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.

ALmighty God and merciful Father, who have kept me this night in all safety,
preserve me likewise this day from all sad accidents. Keep my mind from evil
thoughts, my tongue from swearing, lying, and all evil speakiug, and let all
my actions be such as please thee. And as I grow in age, let me enerease in
grace and goodness, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

An Evening PRAYER.
Our Father, which, etc.

LOrd, I Bless thee, that thou have defended me this day from all evils and
dangers. I beseech thee, forgive me wherein I have offended thee, in thought,
word, or deed. Keep me this night in safety; let me rest in the arms of thy
providence, that no evil spirits do violence to me, nor any sad accident
befall me, through Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

As thou perceivest an improvement in capacity, so add this short intercession
to both these Prayers.

O Lord, protect thy Church, be merciful to this nation, comfort all afflicted
spirits, return my Parents cares and love into their bosoms; Bless my
brothers and sisters, my friends, and all thy people with grace and salvation,
for Jesus sake. Amen.

THE Second Form.
When thou observest the former office to be too little for thy childs
capacity, be careful according to its increase in knowledge, that it may be
obliged to larger services. For that purpose I have prepared these following
prayers.

Now supposing by this time that thy child is made perfect in the lesser
Catechism, I desire that first it rehearses the Articles of its Christian
Faith, that so they may be accustomed upon its spirit, and by prayer fastened
upon the soul, that it may never depart from that faith upon any temptation.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, etc.

After which let it be taught to say this short PRAYER.

O Lord, preserve my soul in this faith: let me not depart from it through any
temptation; but give me grace to continue in the profession of it, to my lives
end; for thy mercies sake in Christ my Savior. Amen.

After which it will be expedient, that thy child should recite all or some of
the Commandments by several periods, that it may understand, that it is
necessary Christ should be obeyed, as well as believed.

After which whole or part rehearsed, let it be taught this short PETITION.

O Lord, which have made known thy will, and pointed out thy ways unto me,
wherein I should walk. O let thy holy Spirit incline my affections to love
them, and strengthen my soul to keep them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning PRAYER.
Our Father, which art, etc.

Confession of sin, and Prayer for Pardon and Grace.
O Lord God, dreadful in thy justice and power, Gracious in thy mercies and
loving kindness; I that am thy poor and sinful creature, do present my self,
my soul, and body, to thy divine Majesty; trusting in thy tender mercies, and
acknowledging my unworthiness to appear before so holy a presence. For, Lord,
I am thine enemy by nature, the imaginations of my heart are evil continnally:
and as thou have added years to my life, so have my corruptions increased. My
sins do multiply every day; my own lusts, and the worlds temptations do more
and more prevail upon me. O Lord, be merciful unto me, forgive me what is
past, and for the time to come prevent me with thy grace, restrain my lusts,
suffer me not to be engaged in the sinful courses of the world, nor be betrayed
to any gross sins, by the ill examples of men. Lord, make me to love, and to
submit to the holy Religion of Christ, and in the strength of thy grace, to
lead a godly, righteous, and sober life, through Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

The thanksgiving.
Lord, I bless thee for all the expressions of thy love and sweet providence
to me. Praised, and for ever praised be thy Name, for the Redemption of Mankind
by Jesus Christ, and for the particular work of thy grace upon my soul: for all
thy temporal blessings, my health, peace, plenty, friends, and safety: for that
thou have kept me this night from every evil, due in justice to my sins. O
Lord, preserve me this day, under the protection of thy providence; keep me,
that I may not offend thee in thought, word, or deed; nor fall into any danger
of soul or body, through the might of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

The intercession.
Lord, be merciful unto all men, preserve thy universal Church from the
enemies of the Gospel: Be gracious to thy Churches planted in these nations, in
all these present dangers, and departures from the faith: Bless all Christian
Magistrates, and preserve the Ministers of the Gospel, that thy people may lead
a godly and quiet life. Bless my Parents and near relations; Releeve all in
affliction, hear their cry, and help them. Forgive mine enemies, and give thy
Grace to all people: through Jesus Christ our Lord, and blessed Savior. Amen.

Evening PRAYER.
Our Father, etc.

Confession of sin, and Petition for Grace and Pardon.
O Lord, I, that am but dust and ashes, a finful, and therefore miserable
creature, do again in confidence of thy goodness, and my Jesus, address my poor
soul unto thee: and lay my self at the foot of thy grace and mercy. I confess
I may justly be ashamed to appear before that holy presence, which I have so
often, and so heinously offended this day, in thought, word, and deed; had I
not a blessed Advocate, that sits at thy right hand, to make intercession
for me. O my dear Jesus, have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, receive me
into the arms of thy compassion: who like a lost sheep have this day ssrayed
from thee, into many errors, and vanities. Lord, lay them not to my charge, but
put them upon the account of thy sufferings, that I may never suffer thy
vengeance for them in this world, nor the world to come. And now I commit my
self to the protection of thy mercy this night, defend me from all those
miseries my sins have deserved; and so hereafter direct me with thy Grace, that
I may live to thy glory all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

Thanksgiving.
O Lord, the heavens declare thy glory, and all the creatures bless thee: O my
soul, do thou also praise the Lord, and let all that is within me, bless his
holy Name. For thou only, O Lord, art the light of my countenance, and my God.
Thou have created me by thy power, redeemed me by thy Christ, sanctified me by
thy Spirit, and preserved me by thy watchful providence, through the whole
course of my life. Lord, I praise thee for the safety of my soul and body this
day, that thy grace has kept me from gross sins, and thy protection from sad
accidents. O keep me this night by the covert of the same fatherly goodness,
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Let the intercession be the same that was used for the morning Service.

Now I commend this office as the fittest to be taught to servants in families,
and to be used by children before they come to men's and women's estate.

THE Third Form.
This third office I have here inserted for the benefit of those who usually
accustoming themselves to the next and largest forms, shall sometime be
necessitated to shorten their service: and may be ordinarily used by those, who
are not yet come up to so great designs of zeal for longer forms.

Morning PRAYER.
Our Father, which art in, etc.

Confession of sin.
O Lord God Almighty, the God of all Glory, Majesty and Power, and the fountain
of mercies; I confess I am unworthy to appear before thy holy presence, having
sinned against heaven and before thee, and in thought, word, and deed,
continually rebelled against thee. I have too much followed my lusts and
desires, and have not endeavored to bring under my affections to the yoke of
Christ. I have loved the vanities of the world, but too much undervalued thy
Kingdom and promises. I have not been so sincere and frequent in thy services,
so diligent in my calling, so just and merciful in my carriage to others, nor
so sober and temperate in the use of my mind, body, and thy blessings, as the
strict holiness of the Gospel has required of me [here make confession of
particulars] For which I stand here guilty of the breach of thy righteous
commandments, and lie liable to the effects of thy wrath, and displeasure.

Prayer for Pardon and Grace.
But O thou preserver of men, for thine own compassion sake, and for thy Jesus
sake, pity the troubles of a burdened soul, and pardon all those sins I have
committed against thee. Let the blood of Christ satisfy thy justice, and his
intercession obtain thy mercy, for a peace and reconciliation with thee; that
my sins may not separate from thy grace here, nor thy glory hereafter. And, O
Lord, strenthen my weak soul, with the graces of thy Spirit, that I may
hereafter overcome all the temptations of the devil, the world, and the flesh;
and may lead a new and holy life before thee; Turn the stream of my affections
to thee, and take possession of my soul, that all my thoughts, words, and
actions, may be subject to the law of Christ. And having kept the faith, and
finished my conversation in holiness, I may at last through thy mercies in
Christ, obtain the crown of eternal glory. Amen.

The Thanksgiving.
O merciful and Gracious Lord, as I acknowledge my dependence upon thee for
every part of my being, so I desire to bless thy holy Name for all thy mercies
to me: especially for the redemption of my soul by the blood of thy Son, and
for the portion of thy grace, that thou have given me. I praise thee, O Lord,
for all temporal blessings, as my health, provision of food and raiment,
friends, understanding, senses, and limbs; and that I enjoy any thing that I
have seen any others to want. Blessed be thy Name for the safety of my soul and
body this night past. O keep me under the shadow of thy wings this day, that I
may fall into no sad accidents, nor dangers: and so defend me with thy grace,
that I may do nothing that may displease thee, or that may occasion sin in
others, or give offense to the holy profession of Christ; for his merits sake,
who is my blessed Jesus. Amen.

Intercession.
Lord, defend thy universal Church, from all enemies, persecutions, and
factions. Preserve thy Churches in these nations, restore them to their former
peace, and keep them from the dangers of their own divisions, and enmities.

Grant that Magistrates, and Ministers, may concur to the upholding thy
truth, and worship, in this needful time. Bless my Parents, children, and all
my near relationss, with all spiritual blessings in Christ, and all temporal
comforts. Relieve, and comfort all that are in distress, all prisoners,
captives, sick and poor persons, distressed widows, and friendless children,
with every oppressed and sorrowful soul. Convert the impenitent, confirm the
weak, turn into the way of truth all that have crred, and forgive and bless all
mine enemies. Lord, hear these my prayers, and grant me my requests; for the
mediation of Jesus Christ my Savior; to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be
given all Glory, Honor, and Praise, this day, and for evermore. Amen.

Evening PRAYER.
Our Father, which, etc.

O Most infinite Majesty, and gracious Father; in mercy thou have added another
day to my age; O wretch that I am, I have added many sins to my former score.
How often, O Lord, have I this day forgotten my obedience to thee? How many
vain thoughts has my mind harbored? How many vain and impertinent words has
my mouth uttered? With how many passions have I been transported, beyond the
bounds of Religion? How many sinful acts have I committed? How many
opportunities of doing good have I omitted, wherein I might have glorified thy
Name? And whereas thou have given it me, as another day of grace, to be getting
oil for my lamp, and to be working out my salvation; O unhappy Creature! I
have rather gone back upon the accounts of the Spirit: Trifling away that
precious time in my indulgencies to my carnal affections, or pursuits of
worldly advantages; neglecting the great prize of Christ, and treasures of
eternity. So that had I but the sins of this day to answer for, at the bar of
thy divine justice, O Lord, I might justly suffer thy wrath to all eternity. O
what has my soul to plead, for the sins of my whole life, if the sins of this
one day may confound me?

For Pardon and Grace.
And now, Lord, where is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee, who though
thou art justly displeased with me for my sins, yet has thy Jesus fully
satisfied thy justice for them, and by the dear price of his blood purchased at
thy hand forgiveness of them: O my dear Lord, I beseech thee therefore shut not
up the bowels of thy compassion from me, nor deny me the benefit of the death
and passion of my Savior. Lord, let his wounds heal me, his blood cleanse me,
his death reconcile me to thy divine Majesty for ever. And grant that in the
residue of my days, I may wholly conform to the Kingdom of Christ; that I may
have peace of conscience here, a comfortable death, and a blessed eternity;
through the merits of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

Thanksgiving.
O merciful Father, after all thy mecies to me in the whole conrse of my life,
my soul has this day further seen and tasted how good the Lord is, in many
significations of mercy, and loving kindness to me. I bless thee, O Lord, for
the great work of mercy in Jesus Christ; For that I have a time to repent me
of those sins, for which I might even now have been suffering in an eternal
punishment. I praise thee, that I am not roating in a torment, languishing in a
disease, pining in a prison, nor a poor vagrant, nor a disconsolate captive.
But on the contrary, O my Lord, thou have given me a residence, a prot^ction, a
plenty, a sound mind, an healthful body, and liberty; But most especially, that
thou have offered me sweet testimonies of thy present grace, and a blessed hope
of future glory. Now, O my Lord, for every of these, and for all other the
blessed evidences of thy love and goodness to me, I do from my soul acknowledge
thy mercy, and bless, praise, and magnity thy great and glorious Name, for
ever and ever. And, O Lord, keep me this night, under the same protection, and
let the mercy of my God so preserve me, that neither sin nor danger, may make
me miserable; through the might of Jesus Christ my ever blessed Savior. Amen.

Use the same intercession that is set for the Morning Service.

THE Largest Form FOR Private Exercise.
Morning PRAYER.
When thou addressest thy self to thy morning service, first frame thy mind to
meditate of the glorious excellencies and presence of God: and worship him in
this or the like manner.

Our Father, which art, etc.

O Most glorious and incomprehensible Lord God of heaven and earth, whose
immense essence and infinite perfections no tongue can express, nor heart
conceive. Before whose Dreadful Majesty the holy Angels veil their faces, and
the glorified Spirits cast their crowns. Thou, O Lord, art only worthy to
receive Glory, Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are, and were created. Therefore being sensible of my miserable
nothing, poverty and dependency; and admiring thy absolute and infinite
excellencies, do throw my self, my soul and body, at the foot of thy Majesty,
and do adore, and worship thy divine presence, acknowledging that blessing,
honor, and power, is due unto thee, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Confession.
O Lord my God, who art a God of purity and holiness, and hate the ways of
iniquity; Though thou have sentenced sin to a wages of death, and an eternal
punishment, and have declared a dislike of all wicked persons, and their
performances; yet, O Lord, wretch that I am, I have not ceased to do evil in
thy sight, and to depart from all thy holy ways. For I have yielded my self
too much to satisfy the vanity of my corrupt mind, and my unholy lusts, not
considering their inconsistencie with the Kingdom of Christ. I have inclined my
affections, desires, and designs, too much to present enjoyments, and suffered
my heart to be betrayed by them, to a forgetfulness or thee, and departure from
thee. O Lord, I have either altogether omitted the duties of thy service and
worship, or performed them too loosely, and subordinately, or with too much
hypocrisy, or confidence in them. I confess I have every way lived
unanswerably to the infinite mercies, and strict commandments of the Gospel:
too much neglecting the great salvation, and the excellencies of the peace of
Christ. O Lord my God, when I consider the iniquities I have committed in my
mind, with evil thoughts; in my tongue, in sinful words; and how much all
parts and faculties have concurred as instruments of sin: how I have offended
against the motions of thy Spirit, and my own purposes, against all thy laws
and all thy providence, in all my actions and employments, and in every part
of my life; my sins become an heavy burden, too heavy for me to bear; [Here
open thy soul to God in particulars] so that for them, and all other my sins, I
have justly deserved thy wrath and indignation, to afflict me in this life with
signal punishments, and in the life to come with eternal torments

Petition for Pardon.
But, O Lord my God, give me a true and sincere repentance, such as thou shall
please to accept in Christ. O teach mine eyes to weep, my heart to break, my
soul to mourn, for all my sins. O let my understanding always perceive, and be
convinced of their filthiness, and deadliness; even as when thou beholdest
sins to punish them, or as when thou requiredst the blood of my Savior to
satisfy thy justice for them. Lord, help me to purpose against them, and truly
to depart from them, as if the shame and unprofitablenesse, the curse, and the
hell of them, were always before me. And, O Lord, I beseech thee for thy
tender mercies, and bowels of compassion sake, who can not delight in the
death of a sinner, to pity my poor soul lying under the burden of my sins. O
my dear Jesus, let these wounds of my soul, be healed by thy stripes, and the
divine justice that I have offended, be satisfied by thy dear sufferings. And
since thou have paid a price for my sins, and still intercedest for the pardon
of them. O deliver me from the guilt and burden of them, an unpeaceable
conscience, and a miserable eternity, the just wages of them; Through the
merits of my dear Jesus, my Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Petition for Grace.
O my most gracious God, I being sensible of my spiritual poverty, and
inabilitie, to understand, desire, or think of the things of my peace, without
thy assistance, do beseech thee in thy tender mercies, not to leave my soul to
the guidance of my sinful nature, nor to give me over to my own vile
affections, but rather grant me power, through thy holy Spirit, to crucify my
lusts, and to deny my self in all things, that are inconsistent with thee. O
strengthen me to encounter with the temptations of the world, and let not the
seeming satisfactions of any outward enjoyment, betray my soul to forget thee,
or to decline my obedience to thee. Lord, grant me the complete armor of thy
grace, that I may always prevent the wiles of the devil, and overcome the
powers and rulers of darkness, in their temptations. Give me a disposedness in
all parts and faculties of soul and body, to exercise their offices in
obedience to Christ. Enlighten my understanding, to mind heavenly things; draw
my will after thee, and command all my affections to thee. Fill me, O Lord,
with every grace of the Gospel, whose exercise thou requirest of me, as a
disciple of Christ. O make me able to live godly to thee in all parts of thy
worship, righteously to men by the strict rules of justice, and soberly to my
self in all temperance, and chastity. Lord, make me humble, sincere, meek,
patient, and peaceable, and give me strength to obey the whole will of Christ,
in all his commaudments: That having run the race that is set before me, I may
obtain through thy undeserved mercy in Christ, the perfect peace of thy
presence for evermore. Amen.

The Thanksgiving.
O* Lord of Glory and Power, whose eye of providence runs through the world,
to guide, govern, and provide for all things; in whom alone I live, move, and
have my being, and from whom I have received, whatsoever comfort I enjoy. O
Lord, my soul acknowledges thou have done gracious things for me, and have
given me a large portion of thy fatherly mercies every way. I bless thee, that
when thou formedst me in my mothers womb, I received no signal defect in body
or mind, and that thou have since kept them both, from all fearful changes and
deformities: And that when the sentence of death was upon me, in the common
fall of Mankind, Lord, thou gave me thy dear Son to redeem my soul to a
possibility of life. I thank thee for every grace and good work that may
evidence thy Spirit in me; and for that I have not committed every gross
wickedness, to which nature and temptation have made me subject. I praise thy
Name, O Lord, for all the comforts I enjoy, that concern this life, my health,
peace, liberty, friends, and livelihood: and for the safety of my soul and body
this night under the protection of thy sweet providence. Keep me this day by
the same fatherly goodness, secure me from all sad accidents, that attend upon
my frail estate; and most especially keep me from all offenses to thy divine
Majesty. O let no temptation prevail upon me, nor let my soul give way to any
occasion of evil. Give me grace to perform to thee all that thou have
commanded me, and all the good thou have put in my power. O let me so live this
day, as if this night following were to be my last sleep, and to morrow the
last judgment; Through the might of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

The interc^ssions are put after the evening prayer: being to be used both
after morning and evening exercises.

Evening PRAYER.
The address to God by way of worship in the morning Prayer, the supplicant if
he please, may now use also.

Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

The Confession.
MOst glorious Lord God, that inhabitest eternity, and art clothed with
Majesty and power; I that am but dust and ashes, and thy poor creature, desire
to fall low at the footstool of thy Glories, magnifying thine excellencies, and
acknowledging my unworthiness, to lift up mine eyes to heaven, against which I
have sinned; or to appeal to those mercies, which I have so much neglected, and
abused. For, Lord, when I consider my self, I am nothing but a mass of
corruption and sin; to which I have made all the faculties of my soul, and
members of my body, (which were created for good works, and thy glory) to
become instrumental. And all those excellent laws, which thou have set before
me to be the rule of my obedience, I have both lightly regarded, and wilfully
transgressed, in the whole course of my life. Such, O Lord, as concern thy self
and thy immediate worship, I have either altogether omitted, or carelessly
performed; in my dealings with men, I have not so strictly as I should,
observed that rule of Christ, to do to all men, as I would they should do unto
me: neither have I been so careful to observe the holy laws of Christ
concerning my self, as I should, in a temperate, chaste, and sober
conversation. And as I have contracted a heavy burden upon my soul, by the
sinfulness of my whole life, so have I this day in particular, added much to
my former wretched account. For I have not restrained my thoughts from vain
imaginations, nor set a strict watch before the door of my lips, to prevent
sinful and impertinent discourses. Lord, I have been too dull and remiss in thy
service, too negligent in the duties of my calling, too careless of the
opportunities of doing good to others. And though thou have given me this day
as another day of grace; yet I have made in it, little ot no progress, in the
way of my salvation: that should thou deal with me according to the carriage
of my soul this day before thee, thou might justly deny me another day of
mercy, and leave me to my self, and to the said wages of my sins for evermore.

For Pardon.
But, O Lord my God, whose mercies are over all thy works, and have graciously
promised to forgive and to accept a poor penitent soul, returning to thee in
sorrow and true repentance, have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me: O hide
not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in thy displeasure. Remember
not my sins and offenses, but think thou upon me according to thy great
goodness. And though I come to thee with a weak faith, and an imperfect
sorrow, even with such a repentance as ought to be repented of: yet, Lord,
accept of me; for I come in the plea of my Saviors blood, that satisfied thy
justice for all my sins. Deny me not therefore, O Lord, the benefits of his
blessed death and passion, let my soul have a portion in the rich price of that
blood, by which I may have peace and reconciliation with thee, my God, for
evermore. Amen.

For Grace.
O merciful Father, in the humble sense of my own insufficiency, not only not
to do, but not to think of any thing in concernment to my salvation, without
thy grace; I do humbly beseech thee, in thy tender compassions, to help me with
thy divine assistance, that I may be able to live conformably to the example of
Christ, and the strict holiness of the Gospel. O convince my judgment, that
there is no peace nor profit in the ways of sin; and incline my will, and
engage all my affections to the pursuit of spiritual things, as the chiefest
good. Let not, O Lord, my carnal lusts and affections, nor any thing that is
desirable in the vain world, nor the policy of the devil, deceive my soul, to
neglect my duty to Christ, or the things of my eternal peace. Lord, make me
sincere, and exemplarie in thy worship and service, diligent in my calling, and
just in all my actions: make me charitable to my power to all that want me, and
strictly sober, chaste, and temperate in my self, and in the use of all thy
creatures. Lord, help me to be such, as I may please thee in all thy ways, and
as I may comfortably appear before thee, when I come to death or judgment:
Through the might of Jesus Christ my blessed Savior. Amen.

Thanksgiving.
O Glorious Lord, who art my good God, and gracious Father; thou have from time
to time given me large expressions of thy love and goodness, even when for my
rebellions against thee, and forgetfulness of thee, I might before this time
have been cast off from thy protection, and made a spectacle of thy justice to
others in some signal punishments. O Lord, how great is thy goodness, that I
can still sing a song of praise for mercies, when I might justly at this
instant have been in sackcloth and ashes, breaking my soul with sorrow, for
some great infelicity! Especially my soul bless the thee, that my Redeemer
lives, and that I still live capable of that redemption, and have had another
opportunity to sorrow for my sins in an hour of acceptance, and am not
desperately howling for them in a remediless eternity. I praise thee for every
portion of preventing and assisting grace, for every good thought, desire, and
work I have done by the help of grace, and for every comfort I have this day
enjoyed. They are thine, O Lord, thy Name be praised. And now to the same
protection that has this day, and all the days of my life, preserved me; I
commit my soul and body, and all that I have this night: Lord, cover me with
the wings of thy power, and fatherly mercies: keep my soul in my integrity to
thee; and let me enjoy my natural rest, as thy blessing, free from all sad
accidents, and trouble, through Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

Intercessions to be used both morning and evening, which the supplicant may
shorten by using an intercession of the lesser forms.
For the universal Church.
O Lord, defend the borders, and peace of thy whole Church, from the invasion
of the Turk, and all other enemies abroad: and from the great increases of
Atheism, and ruining factions, in its own bosom. Direct all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, to lay aside the interests of the world, and to
concur sincerely to uphold the Kingdom of Christ. Enlarge the borders of the
Gospel, that the nations that sit in darkness, may see the great light of
Christ: and that the Jews may be convinced to an acknowledgement of him.
Reduce all those to Christ, that are departed from the faith; bring into the
way of truth, all that have erred, and are deceived: and let all that profess
the Name of Jesus, agree in truth, unity, and concord, through Jesus Christ my
Savior. Amen.

For the Churches of CRIST in these Nations.
O merciful Father, bless the Churches planted in these Nations, let them be
precious in the eye of thy mercy, and defend them with an especial protection
Let them not have the reward of this peoples crying sins, nor feel the effects
of thy just deserved vengeance. O disapppoint the designs of the enemies of
their peace: preserve a never-failing Ministry to uphold thy wotship; keep
thine ordinances from contempt: and though thine enemies have disturbed their
peace, and dishonored their profession, yet let them not have power totally to
waste thy holy vineyard. Let this poor people see their seducements that they
may return from their follies, and factions, to serve thee, with peace, unity,
and holy lives, through the might of Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the afflicted.
O most dear and gracious Lord, who delightest in the exercises of mercy, and
art a strong tower for the distressed to fly unto; I humbly beseech thee to
give the comforts of thy countenance, and ready help to all that are in
distress and misery. Have mercy, O Lord, upon all that are now a dying,
assist their spirits in the difficulties of that hour. Appear with comfort and
peace to the souls, that are oppressed with the heavy sense of their sins.
Raise up friends and supports, for the desolate, fatherless, and diseonsolate
widows. Pity and help all prisoners, captives, and all that suffer
banishment, poverty, and oppression: hear their cries, and help them. Let
these, and all others that are in misery, and heaviness, find peace, patience,
and contentmen in thee: And grant that their light afflictions here, through
thy infinite mercies in Christ, may be exchanged for an exceeding weight of
glory eternally hereafter, for Jesus Christ his sake my Savior. Amen.

For Parents.
Look down, O Lord, with thy especial mercies upon my Parents, and make them
thy children by adoption and grace. Accept of their repentance, receive their
prayers, and assist them to do the will of Christ. Comfort them in their ages,
and afflictions: Teach them to number their days, and every day to be
providing for their departure in the peace of Christ. Lord, pardon all my acts
of disobedience to them, and give me an heart always ready to honor, obey,
and comfort them, all their days, through Jesus Christ my ever blessed
Savior. Amen.

For Children.
O merciful Father, as thou have given me the blessing, to have children born
to me in the flesh, so give them grace, to be born to thee in the Spirit. Make
them true lovers of Thee, and Religion; and tender in the preservation of every
circumstance of it. Keep them in these common departures from the faith, that
they may not be seduced to error and faction, nor be betrayed by ill examples
to profaneness and Atheism. Let their estate in the world be neither too
prosperous, lest they forget thee, nor too adverse, lest they be discouraged:
let their educations and callings be honest, and not subject to great
temptations. Lord, make them just, merciful, sober, and true followers of
Christ in this world, and partakers of his glories in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Lord. Amen.

Occasional PRAYERS.
A prayer to be used before the receiving the blessed Sacrament.
O Merciful Lord, I being invited at this time to receive the blessed
Sacrament, (to the performance of which I stand bound, by my obedience to the
Gospel, and those many excellent ends for which it was ordained,) do humbly
beseech thee to create in me a value, esteem, and desire of it, proportionable
to so great a blessing. O make my soul hunger and thirst after my blessed
Jesus, and the excellent purposes of his death and passion, which are
communicated to me in that Sacrament. Lord, make me as willing to show forth
his death by this part of my Christian duty, as I would be; to partake of the
comfort of the same death, to the salvation of my soul. And then fit me with
thy grace, that I may be a worthy receiver of it: Give me a believing,
penitent, and charitable heart, such as befits the entertainment of so great a
guest: especially, give me grace to come with that reverence of soul and body,
that may signify a discerning the Lords body. And grant, O Lord, that the
bread and wine, that shall be blessed for me, may spiritually become the
communion of the Body, and blood of Christ to the salvation of my soul, through
the same Jesus my blessed Savior. Amen.

In time of sickness.
Most merciful Father, who have pleased to visit me with sickness, and to lay
thine hand upon me: make me to acknowledge my visitation to be an effect of thy
particular and fatherly providence upon me, that my soul may say, thou of very
faithfulness have afflicted me. Lord, sanctify it unto me, and make me
capable, through thy grace, of all those blessed ends, which thou propoundest
to thy self, when thou correctest thy children. Let my bodily distemper, cure
my souls infirmities; and that I may learn thereby to hate sin, and fear thee;
to see the vanity of worldly dependencies, and to fly unto thee, as the only
refuge. Lord, let not the vanities of my health and prosperity be now laid to
my charge; but accept of my repentance and sorrow for them, and grant me a
peace and reconciliation with thee, through the blood of Christ. In my straits,
let me look up to thee with comfort, as to a gracious Father: O do not appear
to me in terror, as a dreadful Judge. Lord, I am thy servant, do with me as it
pleases thee, yet for thy mercies sake, lay no more upon me then what thou
see necessarily to conduce to the salvation of my soul. If it pleases thee
that I survive this affliction, O let me live answerably to thy gracious
intention in chastising me, and to all those my holy purposes and promises made
unto thee in this my visitation; that these light afflictions may be advantages
to me; to the obtaining the exceeding weight of Glory, Through my dear Savior
and Mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.

If the sickness appear dangerous, then add this Prayer.
O, Lord my God, in whom alone is the power of life and death, and who
precisely know the number of my days, be pleased to go along with me in
mercy to my last hour. And if it be thy pleasure, to order this sickness to
end in my death, Lord, make that the entrance to a blessed life. Help me in all
my natural, and spiritual distresses, let neither my pains nor my sins make me
impatient, or unconfident. Lord let not my faith in Christ, nor hope of thy
mercy fail, in the bitter hour: O let the light of thy countenance break
through the terrors of death to comfort me, and let thy Spirit assist me when
my strength fails me. Grant, O Lord, that my death be neither very tormenting
nor uncomelie; and when my soul shall depart, O receive me into the resting
place of thy glory, for Jesus sake my only Savior and Redeemer.

When thou hear any of thy neighbors to be very weak in sickness: Pray for
him in this manner.
O blessed Lord, and fountain of mercies, I humbly beseech thee to look, with
thy tender compassions, upon thy servant A. B. Give him faith to depend upon
thee, patience to submit unto thee, and thy Spirit to comfort him in whatsoever
afflictions thou shall lay upon him. Accept of his repentance and final
preparation for the peace of his soul in Christ: accept of his addresses to the
throne of Grace; hear, and help, when he calls upon thee. Make his bed in the
time of his sickness, and provide for him all things needful in his distress,
both for soul and body. If it be thy will, raise him up to his former health,
but with an engagement upon his Spirit, to live answerable to thy mercies and
deliverances: and if it be thy will to take him out of this life, O assist his
Spirit in the terrors of a dying hour, and receive his soul into the arms of
thy mercy, through Jesus Christ my blessed Savior. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by a woman great with child.
O Lord God, who have blessed my womb with conception (for which I praise thy
providence) and with that conception have made me a partaker of the sorrow,
common to my sex, for the sin of my first mother; grant me a part in the
promised seed of a woman, my Lord Jesus, who came to bruise the head of the
Serpent. And though he has not delivered me from the trouble and miseries of
my body; yet, O Lord, give me deliverance by him, from the sin of my soul.
Lord, keep me from sad accidents, and from an untimely birth. Give my child a
perfect shape, and fitted for right senses, and a good understanding. Grant it
a natural birth, and me patience for the pain; and a prepared soul, for the
peril of it: when it shall be borne, grant me a safe recovery, my child a
timely Baptism, that it may afterward make profession of the faith of Christ,
and through thy grace may lead an holy life, Through the same Jesus Christ my
blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer to be used before, and in a journey.
Almighty and merciful Father; who with thine eye of Providence, that runs
through the world, beholdest me wheresoever I am, in all my ways and actions:
who leddest thy people through the wilderness by a marvelous guidance, and
did direct with safety the Wise men by a Star to our blessed Savior:
Defend me in this my journey from all kinds of dangers, from all temptations to
sin, and forgetfulness of thee; from the hands of evil men, and all sad
accidents whatsoever. Bless my design, and all my relations that I have left
behind me: grant that I may go in safety, and return in peace through the
might and mediation of Christ my Savior. Amen.

A short Prayer to be used by all, at their entrance into the Congregation. And
I desire it may be taught to children, as a means to oblige them to a
mindfulnesse of Gods service.
MOst dreadful Majesty, who have promised thy presence with them that are most
met in thy Name: give me grace to serve thee reverently, as in thy presence;
and to perform my duty in thy worship acceptably, to thy Glory, Through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

An Exercise of Humiliation, to assist humble penitents upon days of their
private fasting, and for a due examination of themselves before the receiving
of the blessed SACRAMENT.
A PSALM.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

For thou art a God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them that
work vanity.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sins.

For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou judge.

My misdeeds prevail against me; O be thou merciful unto my sins.

I will therefore confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin.

Turn thy face away from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

For thy Names sake, O Lord, be merciful* to my sin, for it is great.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a fore burden, too
heavy for me to bear.

Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me: let thy loving kindness and thy truth
always preserve me.

O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make haste, O Lord, to help me.

Haste thee to help me, O Lord God of my salvation.

The confession of sins.
I.
O Lord God, Judge of all men and actions, I am a miserable and wretched
creature; made so, by my great rebellions against thee, and departures from
thee: having all the days of my life multiplied my transgressions before thee.
I humbly confess I have too much inclined my will to the bent of my sinful
nature, and corrupt desires; too often satisfying my sensual appetite in
forbidden enoyments. And when the inward voice of thy Spirit has checked me,
and thy grace empowered me, to contend with my unlawful desires; I have
suffered my carnal part to prevail against thy Grace, and my duto to Christ.
[here call thy self to particular observations of thy actions] So that Lord,
thou might in justice have left me upon the account of a carnal estate,
which is death, and enmity against thee, and cannot please thee. But O Lord,
be merciful unto me, and pity my soul for thy blessed Jesus sake. And let
that degree of spiritualitie that is in me, (though very weak and imperfect)
upon my present sorrow, and promise of future amendmen, be reckoned for a state
of Grace, Sonship, and peace with thee, for my blessed Saviors sake. Amen.

II.
Lord, I am miserable and wretched, for I have too much embraced this present
world, the love of which is inconsistent with all love to, and from thee. I
have engaged too many thoughts, and cares, and too strong designs, for
temporal things: I have had too great a fondness for the honors, pleasures,
profits, and friends of this world. [here bewail thy miscarriages herein] So
that in justice thou may cast me off, as having too much of the world in me,
for Christ's Kingdom. But, Lord, be merciful unto me, and accept of my weak and
imperfect attempts, to despise the world, and to lay it aside; and my present
sorrows for my present miscarriages: that I may through thy mercies in Christ.
be accounted one, (though of the least and lowest) of Christ's Kingdom of Grace
here, and may have my portion of his Kingdom of Glory hereafter. Amen.

III.
Lord, I am miserable and wretched; for I have, in some part of my life,
contracted, and lived in many habits of sin, as of, etc. [here account before
God the remembrance of them] whereby I have been sold under sin, and in a state
of death, and enmity to thee; subject to every lust, and prostitute to every
temptation. But, Lord, be merciful unto me, and through thy infinite mercy, let
me stand in the account of a New man, and under a free pardon of such sinful
habits, as if they had never been: and that I may now appear, washed,
sanctified, and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
my God. Amen.

IV.
Lord, I am miserable and wretched, for besides my sad state of habitual
wickedness, I have multiplied an innumerable number of actual transgressions,
which surpass the number of the stars, and are an heavy burden, too heavy
for me to bear. If I measure my sins by my time [here mention the years of thy
pilgrimage] Lord, I confess, that in every day that I have lived, I have
heaped sin upon sin, and iniquity upon iniquity: If by thy laws; Lord, I
acknowledge there is no one precept of Christ that I have not transgressed,
having sinned against all the Commandments that concern my living godly to God,
justly to men, and soberly to my self [here account by the rules of life in the
preceding larger Catechism.] If I measure my sins by the exercises of all the
faculties and parts of my soul and body, I confess O Lord, that all of them,
in their several offices, have been made instruments of unrighteousness [here
account the miscarriage of every faculty, sense, and member] For all which, O
Lord, I have deserved thou should blot me out of the book of life, and
deliver me up to a state of death and reprobation. But, Lord, be merciful unto
me, and accept of my hearty sorrow for these my sins, my purpose against them,
and sincere endeavor to forsake them; that I may be accounted capable of the
grace of the Gospel, and pardon in Christ. Amen.

V.
Lord, I am miserable and wretched, for thou have required an uncessant course
of service to thy self, both public and private, in constant prayer, praises,
and worship, and a pure intention to glorify thy Name in all of them: But I
have either altogether omitted them, or have bin very slight and imperfect in
the perrformance of them, or have corrupted them with the mixture of many mean
ends, and designs. [acconnt thy failings herein] Lord, thou have obliged me to
abound in righteousness and every good work, and to do good to all men to my
highest capacity. But I have neglected the opportunities, and have often
changed them into pleasures, and worldly satisfactions. [confesse thy
particular omissions] Lord thou have required of me diligence in my calling,
and a just, peaceable, and charitable conversation with all men: But I have not
been so watchful as I should have been in the use of my time, nor so careful in
my words and actions of doing to all men, as I would they should do to me.
[here charge thy soul with thy failings herein] And now, O Lord my God, if none
shall enter into thy Kingdom, but those that keep thy Commandments: where
shall I appear, that am justly chargeable with all these omissions? But, O
Lord, be merciful unto me, and for Jesus sake pardon to my soul these great
neglects of my duty to thee: and graciously accept of my former weak and
imperfect endeavors to perform them, my present sorrow, and future amendment,
to the comfort and peace of my soul. Amen.

VI.
For, O Lord my God, I have no hope but in thy mercy, and in my blessed Jesus:
in whom thou have promised pardon to all sincere penitents, and entered
Covenant with us, to be merciful to our unrighteousness and our sins, and to
remember our iniquities no more. O Lord, make good this thy gracious promise to
my sinful soul, and for my dear Jesus sake, forgive unto me all these sins of
which I have pleaded guilty before thee, and all other my secret and
unremembred transgressions. And, O merciful Father, furnish my soul with thy
divine Spirit, which may (according to thy promise) write thy holy laws in my
mind, and in my heart. Strengthen me in the inner Man, that I may crucify all
my lusts, and overcome all the deceits and temptations of the world, and the
devil. Lord, turn the stream of my affections to things above, and make me
diligently pursue them: Give me grace to hate and forsake every sin as death
and hell: that in the whole course of my remaining life, I may deny
ungodliness, and all worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world: through Jesus Christ, my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Lord, have mercy upon me.
Christ, have mercy upon me.
Lord, have mercy upon me.
Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

A Form for the Services of God in a FAMILY.
Morning PRAYER
Our Father, which art, etc.

Confession.
O Lord our God, who art infinite in thy glories and perfections,
incomprehensible in thy power and Majesty: before the brightness of whose holy
presence the Angels vail their faces, and at the foot of whose Majesty, the
glo^ified Spirits cast their crowns: How much more unworthy, are we poor
sinful dust and ashes, to appear in the presence of so holy a God; whom we have
so heinously offended, in thought, word, and deed, through the whole course of
our lives? For, O Lord, we confess, that though thou have declared how
displeasing all sin is in thy sight, and have manifested thy displeasure, by
the fearful punishments of wicked men: yet miserable wretches that we are, what
little regard have we had to fulfill thy will, or to depart from the ways of
sin? We have still suffered our base lusts too much to prevail upon us, and the
pleasures and profits of the world to surprise, and carry away our hearts; And
when we have found our selves industrious, and exact, in the pursuit of worldly
things, how faint and imperfect have we been, in doing the work of Christ? So
that should thou, O Lord, condemn us, for these our sins, and for the breach
of all thy holy laws, in our loose and vain thoughts: in our sinful words,
uttered in passions, merriments, and other impertinent discourses: and in all
our actions against piety, justice, charity and sobriety; how justly might
thou execute thy displeasure against us, and make this day a day of vengeance
to us, to deprive us of all present comforts, and to scal us up to everlasting
torments?

Petition for pardon of sins and grace.
But, O must gracious preserver of men, who have not appointed us for wrath,
nor would that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance:
Create in us, O Lord, by thy holy Spirit, a true and sincere repentance,
speedily and faithfully to turn from all our evil ways: And do thou fully
forgive us the sins we have committed, even for thy fatherly mercies sake, even
for thy Jesus sake, who has satisfied thy justice for them. O Lord, we beseech
thee to deliver us from the burden and guilt of them: from thy vengeance, and
the sad effects of them, in temporal and eternal punishments. And now, O Lord,
we humbly acknowledge, that we are unable to do any thing of our selves, that
may please thee, without the assistance of thy grace, and thy Christ
strengthening us. O blessed Lord, give us thy grace, O dear Jesus, afford us
thy strength, that we may be able to perform to thee all our duties, as thy
disciples; and yield obedience to all thy Commandments. Raise up our thoughts,
desires, and designs, unto thee: secure our affections to heavenly things: and
let our souls stand always engaged to do the will of Christ. Lord, help us to
watch over our selves, that neither the lust of the flesh, the love of the
world, nor the temptation of the devil, may take us off from our love to thee,
desire of thee, nor faithful obedience to thee: and that we may ever hereafter,
live a podly, righteous, and sober life, to the Glory of thy Name, and the
present, and eternal peace of our souls, through the precious merits of Jesus
Christ our Savior.

Here I desire that the Master of the family, or who is concerned in the
performance of the service for the family, would here interpose some of David's
Psalms, and if he think fit a Chapter also in a judicious order. And after
either, or both, let the whole company join in one profession of the faith,
sayng.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

After which, let this short Petition be used, as was taught in the former
private Form.

O Lord, preserve our souls in this faith, let us not depart from it, through
any temptations. Give us grace constantly to continue in the profession of it,
all the days of our life, Through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

But when the employments of the Family be such, as there is not time for these
interpositions, then go on directly to the Thanksgiving.

O Blessed Lord God, the giver of all goodness, and the fountain of Comfort,
who art pleased to engage a particular providence, to the governing and
disposing of every creature; we humbly acknowledge our necessary dependence
upon thee, and that every comfort we enjoy, is but what we have received from
thee. O what shall we render unto the Lord, for those innumerable mercies we
have received in all parts of our lives? We bless thee for the sum of all
metcies, the redemption of our souls by the blood of Christ, and for the
particular work of thy grace upon us. We praise thee for all thy temporal
blessings, our health, plenty, and peace, that thou have kept us this night
past, from all troubles, and sad accidents; and that we are here together in a
condition to bless thee, in an universal safety this morning, when justly for
out sins, we might have set down in ashes, bewayling some great infelicity. And
since, O Lord, thou have put our souls, and bodies, and all that we have, in
thine own hand, to dispose of as it pleases thee: O keep them, gracious God,
according to thy tender mercies, from every evil, to which sin, and a miserable
nature, have exposed them every moment. O keep our souls, that we may not be
surprised nor overpowered by any temptation to sin against thee, this day.
Lord, give us wisdom to balance every action, by its concernment to us at our
dying hour, and enable us to be doing something that may make out account
comfortable at the great day of Christ. Draw our affections nearer to heavenly
things, and increase in us a greater care, diligence, and earnestness in doing
the will of Christ; that we may this day live acceptably to thee, and after a
constant perseverance in well-doing to our lives end, we may obtain a portion
in thy eternal glories, through thy free grace, and undeserved mercy in Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The intercession.
O most merciful Father, thou have tied us, by the charity of the Gospel, to
pray for all men: O be merciful to the Nations, that sit in darkness, and to
thy ancient people the Jews, let the Sun of righteousness, with healing in his
wings, rise upon them; that they may see and acknowledge the things of their
peace in Christ. Preserve thy universal Church, from all the enemies of the
faith of Christ, and from the sad effects of its own differencies and
distractions. Protect these Churches from their present dangers, and great
distempers every where. Bless, O Lord, our Parents, children, friendr, and
relations. Comfort all in affliction and trouble; Bring them into the way of
truth, that are in error: forgive and bless all our enemies: Gather us
altogether to the resting place of thy Glory, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our Savior. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

Evening PRAYER for a Family.
Our Father, etc.

Confession.
O Most infinite and Glorious Majesty, Lord God of heaven and earth, who have
granted us, poor creatures and wretched sinners, the mercy to appeal unto thee,
as unto a merciful and Gracious Father: who might justly for our sins, stand
now confounded at thy presence, as before the face of an angry Judge. For,
Lord, who have ever provoked thee to anger, if we have not? who were ever
justly accounted sinful, if we are not? For if thou accountest our sins by our
time, what moment is it, in which we have not offended thee? if by the
instruments of action, what faculty of the mind, affections of the heart, what
sense or member of the body, have not been employed to sin against thee? if
thou numbrest our sins by thy holy laws, which of them that concern, either
our duties to thee our God, our righteous carriage to others, or the sober use
of our selves, or thy blessings; have we not transgressed? So that there
appears a numberless number of sins before us, such as become an heavy
burden, too heavy for us to bear. And yet, O Lord, as if it had not been
enough, to have thus offended thee in the former part of our lives, we have
this day added to the sad account, by many sinful imaginations, which we have
given our minds leave to multiply; by many offensive and sinful words, by many
omissions of serving thee, and doing good to others; and by many acts that
cannot but displease thee. That should thou deal with us accordingly, thou
might justly cast us off from thy protection, deprive us of our present
comforts, and sweet enjoyments; and make us miserable by the effects of thy
wrath, here and eternally.

Petition for Pardon and grace.
But, O Lord of mercy, though thou hate sin in it self, and wicked men that
continue in it, yet are thy arms always open to accept, and thy mercies ready
to pardon all them that acknowledge and forsake their sins. We beseech thee
therefore, O Lord, enable us truly to repent us of all our sins, that we may
sorrow for them, and sincerely abhor them; that we may have real purposes
against them, and faithfully forsake them all the days of our lives. And then,
O Lord, be graciously pleased to forgive all those our sins unto us, acquit us
of the guilt, unload us of the burden of them, and do thou accept of the blood
of Christ in full satisfaction for them. O Lord, impute them not unto us,
either to punish us for them in this world with miseries and sad accidents, or
in the world to come with eternal torments. And, Lord, do thou help us for the
time to come with thy grace, or we yet perish. O enlighten our understandings
and judgments, with all spiritual wisdom, that we may know and approve the
things that are excellent: incline our wills to pursue them, and engage all our
affections to them. Wean us from the love of the world, and let our souls
hunger and thirst after righteousness. Grant that we employ our selves in all
our worldly labor and cares for the things of this life, with affections so
subordinate to spiritual things, that we may first seek the Kingdom of God and
its righteusnesse, and use the world as if we used it not. Lord, keep us entire
in our obedience to Christ, that we may upon no temptation depart from the
strict holiness of the Gospel: Lord, make us humble, meek, peaceable, just, and
charitable: make us zealous for thy glory and truth, careful of doing good to
others, and of keeping our selves undefiled members of Christ, to our last end:
Through Jesus Christ onr Lord and Savior. Amen.

Here I also desire the supplicant may interpose the reading of Psalms, a
Chapter, and the Belief, as in the Morning Service.

The Thanksgiving.
O most blessed Lord God, who art the fountain of blessing, and Father of
mercies, who by thy providence, orderest all our particular conditions for us,
in which, we every where observe great evidences of thy love and goodness to
us; We humbly acknowledge our necessary dependence upon thee, and do confess to
thy Glory, that every comfort we enjoy, is of thy free gift and bounty. We
desire therefore according to our bounden duty, to offer up unto thee this
evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all thy mercies and sweet
providence to us. Especially our souls magnify thy divine love, that thou have
given us thy Son, our Jesus, to pay the price of his blood to satisfy thy
justice for all our sins: That thou have engaged us, by being born, and living
under the means of Grace, to make profession of the faith of Christ; and that
thou have not set us in the region and shadow of death. We bless thee, O Lord,
that thou have given us power, in any measure to love or fear thee, to desire
and intend heavenly things; and that thou have not given us up to a reprobate
mind, nor to be led away with the error of the wicked, to fall from our
stedfastness. We praise thy Name for the blessings of this life, for the
present estate and condition in which thou have placed us, and therein, for our
portion of health, peace, friends, and provisions to live; all which, before
this time, thou might have justly taken from us, for our manifold
provocations. Blessed be thy providence, for the mercies of this day past, thou
have given us hearts in any measure to serve thee, and have sweetened our
affairs and enjoyments with any proportion of peace and contentment: That we
have been delivered from all fearful accidents, such as might have made us to
sit down in woe, and filled our souls with amazement and sorrow. Lord, place us
this night also under thy divine protection and providence. Free us from all
terrors and affrightments, and the sudden surprise of any danger or accident,
and when we awake and rise, grant, O Lord, that we may proceed in the way of
good living, and so persevere in it, all the days of our lives; that when we
come to our last sleep, and period of our time, we may rest in, and with thee,
to all eternity; through thy infinite mercies in Jesus Chhrist our Savior.
Amen.

Let the intercession be the same that is used in the morning Service.

The lesser CATECHISM FOR CHILDREN.

BY VV. SMYTH.

THE Lesser CATECHISM for Children.
QUESTION.

What is the best thing to be desired, and labored for?

ANSWER.

To be saved. Mar. 8. 36.


Quest. How is it to be obtained?

Ans. Romans 6. ult.
By the free gift of God in Christ.

Quest. To whom will he give so great an happiness?

Ans. Romans 8. 1.
To all them, that perform the conditions of the Gospel Covenant.

Quest. What are those conditions?

Ans. These three: to Believe, Repent, Ioh. 3. 15.
and Obey the Commandments of Christ. Luke 13. 5


Qu. Heb. 5. 9.
Thousaidst thou must believe: And what are the Articles of thy Christian
faith, as they are contracted into one sum, called the Apostles Creed?

Ans. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontins Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried. He descended into hell, The third day he rose again from the dead, he
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, the Father
Almighty: from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: I
believe in the holy Ghost: The holy Catholic Church: The Communion of Saints:
The forgiveness of sins: The Resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn in these Artieles?

Ans. First, I learn to believe in God, who made me and all the world:
Secondly, in God the Son, who redeemed me and all Mankind: Thirdly, in God the
holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people of God.

Quest. What else art thou bound to believe?

Ans. Romans 4. 4.
All other holy truths, as they shall be administered to me: especially all the
promises of the Gospel, to be relied upon; and the commands to be obeyed.

Quest. The second condition of the Gospel is to repent, and what is that
repentance?

Ans. Ioh. 1. 3. 9.
After a hearty sorrow for, and an humble acknowledgement of my sins, a total
departure from them.

Quest. But are there no sins which may consist with this state of
Gospel-repentance?

Ans. Yes, Sins committed in ignorance, through infirmity, or by supprise in a
sudden temptation; Ioh. 1. 1. 8.
if we be truly humbled for them, and constantly strive against them.

Quest. What sins are not consistent with that estate?

Ans. Heb. 10. 26
All wilful and deliberate courses of sinning; Gal. 5. 24.
and a customary continuing in any known wickedness.

Quest. The third condition of the Gospel of Christ, being to obey his
Commandments, 1 John 2. 6.
among which are accounted the Ten Commandments: and what are they?

1. Exodus 20.
THou shall have no other Gods but me.

2, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands, in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall do no murder.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Quest. Are there not other Commandments of Christ besides these, which are
properly the precepts of the Gospel?

Ans. Mat. 5. 17.
Yes: many: which may be observed by diligent hearing the Gospel preached, and
reading the books of the New Testament; which together with the former
Commandments, are reduced to these three principal heads.

Quest. What are they?

Ans. Tit. 2. 12.
To live Godly, Righteously, and Soberly. The first, respects my duties to God,
The second to men, The third to my self.

Quest. what is it to live godly, in such duties as respect God?

Ans. Luke 1. 14
To perform to him all that worship, and service, that is due unto him,
publicly, and privately.

Quest. What duties art thou bound to perform to him publicly?

Ans. Heb. 10. 25
To join with the Congregation in the frequent receiving the holy Sacrament, in
the public prayers, and in hearing the Word of God read, and preached. And in
all these, behaving my self with such reverence of body and mind, as befits the
presence of so great a Majesty. Heb. 12. 28


Quest. What is that private worship, which thou art bound as a Christian to
perform to God?

Ans. Mat. 6. 6.
To offer up unto him the daily sacrifice of prayer and praise; giving him the
exercise of the affections of my heart, and all other parts and faculties of my
soul and body; Romans 6. 13
to honor him with my substance, in the maintenance of his worship, and
relieving the poor; Gal. 6. 10.
and to serve him truly all the days of my life.

Quest. What is it to live righteously, in respect of our duties to men?

Ans. Romans 13. 1
To yield all honor and obedience to the civil Magistrate: to submit my self
to all my teachers, Heb. 13. 17
spiritual Pastors, and Masters: Ephesians. 6. 5.
to love, honor, and succor my Father and Mother: Ephesians. 6. 1.
to be civil and respective to all my betters. Romans 13. 7
To invade no man's rights or dues; 1 These. 4. 12
nor to advantage my self by another loss; Mat. 7. 12.
and in all things, both in word and deed, to do to all men as I would they
should do unto me.

Quest. What is it to live soberly as to thy self?

Ans. Romans 12. 10
Not to mind high things above my degree, Phi. 4. 11.
but to behave my self contentedly in my present condition: Gal. 5. 25.
to be temperate in eating and drinking: Mat. 5. 28.
to be chaste in all my desires and actions: and to keep my soul and body
undefiled members of Christ, and as becomes the temple of the holy Ghost.

Quest. For as much as no man can do any thing without the grace of God, which
he must continually call for, by diligent prayer. What therefore are the words
of the Lords Prayer?

Ans. Mat. 6 9.
Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread,
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Quest. 1 Eim. 2. 1.
But is God to be sought by no prayers but this?

Ans. Yes.

Here let the Master enquire into the childs progress in the preceding Forms,
or some other of that kind, according to its capacity.


