THE SOLDIERS Pocket Bible: Containing the most (if not all) those places
contained in holy Scripture, which do show the qualifications of his inner
man, that is a fit Soldier to fight the Lords Battles, both before he fight,
in the fight, and after the fight; Which Scriptures are reduced to several
heads, and fitly applied to the Soldiers several occasions, and so may supply
the want of the whole Bible, which a Soldier cannot conveniently carry about
him: And may be also useful for any Christian to meditate upon, now in this
miserable time of War.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.



Jos. 18. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and have good success.

Printed at London by G. B. and R. W. for G. C. 1643.

The Soldiers pocket Bible.
A Soldier must not do wickedly.
Deuteronomy. 23.9. WHen thou go out with the host against thine enemies, keep
thee then from all wickedness. Luke 3.14 The soldiers likewise demanded of
him, saying, and what shall we do? And he said unto them, do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. Levit. 26.27
37. And if you will not for this obey me, you shall not be able to stand before
your enemies. Deuteronomy. 28.25. And the Lord shall cause thee to fall before thine
enemies, thou shall come out one way against them, and fly seven ways before
them. A Soldier must be valiant for Gods Cause.
1 Samuel 18.17.Be valiant and fight the Lords battles. 2 Samuel 10.12. Be strong,
and let us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and let
the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. 1 Samuel 17.47. For the battle is
the Lords, and he will give you into our hands. A Soldier must deny his own
wisdom, his own strength, and all provision for war.
Prove. 3.5. Lean not to thine own wisdom. 1 Samuel 2.9. In his own might
shall no man be strong. 1 Psalm. 44.6.I do not trust in my Bow, neither can my
Sword save me. Psalm. 33.16 A King is not saved by the multitude of an Host,
neither is the mighty man delivered by much strength. 17. Eccle. 8.8. A horse
is a vain help, and shall not deliver in the day of battle. Man has not
power over death, nor deliverance in battle. 2 Chro. 20.12. There is no power
in us to stand against this great multitude, neither do we know what to do,
but our eyes are toward thee. A Soldier must put his confidence in Gods
Wisdom and strength.
Ephe. 6.10 Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Job 12.13 For
with him is wisdom and strength, he has Counsel and understanding. Psalm
68.35. The God of Israel is he that gives strength and power unto his people.
Psalm. 46.4. God is our hope and strength, and help, in trouble ready to be
found. 2 Chro. 25 8. God has power to help, and to cast down. Psalm. 67.16 I
will go forward in the strength of the Lord. 1 Samuel 17.45. Then David said
unto the Philistine, thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and
with a shield, but I come unto thee in the name of the Lord of hoasts, the God
of Israel. A Soldier must pray before he go to fight.
Neh. 4.9. Then we prayed unto our God, and set Watchmen by them day and night
because of them. Judge. 16.28. Then Sampson called unto the Lord, and said, O
Lord God, I pray thee think upon me, O God, I beseech thee strengthen me at
this time, etc. 2 Samuel 15.31. And David said, O Lord I pray thee turn the
Counsel of Abitophill into foolishness. Iam. 1.5. If any of you lack
wisdom let him ask it of God. Psa. 119.34 Give me understanding, and I shall
keep thy Law: ye I shall observe it with my whole heart. Psa. 86.12. Give
strength unto thy servant and save the son of thine hand-maide. Psa. 35.12.
Plead thou my cause O Lord with them that strive with me, fight thou against
them, that fight against me.

Bring out the spear and stop the way against them.

Judge. 10.15. And the children of Israel said unto the Lord we have sinned do
thou unto us whatsoever please thee, only we pray thee deliver us this day. A
Soldier must consider and believe Gods gracious promises.
Chro. 20.20. And when they arose early in the morning they went forth to the
wilderness of Tekoa: and as they departed Jehoshaphat stood and said, hear ye me
O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, put your trust in the Lord your God,
and ye shall be assured; believe his prophets and ye shall prosper. Deuteronomy. 20.4
For the Lord your God goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies and
to save you. Exo. 14.14The Lord shall fight for you. 2 Kin. 17.39. Dan. 3.17
Fear the Lord your God and he shall deliver you out of the hands of al your
enemies Dan. 3.17Behold our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
hot fiery furnice, and he will deliver us out of thine hand O King. 1 Chro. 17
10. And I will subdue all thine enemies. Isa. 41.12.Thou shall seek them and
shall not find them, to wit the men of thy strife; for they shall be as
nothing, and the men that war against thee as a thing of naught. Isa. 54.17.
No weapon made against thee shall prosper. A Soldier must not fear his enemies.
Dut. 20.1. When thou shall go forth to War against thine enemies, and shall
see horses and Chariots more then thou, be not afraid of them for the Lord thy
God is with thee. Dut. 3.32 Ye shall not fear them, for the Lord your God shall
sight for you fear them not for I heve given them into thine hand. 2 Chro. 32
78. Be strong and courageous, fear not, neither be afraid for the king of
Ashur, neither for all the multitude that is with him, for there be more with us
then with him, with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God
for to help us and to fight our battles. Isa. 7.4. Fear not neither, be
faint hearted, for the two tails of the smoking fire brands. Mat. 10.28 And
fear ye not them which kill the body. A Soldier must love his enemies as they
are his enemies, and hate them as they are gods enemies.
Mat. 5.44. But I say unto you love your enemies. 2 Chro. 19 2. Would thou
help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord. Psa 139 21.22. Do not I
hate them O Lord that hate thee, and do not I earnestly contend with them that
rise up against thee? I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine
utter enemies. A Soldier must cry unto God in his heart in the very instant
of the battle.
2 Chro. 13.14. Then Judah looked, and behold the battle was before and
behind them, and they cried unto the Lord. 2 Chro. 14 11. And Asa cried unto
the Lord his God, and said, Lord it is nothing with thee to help with many, or
with no power. 2 Chro. 18.31. And when the Captains of the Chariots saw
Jehoshaphat, they said, it is the King of Is^ael and they compassed about him
to fight but Jehoshaphat cried, and the Lord helped him and moved them to
depart from him. A Soldier must consider that sometimes Gods people have the
worst in battle as well as Gods enemies.
1 Samuel 11.25. The sword devoureth one as well as another. Ecles. 9.2. All
things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean, to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner:
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Ios. 7.4. So there went up
thither of the people about three thousand men and they fled before the men of
Ai. Judge. 6.2. And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. 1 Samuel 4.10.
And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten down, and fled every man
into his Tent, and there was an exceeding great slaughter, for there fell of
Israel thirty thousand footmen. Exo. 17.12. But when Moses let his hand go
down, Amalek prevailed. Lam 1.16My children are desolate because the enemy
prevailed. Soldiers and all of us must consider that though Gods people have
the worst yet it comes of the Lord.
Esa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the Robbers did not I
the Lord. Amos, 3.6 Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done
it. Judge. 42. And the Lord sold them into the hands of Jabin king of Canaan.
Lam. 1.14 The Lord has delivered me into their hands neither am I able to rise
up. Lam. 2.7. The Lord has forsaken his altar he has abhorred his Sanctuary
he has given it into the hand of the enemy. For the iniquities of Gods people
are delivevered into the hands of their enemies.
Deuteronomy. 29.24.25. Then shall all nations say, wherefore has the Lord done this
unto this land, how fierce is his great wrath.

And they shall answer because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God
of their fathers.

Ios. 7.10.11. And the Lord said unto Joshua get thee up; wherefore lie thou
thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and they have transgressed my Covenant
which I commanded them. Ier. 40.2.3 The Lord thy God has pronounced this
plague upon this place now the Lord has brought it and done according as he
has said, because ye have sinned against the Lord. Ier. 50.6.7 My people have
been as lost sheep, all that found them have devoured them, and their enemies
said we offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord. Lam 3.39
Wherefore then is the living man sorrowful; man suffers for his sin.
Therefore both Soldiers and all Gods people upon such occasions must search
out their sins.
Lam. 3.40 Let us search and try our woyes and turn again unto the Lord. Jos.
7.13. Up therefore Sanctify your selves against to morrow, for thus says the
Lord God of Israel, there is an execrable thing amongst you therefore you
cannot stand against your enemies until ye have put the execrable thing from
among you. Especially let Soldiers and all of us upon such occasions search
whether we have not put two little confidence in the Arm of the Lord, and too
much in the arm of flesh.
Jer. 2.13. For my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits that will hold
no water. Jer. 2.37Therefore says the Lord they shall go forth from thence
with their hands upon their heads, because the Lord has rejected their
confidence they shall not prosper thereby. Jer. 17.5. Therefore thus says the
Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm and
withdraws his heart from the Lord. And let Soldiers and all of us consider,
that to prevent this sin, and for the committing of this sin the Lord has
ever been accustomed to give the victory to a few.
Jud. 7.2. And the Lord said unto Gideon the people that are with thee are too
many for me to give the Midionites into their hands, lest Israel make their
vaunt against me, and say, mine hand has saved me. Jud. 7.7Then the Lord said
unto Gideon by these three hundred men that lapped will I save you and deliver
the Midionites into thine hands. Jud. 20.15. And the children of Benjamin were
numbered at that time out of the Cities six and twenty thousand men that drew
sword. Jud. 20.17Also the men of Israel besides Benjamin were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword. Jud. 20.21And the children of Benjamin
came out of Gibeah and slew down to the ground of the Israelites that day two
and twenty thousand men. Jud. 20.25And the second day Benjamin came forth to
meet them out of Gibeah and slew down to the ground of the children of Israel
again eighteeen thousand men. Jud. 20.30And the children of Israel went up
against the Children of Benjamin the third day. Jud. 20.43And compassed the
Benjamits about, and chased them at ease, and over ran them, and there were
slain of Benjamines eighteen thousand men. Jud. 20.44And the Israelites
gleaned of them by the way five thousand men, and persued after them unto Gidon
and slew two thousand men of them. Jud. 20.45So that all that were slain that
day of Benjamin, were five and twenty thousand men, that drew sword. 2 Chronicles.
13.3. And Abijah set the battle in array with the Army of valiant men of War
even four hundred thousand chosen men. J^roboam also set the battle in array
against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, which were strong and
valiant. 2 Chronicles. 13.4 And Abijah stood upon the mount Zemeraim, and said O
Jereboam and all Israel hear ye me. 2 Chronicles. 13.8 Ye think that ye be able to
resist against the Kingdom of the Lord which is in the hands of the Sons of
David;and ye see a great multitude, and the golden calves are with you, which
Jeroboam has made you for Gods. 2 Chronicles. 13.10But, we belong to the Lord our
God and have not forsaken him, 2 Chronicles. 13.12And behold this God is with us as
a Captain, O ye children of Israel fight not against the Lord God of your
fathers, for ye shall not prosper. 2 Chronicles. 13.13.But Jeroboam caused an
Ambushment to compass and come behind them. 2 Chronicles. 13.14.Then Judah looked
and behold the battle was before and behind them, and they cried unto the
Lord. 2 Chronicles. 13.15.And the men of Judah gave a shout, and as the men of Judah
shouted God smote Jeroboam, and also Israel before Abijah and Judah. 2 Chronicles.
13.17.And Abijah and his people slew a great slaughter of them, so that there
fell of them down wounded five hundred thousand chosen men. 2 Chro. 14.8. And
Asa had an Army of Judah that bare shields and spears, three hundred thousand,
and of Benjamin that bare shields and drew bows four hundred and fourscore
thousand, all these were valiant men of war. 2 Chro. 14.9.And there came out
against them Zerah of Ethiopia with an host of ten hundred thousand, and three
hundred Chariots. 2 Chro. 14.10.Then Asa went out before him and they set the
battle in array in the valley of Zephathah besides Mareshah. 2 Chro. 14.11.And
Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord it is nothing with thee to help
with many or with no power, help us O Lord our God for we rest on thee, and in
thy name are we come against this multitude O Lord thou art our God let not man
prevail against thee. And let Soldiers, and all of us know, that the very
nicke of time that God has promised us help, is when we see no help in man.
Genesis 22.14In the mount will the Lord be seen. Exo. 14.13 Then Moses said unto
the people, fear ye not stand still and behold the Salvation of the Lord, which
he will show to you this day the Lord shall fight for you therefore hold you
your peace. 2 Chro. 20 11. O our God will thou not judge them, for there is no
strength in us to stand against this great multitude, neither do we know what
to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2 Chro. 20.17Ye shall not need to fight
in this battle, stand still, move not, and behold the salvation of the Lord
toward you. Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36. Vengeance and recompense are mine, their feet
shall slide in due time for the day of their calamities is at hand, and all
things that shall come upon you make haste. Deuteronomy. 32.36. For the Lord shall
judge his people, and repent toward his servants; when he sees that their
power is gone and none shut up in hold or left abroad. 2 Cor. 12.11. For my
power is made perfect through weakness. Zack. 4.6. For neither by an Army, nor
strength but by my spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Psa 12.5. Now for the
opression of the needy and for the sighs of the poor, I will up says the Lord
I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. Esa. 33.10. Now will I
arise says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self.
Wherefore if our Forces be weakened, and the enemy strengthened, then let
Soldiers and all of as know that now we have a promise of Gods help which we
had not when we were strongers, and therefore let us pray more confidently.
Esa. 33.2. O Lord have mercy on us, we have waited for thee, be thou which
was their arm in the morning, our help also in time of trouble. Deuteronomy. 33.7
Hear, O Lord the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people, his hands
shall be sufficient for him if thou help him against his enemies. Psa. 142.45.
I looked upon my right hand and beheld, but there was none that would know me,
all refuge failed me* and none cared for my soul, then cried I unto the Lord,
and said, thou art my hope. Psa. 22.11. Be no^ far from me, because trouble
is near, and there is none to help. Psa 97.8. Remember not against us our
former iniquities, but make have, and let thy tender mercies prevent us, for we
are brought very low. Psa 35.2. Lay hand upon the sword and bucklen, and stand
up for my help. Psa. 79 9. Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of
thy name. And let Soldiers, and all of us know, that if we obtain any victory
over our enemies, it is our duty to give all the glory to the Lord, and say
Exo. 15.3. The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah. Exo. 15.6.Thy
right hand, O Lord is glorious in power, thy right hand O Lord has bruised the
enemies. Exo. 15.7.And in thy great glory, thou have overthrown them that rose
up against thee. Psa. 118.23. This was the Lords doing; and it is mavelous in
our eyes. Iosha. 10.14.For the Lord fought for Israel. Mica. 7.7Therefore will
we look unto the Lord. 2 Cor. 1.10.Who delivered us from so great a death. 1
Cor. 29.15.Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.
Esra. 9.13.14. And seeing that thou our God have stain us from being beneath
for our iniquities, and have given us such a deliverance, should we return to
break thy Commandments. Psa 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land
of the living. Psa. 119 109. I have vowed, and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments. This is Licensed according to order:

FINIS.

