A TRVE AND EXACT RELATION OF THE Proceedings and Victorious Success of the
Ships in the Service of the King and Parliament, which were sent for the
Relief of IRELAND, Under the Command of Captain Swanley, Admiral: In the
taking diverse ships in Milford Haven.

AS ALSO Their Valorous undertakings (and the wonderful blessing of God upon
them) in the Principality of Wales, in taking diverse Castles, Commanders,
Ammunition, Soldiers, and in the total subduing of the County of PEMBROKE.

Written by Captain William Smith, Vice Admiral in the same Voyage.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1644.

A True and Exact Relation of the proceedings and Victorious success of the
Ships in the service of the King and Parliament, which were sent for the
Relief of IRELAND.
IN the Proceed of the Fleet on our Irish voyage, you may be pleased to take
notice that on the 18. January, 1643. we set sail in Plymouth Sound, and
aftermuch foul weather and contrary winds beating about the Lands end; it
pleased God, to bring part of the Fleet safe to Anchor in Milford Haven on the
23 of the same, viz. The Leopard Regis, the Swallow; the Leopard Merchant,
Providence Merchant, and Cressent Frygot, and within three days after, the
Prosperous, and the two Lerpoole vessels, came into Milford; But through the
neglect of Captain Plunket, and Captain Williams, the said Vessels were
necessitated to remain at Milford seven weeks, it being their charge to have
conveyed them to their desired Port; And at our arrival we found at Anchor in
the Haven, the Globe of Bristoll, and a small ship which arrived at Milford,
eight days before we came in; And had brought from Bristoll, Ammunition to
fortify the Harbor; as great Guns, Powder, Bullet and other provisions, and
had Landed them at Prickspill, which lies on the Northside of the Harbor,
where the enemy had made a Fort, and fortified it; Into which Pyll; the Globe
and the other ship having made us from the mouth of the Harbor, let slip and
run; And my Admiral in pursuit came before the Pyll; where were exchanged
diverse shots, but no hurt done on either side; The Admiral perceiving no
considerable service or execution could be performed on the Fort or Ships;
they being drawn about a Neck of Land behind the Fort; he came to Anchor
before it within shot; and the Swallow a head of him; and the rest of the Fleet
a head of the Swallow, inclining to the Southside: some three days after in
the night, the enemy drew a Gunne out of the Fort to the Westward of the Pyll,
and at break of the day, began a morning salute to the Swallow, who to gratify
their courtesy, answered them; and after many shot their Gunne split, and so
they drew it away at that time: it proved very stormy weather, insomuch that
our Ships hauld home their Anchors, wherefore upon the first opportunity the
Leopard and Swallow were enforced to weigh and come to Anchor, on the South
side, before Angle A birth, where usually the Kings Ships ride when they come
into that Harbor, but shortly after the Admiral sent the Prosperous and
Leopard Merchant, to ride before the Pyll, to hinder, if it were possible, the
strengthening of their Work; which daily the enemy assayed to do; from the
Ships were diverse shots made daily at their works; as also from the Fort at
the Ships; but as yet no considerable damage received, only the Leopard
Merchant, received a shot in her quarter, which dropped into the Masters bed: and
to annoy the Fort the more, the Admiral, with the joint consent of the
Commanders, built a Fort on the South side over against the Pyll, and placed
therein a Demy-Cannon; wherewith we played into their works, which was a
great encouragement unto many in the County, to adhere unto the well-affected
party, who at that time were very weak. Thus having presented you with our
proceedings at Sea, in and about the Harbor; you may be pleased to take a
view of the correspondence we held a shore, both with the ill and well
affected after our happy arrival; I call it happy in respect of the great
deliverance it pleased the most mighty Preserver of all things to afford to the
distressed Inhabitants of Pembroke, and the well-affected Gentlemen of that
County.

The next morning after we came to anchor in the Haven, Colonel Langhorn and
the Major of Pembrooke came aboard the Leopard, and informed my Admiral with
the feeble condition the well-affected party was in; As also of the strength,
power, and insolency of the adverse party: For after the enemy had fortified
the North side of the Harbor, and intending to have fortified the South side
within a day or two, had not our arrival frustrated that design, the enemy
presuming on their strength, cast off their sheeps-cloathiug, in which they had
so long deluded the people, and demonstrated themselves to be like unto the
rest of there Confederates ( Ravening-Wolves.) The Earl of Carbury having
voted, that after the Harbor was Fortified, he would plunder the Town of
Pembrook, and the houses of the Gentlemen who had adhered to that party, and
that their persons should be put to death by cruel tortures; The Major of
Pembrooke they said should be put in a Barrel of nails and brought to
Prickspill, and from the top of a hill should be rouled down into the sea: This
report so terrified the Gentlemen, that they fled from their houses, and hid
themselves in obscure places in disguise, and sent their wives and children to
Tynby, where his Lordship then lay; humbly to supplicate his Lordship to be
pleased to grant them protection, that their houses might not be plundered, nor
their persons abused by the rude soldiers; among whom there was a reverend
aged Gentlewoman, the wife of one Master Griffeth White, who had in her house
eight sons and eight daughters who were Virgins, and four small
Grandchildren, in all number twenty, with diverse servants both Male and Female.
This Gentlewoman pressing his Lordship to commiserate her sad estate, in case
her house should be plundered, desired his protection; assuring his Lordship
that whenever he would be pleased to give her husband leave to wait on him,
she did not not doubt but that her husband would give his Lordship ample
satisfaction in all his lawful demands. His Lordship replied, he would find a
time to speak with her husband, but as for a protection he would grant her
none. The Gentlewoman with tears in her eyes desired his Lordship to look on
her children, who in point of honor he stood engaged to protect: as also the
chashity of Mations and Virgins, the which without his Lordships protection she
said, must undoubtedly be violated, and her family perish. To which his
Lordship answered with diverse reproaches, and some jea^^s among, that it were
better her children and family should perish, than that the King should want
means to perfect his design; to which she said, the King could not want, if
his Majesty would be graciously pleased to be content with what God, and the
Laws of the Land has provided; At which his Lordship flung out of the room,
leaving the Gentlewoman with tears in her eyes, and so she departed to her
house full of grief and pensive thoughts. A passage from his Lordship of so
barbarous a deportment, that I believe history can scarce parallel to have
proceeded from any heathen. And if these be the loyal subjects who fight for
the Gospel, the Kings honor, and the Subjects Liberty, I leave to every man's
judgment to determine. The lamentable condition of the well-affected, being by
the Admiral and Commanders disputed, It was demanded of Colonel Langhorn and
the Major, what force the welaffected party was able to raise to oppose his
Lordship; It was by them replied, that they could not raise above 40 horse, and
about 60 foot: then it was demanded, in case there should be 200 seamen landed
well armed, whether they would join with them, in endeavoring to drive his
Lordship out of the County, for unless they would be active, they must resolve
to prepare to go away with the Fleet, in regard a consumption of victuals would
force us to depart that Harbor. The Colonel and Major, with the well-affected
Gentry, like gallant men who had rather die than outlive the honor of their
Country, or see the ruin thereof by a Jesuiticall and popish faction, resolved
to put themselves under the providence of the Almighty, and with the help of
our Seamen to affront the enemy; the which was without delay put in execution.
And on the 13 of Feb. we fell on a Garrison of the enemies in a strong hold
called ( Stackepoole) the Manor house of one Mr. Roger Lort, on which with our
great guns having made a breach, after 8 hours assault we took it with the
loss of two men, and many wounded on both sides; shortly after they fell on
another garrison of the enemy called Treff^^^ne lying within a mile of Tynbye,
out of which Town his Lordship issued, with about 200 horse and soot, intending
to have relieved Treff^^yne, and faced our forces, on whom we let fly a piece
of Ordnance, whereat his Lordship wheeled about with all his forces and ran
into the Town. Our forces prosecuting their assault upon the Garrison, took it,
and therein 45 horse, and 150 Arms, with the loss of two men on our side, and
six on the enemies: God giving our small forces this good success, they
retired to Pembrooke to reliesh their men, and to enable themselves for a more
potent design on the enemy, intending to oppose their whole body, which
consisted of 1200 men foot and horse, which lay in and about Haverfordwest,
then his Lordships Rendevouz; but his Lordship hearing of this design, having
fortified Haverford West, and placed most of his strength there, his Lordship
like a valiant Commander, with 20. horse, some foot, and four fieldpieces ran
away, telling the rest of the Commanders, that he rode unto the adjacent County
to raise more forces, and that he would suddenly return.

Now when our men were refreshed, and six fild-pieces mounted on Carriages with
Wagons to convey their Ammunition and Victuals, they resolved to fall on the
Fort at the Pyll: and on the 22. of Feb. Colonel Langhorne and the Mayor of
Pembrook, sent aboard the Admiral, to desire that our boats might be sent to
the passage to convey over on the enemies side, their Artillery, Wagons and
Provisions; the which was done on Friday the 23. And about three of the clock
in the morning they were all landed, consting of about 300. horse and foot,
with six field pieces of Ordnance; who proceeding on their March, their horse
in the Front, they advanced before the Pyll, about twelve of the clock at
noone; Our Ships also were at Anchor before the Fort; the Leopard Regis, and
the Swallow road to the Westward, and the Prosperous and Leopard Merchant road
to the Eastward, plying our Ordnance into the Fort; And when our Land Forces
had drawn up their Artillery, they played into the Fort from a hill which lay
to the Eastward of it, and were answered again; the horse and foot did
skirmish from their Ambuscadoes; but on this day no man was either slain or
hurt on either side; Night coming on, caused a cessation; our Land forces
quartering about their Artillery lay in the field before the Fort; it being a
bitter cold night, the next morning being Saturday the 24. by break of the
day, from our Ships and Landforces, we began to ply our Ordnance; from the
Swallow was a shot made into the Fort, which took off the head of one man, and
the Posteriours of another, of which he dyed the next day; Our horse and foot
behaved themselves valiantly that day, and beat the Enemy from their
Ambuscadoes; and with the Enemy entered their Fort, and then the enemy cried
quarter; the which our Commanders in imitation of their Heavenly Father, who is
the God of mercy, granted far above their deserts, and spared their lives;
who had formerly voted, that if they should prove Conquerers, they would kill
the dogs, and ravish the Bitches, and drown the Whelps; most in humane
language, did it not proceed from those that adhere to the Beast, and therefore
proper for them to speak Diabolical and Beasticall language; In the Fort were
taken Arms 200. Pleces of Ordnance 18. Soldiers 240 and Commanders 26. their
names and qualities are expressed in the Schedule annexed; In the Pyll were
taken two ships, the Globe of Bristoll, in her twelve pieces of Ordnance; and
by a shot from the Globe was one of the Swallows men slain on the shore by
his own folly, the other Ship called the Providence had belonging to her ten
great Guns, but the enemy had carried them to Haverford West, in the taking of
this Fort, the protecting power of the Almighty, I hope, by us shall never be
forgorte^, for it was his own arm that got the victory, to whom be ascribed
all honor and glory for ever and ever; for in taking thereof, there was not
one man slain, either by sword or small shot; when the enemy was routed, some
of their soldiers fled to Haverford West, and informed the Commanders there,
of the loss of the Fort, and that all their Commanders and Soldiers therein
were taken prisoners; At which news it is reported, Sir Henry Vaughan with the
of his Commanders, began to rage and swear like mad men and as Bear robbed of
her whelps, ran up and down the streets, crying, beat up our Drums; gather our
horse and foot together, for we will out this night, and be revenged of the
Roundheaded Paliament dogs; And having with this bravado drawn their forces
into a Body, being about 450. Sir John Stepney the Governor of that town, like
a prudent overseer, went into the Churchyard, to see if he could discern our
forces to approach toward Haverford West, about half a mile from the town,
he discovered a heard of black-bullocks coming toward him; hose horned beasts
so amazed the Knight, that being afraid of his own shadow, his worship ran to
the head of their forces, and swor Gods-wounds the Round-headed dogs were
coming; at which report they marched out of the town, and calling to mind the
valiant example of their L. General Carbury, they wheeled about, and ran away,
the boys of the town perceiving them to run, fell on the rear, and took from
them threescore Muskets; this disorder in the rear made those in the front
believe that the Roundheads were at their heels indeed.

The fear thereof metamorphosed aule our Cozen Taffies into Mercuries, and
winged speed, every man fled for his life, some threw away their Arms, and
those that had the charge of the Powder flung it into the River. And in this
manner was the Town of Haverfordwest surrendered; verifying that saying of the
kingly Prophet David, The wicked flies when no man pursues them. When the
enemy fled, they left behind them in Haverfordwest a hundred red Coats which
were never worn, a quantity of victuals, and ten pieces of Ordnance, all which
argued they wanted nothing but a good Cause to maintain. Now our forces being
again refreshed, having our Demi-Cannon and a Demi-Culvering mounted on field
Carriages, and being supplied from our Ships with Powder and all other
Ammunition, they marched toward Tynbie on the 6. of March. On the same day the
Swallow and Crescent Frigot, with the Prosperous Merchant, set sail from
Milford, and came to anchor before Tynbie, where I summoned the Governor and
Mayor to surrender the Town for the service of the King and Parliament: but
receiving a negative answer, I desired the Governor and Mayor to send out of
the Town all the women and children; for unless they would comply I must in
discharge of my duty use my uttermost endeavors to force them thereunto. The
same night our Land Forces came within two miles of the Town, from whence
Colonel Langhorne sent aboard the Swallow, and desired me to summon the Town,
the which I had done before his Letter came, and returned the Colonel their
Answer. And receiving no satisfaction from the Governor or Mayor, the next
morning about eight of the Clock we began to play into the Town with our
Ordnance from our Ships; and about one a clock in the afternoon our Land
Forces came before the Town. And having placed their Demi-cannon within a
quarter of a mile of the Town, they fell to battery, and so we continued
three days. The small shot on both sides performed well. The Town was
maintained with brave resolution, and more bravely assaulted by our Seamen and
Landmen, presenting their naked bodies even in the face of danger. Commissary
Guine the Governor of the Town showed himself to be a man of undaunted
spirit, issuing out of the Town, bringing up his small shot to make good their
Ambuscadoes, and his valor, exposed that Town to unavoydable misery, in
voting he would neither give nor take Quarter. But I may say of his valor as
Saint Paul said in another case to certain Christians in his time: Shall I
praise him for this? No; I praise him not; for all our actions that tend not to
the glory of God, lead us to our destructions. To which indeed this resolution
of his had almost brought him; for leading on his men to face our small shot,
who plied their Muskets so fast that his men forsook him, and himself
received a shot under his right Pap, which enforced him to retreat all alone in
an orderly pace. He was no sooner entered the Town, but the Master Gunner
thereof was also slain. In which we must not omit to manifest Gods providence
toward us, for our small shot having forced the enemy out of their
Ambuscadoes, pursued them close to the town Gate, their Gunner having laden a
piece of Ordnance with Case shot, and watching for such an opportunity, having
travysed the Gunne, said to those that stood by, Now you shall see me make a
slaughter of these Roundheads; at which word a small shot from our forces hit
him in the head, after which he never spoke more; whose fall so daunted the
enemy both Commanders and Soldiers, that forthwith they cried out for Quarter.
The first that forced their entry into the town was Captain Peter Whitty with
his Company of Seamen and Subordinate Officers; Lieutenant Green and Ensign
Dodson, with Lieutenant Calte, who led on the Swallow men, and immediately
after them Colonel Langhorne with his Troop of horse. This Town of Tinbye
was held by the judgment of the most judicious almost impregnable, it being
not to be entered but by single File: wherein were taken three or four hundred
prisoners, as many Arms, seven pieces of Ordnance, all which were taken on
Saturday the 9. of March, and on Sunday the 10. Carew Castle was surrendered, in
which was consummated the total subduing of that Malignant and insulting Party
in the County of Pembrooke; wherein the Lord of Hosts gave his servants the
victory over his and their enemies, which gives us just cause to put our
confidence in him; and in that comfortable Ejaculation expressed by holy David,
to cry and say, By this we know that thou Lord favourest us, in that thou have
not suffered our enemies to triumph over us.

The true relation of him who is a most humble and faithful servant in this
great work, according to the trust reposed.

A list of the names of the worthy and valiant Commanders now in action in the
County of Pembrooke, in the service of the King and Parliament, which opposed
the Earl of Carbury.
Rowland Langhorne, Colonel and Commander in Chief. Simon Thelwell, Colonel
Voluntiere. Thomas Langhorne Sergeant Major. Capt. Ri^e Powell. Capt. Walter
Cuney. Capt. John Poyer. Capt. Peter Whittye. Lieutenant Owgin. Lieut. Richard
Jones. John Powell Coronet.

A list of the uames of the Malignant Commanders taken prisoners at the Pyll,
with their Inferior Officers, in the County of Pembrooke, by these gallant
Commanders above specified.
John Barlow Esquire, Master of the Ordnance, and Captain of a Troop of
Horse. Capt. Edmond Brashaw. Capt. John Brashaw. Capt. John Butler. Capt.
Arnold Butler. Capt. William Marychurch. Cap. John Price. Cap. Fran: Edmonds.

From the Earl of Carbury we took in this action, 4 Castles, 53 pieces of
Ordnance, about six or seven hundred Soldiers, as many arms, and the whole
County of Pembrook totally subdued, and unanimously have taken the Covenant;
and there is great hopes that Carmarthyn and Cardyganshire will both comply
with us.

Commanders which ran away from Haverford West.

Sir Henry Vaughan, Major General of the Army. Sir John Stepney Knight and
Baronet, and Governor of Haverford West. Sir Francis Flyde Knight, Capt. of a
Troop of Horse. James Martin, Capt. of a Troop of Horse. Capt. John Edwards.

Commanders taken at Tynbye, with their inferior Officers.

John Gwyn Governor of Tynby, and Commissary of the Army. David Gwyn Colonel.
Tho. Butler Lieutenant Colonel and High Sheriff for the County of Pembrooke.
Capt. George Lewis. Capt. Thomas Methell.

A Letter sent in general to the Gentlemen of the County of Pembrooke, at the
request of the Well-affected.
Gentlemen,
AS in duty bound, I have always (in all fidelity) highly honored my King,
and ever been a lover of my Country; and as I stand engaged, God has called me
to be a servant to both; And in discharge of the Trust imposed in me, I am come
hither to desire your compliance in the protection of the Gospel in its
inherent purity; as also the Kings honor, with the Subjects liberty; A work
that every good Christian and loyal Subject ought to be active in, with the
tender of both his life and fortunes; In which you have the Obligation of our
Savior to save you harmless, who says, If any man shall hazard his life, or
fortunes, or what is most dear unto him, for my sake, he shall undoubtedly
preserve them. And for your Counter-securitie, you have three Kingdoms in the
body of the Parliament engaged. Now why stand you gazing like the timorous
Israelites on the Host of the Philistims? Did not a little youth, David by
name, being inspired by the Spirit of God, slay their Champion, and overthrow
that Idolatrous Host? And shall a Jesuiticall and Popish Army, with a
Malignant party, as odious in the sight of God as those cursed Philistims, make
you dismayed? No; be comforted; God and the State has presented to you a more
probable means of deliverance, in sending this Fleet to your preservation,
consisting of 12 warlike ships, with store of Ammunition and Landforces, the
major part whereof is not yet come in, occasioned by foul weather at Sea: but
upon the first opportunity of wind and weather undoubtedly will arrive; and
by Gods assistance, I am confident, that if the Gentlemen of this County will
join with me, I make no doubt but we shall drive that Malignant rout, who
endeavor to inslave this Nation under the yoke of the Antichristian beast,
not only out of this County, but consequently out of the Dominion of Wales:
wherefore I shall desire the Gentlemen to give their speedy resolutions; And if
any of them shall not comply, let such look for no favor from me, if it shall
please God to give us the Victory, but what Gods enemies and Destroyers
deserve: And let not any man's heart be afraid, for God has promised to be with
his in his protecting power, even to the end of the world: To whose protection
I commit you all; Expecting your Answer, I remain and rest,

Ever ready to engage my life with you in this great work.
Not answered.
A Copy of the Declaration of the Honorable houses of Parliament now sitting
at Westminster, bearing date 1. Febr. coming to my hand, I caused diverse
Copies thereof to be taken, and, with the Letter following, I sent one to
Pembrooke; one to Haverford West, and another to Tynbie.
Gentlemen:
THat you may see with what sincerity of heart we desire you may be reduced
to a right understanding of the unhappy condition you are now in, we shall not
neglect neither our Pen or Sword; the one to discover unto you the strong
delusions of that Antichristian beast, with whom it is foretold in holy Writ,
that the Princes of the earth shall join in confederacy, as also they with him
undoubtedly must perish, and many Millions of poor souls so misled. Oh be
wise, and timely prevent such certain ruin, by uniting your selves with the
true professors of the Gospel, by whom God has said he will pull that beast
from his Throne, and they shall reward him sevenfold for all the evils he has
done unto the Saints. Now if you shall join with us in this great Work, then
shall our Swords be active in your preservation; and for your more ample
satisfaction, we shall present you a most perspicuous perspective, wherein you
may perceive the perfect way both to your terrestrial and celestial felicity,
being a true copy of the last Declaration of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, the which if you please to peruse with a discerning judgment you
may see with what zeal and care those Worthies of our Land have endeavored to
remove from your eyes those Antichristian mists, through which, as with an
Ignis Fatuus you have been so long misguided. And because we know the Patient
thirsts after the cure, we refer you to application of the means presented
in that Declaration. The which if they may give you that satisfaction as may
make you truly happy in joining with us, our endeavors are fully satisfied,
and you shall find us.

The Summons of the Town of Tynbie.
Gentlemen,
IN a former Letter unto you, wherein was presented, the late Declaration of
the Honorable Assembly of Parliament, we the Conmanders of his Majesty's ships,
desired your resolutions whether you would comply in the contents thereof, and
join with us in the preservation of the Gospel, the Kings honor, and the
Kingdoms safety, to expel the forces brought into the County by the Earl of
Carbury, but receiving no answer, we are now come before your Town, to let you
know that unless you forthwith yield obedience thereunto, we shall use our
best endeavors to force it, in which if it shall please God to deliver you
into our hands, you must expect no other favor then what is due to Traitors,
both to God and their Country; wherefore I advise you seriously to consider and
wisely to provide for your present and future safety, and let us receive your
speedy answer, that by your timely adhearing to us; you may prevent the
demollishing of your Town, by the battering it about your ears with our
Ordnance, and hoping you will preserve it, as also the effusion of much blood
by your sweet compliance we remain and rest.

We further declare, that if the Commanders and Soldiers, shall join with you
in the surrendering of your Town, that they shall have quarter for their lives,
and go whither they please, or continue and be received into the service of
King and Parliament.

Their Answer.
Gentlemen
YOurs, we formerly received with a Declaration there enclosed which was
required from us before we could peruse the contents thereof, which was the
cause of our not returning any answer thereunto, yours of this present we have
received, wherein you desired us to comply with you for the preservation of the
Gospel, and His Majesty's honor, which is the work we have vowed to
maintain with our lives and fortunes, and in so doing, we hold our selves true
Subjects to God, our King and Country; And where you threaten the demollishing
of our Town, which is not ours to dispose of, but His Majesty's; all which we
pray you to take into your serious considerations, as also the cry of the
effusion of much innocent blood; for answer of the Commanders and Soldiers, we
refer you to the Letter you shall receive from the Governor of the Town,
and Fort: Thus with our best respects we take leave and rest.

Your ever loving friend if you please, Richard Wyet Major, David Hamond,
Richard Prickard, John Rogers, Francis Long.
Tynbie March, 6. 1643.
The Sommons to the Castle of Tinbie.
Gentlemen,
THese are to require you that upon sight hereof, you imediately yield up the
Fort to the use of the King and Parliament, and in so doing you shall be
received into the protection of that Honorable Assembly, and enjoy the benefit
of loyal Subjects; but in case you shall continue in your rebellion, you must
expect to be proceeded against as Traitors to your King and Country, and
enemies to God and the Protestant Religion: For if you should make one shot at
the Kings and Parliament Ships, not one of you shall escape for his life, if
it shall please God to give us the victory; consider of it, and let me receive
your resolutions, in which if you please you shall find me,

Your faithful friend to preserve you.

Their Answer.
Gentlemen,
THis Town we hold as loyal Subjects to the Kings Majesty's use, for the
defense thereof we have His Majesty's gracious Commission which we will
endeavor to maintain with the hazard of our lives and fortunes, against all
opposers by what color or pretense whatsoever: This is the resolution of

John Gwynn. David Gwynn. Tho. Boteler.

FINIS.

